
1. Introduction

THC and other components in marijuana are among the most
commonly used illicit drugs in the world. A recent report [1] indicates
over 181 million users world-wide, while an estimated 13.1 million
people exhibit cannabis dependence globally [2]. Marijuana usage is
increasing in many countries, [3] and chronic use appears to be a risk
factor for several mental illnesses including psychosis [4] and depres-
sion [5]. Moreover, chronic use is also linked to reduced performance
on decision-making tasks [6,7]. It is therefore important to better un-
derstand how THC aﬀects the neural processes involved in cognition
and decision-making. Previous studies have indicated deﬁcits in ex-
ecutive function, verbal and visual memory, and visuoperception fol-
lowing chronic cannabis use in humans [8]. Rodent models have like-
wise shown impairments in working memory [9,10] and spatial
memory [11] following acute THC administration. Furthermore, acute
THC causes impairments in reversal learning in macaques [12], as well
as reversal learning and intradimensional set shifting impairments in
rats [13,14]. These ﬁndings have led to the proposal that THC impairs
cognitive ﬂexibility. This is a nebulous term; for the purpose of this

paper we deﬁne cognitive ﬂexibility as the ability to change response
strategies when it is advantageous to do so. Cognitive ﬂexibility is in-
ﬂuenced by distinct neural processes that may compete or cooperate to
modulate behaviour [15]. For example, animals can learn to select
options based on action value estimates acrued over many trials (re-
inforcement learning), or could instead use heuristics to guide choice
[16]. Animals may also rely on innate strategies such as the propensity
to switch choices after reward omission, a widespread phenomenon
termed lose-shift responding [17–20]. These and other systems can be
used to derive choice, and can all manifest as cognitive ﬂexibility.

A common methodological feature in reversal learning and set
shifting paradigms is a sudden and unexpected change in reward con-
tingencies, which is used to assess how animals adapt choice strategy.
Both lose-shift and reinforcement learning strategies are likely engaged
in these paradigms. A physiological mechanism thought to be important
for such reinforcement-driven response adaptations is the reward pre-
diction error (RPE) signaling properties of midbrain dopamine neurons
[21–23]. These neurons brieﬂy increase ﬁring rate following un-
expectedly good reinforcements (rewards), signaling a positive RPE.
Conversely, these neurons decrease ﬁring following unexpectedly poor
reinforcements such as reward omission, signaling a negative RPE. This
RPE signal is suﬃcient to solve a variety of diﬃcult tasks [24]. Drugs or
diseases that aﬀect dopamine transmission are therefore expected to
impair this prediction error, and thereby impair reinforcement learning,
which has been demonstrated in many species and tasks [25–28].

Similar to other drugs of abuse, THC increases the ﬁring rates of
midbrain dopamine neurons [29] and increases dopamine release in
downstream targets such as the ventral striatum [30]. THC acts as an
agonist at the Cannabinoid Receptor 1 (CB1), which is Gi coupled and
acts as an inhibitory presynaptic regulator of neurotransmitter release
[31]. CB1 is located on inhibitory aﬀerents to dopamine neurons [32].
It is therefore likely that CB1 agonism reduces inhibitory input to do-
pamine neurons. We expect that this will suppress the pause in dopa-
mine neuron ﬁring following reward omission and thereby attenuate
the negative RPE. This should attenuate processes driven by reward
omission, such as lose-shift responding and reinforcement learning from
worse-than-expected reinforcements. We have previously shown that
lose-shift is attenuated by acute administration of amphetamine, which
increases striatal dopamine among other eﬀects [26]. We expected that
THC would have a similar attenuating eﬀect on lose-shift due to re-
duction of negative RPE. Furthermore, we expect that THC would im-
pair reinforcement learning from reward omission for the same reason.
Learning from positive reinforcements, however, should remain intact.
To test this hypothesis, we systemically injected rats with THC and
analyzed speciﬁc features of reinforcement-driven response adaptation
in two reward-based decision-making tasks. The ﬁrst was a binary
choice task that rewards random choice; rats nonetheless employ a win-
stay/lose-shift strategy [33]. The second was an uncued reversal task
that can be solved using reinforcement learning. These tasks allow us to
diﬀerentiate between the potential eﬀects of drug on lose-shift re-
sponding that occurs on a trial-by-trial basis, and on the multi-trial
learning required to track reversals of asymmetric reward probabilities.
We found that systemic THC administration attenuated lose-shift re-
sponding on both tasks. However, the drug did not impair the ability to
ﬂexibly reverse choice preference in response to uncued reversals of
reward probability. These results suggest that THC causes an apparent
reduction in cognitive ﬂexibility by impairing trial-by-trial loss sensi-
tivity while sparing slower multi-trial learning from wins. This dis-
sociation is supported by recent computational analyses of rodent and
human choices in decision-making tasks, which have demonstrated that
hybrid models with rapid and gradual components more accurately
capture the choices of humans and rodents than do models with a
unitary timeframe [34–37].

<Middle> Methods.
2.1. Animals

Subjects were 21 adult (90 days old) female Long-Evans rats (bred
in-house) weighing 200–250 g. Animals were pair-housed in a climate-
controlled vivarium under a 12:12 h light:dark cycle (lights on 7:30
a.m.). Animals had restricted access to water (one hour) on behavioural
testing days, but otherwise had ad libitum access to food and water. All
procedures were approved by the University of Lethbridge Animal
Welfare Committee (AWC) in accordance with the guidelines of the
Canadian Council on Animal Care. Our utilization of female rats ﬁlls
knowledge gaps and is encouraged by the AWC.

2.2. Behaviour apparatus

Behavioural testing was performed in aluminum operant con-
ditioning chambers (see Fig. 1) as described previously [33,36]. Brieﬂy,
rats were placed in the operant conditioning chamber for 45 min ses-
sions. Trials were self-paced, and initiated by the rat performing a nose-
poke into the central port. Following 150 ms of nose-poke entry, a tone
(6 kHz) was presented to indicate that the animal could then locomote
to one of the two adjacent sucrose delivery feeders. If the correct feeder
was chosen, a reward (60 μL of 10% sucrose solution) was delivered. If
the incorrect feeder was chosen, no sucrose was delivered, the house-
light illuminated, and the two panel lights extinguished. The state of the
lights then reverted (house-light turned oﬀ; panel light turned on). This
change in lighting served to indicate that reward was not forthcoming,
and was of suﬃciently short duration such that it terminated by the
time the rats returned to the central poke port; there was therefore no
‘time-out’ associated with reward omission. Once a feeder was chosen,
or if no feeder was chosen in the 15 s following a nose-poke, the trial
ended and the rat had to return to the central port to initiate a new trial.

2.3. Experiment 1: acute eﬀects of THC on the Competitive Choice Task
(CCT)

The behaviour of animals in the ﬁrst cohort (n = 10) was shaped
during the ﬁrst two training sessions. All trials were rewarded and no
barriers were present in the ﬁrst training session to facilitate task ac-
quisition. In the second training session, rats were rewarded on 50% of
the trials regardless of feeder choice. In all subsequent sessions, re-
inforcement was controlled by an algorithm that attempted to minimize
the number of rewards given to the rats by predicting which feeder the
rat would select. This was done by examining the choices and re-
inforcements from the previous four trials [20,36]. If either feeder was
selected at a greater than chance rate in the context of these past trials,
it would be unrewarded for the upcoming trial. In doing so, the com-
petitive mode implements the classic ‘Matching Pennies’ task. Optimal
performance (random responding) will result in reward on 50% of the
trials. Parallel barriers positioned between the central port and feeder
wells were added to introduce a choice cost and discourage feeder bias
due to body position. Increasingly longer barriers (4.0, 8.5, 13.5 cm)
were introduced during consecutive days of training. Rats were trained
until they completed two consecutive sessions of at least 150 trials with
the long barriers. All subsequent training and testing sessions were run
with the long barriers.

After initial shaping (9 daily sessions), animals were randomly di-
vided into four groups to receive acute THC (Cayman Chemicals, Ann
Arbour, MI) in a counterbalanced block design. The drug was dissolved
into a 1:1:1:16 solution of THC:ethanol:Cremaphor EL:sterile saline
(0.9%) and delivered by intraperitoneal (IP) injection at one of three
dosages (0.5 mg/kg, 1.0 mg/kg, or 2.0 mg/kg). Injections were ad-
ministered 30 min prior to testing on the behavioural task over a period
of 8 days using the following schedule: vehicle, injection 1, no injec-
tion, injection 2, no injection, injection 3, no injection, and injection 4.
The initial vehicle injection served to habituate animals to the
procedure and was not included in the analysis. Injection days consisted
of one of the three THC dosages or vehicle. Injecting drug or vehicle
every other day provided time for THC to metabolize between sessions
in order to reduce the potential confound of extended drug eﬀects [38].
Running the rats on the task with no treatment every other day also
provided an opportunity to ‘wash-out’ any learned choice strategy
during the drug sessions.

2.4. Experiment 2: acute eﬀects of THC on the reversal task

An additional cohort of female rats (n = 11) performed a reversal
learning task in the same operant conditioning chambers. Animals were
trained on the same schedule as cohort 1. Trial initiation was self-paced
and began with a nose-poke in the central port. A non-informative tone
then prompted the rat to select a sucrose delivery feeder. Correct feeder
choices were rewarded with sucrose solution. No reward was given for
incorrect choices. In contrast to the Competitive Choice Task, the
probability of receiving a reward at a particular feeder was ﬁxed over
blocks of 60 trials to either a high or low reward probability. These
reward probabilities reversed at the beginning of each block of trials.
For example, the left feeder would be the high reward probability side
on trials 1–60, and would then reverse to become the low reward
probability side for trials 61–120. The reversals repeated several times
per session, and the initial location of high-probability feeder was as-
signed randomly each session. Animals were trained on this task for six
sessions, with the high/low reward probability increasing every two
sessions from 0.6/0.4 to 0.7/0.3, and ﬁnally to 0.8/0.2.

Animals were then randomly divided into two equal groups and
received either THC (2.0 mk/kg) or vehicle 30 min before testing in a
counterbalanced design with reward probabilities for testing sessions
set at 0.8/0.2. The injection schedule across sessions was as follows:
vehicle, no injection, injection 1, no injection, injection 2. The initial
injection of vehicle was to habituate animals to the process and was not
included in the analysis.

2.5. Behaviour analysis

Data were analyzed using Matlab version 2013a (Mathworks,
Massachusetts), Graphpad Prism version 6 (Graphpad, La Jolla, CA),
and SPSS version 21 (IBM, North Castle, NY). To minimize potential
confounds, all trials in which the animal sampled both feeders on the
previous trial, which we have previously termed impulsive feeder ap-
proach [26], were omitted from the analysis of lose-shift and win-stay
probabilities. For Experiment 1 (Acute eﬀects of THC on the Competi-
tive Choice Task), we examined several features of responding in-
cluding lose-shift, win-stay, reaction time (duration of nose-poke in
central port), number of trials, response time (time to locomote from
central port to reward feeder), response entropy, intertrial interval, and
impulsive feeder approach. Lose-shift responding is a measure of loss
sensitivity wherein animals chose to shift feeder choice from that of the
previous trial if they failed to receive reward. Win-stay is the re-selec-
tion of the feeder on the current trial that provided a reward on the
previous trial. Response entropy is a measure of the randomness of an
animal’s choice sequence [36], with higher values representing more
unpredictable responses. This was determined by calculating the
Shannon entropy of the animal’s choice sequence binned into four
consecutive trials [39]. This resulted in nearly random feeder selection
having entropy approaching four bits, while any pattern in feeder
choice or side bias resulted in a lower value. Note that response entropy
is only weakly related to win-stay and lose-shift responses because the
competitive algorithm randomizes the rewarded side on a trial-by-trial
basis when the rat is performing well. The resultant choice sequence
thus appears random even in the presence of strong reward sensitivity.
Statistical signiﬁcance for all measures was determined by one-way
repeated measures ANOVAs. The Greenhouse-Geisser correction has
been applied to these calculations (Exp 1: ITI, reaction time) when the
sphericity assumption was violated, as determined by Mauchly’s Test of
Sphericity (α = 0.05). One animal was removed from Experiment 1
(Acute eﬀects of THC on the Competitive Choice Task) due to being an
extreme outlier on most behavioural measures, as determined by
Grubb’s test (α = 0.05).

In Experiment 2 (Acute eﬀects of THC on the Reversal Task), ses-
sion-wide averages of the same measures were analyzed using paired t-
tests because only one level of drug was administered. Two-way re-
peated measures ANOVAs were used to assess the statistical signiﬁcance
of drug and the choice of high/low reward probability feeder. To
quantify changes of behaviour within each block of 60 trials irrespec-
tive of feeder choice, we collapsed across blocks and binned trials in
groups of ten. Each bin was averaged to get a mean value per bin for
each animal prior to computing group statistics. Two-way repeated
measures ANOVAs were also used to determine statistical signiﬁcance
of drug and bin number (learning) within blocks. All ﬁgures display
group means and standard error of the mean.

3. Results.
3.1. Experiment 1: acute eﬀects of THC on the Competitive Choice Task

Ten female Long-Evans rats were trained to perform a competitive
binary choice task (see Methods). We ﬁrst assessed the potential eﬀects
of THC on motivation and motor output. THC had no eﬀect on the in-
tertrial interval (F (1.7,14.7) = 1.65, p = 0.22; Fig. 2A), or the number
of trials performed (F (3,30) = 1.21, p = 0.32; Fig. 2B). Response time
(F (3,30) = 2.628, p = 0.07; Fig. 2C) and reaction time (F (1.2,11.9)
= 2.78, p = 0.12; Fig. 2D) showed a non-signiﬁcant tendency to in-
crease as drug dose increased. Finally, the number of pre-reward an-
ticipatory licks at the feeder was also unaﬀected by THC (F (3,30)
= 0.323, p = 0.80). Together, these results suggest that THC had a
minimal eﬀect on motor output and motivation.

The optimal strategy in this task is to generate random choices from
trial to trial, and to ignore losses and rewards on previous trials.
Overall, THC did not aﬀect the percentage of trials that were rewarded
(F (3,30) = 1.34, p = 0.28; Fig. 3A). However, previous work de-
monstrated that rats persistently engage the lose-shift strategy on this
task [33,36]. Here we found that systemic THC decreased lose-shift
responding in a dose-dependent manner (F (3,30) = 5.34, p = 0.005;
Fig. 3B), similar to the eﬀect of systemic AMPH [26]. Additionally, win-
stay responding also decreased with increasing THC dose (F (3,30)
= 3.52, p = 0.03; Fig. 3C), while the tendency of animals to im-
pulsively approach feeders without ﬁrst performing a nose-poke was
unaﬀected (F (3,30) = 1.57, p = 0.22). THC did not aﬀect the ran-
domness of choice as measured by the response entropy (F (3,30)
= 0.598, p = 0.57; Fig. 3D), suggesting that THC aﬀected trial-by-trial
win and loss sensitivity, rather than altering overall response pattern or
strategy.

3.2. Experiment 2: acute eﬀects of THC on the Reversal Task

We next sought to determine if THC aﬀected the ability to alter
choice strategy in response to changing reward contingencies. Eleven
female Long-Evans rats were trained to perform an uncued serial re-
versal learning tasks in which the reward probabilities (0.8 on one
feeder, 0.2 on the other) reversed every 60 trials (see Methods). THC or
vehicle was administered 30 min prior to testing over two sessions in a
counterbalanced design. The optimal strategy in this task is for animals
to develop a strong bias for the feeder with a higher probability of re-
ward. They must also have the ﬂexibility to switch this bias when a new
block of trials begins and feeder reward probabilities reverse.
Consequently, they could earn reward on nearly 80% of the trials by
choosing optimally, but would earn reward on only 50% of trials by
choosing randomly. In practice, animals acquired rewards on 66 ± 3%
of trials (see Fig. 4), indicating that they did alter their choice biases in
order to exploit asymmetries in reward probability.

Similar to Experiment 1, drug administration did not signiﬁcantly
aﬀect the number of trials per session (t (10) = 1.65, p = 0.13;
Fig. 5A), intertrial interval (t (10) = 1.23, p = 0.25; Fig. 5B), or pre-
reward anticipatory licks (t (10) = 0.07, p = 0.95), further suggesting
no gross impairment in motor control or motivation. However, reaction
time (t (10) = 2.50, p = 0.03) and response time (t (10) = 2.43,
p = 0.04) increased with THC administration. Similar to Experiment 1,
systemic THC decreased lose-shift responding (t(10) = 3.47,
p = 0.007; Fig. 5C). In contrast to Experiment 1, win-stay responding
increased following THC injection with increasing drug dose (t (10)
= 2.37, p < 0.05; Fig. 5D), while impulsive feeder approach was
again unaﬀected by drug (t (10) = 0.059, p = 0.95). Futhermore, THC
administration reduced response entropy (t (10) = 3.83, p = 0.004;
Fig. 5E). This can likely be explained by the fact that THC increased the
probability of the rat returning to the previous feeder choice (high re-
ward probability) regardless of choice outcome (t (10) = 3.38,
p = 0.008; Fig. 5F). This is a good strategy in this task and thus not
considered an impairment.
Next we sought to determine if responding was aﬀected by whether
the animals had selected the high or low reward probability feeder on
either the previous or current trial. Group means for lose-shift and win-
stay responding were computed based on whether the animals had
selected the high or low probability feeder on the previous trial. Group
means were also computed for response time and pre-reward antici-
patory feeder licks based on the high/low reward probability feeder
selection on the current trial. Two-way repeated-measures ANOVAs
were used to analyze the eﬀect of drug and feeder choice. Rats gener-
ated much more anticipatory licking when they selected the high
reward probability feeder (main eﬀect of feeder choice: F (1,9) = 65.8,
p < 0.0001; Fig. 6A), but THC did not aﬀect anticipatory licking (main
eﬀect of drug: F (1,9) = 0.085, p = 0.78; Fig. 6A). Furthermore, re-
sponse times were lower (running velocity was higher) when ap-
proaching the high reward probability feeder (main eﬀect of feeder
choice: F (1,9) = 5.49, p = 0.04; Fig. 6B). THC appeared to have no
eﬀect on response times (main eﬀect of drug: F (1,9) = 3.46, p = 0.10;
Fig. 6B). Together, these data indicate that THC had no signiﬁcant ef-
fect on motivation or the ability of rats to discriminate which of the
feeders was more likely to deliver reward. Feeder choice had a sig-
niﬁcant eﬀect on lose-shift responding (main eﬀect of feeder choice: F
(1,9) = 63.8, p < 0.0001; Fig. 6C), such that animals were much more
likely to lose-shift after receiving a loss at the low reward probability
feeder than the high probability feeder. Consistent with session-aver-
aged data (Fig. 4C), lose-shift responding decreased with THC admin-
istration regardless of the reward probability (main eﬀect of drug: F
(1,9) = 10.4, p = 0.01; Fig. 6C). The prevalence of win-stay re-
sponding was also higher following wins at the high reward probability
feeder (main eﬀect of
feeder choice: F (1,9) = 10.8, p = 0.009;
Fig. 6D), and this was unaﬀected by drug (main eﬀect of drug: F (1,9)
= 1.94, p = 0.20; Fig. 6D). These data suggest that feeder choice has a
much greater eﬀect on our task measures than did THC.
We next sought to determine whether the measures of choice varied
across trials within a block, independent of feeder choice. We collapsed
data across blocks, and aggregated trials into six bins of 10 trials. Two-
way repeated-measures ANOVAs were used to analyze the eﬀect of drug
and bin number. Our data suggests that rats adapted to the changing
reward probabilities. They were more likely to receive a reward in the
later trial bins, as compared to early trial bins, within each block (main
eﬀect of bin number: F (5,45) = 21.5, p < 0.0001; Fig. 7A). Drug had
no eﬀect on the probability of receiving a reward (main eﬀect of drug: F
(1,9) = 0.003, p = 0.95; Fig. 7A). Animals were also less likely to
switch their feeder choice from the previous trial, regardless of
outcome, as trials progressed within a block (main eﬀect of bin number:
F (5,45) = 3.16, p = 0.02; Fig. 7B), and this was further decreased by
drug (main eﬀect of drug: F (1,9) = 12.6, p = 0.006; Fig. 7B). Con-
sistent with the session-averaged analysis, drug had a signiﬁcant eﬀect
to reduce lose-shift responding (F (1,9) = 17.6, p = 0.002; Fig. 7C),
whereas bin number had no eﬀect (F (5,45) = 2.31, p = 0.06; Fig. 7C).
Drug also had a signiﬁcant eﬀect on win-stay (F (1,9) = 5.28,
p < 0.05; Fig. 7D), whereas bin number had a strong eﬀect on win-
stay such that it increased as blocks progressed (F (5,45) = 3.82,
p = 0.006; Fig. 7D). These data reveal that while THC did aﬀect short-
term decision-making (lose-shift, choice switch, and win-stay), it did
not aﬀect the ability to learn to bias choices to high-probability feeders.

<Conclusion> Discussion.
Acute THC has been proposed to impair cognitive ﬂexibility in rats
and other animal models based on evidence that it reduces performance
on some tests of set shifting and reversal learning [12,14]. Performance
on such tasks, however, likely depends on several information proces-
sing systems in the brain, such as those involved in short-term memory,
reinforcement learning, and impulse control [40]. Here, we sought to
reﬁne our understanding of THC’s eﬀects on decision-making by ana-
lyzing its eﬀects on some of these component systems. In particular, we
focused on lose-shift responding to assess immediate short-lasting ef-
fects, and reversal learning to assess more gradual learning over many
trials. We previously found that lose-shift responding depends speciﬁ-
cally on sensorimotor regions of the striatum [36], and is attenuated in
a dose-dependent manner by AMPH administration [26]. This eﬀect is
likely due to the ability of amphetamine to increase dopamine release in
the striatum [41], which is expected to attenuate the brief suppression
the of dopamine transmission that normally indicates that the reinforcement obtained was less than expected [21]. Because THC also
increases tonic dopamine levels, albeit through a diﬀerent mechanism,
we hypothesized that lose-shift would be likewise suppressed by THC.
We indeed found such an eﬀect (Figs. 3 and 5). Lose-shift responding on
this task depends on a memory trace that decays over 7 s [33]. There-
fore, the present data suggest that THC will impair behavioural control
that beneﬁts from rapid, but short-lasting, choice shifting away from
poor response options.

Given its rapid decay, lose-shift responding appears to be distinct
from other forms of reinforcement learning that contribute to decision-
making based on reinforcement delivery over many trials and much
longer timescales [33]. We tested if acute THC aﬀected this gradual
learning by evaluating the ability of rats to ﬂexibly reverse response
biases so as to track uncued reversals of reward probability. We found
that THC had no eﬀect on the slower form of reinforcement learning
needed to solve the Reversal Task (Fig. 7). This is illustrated by the fact
that THC did not reduce the overall reward obtained during sessions or
impair the ability to follow uncued reversals of reward probability.

Our ﬁndings are in contrast to other studies reporting an eﬀect of
THC on reversal learning and set shifting [12,13]. It is unlikely these
discrepancies are due to drug dose eﬀects, as these studies found im-
pairments in set shifting [12] in lower doses (0.1–0.5 mg/kg), and re-
versal learning deﬁcits at equivalent doses (2.0 mg/kg) [13] compared
to those used in our study. We note that these other studies used dis-
criminative cues, which were omitted in the present study. It is possible
that the addition of these task features recruits additional brain regions
that are aﬀected by THC. One such region is the orbitofrontal cortex,
which is involved in updating stimulus-outcome associations [42], and
has increased immediate early gene activity following THC adminis-
tration [13]. This leads us to speculate that animals are less reliant on
the orbitofrontal cortex to perform our uncued tasks, thus leading to
possible THC-induced changes in the region having little eﬀect in task
performance. Furthermore, rats do sometimes receive reward on the
low-probability feeder in the present task. This diﬀers from most re-
versal learning tasks, which tend to provide no reward (or aversive
reinforcement such as quinine) on the previously optimal choice after a
reversal has occurred. Another possibility is that sex diﬀerences inﬂu-
enced our results, although we argue this is unlikely. We have con-
trolled for sex in Long Evans rats performing the Competitive Choice
Task and found only minor diﬀerences unrelated to the main ﬁndings
here (unpublished observations). Moreover, we expect little to no eﬀect
of estrous cycle because an extensive meta-analysis of behavioural and
physiological traits found equal variability in both sexes, even when
including estrous cycle phases [43]. We thus expect that the eﬀects of
THC reported here would replicate in male rats. Our ﬁnding that THC
does not aﬀect uncued reversal learning suggests that THC only aﬀects
certain subsystems involved in cognitive ﬂexibility.

Rats in the present study discriminated the expected value of the
feeders in the Reversal Task; they exhibited increased win-stay re-
sponding, increased pre-reward licks, and more quickly approached the
high probability feeder as compared to the low probability feeder. Rats
also exhibited less lose-shift responding at the high probability feeder.
This reduction is a favorable response policy and suggests that some

processing systems involved in behavioural ﬂexibility can inhibit
others. Because lose-shift responding depends on the dorsolateral
striatum [36], we speculate that the advantageous reduction of lose-
shift involves the suppression of this system by the prefrontal cortex.
Such suppression of innate behaviours by executive systems has been
suggested by others [44,45].

While THC and AMPH both impair lose-shift responding, their ef-
fects on behaviour diﬀered in several respects. For example, AMPH
decreased reaction time [26], whereas THC increased reaction time and
response time in the Reversal Task, and showed a non-signiﬁcant trend
to increase these measures in the Competitive Choice Task (Table 1).
Furthermore, AMPH had no eﬀect on win-stay responding, while THC
decreased this behaviour in the Competitive Choice Task and increased
it in the Reversal Task. Given the weak and opposing eﬀects on win-
stay, we cannot rule out the possibility of a spurious eﬀect due to the
binary nature of many deductive statistical tests [46]. It is also possible
that win expectancy of the rats diﬀers between the tasks.

In contrast to win-stay responding, the tendency to approach feeders
outside of the trial period to seek rewards was unaﬀected by THC.
Animals should always return to the central nose-poke after responding
at a feeder. However, on some trials they would instead approach the
alternate feeder presumably seeking a reward. This was never re-
inforced, and so we argue that it is an impulsive behaviour [26] that
limits total reward during a session. This impulsive feeder approach is
dramatically increased by systemic amphetamine, or by infusions of
amphetamine into the ventral striatum [26], or by lesions of the

142

S.A. Wong et al.

Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 136–144

Fig. 7. Within-block analysis of THC’s eﬀects on behavioural measures in the Reversal Task. (A) The probability of reward was strongly aﬀected by bin number. (B) The probability of a
switch from the previous choice, independent of reinforcement, was aﬀected by both drug and bin number. (C) THC reduced lose-shift responding, while bin number had no eﬀect. (D)
Drug and bin number both had eﬀects on win-stay responding. Signiﬁcance as determined by a two-way RM-ANOVA is indicated by ‘*’ for p < 0.05, ‘**’ for p < 0.01, and ‘****’ for
p < 0.0001. A main eﬀect of drug is indicated by ‘†’, while a signiﬁcant main eﬀect of bin number is indicated by ‘#’. Error bars indicate SEM.

Table 1
Comparison of behavioural measures inﬂuenced by THC in the Competitive Choice and
Reversal Tasks. Strong eﬀects are denoted with two arrows, while moderate eﬀects are
denoted with one arrow. Arrow directions indicate directionality of diﬀerences as com-
pared to vehicle injections. Non-signiﬁcant eﬀects are denoted with ‘-’.

Behavioral Measure

Competitive Choice Task

Reversal Task

Lose-Shift
Win-Stay
Impulsive Feeder Approach
Response Entropy
Number of Trials
InterTrial Interval
Reaction Time
Response Time
Reversal Tracking

↓↓
weak ↓
–
–
–
–
–
–
N/A

↓↓
weak ↑
–
↓↓
–
–
↑
↑
–

Conversely, relatively little CB1 mRNA is expressed in the ventral
striatum this may be an explanation for why ventral striatum-driven
impulsive feeder approach was unaﬀected by THC. Further experiments
will be needed to properly test this hypothesis.

As with all systemic pharmacology experiments, we cannot ascer-
tain which brain structures are aﬀected and can only speculate on po-
tential neurobiological mechanisms. While CB1 expression is greatest in
the striatonigral pathway, amygdala, and hippocampus, moderate ex-
pression also occurs in the neocortex [31]. Nonetheless, our results are
consistent with human studies concluding that THC does not cause
global cognitive impairments [51,52]. Rather, our results suggest that
acute THC administration instead primarily aﬀects speciﬁc components
of the brain’s decision-making systems.

5. Conclusions

sensorimotor striatum (unpublished data). We therefore speculate that
it is a form of goal tracking in Pavlovian approach (which increases
with systemic amphetamine [47]) that may normally be suppressed by
the sensorimotor striatum. The expression pattern of CB1 mRNA pro-
vides a possible explanation for why THC reduces lose-shift responding,
but has little eﬀect on impulsive feeder approach. CB1 mRNA expres-
sion has a ventromedial to dorsolateral gradient in the striatum, with
greater expression towards the dorsal regions of the lateral striatum
[48–50]. While CB1 mRNA is expressed primarily in the dorsolateral
striatum (DLS), immunohistochemistry experiments have demonstrated
that the CB1 receptor itself is primarily located on the corresponding
medium spiny neuron aﬀerents located in the substantia nigra [32].
This leaves DLS CB1 receptors ideally placed to presynaptically mod-
ulate medium spiny neuron-driven inhibition of substantia nigra do-
release and inﬂuence dopaminergic prediction errors.
pamine

The data presented here reveal that THC reduces the immediate
responses to losses, but not the ability to track uncued reversals of re-
ward probability. This suggests that THC is capable of aﬀecting a subset
of dissociated processes that contribute to behavioural ﬂexibility. We
have shown that this occurs both in a competitive choice task, where
insensitivity to losses and wins is the optimal strategy, and in a reward
probability reversal
learning paradigm, where avoiding losses and
chasing wins is the optimal strategy. Thus, at least in some tasks, THC
does not impair overall cognitive ﬂexibility, but does selectively reduce
avoidance of choices associated with recent losses.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the National Science and Engineering
