
1. Introduction
Facial expressions of emotion represent a crucial component of
human social interaction, allowing the observer to infer another's
emotional state (Frith, 2009; Keltner, 2003), and adjust their behaviour
accordingly (Blair, 2003). Children and adults aﬀected by disorders of
social and aﬀective functioning, including psychopathy, often show
diﬃculties in recognizing others’ emotional expressions
(Dawel, O’Kearney, McKone, & Palermo, 2012; Marsh & Blair, 2008). When ca-
tegorizing expressions, attention is typically directed toward critical
facial features, most notably the eyes the mouth
(Eisenbarth & Alpers, 2011; Wells, Gillespie, & Rotshtein, 2016). A
failure to attend to these regions may lead to diﬃculties in judging the
expressed emotion. Although psychopathic traits in children and non-
oﬀenders are associated with atypical eye scan paths for emotional
faces (Dadds, El Masry, Wimalaweera, & Guastella, 2008; Gillespie,
Rotshtein, Wells, Beech, & Mitchell, 2015), these relationships are yet to
be tested in a forensic sample.
Psychopathy is best understood as a collection of personality traits
that vary along a continuum in the general population (Coid, Yang,
Ullrich, Roberts, & Hare, 2009). These traits include elevated levels of
antisocial behaviour, a callous disregard for others, and a deceitful and
manipulative interpersonal style (Hare, 2003), and are often prominent
in clinical and forensic samples (Skeem, Polaschek, Patrick, & Lilienfeld,
2011). A triarchic conceptual framework describes psychopathy along
three core dimensions that have been reliably identiﬁed and
distinguished in clinical and non-clinical samples, namely Boldness,
Meanness, and Disinhibition (Patrick, Fowles, & Krueger, 2009). Bold-
ness refers to psychologically adaptive traits emphasised by Cleckley
(1941), and includes venturesomeness, fearlessness, and interpersonal
dominance (Patrick et al., 2009). Boldness explains a key diﬀerence
between psychopathy and antisocial personality disorder [ASPD] (Wall,
Wygant, & Sellbom, 2015), and contributes over and above Meanness
and Disinhibition to the prediction of clinical psychopathy (Venables,
Hall, & Patrick, 2014). Meanness entails a callous disregard for others,
empathy problems, and a tendency toward exploiting others
(Drislane & Patrick, 2016). The Disinhibition dimension refers to im-
pulse control problems, emotional reactivity, poor behavioural re-
straint, and irresponsibility (Patrick et al., 2009).

Several prominent accounts of psychopathy emphasise the presence
of emotion recognition impairments in relation to the fearless and un-
empathic features (e.g., Boldness, Meanness) of the disorder (Blair,
2005, 2008; Moul, Killcross, & Dadds, 2012). These diﬃculties have
been observed among adult male psychopaths, and in relation to the
broader psychopathy phenotype in both adults and children (Blair
et al., 2004; Dolan & Fullam, 2006; Dadds et al., 2008; Hastings,
Tangney, & Stuewig, 2008; Kosson, Suchy, Mayer, & Libby, 2002;
Prado, Treeby, & Crowe, 2015). Although it is theorized by Blair (2005,
2008) that impairments in recognizing others distress cues (fear and
sadness) are of particular importance in psychopathy, a recent meta-
analysis suggests that these diﬃculties are pervasive across fear, sad,
happy, and surprise emotional expressions (Dawel et al., 2012).
Neurobiologically inspired models of psychopathy propose that the
disorder is characterized by functional impairments in areas related to
emotion processing, including the amygdala (Blair, 2008), and the ex-
tended limbic system (Kiehl, 2006). Support for these models comes
from studies that have shown a reduced amygdala response to fearful
expressions in both adults and children/adolescents with increasing
psychopathic traits (Decety, Skelly, Yoder, & Kiehl, 2014; Jones,
Laurens, Herba, Barker, & Viding, Cardinale, VanMeter, & Marsh, 2014).
The successful decoding of diﬀerent emotional expressions depends
on visual attention toward emotionally salient aspects of the face, most
notably the eyes and the mouth (Eisenbarth & Alpers, 2011; Smith,
Cottrell, Gosselin, & Schyns, 2005; Wells et al., 2016). The precise
pattern of eye movements is thought to be dependent upon the emotion
expressed, and attention is often guided toward the most diagnostic
facial features for a given emotion (e.g., the widened eye whites of
fearful expressions) (Schurgin et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2005; Wells
et al., 2016). While attention to these regions is likely to be modiﬁed by
conscious control, even brieﬂy presented faces trigger very early, po-
tentially reﬂexive eye movements toward diagnostic regions of the face
(Gamer & Büchel, 2009; Scheller, Büchel, & Gamer, 2012). Again, re-
ﬂexive eye movements in these studies were more commonly toward
the eyes than away from the eyes, and varied with the type of expres-
sion. Psychopathy related impairments in emotion recognition may
therefore reﬂect reduced attention to the eye region of emotional faces.
In support of this hypothesis, children with elevated callous-un-
emotional (CU) traits, referring to the aﬀective dimension of psycho-
pathy, show impaired fear recognition and a reduced number and
length of ﬁxations on the eye region (Dadds et al., 2008). When in-
structed to ﬁxate the eye region, these children showed normalized
levels of performance (Dadds et al., 2008). A similar pattern of per-
formance has also been observed in a patient with bilateral amygdala
dysfunction (Adolphs et al., 2005), and is taken as support for amygdala
based models of psychopathy. More recent evidence from non-of-
fending adult males has shown that the interpersonal and aﬀective
features of psychopathy are associated with reduced attention to the
eyes, and that the number of ﬁxations on the eye region is positively
correlated with fear accuracy (Gillespie, Rotshtein, Wells et al., 2015).
Another study with non-oﬀenders has shown that equivalent measures
of Boldness, but not Meanness, are associated with reduced face ex-
ploration during a face perception task (Boll & Gamer, 2016).

In the present study we examined eye scan paths for emotional faces
among adult male violent oﬀenders, and assessed the relationship of
distinct psychopathic traits with attention to the eyes. For comparison
we also recruited a community control group of non-oﬀending adult
males. Because psychopathy consists of a number of positively related
dimensions, suppressor eﬀects in statistical analyses may obscure un-
derstanding of the unique correlates of distinct psychopathic traits.
Thus, we aimed to model these dimensional traits simultaneously in a
way that can account for their covariance (Hicks & Patrick, 2006; Lozier
et al., 2014). We also measured levels of negative aﬀect, including
anxiety and depression, as diﬀerences in emotional face processing and
attentional allocation have been observed in these disorders (Buckner,
Maner, & Schmidt, 2010; Easter et al., 2005; Kohler, Hoﬀman, Eastman,
Healey, & Moberg, 2011). One earlier study suggests that psychopathy
primarily aﬀects the perception of moderate intensity expressions
(Hastings et al., 2008). Therefore in the current experiment we ma-
nipulated the intensity of the emotional expression by morphing each
prototypical expression (100%) with the neutral expression of the same
person. Thus, participants classiﬁed expressions at 90% and 55% in-
tensities (see Gillespie, Rotshtein, Wells et al., 2015; Gillespie,
Rotshtein, Satherley, Beech, & Mitchell, 2015; Gillespie, Mitchell,
Satherley, Beech, & Rotshtein, 2015; Wells et al., 2016).

We predicted that the preference for information form the eye re-
gion would be absent among violent oﬀenders, and that they would
show an absence of stimulus driven eﬀects on eye scan paths. Moreover,
we predicted that distinct psychopathic traits related to a lack of em-
pathy and fearlessness, namely Meanness and Boldness, would be as-
sociated with a pattern of impaired emotion recognition, and reduced
attention to the eyes relative to the mouth. We tested these relation-
ships across various parameters of attention to the eyes and the mouth:
overall dwell time, ﬁxation count, and ﬁrst ﬁxation time. The analyses
focused on the average response across all emotions, and also speciﬁ-
cally on the processing of fearful expressions, given ﬁndings that the
eye region is of particular importance for recognizing fear (Smith et al.,
2005; Whalen et al., 2004). Furthermore, at least one prominent theory
of psychopathy proposes that psychopaths are characterized by parti-
cular deﬁcits in recognizing others distress cues (Blair, 2005, 2008).

<Middle> Method.
2.1. Participants.
Thirty male violent non-sex oﬀenders, aged between 32 and 50
years (M = 35.1, SD = 11.8), were recruited from HMP Grendon, UK.
All participants had normal or corrected to normal vision. The majority
of participants were White Caucasian (n = 19, 63%). Index oﬀences
included, but were not limited to, murder (n = 17) or attempted
murder (n = 2), and wounding with intent (n = 3). Case ﬁle histories
showed that no participants had a pre-diagnosed mental health pro-
blem, although one participant was taking antidepressant medication.
The number of any previous convictions ranged from 0 to 31 (M = 9,
SD = 10), and the number of previous violent convictions ranged from
0 to 14 (M = 2, SD = 3). All participants signed their fully informed
consent. Ethical approval for the study was granted by the University of
Birmingham Committee for Ethical Review, and access was approved
by the National Oﬀender Management Service for England and Wales,
and the HMP Grendon Research Advisory Group.
Eye movement data were also collected from an approximately age
matched community control group of 25 adult males, aged 18–69 years
(M = 37.88, SD = 18.29), to assess the typicality of the eye movements
observed in the violent oﬀender sample. The comparison group was
recruited from the community using online advertisements and parti-
cipants received a monetary payment for taking part. None of the
control group participants reported a history of convictions for either
violent or sexual oﬀences.

2.2. Materials.
2.2.1. Facial expression stimuli.
We used a selection of the facial stimuli developed by Gillespie and
colleagues (Gillespie, Rotshtein, Wells et al., 2015 Gillespie, Rotshtein,
Satherley et al., 2015 Gillespie, Mitchell et al., 2015 Wells et al. 2016)
consisting of male and female expressions displayed at varying degrees
of intensity. These stimuli consisted of ﬁve male and ﬁve female Cau-
casian models,
selected from the NimStim Face Stimulus Set
(Tottenham et al., 2009; http://www.macbrain.org/resources.htm),
showing each of seven diﬀerent expressions: neutral, angry, disgust,
fear, happy, sad, and surprise. Emotional and neutral images from the
same model were morphed to create images of varying levels of emo-
tional intensity (see Gillespie, Rotshtein, Wells et al., 2015; Gillespie,
Rotshtein, Satherley et al., 2015; Gillespie, Mitchell et al., 2015) for
details of the morphing procedure. Images used in the current study
consisted of each emotion, for each model, displayed at moderate (55%
expressive) and high (90% expressive) intensity. The neutral expression
was also included for each model so that participants were not only
viewing emotional faces. Stimuli had a resolution of 504 × 624 pixels.
The positioning of each image on the canvas was manipulated such that
the eyes and the mouth appeared in the same location across all stimuli.

2.2.2. Measures

The Triarchic Psychopathy Measure (Drislane, Patrick, & Arsal,
2014) was used for the assessment of psychopathic traits. The 58-item
self-report measure yields scores on three subscales: Boldness, Mean-
ness, and Disinhibition. Participants respond on a 4-point Likert scale
(3 = true, 2 = somewhat true, 1 = somewhat false, 0 = false). Internal
consistencies (Cronbach’s ɑ) for the Boldness, Meanness, and Disin-
hibition subscales in the violent oﬀender sample were .69, .75, and .91,
respectively. Participants in the control group were also asked to
complete the TriPM for comparison, although two participants in this
group failed to complete the measure. In order to provide a better de-
scription of the sample, participants in the violent oﬀender group were
also asked to complete the State Trait Anxiety Inventory [STAI]
(Spielberger, Gorsuch, Lushene, Vagg, & Jacobs, 1983), which contains
both State [STAI-S] and Trait [STAI-T] subscales, and the Beck De-
pression Inventory [BDI] (Beck, Ward, Mendelson, Mock, & Erbaugh,
1961). Internal consistencies for the STAI-S, STAI-T, and the BDI in the
current sample were good: Cronbach’s ɑ = .94, .93, and .79.

2.3. Eye tracking

We used an EyeLink 1000 corneal-reﬂection based portable eye
tracking system (SR Research Ltd.) to record participants’ eye move-
ments. Although viewing was binocular, only movements of the right
eye were recorded. Gaze location was sampled at 1000 Hz. A Dell
Precision laptop computer was used to manage the recording of eye
movements. Stimuli were displayed on a 19” LG colour monitor, using
SR-Research Experiment Builder software, running on a laptop com-
puter with a separate mouse and keyboard.

2.6. Data analysis

As Age is suggested to aﬀect the processing of emotional expres-
sions, it is included as a covariate in all analyses. For comparison with
the non-oﬀender control group, we ﬁrst examine the main eﬀects of
Group, and any interactions of Group with Emotion, Intensity, or AOI,
for accuracy, dwell
time, ﬁxation count, and ﬁrst ﬁxation time.
However, as the focus of this paper is on the eye movements of violent
oﬀenders, we present in the main text the results for the violent of-
fenders only. For the results of analyses conducted on the comparison
group please see supplementary materials. Eﬀects on accuracy were
computed using a mixed ANCOVA, with the factors Emotion (Anger,
Disgust, Fear, Happy, Sad, Surprise) and Intensity (55%, 90%) as re-
peated factors. For the three eye tracking parameters, we computed
separate mixed ANCOVAs for each eye tracking parameter (dwell time,
ﬁxation count, ﬁrst ﬁxation time) using Emotion, Intensity, and AOI
(Eyes, Mouth) as repeated factors. Signiﬁcant interactions were broken
down using follow up ANCOVAs and Bonferroni adjusted post hoc tests.
To assess the relations of the TriPM subscales with accuracy and
scanning pattern in violent oﬀenders, we computed regression models
across all faces and intensities, and speciﬁcally for fearful expressions,
for each of the four dependent variables (accuracy, dwell time, ﬁxation
count, and ﬁrst ﬁxation time). For each regression model normalized
scores of Boldness, Meanness, Disinhibition, and Age, were used as
predictors of diﬀerential attention to the Eyes and the Mouth (Eyes −
Mouth).

2.4. Procedure

3. Results

Testing took place either in a private room inside the prison, or in a
dedicated eye tracking laboratory at the university. Participants were
seated at a desk and a chin rest of adjustable height was provided to
minimize head movements. Participants were positioned approximately
68 cm form the display monitor, and images were presented at a visual
angle of 21.2°. Participants were asked to categorize the emotional
expression stimuli as quickly and accurately as possible as either neu-
tral or one of the six basic emotions while their eye movements were
being recorded. Standard EyeLink calibration and validation proce-
dures were performed, each using a series of nine ﬁxation points, pre-
sented at random in one of nine locations on the screen. Facial ex-
pression stimuli were presented in a randomized order over four blocks
of 35 trials using the EyeLink software. At the start of each trial the
experimenter conﬁrmed that the participant’s eye gaze fell on a ﬁxation
point presented in the centre of the screen. A ﬁxation cross was then
presented for 1000 ms, followed by an image of an emotional expres-
sion that was displayed for 2000 ms, considered to be the time taken for
an individual to judge facial aﬀect in an in vivo social interaction
(Hoaken et al., 2007). Following display of the target expression, par-
ticipants were asked to categorize the facial expression as neutral, or as
one of the six basic emotions: anger, disgust, fear, happy, sad, surprise.
Expression labels were displayed in a vertical list alongside the relevant
number key (e.g., 1. ANGER). Responses were made using the numeric
keys 0–6.

2.5. Eye movement parameters

Two separate areas of interest (AOIs) were created a-priori that in-
cluded the eyes (300 × 100 pixels) and the mouth (240 × 125 pixels).
For each AOI we were interested in the following gaze parameters:
overall dwell time, total ﬁxation count, and ﬁrst ﬁxation time. For the
analysis of ﬁrst ﬁxation times we only included ﬁrst ﬁxations that were
initiated 100 ms after the presentation of each stimulus. While dwell
time and ﬁxation count provide an estimate of the participants’ interest
in the eyes and the mouth, ﬁrst ﬁxation time provides an index of early
gaze shifts towards these regions.

Mean scores and standard deviations for all self-report measures
completed by violent oﬀenders are shown in Table 1, along with the
inter-correlations between measures. For comparison, descriptive sta-
tistics for the TriPM subscales in the non-oﬀender control group, and in
non-oﬀender (N = 496), and forensic psychiatric samples (N = 296),
reported by van Dongen et al. (2017) are also included. In the violent
oﬀender sample, there was a signiﬁcant positive correlation between
the TriPM Meanness and Disinhibition subscales that survived correc-
tion for multiple comparisons. The correlations of Boldness with
3.1. Accuracy.
Accuracy for recognition of diﬀerent emotional expressions as a
function of the intensity of the expression is shown in Table 2. A mixed
ANCOVA showed that there was a signiﬁcant three way interaction of
Group with Emotion and Intensity F(5, 260) = 2.69, p = .021,
pη2 = .049. Although both groups showed a similar pattern of emotion
recognition, when broken down by Group, the interaction eﬀect was
greater for community controls compared with violent oﬀenders. Below
we present the results for violent oﬀenders only. Results for the control
group are show in the supplementary materials.

The confusion matrix in Fig. 1 illustrates the pattern of responding
among male violent oﬀenders for each emotional expression as a
function of Intensity. Overall, neutral expressions were classiﬁed with a
relatively high degree of accuracy (M = 81.5%, SD = 19.8). We found
signiﬁcant main eﬀects of Emotion F(5, 140) = 19.37, p < .001,
pη2 = .409, and Intensity F(5, 140) = 24.77, p < .001, pη2 = .469,
and a signiﬁcant two-way interaction F(5, 140) = 2.80, p = .019,
pη2 = .091. This two-way interaction was also aﬀected by Age F(5,
140) = 11.34, p < .001, pη2 = .288. Based on the data in Table 3, the

interaction of Emotion and Intensity emerged as expressions of anger,
disgust, happy, sad and surprise were recognized better at higher in-
tensities, but the pattern was reversed for fear. To test these observa-
tions formally we analysed each emotion separately. While expressions
of Disgust F(1, 28) = 20.91, p < .001, pη2 = .428, Happy F(1, 28)
= 14.42, p = .001, pη2 = .340, Sad F(1, 28) = 33.87, p < .001,
pη2 = .547, and Surprise F(1, 28) = 9.50, p = .005, pη2 = .253 were
recognized better at high intensity, the converse was true for Fear F(1,
28) = 11.70, p = .002, pη2 = .295. Angry expressions were recognized
equally well at 55% and 90% intensities F(1, 28) = .657, p = .424,
pη2 = .023. It is also worth noting that Bonferroni adjusted compar-
isons showed that Fear was recognized least accurately compared with
all other emotions (all p < .001), while Happy was recognized with
the most accuracy compared with Disgust, Fear, Sad and Surprise (all
p < .018). Anger was also recognized with more accuracy than Sad
(p = .041).

3.2. Eﬀects of emotion, intensity, and AOI

Table 3 shows means and standard deviations for dwell time, ﬁxa-
tion count, and ﬁrst ﬁxation times as a function of Group, Emotion,
Intensity, and AOI.

3.2.1. Dwell time

For dwell time, the two-, three-, and four-way interactions of Group
with Emotion, Intensity, and AOI were non-signiﬁcant (all F < 2.14,
p > .058), suggesting that dwell times patterns were broadly similar in
both groups. When focussing on the eﬀects for violent oﬀenders only,
there was a signiﬁcant three-way interaction of Emotion, Intensity, and
AOI F(5, 140) = 2.49, p = .034, pη2 = .082. When broken down by
Intensity, the interaction of Emotion and AOI was signiﬁcant for ex-
pressions at both 55% F(5, 140) = 22.62, p < .001, pη2 = .447, and
90% intensity F(5, 140) = 8.07, p < .001, pη2 = .224, but the inter-
action eﬀect was larger for 55% compared to 90% intensity.

For 55% expressions, the eﬀect of Emotion was signiﬁcant for both
the Eyes F(5, 140) = 17.13, p < .001, pη2 = .380, and the Mouth F(5,
140) = 17.35, p < .001, pη2 = .383. Bonferroni adjusted comparisons
for 55% expressions showed that dwell time on the Eyes was greatest
for Fear compared with all other expressions (all p < .012), and for
Surprise compared with Anger, Disgust, Happy, and Sad (all p < .01).
Conversely, dwell time on the Mouth was greatest for Happy and
Disgust compared with all other expressions (all p < .012).

For 90% expressions, the eﬀect of Emotion was signiﬁcant for both
the Eyes F(5, 140) = 9.63, p < .001, pη2 = .256, and the Mouth F(5,
140) = 4.28, p = .001, pη2 = .133. For 90% expressions dwell time on
the Eyes was greatest for Fear compared with all other expressions
excluding Anger (all p < .038), as well as for Anger (p = .045) and
Surprise (p = .004) compared with Happy. Conversely, dwell time on
the mouth was greatest for Disgust compared with Anger, Fear, and Sad
faces (all p < .035).

In summary, as a group violent oﬀenders dwelled relatively longer
on the eyes of fearful faces, and the mouth of disgusted faces, compared
with other emotions. However, the strength of these biases varied with
the expression intensity. This is a similar pattern to that previously
reported for non-oﬀenders (Gillespie, Rotshtein, Wells et al., 2015;
Wells et al., 2016).

3.2.2. Fixation count

For ﬁxation count, the two-, three- and four-way interactions of
Group with Emotion, Intensity, and AOI were all non-signiﬁcant (all
F < 2.59, p > .073), suggesting a similar pattern for ﬁxation counts
in both violent oﬀenders, and non-oﬀenders. When focussing on the
eﬀects for violent oﬀenders only, the two-way interactions of Intensity
with AOI F(1, 28) = 24.95, p < .001, pη2 = .471, and Emotion with
AOI F(5, 140) = 21.27, p < .001, pη2 = .432, were both signiﬁcant.
When broken down by AOI we found opposing patterns at 55% and
90% intensity, with the Eyes ﬁxated more often at higher intensities F
(1, 28) = 13.55, p = .001, pη2 = .326, and the Mouth ﬁxated more
often at lower intensities F(1, 28) = 20.93, p < .001, pη2 = .428. The
eﬀect of Emotion was signiﬁcant for both the Eyes F(5, 140) = 20.52,
p < .001, pη2 = .423, and the Mouth F(5, 140) = 5.71, p < .001,
pη2 = .169. Bonferroni adjusted comparisons showed that the Eyes
were ﬁxated more often for Fear compared with all other expressions
for Surprise compared with Happy and Sad (all
(all p < .002),
p < .006), and for Anger
compared with Happy (p = .003).
Conversely, the Mouth was ﬁxated more often for Disgust compared
with Angry, Sad, and Surprise (all p < .041).

Mirroring the dwell time results, oﬀenders made more ﬁxations on

fearful eyes and disgusted mouths relative to other expressions

3.2.3. First ﬁxation time

For ﬁrst ﬁxation time, the two-, three- and four-way interactions of
Group with Emotion, Intensity, and AOI were all non-signiﬁcant (all
F < 2.37, p > .131), suggesting that ﬁrst ﬁxation times followed a
similar overall pattern in both oﬀenders and non-oﬀenders. When
focussing on the violent oﬀender sample, there were signiﬁcant two-
way interactions of Intensity with AOI F(1, 28) = 27.38, p < .001,
pη2 = .494, and Emotion with AOI F(5, 140) = 17.90, p < .001,
pη2 = .390.

When broken down by AOI, we showed that ﬁrst ﬁxation times on
the Eyes were faster for higher than lower intensity expressions F(1,
28) = 40.93, p < .001, pη2 = .59, while ﬁrst ﬁxation times for the
Mouth were similar at 55% and 90% intensities F(1, 28) = 2.16,
p = .153, pη2 = .072. The eﬀect of Emotion was signiﬁcant for both the
Eyes F(5, 140) = 9.83, p < .001, pη2 = .260, and the Mouth F(5,
140) = 10.95, p < .001, pη2 = .281. Bonferroni adjusted comparisons
showed that the Eyes were ﬁxated faster for Fear compared with Anger,
Disgust and Happy expressions (all p < .01). Surprise Eyes were also
ﬁxated faster than Anger Eyes (p = .028), and both Sad Eyes (p = .007)
and Surprise Eyes (p = .008) were ﬁxated faster than Happy Eyes.
Conversely, the Mouth was ﬁxated slowest for Sad compared with
Anger, Disgust, Fear, and Happy (p < .05). The Mouth was also ﬁxated
faster for Happy than Fear and Surprise (p < .030), for Anger than
Surprise (p = .047), and for Disgust than Fear (p < .020).

There was also a signiﬁcant two-way interaction of Emotion and
Intensity F(5, 140) = 2.43, p = .038, pη2 = .080. When broken down
by Intensity the eﬀect of Emotion was signiﬁcant for expressions at
lower F(5, 140) = 3.04, p = .012, pη2 = .098, but not at higher in-
tensities F(5, 140) = .54, p = .748, pη2 = .019. Bonferroni adjusted
comparisons for 55% expressions showed that the critical facial features
were ﬁxated faster for Fear than for Sad expressions (p = .001).

In summary, the data suggest that fearful eyes, and to lesser degree
surprised eyes, are associated with greater attentional capture as as-
sessed using the timing of the ﬁrst ﬁxation. Smiles also appeared to
capture attention. These eﬀects were larger for the more prototypical
(90% intensity) expressions.

3.3. Eﬀects of psychopathic traits on accuracy and eye scan paths

We next assessed whether accuracy of expression recognition across
intensities among violent oﬀenders can be predicted by the three sub-
scales of the TriPM (Meanness, Boldness, and Disinhibition) after we
controlled for Age, using linear regression. The analysis suggested that
psychopathic traits did not aﬀect accuracy F(4, 25) = .632, p = .644,
ΔR2 = −.50. Psychopathic traits also failed to predict accuracy of re-
sponses to fearful expressions F = .39, p = .812, ΔR2 = −.09.

We then assessed whether the scanning pattern for emotional faces
(irrespective of Emotion or Intensity), and speciﬁcally for Fear, can be
predicted by the TriPm subscales after controlling for Age. The analysis
focused on the preference for the Eyes compared with the Mouth
(Eyes–Mouth). The results of linear regression models predicting eye
scan paths are summarized in Table 4 and Fig. 2. For illustrative pur-
poses in Fig. 2D we also present average heat maps for high (n = 10)
and low (n = 10) Boldness participants.

The analyses revealed that scanning patterns (assessed by dwell
time, ﬁxation count, and ﬁrst ﬁxation time) for emotional faces in
general, and for fearful expressions in particular, can be reliably pre-
dicted by distinct psychopathic traits and Age (see Table 4). A closer
inspection of the parameter estimates for the regressors (proxy to the
strength of relationship) suggested that Boldness and Age were

negatively associated with the preference for the Eyes when measured
in dwell time and ﬁxation count, both when collapsed across expres-
sions, and when modelled separately for fearful expressions (Fig. 2A,
B). These results are indicative of relatively reduced attention to the
eyes (compared with the mouth) with advancing years and Boldness
scores. Similarly Boldness predicted slower ﬁrst ﬁxation times (Fig. 2C),
suggesting that advancing years and Boldness scores were associated
with a relatively longer time taken to ﬁrst ﬁxate the eyes compared
with the mouth. Age was also positively associated with ﬁrst ﬁxation
times across all expressions, although the eﬀect of Boldness missed
signiﬁcance. The eﬀects of Meanness and Disinhibition were non-sig-
niﬁcant for each parameter, across all emotions, and for fearful ex-
pressions only.

To formally verify that Meanness and Disinhibition did not con-
tribute to the eye scanning pattern, we computed backward linear re-
gression. The results of these analyses were similar to those reported
here. Statistical detail for linear regression models predicting dwell
time, ﬁxation count, and ﬁrst ﬁxation time on the eyes relative to the
mouth for the remaining emotions (Anger, Disgust, Happy, Sad,
Surprise) are available in Supplementary Materials. These analyses
show a similar pattern of results to those observed for fearful faces,
suggesting that Boldness and Age eﬀects may be generic across diﬀerent
expressions.

<Conclusion> Discussion.

In the present study we examined the eye movements of adult male
violent oﬀenders compared with non-oﬀenders, and the extent to which
distinct psychopathic traits predicted violent oﬀenders’ preference for
information from the eye region compared with the mouth. Violent
oﬀenders’ eye movements did not diﬀer from those of non-oﬀenders,
and were found to vary with the emotion and intensity of the expres-
sion. Furthermore, Boldness, but not Meanness or Disinhibition, was
associated with reduced attention to the eyes across various eye
tracking parameters among violent oﬀenders.

Across all parameters, oﬀenders and non-oﬀenders showed similar
patterns of eye gaze, with generally increased attention to fearful eyes,
and to happy and disgusted mouths. These eﬀects are consistent with
those found in non-oﬀending participants tested using the same stimuli
(Gillespie, Rotshtein, Wells et al., 2015; Wells et al., 2016), and similar
eﬀects have also been shown by Scheller et al. (2012), and Eisenbarth
and Alpers (2011). Our ﬁndings support the notion that eyes are more
salient for recognizing fear compared with other emotions (Adolphs
et al., 2005; Elsherif, Sahan, & Rotshtein, 2017; Smith et al., 2005), and
that widened eye whites represent the critical diagnostic facial feature
for fear (Whalen et al., 2004). On the other hand, the mouth appears to
be most salient for happy and disgust expressions, perhaps due to the
rather unique shape of a smile, or the furrowing of the nose and the
mouth for disgust (Elsherif et al., 2017; Schurgin et al., 2014).

These stimulus driven eﬀects appear to be greater with increasing
task diﬃculty, including when expressions are presented at shorter
durations, or when expression intensity is reduced (Schurgin et al.,
2014). Increasing task diﬃculty in this study was achieved by morphing
emotional expressions with neutral to create expressions that were 55%
expressive. Results showed that the interaction of emotion and AOI on
violent oﬀenders’ dwell times was greatest when task diﬃculty was
increased, that is, when judging expressions at 55% intensity. Violent
oﬀenders also ﬁxated the eyes of higher intensity expressions more
often, and more quickly, and ﬁxated the critical facial features more
quickly for fear than sad at 55% intensity. It is argued that these pat-
terns may reﬂect increased attention toward the most diagnostic facial

features for each emotion as task diﬃculty increases (Schurgin et al.,
2014; Wells et al., 2016).

When examining the eﬀects of distinct psychopathic traits in violent
oﬀenders, we found that increasing Boldness scores and advancing Age
were associated with shorter overall dwell times, and a fewer number of
ﬁxations, on the eyes compared with the mouth. However, there were
no eﬀects of Meanness or Disinhibition. These results were found for
dwell times and ﬁxation counts averaged across all expressions, as well
as separately for fearful expressions. Similar results were also found for
ﬁrst ﬁxation times, with increasing Boldness scores associated with
slower ﬁrst ﬁxations on the eyes compared with the mouth of fearful
expressions. These results are consistent with those previously reported
in samples of non-oﬀending adult males (Gillespie, Rotshtein, Wells
et al., 2015), and adolescent boys (Dadds et al., 2008). In both of these
studies it was found that psychopathic tendencies indexing the callous
features of the disorder were associated with reduced eye gaze.

Findings from a recent study with non-oﬀenders also showed that
Fearless Dominance, an equivalent measure of Boldness, was associated
with reduced scanning behaviour for emotional faces (Boll & Gamer,
2016). Furthermore, and perhaps surprisingly, these authors found that
Self-Centred Impulsivity, equivalent to Disinhibition, was associated
with fewer reﬂexive gaze shifts toward the eyes. These ﬁndings are in
contrast to results from adult and developmental samples that found
relationships of the fearless and unempathic features of psychopathy
with eye gaze (Dadds et al., 2008; Gillespie, Rotshtein, Wells et al.,
2015), and also with those reported here for violent oﬀenders. How-
ever, there are important methodological diﬀerences between these two
studies. In the current study participants were asked to judge the
emotional expression following a 2000 ms presentation of a facial sti-
mulus. Early eye ﬁxations recorded here therefore share features with
voluntary attentional control, and may not reﬂect an impairment in
reﬂexive orienting per se. In contrast, Boll and Gamer (2016) measured
reﬂexive gaze shifts when faces were shifted unpredictably above or
below a ﬁxation point during presentations lasting 150 ms or 2000 ms.
Furthermore, Boll and Gamer used the Psychopathic Personality In-
ventory (Lilienfeld & Widows, 2005) to assess Fearless Dominance and
Self-Centred Impulsivity. Although these scales measure similar con-
structs to the TriPM Boldness and Disinhibition scales, future research
should seek to further examine the eﬀects of distinct psychopathic traits
on reﬂexive, as well as more controlled attentional processes, and use
diﬀering measures of psychopathic traits.

The modest inter-correlations between the TriPM subscales reported
in this study may seem surprising. Although others have reported sig-
niﬁcant correlations of Boldness and Meanness (van Dongen et al.,
2017), these subscales have previously been shown to be unrelated in
prison inmates (Wall et al., 2015), or modestly related in a large mixed
gender sample (Drislane et al., 2014). Drislane et al. suggest that al-
though Boldness and Meanness may share a fearless temperament,
other factors are also likely to contribute to dispositional Meanness
(also see Patrick, Drislane, & Strickland, 2012). Weak negative corre-
lations between Boldness and Disinhibition may also be expected, given
that Boldness taps adaptive traits including immunity to stress and a
fearless temperament, while Disinhibition taps impulse control pro-
blems and impaired regulation of aﬀect (Drislane et al., 2014; Patrick
et al., 2012). Others have debated that Boldness, or Fearless Dominance
features, may be peripheral to psychopathy. However, ﬁndings from a
recent meta-analysis (N = 10,693) underline the importance of these
more adaptive traits to the conceptualisation and measurement of
psychopathic personality (Lilienfeld et al., 2016).
The ﬁnding that reduced eye gaze in violent oﬀenders is speciﬁcally
related to Boldness, but not Meanness or Disinhibition, may reﬂect a
speciﬁc relationship of Boldness with impaired processing of emotional
stimuli, and reduced physiological reactivity fear (Benning,
Patrick, & Iacono, 2005; Dindo & Fowles, 2011; Esteller, Poy, & Moltó,
2016). In support of this argument, participants scoring high on a trait
measure of psychopathy that indexes Boldness features, including social
potency, stress immunity, and fearlessness (see Benning et al., 2003),
also show abnormal neural activations in the amygdala and prefrontal
cortex during the processing of emotional facial expressions (Gordon,
Baird, & End, 2004).
An alternative theory draws support from a recent study which
showed that Boldness, but not Meanness or Disinhibition, is associated
with a smaller N170 response to low (LSF), but not high (HSF), spatial
frequency ﬁltered emotional expressions (Almeida et al., 2014). LSF
information is detected by magnocellular cells of the tectopulvinar
pathway (superior colliculi–pulvinar), and is thought to allow for the
rapid interpretation of emotional expressions by the amygdala
(Tamietto & De Gelder, 2010; Vuilleumier, Armony, Driver, & Dolan,
2003). The results reported by Almedia et al. therefore suggest that
Boldness may be associated with reduced amygdala processing during
the analysis of LSF emotional expressions. Somewhat intriguingly, de-
tection of fearful eyes is thought to rely predominantly on this mag-
nocellular route (Vuilleumier et al., 2003), and dysfunction at an early
stage in this pathway might account for reduced orienting toward the
eyes, as well as hypoactivity of the amygdala in response to fearful
expressions. These possibilities are worthy of future investigation.

With regard to accuracy, like earlier ﬁndings, expressions of higher
intensity were typically recognized with more accuracy (Gillespie,
Rotshtein, Wells et al., 2015; Schurgin et al., 2014; Wells et al., 2016),
and fear was recognized with least accuracy compared with other ex-
pressions (Guo, 2012; Wells et al., 2016). However, accuracy was un-
related to psychopathic traits, and did not diﬀer for violent oﬀenders
compared with controls. While some studies have found correlations of
psychopathic traits with accuracy (Gillespie, Mitchell et al., 2015;
Prado et al., 2015), these relationships are not consistently reported.
Also, although diﬃculties in emotion recognition have previously been
reported for violent oﬀenders (Gillespie, Rotshtein, Satherley et al.,
2015; Robinson et al., 2012; Schönenberg et al., 2014), the mean values
reported here are similar to those reported by Gillespie, Rotshtein,
Satherley et al. (2015) for sexual and violent oﬀenders tested using the
same stimuli (but fear appears to be less impaired here than previously
observed). The comparison group reported here also show particular
diﬃculty identifying fear compared with other non-oﬀender samples
(see Gillespie, Rotshtein, Wells et al., 2015; Gillespie, Rotshtein,
Satherley et al., 2015; Wells et al., 2016). However, it is important to
note that the current task was made more challenging by limiting the
presentation of emotional faces to 2000 ms, meaning that comparisons
with earlier studies should be made with some caution.

The ﬁndings reported here are based on a restricted sample of se-
vere violent oﬀenders that was relatively modest in size, and our results
should therefore be replicated in a larger sample. Further, emotion
recognition and eye movement patterns may diﬀer between diﬀerent
types of oﬀender, for example sexual oﬀenders with child and adult
victims, or may vary with other disorders know to aﬀect the processing
of emotional faces, including anxiety disorder (Short, Sonuga-Barke,
Adams, & Fairchild, 2016), and borderline personality disorder (Domes,
Schulze, & Herpertz, 2009). Understanding these diﬀerences would
provide a more detailed understanding of aﬀective processing in clin-
ical samples. We used static images of emotional expressions, and the
extent to which psychopathy related diﬀerences in eye gaze would be
observed during a natural social interaction is also of interest. Further,
although psychopathy refers to a dimensional construct (Edens, Marcus,
Lilienfeld, & Poythress, 2006), recent ﬁndings suggest that the re-
lationship of psychopathy with social-cognitive abilities may change at
a point close to the cut-oﬀ score on the Psychopathy Checklist − Re-
vised (Abu-Akel, Heinke, Gillespie,
Mitchell, & Bo, 2015). As such, it would also be of interest to examine
diﬀerences in eye scan paths for oﬀenders with extreme scores on the
PCL-R, relative to non-psychopaths.

5. Conclusion

For the ﬁrst time, the present study explored the eye scanning be-
haviour of violent oﬀenders during a facial emotion recognition task.
Across diﬀerent parameters the scanning behaviour was found to vary
with emotion and intensity, suggesting that eye scan paths were sen-
sitive to stimulus driven eﬀects. We also showed that Boldness, but not
Meanness or Disinhibition, was associated with a reduced tendency to
dwell on and revisit the eye region. Similarly, Boldness was also asso-
ciated with longer ﬁrst ﬁxations latencies for the eyes compared with
the mouth, raising the possibility that these traits are associated with
impaired automatic attention to the eyes. Our results extend the ﬁnding
of psychopathy related diﬀerences in eye scan paths from develop-
mental samples to incarcerated adult violent oﬀenders, and highlight
the utility of the triarchic conceptualization of psychopathy (Patrick
et al., 2009), in particular Boldness traits, for understanding emotion
processing impairments in forensic samples. Our ﬁndings also lend
support to models of psychopathy that emphasise the diﬀerential eﬀects
of processing distinct psychopathic features on emotion processing
(Fowles & Dindo, 2009).


Acknowledgements

