
1. Introduction

The human startle response is a reﬂexive contraction of the skeletal
and facial muscles in response to a sudden, intense stimulus and is re-
garded as a defensive rather than an orienting response (Braﬀ, 2010).
The strength of the human eye blink reﬂex is assessed as a sub-
component of the whole body startle reﬂex using electromyography
(EMG) of the orbicularis oculi muscles. PPI of the startle reﬂex is the
phenomenon that the startle magnitude as a result of a startle-eliciting
stimulus (or “pulse”, e.g. a sound of approximately 118 dB) is decreased
whenever a less intense and non-startling stimulus (or “prepulse”, e.g. a
sound of approximately 85 dB) is presented just before the intense sti-
mulus. PPI can, among others, be modulated by the interval that se-
parates the prepulse and pulse stimuli, with the maximum inhibition
usually occurring between 100 and 120 ms (Graham & Murray, 1977;
Stitt, Hoﬀman, & DeVido, 1980). Hence, it is regarded a useful tool to
investigate information processing, more speciﬁcally, a measure of
sensorimotor gating because the eye-blink reﬂex is based on a muscle
contraction (Braﬀ & Geyer, 1990; Braﬀ, 1993).

For schizophrenia patients, there is ample evidence that PPI is re-
duced compared to healthy individuals when using unimodal para-
digms (Braﬀ et al., 1978; Graham, 1975; see Braﬀ, Geyer, & Swerdlow,
2001; Braﬀ, 2010; Takahashi et al., 2011 for reviews).

Previous studies have shown that PPI also occurs with other than
acoustic stimuli, particularly stimuli from the tactile and nociceptive
modality have been studied, both in healthy control subjects
(Blumenthal, Burnett, & Swerdlow, 2001; Kumari, Antonova, & Geyer,
2008) and schizophrenia patients (Bolino et al., 1994; Kumari et al.,
2003) by using either electrical stimulation or airpuﬀs. There is also
evidence that PPI can be induced by using cross-modal paradigms in
healthy individuals from studies using acoustic prepulses and tactile
pulses (Hoﬀman, Cohen, & Stitt, 1981; Flaten, Firan, & Blumenthal,
2016; Sanes & Ison, 1979; Stitt et al., 1980), studies using tactile pre-
pulses and acoustic pulses (Blumenthal & Gescheider, 1987;
Blumenthal & Tolomeo, 1989; Elden & Flaten, 2003; Hill & Blumenthal,
2005; Perlstein, Simons, & Graham, 2001) and studies using visual
prepulses and electrocutaneous (Rossi et al., 1995) or acoustic (Oranje,
Geyer, Bocker, Kenemans, & Verbaten, 2006) pulses. Typically, the ef-
ﬁciency of those cross-modal pairings in eliciting PPI was lower com-
pared to unimodal conditions. Yet, up to now there is only one cross-
modal study in schizophrenia patients: Braﬀ, Grillon, and Geyer (1992)
reported reduced PPI in schizophrenia patients compared to healthy
controls with acoustic prepulses and either tactile (airpuﬀs) or acoustic
pulse stimuli.

For stimulus processing, it is known that processing times diﬀer
between sensory modalities: For example, it is known that the overall
processing time of acoustic stimuli is shorter than that of visual stimuli.
This is due to faster transduction times in the ear and a shorter distance
from the ear to the auditory cortex (King, 2005). Processing times of
electrocutaneous,
i.e. nociceptive, stimuli are also longer than of
acoustic stimuli (Flaten et al., 2016).

In the current study we investigated the stimulation eﬃciency of an
electrocutaneous prepulse combined with an acoustic startle-eliciting
pulse in healthy controls as well as in patients with schizophrenia. We
expected to ﬁnd signiﬁcantly lower PPI in patients compared to controls
as this was found with both unimodal and cross-modal paradigms be-
fore (see Braﬀ et al., 2001 for a review). We also reasoned that a cross-
modal pairing of stimuli should result in a lower PPI for both patients
and controls as electrocutaneous prepulses have proven to be less ef-
fective in evoking PPI compared to acoustic ones in unimodal para-
digms (Flaten et al., 2016).

This study was part of a larger project investigating somatosensory
(electrocutaneous stimuli) P50 suppression in healthy individuals and schizophrenia patients.

<Middle> Methods.
2.1. Subjects.
The study was approved by the Committee for Biomedical Research
Ethics, Copenhagen, taking into account the ethical principles stated in
the Declaration of Helsinki (Amendment of Washington, 2002). After
written and oral information had been given, written informed consent
was obtained from all subjects before enrolment in the study. To reduce
variance we included only male participants as it is described that
women have lower levels of PPI than males in both healthy people
(Swerdlow et al., 1993) and schizophrenia patients
(Kumari, Aasen, & Sharma, 2004). Additionally, women’s PPI levels are aﬀected
by the menstrual cycle (Swerdlow, Hartman, & Auerbach, 1997).
Twenty-four healthy male volunteers (mean age: 25.67, SD = 4.90)
were recruited through an advertisement on the internet, all from the
Copenhagen area. Absence of any psychiatric disorder as well as alcohol
or drug abuse was ensured by the use of Schedule for Clinical
Assessment in Neuropsychiatry, version 2.1 (SCAN, Wing et al., 1990).
Moreover, the healthy volunteers did not have a ﬁrst-degree relative
with a DSM-IV diagnosis and none of them had ever received psycho-
pharmacological medication, nor had they participated in any electro-
physiological experiment before.

Twenty-three schizophrenia patients (mean age: 35.91, SD = 9.49)
were recruited either by advertisement in the community mental health
centre, or were referred to us by their practitioner. Psychopathology
was assessed with the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS;
Kay, Fiszbein, & Opler, 1987), and the diagnosis was conﬁrmed with the
SCAN. Fulﬁlled DSM-IV criteria for substance dependence was an ex-
clusion criterion. Seventeen patients received antipsychotic treatment
at the time of participation: one with ﬁrst-generation antipsychotics,
three with clozapine, eleven with other second-generation anti-
psychotics, and two with a combination of ﬁrst- and second-generation
antipsychotics. Six patients were free of any medication, deﬁned as
having received no antipsychotics in the last three months preceding
study participation. Twelve patients and ﬁve healthy controls were
smokers ranging from 5 to 25 cigarettes a day. PANSS scores of one
patient were missing. Thus, PANSS scores of 22 patients are reported.
Details regarding healthy control participants and both patient
groups are summarized in Table 1.

2.2. Experimental design and tasks


Prior to the test session a urine sample of all participants was
screened for cannabis, opiates, cocaine, and amphetamines
(Syva®RapidTest d.a.u®4). In order to minimize potential eﬀects of
caﬀeine and/or nicotine, all subjects were asked to refrain from
drinking beverages that contained caﬀeine prior to the assessments on a
test day, and from smoking an hour before meeting at the laboratory.
Subjects were seated comfortably in a sound insulated room
(40 dB), situated adjacent to the control room. They were instructed to
sit still and stay awake. The paradigm was presented via Presentation®
software (Neurobehavioral Systems®, Albany, CA, USA; soundcard:
Creative soundblaster®5.1, 2008 Creative Technology Ltd, Singapore).
The electrocutaneous stimuli were presented by an electrical stimulator
(Digitimer®, model DS7A, Hertfordshire, UK). Acoustic stimuli were
presented binaurally through stereo insert earphones (Eartone® ABR,
1996–2008 Interacoustics A/S, Denmark, C and H Distributors Inc.,
USA).

In our bimodal PPI paradigm we used a short (5 ms) weak electro-
cutaneous stimulus applied over the median nerve of the left forearm as
prepulse. The intensity was set at 80% of the electric current that was
needed to activate the subject’s thenar reﬂex. As such, the electric sti-
mulation could be felt but was not painful according to participants’
reports. The intensities ranged from 2 to 8.4 mA, with a mean of 4.9 mA
(SD = 1.6) for both patients and healthy controls. The startle-eliciting
stimulus consisted of a sound (white noise) with an intensity of 118 dB
and a duration of 20 ms, instant rise and fall.

The assessment of PPI started with three minutes of acclimation to a
background noise (70 dB white noise), which was presented con-
tinuously during the paradigm. The actual experiment consisted of one
block with 24 pseudo-randomized (not more than two trials of the same
type succeeding each other) trials, superimposed on the background
noise: 12 pulse alone trials (pa, trials in which the startle-eliciting sti-
mulus was presented alone) and 12 prepulse-pulse trials (pp, trials in
which the electrocutaneous prepulse preceded the startle-eliciting sti-
mulus). The intertrial intervals (ITI) were randomized between 10 and
20 s. The interval between the prepulse and pulse (stimulus onset
asynchrony, SOA) was ﬁxed to 120 ms. The assessment took approxi-
mately 11 min.

2.3. Signal recording

The eye-blink component, i.e. electromyographic (EMG) activity, of
the startle response was recorded from the right m.orbicularis oculi:
Two electrodes were placed under the right eye for startle response
measurement. The ﬁrst of these was aligned with the pupil, the other
positioned just laterally. EMG recordings were assessed with BioSemi®
hardware (Biosemi, Amsterdam, the Netherlands). Sampling started
immediately before the experimental block was started and lasted until
the end of it (continuous recording). All EMG signals were digitized
online by a computer, at a rate of 4096 Hz.

2.4. EMG data processing

Following oﬄine ﬁltering of the data between 25 and 250 Hz,
startle amplitude was scored as the highest absolute amplitude in mi-
crovolt within the time interval 20–100 ms after the startle-eliciting
pulse. A computerized algorithm was used for peak detection. For each
individual, PPI was calculated as the percentage reduction of the mean
amplitude of prepulse-pulse-trials over the mean of pulse-alone-trials:
%PPI = [(1–(pp/pa))*100%].

2.5. Data analysis

All statistical analyses were performed with IBM SPSS Statistics®,
version 24. Data was checked by Shapiro-Wilk’s test and QQ-diagrams
for normal distribution and Levene’s test was used to check for homo-
geneity of variance. α-level was set a priori at 0.05. First, a repeated
measures ANOVA was performed with within factor “trialtype” (pulse-
alone or prepulse-pulse-trials) and between factor “group” (patients or
controls), to check for group diﬀerences on raw startle amplitudes.

Second, a one-way ANOVA on %PPI data with factor “group” as
ﬁxed factor was performed to screen for possible group diﬀerences in
PPI. To screen for possible eﬀects of medication a second one-way
ANOVA was performed with factor “medication” (medicated versus
medication-free) in patients only. “Age” and “smoking status” (yes/no)
was used as a covariate since subjects were only matched on sex. These
covariates were removed if not signiﬁcant. Post hoc-tests (Student’s t-
tests) were carried out to explore signiﬁcant ANOVA eﬀects.

Additionally, Spearman’s Rho-correlations of PANSS total scores
and the three PANSS subscores (positive, negative, and general) with
“%PPI” were calculated to check for possible associations between ill-
ness severity and %PPI levels.

3. Results

3.1. General

Assumptions to carry out parametric tests were met, i.e. normal
distribution and homogeneity of variance. The factor “age” did neither
covary signiﬁcantly in the raw amplitude analyses, nor in the %PPI
analyses, and was therefore excluded in further analyses. “Smoking
status” had a signiﬁcant eﬀect on %PPI data (p < 0.036) but not on raw
startle amplitude data (p > 0.05) and was therefore only included as
covariate in the analyses of the %PPI data.

3.2. Raw data

The repeated measures ANOVA revealed a signiﬁcant main eﬀect of
“trialtype” [F(1, 45) = 14.725, p < 0.001, partial η2 = 0.247], in-
dicating a larger startle amplitude to pulse-alone-trials than to prepulse-
pulse-trials as expected. The interaction “trialtype” * “group” failed to
reach statistical signiﬁcance, [F(1, 45) = 2.250, p = 0.141, partial
η2 = 0.048] similar as the between-subjects factor “group”, [F(1, 45)
= 0.174, p = 0.679, partial η2 = 0.004]. Average raw amplitude levels
are presented in Table 2.

3.3. %PPI data

The one-way ANCOVA with the covariate “smoking status” revealed
a signiﬁcant eﬀect of “group” [F(1, 44) = 8.486, p < 0.006, partial
η2 = 0.162]. The ANOVA on medication status failed to reveal a sig-
niﬁcant eﬀect [F(1, 21) = 1.312, p = 0.265, partial η2 = 0.059], in-
dicating no %PPI diﬀerence between medicated and medication-free
patients. Post hoc, only the diﬀerence between medication-free patients
(n = 6) and controls (n = 24) became signiﬁcant:
t(28) = 2.446,
p = 0.021, d = −1.549, while the diﬀerence between medicated pa-
tients (n = 17) and controls (n = 24) did not reach signiﬁcance level: t
(39) = 1.562, p = 0.126, d = −0.495.

Post hoc one-sample t-tests showed only signiﬁcant diﬀerence from
0 for controls (t(23) = 4.627, p < 0.001). For the patient group as a
whole (t(22) = 1.368, p = 0.185),
for medicated patients (t(16)
= 1.633, p = 0.122) and medication-free patients (t(5) = −0.422,
p = 0.691) there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence from 0 concerning %PPI
data. Moreover, we tried to get age-matched subgroups of patients and
controls by eliminating the lowest quartile age in controls, i.e. n = 6,
and the highest quartile age in patients, i.e. again n = 6. However, the
calculated t-test on age still showed a signiﬁcant diﬀerence: t(24)
= −2.347, p = 0.030. The eﬀect of diagnosis expressed by Cohen’s d
as calculated eﬀect size from an independent sample t-test on %PPI
indicated a large eﬀect: t(33) = 2.457, p = 0.019, d = 0.831. The re-
sults are presented in Fig. 1.

3.4. Correlations

Spearman’s Rho correlations revealed no signiﬁcant relationship
between %PPI and symptom severity, as expressed by PANSS scores
(total, positive, negative, or general) neither in our patient group in
total, nor in the medicated subsample, nor in the medication-free sub-
sample of patients.

<Conclusion> Discussion.
In this study we investigated if an electrocutaneous prepulse cou-
pled with an acoustic pulse induces diminished PPI in schizophrenia
patients compared to healthy controls, similarly as is usually observed
in unimodal paradigms. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
study using this pair of stimuli for examining PPI in schizophrenia
patients.

In concordance with our hypotheses, our patient group showed
indeed a signiﬁcantly lower %PPI compared to our healthy control
group. Supporting previous unimodal studies in schizophrenia patients
(e.g. Swerdlow et al., 2006) this eﬀect appeared mainly based on
medication-free patients. Given the average raw startle amplitudes the
signiﬁcant group diﬀerence in %PPI is predominantly caused by a dif-
ference in the response of our patients to prepulse-pulse-trials, and not
to pulse-alone-trials, compared to the controls, although this did not
reach statistical signiﬁcance in post hoc-tests. The diﬀerence in %PPI is
therefore more likely reﬂecting a true sensorimotor gating deﬁcit in our
patients instead of simply a reduction in startle reactivity.
As already mentioned above, studies usually report lower PPI levels
in healthy controls in cross-modal compared to unimodal paradigms
(Blumenthal & Gescheider,
1989;
Elden & Flaten, 2003; Hill & Blumenthal, 2005; Perlstein et al., 2001),
including a previous report from our own laboratory (Oranje et al.,
2006). Therefore, we also expected to ﬁnd less %PPI in at least our
healthy participants, and probably also our patients, in the current
study compared to what is usually reported in studies using unimodal
PPI paradigms.

Acoustic prepulses in the range of 80–87 dB (SOA = 100–120 ms)
typically elicit %PPI in a range between 58 and 75% in healthy controls
(e.g. Braﬀ et al., 1992; Düring, Glenthøj, Andersen, & Oranje, 2014;
Oranje et al., 2006; Oranje, Wienberg, & Glenthøj, 2011; Quednow
et al., 2008), while this reached only 35 > 25% (mean > SD) in the
current study. Using the same acoustic prepulses, schizophrenia pa-
tients typically show %PPI in a range between 35 and 70% depending
on medication status and stage of the disease (e.g. Aggernaes et al.,
2010; Braﬀ et al., 1992; Hammer et al., 2013; Oranje, van Oel, Gispen-
de Wied, Verbaten, & Kahn, 2002; Quednow et al., 2008) in unimodal
acoustic PPI paradigms while in the present study only 10 > 29% was
reached.

A possible explanation for our ﬁndings could be the following: the
unimodal auditory paradigm that usually induces maximal levels of PPI
in healthy participants consists of a prepulse intensity of 86 dB and a
pulse intensity of 115 dB separated by a SOA of 120 ms (Braﬀ, 2010). A
change in SOA results in lower PPI (Braﬀ et al., 2001). Logically, PPI
could therefore be decreased in cross-modal paradigms (regardless of
experimental population) due to diﬀerences in processing time of sen-
sory stimuli, i.e. the perceived SOA is diﬀerent from the actual (phy-
sical) SOA (Flaten et al., 2016). In our paradigm, the longer processing
time for electrocutaneous stimuli will result in a perceived SOA shorter
than 120 ms and consequently also less PPI (Braﬀ et al., 2001). Sup-
porting this notion, a study by Bolino et al. (1994) used an unimodal
electrocutaneous PPI paradigm with a perceived SOA of 120 ms and
found PPI levels more close to the ﬁndings from unimodal auditory
paradigms in schizophrenia patients. However, an alternative ex-
planation for the lower PPI levels in the current study, namely that they
are due to a prepulse intensity eﬀect, cannot be excluded: It is con-
ceivable that by using higher levels of electric current we would have
found higher PPI levels in both groups (for the relation between in-
crease in prepulse intensity and PPI see Grillon, Ameli, Charney,
Krystal, & Braﬀ, 1992).

We explored the modality-independent nature of PPI by using a
cross-modal prepulse-pulse combination that had never been used be-
fore in schizophrenia patients to test if the previous result of Braﬀ et al.
(1992) is a general cross-modal phenomenon. Possible eﬀects of drugs,
caﬀeine, and smoking were either controlled for by our procedures or
by the speciﬁc statistical approach that was used. Our study is limited in
the sense that we only managed to match the groups on gender, not on
age. Age could also have had inﬂuences on the comparisons between
medicated and medication-free patients, as the medication-free patients
are younger and probably have a shorter duration of illness and had
fewer acute episodes. However, many studies failed to ﬁnd an eﬀect of
age on PPI (e.g. Oranje & Glenthøj, 2013; Düring et al., 2014; Yang
et al., 2017). Moreover, age did not covary signiﬁcantly in any of the
analyses of our present study. A further limitation is the small sample
size of the medication-free subgroup of patients. In addition, the con-
clusions drawn from the results of this study are pertinent only to males
and a re-examination in female subjects could be an interesting en-
deavor for future studies. Furthermore, the incorporation of unimodal
control conditions (both acoustic-only and electrocutaneous-only sti-
muli) would enable direct comparisons between within-modality versus
cross-modality PPI. Finally, future studies should test diﬀerent SOAs,
and possible eﬀects of diﬀerent prepulse intensities within a cross-
modal paradigm, to tease out the eﬀects of perceived versus actual SOA.
In conclusion, we were able to elicit PPI with a paradigm based on
cross-modal (electrocutaneous-acoustic) stimuli in both healthy con-
trols and schizophrenia patients. Moreover, we found less PPI in our
patients compared to controls, which is analogous to the results of
many previous studies using similar populations of subjects, yet using
unimodal PPI paradigms. Hence, our current results provide further
evidence that sensorimotor gating deﬁcits in schizophrenia are in-
dependent of stimulus modality. In addition, compared to those studies
reporting on unimodal paradigms, we detected less PPI regardless of
diagnostic group, which may be related to diﬀerent speeds of proces-
sing in the brain of the two stimuli modalities used.



Acknowledgements

