

1. Introduction

Attention constitutes a constellation of cognitive processes re-
sponsible for directing awareness to relevant stimuli and ﬁltering out
irrelevant information. Attentional impairments are known to con-
stitute performance reductions in other cognitive domains including
memory and executive functions in patients suﬀering from Alzheimer’s
disease (AD) [1,2]. The basal forebrain (BF) cholinergic system, con-
sisting of cortically-projecting neurons in the nucleus basalis magno-
cellularis (nBM) and substantia innominata (SI) region, mediates es-
sential aspects of attentional information processing [3,4], and
cholinergic dysregulation is a common feature of the mild cognitive
impairment (MCI) and AD pathology [5–8]. Thus, it is suggested that
disruption in cholinergic signaling may underlie cognitive decline in
MCI/AD. Aging is a well-known risk factor for AD. Although a gradual
weakening of the cholinergic system and subtle decrements in atten-
tional capacities have been reported in aging [9–13], the mechanisms
responsible for the accelerated decline in cholinergic function in
sporadic AD are not fully understood.

BF cholinergic neurons depend upon nerve growth factor (NGF) for
survival, growth, and maturation [14–16]. Substantial evidence in-
dicates that the cholinotrophic eﬀects of NGF are mediated by its
binding to the high-aﬃnity tropomyosin kinase A (trkA) receptors
[17–19]. Moreover, the loss of trkA receptors has been observed in the
postmortem brains of AD subjects [20–22]. Together, these studies
support the notion that perhaps deﬁcient trkA signaling in cholinergic
neurons may underlie their exceptional vulnerability and lead to cog-
nitive decline in AD [23,24]. However, neurotrophic modulation of the
cholinergic system and cognitive capacities has not been thoroughly
investigated in the context of aging, which is known to potentially in-
crease the risk of developing AD [25].

We previously found signiﬁcant attentional impairments and dis-
rupted cholinergic signaling in aged but not adult trkA-suppressed rats
[26]. In another follow-up study, we observed that cholinergic-atten-
tional capacities were partially rescued by blocking proNGF, a pre-
cursor of NGF, in trkA-suppressed aged rats [27]. ProNGF is known to
induce apoptotic signaling via its interaction with high-aﬃnity p75
receptors and the sortilin complex [28], and numerous studies in-
dicated that the expression of this pro-neurotrophin is elevated in aging
and AD [29–32]. Thus, age-related imbalance between proNGF/NGF
and trkA/p75 signaling may account for increased vulnerability of the
cholinergic system and associated cognitive impairments in AD.
Moreover, suppression of trkA signaling per se in young may not impose
any inimical eﬀects on the BF cholinergic system. This view is sup-
ported by a previous study showing that forebrain-speciﬁc targeted
deletion of NGF or trkA receptors exerted detrimental eﬀects on BF
cholinergic neurons during postnatal development but did not impact
learning and memory performance when assessed in either young adult
or intermediate-aged mice [33].

During the progression of sporadic AD, cortical areas are aﬀected in
a stereotypic sequence that recapitulates ontogenetic brain develop-
ment [34]. Although the available evidence supports the idea that
perhaps reduced trophic support during ontogenetic development and
maturation of the cortical cholinergic input system may escalate into
MCI and AD [35,36], the premise that developmental abrogation of BF
trkA signaling would accelerate age-related decline in the cholinergic
system and cognitive capacities has never been tested. Here we con-
ducted a longitudinal study to evaluate the life-long impact of devel-
opmental trkA suppression on attentional functions. We utilized an
adeno-associated viral (AAV) vector that expresses trkA-shRNA to se-
lectively knockdown trkA receptors in the BF during the postnatal
phase in rats when cholinergic projections make contact with cortical
target regions. The animals were trained in an operant sustained at-
tention task (SAT), and performance was assessed throughout adult-
hood until old age, at which point cholinergic signaling and mor-
phology were also evaluated. Developmental trkA suppression neither
accelerated the emergence, nor exacerbated the presence, of age-related
attentional impairments. Moreover, postnatal trkA disruption aﬀected
only certain aspects of cholinergic transmission in aged rats. Together,
our ﬁndings indicate that lifelong cognitive engagement may have
compensated for the detrimental eﬀects of developmental trkA knock-
down on age-related decline in attention processes and the cholinergic
transmission that these cognitive capacities depend on.

<Middle> Materials and methods.
2.1. Subjects.
Male Wistar rat pups [post-natal day (PND) 14] were purchased
from Charles River Laboratories (Malvern, PA, USA) along with the
nursing dams (8 pups/dam). Animals were maintained in a tempera-
ture- and humidity-controlled room with a 12:12 light-dark cycle
starting at 7AM at Temple University. At PND 18–21, rat pups under-
went stereotaxic intracranial infusions of AAV vectors (see procedure
below). Pups were returned to cages and maintained with the dams
until weaning at PND 22 following which the animals were group-
housed (2 per cage) with food and water ad libitum until the com-
mencement of further experiments. All experimental procedures were
conducted in accordance with the National Institute of Health guide-
lines and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee and the Institutional Biosafety Committee at Temple
University.

2.2. Stereotaxic surgeries and experimental design

Rat pups (PND 18–21) were prepared for stereotaxic surgeries to
produce knockdown of BF trkA receptors using an AAV vector-based
RNA interference (RNAi) approach. This developmental period was
selected because BF cholinergic neurons make contact with NGF-pro-
ducing target neurons throughout the cortical mantle during postnatal
weeks 3–5, and trkA signaling is critical in facilitating proper cortical
cholinergic innervation [37,18,38,39]. All surgeries were performed
under aseptic conditions. Pups were anesthetized with isoﬂurane (4–5%
for induction and 1–2% maintenance dose) using an anesthesia ma-
chine (Surgivet, Dublin, OH, USA) and mounted on a stereotaxic frame
(Model 962; David Kopf Instruments, Tujunga, CA, USA). The head of
the pups was positioned into the head frame using neonatal rat ear bars
containing Zygoma ear cups (David Kopf). An isothermal deltaphase
pad (Braintree Scientiﬁc, Braintree, MA, USA) was used to consistently
maintain animals’ body temperature at 37 °C throughout the surgical
procedure. A recombinant AAV vector previously designed and vali-
dated in our laboratory for in vivo suppression of trkA receptors (AAV-
trkA) was used in the present study [26,40]. This vector utilizes a
synthetic inhibitory B-cell receptor inducible gene BIC-derived RNA
(SIBR) expression plasmid to guide the expression of both the small
hairpin RNA (shRNA) against the trkA gene and the reporter gene
(green ﬂuorescent protein; GFP). Another AAV vector expressing
shRNA targeting the gene for ﬁreﬂy luciferase (AAV-luc) served as
control for non-speciﬁc virus eﬀects. Prior to the surgeries, AAV vectors
were desalted using the Hyclone buﬀer (University of Iowa Vector
Core). Rat pups received bilateral infusions of either AAV-trkA or AAV-
luc (1.5 μL/hemisphere; titer: 0.7-2.8 × 1013 vg/mL) into the BF, spe-
ciﬁcally targeting the nBM/SI region that contain cholinergic neurons
(from Bregma; A/P: −1.0; M/L: ± 2.3; D/V: −6.0). All injections
were made using a 10 μL Hamilton syringe (28 gauge) at a rate of 1 μL/
min. After cessation of the injection, the needle was left in place for an
additional 4 min to allow complete diﬀusion of virus particles and then
slowly withdrawn. The incision site was stapled and triple antibiotic
ointment was applied to the area surrounding the staples. Rat pups
were given injections of an antibiotic (Baytril, 0.01 mg/kg, s.c.) and an
analgesic (buprenorphine, 0.01 mg/kg, s.c.) prior to returning to the
nursing dam.

A schematic illustration of the experimental design is shown in
Fig. 1. To assess the impact of developmental trkA knockdown on
attentional capacities in aging rats, the animals (N = 8/vector manip-
ulation) were single-housed at 6 months of age and the operant beha-
vioral training was initiated (see task details below). Rats used for be-
havioral studies were handled extensively prior to training and were
partially water-deprived by restricting access to a 10-min period in the
home cage following each behavioral session. On non-training days,
water access was increased to a 30-min period. Food was available ad-
libitum throughout the duration of behavioral testing. Animals remained
on task until 24 months old and the eﬀects of vector manipulation and
age on behavioral performance were assessed on a monthly basis
starting from month 12 until the completion of the study. At 24 months,
animals underwent amperometric recording sessions to evaluate the
status of cortical cholinergic signaling followed by
immunohistochemical examination of trkA and choline acetyltransferase
(ChAT, a marker of cholinergic neurons) expression. A subset of animals
(N = 4-5/vector manipulation) was perfused at 6 weeks of age to assess
the eﬃciency of the viral vector for developmental trkA suppression
(see immunohistochemistry procedure below).
2.3. Operant training and testing procedures

Behavioral training and testing was conducted in modular operant
conditioning chambers made of clear polycarbonate and mounted on a
white polypropylene base (Med Associates Inc., St. Albans, VT, USA).
Each chamber contained a front stainless steel panel with three lights
(2.8 W each), two retractable levers, and a liquid receptacle attached to
a water dispenser in the center of the panel. The back panel of each
chamber contained a house light and the ﬂoor was composed of a
stainless steel grid bar. Operant chambers were enclosed in sound-at-
tenuating cubicles equipped with fans to dampen surrounding noise
(Fig. 2A). All events including signal delivery, lever presentations, and
reward delivery were transmitted using programs written in Medstate
notation via SmrtCtrl™ interface on a Dell Optiplex 960 computer.

Rats were trained in an operant SAT that encapsulates all elements
of signal detection theory to assess attentional capacities [41,10,42].
Animals were initially autoshaped on a FR-1 schedule of reinforcement
for water reward (0.02 mL water) to attain the lever press response.
During this phase, if the animals pressed the same lever > 5 times in
succession, the lever ceased to be reinforced until the discrepancy be-
tween the two levers was reduced. This step was adopted to deter the
development of a side bias. Once the rats made 120 lever presses within
a single autoshaping session, they progressed to the next phase of
training to learn paradigm contingencies. At this stage, the animals
were trained to distinguish between signal (illumination of the central
panel light for 1 s) and non-signal (no illumination) trials. Rats were
pseudo-randomly designated to a lever side under signal trial condi-
tions and had to respond on the opposite lever for non-signal trials. For
example, if a rat was designated to the left lever, on a signal trial, a left
lever press was rewarded (i.e., hit) but not a right lever press (i.e.,
miss). In contrast, a right lever press on a non-signal trial was rewarded
(i.e., correct rejection) but left lever press (i.e., false alarm) was not
rewarded (see Fig. 2B for task illustration). Levers were presented 2 s
after a 1s-long signal illumination. If rats did not lever press within 4 s
the levers were retracted, and it was deemed an omission. The assign-
ment of lever (left or right) for each trial type was counterbalanced
across animals within a group. The inter-trial
interval (ITI) was
12 ± 3s. During this training phase, an incorrect response elicited
correction trials in which the same trial type was repeated up to 4 se-
quential times to assist with learning the task contingencies. If the in-
correct behavior persisted a forced trial was provided, in which only the
correct lever was presented. Rats progressed to the ﬁnal training stage
when they performed 160 trials with ≥70% on hits and correct rejec-
tions and ≤20% omissions for three consecutive days.

The ﬁnal stage of SAT consisted of a pseudo-randomized sequence
of 81 signal (27 per signal duration) and 81 non-signal trials (total 162
trials). Each session was divided into three blocks of 54 trials (27 signal
trials and 27 non-signal trials). Signals occurred unpredictably at three
durations (500, 50, and 25 ms; Fig. 2B), with 9 trials/signal duration in
each block. Moreover, the ITI was reduced to 9 ± 3s, and the house
light remained illuminated throughout the session. These task condi-
tions are known to constrain rats’ behavior for continuous monitoring
of the central panel and tax attentional capacity [41]. Rats were char-
acterized as acquiring the task once they achieved ≥70% on 500 ms
signal duration trials, ≥70% on correct rejections, and ≤10% omis-
sions for three consecutive training sessions. To further assess the im-
pact of aging and developmental trkA knockdown on top-down atten-
tional capacity, rats were tested in a distractor version of SAT (dSAT) at
12 and 24 months of age, respectively. dSAT involved the presentation
of a visual distractor (ﬂashing house light at 0.5 Hz) in the second block
of the session.

Behavioral performance for each session was evaluated by calcu-
lating the proportion of hits (h = hits/hits + misses) for each signal
length and the proportion of false alarms (fa = false alarms/false
alarms + correct rejections). A composite measure of attention was
calculated as a performance score (SAT/dSAT) using the formula, (h-
fa)/[2(h + fa)-(h + fa)2], as described earlier [43]. SAT/dSAT scores

Fig. 2. Behavioral experiments in rats. A) Operant conditioning chambers enclosed in sound-attenuating cubicles used for behavioral training and testing. B) A schematic representation
of the sustained attention task (SAT). Rats discriminated between signal (illumination of the central panel light) and non-signal (no illumination) trials by exhibiting an appropriate lever
press response (either left or right). Animals were pseudo-randomly designated to a lever side for each trial condition. For a left lever assignment on a signal trial, a left lever press was
scored as a hit (h) and rewarded but a right lever press was scored as a miss (m) and was not rewarded. In contrast, a right lever press on a non-signal trial was scored as a correct rejection
(cr) and rewarded but not a left lever press which was considered a false alarm (fa). The assignment of lever (left or right) for each trial type was counterbalanced across animals within a
group. At the ﬁnal stage of SAT training, each session consisted of a pseudo-randomized sequence of 81 signal and 81 non-signal trials with an inter-trial interval of 9 ± 3s. Signals
occurred unpredictably at three durations (500, 50, and 25 ms) and the house light remained illuminated throughout the session.
ranged from −1 to +1; a score of +1 indicated correct responses on all
signal and non-signal trials, 0 indicated inability to discern signal and
non-signal trials, and −1 indicated all misses and false alarms in a
session. Latency for the lever press response under each performance
condition and percentage omissions were also calculated for each ses-
sion. Performance measures on three consecutive sessions were aver-
aged for each rat at a given age and used for statistical analysis.

2.4. In vivo amperometric recordings

Following the completion of behavioral studies at 24 months of age,
rats were prepared for amperometric recordings of cholinergic trans-
mission using enzyme-selective microelectrodes as described earlier
[26,44,45]. Brieﬂy, microelectrode arrays (Quanteon, Nicholasville,
KY, USA) consisting of four rectangular platinum recording sites ar-
ranged side by side in pairs were coated with choline oxidase (Sigma-
Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). The enzyme was immobilized to the
bottom pair of recording sites while the upper pair was coated with
bovine serum albumin and served as sentinel channels. The electrode
channels were electroplated with m-PD (m-phenylenediamine) to en-
hance the selectivity of choline against electroactive analytes such as
ascorbic acid (AA), dopamine (DA) and uric acid. Choline sensitivity
and selectivity was tested for all electrodes by conducting an in vitro
calibration. Electrodes that exhibited the following calibration criterion
were subsequently used for in vivo recordings: choline sensitivity > 3
pA/μM, limit of detection < 500 nM; selectivity ratio for choline:A-
A > 50, linear response for choline concentration R2 > 0.98, and DA
response < 3pA.

For in vivo recordings, rats were anesthetized with urethane (1.2-
1.5 g/kg, i.p.) and placed in a stereotaxic frame. Enzyme-coated mi-
croelectrodes were lowered into the right medial prefrontal cortex
(PFC; A/P: +3.0 mm, M/L: −0.7 mm, D/V: −2.7-3.0 mm) of rats using
a microdrive (MO-10, Narishige International, East Meadow, NY, USA).
Ag/AgCl reference electrodes were implanted into the rostral cortical
region of the contralateral hemisphere. Amperometric recordings were
conducted at 2 Hz by applying a ﬁxed potential of +0.7 V, and data
were digitized using a FAST-16 potentiostat (Quanteon). Background
currents were stabilized for 60 min following which drugs were locally
applied into the PFC using a glass capillary that was attached to the
tip diameter of 15–20 μm.
electrode and pulled to an internal
Depolarization-evoked acetylcholine (ACh) release that mimics the
phasic characteristics of cholinergic transmission on a temporal time
scale (second-based) was measured by applying brief pulses of po-
tassium (KCl, 70 mM; 200 nL) as reported earlier [45]. To determine
the consequences of trkA disruption on tonic changes in cortical ACh
release, we applied a high concentration of nicotine (100 μM; 200 nL)
that is known to produce long-lasting (minute-based) changes in cho-
linergic transmission presumably via low-aﬃnity α7 nicotinic receptor
activation [46,44]. Pulses of drug solutions were applied at 2–10 psi
every 2 min through the capillaries via PTFE tubing connected to a
picospritzer (ALA Scientiﬁc Instruments, Farmingdale, NY, USA). Cho-
line signals were analyzed with respect to peak signal amplitudes and
clearance (T50; time for a signal to be reduced by 50% of peak ampli-
tude). Self-referencing was adopted to eliminate any artifacts on en-
zyme-coated channels due to background noise levels or drug applica-
tion by subtracting currents from sentinel channels. Amperometric
recording data for KCl- and nicotine-elicited signals were binned at
0.5 s and 2.5 s, respectively. Nicotine-evoked signals were box-car ﬁl-
tered by a moving average of 2–5 data points. All data were expressed
as the average of three signals per manipulation per animal.

2.5. Immunohistochemistry and image analysis

Rats were transcardially perfused using 100 mL of ice-cold 0.1 M
phosphate-buﬀered saline (PBS) followed by 200 mL of 4% paraf-
ormaldehyde (PFA; pH 7.4-7.6). The brains were removed, post-ﬁxed

overnight in PFA, and then transferred to 30% sucrose (in 0.1 M PBS)
for 72 h. Coronal sections (50 μm thick) were obtained from the rostral-
caudal axis of the PFC (range: +3.5 mm to +2.5 mm A/P) and BF
(range: −1.0 mm to −1.9 mm A/P) using a freezing microtome
(SM2000R, Leica, Wetzlar, Germany). Slices were stored in cryopro-
tectant solution (15% glucose, 30% ethylene glycol, and 0.04% sodium
azide in 0.05 M PBS) at −20 °C until further processing.

Vector targeting of BF cholinergic neurons and eﬃciency of trkA
knockdown was assessed using GFP/ChAT double immunostaining and
trkA immunohistochemistry as described previously [26,40]. Brieﬂy,
serial sections from the BF regions were randomly selected and rinsed
in 0.5 M tris-buﬀered saline (TBS), blocked with 10% donkey serum
and incubated overnight in goat anti-ChAT (1:200; EMD Millipore,
Billerica, MA, USA). Sections were rinsed in TBS containing 1% triton
X100 (TBST; 3 × 5 min), tagged with rhodamine-conjugated donkey
anti-goat antibody (1:250; Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories; West
Grove, PA, USA), mounted onto gelatin-coated slides, coverslipped with
Prolong Gold Anti-fade with DAPI mounting media (Life Technologies,
Grand Island, NY, USA), and visualized for colocalization of GFP pro-
tein in ChAT-positive neurons. Parallel sections assessed for trkA ex-
pression levels were blocked for endogenous peroxidase using 0.3%
H2O2. To eliminate non-speciﬁc binding of the primary antibody, slices
were blocked in 10% goat serum. Sections were incubated with rabbit
anti-trkA antibody (1:1000; EMD Millipore) overnight. Following rin-
sing with TBST (3 × 5 min), sections were incubated with biotinylated
goat anti-rabbit IgG (pre-diluted; EMD Millipore) for 2 h. The staining
was developed by incubating the sections in streptavidin-HRP followed
by 3-3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) and ammonium nickel sulfate. Stained
sections were mounted on gelatin-coated slides, air dried, dehydrated,
and coverslipped with DPX. To assess the morphology of cholinergic
neurons and terminal distribution, serial sections from the BF (nBM/SI
region) and medial PFC were stained for ChAT as described earlier
[26,40]. Free-ﬂoating sections were incubated with goat anti-ChAT
antibody (1:100; EMD Millipore) and peroxidase staining was devel-
oped using HRP-conjugated donkey anti-goat (1:1000 for cell bodies
and 1:200 for terminals) and DAB.

All sections were analyzed using a Leica ﬂuorescent microscope
equipped with DFC 425C digital camera and Leica Application Suite 3
software (Leica Microsystems Inc., Buﬀalo Grove, IL, USA). Fluorescent
images were captured at 200 x using green and red ﬁlters to visualize
the expression of GFP and ChAT in both hemispheres. Viral vector co-
localization with BF cholinergic neurons was calculated as the per-
centage of ChAT-positive neurons co-expressing GFP out of 100 choli-
nergic neurons (50/hemisphere). For the analysis of BF trkA expression,
images were acquired in the light microscope mode and processed for
quantitative image analysis using NIH ImageJ analysis software.
Digitized images (400 x magniﬁcation) were processed in binary mode
and threshold levels were adjusted to enhance the visibility of cell
bodies. The density of trkA receptors was expressed as percentage of
trkA-positive pixels in the analyzed area (325 μm × 245 μm) from both
hemispheres. Morphometric analysis of cholinergic neurons involved
the measurement of cell size as described previously [26,40]. Mean
cross-sectional area of ChAT-positive neurons was calculated from
randomly selected sampling areas (400 x magniﬁcation) within the
nBM/SI region from both hemispheres. Cell borders were outlined
manually and the area (in pixel2 units) was calculated by NIH ImageJ
based on the user-deﬁned border. Cross-sectional area was converted
from pixels2 to μm2 based on image magniﬁcation (scaling factor: 12.09
pixels/μm). TrkA-densities and mean cross-sectional ChAT areas were
averaged from both hemispheres and data are expressed as analyses
from three sections per animal. PFC ChAT-immunoreactive ﬁber den-
sity was analyzed using a grid counting procedure [26,42,40] from the
right prelimbic region (cortical layers III/V), which was also used to
measure ACh release following terminal depolarization (see ampero-
metric recordings above). Images were captured at 400 x magniﬁcation
and threshold levels were uniformly adjusted across all sections to
maximize visualization of ChAT-positive ﬁbers in Adobe Photoshop CS4
(Adobe Systems Inc., San Jose, CV). Cholinergic ﬁbers were manually
traced and counted using a 50 × 50 μm grid for a total area of
40,000 μm2. Average ﬁber counts were based on three sections per
region per animal.

2.6. Statistics

Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS/PC+ version 24.0
(IBM-SPSS, Armonk, NY, USA). Mixed-design analysis of variance
(ANOVA) tests were applied to analyze behavioral data with age, signal
duration, and/or block as within-subject factors, and trkA manipulation
as a between-subject factor. When appropriate, a one-way ANOVA,
followed by Bonferroni post hoc test for multiple comparisons, was
conducted to determine the source of interaction.
Immunohistochemical and amperometric analyses were conducted
using a one-way ANOVA to determine the impact of developmental
trkA manipulation on trkA density, age, cholinergic morphology and
functionality. A cut-oﬀ p value of 0.05 was considered statistically
signiﬁcant.
3. Results

3.1. Long-term suppression of BF trkA receptors following postnatal infusion
of AAV vector

We ﬁrst assessed the eﬃcacy of the recombinant AAV vector to
suppress trkA receptors in BF neurons, which was injected during the
developmental phase when cholinergic neurons make connections with
NGF-producing cortical regions and NGF-trkA signaling ﬁne tunes this
projection system. Rat pups were infused with the viral vector expres-
sing trkA shRNA or luc shRNA into the BF during postnatal week 3 and
brain sections were visualized at 6 weeks old. As shown in Fig. 3(A, B),
the vector spread, exempliﬁed by the expression of the reporter protein
GFP, into the nBM/SI region and its colocalization with ChAT-positive
neurons indicate that our strategy targeted cholinergic neurons, > 80%
of which express trkA receptors in this region in rats [47]. BF trkA re-
ceptor expression observed at 6 weeks of age signiﬁcantly declined in
AAV-trkA-infused rat pups as compared to pups infused with the control
vector (F(1,9) = 2.86, p < 0.03; Fig. 3D, E). These observations are in
line with our previous work that utilized the AAV vector-based RNAi
approach to target trkA receptors in the nBM/SI region in young and
aged rats [26,40]. Next, we examined brain slices from animals that
have undergone behavioral assessment for 24 months. Assessment of
GFP/ChAT colocalization revealed that infection persisted in 47 ± 5%
of BF cholinergic neurons, indicating that the vector delivered during
the developmental period could maintain stable gene expression in
aged rats (Fig. 3C). Additionally, quantitative analysis of trkA im-
munoreactivity revealed a signiﬁcant reduction of BF trkA protein le-
vels in rats that received AAV-trkA infusions during the postnatal
period (F(1,12) = 2.17, p < 0.05; Fig. 3F,G), demonstrating a sus-
tained decrease in trkA levels for 24 months. It is important to note that
although the reduction in trkA receptors were more robust (79% in-
hibition) during development as compared to reductions noted in aged
rats (47% inhibition), the diﬀerence appeared to be related to a natural
decline of trkA receptors from the post-natal period to adulthood and
old age (age eﬀect: 6 weeks vs 24 months; p < 0.01), rather than a loss
of eﬃcacy of the shRNA [19].

3.2. Developmental trkA knockdown and SAT performance in aging rats

A total of 16 rat pups infused with AAV vectors (N = 8/condition)
began SAT training at 6 months. The animals required 38 ± 5 training
sessions to attain criterion performance. One AAV-luc-infused rat never
reached criterion and was excluded from the study. Average SAT scores
for adult AAV-luc- and AAV-trkA-infused animals examined at 9 months
of age remained comparable (F(1,10) = 0.03, p = 0.98). The impact of
developmental trkA suppression on attentional capacity in aging ani-
mals was assessed by subsequently comparing the performance be-
tween AAV-luc and AAV-trkA animals on a bimonthly basis starting
from 12 months of age until the completion of the study at 24 months.
Behavioral testing was discontinued due to deteriorating health in 4
animals (2/condition) at 16 months of age. At this time point, the
performance of these rats was similar to other rats that completed the
study (average SAT scores: 0.41 ± 0.09 vs 0.58 ± 0.05; F(1,14)
= 2.93, p = 0.11). The data from these animals were not included in
subsequent analyses, comparing performance until 24 months of age. A
mixed ANOVA with signal (3-levels) and age (9 month, 12–24 bi-
monthly time points; 8-levels) as within-subject factors and trkA ma-
nipulation (2-levels) as a between-subject factor was used to analyze
attentional performance. This analysis revealed a signiﬁcant main eﬀect
of signal (F(2126) = 130.55; p < 0.001), a main eﬀect of age (F
(7126) = 12.87; p < 0.001), and a signiﬁcant interaction between the
two factors (F(14,126) = 2.24; p < 0.02) on SAT scores. However,
developmental trkA suppression did not aﬀect attentional performance
(main eﬀect: F(1,9) = 0.08; p = 0.78), and no 3-way interaction be-
tween age, signal duration and the developmental trkA manipulation on
performance was observed (F(14,126) = 1.47; p = 0.13). To determine
the source of interaction between signal duration-dependent perfor-
mance and age, a one-way repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted
on SAT scores for each signal. A consistent decline in attentional per-
formance with rising age was observed in both AAV-luc and AAV-trkA-
infused rats for all signal durations (all F(7,63) > 7.82; p < 0.001;
Fig. 4A–C). Post-hoc comparisons revealed that deﬁcits in SAT scores
arose at 24 months on trials with 50 ms and 25 ms signal durations,
respectively (both p < 0.03 vs 9-month). Response latencies increased
with age (main eﬀect: F(7,63) = 7.24; p < 0.001; see Fig. 3D for
multiple comparisons), and these data are in accordance with human
studies that show decrements in reaction times in attentional tasks in
older adults [48,49]. Like SAT scores, response latencies remained
comparable between the AAV-luc and AAV-trkA animals (F(1,9)
= 0.10; p = 0.75), and no interaction between age and vector infusion
was observed on this behavioral measure (F(7,63) = 0.37; p = 0.91).
Aging rats omitted more trials (main eﬀect of age: F(7,63) = 2.41;
p < 0.04). However, omissions did not diﬀer by vector infusion (F
(1,9) = 0.05; p = 0.83) and the age x vector infusion interaction re-
mained insigniﬁcant (F(7,63) = 0.95; p = 0.47). Because the rate of
omissions remained very low throughout the behavioral testing of an-
imals (range: 0% − 9.8%), and SAT scores are not confounded by this
measure (see Methods), the age eﬀect is indicative of subtle changes in
motivational states to perform the task, which does not impact the
composite index of attentional performance.

3.3. Attentional capacities under distracting conditions

To assess the consequences of developmental trkA suppression on
attentional capacity under conditions of high cognitive load in aging
rats, a visual distractor was presented during the second block of the
test session (dSAT) when rats were 12 and 24 months old, respectively.
A mixed-factor repeated-measures ANOVA with block (3-levels) and
age (2-levels) as within-subject variables displayed a main eﬀect of
block (F(2,18) = 23.44; p < 0.001), a main eﬀect of age (F(1,18)
= 6.98; p < 0.03), and a signiﬁcant interaction between the two fac-
tors F(2,18) = 4.48; p < 0.04). One-way ANOVA showed that at 12
months of age, distractor presentation robustly diminished perfor-
mance, as noted by a main eﬀect of block (F(2,18) = 22.28; p < 0.01),
with a post-hoc analysis demonstrating deﬁcits arising in block 2 (i.e.,
distractor presentation) compared to block 1 (p < 0.001) and block 3
(p < 0.03; Fig. 5A). However, at 24 months old, this main eﬀect of
block induced by the distractor presentation was no longer observed (F
(2,18) = 1.21, p = 0.33; Fig. 5B). This shift may be attributed to the
overall reduction in attentional performance under baseline conditions
at 24 months (Block 1: F(1,20) = 18.74; p < 0.001; 12 vs 24 months)
rather than impaired ability to cope up with a distractor challenge
(Block 3: F(1,20) = 3.36; p = 0.08; 12 vs 24 months). Surprisingly,
AAV-trkA-infused rats performed similarly to AAV-luc-infused rats
under distracting conditions [main eﬀect for trkA manipulation as a
between-subject factor: (F(1,9) = 0.18, p = 0.68)] and the three-way
interaction remained insigniﬁcant (block x age x trkA manipulation: F
(2,18) = 2.44, p = 0.12). Because baseline attentional capacity was
aﬀected in both groups at 24 months, we cannot rule out that a ﬂoor
eﬀect might have contributed to the lack of performance diﬀerences in
the distractor session.

3.4. Impact of life-long suppression of trkA receptors on cholinergic function
in attention task-performing rats

The status of cholinergic transmission was determined by in vivo
monitoring of ACh dynamics in the medial PFC from aged rats after the
completion of behavioral testing. Potassium and nicotine pulses were

locally applied to generate choline spikes that represent hydrolyzed
choline from newly released ACh events and mimic phasic and tonic
characteristics of cholinergic transmission based on its temporal time-
scale [53–55]. Average second-based increases in extracellular choline
levels recorded following terminal depolarization in the medial PFC are
depicted in Fig. 6A. The amplitudes of depolarization-evoked choli-
nergic signals did not diﬀer between the AAV-trkA- and AAV-luc-in-
fused aged rats (F(1,7) = 1.04, p = 0.33; Fig. 6B). Moreover, the
clearance of choline signals remained unaﬀected by the developmental
trkA manipulation (t50: F(1,7) = 0.66, p = 0.53; Fig. 6C). As expected,
local application of nicotine produced a robust increase in cholinergic
transmission that lasted hundreds of seconds in aged rats infused with
the control vector (see population traces in Fig. 6D). Interestingly, de-
velopmental trkA suppression produced a drastic reduction in the am-
plitudes on nicotine-evoked choline signals (F(1,7) = 2.32, p < 0.05;
Fig. 6E). Additionally, the T50 values of these signals remained sig-
niﬁcantly lower as compared to the AAV-luc-infused rats (F(1,7)
= 2.57, p < 0.05; Fig. 6F).
The impact of developmental trkA knockdown was also examined
on the morphology of BF cholinergic neurons and cortical cholinergic
terminal density using ChAT immunohistochemistry in the postmortem
brains of aged rats. As depicted in Fig. 6G and H, the mean cross-sec-
tional area of BF ChAT-positive neurons did not diﬀer between the
AAV-luc- and AAV-trkA-infused rats
(F(1,12) = 0.82, p = 0.43).
Moreover, densitometric analysis of ChAT-positive ﬁbers sampled from
the prelimbic region of the medial PFC exhibited no signiﬁcant diﬀer-
ences
(AAV-luc: 121.54 ± 14.39; AAV-trkA:
112.39 ± 4.54; F(1,12) = 0.61, p = 0.56). Collectively, these data
indicate that although certain aspects of cholinergic transmission were
aﬀected by developmental trkA suppression in aged rats engaged in an
attention task for the full extent of their lives, the integrity of the cor-
tical cholinergic input system was not impacted.


<Conclusion> Discussion.
The cholinotrophic eﬀects of NGF-trkA signaling during develop-
ment are well established [50,51,35]. Moreover, reduced trkA receptor
density observed in AD subjects has been shown to correlate with
deteriorating cognitive performance [20,24]. Because BF cholinergic
signaling is critical for attentional performance [52,4], we hypothesized
that developmental suppression of trkA signaling would escalate age-
related attentional vulnerability by producing cholinergic disruption.
To test this premise, we utilized an AAV vector-based RNAi approach to
knockdown BF trkA during the developmental maturation of the cor-
ticopetal cholinergic circuit and examined the interactions between
age-related changes in attentional function and trkA disruption using a
longitudinal study design. In spite of developmental reductions in BF
trkA receptor expression levels, AAV-trkA-infused rats exhibited com-
parable decline in attentional capacity with rising age as compared to
control animals. Although nicotinic cholinergic transmission in aging
was impacted by developmental trkA knockdown, the morphology of
BF cholinergic neurons, prefrontal cholinergic innervation, and depo-
larization-evoked ACh release in aged rats remained unaﬀected.
AAV vectors allow eﬃcient neuronal infection and maintenance of
gene expression for a long period of time in rodents [53,54]. Moreover,
quantitative analysis of trkA immunoreactivity revealed signiﬁcant re-
ductions of BF trkA protein levels in rats that received AAV-trkA infu-
sions during the postnatal period, and these reductions persisted until
24 months of age. This suggests that our AAV vector-based RNAi ap-
proach produced stable and long-lasting expression of trkA shRNA from
the SIBR plasmid in the cholinergic neurons that mostly express trkA
receptors in the BF region. It is important to note that ∼45-50% re-
duction in trkA receptor levels was maintained in these rats, and this
degree of trkA loss has been reported in mild to moderate AD patients
exhibiting cognitive impairments [55,20]. We also previously observed
attentional impairments in aged rats that received a vector manipula-
tion, producing a similar magnitude of trkA reduction [26,40]. Fur-
thermore, the same strategy was employed in the present study to
produce developmental suppression of trkA receptors, and trkA
knockdown persisted in aged rats, which was at a comparable level to
our earlier work. Together, these ﬁndings dismiss the possibility that
the lack of performance diﬀerences noted between the aging rats in-
fused with AAV-trkA and AAV-luc vector during the postnatal period
could have resulted from either insuﬃcient shRNA expression or trkA
degradation due to the vector.
As noted previously, the integrity of the BF cholinergic system de-
pends upon NGF-trkA signaling [18,56,19]. Moreover, accelerated age-
related cellular changes including the production of amyloid-β, which is
also observed in AD and exerts a negative eﬀect on cholinergic neurons,
are predicted to occur due to a shift in trkA receptor signaling from
neurotrophic to apoptotic signaling. This shift is mediated by the p75
receptor, a low-aﬃnity NGF receptor [57–59]. We previously reported
that suppression of trkA signaling further exacerbated age-related re-
ductions in cholinergic soma size and terminal densities [26]. Ad-
ditionally, depolarization-evoked ACh release, which mimics temporal
characteristics of phasic cholinergic transients critical for the detection
of attention-demanding cues, declined in the PFC of trkA knockdown
aged rats, and this eﬀect was partially rescued by blockade of p75
signaling with a proNGF antibody [40]. Together, these ﬁndings illu-
strated that the aging cholinergic system is exceptionally vulnerable to
trkA dysregulation. In contrast to our earlier studies, persistent sup-
pression of trkA receptors from early development into old age did not
aﬀect the integrity of the cortical cholinergic input system and the
ability of cholinergic synapses to produce cholinergic transients in the
PFC, as compared to aged-matched controls with intact trkA receptors
in the present study. Moreover, attentional performance mirrored this
pattern, with no diﬀerences emerging throughout aging in trkA-
knockdown and control rats. Tonic cortical cholinergic activity is
known to reﬂect the status of top-down attentional capacity [60]. Al-
though tonic increases in ACh release following local application of
nicotine in the PFC was attenuated in AAV-trkA-infused rats, the dSAT
performance, which recruits top-down mechanisms in aging, remained
unaﬀected with the developmental trkA suppression. Together, these
ﬁndings indicate that postnatal trkA knockdown aﬀected only certain
aspects of cholinergic transmission in aging and that these disruptions
were insuﬃcient to impact attentional capacities. Because nicotinic
cholinergic signaling is implicated in a wide range of behaviors in-
cluding spatial and contextual learning and working memory [61–63],
the long-term eﬀects of developmental trkA disruption on cognitive
domains beyond attention remains to be seen.

It is plausible that extensive practice eﬀects may have diluted the
eﬀect of developmental trkA suppression on attentional capacities.
However, the persistent presence of a vigilance decrement into old age,
reﬂected as signal duration-dependent performance eﬀects, in our study
(see Results) argues against the development of any habitual re-
sponding. This is consistent with a previous longitudinal study that
reported vigilance decrements until 31 months following lifelong SAT
training in rats [64]. In addition, we did observe a progressive decline
in attentional capacities with age in both the developmentally-sup-
pressed trkA and developmentally-intact trkA rats, which presumably
would have resulted from a natural decline in trkA signaling. Thus, it
seems unlikely that prolonged training of animals might have con-
tributed to a lack of performance eﬀects between these two groups of
rats.

In the past decade, the concept of cognitive reserve has emerged,
positing that engagement in mental/cognitive activity exerts neuro-
protective eﬀects and enhances the capacity for functional compensa-
tion [65–67]. In rats, performance in a spatial learning task elicited age-
speciﬁc shifts in redox homeostasis, with young-adult animals demon-
strating reductions in oxidative stress while aged rats displayed in-
creased antioxidant capacity in several brain regions including the
frontal cortex, olfactory bulb, pons and medulla oblongata [68].
Moreover, cognitive training produced functional and enzymatic
changes, such as greater functional connectivity between task-depen-
dent brain regions and increased frontal and hippocampal ChAT levels
[69–71]. In the present study, all animals that underwent develop-
mental trkA manipulation were performing SAT from young adulthood
until old age. Thus, it is possible that constant recruitment of BF cortical
cholinergic inputs through lifelong engagement in attentional activity
might have bolstered this circuit to withstand some of the insult pro-
duced through reduced trkA signaling during development. Ad-
ditionally, persistent cognitive activity could plausibly have minimized
the impact of developmental trkA disruption by strengthening the dy-
namic interactions between BF cholinergic neurons and neuromodula-
tory systems such as the hypothalamic orexin/hypocretin system, that
has also been suggested to regulate attentional functions [72–74]. At
the molecular level, one potential player that could mediate circuit-
level plasticity could be the brain-derived neurotrophic factor that is
known to exert neuroprotective eﬀects on cholinergic neurons and
whose expression increases with persistent cortical activity [75–77].
Lastly, in alignment with the cognitive reserve idea, activation of
compensatory non-cholinergic networks may explain the lack of dSAT
performance diﬀerences between trkA-knockdown and trkA-intact aged
rats despite alterations in tonic cholinergic signaling. In light of current
evidence, these interpretations remain speculative, and future experi-
ments on the neurobiological underpinnings of cognitive reserve and
how this neuroadaptive mechanism protects attentional functions from
insults that increase the vulnerability of the cholinergic system are
warranted.

Cholinergic responsivity is also known to be altered during normal
aging [78,26,79,13], and the gradual yet modest declines in the ability
to detect signals with rising age noted in the present study may have
resulted from progressive age-related cholinergic deﬁcits as suggested
earlier [80,10,12]. However, this study remains limited in providing
insights on whether sustained cognitive activity minimizes the detri-
mental eﬀects of normal aging on cholinergic-attentional capacities.
This would require an age-matched non-performing control group of
animals that received similar manipulations during development and
were assessed for attentional performance and the status of their cho-
linergic signaling in old age.

In conclusion, our results indicate that postnatal reductions in BF
trkA receptors did not impact cholinergic integrity and attentional ca-
pacities in aging rats that had received cognitive training throughout
life. Although disruption in NGF-trkA signaling is known to drive
cholinergic pathology in AD, recruitment of brain compensatory me-
chanisms seems to counter the detrimental eﬀects of early cholinergic
compromise on attentional functions in advanced age. Our ﬁndings
provide strong support to the idea that reserve mechanisms orche-
strated by cognitively stimulating environments may have the potential
to either minimize or delay the progression of AD [81]. More research is
needed to delineate speciﬁc neurobiological mechanisms that provide
resilience to cognitive capacities in pathological aging.


Acknowledgements
