

1. Introduction

In recent years, opioids have become the second most commonly
initiated drug of abuse. A study by the National Survey of Drug Use and
Health revealed that 12.5 million Americans reported opioid abuse. As a
consequence, the incidence of overdose is reaching alarming rates
across North America [1].

A major limiting factor in the ﬁght against opioid abuse is the
limited number of therapies currently available. Despite the current
situation, there is no eﬀective medical treatment for this type of ad-
diction. Substitution therapies are the only options currently available,
consisting of a slow acting opioid such as methadone [2] or in some
cases a combination of partial agonists (buprenorphine) and antagonists
(naltrexone) [1]. Despite some success in controlling drug intake, these
therapies do not treat drug seeking directly and are often unsuccessful
[1], leading to a high rate of relapse. Therefore, increasing eﬀorts are
being put toward the development of drug addiction models to study
the biological mechanism of substance abuse and to ﬁnd new treatment
options. So far, rodents and non-human primates have been used almost
exclusively [3].

Over the years, two main categories of assays have been developed
to study addiction in animal models. The ﬁrst consists of the non-con-
tingent assays, including locomotor sensitization and the conditioned
place preference paradigms. The second category consists of the con-
tingent models, including diﬀerent types of self-administration assays
requiring a self-operant response in order to receive a dose [4]. Con-
tingent assays are considered more signiﬁcant and have been shown to
be an eﬃcient way to identify compounds aﬀecting addiction [5]. One
of the main diﬀerences between these two categories resides in the fact
that conditioned place preference is a form of passive administration, as
opposed to self-administration, which is an active administration. This
distinction is important because studies have demonstrated that active
administration leads to diﬀerent molecular and structural changes in
the addicted brain [6,7].

An interesting alternative to rodents or non-human primates in
fundamental research is Danio rerio (zebraﬁsh), which is becoming an
important model for dissecting complex neurological disorders [8,9].
Previous studies demonstrated that zebraﬁsh are sensitive to a wide
variety of drugs of abuse [10–15], including opioids [11,16]. In fact,
several important neuronal networks implicated in addiction in humans
are conserved in zebraﬁsh [17,18]. As with other models, ﬁsh show
signs of addiction as well as withdrawal symptoms [19–22].
In addition, given its ease of genetic manipulation and the ability to per-
form in vivo small molecule screening, zebraﬁsh have potential to be a
powerful addition to the addiction research community.

Thus far, most substance abuse research in zebraﬁsh has been based
on the conditioned place preference paradigm [11,13,14,23]. In these
assays, a drug is delivered in a speciﬁc area of a tank combined with a
speciﬁc visual cue, and trained ﬁsh developed a preference for the area
presenting the cue. Alternatively, a choice assay has been described in
which ﬁsh larvae are given the option between an opioid solution in
one end of the tank and a drug-free environment at the other end.
Zebraﬁsh larvae preferentially swim toward the side with morphine,
and this preference is dependent on the dopamine pathway [16]. So far,
a very limited number of active administration assays have been re-
ported with zebraﬁsh. Recently, an active alcohol administration pro-
tocol was designed in which ﬁsh are trained to voluntary consume
gelatin containing various percentages of ethanol. Using this technique,
it was shown that ﬁsh consume a larger amount of a 10% EtOH gelatin
compared to gelatin without EtOH [24]. Although this assay is an active
form of administration, there was no increase in administration over
time and no evidence of addiction development. Therefore, the use of
zebraﬁsh as an addiction model remains limited by the absence of a
bona ﬁde self-administration model.

In order to overcome such limitations, we developed an opioid self-
administration assay using young adult zebraﬁsh, modeled after the
self-administrations used in mammals. In this assay, ﬁsh are trained to
trigger the delivery of a hydrocodone solution by swimming across a
speciﬁc underwater platform within a test arena. Fish trained to self-
administer opioids demonstrate an escalation in the number of doses
received, and self-administration is dependent on the μ-opioid receptor
as well as two key pathways for drug addiction: the dopamine and
glutamate pathways. The development of this assay will enable im-
proved understanding of the biological mechanism driving drug seeking.

<Middle> Methods.
2.1. Animal housing
Ekkwill strain zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio) (EkkWill Waterlife Resources)
were maintained and embryos were obtained according to standard ﬁsh
husbandry protocols and with the approval of the Massachusetts
General Hospital and University of Utah Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committees.

2.2. Experimental apparatus

2.2.1. Design of the testing arena

The conditioning arena consists of a plastic tray (4-3/4 Gallon
Shallow Tray − 17-1/2"L x 15-1/2"W x 5"H, USPlastic, USA) with de-
limited submersible square platforms and connected to a larger water
reservoir (15 gallons plastic bin, USPlastic, USA) equipped with a pump
(Supreme Aqua-Mag, Thatﬁshplace, USA) to generate a continuous re-
circulating ﬂow of water (Fig. 1A). The arena is illuminated with a
warm white light source (2700 K, 40 W, CFL bulb, McMasterCarr, USA)
providing just enough light to allow the ﬁsh to identify the diﬀerent
platforms without aﬀecting behavior (Fig. 1A).

Infrared cameras (PiNoir camera, Adafruit, USA) are installed over
each platform and are each connected to a mini-computer Raspberry Pi
2 (Adafruit, USA) to monitor movement above each platform. To gen-
erate optimal
light conditions for the camera, an LED strip light
(850 nm, Environmental Lights, USA) was installed above the arena.

One of the platforms is called the “active platform” and is yellow
while the “inactive platform” is identical but is white. The color yellow
was chosen because ﬁsh do not seem to have a natural preference for
this color [25,26]. The computer connected to the camera above the
active platform also controls a peristaltic 12 V pump (Adafruit, USA)

and a small green LED (Adafruit, USA). A small silicone tube is ﬁxed to
one side of the active platform to allow direct delivery of the drug at the
platform.

2.2.2. Development of the coding script

The Raspberry Pi2 used in our assay runs on the latest Raspbian
operating system and a homemade Python script was written to control
the assay. The script was designed to detect the movement generated by
a ﬁsh swimming across the platform by comparing the pixel diﬀerence
between the image of the current frame with the average image of the
previous frames. Movement above a platform was deﬁned as a trig-
gering event when the pixel diﬀerence was higher than a manually set
threshold. The threshold was set to the minimum value for which the
circulating water was not triggering the pump and was set for each
experiment. The code was also designed to record the elapsed time,
save an image of the frame in which the motion is detected and record
the total number of triggering events detected. Finally, when a trig-
gering event was detected above the active platform, the pump and the
LED light were activated for 0.3 s to deliver a dose of drug and to
provide a secondary reinforcing cue.

2.3. Animal conditioning

2.3.1. Animal pre-conditioning

Two to three-month-old ﬁsh were used as they are large enough to
provide good movement detection yet small enough to maintain in
large groups.

The main goal of this assay was to condition ﬁsh to associate the
action of swimming over the active platform with receiving a dose of
drug. Because the arena was a novel environment which could be a
source of stress [27] and the fact that opioids can be aversive for naïve
animals [28], we decided to perform pre-conditioning sessions. The pre-
conditioning protocol was divided in two steps, the ﬁrst one consisted
of performing one habituation session of 50 min daily for 5 days in the
arena, allowing the ﬁsh to swim freely in the arena. During those ses-
sions, ﬁsh food (Larval, AP100, Zeigler, USA) was administered when
motion was detected above the active platform, thus providing a reward
for this action. These sessions allowed the animals to acclimatize to the
arena and forged a positive association with the action of swimming
across the active platform. At the opposite end, swimming above the
inactive platform did not trigger anything, thus no positive reinforce-
ment was developed toward this platform.

The second step of the pre-conditioning was to expose the animals
to hydrocodone (1.5 mg/L) for 60 min in a separate tank following the
session in the arena. Such pre-exposure to an opioid has been shown to
improve opioid self-administration training in rodents [28,29].

Additionally, to further reduce the stress associated with our assay,
we decided to condition the animals in groups of 15 ﬁsh, as it has been
shown that social isolation is a stressful condition for zebraﬁsh [30].
The number of animals was selected based on early preliminary tests in
the arena (data not shown). To avoid pre-selection bias and to get a
more uniform training across the diﬀerent groups, ﬁsh were re-grouped
each night in large tanks containing 50–70 animals.

The combination of pre-training in the arena and pre-exposure to
opioids served to acclimatize ﬁsh to the assay, forge a positive asso-
ciation with the active platform and sensitize the animals to opioids.

2.3.2. Opioid self-administration conditioning

The opioid self-administration conditioning followed an approach
similar to the pre-conditioning. Small groups of 15 animals were
trained for 50 min daily for 5 consecutive days. As with the pre-con-
ditioning, to avoid any bias toward gender or potential genetic pre-
disposition between the diﬀerent groups, as well as to generate uniform
trainings, animals were kept in large groups between sessions and
conditioned in randomly selected subgroups of 15.

As with the pre-conditioning, ﬁsh were allowed to swim freely in the
arena but with the added factor of triggering the release of a dose of
1.5 μg of hydrocodone from a solution of 6 mg/L diluted in water from
the main system by swimming across the active platform. Each trig-
gering event resulted in drug delivery, in accordance with a ﬁxed ratio
(FR) training previously established in other models [3,28]. The con-
tinuous ﬂow of water prevented the saturation of the system and forced
ﬁsh to re-activate the pump in order to receive another dose of drug.

2.4. Animal behavior

2.4.1. Novel tank assay

The novel tank assay was performed in a 1.5L tank (15.2 cm height
x 7.1 cm width x 27.9 cm long from Aquatic Habitats, Apopkam, USA)
ﬁlled with water from the main system. The assay was performed be-
tween 12pm and 4pm and recorded for 5 min. We tested 3 ﬁsh at the
same time as it has been suggested that small groups could yield more
consistent results than individual ﬁsh [31]. The animals were trans-
ferred to the middle of the novel tank. The ActualTrack software (Ac-
tualAnalysis, UK) was used to analyze the videos. To analyze the ex-
ploration rate, two zones were created in the software, the center and
the rest of the tank. The software recorded the position of the ﬁsh in the
tank and generated the data for the latency to enter the diﬀerent zones,
time spent, number of visits in the zones. The software gave the position
(x, y) of the body center for each ﬁsh, the latency to enter the other
area, the total time spent in the diﬀerent areas and the number of visits.
The coordinates of the body center of each ﬁsh were used to calculate
the distance between each pair of animals with the equation.
2.5. Chemical treatment

The following chemicals were use in this paper; Hydrocodone hy-
drochloride (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), Naloxone hydrochloride dihydrate
(Sigma-Aldrich, USA), SCH-23390 hydrochloride (Tocris, UK), MK-801
maleate (Tocris, UK), Ketamine hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich, USA)
and CNQX (Tocris, UK).

3. Results

3.1. Opioid conditioning

To test our conditioning protocol, we used a wild-type strain of
zebraﬁsh (Ekkwill) and analyzed the number of triggering events pro-
duced in every training session for the active and the inactive platforms.
The analysis of the number of triggering events revealed that on the
ﬁrst day of training, there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence detected be-
tween the active platform (1249 ± 338 events) compared to the in-
active platform (956 ± 380 events) (Fig. 1B).

As the week progressed, the number of triggering events increased
for the active platform and decreased for the inactive platform such that
the diﬀerence between the two platforms became signiﬁcant (Fig. 1B).
By day 5, there were 1771 ± 369 triggering events detected above the
active platform, representing a 41% increase compared to day 1,
whereas, we observed a total of 139 ± 51 triggering event at the in-
active platform representing an 85% decrease in triggering events for
the inactive platform between the ﬁrst and last day of training. Thus,
the increase in events detected is speciﬁc for the active platform. As
mentioned earlier, in this assay, each triggering event detected for the
active platform resulted in one pump activation and thus the delivery of
one dose of hydrocodone.

In order to conﬁrm that this increase in motion events was caused
by the presence of hydrocodone in the solution and not just a preference
for the color yellow or a consequence of the pre-conditioning with food,
we repeated the training with pre-conditioned animals but the hydro-
codone solution was substituted with only water from the main system.
Without opioid delivery, training failed to produce any increase in the
number of triggering events for the active platform and caused the total
activation for both platforms to decrease by more than 50% from day 1
(Fig. 1C). We also observed a similar number of triggering events de-
tected through the week between the active and inactive platforms.
The activity of opioids is mainly dependent upon their binding to
the μ-opioid receptor [32]. Therefore, to conﬁrm that the self-admin-
istration of hydrocodone in our assay was dependent on this receptor,
we treated ﬁsh with the μ-opioid receptor antagonist, naloxone. It has
been shown that naloxone can block CPP and opioid self-administration
in diﬀerent animal models [33]. We treated ﬁsh with naloxone for
60 min before each pre-conditioning session as well as before each
training session. As expected, blocking the μ-opioid receptor prevented
development of self-administration behavior. As observed with the
water treated groups, the total number of motion events decreased by
more than 75% for both platforms as the week progressed and no dif-
ference was observed between the platforms (Fig. 1D).

These results suggest that the speciﬁc increase in motion events
observed for the active platform is dependent on the administration of
the opioid and implicate the μ-opioid receptor [11,16].

3.2. Hallmarks of addiction

3.2.1. Self-administration despite adverse consequences

One of the main characteristics of addiction is the repeat adminis-
tration of a drug despite adverse consequences such as physical or
mental pain. For example, addicted animals will exhibit sustained ad-
ministration while faced with a physical punishment such as electric
shock [18,34–37]. We therefore sought to determine if zebraﬁsh would
continue to exhibit self-administration in the face of conditions nor-
mally aversive to them.

It has been previously shown that zebraﬁsh prefer deep water, and
that shallow water can trigger anxiety [38,39]. This particular behavior
allowed us to create an aversive condition in our assay by raising the
height of the active platform. As a consequence, the water level above
the active platform was reduced by ≈25%. Instinctively, ﬁsh should
avoid swimming above the elevated platform unless the reward asso-
ciated with it is powerful enough.

Before testing hydrocodone-conditioned ﬁsh, we conﬁrmed that
non-conditioned ﬁsh would avoid this elevated platform by testing a
group of ﬁsh conditioned to self-administer food but not pre-exposed to
hydrocodone. For the testing session, apart for the change in the plat-
form height, the assay was performed with the same parameters as
previously described. With these animals, we observed a reduction in
the total number of triggering events at the elevated platform when
compared with an assay performed with the regular platform (Fig. 2A).
Interestingly, there was no diﬀerence in the number of triggering events
measured at the inactive platform (Fig. 2A).

When hydrocodone-conditioned ﬁsh were tested with the elevated
active platform, there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the total number
of pump activations observed with the elevated platform versus the
regular platform (Fig. 2B). This suggests that conditioned ﬁsh will ac-
tively cross the active platform despite an aversive condition. Even
when the water depth above the active platform was further reduced to
≈50% of the initial level (triple platform), ﬁsh still visited the active
platform a signiﬁcantly higher number of times than the inactive
platform thus conﬁrming that ﬁsh are willing to overcome an aversive
condition to receive a dose of the drug.

3.2.2. Self-administration following a progressive ratio

As mentioned previously, in our assay, the animals were condi-
tioned with a ﬁxed ratio, but to further establish that our assay is a bona
ﬁde self-administration assay, we decided to test a diﬀerent con-
ditioning protocol: the progressive ratio [28,40–43]. In this assay, an-
imals are required to perform an increasing number of actions in order
to receive a dose of the drug as opposed to the ﬁxed ratio where each
action triggers release of a dose. For example, a mouse would be re-
quired to press a lever ﬁve times in order to activate the delivery of the
drug and this number is increased until the addicted animal gives up
and loses interest. This value is called the break point for this particular
animal. In most cases, the progressive ratio is tested with animals
previously trained with a ﬁxed ratio [44–46].

We thus tested progressive ratio training by modifying our python
script so the pump would only be activated after a variable number of
triggering events. In other words, ﬁsh would have to swim across the
active platform multiple times to receive a single dose. Using this

method is informative because if the ﬁsh simply developed a place
preference for the location of the active platform in the arena, the
number of motion events should not change and the ﬁsh should lose
interest if no drug is delivered. We decided to test the progressive ratio
paradigm in our assay by setting the number of triggering events re-
quired to activate the pump to 5, 10, 15 and 20. The number of trig-
gering events required to activate the pump was increased on successive
days and not during the same session.

We observed that conditioned ﬁsh increased their total number of
visits each time the number of triggering events required for a dose was
increased. This trend was observed with 5 events/dose and became
signiﬁcant with 10 and 15 events/dose, but at 20 events/dose, the
diﬀerence was no longer signiﬁcant when compared to the ﬁxed ratio.
As a result, there were about 4 times more triggering events detected at
the active platform for the 15 events/dose setting as compared with the
ﬁxed ratio (Fig. 2C). Interestingly, the increase in triggering events
observed with the setting at 15 events/dose was such that the actual
dose received by the animals was similar to the dose received with 5
events/dose (Fig. 2D). Furthermore, the fact that the number of visits
doesn’t increase at 20 events/dose suggests that this value could be
considered the break point for the group of ﬁsh tested.

The increase in total triggering events detected with the progressive
ratio demonstrates that hydrocodone-conditioned ﬁsh are willing to
perform the required action multiple times to get a dose. This result
combined with the administration despite an adverse consequence
suggests that the activation of the pump is not simply a conditioned
place preference but rather an active action to self-administer the drug.

3.3. Evidence of withdrawal symptoms

Among the major hallmarks of drug addiction are the intense phy-
sical and psychological manifestations triggered by withdrawal from
the drug. These include an increase in anxiety and stress levels in both
human and animal models, which are thought to promote continued
drug seeking in addicted patients [47]. In zebraﬁsh, previous studies
have demonstrated that withdrawal can cause profound physical
manifestation such as reduced exploration behavior, increased erratic
movements, changes in freezing behavior and changes in locomotion
[19,48]. We therefore investigated the behavior of conditioned ﬁsh
48 h after their last self-administered dose of hydrocodone in the Novel
Tank assay [19]. In this assay, ﬁsh are introduced into a new tank and
the behavior of the ﬁsh is recorded. The inter-ﬁsh distance and the
patterns of swimming can be used as measures of anxiety and stress
level in zebraﬁsh [27,49–51].

Stress and anxiety have been shown to increase social cohesion in
zebraﬁsh [31,52]. We therefore analyzed the eﬀect of withdrawal on
shoaling by measuring the distance between each ﬁsh in a group of
three ﬁsh for a period of ﬁve minutes. Hydrocodone-conditioned ﬁsh
had an average distance of 4.32 cm as compared to 5.92 cm for naïve
animals. Thus, as hypothesized, ﬁsh undergoing withdrawal from hy-
drocodone form a tighter group than naïve animals (Fig. 3).

We also measured the exploration behavior of the ﬁsh by analyzing
the time spent swimming in the center of the tank versus the outer area.
Stressed animals have been shown to exhibit reduced exploration of a
novel environment [19]. As expected, zebraﬁsh undergoing withdrawal
displayed reduced exploration behavior as evidenced by a longer la-
tency to explore the outer area of the tank as it took an extra 103 s for
the conditioned group to enter the outer area (Fig. 4B). In accordance
with this result, hydrocodone-conditioned ﬁsh had a lower number of
visits in the outer area resulting in a shorter total visit time (Fig. 4C and
D).

The results suggest that conditioned ﬁsh in withdrawal display signs
of stress and anxiety as demonstrated by tighter shoals and reduced
exploration activity. This increase in stress during withdrawal further
supports the idea that conditioned zebraﬁsh develop an addiction to
hydrocodone.

3.4. Molecular characterization of the assay

All drugs of abuse share some similar modes of action, and one of
the reasons for their addictive potential is the fact that they target the
natural brain reward system. This system relies heavily on two major
neurotransmitters: dopamine and glutamate [53,54]. Dopamine is re-
leased in the brain upon activation of the reward system and is re-
sponsible for the sensation of pleasure [55]. Many drugs of abuse di-
rectly inﬂuence the release or recycling of dopamine, thus enhancing

the association between the drug and a positive experience [56,57]. It
has been shown that blocking the dopamine pathway can reduce drug
seeking in other animal models [11,58].
On the other hand, glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter that
signals through two majors receptors, the α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-
4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptor and the N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptor [59]. As with dopamine, it has been shown that the
glutamate pathway is required for drug seeking [53].

Because of their crucial roles in addiction processes, we decided to
investigate the involvement of dopamine and glutamate pathways in
the self-administration behaviors we observed, to conﬁrm that similar
pathways are implicated in zebraﬁsh self-administration. Fish condi-
tioned for hydrocodone self administration for at least seven days were
treated with the dopamine receptor-1 antagonist SCH-23390 [11,53] to
block dopamine signaling. Fish were treated for 60 min prior to the self-
administration assay and then introduced in the arena for 30 min.
Treatment with SCH-23390 reduced the number of triggering events for
the active platform and no diﬀerence was observed between the num-
bers of triggering events at the active and inactive platforms (Fig. 5).
Similarly, to test the importance of glutamate signaling in our assay,
we selected the NMDA receptor antagonists MK-801 and ketamine and
AMPA receptor antagonist CNQX. Each of these compounds has been
shown to reduce drug seeking in other animal models [11,58]. As with
SCH-23390, conditioned ﬁsh were treated for 60 min and introduced in

the arena for a 30-min self-administration assay. The treatments with
each compound reduced the number of triggering events registered for
the active platform when compared to control hydrocodone-condi-
tioned ﬁsh. In addition, the preference for the active platform was also
abolished, as the ﬁsh no longer triggered the active platform at a higher
rate than the inactive one (Fig. 5).

Taken together, these results suggest that drug seeking in zebraﬁsh
relies on molecular pathways similar to those required in other animal
models and supports the validity of the assay.

<Conclusion> Discussion.
4.1. Opioid conditioning assay.
In order to better understand the molecular and biological pathways
controlling drug seeking, we developed an opioid self-administration
assay using young adult zebraﬁsh. The design of this assay was inspired
by self-administration assays used in other models. In these assays,
animals are required to press a lever or a button to receive a dose of
drug. Since this kind of action would be hard to reproduce with ﬁsh, we
decided to use a motion detection approach. Instead of pressing a lever,
ﬁsh were required to swim across a submersible platform to receive a
dose of drug. As with other self-administration assays, there was also an
inactive platform for which no dose delivery was triggered. With this
assay, we conditioned zebraﬁsh to self-administer the opioid hydro-
codone in as few as ﬁve days of training. The presence of the inactive
platform allowed us to discriminate a simple increase in locomotion
induced by opioids [60–62], as opposed to a speciﬁc increase in trig-
gering actions at the active platform. The number of pump activations
can be used as a read-out of drug seeking in zebraﬁsh.

Interestingly, we observed an increase in triggering events detected
at the active platform from day 3 to day 5 with an average of 20.69
events per minute at day 3 and 35.42 events per minute on the ﬁfth day.
Furthermore, when ﬁsh were trained for several additional days, the
number of events rose to 60.5 events per minute, suggesting that we
were able to reproduce the escalation in self-administration observed in
addicted subjects/models.

Although there is an increase in triggering events at the end of the
ﬁve days of training, the total of events on the initial day is already
quite high. We believe that this high number is caused by the ex-
ploration of the arena as the number of triggering event for the inactive
platform is also high on day 1. This hypothesis is reinforced by the fact
that both the control ﬁsh and the naloxone treated ﬁsh also have a high
number of triggering events for both platforms on the ﬁrst day. We
could also imagine that because we pre-conditioned these animals to
self-administer food in the arena, some of the triggering event detected
could be caused by food seeking as these ﬁsh might be exploring the
arena to ﬁnd food.

It is also interesting to note that the number of triggering event
detected for the inactive platform for all training conditions, as well as
the active platform for the control and the naloxone groups, both de-
creased as the week progressed, and the numbers of triggering events
for both platforms are quite similar throughout the week. This could
reﬂect a loss of interest in either platform if no reward is provided.

One of the main advantages of zebraﬁsh as a research model is the
ability to perform small molecule screening in vivo [63], which gives us
the possibility to develop a small scale screen to identify compounds
that block drug seeking. In addition, we can train a large number of ﬁsh
in a single week opening up the possibility of screening small chemical
libraries. Such a screen could uncover unexpected biological mechan-
isms important for seeking and could lead to the identiﬁcation of po-
tential treatment candidates. The opportunity of performing this kind of
screen is a much-needed addition to the ﬁeld of addiction research.

In addition to performing a small molecule screen, this assay also
gives us the possibility to study the opioid sensitivity of diﬀerent mu-
tants. The ease and eﬃciency of genetic manipulation techniques such
as CRISPR-Cas9 in zebraﬁsh could allow us to rapidly generate mutant
lines for genes of interest and test their involvement in drug seeking.
Finally, in the present paper, we limited ourselves to opioids, but
the assay could easily be applied to train zebraﬁsh to self-administer
other drugs of abuse. We could, thus, determine if an interesting hit
from the screen is opioid speciﬁc or could aﬀect a global pathway
regulating drug seeking. Since we can also perform food self-adminis-
tration conditioning, we could test the eﬀect of a potential compound
on non-drug seeking, thus further determining if the eﬀect is speciﬁc to
a drug or aﬀects reward seeking in general. The ultimate compound
would be speciﬁc for a drug of abuse without impacting the tendency to
seek natural rewards such as food.

4.2. Evidence of self-administration and hallmarks of addiction

Our initial results demonstrated that ﬁsh learned to swim across the
active platform to receive a dose of drug. However, since our assay is
based on motion detection, the establishment of a place preference for
the active platform could have explained this behavior.

One of the main diﬀerences between conditioned place preference
and self-administration assays is the conditioning phase. Typically, a
place preference assay involves a passive delivery of the drug to the
animal paired with an environment. Previous studies in zebraﬁsh have
used this paradigm by restricting the animals to a speciﬁc chamber
during the conditioning phase [14,64,65]. On the other hand, self-ad-
ministration assays require animals to perform an action to receive a
dose of drug while they are moving freely in the testing chamber. This
type of assay also suggests that the animal has to make the decision to
receive a dose. Since in our assay, ﬁsh still need to perform the action of
swimming across the platform to receive a dose and are free to swim in
the whole arena, we believe that these parameters are in line with self-
administration assays develop with other animal models.

In addition to the conditioning parameters, the fact that conditioned
ﬁsh displayed other hallmarks of addiction also suggests that these
animals were indeed consciously self-administering the drug.

The progressive ratio training gives an indication of the level of
eﬀort a conditioned subject/model is willing to expend to receive a dose
of drug. The break point is a key value that has been used to estimate
and compare the maximum eﬀort diﬀerent subjects are willing to ex-
pend to receive a dose [66]. The progressive ratio suggests that the
animal associates the action with release of the drug. The increase in
triggering actions to compensate for the reduced dose ratio suggests
that conditioned animals perceive the correlation of swimming across
the platform and the delivery of a dose of drug. Thus, despite the fact
that there might be some overlap between self-administration and place
preference, based on our conditioning parameters and the fact that
conditioned animals can successfully perform the progressive ratio, we
believe that the number of triggering event is indeed a measure of self-
administration.

The fact that hydrocodone-conditioned ﬁsh can also be tested with
the progressive ratio is very interesting since it suggests a potential
assay that would determine the sensitivity of diﬀerent mutants to ad-
diction. It is possible to imagine that a mutant might display no dif-
ference during the conditioning phase but could show diﬀerences in the
progressive ratio assay. The breaking point could potentially be used to
test the eﬀect of diverse chemical treatments or genetic lesions on the
rewarding eﬀects of opioids [40].

Self-administration despite adverse consequences, as observed in
this model, is noteworthy because it is one of the main hallmarks of
drug addiction. Addicted subjects are often willing to go to great
lengths to receive a drug of abuse and continue to seek the drug despite
severe consequences on their health or quality of life. The fact that
conditioned ﬁsh are willing to overcome their natural aversion for
shallow water may suggest a similar phenomenon in ﬁsh.

In addition, the fact that we see a large reduction in the number of
triggering events for both the active and inactive platforms when con-
ditioning is performed with water or when the ﬁsh are treated with
naloxone, also suggest that unless a reward is provided ﬁsh will avoid
swimming across those platforms. The platforms measure ≈1.6 cm
high and seem to represent an obstacle for the animals. Thus, even the
simple singular platform could be slightly aversive for ﬁsh, reinforcing
the notion that ﬁsh require a positive reinforcement in order to swim
over one of the platforms.

4.3. Withdrawal syndrome

The novel tank assay has been show to be an eﬀective way to
measure anxiety and stress levels in zebraﬁsh. One of the parameters
that can be measured with such an assay is the exploration rate of the
animals. The latency to enter the top zone is the value most often used
to determine the willingness of animals to explore their new environ-
ment. Upon performing the assay, we noticed that the conditioned
animals were reluctant not only to enter the top zone but also to explore
the rest of the tank. We also noticed that hydrocodone-conditioned ﬁsh
formed a tighter group than the naïve animals. Both the reduction in
the exploration rate and the formation of a tighter group are indications
of stressed animals and suggest that conditioned ﬁsh are suﬀering from
withdrawal symptoms when they are not given access to hydrocodone.

4.4. Molecular characterization of the assay

As a ﬁnal step toward assay validation, we decided to begin the
molecular characterization of drug seeking in zebraﬁsh. It was already
postulated that zebraﬁsh replicate ﬁndings from other animal models of
addiction at the behavioral level, but we wanted to test whether it was
also the case at the molecular level. So our ﬁrst step was to test the
involvement of the two major neurotransmitters, dopamine and gluta-
mate, on drug craving in zebraﬁsh. Our study shows that blocking the
dopamine and glutamate pathways also reduces drug seeking in zeb-
raﬁsh. This is an important result demonstrating that key pathways that
are important for drug seeking in other models are also required in
zebraﬁsh [18,67], thus suggesting that drug seeking in zebraﬁsh relies
on similar pathways as other animals models. This also support the use
of small molecule screening to enhance our understanding of the bio-
logical pathways controlling drug seeking, since potential hits from
such a screen could be relevant for controlling addiction beyond zeb-
raﬁsh.

5. Conclusion

This novel self-administration assay provides an opportunity to
study addiction and drug seeking in a model organism amenable to
scalable drug screening and facile genomic manipulation. The self-ad-
ministration behavior observed relies on pathways conserved in other
animal models and humans, supporting the ability to use this assay to
perform small molecule screening or genetic studies of pathways im-
portant for drug seeking, potentially leading to new knowledge and
novel addiction therapeutics.


Acknowledgements
