
1. Introduction

Conditioned Place Preference (CPP) measures drug reward, espe-
cially the appetitive quality of a reward stimulus that drives the subject
to seek out environmental cues previously paired with a rewarding
substance. A baseline preference for each conditioned stimulus or CS
(e.g. environmental context) in the absence of a paired unconditioned
stimulus or US (e.g. drug) is determined prior to conditioning. For the
conditioning trials that follow, the US is paired with the initially non-
preferred CS, determined from a baseline preference assessment, ac-
cording to a biased stimulus assignment procedure. After conditioning,
a choice test is performed in which both previously conditioned con-
texts are presented in the absence of the US, and the subject is un-
restricted so that it may move between each CS [1]. CPP tasks also
allow for locomotor behavior of the animal to be investigated in the
presence of the rewarding stimulus (US) during conditioning when it is
under the inﬂuence of the drug of interest, compared to behavior in the
reward-paired context (CS), when the drug is not present [2,3].

CPP is induced in rodents in response to various stimuli including:
food, water, sweet ﬂuids, conspeciﬁc social stimuli, access to wheel-
running, opportunities to copulate, novel objects, brain stimulation,
and addictive drugs [1,4–8], including ethanol [9]. CPP induction in
zebraﬁsh was ﬁrst reported in a study using cocaine as the US [10]. The
number of stimuli evoking CPP in zebraﬁsh has increased extensively to
also include food, morphine, amphetamine, ethanol, nicotine, and sal-
vinorin A [11–16], all of which also induce CPP in rodents. CPP in
zebraﬁsh is often induced by a single exposure/conditioning trial,
though increasing the number of conditioning cycles potentiates this
response in a drug-speciﬁc manner [14].

A single exposure to ethanol induces dose-dependent CPP in zeb-
raﬁsh at concentrations of 0.25%, 0.50%, and 1.00% [12]. CPP in
zebraﬁsh is also reported in response to 1.50% ethanol [11,16]. Zeb-
raﬁsh display an U-shaped dose response in locomotor activity when
exposed to (0.00, 0.25, 0.50, or 1.00%) ethanol [17], while ethanol
induces an inverted U-shaped temporal trajectory of locomotor activity
(distance traveled) [18]. Similarly, adolescent rats receiving ethanol
show divergent behavioral preferences for the same dose of ethanol and
require increased ethanol doses, compared to adults, in order to induce
CPP [19]. However, studies in mice indicate that pre-treatment with
ethanol every 48 h for a week before conditioning does not alter CPP,
but it does sensitize locomotor activation to ethanol [20]. These results
suggest that long-term exposure to ethanol may have additional, po-
tentially confounding eﬀects that impact CPP.

Diminished predator avoidance occurs in control zebraﬁsh acutely
treated with 0.50% ethanol or in ﬁsh chronically treated with 0.25%
ethanol for 2 weeks and then acutely treated with 1.00% ethanol.
Chronic 0.25% ethanol exposure also diminishes hyperactivity in zeb-
raﬁsh receiving 0.25% or 0.50% acute ethanol treatment, which the
authors suggest to be a consequence of neural adaptation due to sup-
pression of reinforcing and anxiolytic eﬀects of ethanol by prolonged
alcohol exposure [21]. Alcohol’s anxiolytic eﬀects have been demon-
strated in zebraﬁsh in the form of diminished predator avoidance,
startle reaction, inter-ﬁsh distance, and area occupied by a group of
zebraﬁsh [11,21]. In this study, zebraﬁsh undergo a novel tank test
(dive test) and shoaling test directly prior to ethanol CPP training, as
have been used previously to assess trait anxiety in zebraﬁsh [18].

Thus, rodents and zebraﬁsh pre-exposed to ethanol display altered
locomotor and anxiety-like behavior at baseline along with altered
behavioral responses to ethanol, suggesting neuroplastic changes. These
underlying changes in ethanol tolerance may translate to implications
of ethanol pre-exposure for ethanol-induced CPP. The purpose of this
study was to observe the behavioral eﬀects of chronic exposure of
zebraﬁsh juveniles/adolescents (starting at 20 dpf or 40 dpf) to a low
dose of ethanol (1.50%) for 20-min daily treatments for one week. This
treatment paradigm mimics the cycle of alcohol binge and withdrawal
demonstrated in adolescent humans, and is likely to contribute to
development of ethanol tolerance [22]. Upon reaching adulthood (at
160–175 dpf), ﬁsh were then acutely exposed to ethanol in a single
conditioning trail, after which the ability of ethanol to induce CPP was
assessed. The purpose of this design was to determine if 1 week of daily
20-min ethanol pre-exposure treatments in adolescence (20–40 dpf)
aﬀects ethanol-induced change in percent time spent in an ethanol-
paired context in male and female adult (160–175 day old) zebraﬁsh. In
addition, recorded zebraﬁsh were examined to identify acute locomotor
eﬀects of ethanol exposure in conditioning. Behavioral responses in the
novel tank and shoaling test were assessed in adulthood prior to con-
ditioning.

<Middle> Materials and methods.
2.1. Subjects.
Adult, short-ﬁn wild-type zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio) were maintained in
the lab on a 14 h light/10 h dark photoperiod at 28–29 °C in an Aquatic
Habitats (AHAB) rack system. Each day, the ﬁsh were monitored and
fed a mix of AP-100, TetraMin ﬂakes, and dried brine shrimp twice per
day, and environmental parameters were measured. All experiments
were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at
American University.

2.2. Pre-exposure and behavioral testing chambers

A 24 well plate ﬁlled with 2.5 mL of 1.5% v/v ethanol/water was
used to pre-expose ﬁsh starting at 20 dpf, and a small petri dish ﬁlled
with a total volume of 20 mL of 1.50% v/v ethanol/water was used to
pre-expose ﬁsh starting at 40 dpf. Distinct volumes were used to ac-
count for diﬀerences in the size of ﬁsh at the two ages and so that they
would have similar mobility capacities. Ethanol was purchased from
Sigma.
The novel tank used in this study was a clear Nalgene™
Polycarbonate Narrow Mouth Square container, with the lid and top cut
oﬀ to leave a square opening. This cut container had dimensions of
90 mm x 90 mm x 140 mm (width x length x height) and was ﬁlled to
108 mm (height) with 800 mL of water. For the shoaling test, the ex-
perimental subject ﬁsh remained in the same tank used for the novel
tank test. The shoal was presented by removing a paper divider between
the novel tank and another tank of the same type and dimensions
containing the shoal.

The CPP chamber was covered with packing tape from the outside,
with half covered in light tan tape and the other half covered in dark
tan tape. The CPP chamber had dimensions of 120 mm x 215 mm x
140 mm (width x length x height) and was ﬁlled to 90 mm (height)
with 1.5 L of water during baseline and post-conditioning preference
testing and control conditioning or 1.5 L of (0–1.75%) ethanol during
ethanol conditioning. The CPP chamber was a commercially available
ﬁsh tank (Aqueon) with dark blue plastic partitions placed in the center
of the tank. This partition, covered in paraﬁlm to prevent ﬁsh from
escaping around the edges, was used during conditioning trials to se-
parate the light and dark sides of the chamber. During conditioning,
ﬁsh were conﬁned to either the dark or light tan side of the tank, de-
pending upon whether ﬁsh received ethanol or control conditioning on
a given day. The plastic partitions were removed prior to the baseline
preference assessment and prior to the post-conditioning preference
assessment so that ﬁsh could freely swim between the dark and light
halves of the tank. After each testing day, ﬁsh were removed from the
chamber and individually contained in 150 mL of water in small
(250 mL) opaque plastic beakers so that their identity was maintained
throughout the CPP procedure and so that they could see other ﬁsh
during this holding period.

175

C.L. Clayman et al.

2.3. Procedures

For ethanol pre-exposure, larvae (aged either 20 or 40 days post
fertilization (dpf)) were removed from the AHAB system and immersed
in 1.50% v/v ethanol/water in one well of a 24 well plate or in a petri
dish. Ethanol pre-exposure consisted of daily 20-min treatments for 1
week. Control treatments immersed ﬁsh of the same ages into the same
volume of water to account for handling stress.

Behavioral tests were performed on adult ﬁsh, aged 160–175 dpf,
and included a novel tank test and shoaling test, to assess eﬀects of
ethanol pre-exposure, and CPP. The novel tank test compared anxiety-
like behavior of control and ethanol-pre-exposed zebraﬁsh 1 day before
the start of the CPP procedure. To do this, ﬁsh were removed from their
holding tank and placed in the center of the top of the novel tank. Fish
were observed for 5 min, and their positions in the tank were recorded.
The dependent measure was percent time spent in the lower third of a
novel tank. The novel tank test was immediately followed by a shoaling
test. The shoaling test measures the response to conspeciﬁcs and in-
volves presenting a stimulus ﬁsh (or group of ﬁsh) in a tank adjacent to
the experimental tank and measures the time spent on the half of the
tank closer to the stimulus ﬁsh compared to the time spent on this tank
half in the novel tank test.

Next, ﬁsh were transferred to the CPP chamber so the baseline
preference for either the light or dark side could be determined by
tracking the time spent on each side of the tank. Once determined,
conditioning was performed (days 1 and 2). Order of conditioning to
either ethanol or water was counterbalanced over two total days of
conditioning, with one CS1-US1 (ethanol) pairing on one conditioning
day and one CS2-US2 (water) pairing on the other conditioning day.
The following two-day procedure constituted one conditioning cycle.
On one conditioning day, ﬁsh were exposed to either 0.00%, 1.00%,
1.25%, 1.50%, 1.60%, or 1.75% v/v of ethanol dissolved in 1.5 L of
water and restricted for 20 min to their non-preferred side. On the other
conditioning day, ﬁsh were placed in 1.5 L of water and restricted to
their initially preferred tank side for 20 min. Percent time on the in-
itially non-preferred side (PTN) was then measured the next day (day 3
or 16–30 h after the second conditioning session) as the percent pre-
ference shift toward the initially non-preferred tank side when ﬁsh were
allowed to freely swim in the testing chamber for 20 min.

All responses from the ﬁsh were recorded with a video camera and
analyzed by live-tracking. EthovisionXT® video tracking software
(Noldus) was used to record all behavioral trials and then to quantify
the change in ethanol-induced PTN by measuring time spent in each
side of the chamber pre- and post-conditioning, locomotor behavior in
each conditioning trial, and behavioral response in the novel tank and
shoaling tests. Video recordings were scored with live-tracking by the
same observer.

Data were analyzed using SPSS version 24.0 (SPSS, Inc. 2016).
Statistical analysis to determine the eﬀects of these diﬀerent parameters
were separated into ﬁve diﬀerent comparisons (described below).

2.4. Statistical analysis: ethanol-induced CPP (linear mixed model)

We used a liner mixed model to determine the eﬀect of age of
ethanol pre-exposure (20 dpf, 40 dpf), ethanol conditioning dose
(0–1.75%), sex (male, female), and time ((5-min treatment increments
during the 20 min post-conditioning preference assessment) on percent
time on the non-preferred side (PTN) in the CPP paradigm. As
EthovisionXT® allowed us to record locomotor activity, such as absolute
angular velocity during ethanol and control conditioning, we also used
a linear mixed model to assess changes in this parameter.

Linear mixed models are the appropriate test here because they
account for the inﬂuence of repeated measurements on individual
subjects, as has been done in other studies of zebraﬁsh, which in-
corporate random eﬀects, such as individual subject identity and family
and tank in which ﬁsh are tested [23–28]. The linear mixed model
design in this study controls for the within-subject eﬀects of the beha-
vioral tasks by including a random intercept for subjects, with restricted
maximum likelihood estimation (REML) and a compound symmetry
covariance structure using the linear mixed model procedure in SPSS.
The compound symmetry covariance structure across trials estimated
correlated errors between time points within subjects. Thus, this ana-
lysis allowed us to target dependent variables at various time points
during the post-conditioning preference assessment (PTN) and during
ethanol conditioning (AAV).

Assumptions for the linear mixed model were checked and de-
scriptive statistics were examined for the PTN and AAV. If signiﬁcant
main eﬀects or interactions emerged, post hoc tests with a Sidak cor-
rection were performed. Means presented in reported post hoc tests are
based on estimated marginal means, which are modiﬁed population
means adjusted for all other factors in the model.

2.5. Statistical analysis: conditioning day (2-way ANOVA) and novel tank
and shoaling responses (3-way ANOVA)

The counterbalanced conditioning design used resulted in some ﬁsh
being exposed to ethanol on conditioning day 1 and other ﬁsh being
exposed to ethanol on conditioning day 2. Since the post-conditioning
preference assessment was performed immediately after conditioning
day 2 (i.e. on day 3), we wanted to determine whether one or both
groups were still inﬂuenced by ethanol on day 3, as this could aﬀect the
CPP outcome. To do this, we performed a 2-way ANOVA to assess the
eﬀect of conditioning dose (0–1.75%) and day of conditioning (day 1,
day 2) on PTN.

To determine whether age of pre-exposure (20 dpf, 40 dpf), sex
(male, female), and change PTN response (more or less than 10% in-
crease in preference at post-conditioning preference assessment, re-
lative to baseline) aﬀected novel tank and shoaling responses, we used
separate three-way ANOVAs. We separated degree of PTN for these
statistical tests because the previous analysis indicated that the degree
of PTN varied across ﬁsh. More speciﬁcally, the change in PTN (more or
less than 10%) was derived from a median split of PTN scores of
ethanol-conditioned ﬁsh and supported by Receiver Operating
Characteristics analysis (Supplementary Table 1). Deriving this categorical measure was conducted using similar
methods to those performed in previous CPP studies, which have been
established as a complementary approach to the continuous measures
used here [29].
Assumptions for the ANOVAs were checked and descriptive statis-
tics were calculated for PTN, Percent time on the bottom third of a
novel tank, and the change in time spent next to shoal. If signiﬁcant
main eﬀects or interactions emerged, post hoc tests with a Sidak cor-
rection were performed.

3. Results

3.1. CPP results: behavior in the PTN assessment in 5-min segments

We analyzed CPP by separating the 20-min post-conditioning PTN
test period into 5-min increments to assess if there were diﬀerences in
PTN response throughout the 20-min testing session (n = 83). This
analysis indicates that ethanol conditioning dose signiﬁcantly inﬂu-
enced ethanol-induced PTN (p < 0.005). There was also a non-sig-
niﬁcant trend of an interaction between pre-exposure age and sex
(p < 0.052) and a signiﬁcant four-way interaction between ethanol
conditioning dose, pre-exposure age, sex, and time (p < 0.040).

Post-hoc tests identiﬁed that the 1.00% conditioning dose group had
a signiﬁcantly greater mean of 67.82% post-conditioning PTN, com-
pared to 35.03% post-conditioning PTN observed in adults conditioned
to 1.50% ethanol (p < 0.037). None of the other conditioning dose
groups showed signiﬁcant diﬀerences in pairwise comparisons, nor did
pairwise comparisons within groups for pre-exposure age, time, and
sex. However, within ﬁsh pre-exposed to ethanol at 40 dpf, male zeb-
raﬁsh had a signiﬁcantly greater average estimated marginal mean of
59.56% post-conditioning percent time on the ethanol-paired side,
compared to 33.78% post-conditioning percent time on the ethanol-
paired side observed in female zebraﬁsh (p < 0.031). These results
suggest a sex diﬀerence in ethanol-induced PTN in ﬁsh pre-exposed at
40 dpf.

Sex diﬀerences were observed across pre-exposure ages and con-
ditioning doses used. For example, in ﬁsh pre-exposed to 1.5% ethanol
at 20 dpf, receiving control conditioning, and assessed at the 5–10 min
time point of preference testing, females displayed a signiﬁcantly
greater mean percent time of 100.00% post-conditioning PTN, com-
pared to a mean of 45.19% in males (p < 0.044). However, in ﬁsh pre-
exposed to 1.5% ethanol at 40 dpf, conditioned to 1.75% ethanol, and
assessed at the 10–15 min time point of preference testing, males dis-
played a signiﬁcantly greater mean of 84.92% post-conditioning PTN,
compared to a mean of 5.27% in females (p < 0.035). Similarly, in ﬁsh
pre-exposed to 1.5% ethanol at 40dpf, conditioned to 1.00% ethanol,
and assessed at the 15–20 min time point of preference testing, males
displayed a signiﬁcantly greater mean percent time of 82.33% post-
conditioning PTN, compared to a mean of 28.20% in females
(p < 0.026).

Signiﬁcant eﬀects were most prevalent when the 1.75% ethanol
conditioning dose was used. Females conditioned to 1.75% ethanol at
20 dpf displayed signiﬁcantly greater mean of 100.00% post-con-
ditioning PTN during the 0–5 min time segment of preference testing,
compared to a mean of 15.62% in female ﬁsh pre-exposed to ethanol at
40 dpf during (p < 0.025). Similar results were observed at the
5–10 min time segment (p < 0.020) and the 10–15 min time segment
(p < 0.012). Lower ethanol doses have eﬀects that vary instead based
on pre-exposure at 40 dpf, compared to control pre-exposure. Female
ﬁsh pre-exposed at 40 dpf and conditioned to 1.00% ethanol, displayed
a signiﬁcantly reduced mean post-conditioning PTN during the
10–15 min (p < 0.031) and 15–20 min time segments (p < 0.015),
compared to ﬁsh with control pre-exposure.

Within females with control pre-exposure and conditioned to 1.00%
ethanol, ﬁsh assessed at the 10–15 min time segment of preference
testing displayed signiﬁcantly greater mean of 92.26% post-con-
ditioning PTN, compared to a mean of 58.54% in ﬁsh assessed at the
0–5 min time segment of preference testing (p < 0.046).

These results indicate that conditioning ﬁsh to a low dose of ethanol
(1.00%) is suﬃcient to induce PTN in male and female adult zebraﬁsh.
However the degree of PTN under these conditions is signiﬁcantly less
than that observed with a higher conditioning dose of ethanol (1.50%).
In additon, there is a signﬁciant interaction between pre-exposure age
and sex on PTN (Fig. 1) and a signiﬁcant interaction eﬀect of pre-ex-
posure age, ethanol conditioning dose, sex, and time of assessment on
PTN (Fig. 2). More speciﬁcally, control female ﬁsh not receiving
ethanol pre-exposure exhibit a statistically non-signiﬁcant increase in
PTN at the lower (1.00-1.25%) ethanol conditioning doses, relative to
males. In contrast, male zebraﬁsh show a non-signiﬁcant increase in
ethanol-induced PTN at the lower (1.00-1.25%) ethanol conditioning
doses if they received ethanol pre-exposure at either age examined.
These directional trends are reversed at the higher ethanol doses
(1.50%, 1.60%, 1.75%), where control females with no ethanol pre-
exposure show a non-signiﬁcant decrease in preference for ethanol,
while males with ethanol pre-exposure at either 20 dpf or 40 dpf show a
non-signiﬁcant decrease in ethanol-induced PTN.

Further assessing PTN throughout the 20-min post-conditioning
preference assessment period revealed signiﬁcantly greater PTN during
the second half of the assessment period (10–20 min) in males pre-ex-
posed at 40 dpf and control females with no pre-exposure when the low
conditioning doses were used (1.00-1.25%) and in females pre-exposed
at 20 dpf in response to the high conditioning doses (1.60-1.75%).

Fig. 1. Post-Conditioning Percent Time on the Initially Non-Preferred Side.
CPP test results (post-conditioning percent time on initially non-preferred side (PTN) in
adult (160–175 day old) zebraﬁsh varies depending upon both the ethanol pre-exposure
condition (panels A and B) and sex (males as blue bars; females as pink bars). There was a
signiﬁcant eﬀect of ethanol conditioning dose (p < 0.005) and a trend of a non-signiﬁcant
interaction of pre-exposure and sex (p < 0.054). (A) Control female ﬁsh not receiving
ethanol pre-exposure exhibit the trend of increased ethanol-induced PTN for a 1.00-
1.25% ethanol conditioning dose relative to males. (B) In ﬁsh receiving ethanol pre-ex-
posure starting at either 20 dpf or 40 dpf, males show a trend of increased ethanol-
induced PTN for the 1.00-1.25% ethanol conditioning dose relative to females. Pre-ex-
posure ages 20 and 40 dpf are pooled in the graph to show overall trends. Trends vary at
the higher ethanol doses. (A) Control females conditioned to 1.50-1.75% ethanol show
non-signiﬁcantly decreased PTN, relative to lower doses. (B) Pre-exposed females con-
ditioned to 1.50-1.75% ethanol show non-signiﬁcantly increased PTN, relative to lower
doses. (A) Control males conditioned to 1.50-1.75% ethanol show non-signiﬁcantly in-
creased PTN, relative to lower doses.(B) Pre-exposed males conditioned to 1.50-1.75%
ethanol show non-signiﬁcantly decreased PTN. Values are mean and error bars represent
+/− 1 standard error (SE) (n = 83).

3.2. Absolute angular velocity during conditioning

Absolute angular velocity (AAV) of zebraﬁsh in the test chambers
was measured during both conditioning days to determine if ethanol
conditioning signiﬁcantly impacts this swimming parameter, which
could potentially aﬀect PTN measurements (n = 83). Consequently, we
assessed changes in AAV, with AAV during each of the 5-min control
conditioning responses subtracted from the comparable AAV responses
to ethanol conditioning during the respective time increments. This
model includes the same ﬁxed factors as above, with the additional
ﬁxed factor of PTN greater or less than 10 percent.

The linear mixed model identiﬁed that ethanol conditioning dose
(p < 0.019), sex (p < 0.036), and conditioning time increment
(p < 0.001) signiﬁcantly aﬀected AAV. AAV measurements were also
signiﬁcantly aﬀected by interactions between degree of PTN and sex
(p < 0.039), pre-exposure age and sex (p < 0.008), and ethanol
conditioning dose and conditioning time increment (p < 0.008).

In particular, ethanol-induced AAV in ﬁsh exposed to the 1.50%
conditioning dose (51.04°/second) was signiﬁcantly greater than the
AAV measured in ﬁsh exposed to the 1.00% conditioning dose (-89.96°/
second) (p < 0.014) (Fig. 3). None of the other conditioning dose
groups showed signiﬁcant diﬀerences in pairwise comparisons. Male
zebraﬁsh had a signiﬁcantly greater ethanol-induced AAV (23.68°/
second) than female zebraﬁsh (-31.14°/second) (p < 0.036) (Figs. 3
and 4).

Evaluation of changes in AAV across the conditioning time intervals
revealed a signiﬁcantly greater overall ethanol-induced AAV (36.64°/
second) at the end of the conditioning trial (i.e. during 15–20 min of
ethanol conditioning), compared to 0–5 min (-33.34°/second)
(p < 0.001) and 5–10 min increment (-19.08°/second)
(p < 0.010). In particular, ﬁsh conditioned to 1.50% ethanol displayed
signiﬁcantly greater AAV at the end of the conditioning trial
(15–20 min), relative to any of the earlier time segments (p < 0.006).
An exception occurred for ﬁsh conditioned to 1.60% ethanol, which
displayed signiﬁcantly greater AAV at the beginning of the conditioning
trial (0–5 min) relative to any of the later time segments (p < 0.038).
Females pre-exposed at 20 dpf displayed a signiﬁcant decrease
ethanol conditioning-induced AAV (-143.653°/second), compared to
males pre-exposed at 20 dpf (39.725°/second) (p < 0.002), regardless
of ethanol dose used. Females pre-exposed at 20 dpf also displayed a
signiﬁcant ethanol-induced decrease in AAV (-143.653°/second), com-
pared to females with no ethanol pre-exposure (25.728°/second)
(p < 0.007) and compared to females with ethanol pre-exposure at 40
dpf (24.497°/second) (p < 0.026) (Fig. 4). Among male and female
ﬁsh displaying less than a 10% increase in PTN, males exhibited a
signiﬁcantly greater estimated marginal mean ethanol-induced AAV
(35.96°/second), compared to females (−48.65°/second) (p < 0.008).
Among male and female ﬁsh conditioned to 1.5% ethanol, AAV was
signiﬁcantly greater in the 15–20 min time segment (147.963°/second),
relative to the 0–5 min time segment (-8.819°/second) (p < 0.001),
the 5–10 min time segment (22.076°/second) (p < 0.001), and the
10–15 min time segment (42.946°/second) (p < 0.006). Similar re-
sults were observed for both male and female ﬁsh conditioned to 1.60%
ethanol: AAV was signiﬁcantly diminished in the 0–5 min time segment
(-89.638°/second), relative to the 5–10 min time segment (41.757°/
second) (p < 0.030), the 10–15 min time segment (37.602°/second)
(p < 0.038), and the 15–20 min time segment (57.094°/second)
(p < 0.011). Thus, there is a time-dependent increase in AAV induced
by high ethanol conditioning doses during the 20-min conditioning
trail.

A similar overall trajectory of responses occurred when comparing
ﬁsh based on pre-exposure history or their levels of PTN exhibited
(Fig. 4). For both males and females, ﬁsh with control pre-exposure or
ﬁsh that exhibit less than 10% increase in PTN displayed a non-sig-
niﬁcant trend of diminished AAV at low ethanol doses (Fig. 4A; 4C).

However, females with 1.5% ethanol pre-exposure and females with
more than a 10% increase in PTN displayed a non-signiﬁcant trend of
diminished AAV across ethanol doses. In contrast, males with 1.5%
ethanol pre-exposure and males with more than 10% increase in PTN
displayed a non-signiﬁcant trend of reduced AAV compared to controls,
but greater AAV compared to females across all ethanol doses (Fig. 4B;
4D).

Absolute Angular Velocity During Conditioning "For ﬁsh exhibiting
less PTN, control and ethanol pre-exposed zebraﬁsh conditioned to a
low ethanol dose (1.00-1.25%) tend to show non-signiﬁcantly de-
creased AAV. In contrast, control and ethanol pre-exposed zebraﬁsh
exhibiting less PTN and conditioned to a high ethanol dose
(1.50–1.75%) tend to show non-signiﬁcantly greater AAV. For ﬁsh ex-
hibiting more PTN, control ﬁsh conditioned to a low ethanol dose (1.00-
1.25%) and ethanol pre-exposed ﬁsh conditioned to a high ethanol dose
(1.50-1.75%) tend to show non-signiﬁcantly decreased AAV (Fig. 5).

Taken together, these results indicate that AAV can be measured in
zebraﬁsh and assessed as a factor of age of ethanol pre-exposure,
ethanol conditioning dose, duration of exposure to the ethanol condi-
tion dose, and sex. In general, ethanol conditioning produced greater
AAV when ﬁsh were conditioned to 1.50% ethanol (especially at the
end of the conditioning trial), compared to ﬁsh conditioned to 1.00%
ethanol. Ethanol conditioning also induced greater AAV in male ﬁsh
with less than 10% increase in PTN, compared to female ﬁsh with less
than 10% increase PTN.

3.3. Does the day of ethanol conditioning aﬀect PTN?

Day of ethanol conditioning to the initially non-preferred side did
not signiﬁcantly impact PTN response (p = 0.081). However, there was
a signiﬁcant eﬀect of ethanol conditioning dose (p < 0.001). Post hoc
tests identiﬁed that the 1.00% conditioning dose group had a sig-
niﬁcantly greater mean post-conditioning PTN (68.99%), compared to
ﬁsh with control conditioning (50.03%) (p < 0.001), ﬁsh conditioned
to 1.25% ethanol (45.30%) (p < 0.001), ﬁsh conditioned to 1.50%

ethanol (37.30%) (p < 0.037), and ﬁsh conditioned to 1.60% ethanol
(37.99%) (p < 0.001). None of the other conditioning dose groups
showed signiﬁcant diﬀerences in pairwise comparisons.

3.4. Novel tank

The novel tank test assesses anxiety-like responses demonstrated
when the ﬁsh remain at the bottom of a novel tank. Consequently, we
sought to determine whether the zebraﬁsh receiving ethanol or control
pre-exposure as juveniles displayed anxiety-like behavior prior to con-
ditioning as adults, as determined by percent time spent in the lower
third of a novel tank (n = 83; Fig. 6).

The analysis identiﬁed a signiﬁcant eﬀect of sex (p < 0.010) and a
signiﬁcant interaction between pre-exposure age and sex (p < 0.045)
on percent time spent in the lower third of the novel tank (Fig. 6). In
particular, female zebraﬁsh spent signiﬁcantly more time (41.83%)
spent in the lower third of the novel tank, compared to males (39.15%)
(p < 0.010), regardless of conditioning dose used (Fig. 6A). A sig-
niﬁcantly greater percent time in the lower third of the novel tank was
also observed for female zebraﬁsh receiving ethanol pre-exposure at 20
dpf, compared to male zebraﬁsh receiving ethanol pre-exposure at 20
dpf (p < 0.003) (Fig. 6A). Further, ﬁsh with more than 10 percent
increase in PTN showed a non-signiﬁcant trend of more percent time in
the lower third of the novel tank, compared to ﬁsh with less than 10
percent increase in PTN (p = 0.137) (Fig. 6B).

In general, female ﬁsh spent more time in the lower third of the
novel tank compared to males. Ethanol dose did not aﬀect this beha-
vior, through females with ethanol pre-exposure at 20 dpf spent more
time in the bottom of the novel tank when assessed immediately prior
to CPP testing.

3.5. Shoaling test

Shoaling behavior was examined determine whether ethanol pre-
exposure aﬀected the way that adults responded to social stimuli, as an
alternative index of anxiety-like behavior in zebraﬁsh (n = 83; Fig. 7).
There was a signiﬁcant eﬀect of sex (p < 0.046) on shoaling behavior
(Fig. 7A), with females displaying a greater increase in percent time
spent on the side adjacent to the shoal (33.22%), compared to males
(20.02%) (p < 0.046) (Fig. 7A). In addition, ﬁsh with more than 10%
increase in PTN also showed a trend of non-signiﬁcantly greater percent
time spent on the tank side adjacent to the shoal, compared to ﬁsh with
less than 10% increase in PTN.

<Conclusion> Discussion.
Overall, the results of this study indicate that ethanol pre-exposure
during the juvenile stage has measurable behavioral eﬀects on adult
zebraﬁsh and that there are diﬀerences in the responses of male and
females (Fig. 8).

4.1. Percent time on the initially non-preferred side

The 1.00% ethanol dose signiﬁcantly increased time spent in the
ethanol-paired environment, relative to 1.50% ethanol, an eﬀect that
may be related to reduced AAV speciﬁc to the 1.00% ethanol con-
ditioning dose, relative to the 1.50% dose. Zebraﬁsh pre-exposed to
1.50% ethanol as juveniles demonstrated a distinct sex-dependent
pattern of ethanol-induced PTN as adults, compared to zebraﬁsh with
no ethanol pre-exposure. Speciﬁcally considering control animals with

no ethanol pre-exposure, males demonstrate a subtle U-shaped dose-
response, with greater PTN at the low and high ethanol conditioning
doses, relative to the intermediate dose of 1.25% ethanol. In contrast,
females with no ethanol pre-exposure show a subtle inverted U-shaped
dose-response, with greater PTN at
the intermediate 1.00-1.25%
ethanol doses, relative to the lower and higher ethanol doses. With
regard to animals with 1.50% ethanol pre-exposure, males demonstrate
a subtle inverted U-shaped dose-response, while females show a subtle
U-shaped dose response. Considering PTN responses across all con-
ditioning doses, males with ethanol pre-exposure at 40 dpf showed
more overall PTN, relative to females. This suggests that the interaction
of ethanol conditioning dose, pre-exposure age, sex, and time interval
of assessment is largely driven by a time-course dependent
enhancement of responses in females at speciﬁc ethanol conditioning
doses and diminished responses at other doses. This is consistent with
the presence of multiple signiﬁcant post-hoc tests assessing the inter-
action of pre-exposure age, ethanol conditioning dose, sex, and time.
Previous studies have shown that responsiveness to ethanol may
emerge in ethanol-adapted zebraﬁsh when an escalated dose of ethanol
is utilized in conditioning relative to the chronic dose of 1.50% ethanol
in adolescence [18]. However, the present study suggests adaptation of
zebraﬁsh to ethanol pre-exposure and indicates that altered dose-de-
pendent responsiveness to ethanol varies across male and female zeb-
raﬁsh, possibly due to hormonal mechanisms. This is consistent with
ﬁndings that tolerance and sensitization to ethanol are altered by an-
drogen and estrogen levels in rodent models of addiction [30].
Furthermore, the 10–20 minute time interval of the post-conditioning PTN assessment indicated either a peak or trough of the time
spent on the ethanol-paired side. Indeed, signiﬁcant diﬀerences in PTN
were typically observed during the second half of the 20-minute as-
sessment period. This suggests that habituation to the CPP chamber
during the ﬁrst half of the assessment period may preclude the ability to
assess ethanol-induced PTN at these earlier times. However, this time-
dependent PTN response also varied dose-dependently between male
and female zebraﬁsh based on their previous history of ethanol ex-
posure. This may imply that there are various factors contributing to
seeking out the ethanol-paired environment when given the opportu-
nity, which may be inﬂuenced by a diminished need to habituate to the
environment in speciﬁc groups. This is similar to other studies of the
reinforcing eﬀects of addictive substances that may persist in zebraﬁsh
despite adverse consequences [31], which are implicit in the relatively
novel environment of the conditioning chamber, which is analogous to
an open ﬁeld task in rodent models.

4.2. Conditioning order is not predictive of PTN response

Although previous studies have indicated that percent time on the
ethanol-paired side is enhanced when ﬁsh are conditioned to water
prior to conditioning to ethanol [12], the present study determined that
conditioning order is a non-signiﬁcant predictor of the degree of PTN
exhibited by ﬁsh, and consequently does not alter the degree of CPP
observed. This ﬁnding supports the hypothesis that ﬁsh are no longer
under the acute inﬂuence of ethanol during the post-conditioning pre-
ference assessment, regardless of whether ethanol conditioning oc-
curred on day 1 or day 2.

4.3. Absolute angular velocity

Chronic ethanol exposure over 22 days inﬂuences responsiveness of
zebraﬁsh to an acute 60-min ethanol exposure on day 23 [22]. Control
ﬁsh show decreased distance traveled in the middle of an ethanol ex-
posure trial, with increased distance traveled upon initial exposure and
at the end of the trial. When ethanol-exposed ﬁsh are less responsive to
acute ethanol challenge, this is often attributed to tolerance [22].
Zebraﬁsh with chronic ethanol exposure also show increased AAV and
less exploration during ethanol withdrawal, hyperexcitability and an-
xiogenic eﬀects, respectively [22].

In this study, ﬁsh conditioned to 1.50% ethanol displayed sig-
niﬁcantly greater ethanol-induced AAV, relative to ﬁsh conditioned to
1.00% ethanol. However, the ﬁsh conditioned to 1.00% ethanol showed
a signiﬁcantly greater PTN, compared to ﬁsh conditioned to 1.50%
ethanol. These results suggest that the diﬀerent conditioning doses have
a variable impact on locomotor parameters and can also signiﬁcantly
aﬀect the conditioned response to ethanol. This eﬀect of conditioning
dose is independent of the inﬂuence of pre-exposure age, sex, and time
of assessment, suggesting a speciﬁc eﬀect of ethanol. For example, a
low (1.00%) conditioning dose contributes to both locomotor sup-
pressant eﬀects and a greater conditioned response to ethanol, while
the high (1.5%) conditioning dose causes enhanced locomotor activity
along with a diminished conditioned response to ethanol. These two
eﬀects imply that ethanol-induced locomotor suppression, indicated by
a decrease in AAV, may be a mechanism of the rewarding association
developed in the ethanol-paired environment. It has similarly been
observed in rodents that certain experimental lighting conditions [32]
or injection of recombinant tissue plasminogen activator into the nu-
cleus accumbens [33] are associated with decreased sensitization to
ethanol as well as diminished CPP scores [32,33].

Furthermore, the timing of ethanol pre-exposure impacts the
ethanol-induced change in angular velocity, with male zebraﬁsh pre-
exposed at 20 dpf or female zebraﬁsh pre-exposed at 40 dpf showing an
increase in AAV when conditioned to ethanol, while female zebraﬁsh
pre-exposed at 20 dpf showed a decrease in AAV in ethanol con-
ditioning. These results indicate that chronic exposure to ethanol in-
teracts with the eﬀect of acute ethanol exposure. Zebraﬁsh acutely
exposed to ethanol also exhibit a dose-dependent increase in path
length across increasing ethanol doses. In contrast, ﬁsh receiving
chronic treatment with 0.25% ethanol prior to acute treatment with
0.25% ethanol exhibit diminished path length, compared to ﬁsh acutely
treated with 0.50% or 1.00% ethanol after chronic treatment [21].

Our results also suggest diﬀerential ethanol susceptibility in male
and female zebraﬁsh with regard to AAV measurements. Ethanol, in
general, induced a decrease in AAV in females and an increase in AAV
in males. Furthermore, male ﬁsh with less than 10% increase in PTN
displayed greater AAV, compared to female ﬁsh with less than 10%
increase in PTN. Higher ethanol doses also contributed to diminished
PTN responses and increased AAV. Thus, the sex-dependent diﬀerence
in the AAV response in ﬁsh that display a diminished PTN response may
be relevant to similar variation also observed in the conditioned re-
sponse to ethanol and the locomotor stimulant eﬀects of ethanol in
male and female zebraﬁsh. Diﬀerential development of sensitization or
tolerance to the depressant eﬀects of ethanol between distinct pre-ex-
posure times and between males and females has also been observed in
rodents [34]. Female rats exposed to ethanol in adolescence exhibit
enhanced sensitivity to the locomotor stimulant eﬀects of ethanol as
well as enhanced ethanol self-administration in late adolescence,
compared to males.

The altered sensitivity to the locomotor eﬀects of ethanol along with
altered responses to ethanol conditioning is reﬂected in the similar
trajectory of responses of male and female zebraﬁsh under control pre-
exposure conditions and with less than 10% increase in PTN and of
males and females with 1.50% ethanol pre-exposure and with more
than 10% increase in PTN. When analyzing ethanol-conditioned ﬁsh
displaying more or less PTN, a median split of ﬁsh was used with the
cutoﬀ-point of 10 percent PTN, conﬁrmed by ROC analysis to be an
accurate method of predicting which ﬁsh display more or less of a PTN
response based on their pre-exposure age and sex.

It has been reported that female zebraﬁsh exhibit a heightened
sensitivity to both acute and chronic ethanol treatment in terms of
disrupted clustering behavior with co-treated ﬁsh, indicated by in-
creased nearest neighbor distance [35]. Females also exhibit relatively
greater disruption of clustering with 7, 8, and 10 weeks of chronic
ethanol treatment, compared to males. While wild type female zebra-
ﬁsh exhibit relatively greater disruption of clustering in response to
acute treatment with 0.5% ethanol, males show relatively greater dis-
ruption of clustering with acute treatment with 1.00% ethanol

Though ethanol decreased AAV in the ﬁrst half of the conditioning
trial in the present study, it also increased angular velocity in the last
quarter of the conditioning trial. This increased AAV is consistent with
qualitative observation of circling and thigmotaxis in the second half of
the ethanol conditioning trials. This may be a consequence of either
ethanol-induced alteration of exploratory behavior or disruption of
glutamatergic function, which is also implicated in hyperactivity and
anxiety [36–38]. Since the measure of ethanol-induced AAV was shown
to vary across time within the conditioning trial, this indicates that
angular velocity may be a useful index of the pharmacokinetic proﬁle of
ethanol for zebraﬁsh.

4.4. Novel tank test & shoal test

Ethanol alters locomotor behavior at high doses and has an anxio-
lytic eﬀect at low doses [39]. Previous studies also report that ethanol
dose-dependently aﬀects novel tank test scores, with more time spent in
the upper third of the novel chamber following 0.50% ethanol ex-
posure, less time spent in the middle chamber third with 1.00% ethanol
exposure, and more time spent in the lower chamber third with 0.00%
or 1.00% ethanol exposure [17]. Zebraﬁsh with 0.25% ethanol ex-
posure and controls demonstrate unbiased dark preference and habi-
tuate more quickly to a novel tank, compared to ﬁsh with 0.5% or 1.0%
ethanol exposure, which demonstrate dark avoidance [17]. Previous
studies also indicate that chronic ethanol treatment followed by with-
drawal increases anxiety-like behavior in a novel tank and impairs
shoaling in AB zebraﬁsh and reduced shoaling was established in the SF
zebraﬁsh strain [40,41].

Overall, impaired shoaling in response to ethanol pre-exposure did
not occur in the wild-type (i.e. not from a speciﬁc zebraﬁsh strain) ﬁsh
utilized in the present study, implying that wildtype ﬁsh may be re-
sistant to one eﬀect of discontinued ethanol exposure despite the eﬀect
of the pre-exposure age on ethanol-induced increase in PTN. Similarly,
novel tank responses were not aﬀected by ethanol pre-exposure age.
Both novel tank and shoaling responses were assessed prior to con-
ditioning and ∼5 months after initial pre-exposure occurred, sug-
gesting that the response observed in these two tests reﬂected typical
responses to novelty and social stimuli, unaﬀected by ethanol exposure
as juveniles. This may be due in part to the timing of the age of ethanol
pre-exposure and/or the ethanol treatments being conﬁned to 20-min
daily treatments for one week, rather than continual exposure. Other
studies show that continuous exposure of zebraﬁsh to ethanol for one
week starting at the embryonic stage increases adulthood anxiety-like
behavior in a novel tank, while shoaling is diminished [42]. Future
studies may evaluate whether the acute eﬀects of ethanol are related to
baseline shoaling responses in the same individual ﬁsh, as ethanol has
been shown to acutely alter shoaling behavior [43].

Despite the absence of an eﬀect of ethanol pre-exposure age on
novel tank and shoaling responses noted above, diﬀerences emerged
when comparing male and female zebraﬁsh. Females spent a greater
percent time in the lower third of the novel tank, compared to males,
especially if they received ethanol exposure at 20 dpf, and females,
speciﬁcally, exhibited a greater increase in percent time spent on the
tank side adjacent to the shoal, suggesting sex-speciﬁc eﬀects. Acute
alcohol intoxication increases ACTH and cortisol levels to a greater
degree in human females, consistent with HPA response to alcohol
varying according to estrogen levels in rodents [30]. The impact of
environmental stress on the benzodiazepine/GABA receptor complex in
rats is inﬂuenced by sex hormone activity [30]. This inﬂuence of sex
hormones on anxiety-related responses may be reﬂected in sex-depen-
dent behavioral diﬀerences of zebraﬁsh in a 5-minute novel tank test.
Female zebraﬁsh have diﬀerential tank preference depending upon
their activity level, indicated by distance traveled, while males do not
show an activity-dependent preference, and females with higher ac-
tivity levels prefer the top of a novel tank, while females with low ac-
tivity level prefer the bottom [18]. Overall, these results suggest that
females exhibit a trend for increased baseline anxiety-like behavior,
indicated by the novel tank test, which is also associated with non-
signiﬁcantly greater ethanol-induced PTN. This may be a function of
habituation to the novel environment of the conditioning chamber.

5. Conclusions

Consistent with our hypothesis, ethanol pre-exposure of juvenile
zebraﬁsh aﬀected distinct behavioral responses of adult male and fe-
male zebraﬁsh. Ethanol pre-exposure age aﬀected ethanol-induced time
spent on the initially non-preferred tank side (PTN) diﬀerentially in
male and female zebraﬁsh assessed in the CPP paradigm. The PTN re-
sponse of individual zebraﬁsh was associated with changes in absolute
angular velocity during ethanol conditioning. Behavioral measures of
ethanol-induced locomotor behavior during conditioning were inﬂu-
enced by ethanol conditioning dose, sex, and pre-exposure age. Female
zebraﬁsh displayed greater anxiety-like behavior in a novel tank and
increased shoaling responses regardless of ethanol pre-exposure



References

[1] M.T. Bard