
1. Introduction

Probabilistic categorization learning requires a coordinated inter-
action between declarative and non-declarative memory. Over the past
20 years, evidence has accumulated that probabilistic learning involves
distinct anatomically and functionally segregated memory systems [1].
It has been discussed whether these systems interact in a competitive
[2,3] or cooperative manner [4]. Brain regions which are involved in
cognitive control, performance integration and reward learning [5–9]
represent additional factors aﬀecting the probabilistic categorization
learning process. With respect to memory, the interplay of the medial
temporal lobe [MTL] and the basal ganglia is in the focus of research
[2]. Declarative memory involves the hippocampus which supports the
acquisition of ﬂexible knowledge in contrast to more rigid striatum-
dependent memory systems [10,11].

The weather prediction task (WPT) is a well-known probabilistic
learning task [5–7,2]. In this task, participants are asked to classify one
to three (out of four) diﬀerent cue cards into one of two weather ca-
tegories (rain or sun) based on feedback they receive for their actions.

The WPT is a well-established probabilistic categorization learning task
that demonstrates the diﬀerential contributions of declarative (medi-
ated by the hippocampus) and nondeclarative (mediated by the basal
ganglia) memory processes [12]. Patients with basal ganglia disorders
show reduced performances in the WPT, especially in the early prob-
abilistic learning phase [5]. However, amnesic patients with damage to
the hippocampus perform comparably to controls in the early phases of
learning, presumably because the declarative memory system interferes
with the nondeclarative regularities detected by the nondeclarative
memory system [6].

Additionally, further studies focused on the contribution of de-
clarative knowledge to WPT performance [8,13,9,14]. Schwabe and
Wolf [9], for instance, demonstrated a positive correlation between
WPT task performance and hippocampal activation. It seems that the
hippocampus-based learning and the hippocampal activity play an
important role in the categorization learning process and support the
learning performance in a probabilistic learning task.

The hippocampal activity as well as the hippocampal based memory
processing and hippocampal based behavior can be in turn modiﬁed by
the environmental enrichment [15–17]. This eﬀect might be mediated
by enhanced visual exploration of enriched environments, which in
turn promotes hippocampal neuroplasticity and hippocampus-depen-
dent learning and declarative memory. Based on these ﬁndings a
modiﬁcation of the environmental enrichment or a visual exploration
training should enhance hippocampal-based learning and behavior as
well as the related hippocampal activity. Since the hippocampus re-
sponds to both the real and the virtual environment in a comparable
way [18,19], it should be possible to use video games as an eﬀective
training method to enhance hippocampal-based learning and behavior
as well as the related hippocampal activity.

In previous research, playing video games has already been linked
to improved attention resources, visual imagery, problem solving, vi-
sual processing, response speed [20–22] and cognitive ﬂexibility [23].
Moreover and in accordance with the positive eﬀect of the environ-
mental enrichment, Clemenson and Stark [17] demonstrated that video
games provide a strong environmental enrichment, which leads to en-
hanced memory performance on a task that is thought to tax hippo-
campal processing. All these cognitive functions, which can be im-
proved by video games, are important factors within the probabilistic
categorization learning process.

Using the WPT, the current study investigated the eﬀects of video
game playing on the performance in a probabilistic categorization task,
the related usage of learning and memory processes as well as other
cognitive functions and its neural correlates, which represents a widely
unexplored area in gaming research up to now. We used a modiﬁed
version of the WPT (see [9]) that include an equal condition (50/50%
probabilities) as well as more certain (probabilities in the 80/20%
range) and less certain conditions (probabilities in the 70/30% and 60/
40% range). In contrast to the uncertain conditions, which should ad-
dress the nondeclarative learning and activate the implicit memory
system (mediated by the basal ganglia), the certain condition should be
related to a more pronounced usage of declarative knowledge and
should additionally activate the explicit memory system (mediated by
the MTL, especially the hippocampus).

Based on previous ﬁndings, we expected that video gamers show
better categorization performances due to a more pronounced usage of
declarative knowledge, hippocampus-dependent learning and memory
processes. More speciﬁcally, we aimed to investigate to which degree
probabilistic categorization learning is positively mediated by the as-
sumed enhanced hippocampus-depending learning of video gamers that
is due to the strong environmental enrichment of video games. To
measure these eﬀects of video game playing the categorization per-
formance in the WPT, the brain activity and the explicit knowledge of
the task and their relation to each other were assessed.

<Middle> Materials and methods.
2.1. Participants.
The current study included ﬁfteen healthy right-handed video ga-
mers (13 male and 4 female; mean age: 24.6 years; SD: 3.0 years) and
ﬁfteen healthy right-handed non-gamers (13 male and 4 female; mean
age: 27.5 years; SD: 4.1 years). The subjects were recruited through
advertisements at the Ruhr University and in local newspapers. The
group membership was deﬁned on the basis of a screening ques-
tionnaire. Video gamers were characterized by playing more than 15 h
of video games like “starcraft” or other action-based videogames per
week. Non-gamers, with low or without any video game experience,
were deﬁned by playing less than 4 h per week.

All participants had normal or corrected to normal vision and no
current or past mental illnesses. The study was performed in accordance
with ethical standards laid down in the declaration of Helsinki and
written informed consent was obtained from all subjects. The in-
vestigation was approved by the local Ethics Committee of
the Psychological Faculty of the Ruhr University Bochum, Germany.

2.2. Stimuli and task

Subjects were scanned while performing a modiﬁed version of the
WPT ([5,6,2]; see Fig. 1). The experiment was performed using Pre-
sentation® software (Neurobehavioral Systems, Inc., Albany, CA, USA)
and MRI-suitable LCD video goggles (Resonance Technology Company,
Inc., Northridge, CA, USA) with a resolution of 800 × 600 pixels, re-
gistering the responses with an MRI-suitable keypad.

Before the WPT started, participants were instructed that on each
trial one to three (out of four) diﬀerent cue cards will appear and that
they should learn to predict the weather based on the presented cards.
Participants classiﬁed card stimulus sets as predictions of the weather
(sun/rain) and got feedback (positive/negative) accordingly to their
choice. Each card pattern was associated with ﬁxed probabilities for
more/less probable weather outcomes (probabilities of 50/50%; 60/
40%; 70/30%; 80/20%). The diﬀerent card combinations and positions
were randomly presented and associated with the two possible weather
outcomes. The experiment consisted of two sessions of 100 trials each,
resulting in 200 trials over the course of the experiment (see [9]). After
completion of the WPT, the participants answered a self-designed post-
experimental questionnaire to assess cue usage and declarative
knowledge about the WPT. The questionnaire was completed outside
the scanner and contained 14 items that assessed explicit task knowl-
edge about the WPT. For example, participants were asked which card
or card combinations were most strongly associated with the two
weather possibilities. For 12 items, one point was given for each correct
answer. For the remaining two items that contained two sub-questions
up to two points were given. The score reached in the post-experimental
questionnaire was used as a measure of declarative knowledge. Subjects
could reach up to 16 points in the explicit knowledge questionnaire.

2.3. Image acquisition

The experiment was performed using a Philips 3T Achieva MRI
scanner with a 32 channel SENSE head coil. In order to create a mean
structural image and to overlay activations, a T1 weighted structural
image was acquired for each participant at the beginning of the ex-
perimental
size = 1 × 1 × 1 mm,
TE = 3.8 ms, ﬂip angle = 8°). T2* weighted EPIs were acquired in an
ascending sequence of 32 slices (voxel size = 1.79 × 1.79 × 3 mm,
TR = 2000 ms, TE = 30 ms). The ﬁrst ﬁve dummy images obtained at
the beginning of each scanning session were discarded to allow for MRI
signal stabilization.
2.4. Data analyses

All data analyses described below included the covariate “gender”
in order to take into account of possible gender eﬀects.
For the analysis of the behavioral data, Greenhouse Geisser and
Bonferroni corrected repeated measures ANCOVAs with the covariate
“gender” and the factors “group” (video gamers vs. non-gamers) and
“condition” (probabilities of 60/40%; 70/30%; 80/20%) were applied
for the percentage of the more probable weather outcomes within and
between groups. Additionally, two-tailed t-tests were used to resolve
signiﬁcant interactions. Furthermore, separate ANCOVAs with the
covariate “gender” and the factor “condition” (probabilities of 60/40%;
70/30%; 80/20%) were calculated for both groups. Two-tailed t-tests
were applied to resolve signiﬁcant interactions. An independent sam-
ples t-test was conducted for a group comparison regarding the de-
clarative knowledge about the WPT, as represented by the total score
reached in the post-experimental questionnaire.

The functional and structural images were preprocessed using the
latest release of SPM 8 (http://www.ﬁl.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/
spm8). Preprocessing included slice time correction to the middle slice
of each volume, realignment and unwarping as well as co-registration
of the T1-weighted image to the mean T2*-weighted image. Structural
images were segmented into gray matter, white matter, and cere-
brospinal ﬂuid. The gray matter images were normalized to a standard
anatomical
template image (Montreal Neurologic Institute, MNI).
Normalized gray matter images were used for normalization of the
structural and functional images. Finally, data were spatially smoothed
using an isotropic 8 mm Gaussian kernel (full-width-half-maximum, FWHM).
The preprocessed data were submitted into a ﬁrst level analysis
where the blood oxygenation level dependent signal (BOLD) was
modeled with the canonical hemodynamic response function (HRF). A
high-pass ﬁlter at 128 s was used to remove low frequency drifts. Nine
regressors were deﬁned on the ﬁrst level: choices of the more and less
probable outcomes for the four card set probability conditions (prob-
abilities of 50/50%; 60/40%; 70/30%; 80/20%), a ﬁxation regressor as
baseline, and one additional information regressor to increase the
amount of explained variance. The additional information regressor
included blank slices and feedback. Choices of the more probable out-
come of the 60/40% and 80/20% conditions were contrasted against
the ﬁxation regressor. The resulting contrasts were then used in a
second level analysis for the calculation of group diﬀerences.

In the group level analysis, a full factorial model with two factors
and the covariate “gender” was applied to the data from the WPT. The
model included the between-subject factors “group” (video gamers vs.
non-gamers) and the within-subject factor “condition” (probabilities of
60/40% vs. 80/20%).

The signiﬁcance threshold was set to p ≤ .05 using a voxelwise false
discovery rate correction (FDR); with a minimal cluster size of 23 voxels
was applied. Only regions were reported that reached the signiﬁcance
level. Additionally, percent signal change measures were computed in
signiﬁcant regions using the MarsBaR toolbox (http://marsbar.
sourceforge.net).

Additionally, Pearson correlations were computed to investigate the
relationships between the categorization performances, questionnaire
points and brain activity. Besides this relationships group as well as the
gender eﬀects were further explored investigated.

3. Results

3.1. Behavioral data

Behavioral data yielded evidence for a better categorization per-
formance of video gamers, particularly under conditions characterized
by stronger uncertainty (see Fig. 2). More speciﬁcally, the analysis
showed signiﬁcant main eﬀects for the factor “group” (F1,31 = 16.18,
p = 0.001). The subsequent analysis of the main eﬀect “group” re-
vealed higher percentages of the more probable weather outcomes for
video gamers, especially in the more uncertain 60/40% condition (60/
40% condition:
70/30% condition:
t32 = −2.52, p = 0.017; 80/20% condition: t32 = −3.03, p = 0.005).
The separate ANCOVAs with the covariate gender and the factor

t32 = −3.63,

p = 0.001;

“condition” (60/40%; 70/30%; 80/20%) yielded only for non-gamers a
signiﬁcant main eﬀect for the factor condition (F2,28 = 4.06, p = 0.03;
see Fig. 3). The analysis of the categorization performance of video
gamers did not show any signiﬁcant results. The subsequent analysis of
the categorization performance of non-gamers showed that they chose
the more probable weather outcomes more often in the clearer 80/20%
condition than in the 60/40% (t16 = −2.56, p = 0.021) and 70/30%
condition (t16 = −3.31, p = 0.004; see Fig. 3).
3.2. Post-experimental questionnaire
The analysis of the post-experimental questionnaire showed that
video gamers had more explicit knowledge acquired about the WPT.
Video gamers reached an average of 11.6 (SE =0.9) of 16 points
whereas non-gamers only reached 8.9 (SE =0.7) of 16 points, which
was significantly different from each other (t32 = −2.40, p =0.022;
see Fig. 4).
3.3. Imaging data
The full factorial analysis yielded significant results for the main
effect “group” (see Table 1 and Figs. 5 and 6). The contrast video gamers
> non-gamers yielded activation clusters especially located in
the hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus as well as in the tha-
lamus, the precuneus, the cingulate gyrus and the insula. Furthermore,
the analysis yielded signiﬁcant activation clusters in frontal, temporal
and parietal brain regions (see Table 1).
Apart from these group diﬀerences the analysis yielded for both
groups activation clusters that are typically activated in the WPT,
especially the basal ganglia.
3.4. Correlation analyses.
The correlation analyses between the imaging data (percentage
signal changes) and the results of the behavioral data, showed a sig-
niﬁcant correlation between the group membership and the categor-
ization performance (r(34) = −.58, p = .001), questionnaire points (r
(34) = −.39, p = .022) and hippocampal activity in the uncertain 60/
40% condition (r(34) = .34, p = .05). Additionally,
the analyses
showed a trend between the group membership and the hippocampal
activity over all conditions (r(34) = .34, p = .052) as well as the hip-
pocampal activity in the certain 80/20% condition (r(34) = .33,
p = .058).
The categorization performance in the 70/30% condition correlates
signiﬁcantly with the results of
the questionnaire (r(34) = .58,
p = .001) and the hippocampal activity in the 70/30% condition (r
(34) = .51, p = .002) as well as with the hippocampal activity over all
conditions (r(34) = .37, p = .033). Furthermore, the categorization
performance in the 80/20% condition correlates also signiﬁcantly with
the reached questionnaire points (r(34) = .52, p = .002).

Moreover, a signiﬁcant correlation between results if the ques-
tionnaire and the hippocampal activity in the 70/30% condition could
be found (r(34) = .41, p = .015) as well as a trend between the
reached questionnaire points and the hippocampal activity in the 80/
20% condition.

<Conclusion> Discussion.
The current study investigated the eﬀects of video game playing
experience on categorization learning using the WPT. Results from
previous studies yielded evidence of beneﬁcial eﬀects of video game
experience on cognitive functions. This enhancing eﬀect is thought to
be mediated by visual exploration of highly enriched environments,
which in turn promotes hippocampal activation and further enhances
hippocampus-dependent learning and declarative memory performance
(see [18,19,17]). Schwabe and Wolf [9] showed a positive correlation
of hippocampal activation and task performance during probabilistic
categorization learning.
In line with ﬁndings from previous studies, current results suggest
that video game playing enhances probabilistic categorization learning
in the WPT. Video gamers showed better categorization performances
than non-gamers, especially under the high uncertain 60/40% and 70/
30% conditions, with pronounced usage of declarative knowledge and
pronounced involvement of the hippocampus. Furthermore, in contrast
to non-gamers, video gamers showed no performance diﬀerences be-
tween the three conditions within their group. Non-gamers had more
problems under the uncertain 60/40% and 70/30% conditions but
showed signiﬁcantly better performances under the certain 80/20%
condition. It seems that the categorization performance of video ga-
mers, in contrast to those of non-players, was not aﬀected by the un-
certainties of the conditions within the WPT. Additionally, video game
players showed better declarative knowledge about the card combina-
tions and related weather outcomes as shown in the post-experimental
questionnaire. These results suggest that video gamers have an in-
creased ability to draw conclusions despite existing uncertainties,
which seems to be based on their higher declarative knowledge about
the card combinations and related weather outcomes.
Moreover, the functional imaging data revealed typical WPT activations
[2,9,14] but also significant group differences. Video gamers
showed higher activations of the hippocampus and parahippocampal
gyrus, the precuneus, the thalamus, attention-based areas like the superior
and inferior parietal lobe, the frontal gyrus and (anterior) cingulate
gyrus, occipital visual areas and the inferior temporal gyrus as
well as in the middle temporal gyrus, combined with higher declarative
knowledge about the WPT. The latter might be based on stronger hippocampal
activation [1,9]. This more detailed declarative knowledge of
video gamers might enable more complex and flexible decisions as well
as better conflict management by better predicting weather outcomes.
Furthermore, the higher activation of the precuneus in video gamers
can be explained by the well-known functions of the precuneus [24,25].
Fletcher et al. [24] Both could show that the precuneus plays a key role
in visual imagery, which is used in conscious memory recall. Current
results suggest that video gamers used pronounced visual imagery
during card categorization. Hippocampus activation combined with
precuneus activation suggest an interplay between conscious decision
making about the weather outcome and declarative knowledge. Video
game playing might increase visual imagery, which in turn has a positive
effect on the generation of explicit task knowledge. Additionally,
previous studies showed that the precuneus has an active role in constructing
an internal representation of the environment [26,27] while
environmental exploration is reflected by hippocampal activation [17].
Additionally, video gamers showed higher activations in both
frontal gyrus and (anterior) cingulate gyrus. These structures are involved
in higher-level functions, such as executive attention, conflict
management, target as well as error detection, cognitive control, decision-
making [28,29], and self-regulation [30]. Video gamers consciously
made their decision about the weather outcome on the basis of
declarative knowledge which in turn requires higher executive attention
and cognitive control as well as a more pronounced conflict
management as reflected by their activation pattern.
Activation clusters in the middle temporal gyrus might suggest a
more pronounced use of semantic memory as well as semantic control
[31,32]. Interestingly, previous studies showed that the middle temporal
gyrus is connected with the medial superior frontal cortex, the
cingulate cortex and the precuneus. All these areas play a critical role in
semantic memory. Especially the anatomical connectivity between the
middle temporal gyrus and the precuneus seems to be very strong.
The signiﬁcant activation cluster in the thalamus of video gamers
that probably projects to the pre-frontal and temporal cortex (pre-
frontal cortex: 0.18 probability; temporal cortex: 0.55; https://fsl.fmrib.
ox.ac.uk/connect/) suggest that video gamers use a more evaluated
declarative learning from the beginning, which required more pro-
nounced cognitive control, selection and consciousness attention pro-
cesses [34–36].
However, video gamers showed higher activations in occipital vi-
sual areas (e.g. cuneus), areas that are related to the processing of visual
stimuli like the inferior temporal gyrus (see [37]) and attention-based
areas like the superior and inferior parietal lobe. The superior parietal
lobule receives a great deal of visual input and is involved in (covert)
orienting of attention. Covered orientation is reﬂected by activations in
occipital visual areas and in regions of the superior parietal cortex [38].
These signiﬁcant activation results can be traced back to the enhanced
visual processing and attention of video gamers that have already been
shown in previous studies (see [20–23]).

Apart from these group diﬀerences and in line with previous studies,
both groups showed activations in brain areas that are related to at-
tention and executive functions as well as in the basal ganglia and in
memory-associated regions of the medial temporal lobe [13,39].

The results of the correlation analyses including the signiﬁcant re-
sults of the collected measurements ﬁt well within the overall theore-
tical framework of this study. The results underline the group eﬀect of
the behavioral and und imaging data as well as the sum of ques-
tionnaire points, as a measure to collect the explicit knowledge about
the categorization task. Moreover, the signiﬁcant positive correlations
between the categorization performance and the reached questionnaire
points (explicit task knowledge) as well as the hippocampal activity
show that a high categorization performance is related to a higher
hippocampal activity and accompanied with more pronounced explicit
task knowledge. The signiﬁcant correlation between the reached
questionnaire points and the hippocampal activity support this as-
sumption. The post-experimental questionnaire showed an improved
explicit memory performance of video gamers. This is an indication of a
higher hippocampal processing (see [17]). However, this assumed in-
creased hippocampal processing of video gamers is conﬁrmed by the
higher hippocampal activity and is related to an increased categoriza-
tion performance.

A critical limitation of the current study might be the small sample
size. Further studies should recruit larger samples of video gamers to
support the results regarding to the positive eﬀects of video game
playing on the categorization learning performance. Additionally, fur-
ther training studies are necessary to ensure that the beneﬁts of video
gamers in probabilistic categorization learning are based on their video
game consumption and are not caused by other factors. Moreover, fu-
ture studies should model the use of cognitive learning strategies within
and between the groups. A suitable assessment to model the learning
strategies would strengthen the results, especially in regard to the more
pronounced usage of a declarative learning by video gamers (e.g. [9]).

5. Conclusion

The results of the current study are in line with the idea that video
game playing is associated with many cognitive beneﬁts in the realm of
visual imagery, problem solving, and visual processing [22,23,17]. All
these cognitive functions, which can be improved by video games, are
important factors within (categorization) learning processes. Especially
the enhancement of hippocampal-based learning and behavior through
a modiﬁcation of the environmental enrichment could be replicated
and related to an enhanced hippocampal activity. In accordance with
the positive eﬀect of the high environmental enrichment of video games
[17], the current study demonstrated that video games lead to en-
hanced hippocampal learning and memory performance. Additionally,
video game playing seems to enhance hippocampal activity.
Furthermore, in line with previous studies [9], the results of the current
study yield evidence for a positive relation of task performance and
hippocampal activation in the WPT.
This is, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst study demonstrating the positive
eﬀects of video game playing on learning performance including
memory systems and related brain regions. More speciﬁcally, we could
show for the ﬁrst time that video game playing enhances the learning
performance in probabilistic categorization learning under an increased
usage of hippocampus dependent declarative knowledge. In contrast to
non-gamers, video gamers had a higher declarative knowledge about
the WPT, an improved ability of visual imagery and higher activation in
the hippocampus and other brain regions that are associated with a
more pronounced use of semantic memory, attention and conﬂict
management. In general, the results of the current study show the
special role of the hippocampus in the probabilistic learning of video
gamers.
However, the present ﬁndings might be relevant for the usage of
video games as an eﬀective cognitive training or neuropsychological
rehabilitation method, which could be used to improve hippocampal
plasticity and to reduce age-related cognitive limitations [40–42].
Playing video games is fun, but it also trains our brains.


Acknowledgments
