

INTRODUCTION

Transcriptional adaptation to ﬂuctuations in nutrient availability is
critical for ﬁtness [1]. In response to previous experiences,
certain inducible genes show a mitotically heritable increase in
the rate of transcription [2–12]. This epigenetic phenomenon,
referred as transcriptional memory, is observed in yeast,
Drosophila, and humans [5, 7, 13]. However, its evolutionary
history and adaptive impact have not been explored. Also,
whereas some aspects of transcriptional memory are deeply
conserved, gene-speciﬁc features also occur [4, 6, 8, 14], sug-
gesting that gene-speciﬁc regulatory systems can be regulated
by transcriptional memory.

In S. cerevisiae, GAL genes exhibit transcriptional memory.
These genes are speciﬁcally induced in galactose to mediate
galactose utilization [15, 16]. When cells are shifted from glucose
to galactose, the initial rate of induction of GAL genes is very
slow; the Gal1 protein reaches steady-state levels 10 hr after
shifting from glucose to galactose (Figure 1B; compared with
the doubling time of budding yeast, 1.5–2 hr). However, in cells
that have been previously grown in galactose, GAL genes are
rapidly reactivated. This phenomenon persists in the population
for 7 or 8 cell divisions after repression in glucose [2, 11, 14, 17].
Like other genes that show memory, GAL transcriptional
memory is also associated with changes in chromatin structure,
leading to a state that is poised for faster reactivation [14].

The initial induction of GAL genes is slow in part because, in
most cells, there are fewer molecules of the Gal3 co-activator
than the Gal80 inhibitor [11, 18]. Consequently, the expression
is initially heterogeneous, with some cells responding and others
not [18]. On the other hand, during memory, reactivation is more
uniform [18]. GAL memory requires the Gal1 galactokinase, a
paralog of Gal3 [2, 11, 14, 17]. Gal1 is abundantly produced in
galactose, extremely stable, and diluted very slowly after repres-
sion in glucose [14]. A few hundred molecules of Gal1 are neces-
sary and sufﬁcient to produce the effects of memory, including
the changes in chromatin structure over the GAL1 promoter
and uniformity of expression [11, 14]. Because both Gal1 and
Gal3 can interact with Gal80 to relieve inhibition of the Gal4 acti-
vator [19–23], this leads to a model whereby residual Gal1 allows
cells to more rapidly overcome Gal80 repression and rapidly
induce GAL genes during memory (Figure 1A).

Here, we explored the adaptive value, evolutionary history,
and molecular mechanism of GAL gene transcriptional memory.
In S. cerevisiae, GAL transcriptional memory confers a strong
adaptive advantage, allowing much faster adaptation to
galactose and better utilization of mixed sugars. In contrast,
S. uvarum, a divergent Saccharomyces species, does not beneﬁt
from previous growth in galactose but instead shows constitu-
tively fast GAL gene activation due to basal GAL1 expression.
Replacing the GAL1 promoter in S. cerevisiae with that from
S. uvarum recapitulated this difference in behavior, conﬁrming
that the basal expression of Gal1 and the resulting fast activation
of other GAL genes are genetically encoded by this promoter.
Using a point mutation in Gal1 that disrupts the interaction with
Gal80, we demonstrate that fast induction of GAL genes in
both species results from a physical interaction between Gal1
and Gal80. A screen for mutants that block GAL memory down-
stream of Gal1 identiﬁed a mutation in Gal4 central domain (CD),
revealing a critical role for this domain in transcriptional memory
downstream of both Gal1 and Gal80. The CD serves to poten-
tiate Gal4 activation, and this function is regulated by Gal80.
Ectopically expressed CD complemented deletion of the CD in
trans and was recruited to chromatin-bound Gal4Dcd, suggest-
ing that potentiation is the result of an inter-domain interaction
within Gal4. Thus, recently diverged species employ either
epigenetic or genetic strategies to alter the transcriptional
potency of a transcription factor, promoting faster adaptation
to changes in carbon source.

<Middle> RESULTS.
Transcriptional Memory Enhances Fitness by Promoting
Uniform, Rapid Activation of GAL Genes
Because Gal1 is both necessary and sufﬁcient to promote faster
induction of GAL genes during memory, Gal1 most likely inter-
acts with Gal80 to allow rapid de-repression of GAL genes
(Figure 1A). The relative rates of GAL1 transcription can be
compared by measuring Gal1-mCherry ﬂuorescence expressed
using ﬂow cytometry [11, 14]. In cells that had not been previ-
ously exposed to galactose (i.e., naive cells), Gal1-mCherry
was undetectable for the ﬁrst 4 hr after shifting from glucose to
galactose (Figures 1B and 1D, ACT). Between 4 hr and 8 hr after
switching cells to galactose, expression of Gal1-mCherry was
apparent in a subset of cells in the population (i.e., bimodal
expression; Figures 1B and 1D, ACT). After 10 hr in galactose,
the entire population expressed Gal1-mCherry (Figure 1D,
ACT). In contrast, in cells that were previously grown in galactose
and then repressed for 12 hr (7 or 8 cell divisions; i.e., memory),
the population responded uniformly and rapidly; Gal1-mCherry
ﬂuorescence was measurable within 4 hr after shifting back to
galactose (unimodal expression; Figures 1B and 1D, REACT).
Likewise, ectopic expression of GAL1 promoted both rapid
and unimodal accumulation of Gal1-mCherry (Figures 1B and
1D, ACT + eGAL1) [11, 14, 17, 24]. Furthermore, consistent
with the model in Figure 1A, either loss of Gal80 or a point muta-
tion in Gal4 (V864E) that disrupts the interaction with Gal80 [25]
also resulted in rapid, unimodal expression of Gal1-mCherry
(Figures 1C and 1D). Thus, memory leads to faster and more
uniform GAL1 transcriptional activation, most likely by promot-
ing rapid and uniform relief of Gal80 repression.
To quantify the adaptive effect of faster reactivation of GAL
genes during memory, we followed the growth kinetics upon
shifting cells from glucose to galactose (Figure 1E). Naive cells
exhibited a long growth lag before entering exponential phase
(Figure 1E, ACT). In contrast, during memory or in cells ectopi-
cally expressing Gal1, adaptation was much faster (Figure 1E,
REACT and ACT + eGAL1). Although the growth rates were ulti-
mately similar once cells reached exponential phase, memory
confers a large ﬁtness beneﬁt by decreasing the growth lag after
shifting cells from glucose to galactose (Figure 1E, gray circles).
Rapid GAL gene activation in fungal species is also associated
with increased responsiveness to low concentrations of galac-
tose [26–28]. During memory or in cells expressing ectopic
Gal1, Gal1-mCherry was expressed at higher levels in media
with low concentrations of galactose (Figure 1F). Because yeast
cells are most likely exposed to mixtures of sugars in nature, we
asked whether this higher sensitivity for galactose also impacts
the expression of Gal1-mCherry in the presence of glucose.
S. cerevisiae normally does not induce GAL genes in the pres-
ence of low levels of glucose (0.2% glucose and 1.8% galactose;
Figure 1G, inset). However, during memory or in the presence of
ectopic Gal1, Gal1-mCherry expression was observed in the
presence of glucose (Figure 1G,
inset). This Gal1-mCherry
expression correlated with a ﬁtness beneﬁt in 0.2% glucose +
1.8% galactose medium.
In this medium, once glucose is
exhausted after 7 hr of growth, naive cells exhibited a signiﬁ-
cant lag before adapting to galactose (Figure 1G) [27, 29, 30].
However, during memory or in the presence of ectopic Gal1,
this lag was absent and cells adapted immediately to galactose
(Figure 1G). Thus, transcriptional memory provides a strong
adaptive advantage in both galactose and glucose-galactose
mixtures.

Gal1-D117V Disrupts the Interaction with Gal80,
Speciﬁcally Blocking GAL Transcriptional Memory
To explore the molecular basis of faster reactivation of GAL
genes during memory, we performed a genetic screen based
on ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). After 4 hr in galac-
tose, strong expression of Gal1-mCherry occurs during reactiva-
tion, but not during activation (Figures 1D and 2A). We exploited
this difference to sort for GAL memory mutants: UV-mutagen-
ized cells that failed to express Gal1-mCherry after 4 hr of
reactivation (Figure 2A; sort I) but expressed Gal1-mCherry after
12 hr in galactose (Figure 2A; sort II). This second sort removed
mutants or those that had lost Gal1-mCherry expression.
Gal
The recovered cells were colony puriﬁed and screened by ﬂow
cytometry to identify those that speciﬁcally lost rapid GAL1
reactivation during memory.
Based on the model in Figure 1A, we expected to identify null
alleles of Gal1. We removed many such mutants by focusing on
those that were able to grow on galactose (Gal1 is required to
grow on galactose; data not shown). The screen also identiﬁed
an allele of GAL1 that was Gal+ but speciﬁcally blocked memory;
gal1-D117V reduced the rate of Gal1-mCherry reactivation
during memory without altering the rate of activation of Gal1-
mCherry (Figure 2B). Reconstruction of the gal1-D117V mutation
into the GAL1 locus recapitulated these phenotypes (data not
shown), conﬁrming that this mutation is causative. gal1-D117V
cells also lost the ﬁtness beneﬁt of memory; the growth of
gal1-D117V during reactivation closely resembled the growth
of naive wild-type cells during activation (Figure 2C). This muta-
tion had no effect on Gal1-mCherry stability (Figure S1B) or the
rate of activation (Figure 2B) and only slightly affected the rate
of exponential growth in galactose (Figure 2C). Finally, the
effects of this mutation were recessive because ectopic expres-
sion of Gal1 in gal1-D117V led to faster Gal1-mCherry expres-
sion (Figure S1C) and rapid adaptation to growth in galactose
(Figure S1D). Thus,
the gal1-D117V mutation speciﬁcally
disrupts memory without signiﬁcantly affecting other functions
of Gal1.
The structures of Gal1, Gal3, and Gal3-Gal80 are known
[20, 31]. Gal1 and Gal3 show 74% sequence identity and are
structurally superimposable with a root mean square deviation
of 1.1 A˚
(Figure S1A) [20, 31]. Aspartate 117 maps to the
predicted interaction surface between Gal1 and Gal80. In the
Gal3-Gal80 structure, Gal3-Asp111 is at the structurally equiva-
lent position to Gal1-Asp117 and forms an ionic bond with
Gal80-Arg367 (Figures 2D and S1A)
[20]. To test whether
disrupting this salt bridge reduces the afﬁnity between Gal1
and Gal80, we performed co-immunoprecipitation of wild-type
and D117V Gal1-mCherry with Gal80-myc. Although these
proteins were expressed at similar levels, immunoprecipitation
of Gal80 recovered only 20% of Gal1-D117V compared with
wild-type Gal1 (Figure 2E). This reduced afﬁnity for Gal80 led
to slow, bimodal expression of Gal1-mCherry during both activa-
tion and reactivation (Figure 2F). Furthermore, a complementary
mutant in Gal80 (R367L) predicted to disrupt the salt bridge
phenotype between Gal80 and both Gal3 and Gal1 led to a Gal
(data not shown). Thus, interaction between Gal1 and Gal80
plays a critical role in GAL gene transcriptional memory.
Constitutively Fast GAL Expression in S. uvarum Is due
to Higher Basal Expression of Gal1
S. uvarum diverged from S. cerevisiae 20 million years ago and
has evolved a distinct strategy for adapting to growth in galac-
tose (Figure S2A) [27, 32, 33]. We asked whether this species
beneﬁts from previous growth in galactose. Although the rate
of Gal1-mCherry reactivation during memory was slightly faster
than the rate of activation in S. uvarum (Figures 3A and S2B),
this difference was much smaller than that observed in S. cere-
visiae (Figure 3B). Moreover, in S. uvarum, previous growth in
galactose did not lead to a ﬁtness beneﬁt (Figure 3C). This
suggests that the rapid initial GAL gene induction in S. uvarum
is sufﬁcient to provide maximal ﬁtness beneﬁt and that
increasing this rate further provides no additional effect.
Several differences between S. uvarum and S. cerevisiae
might explain the difference in their response to previous growth
in galactose; S. uvarum has higher basal expression of the key
activators GAL1, GAL3, and GAL4 and lower expression of
the GAL80 inhibitor [27, 33]. Thus, differences in cis-acting
elements in the promoter, trans-acting factors, or both could
lead to constitutive fast GAL gene expression. To investigate
these possibilities, we substituted the GAL1 promoter (PGAL1)
in S. cerevisiae with PGAL1 from S. uvarum. In this strain, induc-
tion of Gal1-mCherry during both activation and reactivation
was as fast as reactivation in wild-type cells (Figure 3D). Thus,
PGAL1 from S. uvarum is sufﬁcient to induce constitutively fast
GAL1 expression in S. cerevisiae without any other uvarum
factors.

The effects of PGAL1 from S. uvarum are consistent with this
promoter being more easily induced. Hybrid cerevisiae-uvarum
promoters suggest that this effect is largely explained by differ-
ences in the UASGAL elements and GAL1-proximal sequences
(Figures S2C–S2E) [34]. However, because epigenetic GAL
gene transcriptional memory in S. cerevisiae requires only a
few hundred molecules of Gal1 per cell [14], very low basal
expression of Gal1 by PGAL1 from S. uvarum might also cause
this faster induction through a positive feedback mechanism.
To distinguish between these possibilities, we asked whether
S. cerevisiae with the S. uvarum PGAL1 also promoted faster
activation of other GAL genes in trans. In cells bearing the S. uva-
rum PGAL1, the rate of Gal7-Venus activation and reactivation
was as fast as that observed during memory in wild-type S. cer-
evisiae (Figure 3E). Likewise, S. uvarum PGAL1 promoted faster
adaptation to galactose (Figure 3F). Thus, the S. uvarum PGAL1
is sufﬁcient to induce constitutive fast activation of GAL genes
in trans and faster adaptation to galactose, most likely through
basal Gal1 production.

Whereas the levels of basal Gal1 protein in cells having the
PGAL1 from S. uvarum were below the level of detection using
either ﬂow cytometry or immunoblot, qRT-PCR revealed that

this promoter led to a signiﬁcant increase in GAL1 mRNA in cells
grown in glucose (p = 0.03; Student’s t test; Figure 3F, inset) [27].
If this basal expression were causative, then disrupting the inter-
action between Gal1 and Gal80 should block this effect. Indeed,
introduction of the gal1-D117A mutation into the S. cerevisiae
strain harboring the S. uvarum PGAL1 blocked the cis and trans
effects of this promoter on expression (Figures 3G and 3H) and
growth (Figure 3I). Thus, constitutive fast GAL genes induction
conferred by the S. uvarum PGAL1 is due to genetically encoded
basal expression of Gal1 that impinges upon the same molecular
mechanism employed during epigenetic transcriptional memory
in S. cerevisiae.

Fitness Costs of Constitutive GAL1 Expression
If faster GAL genes expression promotes adaptation to galac-
tose, why is it restricted to memory in S. cerevisiae? Basal
Gal1 expression is detrimental to growth in glucose-galactose
mixtures because the galactose-1-phosphate generated by
the galactokinase activity of Gal1 inhibits phosphoglucomutase
and slows glycolysis [27, 35]. Consistent with this model,
S. cerevisiae expressing ectopic GAL1 or S. uvarum showed a
measurable growth disadvantage when adapting from glucose
to a glucose-galactose mixture (1:1 ratio; 1% each sugar;
Figures S3A and S3B). Competitive growth experiments
between wild-type S. cerevisiae and S. cerevisiae harboring
the S. uvarum PGAL1 also showed a ﬁtness cost to basal
expression of Gal1 (Figure S3C). Thus, consistent with previous
studies, basal GAL1 expression can have both positive and
negative effects on ﬁtness; it promotes adaptation from glucose
to galactose but is detrimental in glucose-galactose mixtures
[29, 36].

The Gal4 CD Promotes Stronger Transcription during
GAL Memory
In addition to the gal1-D117V mutant, which showed speciﬁc
loss of memory without strong effects on activation, the ﬂow
cytometry screen also identiﬁed a mutation in Gal4 (L282P)
that both blocked memory and led to defective activation of
Gal1-mCherry (Figure S4A). This mutation most likely destabi-
lizes the Gal4 protein, leading to lower protein levels (Figure S4A,
inset). However, this mutation was interesting because it was
resistant to ectopic expression of Gal1 (Figure S4A), conﬁrming
that the loss of memory in gal4-L282P cells was not simply an
effect of lower levels of Gal1 during reactivation. Thus, Gal4-
L282P both causes a defect in activation and blocks memory
downstream of Gal1.

The gal4-L282P mutation lies within the CD of Gal4 (Gal4-239-
767; Figure 4A) [37]. In other members of the zinc binuclear clus-
ter transcription factor family, the CD has been proposed to have
a regulatory function [38–41]. However, the role of Gal4 CD is
unclear; deletion of this domain produces a largely functional
activator, but mutations in this domain disrupt Gal4 function
[37, 42].

To explore the role of the Gal4 CD, we tested how loss of this
domain affected memory and the response to Gal1. Unlike Gal4-
L282P, Gal4Dcd protein levels were similar to full-length Gal4
protein levels (Figure 4B, inset) and the rate of Gal1-mCherry
activation was similar in gal4Dcd and wild-type cells (Figure 4B)
[37]. However, cells lacking the CD showed no memory
(Figure 4B) and were unaffected by ectopic expression of either
Gal1 (Figure S4B) or Gal3 (data not shown). Further, dimethyla-
tion of lysine 4 on histone H3 (H3K4me2), a chromatin mark
that is associated with GAL transcriptional memory and is
induced by ectopic expression of Gal1 [14], was still observed
in cells lacking the Gal4 CD (Figure S4D). Therefore, the gal4Dcd
mutant blocked memory downstream of both Gal1 and chro-
matin changes associated with memory (Figure S4C).

Given the weak sequence conservation of the CD, we asked
whether CD promotes memory by acting as a spacer to increase
the access of the activation domain to co-activators. The CD was
replaced either with domains 12–16 of human b-spectrin, which
should function as a spacer of similar size to the CD [43], or with
the CD from Leu3, a related transcription factor [40, 44].
Although these hybrid proteins supported Gal1-mCherry expres-
sion, they blocked memory and were unresponsive to Gal1 (Fig-
ures 4C and 4D). Thus, the Gal4 CD has a sequence-speciﬁc
function in potentiating expression and is neither a simple spacer
nor a generic, swappable domain.

Because Gal3 has a higher afﬁnity for Gal80 than Gal1 [23],
loss of memory could result if Gal4Dcd is de-repressed normally
by Gal3 but is unresponsive to Gal1 (Figure 1A). To test this hy-
pothesis, we asked whether Gal1 could replace Gal3 to promote
activation of Gal1-mCherry. In cells lacking Gal3, Gal1-mCherry
is not expressed (Figure 4E; gal3D and gal4Dcd gal3D). How-
ever, ectopic expression of Gal1 complemented this defect in
gal4Dcd cells, allowing Gal1-mCherry expression (Figure 4E)
but at levels observed during initial activation. This argues that
Gal4Dcd responds to both Gal1 and Gal3 but is limited in its
activity, leading to slower/lower expression of Gal1-mCherry.

The Gal4 CD Is a Target of Gal80 Repression
Loss of the Gal4 CD also altered Gal80 repression. During both
activation and reactivation, gal4Dcd cells showed unimodal
Gal1-mCherry expression (Figures 4G and S4E). Hence, loss of
the CD had two effects: it both reduced the strength of Gal1-
mCherry expression during reactivation (as measured by
average expression in the population; Figure 4B) and led to a
more uniform activation of the population (Figures 4G and
S4E). Because both loss of Gal80 and transcriptional memory
also led to unimodal activation (Figure 1D), this implied that the
CD is required for proper Gal80 repression. If so, then loss of
Gal80 might not further increase the rate of activation. Indeed,
neither loss of Gal80 nor disruption of the Gal4-Gal80 interaction

An Inter-domain Interaction Potentiates Gal4 Activation
In the other members of the Gal4 transcription factor family, the
CD directly interacts with the activation domain to allosterically
regulate activation [38, 40, 41]. To test whether the CD interacts
with the rest of Gal4, we asked whether this domain could
potentiate Gal4Dcd activation in trans (Figure 5B, schematic).
Ectopically expressed CD localized in the nucleus (Figure 5A), in-
dependent of Gal4 (Figure S5A). Ectopic CD increased the rate of
Gal1-mCherry activation in gal4Dcd strains (Figures 5C and 5D).
However, this effect required either expression of ectopic Gal1
(Figure 5C) or loss of Gal80 (Figure 5D). Chromatin immunopre-
cipitation (ChIP) experiments revealed that ectopic CD was
recruited to the GAL1 promoter by Gal4Dcd (Figure 5E). This
suggests that CD physically interacts with Gal4Dcd to potentiate
activation, and this interaction is regulated by Gal1-Gal80.

This effect was highly speciﬁc; in the absence of ectopic Gal1,
ectopic CD neither upregulated Gal1-mCherry expression nor
bound to the GAL1 promoter (Figures 5C, 5E, and S5B). Further-
more, ectopic CD neither bound nor potentiated activation from
full-length Gal4 (Figures 5E, 5F, and S5C). Finally, ectopic L282P
mutant CD (CDmut) (expressed at similar levels to wild-type CD;
Figure 5C, inset) was not recruited to Gal4Dcd (Figure 5E). Thus,
the L282P mutation in the Gal4 CD disrupts the interaction with
other domains of Gal4, blocking potentiation.

<Conclusion> DISCUSSION.
This study provides important new insights into both the molec-
ular mechanism of epigenetic GAL gene transcriptional memory
in S. cerevisiae and an illustration of the evolutionary logic
whereby the same molecules can produce either conditional,
epigenetic mechanisms of faster reactivation or constitutive,
genetic mechanisms of fast activation. Our current model for
both is shown in Figure 6. Gal80 physically interacts with both
the activation domain and CD of Gal4, which may explain why
ectopic CD is only able to complement the gal4Dcd phenotype
in either the absence of Gal80 or in the presence of ectopic
Gal1 [21, 45–48]. Although it is not yet clear whether the Gal80
that binds to the Gal4 activation domain is the same molecule
as the Gal80 that interacts with the CD, our results suggest
that both interactions are required for proper repression. Early
during activation, Gal3 interacts with Gal80, permitting Gal4-
mediated transcriptional activation in a subset of the cells in
the population (Figure 6A). In these cells, the CD potentiates acti-
vation, leading to high-level expression. During memory, or in
S. uvarum, the population shows uniform, rapid transition to
high-level expression of GAL genes because of elevated con-
centrations of the Gal1 co-activator (Figure 6B). However, in cells
lacking the Gal4 CD, the population responds uniformly, but the
level of expression is low. These cells do not show memory both
because they are less well repressed by Gal80 (and therefore do
not beneﬁt from previous expression of Gal1) and because they
are unable to achieve full activation.

Slight differences in the degree of repression of GAL1 among
Saccharomyces species leads to two different strategies that
favor growth under different conditions. Low-level basal GAL1
expression in S. uvarum leads to rapid adaptation to galactose
but also encumbers a ﬁtness cost
in glucose-galactose
mixtures [27, 29, 36]. On the other hand, tight GAL1 repression
restricts ﬁtness during initial induction in galactose but leads to
optimal utilization of glucose in the presence of galactose.
Glucose is the most efﬁciently utilized sugar through glycolysis,
and S. cerevisiae has a clear preference for it; expression of
several genes is optimized for growth in glucose over other car-
bon sources [49]. Epigenetic memory in S. cerevisiae allows cells
to beneﬁt from recent growth in galactose without compromising
the preference for glucose over longer timescales.

A whole-genome duplication during Saccharomyces evolution
has led to specialization of function between the duplicated pa-
ralogs Gal1 and Gal3 [26, 28, 32–34]. The sub-functionalization
of these proteins in different species has led to different evolu-
tionary paths. K. lactis and C. albicans, which diverged from
Saccharomyces before the whole-genome duplication, also
exhibit constitutive fast induction of GAL genes [26, 28, 32].
This is because these species lack Gal3 and therefore must ex-
press higher basal levels of Gal1 to allow expression of the GAL
genes. This implies that basal GAL1 expression is the ancestral
regulatory scheme that has been maintained in S. uvarum,
in part
through promoter-driven basal expression of Gal1
[26, 34, 50]. Replacing PGAL1 in S. cerevisiae with the PGAL1
from the more closely related Saccharomyces species S. mika-
tae and S. paradoxus did not lead to faster induction of Gal1 (Fig-
ures S2A and S2B). This suggests that basal GAL1 expression
due to promoter differences persisted in S. uvarum but was
lost in S. cerevisiae, S. paradoxus, and S. mikitae. Tighter
GAL1 repression has been accompanied by specialization of
GAL3 as a co-activator: Gal3 from S. cerevisiae has lost galacto-
kinase activity and has 10-fold higher afﬁnity for Gal80 repressor
than Gal1 [21, 23, 27, 33, 34]. Taken together, our results suggest
that GAL transcriptional memory in S. cerevisiae is a product of
tighter GAL1 repression and specialization of GAL3 as a co-
activator. Thus, GAL memory may be an example where an
epigenetic mechanism for faster reactivation evolved from an
ancestral state of genetically encoded fast activation.

Using a FACS-based genetic screen, we identiﬁed two muta-
tions that provide important insight into the molecular mecha-
nism of GAL transcriptional memory. The gal1-D117V mutation
maintains galactokinase function but reduces afﬁnity for Gal80,
speciﬁcally disrupting memory. Furthermore, gal1-D117V
blocked fast GAL gene activation caused by the S. uvarum
PGAL1, conﬁrming that these effects are mediated by low-level
expression of Gal1.

The screen also identiﬁed gal4-L282P, a mutation in the CD of
Gal4 that blocks the ability of Gal4 to respond to Gal1. Deletion
of the CD disrupted memory without strongly altering Gal4 protein
levels or the rate of activation. The CD has two functions: it
promotes tighter Gal80 repression and it promotes stronger
Gal4 activity (Figure 6C). Disrupting these functions resulted in a
qualitative change in the GAL1 transcriptional output, leading to
a more uniform population of cells that transitioned to a weaker
level of expression (Figure 6C). In other words, unimodal induction
is necessary, but not sufﬁcient, for the rapid expression observed
during memory. Because Gal80 interacts with both the CD and the
activation domain [21, 45–48], we propose that the CD either en-
hances Gal80 recruitment to Gal4 or inhibits dissociation of Gal80
from Gal4. If so, then Gal80 would most likely also regulate the
potentiation of Gal4 activation by the CD. We envision that the
CD physically interacts with the activation domain, allosterically
altering its ability to promote transcription. Consistent with this
notion, the CD can interact with Gal4Dcd in trans to increase the
rate of activation, and this interaction is both regulated by Gal80
and disrupted by substitution of Proline for Leucine 282. Thus,
the CD plays a critical role in promoting both stronger repression
by Gal80 and stronger transcription.

GAL transcriptional memory is a manifestation of ongoing
resolution of expression levels of the partially redundant paral-
ogs, Gal1 and Gal3. Among different Saccharomyces species,
the degree of repression of GAL1 in glucose dictates whether
faster adaptation to galactose is a hardwired, genetic mecha-
nism or a conditional, epigenetic mechanism. Because basal
GAL1 expression compromises ﬁtness in mixtures of sugars,
S. cerevisiae has traded faster kinetics of GAL gene activation
for optimal growth in glucose-galactose mixtures. But during
memory, S. cerevisiae can more rapidly adapt to a challenge
that they have experienced recently by switching from a hetero-
geneous to uniform behavior and employing an inter-domain
potentiation of Gal4 activation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

