
1. Introduction

Beginning a new romantic relationship is often accompanied by a
barrage of emotional and physiological changes. Individuals report
experiencing euphoria during the honeymoon period and exhibit dif-
ferences in hormone and neurotransmitter levels (Marazziti, Akiskal,
Rossi, & Cassano, 1999; Marazziti & Canale, 2004), and brain activation
patterns (Aron et al., 2005). Recent evidence points toward a link be-
tween autonomic reactivity and relationship formation, with new ro-
mantic relationships potentially buﬀering physiological reactivity to
negative emotions. Speciﬁcally, diﬀerences in heart rate variability
(HRV) have been detected between single and newly-coupled in-
dividuals presented with emotional stimuli (Schneiderman, Zilberstein-
Kra, Leckman, & Feldman, 2011).

HRV refers to the variation between successive heartbeat intervals
and is extracted through electrocardiography (ECG). A variable heart
responds more readily to environmental cues and returns to baseline
more quickly. The high frequency (HF) component of HRV (.15–.40 Hz)
primarily represents the inﬂuence of the parasympathetic nervous
system (Thayer, Åhs, Fredrikson, Sollers, & Wager, 2012) which is as-
sociated with vegetative and restorative functions. Resting HRV refers
to a single measurement taken while the individual is at rest, whereas
HRV reactivity measures phasic changes in HRV in response to a
stressor.

According to Porges’ (1995; 1998) polyvagal theory, the myelinated
branch of the vagus nerve exerts parasympathetic inﬂuence on the
heart and controls the social engagement system. This social engage-
ment system serves as the neurophysiological basis for courting beha-
viours associated with seduction and the control of facial expression,
vocalization, and head tilt. This system communicates reproductive
availability and fosters proximity with potential romantic partners
(Porges, 1998). In times of stress this system is depressed to allow for
the expression of the sympathetic nervous system’s ﬁght-or-ﬂight re-
sponse. HRV may therefore serve as an index of both the vagus nerve’s
parasympathetic inﬂuence on the heart and the activation of the social
engagement system. Building on Porges’ theory, Schneiderman et al.
(2011) found that, in comparison to single participants, individuals
who had recently begun new romantic relationships demonstrated
lower HRV reactivity in response to negative emotion-inducing videos.
They postulated that HRV reactivity decreases during the process of
courting associated with new romantic relationships due to increased
activation of the social engagement system.
The ﬁrst purpose of the present study is to replicate key ﬁndings
reported by Schneiderman et al. (2011). A cohort of single women was
studied over a 6-month period. The replication hypothesis asserts that
compared to participants who remained single over the 6-month follow-
up, their newly-coupled counterparts will evidence (a) higher HRV
during an emotionally evocative negative ﬁlm clip and (b) lower HRV
reactivity, deﬁned as milder change in HRV from positive to negative
ﬁlm clips. Schneiderman et al. interpreted both ﬁndings as evidence for
love causing a “buﬀered stress response” to negative stimuli (p. 1318).
However, given the cross-sectional nature of their methodology, as-
sertions about cause cannot be claimed with certainty. Thus, two
competing longitudinal hypotheses are posited to understand the re-
lationship between HRV reactivity and relationship status:

1. The consequence hypothesis asserts that newly-coupled individuals
will evidence a drop in HRV reactivity to emotion-evoking ﬁlm clips
as their relationship status changes from single to coupled, while
HRV for singles will remain unchanged.

2. The cause hypothesis states that single individuals with lower HRV
reactivity at baseline will be more likely to enter into a new ro-
mantic relationship over a 6-month follow-up interval. Other vari-
ables associated with HRV reactivity and relationship formation
may serve as potential moderators including: resting HRV, attach-
ment style, emotional distress, self-esteem, and body mass index.

<Middle> Method.
2.1. Participants.
Ninety-one single, female postsecondary students who were inter-
ested in forming a monogamous heterosexual romantic relationship
participated in the study. Eight participants were excluded for technical
reasons, excessive ectopic heartbeats, or failure to follow instructions.
Of the remaining 83 participants, 47 (57%) returned and completed the
follow-up laboratory session and thus comprise the sample of interest.
Mean age was 19.09 years (SD = 2.23). Mean BMI was 22.31,
SD = 2.84, range = 17.47–31.01. Twenty-eight (60%) remained single
while 19 (40%) became coupled over the 6-month follow-up, oper-
ationally deﬁned as entering into a monogamous heterosexual romantic
relationship lasting at least 10 days. The length of 10 days was chosen
based on Schneiderman et al.'s (2011) 2-week minimum relationship
duration. Shorter relationship duration was expected to yield greater
diﬀerences in HRV in the event that HRV reactivity changed upon be-
ginning a romantic relationship. Mean duration of the romantic re-
lationships at follow-up was 37.2 days (SD = 18.23; range 10–66 days).

2.2. Materials

2.2.1. Demographics questionnaire assessing BMI
Demographics Questionnaire Assessing BMI: calculated as
BMI = weight (lb.)/(height [in.] x height [in.]) x 703 from self-re-
ported height and weight. Motivation to begin a romantic relationship
was assessed using the item “Please rate your motivation to begin a
monogamous heterosexual romantic relationship on the following
scale” rated on two separate scales. For the ﬁrst scale, responses ranged
from 0 (I do not want to begin a monogamous romantic relationship), to 4 (I
am currently taking action to begin a relationship). On the second scale,
responses ranged from 0 (Not at all motivated) to 7 (Extremely motivated).
Participants also rated their expectancy to begin a romantic relation-
ship over the follow-up period. Possible responses for the expectancy
item ranged from 0 (Not at all likely) to 7 (Extremely likely).

2.2.2. Rosenberg self-esteem scale (RSES)

Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (RSES): a 10-item self-report measure
of global self-esteem (Rosenberg, 1965). Responses were given on a 4-
point Likert-type scale, ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 4 (strongly
agree).

2.2.3. Attachment style questionnaire (ASQ)

Attachment Style Questionnaire (ASQ): a 40-item self-report mea-
sure of how individuals currently view their attachment security with
other adults (Feeney, Noller, & Hanrahan, 1994). Respondents rated
how much they agree with each item on a 6-point scale ranging from 1
(totally disagree) to 6 (totally agree). The two-dimensional scoring
method described by Alexander, Feeney, Hohaus, and Noller (2001)
yields two insecure subscales. Individuals who scored high on the
Avoidant Attachment subscale were expected to not meet the inclusion
criteria of being motivated to form a monogamous romantic relation-
ship. Thus, the Anxious Attachment (ASQ: AN) subscale was chosen as
the measure of attachment security.

2.2.4. Kessler psychological distress scale (K6)

Kessler Psychological Distress Scale (K6): a 6-item scale measuring
general emotional distress during the past 30 days (Kessler et al., 2002).
Respondents rated items on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (None of the
time) to 4 (All of the time).

2.2.5. Pleasantness questionnaire

Pleasantness Questionnaire: a manipulation check to ensure the ﬁlm
clips produced emotions of the intended aﬀective valence (Rottenberg,
Ray, & Gross, 2007). Emotions experienced while viewing the ﬁlm clips
were rated on a 9-point Likert-type scale ranging from 0 (unpleasant) to
8 (pleasant).

2.3. Apparatus

2.3.1. Electrocardiogram

ECG was recorded using a 72-channel ampliﬁer, sampled at
1024 Hz. Participants were ﬁtted with three electrodes with snap-on
Ag-AgCl on cleaned skin located below the right clavicle and below the
left rib in a lead-II conﬁguration and a ground electrode below the left
clavicle. Raw ECG data was extracted and inspected using ASA-Lab
software (Version 16; Advanced Neuro Technology, Enschede,
Netherlands) and then imported into Kubios 2.1 HRV specialized ana-
lysis software (Biosignal Analysis and Medical Imaging Group; http://
kubios.uef.ﬁ/). Using a fast Fourier transformation method, a distinct
peak known as an R-spike was identiﬁed and interval series between R-
spikes were calculated by power spectrum density to derive HFms2 as
the metric of HF HRV (bandwidth = .15–.40 Hz).

2.4. Procedure

The protocol was approved by the Lakehead University Research
Ethics Board and was carried out in accordance with the provisions of
the Tri-Council Policy Statement: Ethical Conduct
for Research
Involving Humans. Participants completed an online battery of psy-
chometric questionnaires including the RSES, ASQ, and K6. They then
attended a laboratory session before which they refrained from
drinking alcohol for 24 h, and eating, drinking caﬀeinated beverages, or
exercising for 2 h as these variables have been shown to aﬀect HRV
(Buchheit et al., 2004; Nederkoorn et al., 2000; Sondermeijer, van
Marle, Karmen, & Krum, 2002; Weise, Krell, & Brinkhoﬀ, 1986). During
the baseline laboratory session, researchers attached ECG electrodes to
participants who then viewed four 4:45-min ﬁlm clips which depicted
couples engaging in various tasks. Pilot participant ratings were used to
amalgamate shorter clips into three pairs of 4:45-min ﬁlm clips de-
signed to evoke diﬀerent emotions (positive, neutral, and negative
emotions). Each pair of clips was rated as being equivalent in both af-
fective valence and arousal.

Participants watched ﬁlm clips in the following order: neutral, po-
sitive or negative, neutral, positive or negative. Positive and negative
clip presentation was counterbalanced between individuals. After each
clip, participants rated its aﬀective valence on the pleasantness scale.
Participants were asked to return to the laboratory either (a) when they
had entered into a monogamous heterosexual romantic relationship
that lasted at least 10 days, or (b) at the end of the 6-month follow-up
period, if they remained single. When participants returned for their
follow-up sessions, the same procedure was followed with the equiva-
lent clips.

3. Results

3.1. Data preparation

Skewed variables were corrected using a log transformation (ln
HFms2, ln K6, ln BMI). Table 1 presents the comparisons between sin-
gles and newly coupled participants on demographic and psychometric
variables. Ln BMI was signiﬁcantly lower amongst those who formed
romantic relationships (p = .03). One motivation item also showed a
trend towards statistical signiﬁcance (p = .06) indicating that those
with higher motivation to form romantic relationships were more likely
to become coupled. Both motivation items were highly correlated,
r = .713, and a composite motivation score was created and used as a
covariate to control for motivation during hypothesis testing. None of
the psychometric or demographic variables contained outliers. HRV
reactivity (ln Δ HFms2) at follow-up contained one univariate outlier.
The outlier was replaced with the next lowest nonoutlier score.

Film clips evoked emotions of the appropriate valence (eﬀect of clip
valence on pleasantness ratings p < .001) with no eﬀects of pre-
sentation order or relationship status (ps < .05). There was also a
trend towards a signiﬁcant main eﬀect of clip valence on HRV (ln
HFms2; p = .061), driven by a reduction in ln HFms2 from the ﬁrst
neutral to the positive clip (p = .028). ECG recordings during the ﬁrst
neutral ﬁlm clip provided a measure of resting HRV. As in
Schneiderman et al.'s (2011) study, within-session HRV reactivity (Δ ln
HFms2) scores were computed by subtracting participants’ ln HFms2
while viewing the negative ﬁlm clip from ln HFms2 while viewing the
positive ﬁlm clip. Thus, positive Δ ln HFms2 scores indicate a reduction
in ln HFms2 from positive to negative ﬁlm clips.
3.2. Analytic strategy

The primary analytic techniques used for this study were moderated
logistic regression, and mixed model analysis of variance (ANOVA)
which were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics 20. The replication
hypothesis was evaluated using two separate univariate ANOVAs

comparing ln HFms2 during the negative clip and Δ ln HFms2 for singles
and newly coupled participants at follow-up. To test the consequence
hypothesis, a 2 (time) × 2 (relationship status) mixed model ANOVA
was performed to evaluate within-participant change in Δ ln HFms2
between baseline and follow-up with a speciﬁc, a priori interest in the
newly coupled subgroup.

The cause hypothesis was evaluated using ﬁve moderated logistic
regressions in the prediction of relationship status at follow-up Y (single
vs. newly coupled) from Δ ln HFms2 at baseline X, with separate ana-
lysis for each of ln HFms2, RSES, ASQ: AN, ln K6, and ln BMI as mod-
erators Ms. A simple moderation analysis was conducted for each
moderator. Each of the ﬁve regressions tested pathways from X to Y, M
to Y, and the interaction between X and M to Y. For the logistic re-
gression analyses, all predictor variables were mean centered as it in-
creases interpretability (Hayes, 2013). Data for all analyses were as-
sessed for violations of parametric assumptions to ensure accurate
generalizations of the ﬁndings.

3.3. Replication hypothesis

The replication hypothesis was evaluated using two univariate
ANOVAs comparing ln HFms2 during the negative clip and Δ ln HFms2
between singles and newly-coupled participants at follow-up. Contrary
to expectations, newly-coupled participants did not diﬀer from their
single counterparts at follow-up with regard to (a) ln HFms2 during the
negative clip; Ms = 6.21 (SD = 1.00) and 6.12 (SD = 1.25), for single
and newly-coupled participants respectively, F(1,45) = .09, p > .250,
η2 < .01, or (b) Δ ln HFms2; Ms = −.12 (SD = .37) and .02
(SD = .50), for single and newly-coupled participants respectively, F
(1,45) = 1.14, p < .250, η2 = .03. These results do not provide evi-
dence of a buﬀered physiological response to negative emotions
amongst the newly-coupled participants.

3.4. The consequence hypothesis

It was predicted that newly-coupled participants at follow-up would
show reduced Δ ln HFms2 when compared to their baseline values,
whereas Δ ln HFms2 for singles would remain unchanged over time. A 2
(time) × 2 (relationship status) mixed model ANOVA was conducted to
determine if Δ ln HFms2 varied as a function of time (baseline vs.
follow-up) or relationship status (single vs. newly-coupled). No sig-
niﬁcant eﬀects were observed for time, F(1.45) = .14, p > 250,
η2 < .01, relationship status, F(1.45) = .01, p > .250, η2 < .01, or
their interaction, F(1,45) = 1.03, p > .250, η2 = .02.

As newly-coupled participants were of particular interest, a
repeated measures ANOVA was conducted on this sample (n = 19) to
investigate the a priori prediction that Δ ln HFms2 would decrease from
baseline to follow-up. Results revealed no signiﬁcant main eﬀect of time
on Δ ln HFms2, F(1,18) = .55, p > .250, η2 = .03. Thus, results do not
support the consequence hypothesis that HRV reactivity decreases as a
function of beginning a new romantic relationship.

3.5. The cause hypothesis

The alternative hypothesis predicted that individuals with higher Δ
ln HFms2 at baseline would be less likely to form new relationships over
the course of the follow-up period. Five moderated logistic regressions
were performed to test this hypothesis. Mean-centered Δ ln HFms2 from
the ﬁrst laboratory session was used to predict relationship status at
follow-up, with a separate analysis for each of ﬁve potential mod-
erators: ln HFms2, RSES, ln K6, ASQ:AN, and ln BMI.

After controlling for motivation to begin a romantic relationship,
only two of the regressions reached statistical signiﬁcance. The re-
gression moderated by ln BMI revealed a signiﬁcant overall model,
χ2(3) = 13.67, p = .008, and a signiﬁcant HRV Reactivity × ln BMI
interaction, R2 = .25, b = .68, SEb = .34, p = .043, 95% CI [1.02,
3.81] (Fig. 1). The regression moderated by resting HRV revealed both
a signiﬁcant overall model, χ2(4) = 10.77, p = .029, and a signiﬁcant
HRV Reactivity × Resting HRV interaction, R2 = .21, b = −1.38,
SEb = .78, p = .020, 95% CI [−3.94, −.31] (Fig. 2). The models for
moderators ASQ: AN, ln K6, and RSES did not reach statistical signiﬁcance.

<Conclusion> Discussion.
In contrast with Schneiderman's ﬁndings, no statisti-
cally signiﬁcant diﬀerences in HRV were observed between single and
newly-coupled participants at follow-up, nor were changes in HRV
observed as relationship status changed from single to newly-coupled.
Consequently, the contention that beginning a new romantic relation-
ship ‘buﬀers’ vagal withdrawal in response to negative emotions was
not supported.

Instead, HRV reactivity predicted who would become coupled,
when moderated by either BMI or resting HRV. Based on evolutionary
theory, BMI serves as a basis for mate selection because it provides a
reliable cue to female health and reproductive potential (George,
Swami, Cornelissen, & Tovée, 2008) and thus inﬂuences mating strategy
(Perilloux, Cloud, & Buss, 2012). Low BMI women are chosen more
often by their speed dating partners (Asendorpf, Penke, & Back, 2011)
and are more particular in choosing a mate (Speakman, Djafarian,
Stewart, & Jackson, 2007). Higher BMI women are more likely to settle
for less attractive mates to compensate for their own lower levels of
mate value. In the current study, however, the results indicate a more
complex relationship between BMI, HRV, and relationship formation.
Women with lower BMI were more likely to become coupled, but only if
they exhibited lower HRV reactivity. Women with higher BMI demon-
strated the opposite pattern.
HRV has been linked to mental and physical health, emotion regulation, self-esteem, and social prowess (Martens et al., 2010;
Park & Thayer, 2014; Porges, 1998) all of which contribute to one’s
mate value. Low HRV reactivity may indicate higher mate value, and
higher BMI women with this pattern of cardiac reactivity may therefore
be choosier when selecting mates; however, selective mating strategies
are typically more successful for low BMI women. This explanation
would account for the lower relationship formation rates amongst
higher BMI women with low HRV reactivity.

The HRV reactivity by resting HRV interaction indicates that HRV
reactivity inﬂuences coupling success only among those with higher
resting HRV. Amongst those with high resting HRV, lower HRV re-
activity predicts the highest coupling success (probability = .71)
whereas higher HRV reactivity predicts the lowest rates of coupling
success (probability = .08). HRV is associated with emotion regulation,
a process intimately involved in the attraction and retention of a ro-
mantic partner. For instance, higher resting HRV is associated with
better overall emotion regulation abilities (Park & Thayer, 2014). Fur-
ther, lower HRV reactivity is associated with utilizing active emotion
regulation strategies (e.g., reappraisal), while higher HRV reactivity is
associated with the activation of the sympathetic system to deal with
stressors (Park & Thayer, 2014). Neither pattern of HRV response has
consistently been found to be associated with superior outcomes; the
beneﬁts of each strategy appear to be context dependent. Interpreted
from this perspective, amongst those who have better overall emotion
regulation abilities, using active emotion regulation strategies to cope
with negative emotions confers an advantage in romantic relationship
formation.

4.1. Limitations and conclusions

While the longitudinal design of the present study provides a strong
methodological advancement over previous research, the study was not
without limitations. Most apparent was the high dropout rate between
the baseline and follow-up laboratory sessions. Less than 60% of eli-
gible participants returned for follow-up, reducing the power of all
analyses that included variables measured at follow-up. That being
said, the follow-up completers were comparable to noncompleters on
most demographic and psychometric variables with the exception of
BMI. The moderated regressions also achieved adequate power above
the convention of .80 despite the high drop-out rate. In addition,
variables such as time of day and the timing of the menstrual cycle may
also have had eﬀects on HRV (Bassiouny et al., 2002; Leicht,
Hirning, & Allen, 2003) and were not controlled for in this study.
Finally, although it would be inconsistent with Porges’ polyvagal
theory, it is possible that HRV diﬀerences could develop after longer
relationship duration or only in satisfying relationships. These ques-
tions could not be answered in the present study. Longer follow-up
periods, larger sample sizes, and the collection of relationship sa-
tisfaction data would allow for the testing of such questions in future
studies.

The heart has been associated with love for thousands of years. This
study further elucidates the heart-love connection by successfully pre-
dicting relationship formation based on cardiac functioning and BMI.
The present study failed to directly replicate Schneiderman et al.'s
(2011) cross-sectional results of diﬀerences between the cardiac re-
activity of singles and the newly coupled; however, the main ﬁnding is
consistent in that pre-existing diﬀerences in HRV and BMI make some
individuals more likely to form relationships. Despite consistent ﬁnd-
ings, Schneiderman et al. contention that love buﬀers vagal withdrawal
in response to stress was not supported. Instead, HRV reactivity may be
a marker for mate value and emotion regulation and interact with BMI
and resting HRV to determine which women will be successful in en-
gaging in intermediate- and long-term mating strategies. Perhaps it is
our heart and not our head that determines which of us will ﬁnd love
after all.

References
