
1. Introduction

The importance of touch is widely documented. Pleasant touch
forms the basis for aﬃliative behaviour and social bonding in both
humans (Dunbar, 2010; Field, 2010; Montagu, 1971) and primates
(Dunbar, 2004, 2010). When facing stressful circumstances, touch is a
powerful tool to induce feelings of calmness in both adults (Coan,
Schaefer, & Davidson, 2006; Olson & Sneed, 1995) and children
(Harrison, Olivet, Cunningham, Bodin, & Hicks, 1996). The beneﬁcial
eﬀects of touch are documented on multiple domains, such as stress
response, reward sensitivity and mood as well as interoceptive aware-
ness.

Concerning the eﬀects on parameters reﬂecting the endocrine and
autonomic stress response, tactile interactions have been observed to
reduce salivary cortisol levels
(Ditzen et al., 2007; Heinrichs,
Baumgartner, Kirschbaum, & Ehlert, 2003) and heart rate in adults
(Ditzen et al., 2007; Drescher, Gantt, & Whitehead, 1980; Drescher,
Whitehead, Morrill-Corbin, & Cataldo, 1985),
infants (Fairhurst, Löken, & Grossmann, 2014) and primates (Aureli, Preston, & de Waal,
1999). Studies on massage therapy further show that long term tactile
stimulation increases heart rate variability (Sripongngam et al., 2015).
Touch has also been deﬁned as an evolutionary inherent reward
(Rolls, 2005) and is hence assumed to impact on reward and mood.
Subjective reports about touch massage in particular have described it
as providing feelings of happiness and relaxation (Lindgren,
Jacobsson, & Lamas, 2014). Not only touch massage, but also shorter
social interactions between individuals have been shown to be in-
trinsically rewarding and pleasurable, presumably because they communicate warmth and intimacy
(Hertenstein, Keltner, App, Bulleit, & Jaskolka, 2006).
Further, touch is reported to impact on interoceptive awareness, the
sense of the physiological condition of the body (Tsakiris, Tajadura-
Jimenez, & Costantini, 2011). Following 60 min of touch massage,
participants hence reported increased self-perception and connection
between mind and body (Lindgren et al., 2014).

Tactile interactions are usually characterized by a wide range of
movements, with diﬀerent velocities and pressures. From the above
studies, it is unknown which particular tactile feature led to such
beneﬁcial physiological eﬀects. A particular kind of “dynamic touch” is
the type of movement applied for caressing and stroking (Morrison,
Löken, & Olausson, 2010). Such slow stroking stimulation activates a
particular class of unmyelinated, low threshold and slowly conducting
(< 1 ms) mechanoreceptors, so called C-tactile ﬁbres (CTs). Those ﬁ-
bres seemingly only exist on the hairy skin of the human body
(Ackerley, Carlsson, Wester, Olausson, & Backlund Wasling, 2014;
Liljencrantz & Olausson, 2014; Olausson et al., 2008, 2002; Olausson,
Wessberg, Morrison, McGlone, & Vallbo, 2010), especially on the arm
and leg (Vallbo, Olausson, & Wessberg, 1999; Vallbo, Olausson,
Wessberg, & Norrsell, 1993; Wessberg, Olausson, Fernström, & Vallbo,
2003). CT ﬁbres show the highest ﬁring frequency to gentle stroking
within a velocity range of 1–10 cm/s (Löken, Wessberg, Morrison,
McGlone, & Olausson, 2009), which is also evaluated as the most
pleasant (Ackerley, Backlund Wasling et al., 2014; Löken et al., 2009).
It is therefore assumed that CT aﬀerents code the hedonic dimension of
touch, and hence play an important role in the maintenance of the
physical and social well-being of the individual (Bjornsdotter,
Morrison, & Olausson, 2010). Central processing of CT-optimized
stroking stimulation includes not only the typical somatosensory re-
gions (McGlone, Wessberg, & Olausson, 2014), but also the posterior
insula, which is proposed to be a primary projection area for the CT
ﬁbres (Bjornsdotter, Loken, Olausson, Vallbo, & Wessberg, 2009), the
pregenual anterior cingulate cortex (Case et al., 2016; Lindgren et al.,
2012), the posterior superior temporal sulcus (Davidovic, Jönsson,
Olausson, & Björnsdotter, 2016) and the orbitofrontal cortex (McGlone
et al., 2012), involved in reward processing (Francis et al., 1999;
Gottfried, de Carvalho, & Schultz, 2010; Kringelbach, 2005; O’Doherty, 2004;
Schultz, Tremblay, & Hollerman, 2000). We recently investigated the
time course of neural responses to long-lasting (40 min) CT-targeted,
slow stroking stimulation and found a decrease of somatosensory acti-
vation. At the same time, the posterior insula remained at stable acti-
vation level but increased its connectivity with the orbitofrontal cortex
during the stimulation. In line, we found an increased response in or-
bitofrontal and striatal reward-related areas (Sailer et al., 2016). This is
remarkable, as the touch was performed in a highly controlled, non-
social fashion: stroking stimulation was conducted via a brush attached
to a robotic device which stroked the forearm with constant force and
velocity.
Based on this study it is conceivable that such prolonged stimulation
of CT ﬁbres may go along with beneﬁcial changes on a) the stress re-
sponse, b) reward sensitivity and mood as well as c) interoceptive
awareness, as has been reported for multiple interpersonal aﬀective
touch conditions. Alternatively, pure CT stimulation may not lead to
signiﬁcant alterations in such domains, if isolated from any social
context.
We hence hypothesized an eﬀect of long-lasting CT-targeted
stroking stimulation on the stress response (operationalized as heart
rate variability, salivary cortisol levels and self-reported stress), mood
and reward sensitivity (operationalized as self-reported mood and re-
sponsiveness to pleasant sensation) and interoceptive awareness (op-
erationalized with the heart rate perception test (Pollatos, Herbert,
Matthias, & Schandry, 2007)).

In order to rule out potential unspeciﬁc test eﬀects, a control con-
dition with vibration instead of brush stroking was employed. C-tactile
aﬀerents are optimized to signal caress-like touch such as brush
stroking (Ackerley, Backlund Wasling et al., 2014; Liljencrantz et al.,
2017), while vibration is known to activate C-tactile aﬀerents to a lesser
extent (Bessou et al., 1971; Wiklund Fernström, Jonsson,
1960; Kumazawa & Perl, 1977; Olausson et al., 2002). High frequency vibra-
tion is primarily signalled by rapidly adapting units fast-conducting Aβ
low threshold mechanoreceptors (RA-LTMs) such as the Pacinian cor-
puscles (Sato, 1961; Verillo, 1966). CT ﬁbres, on the other hand, show
limited capacity to encode vibratory stimuli at high-frequency. Considering this, vibration at 100 Hz was
chosen as control condition in order to limit C-tactile activation as
much as possible. It seems reasonable to assume that a potential CT
activation during vibration was negligible, and that other aﬀerents
played a much larger role in its detection. That CT ﬁbres respond poorly
to vibration is further supported by observations in Aβ denervated
subjects that fail to detect vibration but can detect CT-targeted slow
brushing.

<Middle> Methods.
2.1. Participants.
40 healthy subjects, 22 women and 18 men, aged between 18 and
51 years (mean = 27.58, SD = 8.38) were included into the study.
77.5% were recruited via announcements on university boards, the
remaining through announcements online via Facebook. None of the
participants reported any chronic illness or skin disease that aﬀected
the arm. One participant reported regular psychopharmacological
medication. As a prerequisite for the reward test, normal olfactory
function was ascertained in all participants with the “Sniﬃn’ Sticks” 16-
item odour identiﬁcation test (Burghart Instruments, Wedel, Germany),
using a cut-oﬀ of 11 (Kobal et al., 1996). The ﬁrst 20 participants (11
women and 9 men, aged between 20 and 39 years, mean = 25.7,
SD = 5.42) were assigned to the experimental “brush stroking” condi-
tion, the next 20 participants (11 women and 9 men, aged between 18
and 51, mean = 29.45, SD = 10.35) were assigned to a control “vi-
bration” condition. Two participants in the vibration group were 51
years, thus older than the rest of the sample (which was between 18 and
40). As the mean values of those participants were within 1 SD of the
mean values of the rest of the subjects for pleasantness ratings, cortisol
levels and all the pre-and post-measures, and within 2 SD for SDNN
(standard deviation of normal to normal R–R intervals, i.e. the index
chosen for measuring the heart rate variability) and intensity ratings,
these data were not excluded from further analysis. Instead, we decided
to control for age statistically (see Section 2).

The study was approved by the ethics committee of the University of
Gothenburg. All participants gave written informed consent and re-
ceived a ﬁnancial compensation of 200 SEK (∼23 €) per hour for
participation.

2.2. Materials and methods

2.2.1. Experimental stimulations: “brush stroking” and control “vibration”
The whole experimental procedure is shown in Fig. 1. Participants
lay on a hospital bed with their left arm comfortably stabilized with
medical cushions. They were visually shielded by occluding glasses that
prevented peripheral sight but allowing looking straight ahead. Fur-
thermore, they were auditory shielded by headphones. This was done in
order to increase their focus on the tactile stimulation. Participants
were instructed to rate the pleasantness and intensity of the tactile
stimulation every two minutes throughout the stimulation. In total, 16
ratings were collected. This was done on a visual analogue scale (VAS),
presented on a computer screen, by using a mouse positioned on the
right side of the participants. For pleasantness, participants were asked
“How pleasant was the stimulation?” on the screen (endpoints of the
scale: “not pleasant at all” (−10) and “very pleasant” (+10)). For in-
tensity, they were asked “How intense was the stimulation?” (endpoints
of the scale: “weak” (−10) and “strong” (+10)) (compare Sailer et al.,
2016; Triscoli, Ackerley, & Sailer, 2014 for similar design). Further, two
5-min-long baselines were included, one before the onset of the tactile
stimulation and one at the end of the experiment, where the partici-
pants were instructed to rest.

In the “brush stroking” condition, the participants received slow
stroking stimulation using a custom-built robotic device which delivers
highly replicable force (linear tactile stimulator, LTS; Dancer Design; St

72

C. Triscoli et al.

Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 71–81

Fig. 1. Experimental procedure.

Helen’s, UK, driven by LabVIEW software (National
Instruments;
Austin, TX)). A 60 mm wide ﬂat water-colour brush made of ﬁne,
smooth goat’s hair was attached to the robot. It stroked the subjectś left
dorsal forearm continuously and without interruption for an average
duration of 35 min. The continuous back-and-forth brush strokes were
administered with a predeﬁned force of 0.4 N+/− 0.05 and a velocity
of 3 cm/s. The brush traversed a distance on the skin of ∼10 cm for
each direction.

In the “vibration” condition, the participants received vibration
stimulation using a custom-built 2.0” × 1.25” × 0.020” piezoelectric
element (Piezo Systems, Inc., MA, USA) which mechanically produces
electrical signals (Gautschi, 2002). It was mounted on a wooden shaft
with a contact surface made of balsa wood. The device was controlled
by a battery powered drive circuit, 44 V (peak to peak), 50–150 Hz
(EIN-407, Piezo Systems, Inc., MA, USA) and delivered a vibrating
stimulation on the subjectś left dorsal forearm (compare (Chesler et al.,
2016) for similar procedure). Vibration was given at a predeﬁned force
of 0.4 N+/− 0.05 and a constant frequency of 100 Hz continuously
and without interruption during the whole session for an average
duration of 35 min, comparable to the experimental “brush stroking”
condition. The devices used for the two types of tactile stimulation are
shown in Fig. 2. As a measure of the changes during tactile stimulation,
diﬀerences between the last and the ﬁrst rating were computed parti-
cipant-wise, obtaining a “tactile pleasantness change” score for plea-
santness and a “tactile intensity change” score for intensity.

2.2.2. Pre- and post-measures

The endocrine, autonomic and subjectively rated stress response
was investigated through salivary cortisol levels, heart rate variability
and a self-report questionnaire, respectively.

Cortisol levels were assessed from saliva samples using Salivette
cotton rolls (Salivette® Cortisol, Sarstedt, Nümbrecht, Germany) at four
times: 30 min and 1 min before the onset of the tactile stimulation and
1 min and 30 min after the oﬀset of tactile stimulation. Participants
were instructed not to eat or drink anything except of water for 1 h
before the experiment began. Upon their arrival, all participants were
administered a standardized drink of 250 ml of grape juice (Kirschbaum
et al., 1997). Saliva samples were stored at −20 °C in a laboratory
freezer until analyses. After thawing, saliva samples were centrifuged
for 10 min at 4000 rpm. Salivary cortisol levels were determined by
using a commercially available luminescence assay (LIA, IBL-Hamburg,
Germany). Due to non-normal (left skewed) distribution of cortisol
data, this measure was log transformed before ﬁnal data analysis. The
area under the curve with respect to the ground (AUCG) and with re-
spect to increase (AUCI) were calculated reﬂecting total hormone
concentrations and the cortisol response to the experimental stimulation, Kirschbaum, Meinlschmid, &
Hellhammer, 2003). As in healthy individuals cortisol levels peak in the
morning and decline slowly throughout the day (Debono et al., 2009;
Krieger, Allen, Rizzo, & Krieger, 1971; Weitzman et al., 1971), the
participants were additionally divided into two groups based on the
time of the day when the experiment was conducted (“morning group”:
between 8 am and 1 pm, “afternoon group”: between 1 pm and 6 pm).
Speciﬁcally, in the “brush stroking” group, 13 subjects performed the
experiment in the morning and 7 in the afternoon, while in the “vi-
bration” group, 10 subjects performed the experiment in the morning
and 10 in the afternoon. Thus, the day time of saliva collection was not
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between the groups
(Chi-square = 0.92;
p = 0.337).
Heart rate was monitored via electrocardiogram recorded at
1000 Hz with a custom-made ampliﬁer (program: “Chart Pro”, data
collection unit: PowerLab 16 SP, company: AD Instruments, Dunedin,
New Zealand). One Ag–AgCl surface electrode was placed below the
right clavicle and the other two below the ribs, laterally and symme-
trically, following the bony landmarks. Heart rate was collected during
the whole tactile stimulation session and during two resting-period
baselines. These baselines lasted for 5 min right before the tactile sti-
mulation onset and at the end of the experiment, after the post-tests
were collected. During tactile stimulation, two triggers were set for the
onset and the oﬀset of the ratings. The rating period was then excluded
from the analysis due to the associated movement that would interfere
with heart rate. After visual inspection, artefacts due to rarely occurring
ectopic beats or missed beat detections were manually corrected by
removing an ectopic beat or by adding a missed beat. The very low
frequency trend components were removed using the smoothness priors
method in 17% of the heart rate data. Mean heart rate variability was
calculated separately for each of the 16 blocks during tactile stimula-
tion and for the two resting-period baselines with Kubios HRV 2.2
(Tarvainen, Niskanen, Lipponen, Ranta-Aho, & Karjalainen, 2014) de-
veloped using MATLAB® release 2014a (The MathWorks, Inc.).

Heart rate variability was extracted from heart rate data. It was
operationalized in one time-domain parameter (i.e., standard deviation
of normal to normal RR intervals; SDNN), obtained participant-wise for
each block. SDNN is a measure of high- and low-frequency oscillations
in RR intervals, reﬂective of perturbations in the autonomic tone (Pope
et al., 1999). SDNN was baseline-corrected to the 5 min right before the
tactile stimulation onset (ﬁrst baseline).
In order to reduce the eﬀect of possibly outliers, salivary cortisol
and SDNN were submitted to winsorisation (Ghosh & Vogt, 2012).
Therefore, the values outside the upper limit (75th percentile
+ 1.5 × interquartile range) were replaced with the value corre-
sponding to the upper limit, and the values outside the lower limit
(25th percentile − 1.5 × interquartile range) were replaced with the
value corresponding to the lower limit. For the log-transformed cortisol,
4.4% of the values (in 6 subjects) were replaced. 5.6% of the values for
SDNN (in 25 subjects) were replaced.
Subjective stress response was assessed before and after the ex-
periment with a computerised version of the “Arnetz & Hasson Stress
Questionnaire” (Andersson, Johnsson, Berglund, & Öjehagen, 2009).
Answers for each of the 7 items (i.e. “health status”, “quality of sleep”,
“ability to concentrate”, “stress level”, “energy level”, “life control” and
“social life” right now) were given on visual analogue (VAS) scales with
values ranging from 0 indicating high stress to 10 indicating low stress.

Interoceptive awareness was assessed with the heart beat perception test.
The heart beat perception test was performed before and after the
experiment. The accuracy of detection of onés own heart beat is a well-
established measure of interoceptive awareness (Schandry, 1981; Wölk,
Sütterlin, Koch, Vögele, & Schulz, 2014). The same procedure as in
Schandry (1981) and Wölk et al. (2014) was used. The participants sat
relaxed on a chair and read the instructions on a computer screen po-
sitioned in front of them. They were asked to quietly count their own
heart beats for a given time interval of 25-, 35- and 45-s (in randomized
order) without using supplementary aids such as feeling the pulse at the
wrist or neck. An additional ﬁrst time interval served as practice to
familiarize the participants with the task and was therefore not in-
cluded in the analysis. Two acoustic cues signalled the onset and oﬀset
of each time interval. After the second acoustic cue, the participants
were asked to report the counted number of heart beats and to provide
an answer about how sure they were regarding the reported number, on
a scale from 0 (“not sure at all”) to 8 (“very sure”). During the whole
task, the actual heart rate was monitored. Subsequently, for each time
interval, the absolute diﬀerence between actual and reported heart-
beats was divided by the number of actual heartbeats, and the resulting
value was subtracted from 1. The thereby obtained three diﬀerent va-
lues (one for each time interval) were summed up and divided by 3,
obtaining a cardioceptive accuracy index. In this way, two cardiocep-
tive accuracy indices, pre- and post-test, were obtained for each subject
across the three time intervals with the formula above, used in a pre-
vious study (Wölk et al., 2014) and partially modiﬁed from Werner and
colleagues (Werner, Jung, Duschek, & Schandry, 2009) High values
point at a small diﬀerence between reported and actual heartbeats and
thereby indicate good cardiac perception.

As interoceptive awareness has been found to depend on body mass
index (BMI) (Herbert, Blechert, Hautzinger, Matthias, & Herbert, 2013),
the height and weight of all participants was measured upon their ar-
rival and their BMI was calculated. In the present sample, cardioceptive
accuracy in the pre- and post-test did not signiﬁcantly correlate with
the BMI (respectively, pre-test: r(40) = −0.06, p = 0.734; post-test: r
(40) = 0.16, p = 0.922).

Reward sensitivity and mood were assessed through an odour
evaluation test and two questionnaires. For the odour evaluation test,
participants were presented with three odours (“ﬂowers”, “aloe” and
“rose” (Firmenich, Kerpen, Germany)). The odours were delivered in
opaque glass bottles of 50 ml capacity. In order to ensure equal in-
tensity, odours were diluted in propylene glycol (Sigma Aldrich,
Steinheim, Germany) to respectively 5.5%, 0.49% and 5.5% (compare
Croy, Angelo, & Olausson, 2014; Triscoli, Croy, Olausson, & Sailer,
2014). Odour presentation was guided by a computerized protocol
(programmed in MATLAB, Mathworks, Natick, MA) and involved 3 s of
sniﬃng. After each odour presentation, participants rated the plea-
santness and intensity on a visual analogue scale (VAS), presented on a
screen. For pleasantness, the question was “How did you experience the
latest stimulation?” (endpoints “unpleasant” (−10) and “pleasant”
(+10)), for intensity the question was “How intense did you experience
the latest stimulation?” (endpoints “weak” (−10) and “strong” (+10)).
With a delay of 15 s after the rating, the next odour was presented. Each
odour was presented twice and odour presentation was randomised.
Two mean pleasantness ratings and two mean intensity ratings, pre-
and post-test, were calculated for each subject by averaging the ratings
across the six trials and across odours. It was assumed that higher
ratings of odour pleasantness post-stimulation compared to pre-stimu-
lation would indicate increased reward sensitivity.

Two computerised questionnaires evaluating the degree of reward
sensitivity and current mood were administered to the participants
before and after the experiment. The “Snaith-Hamilton Pleasure Scale”
(Snaith et al., 1995), is a 14-item questionnaire which measures he-
donic tone, or ability to experience pleasure. Ratings were given on a 7-
points Likert scale, from “not at all true for me” to “very true for me”.
Examples of the items are “I would enjoy being with my family or close
friends”. In order to focus the subjects on the current situation, the in-
structions of the questionnaire were partially modiﬁed from its original
form (i.e. the instruction “this questionnaire is designed to measure
your ability to experience pleasure in the last few days” was changed to
“this questionnaire is designed to measure your ability to experience
pleasure right now”). The “Multidimensional Mood State Ques-
tionnaire” (MDMQ) (Steyer, Schwenkmezger, Notz, & Eid, 1997), is a
30-item questionnaire which evaluates the current mood through three
diﬀerent scales: “Good–Bad”, “Calm–Nervous” and “Awake–Tired”.
Ratings were given on a 6-points Likert scale, from “extremely” to
“deﬁnitely not”. Examples of the items are: “content” (for
“Good–Bad” scale), “tense” (for the “Calm–Nervous” scale), and “rested”
(for the “Awake–Tired” scale). For each participant and for each of the
questionnaires scales, two mean values were obtained for the pre- and
post-test.
In order to control for potential alterations of tactile sensitivity
in the course of the experiment, the Von Frey monoﬁlament test was
executed on the left dorsal forearm, following the same staircase based
routine as reported before (Jönsson et al., 2015). Participants were
prevented from watching the stimulation by wearing occluding glasses
which prevented peripheral sight. Nine microﬁlaments, mounted on
plastic rods and ranging from 13.7 mN to 0.08 mN were applied with a
force suﬃcient to innocuously sting but not indent the skin, in a
staircase method. The experimenter applied the strongest microﬁla-
ment to the left forearm of the subjects, corresponding to a force of 13.7
mN, after which the subjects were asked to verbally report whether
they felt it or not. If the subjects gave a positive answer (“yes”), the
experimenter continued with the next weaker microﬁlament. If the
answer was still positive, the experimenter continued in decreasing
order until the subject could not feel the stimulation anymore. At this
point, the corresponding stimulus was reported as the ﬁrst reversal
point and the experimenter continued in the opposite direction of the
microﬁlaments, with the next stronger microﬁlament in increasing
order. As soon as the subjects could again feel the stimulation, the
corresponding stimulus was reported as the second reversal point and
the procedure started again in the opposite direction, thus, with the
next weaker microﬁlament in decreasing order. A total amount of six
reversal points was collected. The ﬁrst two reversal points served for
familiarizing with the task and were not used for further analysis. The
last four reversal points were averaged for each participant separately
for the pre-test and post-test.

2.2.3. Data analysis

For all dependent variables, a measure of the change between pre-
and post-tactile stimulation was computed as the participant-wise dif-
ference between the mean values during the post-test and the mean
values during the pre-test. This was done for the odour pleasantness and
odour intensity ratings, obtaining an “odour pleasantness change” score
and an “odour intensity change” score, for the “Arnetz & Hasson Stress
Questionnaire” scores, obtaining a “stress level change” score, for the
heart beat perception test, obtaining a “cardioceptive accuracy change”
score, for the “Snaith-Hamilton Pleasure Scale”, obtaining a “pleasure
scale change” score, for the scales of the “Multidimensional Mood
State Questionnaire”, obtaining a “Good–Bad change” score, a
“Calm–Nervous change” score and an “Awake–Tired change” score and
for the Von Frey monoﬁlament test, obtaining a “skin sensitivity
change” score. Finally, in order to collect a representative value of the
heart rate variability changes during tactile stimulation, diﬀerences
between the mean last value (block 16) and the mean ﬁrst value (block
1) were computed participant-wise on the SDNN data, obtaining a
“SDNN change” score.

In order to determine whether there were signiﬁcant relationships
among the experienced pleasantness and intensity of the tactile sti-
mulation with the heart rate variability measures and the pre- and post-
test measures, Spearmańs correlations
(N = 20) were computed
separately for the experimental and control conditions “brush stroking”
and “vibration”.

More speciﬁcally, the “tactile pleasantness change” score and the
“tactile intensity change” score during the stimulation were correlated
for the stress response, the “SDNN
with the following variables:
change” score, AUCG and AUCI salivary cortisol, and the change scores
of the “Arnetz & Hasson Stress Questionnaire”. For the reward sensi-
tivity and mood, the “odour pleasantness change” and the “odour in-
tensity change” scores (odour evaluation test), the change score of the
“Snaith-Hamilton Pleasure Scale” and the change scores of the three
scales of the “Multidimensional Mood State Questionnaire”. For the
interoceptive awareness, the “cardioceptive accuracy change” score
(heart beat perception test). The correlations were Bonferronís cor-
rected at p = 0.004 in order to adjust for multiple testing of 13 vari-
ables.

2.2.4. Inferential statistical analysis

Statistical analyses for the ratings, the questionnaires and the bio-
logical parameters were made using SPSS Statistics version 21 (IBM,
Chicago, USA).

For the dependent variables obtained during tactile stimulation
levels, pleasantness and intensity ratings, and heart rate
(cortisol
variability) it was analysed whether there was a stimulation dependent
change over time and whether there were signiﬁcant group diﬀerences
and interactions between group and stimulation change over time. For
those variables where there was a diﬀerence between brush stroking
and vibration (i.e. heart rate variability, see results), it was also in-
vestigated whether such diﬀerence was due to the higher perceived
pleasantness and/or intensity of brush stroking compared to vibration.
For the dependent variables before and after tactile stimulation
(reward sensitivity and mood,
interoceptive awareness and tactile
sensitivity) it was analysed whether there was a stimulation dependent
change before versus after and also whether there were signiﬁcant
group diﬀerences and interactions between group and stimulation
change before versus after.

For the pleasantness and intensity ratings, each dependent variable
was separately submitted to a linear mixed model analysis, with “block
number” (16 levels i.e. blocks) and “tactile stimulation” (“brush
stroking” versus “vibration”) as the ﬁxed factors, and “subjects” and
“age” as random combinations in order to control for random eﬀects
among subjects. Restricted maximum likelihood estimation was used.
The level of signiﬁcance was set to p = 0.05.

In order to analyse cortisol levels, the log-transformed dependent
variable was submitted to a linear mixed models analysis, with “col-
lection time” (4 time-points collected every 30 min: at the beginning of
the experiment, right before the onset of the tactile stimulation, right
after the oﬀset of the tactile stimulation and at the end of the experi-
ment), “tactile stimulation” (“brush stroking” versus “vibration”) and
“time of the day” (“morning” versus “afternoon”) as the ﬁxed factors,
and “subjects” and “age” as random combinations. For heart rate
variability, SDNN was submitted to a linear mixed model analysis, with
“block number” (18 levels, i.e. 2 baselines and 16 blocks), “tactile sti-
mulation” (“brush stroking” versus “vibration”), pleasantness and in-
tensity ratings as the ﬁxed factors, and “subjects” and “age” as random
combinations in order to control for random eﬀects among subjects.
Restricted maximum likelihood estimation was used. The level of sig-
niﬁcance was set to p = 0.05.

To determine whether there was an eﬀect of the tactile stimulation,
diﬀerences between pre- and post-tests were statistically compared for
the two stimulation types for the measures obtained only prior to and
following tactile stimulation. These measures were: the odour plea-
santness and intensity ratings (across the three diﬀerent odours), the
mean questionnaires scores of the “Snaith-Hamilton Pleasure Scale”
and the “Multidimensional Mood State Questionnaire” for reward
sensitivity and mood, the cardioceptive accuracy indices for the heart
beat perception test for the interoceptive awareness, the
“Arnetz & Hasson Stress Questionnaire” for the subjective stress re-
sponse, and the skin sensitivity values obtained with the Von Frey
monoﬁlament test for controlling for potential alterations of tactile
sensitivity. Each of these dependent variables was separately submitted
to a linear mixed models analysis, with “tactile stimulation” (“brush
stroking” versus “vibration”) and “session” (“before” versus “after”) as
the ﬁxed factors, and “subjects” and “age” as random combinations.

3. Results
3.1. Perceived touch pleasantness and intensity

Tactile stimulation was rated as more pleasant by the experimental
“brush stroking” group than the control “vibration” group (for the
means, see Table 2). This was evident from the main eﬀect of tactile
stimulation (F(1,631) = 6.05, p = 0.014). Pleasantness ratings de-
creased over time for both groups, as shown by the main eﬀect of block
number (F(1,631) = 28.86, p < 0.001), ending in the slightly negative
range. Speciﬁcally, they were above the neutral point until about
20 min from the onset of the brush stroking (until ∼block 9), and be-
came neutral or slightly negative only after. No signiﬁcant interactions
were found between tactile stimulation and block number (F(1,631)
= 2.31, p = 0.129) (Fig. 3).

Tactile stimulation was rated as more intense by the experimental
“brush stroking” group than the control “vibration” group (for the
means, see Table 2), as evident from a main eﬀect of tactile stimulation
(F(1,631) = 14.36, p < 0.001). At the same time, intensity was rated
as being stable over time by both groups. Neither a main eﬀect of block
number (F(1,631) = 0.47, p = 0.495), nor an interaction of tactile
stimulation and block number (F(1, 631) = 1.59, p = 0.208) were
found.

3.2. Tactile sensitivity

Tactile sensitivity, as measured with the Von Frey monoﬁlament
test, did not diﬀer between groups (F(1, 316) = 0.41, p = 0.522), or
before versus after tactile stimulation (F(1, 316) = 0.79, p = 0.375),
and there was no signiﬁcant interaction eﬀect (F(1, 316) = 2.48,
p = 0.116) (for the means and SD, see Table 1).

3.3. Stress response

Cortisol levels decreased over time irrespective of the condition
(signiﬁcant main eﬀect of “collection time”)
(F(1,152) = 6.19, p = 0.014), and they were higher during the morning than the after-
noon (signiﬁcant main eﬀect of “time of the day”) (respectively,
“morning” group: M = 1.48, sd = 0.64; “afternoon” group: M = 0.94,
sd = 0.61) (F(1,152) = 9.10, p = 0.003). However, the two groups did
not diﬀer (absent main eﬀect of “tactile stimulation”) (F(1,152) = 0.97,
p = 0.327). No signiﬁcant interaction eﬀects among “collection time”,
“tactile stimulation” and “time of the day” emerged. For the means, see
Table 1.
Heart rate variability increased over time (F(1, 613) = 4.08,
p = 0.044), but did not diﬀer between the two types of stimulation
(absent main eﬀect of “tactile stimulation”)
(F(1,613) = 0.16, p = 0.686). No signiﬁcant main eﬀects of “pleasantness” (F(1, 613)
= 0.24, p = 0.624) or “intensity” (F(1, 613) = 0.15, p = 0.703) on
heart rate variability were found. However, the heart rate variability
signiﬁcantly changed over time in relation to the stimulation and in
relation to the pleasantness and intensity ratings. Hence, signiﬁcant
interactions were revealed for “block number” by “pleasantness” (F(1,
613) = 8.74, p = 0.003), “block number” by “intensity” (F(1, 613)
= 6.39, p = 0.012) and “block number” by “pleasantness” and “in-
tensity” (F(1, 613) = 8.72, p = 0.003). The SDNN increased across
blocks only for “brush stroking”, but was stable for “vibration” (Fig. 4)
and this increase was due to both the higher pleasantness and intensity
of “brush stroking” to compare to “vibration” (interaction “tactile sti-
mulation” by “block number” and “pleasantness”: F(1, 613) = 6.87,
p = 0.009; interaction “tactile stimulation” by “block number” and
“intensity”: F(1, 613) = 4.22, p = 0.040). Speciﬁcally, only for
“stroking”, the higher the SDNN was, the lower the pleasantness ratings
were (for the last block numbers, i.e. towards the end of brush
stroking), while the lower the SDNN, the higher the pleasantness rat-
ings (for the ﬁrst block numbers, i.e. in the beginning of brush stroking)
(black dots in Fig. 5A). As well, only for “stroking”, the higher the
SDNN was, the higher the intensity ratings were (for the last block
numbers, i.e. towards the end of brush stroking), while the lower the
SDNN was, the lower the intensity ratings were (for the ﬁrst block
numbers, i.e. in the beginning of brush stroking) (black dots in Fig. 5B).
In contrast, these two patterns were not seen for “vibration” (grey dots
in Fig. 5A and B), where the data were less well aligned to the re-
gression line. This interpretation was further conﬁrmed by a signiﬁcant
third level interaction among “tactile stimulation”, “block number”,
“pleasantness” and “intensity” (F(1, 613) = 5.48, p = 0.020). Speciﬁ-
cally, the SDNN showed an initial increase until about 20 min from the
onset of brush stroking (until ∼block 9), after which it plateaued. For
the means, see Table 2.

Stress ratings on the Arnetz & Hasson Stress Questionnaire did not
diﬀer between groups (F(1,76) = 1.69, p = 0.197), or before versus
after tactile stimulation (F(1,76) = 0.12, p = 0.726) (for the means and
SD, see Table 1) and there was no signiﬁcant interaction eﬀect (F(1,76)
= 0.19, p = 0.666).

3.4. Reward sensitivity and mood.
No signiﬁcant results were found for the odour evaluation test (for
the pleasantness ratings: diﬀerences post- compared to pre-stimulation
(F(1,473) = 0.44, p = 0.506), between groups
(F(1,473) = 2.47,
p = 0.117), or interaction eﬀects (F(1,473) = 0.00, p = 0.947) and for
the intensity ratings: diﬀerences post- compared to pre-stimulation (F
(1,475) = 0.05,
(F(1,475) = 0.00,
p = 0.965), or interaction eﬀects (F(1,475) = 0.47, p = 0.492)), for
in the “Multidimensional Mood State Questionnaire”
the scores
(“Good–Bad” scale: diﬀerences post- compared to pre-stimulation (F
(F(1,76) = 0.01,
(1,76) = 0.40,
p = 0.944),
p = 0.947);
“Calm–Nervous” scale: diﬀerences post- compared to pre-stimulation (F
(F(1,76) = 0.00,
(1,76) = 0.72,
p = 0.970),
p = 0.730);
“Awake–Tired” scale: diﬀerences post- compared to pre-stimulation (F
(1,76) = 0.90,
(F(1,76) = 0.19,
p = 0.664), interaction eﬀects (F(1,76) = 0.22, p = 0.641)) and in the
“Snaith-Hamilton Pleasure Scale” diﬀerences post- compared to pre-
stimulation (F(1,76) = 0.00, p = 0.969), between groups (F(1,76)
= 0.00, p = 0.974), interaction eﬀects (F(1,76) = 0.95, p = 0.334)
(see Table 1).
The “pleasure scale change” of the “Snaith-Hamilton Pleasure Scale”
(representing reward sensitivity and mood) correlated signiﬁcantly
negatively with the “tactile pleasantness change” (r(20) = −0.75,
p < 0.001) in those participants who received the “brush stroking”
condition. Thus, the less the perceived pleasantness for brush stroking
decreased over time, the higher was the score in the post-test compared
to the pre-test. However for the participants of the “vibration condi-
tion”, no such correlation was obtained (r(20) = 0.23, p = 0.353). No
further signiﬁcant correlations were found, between the “tactile plea-
santness change” and the other experimental domains, i.e. stress re-
sponse and interoceptive awareness (p’s > 0.05).

3.5. Interoceptive awareness

No signiﬁcant diﬀerences were found for interoceptive awareness,
neither between groups, nor before versus after tactile stimulation (for
means and SD, see Table 1).

<Conclusion> Discussion.
The present ﬁndings demonstrate that pleasant touch at the CT-
optimized stroking velocity improves the autonomic response of the
individual, as shown by increased heart rate variability.

4.1. Stress response

Although at the onset of the tactile stimulation the heart rate
variability index (i.e., SDNN) was similar for both groups, it subse-
quently increased with continuous brush stroking, but not with vibra-
tion, and after ∼13 min from the onset and until the end of the tactile
stimulation heart rate variability was clearly higher for brush stroking
than vibration (Fig. 4). This increase was related to the higher per-
ceived pleasantness and intensity of brush stroking compared to vi-
bration. Increased SDNN is an index of good balance between sympa-
thetic and parasympathetic tone, which is required for the maintenance
of overall health (McLachlan et al., 2010). In these terms, an imbalance
of the autonomic nervous system, commonly resulting from excessive
sympathetic activity and inadequate parasympathetic input, is often
induced by stressors, and is cause of several stress-exacerbated dis-
orders (Streeter, Gerbarg, Saper, Ciraulo, & Brown, 2012). Our study
indicates a beneﬁcial eﬀect of long-lasting pleasant touch performed at
CT optimized velocity on heart rate variability. Noticeably, in our
previous study (Sailer et al., 2016), an increased activation in OFC
(orbitofrontal cortex) was seen during ∼40 min of brush stroking with
a very similar temporal trend as for the SDNN in this study. SDNN in the
present study, as well as OFC activation in the previous one, showed an
initial increase until about 20 min from the onset of the brush stroking,
which was followed by a plateau. OFC is typically involved in coding
the rewarding aspects of a stimulus (Francis et al., 1999; Gottfried et al.,
2003; Kobayashi et al., 2010; Kringelbach, 2005; O’Doherty, 2004;
Schultz et al., 2000). This similar trend may point at a positive eﬀect of
CT-targeted touch at both the neural and physiological level. A possible
explanation could be an orbitofrontal modulation on the cardiac ac-
tivity in response to aﬀectively salient stimuli. Supporting this view,
several pathways through which fronto-cortical activity modulates the
parasympathetic tone have been identiﬁed (Ter Horst & Postema,
1997). Several neuroimaging studies have found an association be-
tween orbital prefrontal cortical activity and cardiovascular autonomic
responses (Cechetto, 2014; Lane, 2001). Speciﬁcally, it has been shown
that emotional arousal induced by the sight of emotionally connoted
pictures was associated with a reduction in heart rate variability and
concomitant decreases in medial prefrontal cortex and posterior orbi-
tofrontal activation (Lane, 2001). In the present study, these autonomic
eﬀects seem not to be explicitly experienced by the individuals because
in both studies the pleasantness ratings became neutral over time. As to
the late start of SDNN increase (see Fig. 4), one may draw on the notion
of HRV to represent an index of safety (Thayer et al., 2009). In an ex-
perimental situation that is unfamiliar to the participant, safety may
take some time to ascertain. At the beginning of the stroking, the task
and the situation were novel, and only after continuous repetition they
may have become a safe routine. Heart rate variability may thus
mediate strategies of information updating with respect to the de-
creased perceived pleasantness: the more the ratings changed over
time, the more updating was required (Geisler, Vennewald,
Kubiak, & Weber, 2010).
Salivary cortisol levels decreased over time both for touch and
vibration. Pleasant tactile interactions have been found to reduce cor-
tisol levels (Heinrichs et al., 2003). However, from our results it is not
possible to interpret the decrease in cortisol as an exclusive eﬀect of
stroking, because the same result was found for vibration. The absence
of a unique eﬀect of the CT-optimized pleasant touch on salivary cor-
tisol may lead to two diﬀerent interpretations. On the one hand, it is
possible that the reduction in cortisol levels may have been due to the
simple passage of time, so that the participants may have become more
relaxed after 35 min of tactile stimulation. On the other hand, it is
conceivable that any type of tactile stimulation provokes a decrease in
cortisol. For example, a reduction in cortisol levels has also been ob-
served while having phone conversations through a huggable human-
shaped device (Rapaport, Schettler, & Breese, 2010; Sumioka, Nakae,
Kanai, & Ishiguro, 2013). Similarly, electromechanical stimulation has
been found to produce similar eﬀects on social behaviour as physical
contact (Haans, IJsselsteijn, Graus, & Salminen, 2008). A possible ex-
planation to the diﬀerent results of the two stress indices (salivary
cortisol and SDNN) can be that the endocrine and cardiovascular sys-
tems are diﬀerently responsive to sensory stimuli. For example, heart
rate variability has been seen to be a more suitable psychophysiological
marker of emotion regulation than cortisol (Pawan, Chwo, & Li, 2013).
Therefore it could be that SDNN is more sensitive to aﬀective touch
than cortisol.
Contrarily to SDNN and cortisol levels, no eﬀect of either touch type
or session (before versus after tactile stimulation) was found on sub-
jective stress response. These ﬁndings support the use of objective
measures in stress research.
4.2. Tactile sensitivity

In accordance with many previous studies (Jönsson et al., 2015;
Löken et al., 2009; McGlone et al., 2014; Olausson et al., 2010;
Sehlstedt et al., 2016; Triscoli, Ackerley et al., 2014), brush stroking at
the CT-optimized velocity (3 cm/s) was perceived as pleasant, and as
more pleasant than vibration (Davidovic et al., 2016). Across repeti-
tions, pleasantness was reported to decrease, as has been found in
previous studies of our group (Sailer et al., 2016; Triscoli, Ackerley
et al., 2014; Triscoli, Croy et al., 2014). This mirrors a reduction of the
aﬀective value of touch over continuous stimulation. However, in the
present study the stroking experience became slightly unpleasant in the
end. A similar decrease in the pleasantness ratings was seen for vibra-
tion. Conversely, the intensity of both stroking and vibration was rated
as constant over repetitions.

Vibration was rated as less intense than the brush stroking. Further
inspection of the data showed that the standard deviation of the in-
tensity ratings for the vibration group was rather high, possibly because
such vibration is not a common tactile stimulation experienced in ev-
eryday life.

Finally, as expected, no alterations of discriminative tactile sensitivity
were detected, as shown by the lack of diﬀerences between either touch
type or session (before and after) in the Von Frey monoﬁlament test.
4.3. Reward sensitivity and mood

Contrarily to our hypothesis, no eﬀect of either touch type or session
(before versus after tactile stimulation) was found on reward sensitivity
and mood. However, our results showed that the more the stroking was
perceived as pleasant throughout the experiment, the higher the he-
donic tone, or the ability to experience pleasure, after 35 min of plea-
sant touch. This was not found for the vibration group.

4.4. Interoceptive awareness

Touch massage has been suggested to have a positive inﬂuence on
body awareness (Lindgren et al., 2014). However, no eﬀect of either
touch type or session (before versus after tactile stimulation) was found
on interoceptive awareness with the present set-up.
4.5. Implications and future directions
In summary, our results showed that long-term pleasant touch at the
CT-optimized velocity promotes beneﬁcial eﬀects on the autonomic
stress response, as documented from an increase in a heart rate varia-
bility index. This may be due to the artiﬁcial lab situation, in which CT
stimulation was isolated from any social context. Here, stroking was
performed with a brush by a machine in a laboratory setting, in contrast
to a caress by a near one in everyday life. This does not see to lead to
signiﬁcant alterations in the endocrine stress response, reward sensi-
tivity, mood, and interoceptive awareness.
It is conceivable that in real-life situations where pleasant touch is
performed among individuals and therefore has a greater social and
emotional value, its eﬀects on the stress response may be even larger
than in controlled laboratory settings. In order to evaluate the physio-
logical eﬀects of pleasant touch in more ecological situations, future
research could for example use a human hand to perform the stroking.
The observed beneﬁcial eﬀects of prolonged pleasant touch on the
autonomic system may have clinical implications in long-term touch
therapies, for example in the treatment of symptoms associated with
sympathetic dominance of the autonomic nervous system. Moreover,
such ﬁndings may redeﬁne the role of long-lasting tactile social inter-
actions between individuals. Particularly, caressing and cuddling, per-
formed between individuals in everyday situations may lead to a higher
level of physiological well-being and life quality when prolonged for a
rather long time.

4.6. Limitations

An important limitation of our study regards the salivary cortisol
measure. From our results it is not possible to conclude whether the
observed decrease in salivary cortisol levels was due to the simple
passage of time or to the eﬀect of (any type of) tactile stimulation. The
inclusion of a third condition, with the participants simply resting for
35 min, might have been useful for excluding the ﬁrst hypothesis (de-
crease in cortisol due to the passage of time). Furthermore, it cannot be
excluded that C-tactile ﬁbres were activated by vibration. Vibratory
stimuli have been found to activate C-tactile ﬁbres, but to a lesser extent
than brush stroking (Bessou et al., 1971). However, designing a control
condition similar to brush stroking which does not activate C-tactile
aﬀerents is diﬃcult. C-tactile aﬀerents are activated by static touch and
by stroking velocities outside the CT optimal velocity range (1–10 cm/
s) (Vallbo et al., 1999). Consequently, vibration was preferred as it
seems to be less CT-targeted than other alternatives.

5. Conclusion

The present study demonstrates the existence of physiological cor-
relates to the conscious hedonic experience deriving from stroking at
the CT optimal velocity. In particular, an increased activity of the
parasympathetic system occurred during 35 min of pleasant brush
stroking compared to vibration, as indicated by the increment in SDNN.
Other indicators of physiological well-being such as salivary cortisol
were not dependent on the type of touch, as shown by a reduction in
cortisol regardless the type of the stimulation. Overall, whereas reward
sensitivity and interoceptive awareness seem not to be aﬀected by
prolonged pleasant touch, beneﬁcial eﬀects were found for autonomic
nervous system regulation.

Acknowledgements
