Introduction

Exposure to adversity during the prenatal period, such as maternal
psychiatric problems, substance (ab)use, single parenthood and pov-
erty, has been shown to predict aggression in childhood that persists
into adolescence and adulthood (Côté, Vaillancourt, LeBlanc,
Nagin, & Tremblay, 2006; Hay et al., 2011; NICHD Early Child Care
Research Network, 2004). Yet, not all children seem to be equally af-
fected by adversity. Guided by theories of diﬀerential susceptibility
(Belsky & Pluess) and sensitivity to context
(Boyce & Ellis, 2005), a number of studies have demonstrated that in-
dividual diﬀerences in stress reactivity, as measured by indices of the
cardiac autonomic nervous system (ANS), can predispose or protect
against the eﬀects of adversity on children’s behavioral maladjustment
(e.g. El-Sheikh & Erath, 2011). Although these studies provide im-
portant insights into physiological measures of susceptibility, they have
focused mostly on older children. Little is known about the role of the
cardiac ANS in interaction with early adversity during infancy when the
physiological systems involved in emotion regulation are emerging and
presumably most responsive to environmental inﬂuences (Beauchaine,
Neuhaus, Brenner, & Gatzke-Kopp, 2008; Laurent, Harold, Leve,
Shelton, & Van Goozen, 2016).
Altered ANS functioning has been consistently linked to aggression
in children, adolescents and adults (Van Goozen, Fairchild,
Snoek & Harold, 2008). The ANS is comprised of a sympathetic (SNS)
and parasympathetic (PNS) branch. PNS activity is often assessed by
respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA). RSA is the heart rate variability at
the frequency of respiration (Cacioppo, Uchino, & Berntson, 1994), and
is considered to index the neural control of the heart via the vagus
nerve (Porges, 2007). During restful periods, the vagus exerts an in-
hibitory inﬂuence on the heart acting as a ‘brake’ by increasing vagal
output to the sino-atrial (SA) node of the heart and limiting sympathetic
inﬂuences which contribute to a slow and steady heart rate. In response
to stress, the vagal ‘brake’ is disengaged resulting in a decrease in vagal
output to the SA node of the heart and thus contributing to an increase
in heart rate (Porges, 2007). If withdrawal of the vagal ‘brake’ is not
suﬃcient to manage a stressor, the sympathetic activity is expected to
increase in order to prepare the body for a more active stress response.
The majority of research examining stress reactivity in young chil-
dren has focused on RSA or global measures of cardiac autonomic
functioning like HR without speciﬁc assessments of activity within the
sympathetic branch. Pre-ejection period (PEP) reﬂects the time interval
between the onset of the heartbeat and ejection of blood into the aorta
(Cacioppo et al., 1994) and is commonly used as an index of myocardial
contractility and sympathetic control of the heart (Berntson et al.,
1994). Both RSA and PEP are used as indicators of the complex pro-
cesses that underlie responsiveness of the ANS to a changing environ-
ment, e.g., from rest (baseline) to challenge or vice versa.
Low baseline PNS activity, as indicated by RSA, has been identiﬁed
as a vulnerability factor that exacerbates the relation between adversity
(e.g. marital conﬂict, parental drinking problems) and children’s ex-
ternalizing behavior (El-Sheikh, 2005a; El-Sheikh et al., 2001). Other
studies have measured RSA reactivity to stress, with decreases in RSA in
response to stress considered to be indicative of better adaptation (El-
Sheikh & Erath, 2011). RSA withdrawal in response to stress has been
associated with lower levels of externalizing behavior in the context of
adversity (El-Sheikh, 2001; Katz, 2007), although ﬁndings have been
inconsistent (Obradovic, Bush, Stamperdahl, Adler, & Boyce, 2010).
Studies investigating interactions between adversity and SNS activity
(measured as skin conductance level [SCL] in most studies) indicate
that either very low or very high baseline levels of SCL and high SCL
reactivity may increase the risk of aggression and externalizing beha-
vior in the context of adversity (El-Sheikh, 2005b; El-Sheikh et al.,
2007).

It is clear that ANS functioning has important implications for the
association between adversity and the development of aggression.
However, such associations may be less straightforward in infancy. For
example, recent studies indicated a stronger positive relation between
higher (rather than lower) baseline RSA and (externalizing) problem
behavior in infants and toddlers exposed to a more negative caregiving
environment (Conradt, Measelle, & Ablow, 2013; Eisenberg et al.,
2012). Measures of RSA reactivity and SNS functioning in infants have
not been studied as moderators of relations between early adversity and
aggression before, although there is one study in toddlers reporting no
eﬀects of RSA reactivity (Eisenberg et al., 2012).

Adaptation to stressful contexts requires a delicate balance in the
operation of both the PNS and SNS (Porges, 2007), and the synergistic
action of both systems determines the eﬀectiveness of regulation
(Berntson, Cacioppo, & Quigley, 1991). Although the eﬀects of both
branches of the ANS on the heart is generally believed to be reciprocal,
with increased activity in one branch and decreased activity in the
other, reactivity in both branches can also be nonreciprocal (i.e., in-
creased or decreased activity of both branches at the same time;
Berntson et al., 1991). Reciprocal cardiac PNS activation, with in-
creased PNS stimulation and decreased SNS stimulation on the heart, is
expected during calm states, while reciprocal SNS activation (i.e., in-
creased SNS activity and decreased PNS activity) is more adaptive when
confronted with challenging stressful situations. Previous studies have
suggested that reciprocal cardiac SNS activation in response to stress is
normative in children, adolescents and adults
(Alkon, Boyce,
Davis, & Eskenazi, 2011; Berntson et al., 1991; Salomon et al., 2000),
and linked to better emotion regulation in young children (Stifter,
Dollar, & Cipriano, 2011). Conversely, nonreciprocal activation of PNS
and SNS, as indicated by coactivation (i.e., increased activity in both
the PNS and SNS) and coinhibition (i.e., decreased activity in both the
PNS and SNS), has been linked to more externalizing problems in
school-aged children in the context of marital conﬂict, compared to
patterns of reciprocal SNS activation or reciprocal PNS activation (El-
Sheikh et al., 2009). Similar ﬁndings have been reported in the context
of maltreatment predicting aggression in girls (Gordis, Feres, Olezeski,
Rabkin, & Trickett, 2010).

So far, there have been no studies that we know of that have ex-
amined measures of both PNS and SNS functioning in infancy as po-
tential moderators of the eﬀects of early adversity on outcome in tod-
dlerhood. Elucidating how early physiological systems increase or
decrease susceptibility to aggression, may enhance our ability to iden-
tify children at risk of aggression at an early age, before developmental
trajectories begin to be set.

In the present study, we investigated the interaction between ANS
response to and recovery from stress measured in 6-month-old infants,
taking into consideration both the PNS and SNS, and prenatal risk in
predicting physical aggression at 20 months of age. We were speciﬁ-
cally interested in cumulative risk as previous work has shown a dose-
dependent relation between the presence of multiple risk factors and
child adjustment, with increases in the number of risk factors being
associated with increased levels of problems (Appleyard, Egeland, van
Dulmen, & Sroufe, 2005). We measured parasympathetic RSA and
sympathetic PEP response and recovery from stress. Although previous
studies involving PNS and SNS interactions have focused on SCL (El-
Sheikh et al., 2009; Gordis et al., 2010), PEP is considered to be a more
direct measure of cardiac SNS activity (Cacioppo et al., 1994), that can
be reliably measured in infants (Alkon et al., 2006; Quigley & Stifter,
2006). We hypothesized that higher levels of coactivation and coinhibi-
tion would exacerbate the relation between cumulative prenatal risk
and physical aggression, whereas, reciprocal PNS activation and re-
ciprocal SNS activation would attenuate the association between cu-
mulative risk and physical aggression.

<Middle> Methods and materials.
1.1. Participants.
The participants in this study were part of an ongoing longitudinal
study into neurobiological and neurocognitive predictors of early be-
havior problems (Mother- Infant NeuroDevelopment Study in Leiden,
The Netherlands [MINDS − Leiden]). We oversampled women based
on the presence of one or more risk factors (see criteria under
Cumulative risk). The sample was composed of 113 mothers and their
infants (55.8% males) who had completed the prenatal home-visit
during the third trimester of pregnancy (T1), and the postpartum home-
visits at six (T2) and 20 months (T3). The mean age of the children was
6.03 months (SD=0.41, range 5–7 months) at T2 and 19.94 months
(SD=0.81, range 18–24 months) at T3. The mothers were on average
22.96 years (SD = 2.12, range 17–27 years) at T1. Approximately 96%
of the mothers had a partner (87.6% was married or living with a
partner) and 32.7% of the mothers had a high educational
level
(Bachelor’s or Master’s degree). Families were predominantly
Caucasian (88.5%).

Of the 136 mothers originally enrolled in the study at T1, 10 did not
participate at T2, and another 13 dropped out between T2 and T3. Main
reasons for families dropping out were inability to contact, moving
away or too busy. Sample attrition was unrelated to demographic
variables (i.e., maternal age, ethnicity, marital status, educational level;
ps > 0.05). However, mothers who dropped out were more often
single (χ 2(1) = 8.41, p = 0.013).

The study was approved by the ethics committee of the Department
of Education and Child Studies at the Faculty of Social and Behavioral
Sciences, Leiden University, and by the Medical Research Ethics
Committee at Leiden University Medical Centre. Informed consent was
obtained from all parents of infants included in the study. Mothers were
compensated for each completed home or laboratory visit and children
were given a small present for their participation.

1.2. Procedures

The protocol during the six-month home-visit (2 h), included at-
tachment of cardiac monitoring equipment to the infant’s chest and
back after which they watched a 2-min relaxing movie while lying on a
blanket, followed by two procedures designed to elicit physiological
responses to social stress (Still Face Paradigm) and frustration (Car
seat). The social stress and frustration tasks were administered with a
break in between to limit carry over eﬀects. Infants were only assessed
in the next procedure when they were calm and displayed no distress.
The home-visits were scheduled at a time of the day when mothers
deemed their infant to be most alert.
The Still Face Paradigm (SFP; Mesman, Van
IJzendoorn, & Bakermans-Kranenburg, 2009) is a well-established social
stress paradigm comprising a sequence of three 2-min episodes
during which the mother is asked to interact normally with the infant
(SFP baseline), then withhold interaction (SFP social stress), and then
resume interaction (SFP recovery) (for a more detailed description of
the SFP, see Suurland, Van der Heijden, Smaling, Huijbregts, Van
Goozen, & Swaab, 2016). The Car Seat (CS) task, adapted from the La-
boratory Temperament Assessment Battery Pre-locomotor version (Lab-
TAB; Goldsmith & Rothbart, 1999), was used to measure infant phy-
siological response to a frustrating event. Following a 2-min baseline
(CS baseline), mothers placed their infants in a car seat and stood 1 m
away from their child. After 1 min of restraint (CS frustration), a 2-min
recovery period (CS recovery) followed in which mothers were allowed
to hold their child and interact as they normally would. Mothers were
instructed to remain neutral and refrain from comforting or speaking to
the child during the CS frustration episode.

During the challenge episodes, infant distress (i.e., whining, fussing
or crying) was coded by trained raters from videotaped recordings ac-
cording to scales of
the Mother Infant Coding System (Miller,
McDonough, Rosenblum, & Sameroﬀ, 2002) for the SFP; the Lab-TAB
coding system (Goldsmith & Rothbart, 1999) was used for the CS.
During the SFP social stress and the CS frustration episodes respectively
26.8% and 25.5% of the infants showed signs of distress.

1.3. Measures

1.3.1. Physiological measures

Parasympathetic RSA and sympathetic PEP were monitored con-
tinuously with the Vrije Universiteit Ambulatory Monitoring System
(VU-AMS 5 fs; De Geus, Willemsen, Klaver, & Van Doornen, 1995;
Willemsen, De Geus, Klaver, Van Doornen, & Carroll, 1996). The VU-
AMS device continuously recorded electrocardiogram (ECG), and im-
pedance cardiogram (ICG) measures; basal thorax impedance (Z0),
changes in impedance (dZ), and the ﬁrst derivative of pulsatile changes
in transthoracic impedance (dZ/dt). The ECG and dZ/dt signal were
sampled at 1000 Hz, and the Z0 signal was sampled at 10 Hz. The
VUDAMS software suite version 2.0 was used to extract mean values of
heart rate (HR), RSA, and PEP across SFP baseline (2 min), SFP social
stress (2 min), and SFP recovery (2 min), and CS baseline (2 min), CS
frustration (1 min), and CS recovery (2 min).

R-peaks in the ECG, scored by the software, were visually checked
and adjusted manually when necessary. RSA was derived by the peak-
trough method (De Geus et al., 1995; Grossman et al., 1990), which
combined the respiration (obtained from ﬁltered [0.1–0.4 Hz] thoracic
impedance signal) and inter beat interval (IBI) time series to calculate
the shortest IBI during heart rate acceleration in the inspiration phase
and the longest IBI during deceleration in the expiration phase (De Geus
et al., 1995). RSA was deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the longest
IBI’s during expiration and shortest IBI’s during inspiration. Automatic
scoring of RSA was checked by visual inspection of the respiratory
signal from the entire recording. RSA was not calculated if > 30% of
the data in an episode were missing.

PEP is the time interval between the onset of the ventricular de-
polarization (Q-wave onset) and the onset of left ventricular ejection of
blood into the aorta (B-point on the Dz/dt complex) (De Geus et al.,
1995). Average dZ/dt waveforms were derived by the software. PEP
was automatically scored from the Q-wave onset (opening of the aortic
valve) on the ECG and the B-point on the dZ/dt waveform. Each au-
tomated scoring was checked and corrected manually when necessary
(Riese et al., 2003). In case waveforms were morphologically distorted
in such a way that visual correction of automated scoring was not
possible, these waveforms were discarded. The procedure of interactive
visual scoring was done independently by two trained raters. Post-
scoring, the raters chose a consensus for the points where their judg-
ment did not overlap, and these were retained for analysis; inter-rater
reliability (intraclass correlation, ICC) was 0.949.

1.3.2. Cumulative risk

During the third trimester of pregnancy (between 26 and 40 weeks
gestation, M = 29.78, SD = 3.63), mothers were screened for the
presence of risk factors (see for a more elaborate description of these
criteria: Smaling et al., 2015; Suurland et al., 2016), including current
psychiatric disorder(s) with the Dutch version of the Mini- International
Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI-plus; Van Vliet, Leroy, & Van Megen,
2000), substance use (alcohol, tobacco and/or drugs) during preg-
nancy, no secondary education, unemployment, self-reported ﬁnancial
problems, limited or instable social support network, single status, and
maternal age < 20 years. The cumulative risk score was computed as
the sum of risk factors present (maximum number of risk factors was
10), with M=0.67, SD=0.93 (range 0–3). There were 66 mothers with
no risk factors, 25 with one risk factor, 15 with two risk factors, and 7
with three risk factors. The prevalence of the diﬀerent risk factors
among mothers with one or more risk factors (41.6%) was: 55.3%
current psychiatric diagnosis, 4.3% alcohol, 44.7% smoking, 2.1%
drugs, 10.6% single status, 10.6% unemployed, 4.3% no secondary
education, 8.5% ﬁnancial problems, 8.5% limited social support, 14.9%
age < 20 years.

1.3.3. Maternal reports of physical aggression

Mothers reported on their child’s physical aggression at 20 months
using the 11-item Physical Aggression Scale for Early Childhood
(PASEC; Alink et al., 2006). Mothers indicated whether their child had
shown physically aggressive behaviors (e.g. ‘hits’, ‘kicks’, ‘destroying
things’) in the past two months on a 3-point Likert scale (0 = ‘not’ true
to 2 = ‘very true or often true'). A total score for physical aggression
was calculated by summing item scores (range 0–22). Internal con-
sistency (Cronbach’s alpha) was 0.73.

1.4. Missing data

Approximately 12% of ANS data were missing across the SFP and CS
episodes. Missing data were due to dyads that did not complete the SFP
or CS because the infant became too fussy (3.8%), loose electrodes
(5.7%), equipment failure (1.9%), or excessive child movement in
which case PEP and/or RSA could not be scored (88.6%). Missing data
were not systematically related to demographic and obstetric variables
(see variables listed in Table 1; ps > 0.250) or cumulative risk and
physical aggression (ps > 0.250). Main analyses were conducted based
on the number of infants for which there was data (see Supplementary
Table 1 for available ANS data across SFP and CS episodes).

1.5. Data analysis

All variables were examined for outliers and violations of speciﬁc
assumptions applying to the statistical tests used. Variables with values
that exceeded > 3SD from the group mean were recoded to the next
extreme value within 3SD from the mean (across all SFP and CS epi-
sodes there were 14 outliers for RSA and two outliers for PEP). Because
RSA was skewed at baseline, the emotional challenge tasks, and re-
covery, its natural logarithm (lnRSA) was used in the analyses.

Baseline levels of lnRSA and PEP were signiﬁcantly correlated with
lnRSA and PEP challenge scores (rs = .27 to 0.84, ps < 0.001).
Further, lnRSA and PEP challenge scores were signiﬁcantly correlated
with lnRSA and PEP recovery scores (rs = .53 to 0.87, ps < 0.001). To
control for initial levels of arousal, response and recovery variables for
lnRSA and PEP were computed as standardized residualized change
scores (Eisenberg et al., 2012; El-Sheikh et al., 2009). The standardized
residualized change scores for response to challenge were obtained by
regressing the challenge scores on the baseline levels and for recovery
from challenge by regressing the recovery scores on the challenge
scores. This was done separately for the SFP and the CS. The standar-
dized residualized change scores for lnRSA and PEP during response
and recovery on the SFP were signiﬁcantly correlated with the stan-
dardized residualized change scores for lnRSA and PEP during response
and recovery on the CS (rs = .24 to 0.28, with ps = 0.021 to 0.009).
Therefore, the residualized change scores of lnRSA and PEP on the SFP
and CS were averaged to create four indices: lnRSA response and PEP
response (average SFP and CS) and lnRSA recovery and PEP recovery
(average SFP and CS). Negative values reﬂect lnRSA and PEP decreases
(i.e., greater PNS suppression and greater SNS activation respectively),
while positive values reﬂect lnRSA and PEP increases (i.e., greater PNS
activation and greater SNS suppression respectively).

Preliminary analyses tested for potential covariates (demographic
and obstetric characteristics). Hierarchical linear regression analyses
were conducted to examine the interactive eﬀects of cumulative risk
and ANS response and recovery on physical aggression. Two sets of
regression analyses were conducted: (1) lnRSA and PEP response
measures, and (2) lnRSA and PEP recovery measures. All variables were
centered to their mean prior to analyses (Aiken & West, 1991). Step 1
included cumulative risk, Step 2 included lnRSA and PEP, Step 3 in-
cluded all two-way interactions between cumulative risk, lnRSA and
PEP, and Step 4 included the three-way interaction between cumulative
risk, lnRSA, and PEP. Signiﬁcant interaction eﬀects were examined
following procedures recommended by Aiken and West (Aiken & West,
1991) by plotting regression lines of the relation between cumulative
risk and physical aggression at 0 risk factors and 1.6 risk factors (i.e.,
mean number of risk factors for the group of infants with ≥1 risk
factors) and 1 SD above and below the mean for the moderators (lnRSA
response/lnRSA recovery, and PEP response/PEP recovery).

The scores for the cumulative risk variable were skewed to the right,
with 58% of the participants having no risk factors and 42% having one
or more risk factors. Although the regression residuals did not show any
skewing, we checked the consistency of our ﬁndings by conducting all
regression analyses with the cumulative risk variable dichotomized at 0
versus 1 or more risk factors. The results of these analyses did not
change the pattern of ﬁndings (data not shown). We also tested whether
the main and interactive eﬀects were moderated by sex. Because this
was not the case, we do not report these ﬁndings. All analyses were
conducted using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS for
Windows, version 21.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago).

2. Results

2.1. Descriptive analyses

Descriptive statistics for lnRSA and PEP baseline, challenge episodes
and recovery are presented in Supplementary Table 1. LnRSA and PEP
response and recovery levels on the SFP and CS were signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from zero (t(105) = 4.33, p < 0.001 for lnRSA SFP response,
t(97) = 3.68, p < 0.001 for
t(91) = 2.56,
p < 0.05 for PEP SFP response, t(87) = 2.87, p < 0.01 for PEP CS
response, and t(82) = −2.28, p < 0.05 for PEP CS recovery), except
for lnRSA CS response (t(98) = 0.23, p = 0.816), lnRSA SFP recovery (t
(105) = −1.15, p = 0.140), and PEP SFP recovery t(87) = 0.14,
p = 0.889.

Averaged across the SFP and CS challenge episodes, 63% of the
sample showed a decrease in lnRSA (i.e., PNS suppression) and 62%
exhibited a decrease in PEP (i.e., SNS activation) from baseline.
Averaged across the SFP and CS recovery episodes, 44.5% of the sample
showed an increase in lnRSA (i.e., PNS activation) and 54.4% showed
an increase in PEP (i.e., SNS suppression) from the challenge episode.
Thus, there was suﬃcient variability in infant lnRSA and PEP response
to and recovery from challenge.

2.2. Preliminary analyses

Means, SDs, and correlations for the potential covariates and main
study variables are presented in Table 1. For interpretation purposes,
lnRSA and PEP raw change scores are used for means and SDs in
Table 1; however, as noted, residualized change scores are used in the
correlation and regression analyses. The demographic characteristics
(ethnicity, sex) and obstetric characteristics (gestational age, birth
weight) were not signiﬁcantly related to the main study variables
(ps > 0.05). Higher levels of cumulative risk were associated with
higher physical aggression scores (r = 0.31, p < 0.01). Cumulative
risk was not related to response and recovery measures of lnRSA and
PEP.

2.3. Hierarchical regression analyses

2.3.1. LnRSA and PEP response

Results of the hierarchical regression analysis for lnRSA and PEP
response are shown in Table 2. There was a signiﬁcant main eﬀect of
cumulative risk (b = 0.65, SE = 0.27, p < 0.05). Higher cumulative
risk predicted higher levels of physical aggression. There were no sig-
niﬁcant main eﬀects for lnRSA response or PEP response. There were no
signiﬁcant two-way interaction eﬀects between cumulative risk, lnRSA
and PEP on physical aggression. However, a signiﬁcant three-way in-
teraction between cumulative risk x lnRSA response x PEP response was
found (b = −1.23, SE = 0.53, p < 0.05), explaining 4.7% of the
variance in physical aggression over and above the variance explained
by cumulative risk, lnRSA and PEP response and all two-way interac-
tions.

Examination of simple slopes (see Fig. 1) revealed that for infants
exhibiting coactivation (i.e., lnRSA response at 1 SD above the mean
and PEP response at 1 SD below the mean) in response to challenge,
higher cumulative risk predicted higher levels of physical aggression
(β = 0.74, p < 0.001). Conversely, for infants exhibiting coinhibition,
reciprocal PNS activation and reciprocal SNS activation in response to
challenge, cumulative risk was unrelated to physical aggression
(β = 0.34,
and β = −0.02,
p = 0.929 for respectively coinhibition, reciprocal PNS activation and
reciprocal SNS activation).

p = 0.199, β = −0.05,

p = 0.836,

2.3.2. LnRSA and PEP recovery

Results of the hierarchical regression analysis for lnRSA and PEP
recovery are shown in Table 2. The main eﬀect for cumulative risk was
the same as in the hierarchical regression analysis for lnRSA and PEP
response. There were no signiﬁcant main eﬀects for lnRSA recovery or
PEP recovery, and none of two-way or three-way interactions were
signiﬁcant.

<Conclusion> Discussion.
Our ﬁndings showed that higher levels of coactivation of the PNS
and SNS, as reﬂected in RSA increases and PEP decreases in response to
stress, at 6 months increase vulnerability for physical aggression at 20
months, but only in the presence of higher levels of cumulative prenatal
risk. Cumulative risk was not associated with physical aggression for
infants who exhibited reciprocal PNS activation, reciprocal SNS acti-
vation or coinhibition in response to stress. We found no eﬀects for PNS
and SNS recovery from stress.

In previous studies, coactivation has been found to operate as a
vulnerability factor for aggressive behavior and externalizing behavior
problems in school-aged children exposed to adversity (e.g. marital
conﬂict and maltreatment; El-Sheikh et al., 2009; Gordis et al., 2010).
Our results extend these ﬁndings and indicate that coactivation of the
PNS and SNS as represented by RSA and PEP at six months of age
predicts physical aggression more than a year later. In fact, physical
aggression scores for children exposed to a higher level of prenatal risk
and exhibiting coactivation, were more than one standard deviation
above the mean physical aggression scores reported in an community
sample of 24-month old children (Alink et al., 2006).

Coactivation of the PNS and SNS indicates that both branches of the
ANS are activated, and this may yield an ambivalent physiological re-
sponse in which one branch increases arousal whereas the other branch
dampens it (Berntson et al., 1991). Salomon et al. (2000) found that
children exhibiting coactivation produced smaller changes in HR in
response to challenge than children exhibiting reciprocal SNS activa-
tion. Although both coactivators and reciprocal SNS responders acti-
vated the SNS, PNS activation buﬀered the HR response of coactivators,
such that these children had the lowest HR reactivity. In situations
without challenge or stress, coactivation of the PNS and SNS may op-
erate to preserve the baseline functional state of an organ or system
(Berntson et al., 1991). The results of our study suggest that coactiva-
tion, as reﬂected in RSA increases and PEP decreases in response to
challenge reﬂects a maladaptive ANS response and is linked to poorer
developmental outcome. These results support previous ﬁndings that
PNS activation (i.e., RSA increase) in response to stress is associated
with impaired emotion regulation (e.g. Suurland et al., 2016). In case of
increases in RSA accompanied by decreases in PEP in response to stress.
the PNS continues to exert its inhibitory inﬂuence on the SNS and sti-
mulates the body into a calm state, thereby prohibiting an active stress
response. Interpreted within the framework of biological susceptibility
to context (Boyce & Ellis, 2005), this pattern of stress responsivity may
reﬂect infants’ conditional adaptation to a stressful prenatal and early
postnatal environment. Moreover, in adverse early postnatal environ-
ments patterns of coactivation may lead to consolidation of less adap-
tive emotion regulation strategies contributing to higher levels of ag-
gression, even more so because in these environments it may be more
adaptive for children to act aggressively (i.e., to get what they want, or
to get attention from others).

The current study did not provide empirical support for previous
ﬁndings indicating that coinhibition of the PNS and SNS, as reﬂected by
RSA decreases and PEP increases, also acts as a vulnerability factor for
externalizing behavior problems (El-Sheikh et al., 2009; Gordis et al.,
2010). It should be noted that these results were obtained in older
children exposed to adversity compared to the infants/toddlers in our
study. It is possible that coinhibition acts as a biomarker for aggression
only later in development, for example after more prolonged exposure
to adverse, threatening or stressful situations.
Contrary to our expectations, RSA and PEP recovery did not mod-
erate the impact of prenatal adversity on physical aggression. It is
possible that for the majority of infants the recovery period was not
long enough to recover from the emotional challenge/stress.
Consequently, variance in the RSA and PEP recovery variables was
insuﬃcient to reveal eﬀects on physical aggression. The SFP showed no
RSA and PEP recovery, whilst the CS showed a decrease in RSA and an
increases in PEP upon recovery, indicating SNS recovery but no PNS
recovery on the CS. Few studies to date have addressed ANS recovery
from stress (see El-Sheikh & Erath, 2011). One study in adolescents
linked blunted SNS recovery to more antisocial behavior (Sijtsema, Van
Roon, Groot, & Riese, 2015). Another study in 4–7 year-old children
showed that lower vagal recovery was associated with maladaptive
emotion regulation strategies to frustration (Santucci et al., 2008). To
our knowledge, no other previous studies have examined the associa-
tion between ANS recovery and outcome in young children, underlining
the importance of studying ANS recovery measures in future research.
Recent literature has suggested that measures of heart rate varia-
bility (HRV), including RSA, should be considered together with, or
adjusted for, HR because of signiﬁcant overlap between measures of
HRV and HR (e.g. Monfredi et al., 2014). There is no consensus as yet
on whether HR corrections should be applied or not. Some researchers
have noted that correcting HRV measures for HR may be especially
important in study populations of young children with a large age range
in which growth is likely to have a substantial impact on structural and
morphological changes of the heart (Herzig et al., 2017). We in-
vestigated the relation between HR and RSA in our study in additional
analyses reported in the Supplementary materials. In line with Herzig
et al. (2017), we found a strong and signiﬁcant linear correlation be-
tween HR and RSA in response to and during recovery from stress.
However, adjusting for HR in the regression models did not aﬀect our
results, which is consistent with the restricted age range of our study
population. In addition, physical aggression could not be predicted
from the interaction between cumulative risk and HR alone, suggesting
that it is important to examine speciﬁc indicators of PNS and SNS ac-
tivity and their interaction with cumulative risk in order to gain more
insight into which children are more at risk of developing physical
aggression.

The ﬁndings of this study provide insight into the mechanisms by
which prenatal adversity interacts with biological susceptibilities to
explain early aggression. However, it is unknown to which extent early
adversity has already exerted its inﬂuence on the ANS earlier in de-
velopment, in utero and the ﬁrst six months of life, and thus inﬂuenced
this early biological susceptibility for aggression. In the present study,
cumulative risk was not related to RSA and PEP activity. However, as
noted by Boyce (Boyce, 2016), biology x environment interactions are
probably ‘both the originating source and the functional mechanism’ of
biological susceptibility to early environments. Future studies should
therefore consider both mediating and moderating processes in the
study of early adversity, biology and developmental outcomes.

Although this study has some important strengths, including the
longitudinal design, the use of speciﬁc measures of both PNS and SNS
activity, and two diﬀerent stress tasks, there are also limitations that
should be discussed. First, the range of cumulative risk was somewhat
restricted, with 42% having one or more risk factors, but only 6%
having three risk factors, which may limit the generalizability of our
results to samples with higher levels of risk. Another limitation is the
reliance on maternal reports of physical aggression. Although the
PASEC has shown suﬃcient validity and reliability in earlier studies,
future studies should use multiple informants and methods including
behavioral observations of early physical aggression.

The ﬁrst signs of aggression can already be observed in the ﬁrst year
of life (Hay et al., 2011). Although higher rates of aggression are
common around age two (Alink et al., 2006), children who show high
levels of aggression as toddlers are at risk for severe and persistent
aggressiveness over the course of childhood (Côté et al., 2006; NICHD
Early Child Care Research Network, 2004). Understanding the biolo-
gical mechanisms underlying the earliest forms of aggression is of cri-
tical importance, particularly because the ANS still undergoes strong
development in the ﬁrst years of life, which may also render it more
malleable and a good target for intervention programs (Beauchaine
et al., 2008). Our ﬁndings underline the importance of studying pat-
terns of stress reactivity across systems, speciﬁcally their interplay, in
interaction with adversity during the prenatal period. The results of this
study show that coactivation of the PNS and SNS in response to stress
may be a biological marker that, already by 6 months of age, increases
vulnerability for aggression during toddlerhood. Future studies of how
patterns of coactivation develop and whether these can be inﬂuenced
by intervention are necessary.

Acknowledgements
