

1. Introduction

Obstructive Sleep Apnea is a common prevalent disorder which is
associated with increased cardiovascular morbidities and mortality,
metabolic dysfunction and neurocognitive impairments [1]. With the
progress of OSA, patients will suﬀer from daytime sleepiness, depres-
sion, decline in memory, emotional disorders, cognitive loss, decline in
the ability of language understanding and expressing [2]. Intermittent
hypoxia (IH), as one of the major pathophysiological changes of OSA,
plays a signiﬁcant role in the processing of OSA [3]. Exposure to IH is
associated with neurodegenerative changes in addition to alterations in
brain regions and neurotransmitter systems involved in learning and
memory, attention, and locomotor activity. Multiple pathophysiological
processes appear to be involved in the mechanistic aspects of the be-
havioral and neuronal susceptibility to IH, and include pathways
leading to increased oxidative stress and inﬂammation, altered gene
regulation, and decreases in the cellular and molecular substrates of
synaptic plasticity [4]. In addition, both environmental and genetic
factors modulate the end-organ susceptibility to IH-induced cognitive
dysfunction. Collectively, the available data indicated that the cognitive
impairment could be the consequence of IH in the brain [5].

MicroRNA (miRNA) which is the endogenous non-coding single-
stranded small molecule RNA has the capacity for blocking a number of
target genes and suppressing their translation [6]. Research on stroke
and brain injury found that regulating miRNA expression in brain could
alleviate the neuronal apoptosis and improve neurobehavioral func-
tions [7–9]. Thus intervening the target genes through up/down-reg-
ulating the expression of target miRNA could be a potential way to
protect from cognitive impairment after IH. It is important to analyse
the miRNA expression in rat hippocampus after chronic intermittent
hypoxia. As far as we know, miRNA expression in rat hippocampus after
IH has not been reported yet. In our study, we investigate the micro-
array based analysis of microRNA expression proﬁling in rat hippo-
campus after IH which could lay some foundation for future study of the
miRNA functional mechanism involved in the complex course of OSA-
reduced cognitive impairment.

<Middle> Materials and methods.
2.1. Animal model of intermittent hypoxia.
Animal care and experiments were conducted in accordance with
the Policy of Animal Care and Use Committee of Tianjin Medical
University. Male Sprague-Dawley rats (weight 280–300 g, 3 month-old)
were purchased from the Department Of Laboratory Animal Science
(Peking University Health Science Center). The animals were housed on
a 12-h light/dark cycle in a temperature controlled animal facility with
food and water available ad libitum. Animals were divided into four
groups (n = 12/group) for microarray, RT-PCR and western blot, in-
cluding control (normoxia) group, IH 1 week group, IH 2 weeks group
and IH 4 weeks group. Furthermore, we added 32 rats to detect spatial
learning and memory by MWM after IH 2 weeks and 4 weeks. Rats
underwent intermittent hypoxia (IH) at a rate of 30 cycles/h (nadir 5%
O2 to peak 21% O2 with 0% CO2), or room air breathing (control) in
the same plastic cage placed next to the cage equipped with the IH
apparatus for 8 h/d during the “light on” period of 12 h. In each cycle,
for the ﬁrst 30 s, the oxygen concentration inside was lowered to 5%
and maintained for 50 s, followed by an increase in the oxygen con-
centration to 21% for 40 s [10]. The IH rats were allowed free access to
food and water, while the amount of food for control rats was restricted
to adjust their average body weight comparable to that of the IH rats
every week.
2.2. Morris Water Maze test
The Morris Water Maze test was used to assess spatial reference
learning and memory in the animals. An escape platform (10 cm in
diameter) was positioned 1 cm below the water surface. Distinctive,
geometric, extramaze cues were affixed at specific locations and were
visible to the animals while in the maze. The spatial acquisition trial
was performed on 15–19 d and 29–33 d post-IH, and the reference
memory probe trail was conducted 24 h after the last spatial acquisition
training as previously reported [11]. Each spatial acquisition trial session
consisted of four trials separated by a 15 min inter-trial interval. In
each training trial, the rat was placed in the maze from a quasi-random
start point and allowed a maximum of 90 s to find the escape platform,
where it remained for 15 s. Rats that failed to locate the platform at the
end of 90 s were manually guided to the platform. On the day following
acquisition testing, memory retention was evaluated in a single 60-
sprobe trial in which the submerged platform was removed and the
animal released from the quadrant opposite the former platform-containing
quadrant. The entire procedure in the pool was monitored by a
tracking system (Ethovision 3.0, Noldus Information Technology, Wageningen,
Netherlands) to record the latency-time to reach the platform
and calculate the time spent in the goal quadrant and the average
swimming speed.
2.3. Tissue preparation
Rats were sacrificed by transcardiac perfusion with cold PBS to
eliminate the RNA and protein expressed by blood cells. Briefly, the
brain was dissected and the hippocampus was removed. The tissues
were then flash-frozen and stored in liquid nitrogen for subsequent RNA
examination and protein extraction [12].
2.4. Western blot
The protein concentrations were detected with Pierce BCA Protein
Assay Kit (Thermo, USA). According to the manufacture's protocol,
equal amounts of protein (50 μg) were separated by SDS-PAGE and
transferred onto PVDF membrance (Millipore, Bedford, MA). Then blots
were blocked by 5% nonfat milk dissolved in TBST for 2 h and incubated
overnight at 4 °C in the following primary antibodies: cleavage
caspase-3 (1:1000, Cell Signaling Technology), GAPDH (1:1000, Cell
Signaling Technology), Bcl-2 (1:1000, Cell Signaling Technology) and
Bax (1:1000, Cell Signaling Technology), all dissolved in TBST.
Subsequently, blots were washed 3 times by TBST and incubated with
second antibody HRP goa tanti-rabbit
(1:1000, Cell Signaling
Technology) for 1 h at room temperature. Protein bands were detected
with Immolilon Western chemiluminescent HRP substrate (Millipore,
USA). Chemiluminesence was imaged in a Molecular Imager Chemi
Doc™ XRS + WB with Image Lab™ software (Bio-Rad, CA, USA), and
band intensity was measured by Image J software.

2.5. MiRNA microarray analysis

We used Onearray (by Phalanx Biotech Group, china) to analysis the
miRNAs regulated after IH. MiRNAs were enriched from total RNA
extracted using a mirVana miRNA Isolation Kit and labeled with a
mirVana Array Labeling Kit (Ambion). The labeled miRNAs were used
for hybridization on each miRNA microarray, to determine the diﬀer-
ential expression of miRNAs. This procedure was repeated twice. Target
labeling, hybridization, imaging and data processing were performed at
Phalan Biotech according to the protocols described by the manu-
facturers using the Mouse & Rat miRNA OneArray Microarray and
Sanger miRBase 19. Data were acquired using Agilent Feature
Extraction software version 10.7. Further data analyses were performed
using GeneSpring GX 10.0.



2.6. RNA isolution and quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR)
The RNA was harvested from acquired tissues using TRIzol reagent
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) following the manufacturer's instruc-
tions. cDNA generation and RT-PCR was performed using Hairpin-itTM
miRNA/mRNA RT-PCR Quantitation kit
(GenePharma, Shanghai,
China). All PCR reactions were performed using standard PCR condi-
tions. U6 served as the internal control for miR-26b and miR-207, and
the primer sequences showed in Table 1. The cycle threshold (Ct value)
was acquired using the Opticon Monitor Analysis Software (MJ Re-
search, St. Bruno, Quebec, Canada). The data were analyzed using the
2−△△Ct method, in which the RNA levels of the normoxia group were
used as controls.

2.7. Statistical analysis

The data are expressed as mean ± SD. Statistical analysis was
performed with SPSS19.0 and GraphPad Prism 5. Data from the spatial
acquisition trial of the MWM test were analyzed using repeated mea-
sures ANOVA. For other data, statistical comparisons were analyzed
using a one-way ANOVA followed by a LSD post hoc analysis. When p
values were less than 0.05, statistical signiﬁcance was considered.

3. Results

3.1. MWM tasks for spatial memory and learning performance

We assessed the eﬀects of IH exposure on spatial memory and
learning performance in these rats using Morris water maze tasks. As
shown in Fig. 1, the results of the escape latency of the tested animals to
IH signiﬁcantly increased the escape latency on the last four training
days (days 16–19 and 30–33) in comparison to the control group
(*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01). This ﬁnding indicates that exposure to IH
negatively aﬀects task performance in comparison to the control ani-
mals post-IH 2 and 4 weeks. For the swimming speed, our results re-
vealed that there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence among the IH and con-
trol group. These results indicate that there was no eﬀect of IH at the
tested doses on the motor activity of the animals. The percentage of
time spent in the target quadrant diﬀered signiﬁcantly between the IH
group and control group (p = 0.0331 for 2 W, p = 0.0231 for 4 W).

3.2. Western blot for the expression of markers for apoptosis

Since the IH induced memory and learning dysfunction was mostly
hippocampus-dependent, we investigated the apoptosis and anti-apop-
tosis proteins in the rat hippocampus after IH. The expression levels of
Bcl-2, Bax and Cleaved Caspase-3 in hippocampus after IH injury were
detected by the western blot assay. Our results showed that the ex-
pression level of Bax (P < 0.0001) and Cleaved Caspase-3 (P = 0.005)
were increased, while the expression level of Bcl2 (P < 0.0001) was
decreased after IH injury (Figs. 2–3). These data suggest that IH in-
creases the apoptosis in the rat hippocampus.

3.3. Total RNA quality

The purity of RNA was detected by ultraviolet spectrophotometer in
the ration of the readings at 260 nm and 280 nm (A260/A280). A ratio
of absorbances at 260 nm and 280 nm (A260/A280) more than 1.8 is
usually considered an acceptable indicator of RNA purity which in-
dicates that there is no detectable protein contamination of the RNA
sample. A ratio of absorbances at 260 nm and 230 nm (A260/A230)

greater than 1.5 indicates that there is no detectable other organics in
the RNA sample. The assessment of RNA Integrity Number (RIN) which
the ratio of 18 s to 28 s rRNA not less than 5 indicates the sample can be
used to detect. The results showed that the A260/A280 ratio was in the
range of 1.8–2.0, the A260/A230 ration was in the range of 2.3–2.4,
and the RIN ration was in the range of 7.7–8.6, which indicated that the
purity and integrity of RNA extracted from rat brain hippocampus
tissue met the requirements for the following microarray experiments.

3.4. Diﬀerences in the distribution of gene probe and microarray analysis

Volcano plot revealed the diﬀerences in the distribution of gene
probe in diﬀerent groups (Fig. 4). As we used a single channel to scan
the array, the data we got from each group should be compared with
the data of sham group to discover the diﬀerent expression of miRNAs.
Each point represents a gene probe, plots by log2 |Fold change| on the
horizontal axis represents fold change and the negative log10(P-value)
on the vertical axis represents signiﬁcance of diﬀerence. The red and
green dotted line respectively represents P-value and fold-change
threshold screening. We set the threshold screening of diﬀerential genes
log2 |Fold change| ≥ 0.585 and p-value < 0.05. Our result revealed
that 15 miRNAs were up-regulated and 46 miRNAs were down-regu-
lated after IH 1 week, 5 miRNAs were up-regulated and 14 miRNAs
were down-regulated after IH 2 weeks, and 10 miRNAs were up-regu-
lated with 14 miRNAs were down-regulated after IH 4 weeks (Fig. 5).
From the array date, we found that the expression of miR-26b-5p and
miR-148b-3p were up-regulated at all the three time points (1w, 2w,
4w) post IH. The ratio of global up-regulation miR-26b and miR-148b-
3p against sham group were 1.06, 1.04, 0.95 and 0.75, 0.69, 0.72, re-
spectively. Furthermore, miR-1188-3p, miR-3102, miR-320-5p, miR-7a-
2-3p, miR-185-3p, miR-207, miR-3550, miR-3584-3p, miR-3594-3p,
miR-702-3p were down-regulated at all the three time points (1w, 2w,
4w) post IH. We used unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis to
further analyze gene which changed 1.5 fold, the results of array data
including control and IH groups were shown in Fig. 6.
3.5. qRT-PCR for miR-26b and miR-207

To verify the expression level of target miRNA post IH, we detected
the expression of miR-26b and miR-207 in hippocampus by qRT-PCR.
We detected these two miRNAs since they were changed signiﬁcantly
post-IH. The data showed that miR-26b was significantly up-regulated
(P =0.0016) and miR-207 was down-regulated (P<0.0001) post-IH
(Fig. 7). The expressions of miR-26b and miR-207 were consistent with
the results of microarray analysis.
<Conclusion> Discussion.
In this study, we tested the performance changes of rats suﬀered
from IH and investigated the expression of apoptosis and anti-apoptosis
proteins in rat hippocampus. Then we selected two miRNAs called miR-
26b and miR-207 through microarray analysis, which might be the
crucial genes in the process of OSA-induced cognitive dysfunction.

Multiple studies have shown that the OSA patients usually suﬀered
from IH injury, and can impair the performance of learning and
memory, which are most likely hippocampal-dependent [13]. In the rat
model of OSA, we found that IH treatment can impair the performance
of standard water maze tests. Consistent with this result, the expression
of apoptosis and anti-apoptosis proteins were changed in the rat hip-
pocampus which suﬀered from IH. All the results showed that the IH-
induced cognitive dysfunction might be connected with the changes in
hippocampus.

The process of changes in gene expression is like a “black box” in
brain injury, it is not only involved in changes in the signal pathway,
but also in complex changes in the three-dimensional network. The
brain injury could rapidly induce a number of gene expression [14], the
changes in the expression of upstream genes then contribute to the
expression changes in the downstream genes which could result in
global biochemical cascade followed by the brain function deteriorating
severely [15–17]. Based on the above background we hypothesize there
may be some target genes which could play crucial role in the cognitive
dysfunction caused by IH. It is foreseeable that in such a complicated
gene expression network, the role of implementing only a single gene
therapy in genetic intervention on the treatment of IH caused hippo-
campus injury will be limited, otherwise, methods which could be able
to intervene with the expression of many genes at the same time could
potentially improve the eﬃciency on the treatment of OSA-related
cognitive dysfunction. The objective of our research is to explore the
changes of miRNA expression level in the rat hippocampus after IH,
looking for the miRNAs which could involved in the consequences of
cognitive dysfunction. The expression level of miRNAs in hippocampus
after ischemia brain injury has been reported in a recent study [18].
However, it has not yet been determined whether miRNA expression is
altered in hippocampus after IH. Our research used the high throughput
gene expression research tool named miRNA microarrays to detect
some putative diﬀerential expression miRNAs after IH injury. At 1
week, 2 week, and 4 week time points post injury, respectively, the
expression of a set of miRNAs have been detected. The number of
miRNAs diﬀerentially expressed (including up-regulation and down-
regulation) and the time points when an animal was subjected to IH
injury have no apparent correlation. After data analysis, we found that
miR-26b showed a consistent high expression in the rat hippocampus at
three time points after experimental IH injury, while the expression of
miR-207 showed a consistent low expression at every time point of IH.
We presume that miR-26b and miR-207 could play some role in the
complex pathological process of IH induced cognitive dysfunction.

MiR-26b is down-regulated in various tumor types and may exhibit
tumor-suppressive activity during tumorigenesis,
including gastric
cancer, bladder tumor, breast cancer, osteosarcoma, lung cancer, and
hepatocellular carcinoma [19–22]. A research about hepatocellular
carcinoma revealed that down-regulated miR-26b expression, a
member of the mature miR-26 family, can promotes hepatocellular
carcinoma cell apoptosis by the induction of Bax and inactivation of
Bcl-2-related mitochondrial apoptotic signaling pathway [23]. A specific
spectrum of miRNAs, including miR-26, miR-27, miR-103, miR-
107, miR-181, miR-210, and miR-213, is induced in response to low
oxygen or via a hypoxia-inducible-factor-dependent mechanism [24].
Using genetic approaches, promoter-reporter assays, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation have validated a group of hypoxamirs, including
miR-24, miR-26, miR-103, miR-181, miR-210, and miR-213 [25]. These
studies revealed that miR-26 might be involved in the process of hypoxia.
Research indicates that hypoxia-inducible factor induces the
transcription of multiple hypoxamirs through binding to hypoxia responsive
elements in their respective promoters directly [26]. Hypoxiainducible
factor can bind directly and transactivate hypoxia responsive
elements in the promoters of miR-24-1, miR-26, and miR-181. Upregulated
miR-26 can increase hypoxia-inducible factor expression and
lead to break the homeostasis of mitochondria and apoptosis. In addition,
miR-26 has emerged as a key tumour suppressor in various cancers.
For example, miR-26 has been found to decrease in bladder and
breast cancer, oral squamous cell carcinoma, anaplastic carcinomas,
Burkitt lymphoma, hepatocellular carcinoma and rhabdomyosarcoma
[27]. MiR-26 can suppress the induction of many inflammation-related
cytokines, chemokine and tissue-remodelling genes via down-regulated
TNF-α/NF-κB signaling [28]. A microarray of study in the acute phase
of ischemic stroke revealed that miR-207 and miR-352 were mainly
down-regulated through the middle cerebral artery occlusion model.
The neurological deficit scores and infarct volumes were attenuated,
and the structure of mitochondria ridges was improved by lateral
ventricle injection with miR-207 agonist mimics. And the further study
revealed that miR-207 might play its protective effects through regulating
the lysosomal-associated membrane proteins, which is an important
organelle in autophagy. Nonetheless the mechanism of miR-207
affected the latter part of lysosomal-autophagy flux still obscure [29].
And other study suggested that miR-207 could modulate neurotrophins
signaling to anti-neurodegenerative [30] and suppressed cell apoptosis
in 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) insult [31]. These evidences suggested
that miR-26b and miR-207 might play important roles under
different conditions, and should be the target genes in the related diseases.
But the effect of miR-26b and miR-207 in the process of IH-induced
cognitive dysfunction and hippocampal protein apoptosis still
need to be further studied.
In the next stage, we will use animal models of OSA to investigate
the forward or reverse interference with the expression of miR-26b and
miR-207, e.g. delivery of pre-miRNA or knockdown of miRNA, to observe
its influence on the expression of the target gene of miR-26b and
miR-207, to compare with the outcome of IH-induced cognitive dysfunction,
and to investigate if their expression level changes could
improve or deteriorate the outcome of animals which were subjected to
intermittent hypoxia injury.

Acknowledgements
