
1. Introduction

Opioid peptides have a long history of involvement in pain, reward,
and learning and memory. Previous reports from our laboratory and
others have demonstrated that the general opioid antagonist naloxone,
impairs learning of many associative tasks such as delay conditioning,
operant lever-pressing behavior, fear conditioning, and trace eyeblink
conditioning [1–5]. In exploring the role for speciﬁc opioid receptors in
learning and memory, our laboratory has shown that antagonizing the
kappa-opioid receptor (KOR) impairs acquisition for the associative
paradigm whisker-trace eyeblink (WTEB) conditioning [6].

In WTEB conditioning a neutral conditioned stimulus (CS; Whisker
stimulation) is paired following a stimulus free trace interval with a
salient unconditioned stimulus that elicits an eye-blink (US; Eye shock).
This paradigm has been shown to be dependent on, and induce plasti-
city in primary somatosensory cortex (S1), a likely site for memory

storage [7–10]. Our subsequent studies exploring the role of KOR with
learning have demonstrated that either systemic or direct S1 KOR in-
hibition impairs WTEB acquisition [6]. Consistent with our ﬁndings,
many studies have shown that KOR modulation can alter learning on
various tasks such as inhibitory avoidance, spontaneous alternation,
water-maze, radial-arm-maze, and conditioned place aversion [11–15].
These studies have strongly suggested that KOR plays a prominent role
in mediating various types of learning.

KOR’s endogenous ligand and the most likely molecular trigger for
these eﬀects on learning is dynorphin. Dynorphin is synthesized from
the precursor peptide prodynorphin (PD), which is synthesized in ve-
sicles from the precursor preprodynorphin (PPD) [16]. Similar to KOR,
Dynorphin and its upstream precursors have been implicated in various
forms of learning. For instance, PD knockout mice exhibit enhanced
levels of freezing in a contextual fear conditioning task [17]. Likewise,
dynorphin knockout mice display reduced age-related deﬁcits in water
maze learning [18], while dynorphin injected directly into the hippo-
campus impairs water maze performance [19]. Although the speciﬁc
role of dynorphin and its precursors in learning appears to vary de-
pending upon the tasks, these studies collectively suggest that they play
a prominent role in the acquisition and consolidation of learning tasks.
Upon exploring the speciﬁc cell type expressing these peptides, it
has been demonstrated that the dynorphin precursor ligand PPD is
primarily found in Somatostatin-containing GABAergic interneurons
(SOM) within S1 [20]. These ﬁndings suggest that SOM interneurons
are a likely upstream cell of KOR activation in S1 with WTEB. SOMs are
a major subclass of interneurons in the central nervous system that
serve a variety of roles in various species. SOM cells represent a sig-
niﬁcant proportion of all inhibitory interneurons in the neocortex [21].
Additionally, this population of cells is localized in areas important for
learning and memory, such as the neocortex and hippocampus [22],
two brain regions critically involved in WTEB acquisition [8,23,24]. In
S1, tonically-active SOM cells serve to inhibit neuronal activity, as
optogenetic silencing SOM cells causes an increase in ﬁring of pyr-
amidal cells in the area. SOM cells in S1 also receive input from va-
soactive intestinal peptide (VIP)-containing inhibitory interneurons.
Interestingly, during active whisking, VIP-containing cells cause a de-
crease in SOM activity [25]. This process does not seem to require ac-
tive whisking by the animal as passive whisking will also instigate the
same mechanism via thalamic relays [26].

Similar to that observed with KOR modulation, studies have
strongly suggested a role for SOM cells in learning. Silencing SOM cells
in the hippocampus impairs acquisition of contextual-based fear
learning [27]. SOM cells are also disinhibited by VIP-containing in-
hibitory neurons during auditory discrimination [28]. This VIP disin-
hibition is similar to what is seen in S1 during active [25], or passive
whisking [26]. Additionally, SOM cells have been demonstrated to in-
crease in density within somatosensory cortex in a whisker associative
paradigm [29]. These studies suggest that neocortical SOM cells reg-
ulate learning processes. Furthermore, these studies along with those
mentioned above collectively suggest that neocortical SOM cells are
regulating learning through KOR modulation. However, the speciﬁc
role for neocortical SOM regulation of KOR activity with associative
learning has never been explored. To explore this molecular pathway
and its potential role with associative learning, the current study set out
to characterize the expression proﬁle of PD (Dynorphin’s precursor) in
S1 SOM interneurons during and immediately following WTEB acquisition.
<Middle> Methods.
2.1. Animals.
Three to six month old male C57BL/6 mice were bred in-house and
housed in same litter groups until surgery. After surgery they were
transferred to individual housing in standard (12” × 12” × 12”) la-
boratory cages. All mice were kept on a 12-h light-dark schedule (lights
on at 0700) in a temperature controlled room (∼21° C) and provided ad
libitum access to food and water. All procedures performed were re-
viewed and approved by the University of Illinois Animal Care and Use
Committee.

2.2. Surgery

Surgeries were performed as previously described [30]. Mice were
placed under ketamine (1 mg/kg i.p.) and xylazine (6 mg/kg i.p.) an-
esthesia. Once anesthetized, a headgear consisting of a plastic strip
connector with two Teﬂon-coated stainless steel wires and one un-
coated ground wire were secured to the skull via dental cement. Teﬂon-
coated wires from the headgear were fed under the skin to the peri-
orbital region of the eye, stripped to provide contact, and fastened to
the skin. A ground wire was tightly secured to a screw in the skull. All
mice were given a minimum of seven days to recover from surgery
before onset of training.

2.3. Behavioral training

Mice were placed into standard laboratory cages diﬀerent from their
home-cage in a sound- and light-attenuated chamber. All WTEB
training took place between 0900 and 1400. The headgear described in
the surgery section was connected to a tether that was connected to a
computer running a custom LabView program. The program delivered
both whisker and shock stimuli as well as monitored eyelid closure via a
camera attached to the tether. Whisker stimulation was delivered via
activation of a piezo-electric strip (Piezo Systems, Cambridge, MA) at-
tached to a comb that was situated directly in front of the whisker pad.
This allowed for precise control in stimuli presentation, timing and
delivery. For a complete description see Ref. [30]. One day prior to
training, mice were habituated to the tether and chamber for 10 min.
On training days, mice were conditioned as previously described [30].
A presentation of the CS (250 ms whisker stimulation) was paired with
a US (100 ms periorbital shock, 0.1–0.5 mA square wave shock, 60 Hz,
0.5 ms pulses). The US shock intensity was tailored to each mouse to
generate a detectable eye-blink response with minimal voltage. The CS
and US were separated by a 250 ms stimulus-free trace interval (Fig. 1).
Mice were presented with the CS-US pairings 30 times per session (day)
with an intertrial interval of 15–25 s (mean of 20 s). To monitor eyelid
closure a camera on the tether provided a live video feed of the eye that
was converted to a binary image in LabView in real time. Upon closure
of the eyelid, the size of the visible eye decreased indicating a blink
(Fig. 1). A conditioned response (CR) was deﬁned as a 4-standard de-
viation change in size of the eye binary image from baseline, occurring
after CS onset and within 20 ms prior to US onset (Fig. 1). Baseline was
deﬁned as the average size of the eye binary Image 60 ms prior to CS
onset for each trial. These settings are consistent with that used in other
laboratories conducting eyeblink analyses [31–33]. Mice received one
training session per day and were identiﬁed based on which stage in
acquiring the association they achieved. The stages were operationally
deﬁned as exhibiting three CRs out of ﬁve consecutive trials for the
acquisition group [ACQ; behaviorally deﬁned as C1 (one day before
behavioral criterion was achieved)], four CRs out of ﬁve consecutive
trials for the criterion group [CRIT; behaviorally deﬁned as C (the day
behavioral criterion was achieved)], and for the overtrained (OT) group
as exhibiting four CRs out of ﬁve consecutive trials for two consecutive
days [behaviorally deﬁned as C + 1 (one day after reaching behavioral
criterion)]. Previous studies from our laboratory have demonstrated
these behavioral points to be consistent with acquisition of the trace
association [5,6,34]. Pseudo-trained mice were provided 30 unpaired
presentations of the CS and US per day and yoked to an individual
trained mouse to control for stimulation induced plasticity unrelated to
learning. A cage control group (CC) was also used to establish diﬀer-
ences due to surgical procedures. Upon achieving the behavioral cri-
teria established for their group, mice were allowed to complete the
training session and then sacriﬁced after one hour.

2.4. Immunoﬂuorescence

For examining learning-induced changes in PD and SOM expression,
7 groups were utilized (CC, Pseudo-ACQ, Pseudo-CRIT, Pseudo-OT,
ACQ, CRIT, and OT). One hour after reaching their group speciﬁc be-
havioral criteria, mice were transcardially perfused with 0.1 M PBS and
4% paraformaldehyde. The brains were then collected and placed into
4% paraformaldehyde overnight at 4 °C and transferred to 30% sucrose
in 0.1 M PBS until sectioning. Brains were then coronally sectioned at
30 μm and stored in cryoprotectant (30% sucrose and 30% ethylene
glycol in 0.1 M PBS).

Proteins were visualized in the brain sections using a standard im-
munoﬂuorescence protocol. Three sections per mouse were taken
spanning S1. Previous work from our lab has found three sections per
mouse to be suﬃcient for ﬁnding signiﬁcant changes in WTEB induced
protein expression [35]. Additionally, three sections per mouse allowed
for establishing an average per mouse and conﬁrm minimal variance
within subjects. Free ﬂoating sections were washed in PBS, placed in
PBS+ (3% Normal goat serum and 0.5% Triton-x in PBS) for 30 min at
room temperature and then incubated for 2 days at 4 °C in a primary
antibody cocktail containing (anti-prodynorphin 1:250, made in rabbit,
and anti-somatostatin 1:50 made in guinea pig, AbCam, Cambridge,
MA). The sections were then washed in PBS+ and incubated for 2 h in a
secondary antibody cocktail (Goat-Anti-Rabbit AlexaFluor 488 1:100,
Goat-Anti-Guinea Pig AlexaFluor 633 1:100; Fisher Scientiﬁc) at room
temperature. The sections were then placed into a DAPI solution
(300 nM; Fisher Scientiﬁc) at room temperature for 5 min before being
dipped in PBS followed by ddH20 and mounted on slides with Prolong
Diamond mounting medium (Fisher Scientiﬁc).

2.5. Imaging

Slides were imaged using LSM700 (Zeiss Confocal, 40× magniﬁ-
cation) at the University of Illinois Institute for Genomic Biology. S1
was localized within each section using the DAPI cellular stain and atlas
images [36]. Once identiﬁed the brain sections were excited with lasers
corresponding to the excitation frequency of DAPI and the secondary

antibodies (405 nm, 488 nm, 639 nm), using a consistent image slice
thickness of 0.9 μm to minimize detection of false positive co-expres-
sion. Three images (160 um × 160 um) were taken per section [medial
region (approximately layer 4), dorsal to the medial region (approxi-
mately layer 2), and ventral to the medial region (approximately layer
6)]. Acquired images were then analyzed for co-expression with ImageJ
software. Brieﬂy, staining for each channel (DAPI, PD, & SOM) was
localized with the ImageJ ‘ﬁnd maxima’ function. Once acquired ex-
pression quantiﬁcation and co-expression were then visually de-
termined by observers blind to the treatment groups per image. Note,
due to the method used these ﬁndings represent changes in cell density
or percentage of cells per unit area.

2.6. Statistics

A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to analyze co-
expression proﬁles between groups. In addition, a two-way ANOVA
with repeated measures and degrees of freedom adjusted via Kenward-
Rogers was used to analyze behavioral performance across successive
days with Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons.

3. Results

3.1. Behavioral

Mice trained on WTEB conditioning were found to have a signiﬁcant
overall eﬀect of group (Trace or Pseudo; ACQ, CRIT, OT) [F (5, 42.7)
= 22.59, p < 0.0001], criterion day (C2, C1, C, C + 1) [F (3, 70.4)
= 23.38, p < 0.0001], and a group by criterion day interaction [F (9,
63.6) = 8.33, p < 0.0001]. Post-hoc analyses to determine individual
diﬀerences demonstrated a signiﬁcant eﬀect between trace and their
yoked pseudo groups at ACQ, CRIT and OT behavioral time points.
These ﬁndings demonstrate that unlike the pseudo group, the trace
groups exhibited a sequential increase in acquisition for the trace as-
sociation (Fig. 2).

3.2. Somatostatin

For the immunoﬂuorescence analysis, there were no statistical
within subject diﬀerences across the three image sections; thus, for
subsequent analyses the three images were averaged to obtain a single
section average. The section averages were then averaged to obtain an
animal mean. Thus, each animal average is the mean of 9 images (3
images/section and 3 sections/mouse). DAPI was used to localize in-
dividual cells, providing sites for analysis of the other two cellular
markers, (PD and SOM) discussed below. There was a signiﬁcant in-
crease in DAPI+ cell density in the trace criterion group compared to
the cage control group (Fig. S1). Interestingly, the CRIT trace group also
exhibited a signiﬁcant increase in SOM+ cell density compared to all
other groups except the ACQ group (Fig. S2). As the current study did
not investigate the diﬀerences between glial and neuronal cells, it is
diﬃcult to determine the source of this increase in cellular expression.
To control for diﬀerences in cell density, subsequent analyses of the
number of somatostatin positive (SOM+) or prodynorphin positive (PD
+) cells were expressed as a percentage of the total number of DAPI+
cells. Using this analysis it was further determined that there were no
signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the percentage of DAPI+ cells that were SOM
+ between any groups (Fig. 3).

3.3. Prodynorphin

Analysis of prodynorphin demonstrated a signiﬁcant overall eﬀect
of the percent of PD+ per DAPI+ cells between groups [F (6, 18.9)
= 85.80, p < 0.0001], with post-hoc eﬀects demonstrating a sig-
niﬁcant increase in the percentage of PD+/DAPI+ cells in the trace
acquisition (32.10 ± 1.01), and criterion (30.77 ± 1.08) groups re-
lative to pseudo acquisition (13.43 ± 1.05), pseudo criterion
(11.29 ± 1.06), and cage controls (9.01 ± 1.07) (Fig. S4).

3.4. Prodynorphin and somatostatin

Our subsequent analysis of the number of SOM+ cells that were
also PD+ demonstrated, consistent with previous reports [20], that
90.85% of PD+ cells were SOM+ (Fig. 3). Based on this ﬁnding, we
further examined the percentage of SOM+ cells that were PD+ or PD-
in our training groups and found a signiﬁcant eﬀect of group on the
percentage of PD+/SOM+ cells [F (6, 19.8) = 35.97, p < 0.0001] as
well as an opposite eﬀect in PD-/SOM+ cells [F (6,19.3) = 24.94,
p < 0.0001] (Fig. 3). Post-hoc analyses further demonstrated that the
trace acquisition (57.52 ± 2.79) and the trace criterion
(54.82 ± 2.87) groups displayed a signiﬁcantly higher percentage of
PD+/SOM+ cells than pseudo acquisition (24.04 ± 2.84), pseudo
criterion (21.38 ± 2.86), and cage control (16.43 ± 2.86) groups
(Fig. 3). The percentage of PD-/SOM+ showed an inverse eﬀect, with
the
criterion
(41.57 ± 3.40) groups displaying a signiﬁcantly lower percentage
than
criterion
(74.23 ± 3.38), and cage control (82.05 ± 3.38) groups (Fig. 3).
There were no signiﬁcant diﬀerences noted in the OT groups relative to
their appropriate controls in either of these measures. These ﬁndings
suggest that this increase in PD in SOM neurons is a transient increase
that returns to control levels with overtraining.
<Conclusion> Discussion.
To explore the role of KOR on associative learning, the current study
set out to examine learning-induced upstream mechanisms mediating
KOR activation. In these studies, it was found that learning induces a
signiﬁcant transient increase in the percentage of neocortical SOM+
cells expressing the precursor peptide PD. Speciﬁcally, the current
studies found that the percentage of neocortical PD+/SOM+ cells
signiﬁcantly increased during acquisition and into consolidation of the
associative paradigm WTEB conditioning. Consistent with these ﬁnd-
ings, it was subsequently demonstrated that the percentage of neocor-
tical PD−/SOM+ cells decreased during these learning phases. These
ﬁndings, along with our additional analyses demonstrating that the
percentage of SOM+ cells remained constant with learning further
suggests that learning does not alter neocortical SOM expression but
rather PD expression within SOM+ cells. Interestingly, our subsequent
analyses of the percentage of neocortical PD+/SOM+ cells during
overtraining demonstrated a signiﬁcant reduction to pre-conditioning
expression levels. These ﬁndings further support a learning-induced
time-dependent neocortical regulation of neocortical PD expression in
SOM+ neurons.

Our previous ﬁndings have shown that neocortical KOR plays a
prominent role in facilitating acquisition and consolidation of the
forebrain dependent paradigm WTEB. Speciﬁcally, we have shown that
KOR antagonism can dramatically impair acquisition [6] while selec-
tive antagonism of the diﬀerent phases of KOR activation (driving ki-
nase or transcription factor activation) can independently impair either
acquisition or consolidation of the association [37]. The current study
provides the ﬁrst examination of the endogenous mechanisms driving
this learning-induced KOR activation. KOR’s endogenous ligand, dy-
norphin, is derived from the precursor PD. Interestingly, studies have
shown that PD’s precursor, PPD in somatosensory cortex is pre-
dominately expressed in SOM+ cells [20]. Our ﬁndings are consistent
with these ﬁndings as 90.85% of PD containing cells were also found to
express SOM. Interestingly our subsequent ﬁndings demonstrating that
KOR activation plays a transient role in neocortical learning is also
consistent with our previous study demonstrating that diﬀerent phases
of KOR activation facilitate diﬀerent phases of learning [37]. Further-
more, these ﬁndings are consistent with previous studies from our lab
[34] demonstrating that learning results in a neocortical synaptic re-
organization that returns to pre-conditioning levels with overtraining.
Collectively these studies provide a comprehensive time-dependent,
cell-speciﬁc understanding of a neocortical mechanism mediating as-
sociative learning.

Consistent with our ﬁndings, others have found that learning can
alter neocortical SOM expression. Cybulska-Klosowicz et al., found that
the number of SOM+ cells was increased within layer IV neocortical
whisker barrels 24 h following a three-day conditioning procedure
[29]. While the current study demonstrated this increase in SOM+ cell
expression, it was not signiﬁcant when the subsequent DAPI+ increase
was taken into account. It is important to note that the current study did
not investigate neuronal vs glial expression, therefore it is diﬃcult to
ascertain the cell type speciﬁcity for the increased SOM or DAPI ex-
pression. Additionally, unlike the current study, Cybulska-Klosowicz
and coworkers utilized a delay learning paradigm, where whisker sti-
mulation was paired and co-terminated with a tail rather than peri-
orbital shock US. Further studies would be needed to determine if these
diﬀerences were the cause for the increased SOM expression and if this
could then alter KOR activation. Interestingly in addition this dis-
crepancy, others have found that PD knockout mice exhibit heightened
freezing following fear conditioning [17]. Furthermore, hippocampal
CA3 dynorphin injections impair water maze conditioning escape la-
tency, but not retention performance [19]. Although these studies ap-
pear to contradict the current ﬁndings, the analyses by Bilkei-Gorzo
et al. [17] were conducted with genetic knockout mice that could have
abnormal neuronal development due to the absence of the gene from
utero. Furthermore, Sandin et al. [19] explored the role of dynorphin in
the CA3 region of the hippocampus, while the current study explored
dynorphin’s precursor in S1, making it diﬃcult to draw a direct com-
parison between the two studies. Future studies would be needed to
better understand these possible diﬀerences and more fully elucidate
the process by which this mechanism is capable of modulating acqui-
sition and memory consolidation for diﬀerent learning paradigms in
diﬀerent brain regions.

We should note, although our ﬁndings that PD+/SOM+ expression
increases during learning is novel and greatly adds to our under-
standing of KOR in associative learning, one must be cautions regarding
the global implications of these ﬁndings. The current study focused on
PD expression during a speciﬁc associative learning paradigm in a
single neocortical brain region. PD expression in other brain regions
during diﬀerent learning paradigms has not been explored and should
be a focus for subsequent studies. Furthermore, while we were able to
detect a transient increase in the percentage of PD+/SOM+ cells with
learning, it would be of interest for future studies to utilize a higher

temporal resolution in exploring the time- and learning-dependent
neocortical mechanism mediating task acquisition and memory con-
solidation.

The current study identiﬁed a possible upstream driver of neocor-
tical KOR regulation with associative learning in S1. Interestingly, the
transient increase in PD+/SOM+ cells suggests that there is an in-
crease in PD synthesis in cells that were otherwise relatively dormant
prior to the learning event. Furthermore, the fact that this increased
expression returns to baseline with overtraining further solidiﬁes the
time dependency of this process. In the growing ﬁeld of KOR mediated
learning, the current study identiﬁes an important upstream component
that can be used to better understand the mechanisms by which we
form associations.


References

