
INTRODUCTION

Sleep is among the most basic needs of living organisms, yet
mechanisms that regulate sleep remain poorly understood.
Several neuropeptides have been implicated in regulating
mammalian sleep [1], including hypocretin [2–4], which pro-
motes wakefulness, and galanin [5–8] and melanin-concen-
trating hormone [9–12], which promote sleep, suggesting that
examining additional neuropeptides may identify novel mecha-
nisms that regulate sleep. Identifying these mechanisms using
mammalian models has been challenging due to their poor
amenability for large-scale screens, although such screens are
possible [13]. As an alternative approach, several groups have
used behavioral criteria to study sleep-like states in simpler
model organisms that are amenable to screens,
including
Drosophila [14–22], C. elegans [23–25], and zebraﬁsh [26–30].
In particular, several groups have demonstrated behavioral,
anatomical, genetic, and pharmacological conservation of sleep
between zebraﬁsh and mammals, establishing zebraﬁsh as a
vertebrate sleep model [26–28, 30–33]. We previously described
a screen for genes whose overexpression affects zebraﬁsh
sleep, and reported that the neuropeptide neuromedin U is
necessary and sufﬁcient for normal levels of arousal [29]. Here
we demonstrate that another neuropeptide identiﬁed in the
screen, neuropeptide Y (NPY), is necessary for daytime sleep
and sufﬁcient to promote sleep.
NPY is widely expressed in the brain and has been implicated
in regulating endocrine, behavioral, and circadian processes
[34], and is perhaps best known for its role in promoting feeding
[35–38]. NPY has also been shown to affect sleep, but its role in
this behavioral state remains unclear. Several studies have
shown that injection of in vitro-synthesized NPY into the
rodent brain [39–45] or intravenously into young healthy [46] or
depressed [47] humans can induce sleep or reduce locomotor
activity. However, other rodent studies reported the opposite ef-
fect [48–50]. The basis for these disparate reports is unclear, but
may be due to different sites and doses of NPY injection, or the
use of in vitro-synthesized peptide that may vary in different
preparations and from endogenous NPY. Understanding the
role of NPY in mammalian sleep is also confounded by links
between mechanisms that regulate feeding and sleep [48–51].
Indeed,
reports of wake promotion by injected NPY also
observed increased feeding [48–50], suggesting that
the
increased wakefulness may result
from increased feeding.
npy mutant mice exhibit several phenotypes, including increased
anxiety, depression-like behavior, and cognitive deﬁcits [52, 53],
and are less susceptible to diet-induced obesity [54]. However,
an analysis of sleep in these animals and a role for npy-express-
ing neurons in sleep have not been described. As a result, the
role of NPY in vertebrate sleep remains unclear.

Here we show that NPY is sufﬁcient to promote sleep in zebra-
ﬁsh, whereas loss of npy or npy-expressing neurons results in
less daytime sleep. We also show that NPY promotes sleep by
inhibiting the wake-promoting noradrenergic system, providing
a mechanistic basis for sleep regulation by NPY. Together with
the requirement of noradrenergic signaling for the wake-promot-
ing function of hypocretin [55, 56], these results suggest that the
noradrenergic system integrates neuropeptidergic signals that
regulate sleep/wake states.

<Middle> RESULTS.
Overexpression of Human NPY Reduces Locomotor
Activity and Increases Sleep in Zebraﬁsh
We previously performed a screen to identify genes that affect
larval zebraﬁsh sleep [29]. We injected >1,200 unique plasmids
in which a heat shock-inducible promoter (hsp) regulates the
expression of genes that encode for secreted proteins into
wild-type (WT) zebraﬁsh embryos at the one-cell stage. We
used human open reading frames (ORFs) encoding secreted
proteins from the hORFeome v3.1 library [57] because there
was no resource of zebraﬁsh ORFs. Co-injection of each plasmid
with tol2 transposase mRNA resulted in incorporation of the hsp-
regulated transgene into the genome in many cells of each ani-
mal and enabled heat shock-induced overexpression [29]. We
then compared sleep/wake behaviors in injected animals before
and after heat shock and to negative control animals injected
with an hsp:egfp plasmid. One gene whose overexpression
increased sleep at night (Z score 1.8) encoded human NPY (Fig-
ure S1A). Even though zebraﬁsh exhibit high levels of sleep at
night, NPY-overexpressing animals were 28% less active and
slept 34% more than control animals during the night after
heat shock (p < 0.05 and p < 0.01, two-tailed Student’s t test)
(Figures S1B–S1G). We observed a similar phenotype during
the day before heat shock that did not reach statistical signiﬁ-
cance, consistent with leaky expression from hsp that often is
observed using this transient injection assay, but is not observed
using stable transgenic lines [29].

Overexpression of Zebraﬁsh NPY Reduces Locomotor
Activity and Increases Sleep in Zebraﬁsh
Using reciprocal BLAST searches, we identiﬁed a single zebraﬁsh
npy ortholog, which encodes for a preproprotein that generates a
predicted 36-amino acid mature peptide that is 89% identical to
the human and mouse orthologs (Figure S1H). npy is widely ex-
pressed in the mammalian brain, particularly in the hypothalamus,
amygdala, locus coeruleus (LC), and cerebral cortex [58, 59]. Using
in situ hybridization (ISH) with an npy-speciﬁc probe, immunostain-
ing for total extracellular signal-regulated kinase (t-ERK), and im-
age registration to the Z-Brain atlas [60], we found that npy is simi-
larly expressed in several discrete nuclei within the larval zebraﬁsh
brain (Figures S1I–S1N; Movie S1). We also observed npy expres-
sion in the retina (data not shown) but not in other tissues.

To test whether overexpression of zebraﬁsh NPY affects
sleep, we generated Tg(hsp:npy) zebraﬁsh. Tg(hsp:npy) animals
and their WT siblings had similar amounts of locomotor activity
and sleep before heat shock (Figures 1A–1D). However,
following a heat shock at 3 p.m., Tg(hsp:npy) animals were
50% less active (Figures 1A and 1B) and slept 111% more (Fig-
ures 1C and 1D) than their WT siblings for the rest of the day
(p < 0.0001, two-tailed Student’s t test). The phenotype resulted
from a 230% increase in the number of sleep bouts (Figure 1E)
and an 85% decrease in the length of wake bouts (Figure 1G)
(p < 0.0001, two-tailed Student’s t test), with a smaller decrease
in the length of sleep bouts (Figure 1F), and thus is primarily due
to fragmentation of the wake state.

The increase in sleep after the heat shock-induced pulse of
NPY overexpression dampened by nighttime. A previous study
showed that the circadian system inhibits sleep in the evening,

when homeostatic sleep drive is high [61], suggesting that the
circadian system might limit NPY overexpression-induced sleep
to the day. To test whether NPY overexpression can also increase
sleep at night, we heat shocked animals during the last hour of the
day. We found that Tg(hsp:npy) animals were 46% less active
(Figures S2A–S2C) and slept 54% more (Figures S2D–S2F)
than their WT siblings during the night (p < 0.0001, two-tailed Stu-
dent’s t test), similar to the daytime phenotype when NPY overex-
pression was induced in the afternoon. This phenotype was due
to longer sleep bouts (Figure S2H) and shorter wake bouts (Fig-
ure S2J), with no change in the number of sleep bouts (Fig-
ure S2G). These results suggest that dampening of NPY-induced
sleep at night following heat shock in the afternoon is due to
declining levels of NPY rather than effects of the circadian clock.
Light affects locomotor activity and sleep in zebraﬁsh [27, 28],
as it does in mammals [62]. To determine whether light affects
NPY overexpression-induced sleep, we entrained larvae by
raising them in 14:10-hr light:dark (LD) conditions for 4 days,
and then transferred them to constant dark before inducing
NPY overexpression. NPY-overexpressing animals were 54%
less active and slept 80% more than WT siblings during the rest
of the subjective day (Figures S2K–S2N) (p < 0.0001, two-tailed
Student’s t test). This phenotype was due to more sleep bouts
and shorter wake bouts, with no change in the length of sleep
bouts (Figures S2O–S2Q). Hence, NPY overexpression promotes
sleep independent of lighting condition and circadian phase.

Overexpression of NPY Increases Arousal Threshold
Sleep is distinguished from quiet wakefulness by reduced
sensory responsiveness [63]. Because NPY overexpression in-
creases sleep, we asked whether it also alters arousal threshold
by monitoring responses to mechano-acoustic stimuli. We found
that the stimulus intensity at which we observed the half-
maximal response (effective tap power 50; ETP50) was 290%
higher for Tg(hsp:npy) animals than their WT siblings (Figure 1H)
(p < 0.05 by extra sum-of-squares F test). Thus, NPY overex-
pression increases arousal threshold, consistent with increased
sleep. We next asked whether NPY overexpression affects
arousal in awake and/or sleeping animals by allowing 5 min be-
tween trials. According to the behavioral deﬁnition of sleep, we
scored animals as awake if they moved during the minute before
a stimulus was delivered. We used stimulus intensities of 2.3,
3.0, and 4.0 arbitrary units, which were lower than the ETP50
values of both Tg(hsp:npy) and WT animals. NPY-overexpress-
ing animals were less responsive to these stimuli than WT sib-
lings during both awake (Figure 1I) and sleep (Figure 1J) states.
These data suggest that NPY overexpression decreases arousal
in awake animals and increases sleep depth in sleeping animals.

npy Mutant Zebraﬁsh Are More Active and Sleep Less
during the Day
We next asked whether endogenous npy is required for normal
sleep/wake behaviors by using the zinc ﬁnger nuclease method
to generate zebraﬁsh containing a predicted null mutation in the
npy ORF [64]. We isolated zebraﬁsh containing a 17 nt deletion
in the second exon of the npy gene [64], which results in a trans-
lational frameshift at the beginning of the mature peptide domain
(Figure 2A), generating a protein that lacks the mature peptide
domain and thus is most likely nonfunctional. Homozygous
mutant animals are viable and fertile, and lack obvious develop-
mental defects.

Consistent with the NPY overexpression phenotype, npy
larvae were 23% more active and slept 36% less during the
day than their npy+/+ siblings (p < 0.0001 and p < 0.01, one-
way ANOVA, Holm-Sidak test) (Figures 2B, 2C, 2E, and 2F).
These effects were due to fewer sleep bouts (Figure 2H) and
longer wake bouts (Figure 2L), with no effect on the length of
 / 
sleep bouts (Figure 2J). Thus, reduced daytime sleep in npy
animals is due to consolidation of the wake state. We did not
phenotypes at night. These data indicate that
observe npy
endogenous npy is required for normal daytime sleep amounts.
Microinjection of NPY into the hamster suprachiasmatic
nucleus phase shifts the locomotor activity circadian rhythm in
constant light (LL) [65, 66], suggesting that NPY may regulate
entrainment or expression of circadian rhythms. To test whether
endogenous npy is required for circadian regulation of locomotor
activity and sleep, we tested larvae that were entrained for
4 days in LD, then monitored for 24 hr in LD and then for 48 hr
in LL. Absence of npy had no obvious effect on the locomotor
activity or sleep circadian period length or phase (Figures 3A
animals were more active
and 3D). As expected, in LD, npy
(Figures 3A and S3A) and slept less (Figures 3D and S3C) than
their npy+/+ and npy+/ 
siblings during the day, with no pheno-
type at night. The daytime phenotype was due to fewer sleep
bouts and longer wake bouts (Figures S3E and S3I). Following
animals were more active by 30% and
the shift to LL, npy
26% during the subjective day and night,
respectively,
compared to their npy+/+ siblings (p < 0.001 and p < 0.01, one-
larvae
way ANOVA, Holm-Sidak test) (Figures 3A–3C). npy
also slept 40% less during the subjective day and night
(p < 0.0001 and p < 0.001, one-way ANOVA, Holm-Sidak test)
(Figures 3D–3F). These phenotypes were primarily due to longer
wake bouts (Figures 3K and 3L), although there were also fewer
(Figures 3G and 3H) and shorter (Figures 3I and 3J) sleep bouts.
These results indicate that npy is not required for circadian regu-
lation of locomotor activity or sleep in zebraﬁsh larvae but rather
regulates sleep in a light-dependent manner.
Ablation of npy-Expressing Neurons Increases
Locomotor Activity and Decreases Sleep
As an alternative approach to test the hypothesis that NPY is
necessary for normal sleep duration, we ablated npy-expressing
neurons. To this end, we generated Tg(npy:kalta4) zebraﬁsh, in
which NPY neurons express an optimized version of the tran-
scriptional activator Gal4 (KalTA4). To verify the speciﬁcity of
this transgene, we performed double ﬂuorescence ISH (FISH)
using probes speciﬁc for npy and kalta4. We observed that kalta4
is expressed in >80% of npy-expressing neurons (>95% for
some brain regions), and that >92% of kalta4-expressing neu-
rons express npy (Figure S5A; Table S1). We mated these ﬁsh
to Tg(uas:nfsb-mcherry) animals [67], resulting in the expression
of nitroreductase (nfsb) in npy-expressing neurons (Figure 4A).

 / 

NFSB is a bacterial protein that converts the inert prodrug metro-
nidazole (MTZ) into a cytotoxic DNA-crosslinking agent, thus
enabling drug-inducible ablation of the targeted cell type [68].
We treated Tg(npy:kalta4);Tg(uas:nfsb-mcherry) and Tg(npy:
kalta4) sibling control animals with MTZ or DMSO vehicle control
for 48 hr (from 3 days post-fertilization [dpf] to 5 dpf). MTZ treat-
ment almost completely eliminated mCherry-labeled cells in
double-transgenic animals (Figures 4A–4C), indicating loss of
most npy-expressing neurons. Consistent with these observa-
tions, we detected TUNEL labeling in npy-expressing neurons
in Tg(npy:kalta4);Tg(uas:nfsb-mcherry) animals treated with
MTZ, but not in those treated with DMSO (Figures S5B–S5D),
indicating that MTZ treatment induces apoptosis of npy-ex-
phenotype, npy-
pressing neurons. Consistent with the npy
ablated animals were 23% more active (Figures 4C and 4D)
and slept 28% less (Figures 4F and 4G) (p < 0.01 and p < 0.05,
two-tailed Student’s t test) compared to sibling controls during
the day. This phenotype was due to fewer sleep bouts (Figure 4I)
and longer wake bouts (Figure 4M), indicating consolidation of
animals. To conﬁrm that the
the wake state, similar to npy
Tg(uas:nfsb-mcherry) transgene alone does not cause a behav-
ioral phenotype, we crossed Tg(npy:kalta4)/+;Tg(uas:nfsb-
mcherry)/+ to WT ﬁsh, excluded animals that were positive for
mCherry, and treated the remaining animals with MTZ. We
observed no difference in locomotor activity or sleep among an-
imals of these three genotypes (Figure S4). The cell ablation
phenotype was slightly weaker than that of the npy mutant,
most likely because the npy:kalta4 transgene is not expressed
in all npy-expressing neurons. Because a small number of neu-
rons express kalta4 but not npy in some brain regions (8% in
the subpallium, <5% in other brain regions; Figure S5A;
Table S1), it is possible that ablation of these NPY-negative cells
is responsible for the behavioral phenotype. However, this is un-
likely to be the case, due to the small number of cells involved
and because the NPY neuron ablation phenotype is consistent
with the npy mutant phenotype, suggesting that both NPY and
npy-expressing neurons are necessary for normal daytime sleep
amount.

 / 

The NPY Overexpression Phenotype Is Not Blocked by
Manipulation of Several Pathways Known to Regulate
Sleep
To identify genetic mechanisms through which NPY affects
sleep, we tested whether the NPY overexpression phenotype
is suppressed in zebraﬁsh containing mutations in other genes
implicated in regulating sleep (Table S2). We found that the
NPY overexpression phenotype persisted in larvae containing
null mutations in histidine decarboxylase (hdc) [69], hypocretin
receptor (hcrtr) [27], corticotropin releasing hormone a (crha)
(C.S. and D.A.P., unpublished data), crhb (C.S. and D.A.P., un-
published data), or arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase 2 (aanat2)
[70] (data not shown). These data suggest that NPY promotes
sleep via other mechanisms.

NPY Promotes Sleep by Inhibiting Noradrenergic
Signaling
Pharmacological and genetic studies in mammals and zebraﬁsh
have shown that norepinephrine (NE) plays an important role in
promoting arousal [56, 71], and that the LC is the primary source
of NE in the brain [72].We obtained several lines of evidence suggesting
that NPY promotes sleep by inhibiting NE signaling. First,
a nucleus of 3–5 npy-expressing neurons is located adjacent to,
and sends projections that form close contacts with, LC neurons
(Figures 5A–5H; Movie S2). Although this does not prove a direct
interaction between the two neuronal populations, it is consistent
with our functional evidence that NPY promotes sleep by inhibiting
NE signaling (see below). The zebrafish genome contains
seven annotated npy receptor genes [73]. Using FISH, we did not
detect npy receptor expression in LC neurons, although we
observed expression of npy receptor y1 (npy1r) (Figure 5I) and
npy receptor y2 like (npy2rl) (Figure 5J) near the LC. The other
npy receptors showed expression in other brain regions (npy8ar
and npy8br) or no detectable pattern of expression (npy2r, npy4r,
and npy7r) (data not shown). These results suggest that NPY
indirectly affects NE signaling, although an npy receptor might
be expressed in LC neurons at levels too low to be detected us-
ing FISH, a common problem for G protein-coupled receptors
(GPCRs).

 / 

and dbh

Second, we found that the sedating effects of NPY overex-
pression and loss of NE signaling are not additive. We made
this observation by overexpressing NPY in larvae that lack NE
synthesis due to mutation of dopamine beta hydroxylase (dbh)
[56], or that lack NE signaling due to treatment with the a-1-
adrenergic receptor antagonist prazosin. Both genetic and phar-
macological inhibition of NE signaling increase sleep in zebraﬁsh
[56]. If NPY promotes sleep by inhibiting NE signaling, then overexpression of NPY should not further increase sleep in dbh
larvae or in WT larvae treated with prazosin. Alternatively, if
NPY promotes sleep via an NE-independent mechanism, then
the combined effects of NPY overexpression and loss of NE
signaling on sleep should be additive. Because the behavior of
dbh+/ 
animals is indistinguishable from that of their dbh+/+ sib-
lings [56], we compared dbh+/ 
siblings to reduce
the number of comparisons in each experiment, and thus in-
crease the number of animals per condition. Prior to heat
larvae were 40%
shock-induced NPY overexpression, dbh
less active and slept >100% more than their dbh+/ 
siblings for
both Tg(hsp:npy) animals and their non-transgenic siblings (Fig-
ures 6A–6D)
(p < 0.01, two-way ANOVA, Holm-Sidak test).
NPY overexpression decreased locomotor activity by 54%
and increased sleep by 60% in Tg(hsp:npy);dbh+/ 
animals
compared to dbh+/ 
siblings (Figures 6A–6D) (p < 0.0001 and
p < 0.05, two-way ANOVA, Holm-Sidak test). However, overex-
pression of NPY did not further affect the sleep/wake behavior of
animals, as activity and sleep amounts were indistin-
dbh
animals (Figures
guishable for Tg(hsp:npy);dbh
6A–6D). We obtained similar results for NPY overexpression in
prazosin-treated animals compared to DMSO vehicle-treated
controls (Figures S6A–S6D). To conﬁrm that the failure of NPY
or prazosin-treated
overexpression to enhance sleep in dbh
animals is not due to a ceiling effect for sleep, we found that
treatment with melatonin, an alternative sedative, enhanced
sleep induced by overexpression of NPY (Figures S7A–S7D) or
prazosin (Figures S7E–S7H).
Third, we found that the increased locomotor activity and
animals compared to their
reduced sleep observed in npy
npy+/+ siblings were abolished by treatment with prazosin. We
 / 
made this observation by treating npy+/+, npy+/ 
larvae with either DMSO or prazosin. If NPY promotes sleep
by inhibiting NE signaling, then loss of NPY should not affect

, and npy

prasozin-induced sleep. Alternatively, if NPY promotes sleep
via an NE-independent mechanism, then loss of NPY should
affect sleep amount in prazosin-treated animals. Consistent
with the former possibility, we found that prazosin decreased ac-
tivity and increased sleep, and this phenotype was indistinguish-
able for npy+/+, npy+/ 

siblings (Figures 6E–6J).

, and npy

 / 

Fourth, we found that NPY regulates dbh expression in the LC.
NPY overexpression decreased dbh mRNA in the LC by 38% at
3 hr post-heat shock in Tg(hsp:npy) animals compared to WT
siblings (p < 0.05, two-tailed Student’s t test) (Figures 7A and
7D). This time point coincides with the maximal effect of NPY
overexpression on locomotor activity and sleep (Figures 1A
and 1C), suggesting that NPY overexpression-induced sleep
may result from reduced dbh expression, and thus reduced NE
levels. However, effects of NPY overexpression on behavior
begin within the ﬁrst hour after heat shock, and we only observed
a trend of decreased dbh mRNA at 1 and 2 hr post-heat shock
that was not statistically signiﬁcant (Figure 7D). These observa-
tions suggest that reduced dbh expression may not be the pri-
mary cause of NPY overexpression-induced sleep, but may
rather be a secondary effect that maintains NPY-induced sleep,
perhaps resulting from decreased LC neuron activity. We also
tested whether NPY overexpression affects the level of tyrosine
hydroxylase (th), which acts upstream of dbh in the NE synthesis
pathway. We found that NPY overexpression did not signiﬁcantly
change th mRNA expression in the LC at 1, 2, or 3 hr post-heat
shock (data not shown). Reduced dbh expression was not sim-
ply a consequence of increased sleep, as dbh mRNA level was
unaffected following overexpression of the sleep-promoting
neuropeptide prokineticin 2 (Prok2) [74] (Figure 7E) or treatment
with the sedative melatonin (Figure 7E). The interaction between
NPY and dbh appears to be speciﬁc, as NPY overexpression did
not affect expression of other genes involved in promoting
arousal, including the neuropeptides hcrt [28, 56] or adenylate
cyclase activating polypeptide 1a (adcyap1a) (C.S. and D.A.P.,
unpublished data) (Figures 7B, 7C, and 7E). These results indi-
cate that overexpression of NPY selectively decreases the level
of dbh mRNA in the LC, presumably resulting in decreased NE
levels and thus increased sleep. In support of this ﬁnding, we
observed that dbh mRNA level was 33% higher in the LC of
and npy+/+ siblings dur-
npy
ing the day (Figures 7F and 7G) (p < 0.05, one-way ANOVA,
Holm-Sidak test). Moreover, dbh mRNA level in the LC of WT an-
imals was 25% lower at night compared to the day (p < 0.05,
two-tailed Student’s t test) (Figure 7H). This result demonstrates
a correlation between the wake circadian phase of this diurnal
species and the level of dbh mRNA in the LC, and suggests
that changes in NE levels may contribute to the regulation of
normal sleep/wake states. Taken together, these results are

animals compared to their npy+/ 

 / 

0
consistent with a model in which NPY promotes sleep by inhibit-
ing NE signaling.

<Conclusion> DISCUSSION.
NPY has been shown to affect sleep in mammals, but its role in
sleep has been unclear. Infusion of NPY in rodents has been
reported to increase [39–45] or decrease [48–50] sleep. These
opposite effects may be due to different sites of injection or
dosage, or the use of in vitro-synthesized NPY that may lack
modiﬁcations present on endogenously produced peptide.
These studies are also confounded by other functions of NPY.
For example, experiments in rats found the wake-promoting ef-
fects of NPY to be associated with feeding behaviors [48–50],
and NPY can induce hypothermia [75] and increase social inter-
actions [76], which may affect sleep. In agreement with some
rodent studies, intravenous NPY injection promoted sleep in
both healthy [46] and depressed [47] humans. Reduced NPY
was observed in humans with major depression who report sleep
disturbances [77] and in humans with primary insomnia [78],
consistent with a sleep-promoting role for NPY. Reduced NPY
was also found in individuals with post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) [79], and could contribute to the insomnia and frag-
mented sleep experienced by these patients. npy-expressing
neurons are also implicated in mammalian sleep. For example,
GABAergic cortical interneurons co-expressing neuronal nitric
oxide synthase (nnos) and npy express c-fos, a marker of
neuronal activity, during sleep in rodents [80]. Furthermore,
extracellular single-unit activity in the basal forebrain of anesthe-
tized rats showed increased ﬁring of npy-expressing neurons
during slow-wave sleep [81].

To address the role of endogenous NPY in sleep, we per-
formed genetic gain- and loss-of-function studies using zebra-
ﬁsh larvae. These studies are performed before the onset of
feeding, when larvae receive nutrients from the yolk sac [82],
and before the onset of social interactions [83]. Furthermore,
because zebraﬁsh are poikilothermic, thermoregulation is un-
likely to be a factor in studies of zebraﬁsh sleep. Thus, zebraﬁsh
larvae allow the role of NPY in sleep to be addressed without the
complications of mammalian models. We found that overexpres-
sion of NPY suppresses locomotor activity and increases sleep
during the day and night, whereas npy mutant zebraﬁsh are
more active and sleep less during the day. Analysis of sleep ar-
chitecture revealed that NPY overexpression results in shorter
wake bouts, whereas npy mutants have longer wake bouts, sug-
gesting that NPY regulates consolidation of the wake state.
Consistent with this phenotype, ablation of npy-expressing neu-
rons resulted in decreased sleep during the day, again due to
longer wake bouts. The daytime speciﬁcity of the loss-of-func-
tion phenotype could be explained by the presence of redundant
sleep-promoting systems at night, the primary sleep phase of
zebraﬁsh. Consistent with our observations, overexpression in
Drosophila of neuropeptide F (NPF), a Drosophila homolog of
NPY, or its receptor NPFR1, promotes sleep [84], although
stimulation of NPF neurons was recently shown to promote
wakefulness and feeding [85]. This discrepancy could arise
from differences in nutritional status [85]. The Drosophila short
neuropeptide F (sNPF) is also thought to promote sleep [86]
and has been referred to as an NPY ortholog, but is more likely
an ortholog of vertebrate RFamide peptides [87]. In C. elegans,
locomotor quiescence during lethargus is abolished in mutants
lacking the receptor npr-1 and reduced in mutants lacking the
npr-1 ligands ﬂp-18 and ﬂp-21 [88]. npr-1 mutants are also
more responsive to oxygen and pheromones, resulting in altered
foraging and accelerated locomotion [89–91]. Whereas NPR-1 is
related to NPY receptors [92], FLP-18 and FLP-21 are more
similar to RFamide peptides [87, 93]. Combined with our results,
these studies establish NPY as a conserved sleep-promoting
neuropeptide, and the human studies described above suggest
this function is conserved in humans.

npy is widely expressed in the mammalian brain, particularly in
the hypothalamus, amygdala, LC, and cerebral cortex [58, 59].
Similar to mammals, NPY is expressed in several discrete brain
regions in zebraﬁsh larvae. Because of this broad expression
pattern, NPY could act via several known sleep/wake regulators.
First, npy-expressing neurons innervate hcrt-expressing neu-
rons, and NPY inhibits hcrt neurons in mouse brain slices [94].
Second, a hypothalamic population of npy-expressing neurons
project to the histaminergic tuberomammillary nucleus in ro-
dents [95]. Third, corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) impairs
sleep and enhances vigilance [96], and NPY enhances inhibitory
synaptic transmission in crh-expressing neurons in amygdala
brain slices [97]. Fourth, melatonin promotes sleep in diurnal ver-
tebrates, including humans [98], and application of NPY to rat pi-
neal explants increases melatonin production [99]. To determine
whether any of these pathways underlie the sleep-promoting ef-
fects of NPY, we tested whether the NPY overexpression pheno-
type is blocked in zebraﬁsh mutants in which these pathways are
affected but found this not to be the case. We also found that
NPY overexpression increased sleep in WT and melatonin-
treated animals to a similar extent. These observations suggest
that NPY does not affect sleep by modulating these pathways.
In contrast to these negative results, we made several obser-
vations suggesting that NPY promotes sleep by inhibiting NE
signaling. Pharmacological and genetic studies in mammals
and zebraﬁsh have shown that NE promotes arousal, and that in-
hibition of NE signaling increases sleep [56, 71, 72]. We found
that overexpression of NPY did not enhance the increased sleep
animals and in prazosin-treated WT animals,
observed in dbh
suggesting that NPY overexpression promotes sleep by inhibit-
ing NE signaling. Consistent with this possibility, we found that
prazosin treatment abolished the decreased sleep observed in
npy mutants, suggesting that elevated NE signaling underlies
the npy mutant phenotype. In support of these functional interac-
tions, we found that NPY overexpression decreases the level of
dbh mRNA in the LC, the primary source of NE in the brain [72],
and thus most likely reduces NE levels. We observed a trend of
reduced dbh mRNA levels at 1 and 2 hr after induction of NPY
overexpression, and a signiﬁcant reduction at 3 hr post-heat
shock. These observations suggest that reduced dbh expres-
sion may not be the primary cause of NPY overexpression-
induced sleep, but rather may be a secondary effect that
maintains NPY-induced sleep, perhaps
from
decreased LC neuron activity. Consistent with this possibility,
NPY can inhibit LC neurons in rodent brain slices [100]. However,
the maximal effect of NPY overexpression on behavior occurred
at 3 hr post-heat shock, coinciding with a signiﬁcant reduction
in dbh expression in the LC, consistent with NPY directly pro-
moting sleep by decreasing dbh expression, and thus NE pro-
duction, in the LC. Moreover, we found that npy mutants have
elevated dbh expression in the LC, presumably resulting in
increased NE levels and increased arousal.
It was recently
shown that dbh expression undergoes a circadian oscillation in
whole zebraﬁsh larvae [101]. Consistent with this observation,
we found that the level of dbh mRNA in the LC is lower at night
compared to the day, suggesting that NE levels contribute to
the diurnal sleep/wake cycle.

Consistent with an interaction between NPY and the LC, we
identiﬁed a small population of npy-expressing neurons that is
adjacent to, and appears to innervate, the LC. This observation
contrasts with mammals, where npy and dbh are co-expressed
in LC neurons [102, 103]. We were unable to detect expression of
NPY receptors in LC neurons, suggesting that NPY may indi-
rectly affect NE signaling. However, expression of GPCRs, the
protein class of NPY receptors, is notoriously difﬁcult to detect,
and we thus cannot rule out the possibility that an NPY receptor
is expressed in LC neurons. We did observe expression of npy1r
and npy2rl in cells near the LC, suggesting the possibility of local
indirect interactions between NPY neurons and the LC. Thus,
whereas the anatomic interaction between the NPY and NE sys-
tems appears to differ in zebraﬁsh and mammals, the functional
relationship between the systems may be conserved. Taken
together, these observations suggest that NPY could regulate
sleep by directly affecting the ﬁring of LC neurons and/or the
level of NE. Alternately, the site of interaction between NPY
and NE in sleep may lie in a network of neurons near the LC or
elsewhere in the brain.

In both mammals and zebraﬁsh, NE is necessary for the wake-
promoting functions of Hcrt signaling and hcrt-expressing neu-
rons [55, 56]. Here we provide evidence that NE signaling
mediates the sedating effect of NPY, suggesting a central role
for the NE system in neuropeptidergic regulation of sleep/wake
states. Although Hcrt and NPY have opposite effects on sleep
via NE signaling, both neuropeptides promote feeding via neu-
rons in the hypothalamus [38, 104], suggesting a segregation
of neuronal circuits through which these neuropeptides regulate
sleep and feeding. Although an interaction between NPY and the
LC has been shown to control stress responses in rodents [105],
to our knowledge this is the ﬁrst demonstration of an interaction
between NPY and the NE system in the context of sleep.

Finally, we note that cerebrospinal ﬂuid levels of NPY are
reduced in individuals suffering from PTSD who have sleep dis-
turbances [79], and treatment with prazosin reduces nightmares
and improves sleep in these individuals [106]. Because we found
that npy mutant zebraﬁsh have elevated dbh expression, and
presumably more NE, the reduced NPY observed in PTSD might
cause increased NE levels, thereby disrupting sleep. These ob-
servations suggest that NPY might be therapeutic for at least
some aspects of PTSD.

In summary, our results identify NPY as a regulator of sleep/
wake behaviors in zebraﬁsh, and suggest that NPY promotes
sleep by inhibiting NE signaling. These results highlight a central
role for NE signaling in regulating sleep, and suggest that modu-
lation of NPY signaling may be a useful therapeutic approach for
sleep disorders.

References