
INTRODUCTION

Time perception is unique because there are no dedicated sen-
sory organs or receptors for time. The brain appears to create the
subjective sense of time by integrating a variety of sensory inputs
and internal states [1]. Many studies have implicated cortico-
basal ganglia networks in interval timing in the seconds to mi-
nutes range [2–5]. However, it remains unclear how basal ganglia
output contributes to timing behavior.

Traditional studies examining interval timing have two major
limitations. First, the behavioral methods are time consuming

and yield results that are difﬁcult to interpret. For example,
operant procedures using lever pressing as the behavioral
readout are commonly used across many species [6].
Training typically takes months and produces complex stereo-
typed behaviors between lever presses. Second, techniques
commonly used in animal timing studies, like lesion, electri-
cal stimulation, and pharmacological manipulations, cannot
precisely manipulate speciﬁc neuronal populations and neuro-
imaging timing studies in humans rely on correlational
analyses of brain activity and behavioral data [4, 7]. To over-
come these limitations, we designed a novel task for studying
interval timing in head-ﬁxed mice during optogenetic manipu-
lation of deﬁned neuronal populations. Using a ﬁxed time
schedule of reinforcement, we trained mice to exhibit accu-
rate timing behavior within a few hours. Mice rapidly showed
licking behavior that peaks at the expected time of reward
delivery in accordance with previous studies using lever
presses as a behavioral measure [8, 9]. Licking on this task
can be precisely quantiﬁed and shows the hallmarks of inter-
val timing.

Licking is also a behavioral measure with well-characterized
neural circuits [10–12]. Previous work demonstrates the impor-
tance of a cortico-basal ganglia circuit, including the ventrolat-
eral striatum and lateral substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr) in
orofacial behavior [10, 13]. In particular, a subset of GABAergic
projections from the SNr to the deep layers of the superior
colliculus (SC)
is critical for the initiation and termination of
self-paced licking behavior [10, 14]. The basal ganglia output
regulates SC neurons in regulating licking bouts. The SC output,
in turn, regulates central pattern generators in the brainstem to
generate orofacial and other movements [15, 16].

Optogenetic stimulation of

the nigrotectal pathway can
directly terminate licking behavior by uniformly increasing
inhibition of tectal projection neurons, thus disrupting descend-
ing motor commands [10]. By stimulating channelrhodopsin
(ChR2)-expressing GABAergic projection neurons in the SNr,
we could uniformly increase SNr output and interfere with the
normal pattern of nigrotectal signaling, which is time locked to
the licking bout [17]. Using this procedure combined with quan-
titative behavioral analysis, we examined the contribution of the
basal ganglia output to interval timing behavior in mice.
In agreement with previous work in freely moving mice [10],
voluntary licking behavior was highly stereotyped, consisting of
bouts of rhythmic protrusion and retractions of the tongue at a
relatively ﬁxed rate (6–10 Hz) for both anticipatory and consum-
matory licking [17]. After training, all mice showed anticipatory
licking prior to each reward delivery (Figure 1C, left), starting
4–6 s before the reward and peaking at roughly the expected
time of reward delivery. Consummatory licking stopped 2–4 s
after the reward delivery. As the mouse became sated during
the session, anticipatory licking gradually decreased and
consummatory licking decreased more abruptly (Figure S1). Af-
ter training, all mice showed anticipatory licking prior to each
reward delivery (Figure 1C, left), starting 4–6 s before the reward
and peaking at roughly the expected time of reward delivery.

Peak Probe Trials
After 5–10 days of training on the ﬁxed-time task, peak probe
trials were introduced (Figure 1B, right). During these trials,
reward delivery was omitted, followed by an extended period
of no reward delivery. Probe trials lasted for 30–40 s and were
randomly inserted with 20% probability. Mice readily learned
this peak procedure with maximal response rates occurring
around 10 s (i.e., the expected reward time) within a few days
(Figure 1C, right).

A hallmark of interval timing is the spread in timing of behavior
scales linearly with the temporal duration being timed. This ‘‘sca-
lar property’’ is analogous to the Weber-Fechner law in psycho-
physics [1]. To test whether mice also exhibit the scalar property
using our novel behavioral paradigm, three mice were trained on
the peak procedure with two additional intervals: 7.5 and 15 s
(Figure 2A). All mice tested were highly accurate in timing these
intervals (Figure 2B; 7.5-s condition: 8.09 ± 0.10 s; 10-s condi-
tion: 10.33 ± 0.14 s; 15-s condition: 15.26 ± 0.19 s; n = 13 for
each condition; 3–5 sessions for each duration for three mice).
Performance on these three durations was normalized by the
peak response time and maximum lick rate and then superim-
posed across all three intervals (Figure 2C). The resulting data
clearly demonstrate the scalar property (Figure 2D; 7.5-s condi-
tion: 0.55 ± 0.04; 10-s condition: 0.56 ± 0.03; 15-s condition:
0.59 ± 0.02; n = 13 for each condition; 3–5 sessions for each
duration for 3 subjects). This result establishes that the head-
ﬁxed peak procedure is a powerful method that not only expe-
dites training but also produces results with the essential
features of interval timing behavior.

Stepping Dynamics and Motivational Modulation of
Licking Behavior
To reveal ‘‘single-trial’’ dynamics of the licking behavior [17, 19],
we analyzed behavioral data during each interval using statistical
methods previously used for ﬁtting latent dynamical spike-train
models [19]. Our analysis revealed that behavior during the
ﬁxed-time-schedule task is well described by a ‘‘stepping’’
model for both the start and end of the licking bout (Figures 3A
and 3B). In other words, the licking behavior displays stepping
dynamics with variable step onset and offset times. In accor-
dance with traditional lever-pressing data from rodents, the ca-
nonical Gaussian distribution found on peak trials, a key feature
of interval timing behavior, is a product of averaging many trials.
This conclusion is in agreement with a recent study that found

Figure 1. Experimental Setup and Behavioral Tasks
(A) Head-ﬁxed setup. Mice were placed on a raised platform and secured in
place by head bars attached to chronic implants. A blunt-tipped needle is
placed within licking distance, allowing for administration of a 10% sucrose
reward using a solenoid under the control of an Arduino and MATLAB
Psychtoolbox.
(B) Schematic diagram of the behavioral tasks. In the ﬁxed-time-schedule task
(left), a drop of water was delivered every 10 s throughout the session. Once
mice demonstrated anticipatory licking, they were transitioned to a peak
procedure (right), where 20% of rewards were omitted on probe trials in order
to estimate their internal representation of expected time of reward delivery.
(C) Examples of behavioral data. Individual trial (top) and cumulative Peri-
stimulus time histogram (PSTH) (bottom) of licking behavior during rewarded
(left) and peak (right) trials.
See also Figure S1.

<Middle> RESULTS.
Behavioral Performance
Mice were trained on a 10-s ﬁxed-time-schedule task (Figures
1A and 1B, left). Head-ﬁxed mice voluntarily licked a blunt-tip-
ped drinking needle placed in front of their mouth that delivered
a 10% sucrose solution every 10 s. A solenoid connected to an
Arduino slaved to a custom-written MATLAB Psychtoolbox
scripts controlled sucrose delivery. No external conditioned
stimulus was presented. Individual
licking contacts between
mice and the drinking needle were recorded with a contact
lickometer [18].
In agreement with previous work in freely moving mice [10],
voluntary licking behavior was highly stereotyped, consisting of
bouts of rhythmic protrusion and retractions of the tongue at a
relatively fixed rate (6–10 Hz) for both anticipatory and consummatory
licking [17]. After training, all mice showed anticipatory
licking prior to each reward delivery (Figure 1C, left), starting
4–6 s before the reward and peaking at roughly the expected
time of reward delivery. Consummatory licking stopped 2–4 s
after the reward delivery. As the mouse became sated during
the session, anticipatory licking gradually decreased and
consummatory licking decreased more abruptly (Figure S1). After
training, all mice showed anticipatory licking prior to each
reward delivery (Figure 1C, left), starting 4–6 s before the reward
and peaking at roughly the expected time of reward delivery.
Peak Probe Trials
After 5–10 days of training on the fixed-time task, peak probe
trials were introduced (Figure 1B, right). During these trials,
reward delivery was omitted, followed by an extended period
of no reward delivery. Probe trials lasted for 30–40 s and were
randomly inserted with 20% probability. Mice readily learned
this peak procedure with maximal response rates occurring
around 10 s (i.e., the expected reward time) within a few days
(Figure 1C, right).
A hallmark of interval timing is the spread in timing of behavior
scales linearly with the temporal duration being timed. This ‘‘scalar
property’’ is analogous to the Weber-Fechner law in psychophysics
[1]. To test whether mice also exhibit the scalar property
using our novel behavioral paradigm, three mice were trained on
the peak procedure with two additional intervals: 7.5 and 15 s
(Figure 2A). All mice tested were highly accurate in timing these
intervals (Figure 2B; 7.5-s condition: 8.09 ± 0.10 s; 10-s condition:
10.33 ± 0.14 s; 15-s condition: 15.26 ± 0.19 s; n = 13 for
each condition; 3–5 sessions for each duration for three mice).
Performance on these three durations was normalized by the
peak response time and maximum lick rate and then superimposed
across all three intervals (Figure 2C). The resulting data
clearly demonstrate the scalar property (Figure 2D; 7.5-s condition:
0.55 ± 0.04; 10-s condition: 0.56 ± 0.03; 15-s condition:
0.59 ± 0.02; n = 13 for each condition; 3–5 sessions for each
duration for 3 subjects). This result establishes that the headfixed
peak procedure is a powerful method that not only expedites
training but also produces results with the essential
features of interval timing behavior.
Stepping Dynamics and Motivational Modulation of
Licking Behavior
To reveal ‘‘single-trial’’ dynamics of the licking behavior [17, 19],
we analyzed behavioral data during each interval using statistical
methods previously used for fitting latent dynamical spike-train
models [19]. Our analysis revealed that behavior during the
fixed-time-schedule task is well described by a ‘‘stepping’’
model for both the start and end of the licking bout (Figures 3A
and 3B). In other words, the licking behavior displays stepping
dynamics with variable step onset and offset times. In accordance
with traditional lever-pressing data from rodents, the canonical
Gaussian distribution found on peak trials, a key feature
of interval timing behavior, is a product of averaging many trials.
This conclusion is in agreement with a recent study that found
similar stepping dynamics in the lever-pressing behavior of
rats [20].

Our single-trial analysis also made it possible to analyze how
changes in internal states during a single session affect timing
behavior [21]. Early in the session, when water-deprived mice
were highly motivated, licking started earlier and ended later
with higher rates (Figure 3C). As mice became sated, anticipa-
tory licking and bout duration gradually decreased, but the
center of the bout, which reﬂects the expected timing of the
reward delivery, did not change signiﬁcantly. Bout duration
was strongly modulated by motivational state (n = 10 mice;
p < 0.05, unpaired t test), but the peak of the licking response
was not (Figure 3D; n = 10 mice; p > 0.05, unpaired t test).
Thus, motivational state has a strong impact on the variance
of timing behavior. Traditionally, data from the entire session
are used to analyze the peak and variance. Because the
observed variance can be partly attributed to motivational mod-
ulation, traditional methods systematically underestimate the
precision of timing behavior.

Effect of Nigrotectal GABAergic Pathway Stimulation on
Timing
We previously showed that optogenetic stimulation of the SNr-
SC GABAergic pathway disrupts self-paced licking behavior by
uniformly increasing inhibition of deep/intermediate-layer tectal
neurons and interfering with motor commands from SNr neurons
[10]. To examine the function of the SNr-SC GABAergic pathway
in timing, we expressed Cre-dependent ChR2 bilaterally with
AAV5-EF1a-DIO-hChR2(H134R)-eYFP in the lateral SNr of
Vgat-IRES-Cre mice (Vgat::ChR2 SNr-SC; n = 6) and targeted
the axon terminals in the lateral SC with optic ﬁbers (Figures
4A–4C and S2).

We used 3 different stimulation protocols to compare the ef-
fects of stimulation at different times during the interval: (1) 2 s
to 1 s before reward delivery; (2) 1 s before reward delivery;
and (3) 1 s after the reward delivery. We also varied the stimula-
tion frequency in each condition: 10, 25, 50, and 100 Hz. Stimu-
lation of nigrotectal projections signiﬁcantly reduced the number
of licks for the duration of the stimulation in a frequency-depen-
dent manner (Figure 4D; n = 6 mice; p < 0.05, one-way ANOVA
with post hoc Tukey test). In agreement with previous work
[10], this result shows that the nigrotectal pathway is important
for both anticipatory and consummatory licking.

We conducted slice experiments to conﬁrm that photo-stimu-
lation of SNr neurons can evoke spiking in a frequency-depen-
dent manner. Using the same stimulation frequencies and pulse
width, we showed that SNr neurons were able to follow the pulse
train at high frequencies (Figures 5A and 5B; n = 4 mice). Spike
ﬁdelity was nearly perfect up to 50 Hz. At 100 Hz, although
more spiking was produced than at 50 Hz, the spiking could
not follow the stimulation pulse train perfectly, showing a ceiling
effect. In our experiments, perfect spike ﬁdelity is not necessary
so long as there is a frequency-dependent effect of stimulation.
In fact, the evoked ﬁring rate at different stimulation frequencies
from our slice experiments could explain the behavioral data
from Figure 4 very well. Using the evoked spiking from the slice
experiments as estimates of in vivo activation of the nigrotectal
pathway, we examined the relationship between spiking and
suppression of licking. Estimated SNr spiking, based on results
from slice experiments, could account for most variance in the
suppression of licking behavior (Figure 5C; r2 > 0.90, p < 0.001
in each). Thus, higher nigrotectal output results in stronger sup-
pression of licking.

To test whether nonspeciﬁc effects of laser stimulation or
infection contributed to the reduced licking rate during
viral
stimulation in Vgat::ChR2SNr-SC mice, we injected Vgat-IRES-
Cre mice (n = 5) with an AAV-Flex-eYFP control vector (Vgat::
eYFPSNr-SC). Under the same experimental conditions, laser
stimulation in the absence of ChR2 had no effect on licking
behavior (Figure S3; n = 6 mice; p > 0.05, one-way ANOVA).

Interestingly, photo-stimulation of nigrotectal GABAergic pro-
jections at 100 Hz not only transiently suppressed licking but also
altered the timing of
in 5
Vgat::ChR2 SNr-SC mice (Figure 6A). Based on the ﬁtting of the
stepping model by the single-trial analysis, we could deﬁne the
start and end of the licking bout on each peak probe trial.

the response on the next

trial

Photo-stimulation 1 s after the reward signiﬁcantly delayed the
licking bout on the next trial (Figure 6B; n = 5; p < 0.05, unpaired
t test). Photo-stimulation 1 s before the reward signiﬁcantly de-
layed the center of the bout (peak) and start of the bout (Fig-
ure 6C; n = 5; p < 0.05, unpaired t test). Yet stimulation at an
earlier point (2 s to 1 s) before the reward delivery resulted in
an earlier peak (Figure 6D; n = 5; p < 0.05, unpaired t test; Fig-
ure S4). Furthermore, when the stimulation frequency was low-
ered to 50 Hz 1 s after the reward condition, signiﬁcant delays
in consummatory licking were still evident in three of the four
mice, whereas shifts on subsequent peak trials were only found
in a single mouse (p < 0.05, unpaired t test; data not shown).
Taken together, these results strongly suggest that the reset-
ting/pausing effect on peak trials is not due to delays in the termi-
nation of consummatory licking. Cancelation of the current
licking bout is relatively independent of the delay in the next
bout of licking.

Photo-stimulation 1 s after the reward is thus most effective at
delaying consumption licking (Figures 6 and S3; n = 5; p > 0.05,
unpaired t test). There was no correlation between the end
time of the consumption licking and start/end of the licking
bout in both stimulation or no stimulation conditions (Figure S5;

3766 Current Biology 27, 3763–3770, December 18, 2017

Figure 4. Optogenetic Stimulation of SNr-SC Pathway Cancels Licking Behavior
(A) Schematic of surgical and optogenetic procedures.
(B) Diagram of licking-related circuitry: dorsolateral striatum (DLS); substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr); superior colliculus (SC); and central pattern generators
(CPGs).
(C) Image of axons within the SC expressing ChR2 after injections of AAV5-EF1a-DIO-hChR2(H134R)-eYFP into the SNr.
(D) Schematic of stimulation conditions relative to presentation of reward (top). Examples (left) and summary (right) of optogenetic stimulation effects on
anticipatory and consummatory licking behavior with Vgat::ChR2SNr-SC mice showing frequency-dependent modulation of licking behavior by optogenetic
stimulation. *p value < 0.05 (n = 6 mice; one-way ANOVA, post hoc Tukey test).
See also Figures S2 and S3A.

r2 < 0.10, p > 0.05). These results indicate that the nigrotectal
GABAergic projection is also critical
timing behavior.
Under the same experimental condition, photo-stimulation in
the absence of ChR2 expression in control animals (5 Vgat::
eYFPSNr-SC mice) had no effect on peak test performance (Fig-
ure 6; n = 5; p > 0.05, unpaired t test).

<Conclusion> DISCUSSION.
We designed a novel behavioral task for studying interval timing
in mice. Compared with the traditional freely moving operant
approach, this procedure has three major advantages: (1) by
eliminating complex behavioral sequences observed in freely
moving animals, the behavioral measure was simpliﬁed, allowing
focus on central timing mechanisms with a clearly deﬁned and
quantiﬁable behavioral readout; (2) behavioral training, which
only takes a few days, is more efﬁcient than traditional operant
procedures, which require months of training for the standard
peak procedure; and (3) mice display all the hallmarks of interval
timing, such as the scalar property. Taking advantage of the
above features, we used optogenetics to interrogate the role of
a deﬁned neural pathway in timing.

Using quantitative modeling of single-trial behavior, we show
that licking behavior can be described by a stepping model
[19]. The apparent Gaussian distribution of
the behavioral
timing function from peak trials is a result of averaging data
from many trials with variable step onset and offset times
[20]. The start and stop times on peak trials are of particular in-
terest because they reﬂect the animal’s moment-to-moment
estimate of when the reward will arrive on each trial. All animals
tested showed a ‘‘peak’’ around the timing of the target dura-
tion (Figures 2A and 2B). The variance is also proportional to
the time interval (Figures 2C and 2D). This scalar property, a
hallmark of interval timing, is thought to be analogous to the
Weber-Fechner law, which has been characterized for other
sensory modalities [4].

Traditional timing studies often rely on the ‘‘peak response,’’
which is a result of averaging behavior from many trials. The
gradual ramping pattern of the anticipatory behavior could be
an artifact of averaging [20], creating a misleading picture of
the underlying mechanisms [22]. Our single-trial analysis pro-
duces a more accurate depiction of timing behavior. We show
that licking behavior during each interval can be described by
a ‘‘stepping’’ model, with abrupt onsets and offsets. As shown
by recent work, event-aligned analysis of averaged data can
lead to inaccurate interpretation of underlying neural mecha-
nisms [19]. Our ﬁnding suggests a stepping dynamic is more
likely to capture the neural activity that generates timing
behavior in accordance with previous in vivo electrophysiolog-
ical results [10].

Our single-trial analysis also demonstrates signiﬁcant moti-
vational modulation of timing behavior (Figure 3). Early in the
session, when the mouse is highly motivated, the lick bouts
start earlier and end later and the average licking rate is higher.
Anticipatory licking is gradually reduced during the session,
though consummatory licking bouts remain consistent (Figures
3C and S1). The motivational state of the animal primarily mod-
ulates the spread of the licking bout (i.e., lick bout duration is
determined by how thirsty the animal
is). In previous work,
data from the entire session are averaged without regard for
the motivational state. Consequently, previous work has not
considered the portion of behavioral variability that can be
attributed to motivational states,
thus underestimating the
precision of interval timing in animals. The Weber fraction, a
common measure of timing precision, is much lower when
the animal is sated (Figure 3D). Given strong motivational mod-
ulation of timing behavior and on basal ganglia output [21, 23],
future studies of timing must take into account internal motiva-
tional states.

We used cell-type-speciﬁc optogenetic manipulation to
study the role of a basal ganglia output pathway that is known
to be critical for licking behavior [10]. Activation of the nigro-
tectal GABAergic pathway stopped both anticipatory and
consummatory licking behavior. Previous work showed that
such pausing is due to disruption of the patterned neural
To test the contribution of this pathway to interval timing, we
selectively stimulated the axon terminals of SNr GABAergic pro-
jections neurons in the intermediate/deep layers of the SC. In
agreement with previous work [7], we showed that both anticipa-
tory and consummatory licking can be precisely and selectively
terminated by photo-stimulation. More importantly, we found
that photo-stimulation of the nigrotectal pathway not only inter-
rupts ongoing licking but also delays timing of the next licking
bout on peak trials. Yet stimulation did not affect licking bout
duration (Figure 6). Therefore, canceling a discrete basal ganglia
output may also pause or reset the oscillatory cycle for precise
timing of future actions that occur up to 10 s later.

One alternative explanation of our result is that animals can
use the end of consummatory licking as a cue to time the
next reward delivery. According to this account, any interrup-
tion of consummatory licking can delay the start of the next
bout accordingly. The available evidence, however, does not
support this interpretation. First, single-trial analysis demon-
strates that the end of the consummatory licking does not pre-
dict the start of the next bout of licking (Figure S5C). Second,
delays in the termination of consummatory licking and shifts
in peak trial activity are differentially modulated by stimulation
frequency, with termination of consummatory licking being
more sensitive. It is also clear from Figure 6A that delays in
the termination of consummatory licking are not necessary for
peak shifts. A potential explanation is that divergent pathways
are responsible for timing and motor command signals. SNr
efferents have collateral branches to the thalamus and SC
[24, 25]. Consequently, updates may be sent to cortical regions
through SNr-thalamus collaterals. This would explain the resil-
ience of timing behavior during lower frequency stimulation.
Thus, it is possible that the nigrotectal pathway not only generates
high-level motor commands for licking but also efference
copies to higher levels that adjust the oscillatory cycle based
on a variety of feedback signals. When such signals are interrupted
by cancelling licking behavior, it is possible to pause
the timing mechanism. Future studies using cell-type-specific
manipulation of the upstream circuits will be needed to test
this hypothesis.
According to the scalar expectancy theory of timing, pulses
from a pacemaker are accumulated and compared to a reference
memory, and the ratio between the current ‘‘clock
reading’’ and remembered time is used to generate behavior
[1]. The present results suggest that this timing mechanism
is not fully dissociable from high-level motor commands
[26–28]. The corticostriatal circuit, which is upstream of the nigrotectal
pathway, can generate oscillatory processes that act
as the internal clock [2, 29]. The period of this oscillator,
perhaps responsible for ‘‘clock speed,’’ is adjusted according
to the relevant perceptual inputs (e.g., rewards at regular intervals).
The amplitude of the cycle may be proportional to the lick
rate or behavioral vigor. As suggested by our single-trial analysis,
this parameter is modulated by the motivational state
and appears to set thresholds for the initiation of bouts of
licking (Figure 3). Finally, the phase of
the oscillation is adjusted by the reward
feedback as well as descending motor
commands to initiate licking [2].

In conclusion, we introduced a novel
behavioral task for the rapid acquisition
of interval timing behavior using licking
as a behavioral
readout. Quantitative
analysis of single-trial behavior demon-
strated clear motivational modulation of
timing behavior. Using optogenetic stim-
ulation of the nigrotectal pathway, we
could selectively delay the timing of the
next bout of licking, suggesting that basal ganglia output may
play a role not only in initiating actions but also in adjusting cen-
tral timing mechanisms.
References