
INTRODUCTION
The vast majority of bacterial diversity is found within phylumlevel
lineages that lack isolated representatives [1], commonly
referred to as ‘‘candidate phyla.’’ Candidate phyla constitute at
least 103 out of approximately 142 widely recognized bacterial
phyla for which there is genomic representation [1–3]; 46% of
known bacterial phyla are clustered in the Candidate Phyla Radi-
ation (CPR). However, there remain many phylum-level bacterial
lineages that have no genomic representation and are not yet
formally recognized [4]. Genome-resolved metagenomic studies
offer unique and unprecedented insights into the biology of these
uncultured, poorly understood lineages and their biochemical
diversity [3–8]. In addition to revealing the environmentally and
economically important roles played by such bacteria, these
studies contribute greatly to our understanding of the distribution
of lifestyles across the tree of life. For example, genomes from
members of the CPR suggest that they are metabolically sparse
and lack many biosynthetic pathways typically required for life,
presumably because these organisms are dependent on other
microbes for survival
[6, 9]. Candidate phyla genomes may
also reveal novel functional diversity, as phylogenetic diversity
is correlated with novel proteomic diversity and biological prop-
erties [10, 11].

Marine mammals are an ecologically important group of
animals harboring little-explored microbial communities. Previ-
ous research has shown that bottlenose dolphins, in particular,
host a rich diversity of novel bacteria [12]. Nearly 70% of near-
full-length 16S rRNA genes from the dolphin microbiota were
novel in 2015 at the species level, and representatives from 25
bacterial phyla were present in the mouth alone. Furthermore,
a surprising number of candidate phyla such as Gracilibacteria
(BD1-5/GN02), Modulibacteria (KSB3), and the Parcubacteria
(OD1) supergroup, which are unusual in mammal-associated en-
vironments, were found in the dolphin mouth [12]. Genomes from
such candidate phyla have nearly exclusively been retrieved
from non-host-associated environments, and thus it is unknown
how these bacteria adapt to a mammalian environment. Interest-
ingly, despite evidence that the marine mammal microbiota is
shaped by the sea, these bacteria were not detected in the adja-
cent seawater [12].

The vast majority of bacterial diversity is found within phylum-
level lineages that lack isolated representatives [1], commonly
referred to as ‘‘candidate phyla.’’ Candidate phyla constitute at
least 103 out of approximately 142 widely recognized bacterial

On the basis of these prior observations, we concluded that
marine mammals afford an unusual opportunity for studying
bacterial diversity. Working under the hypothesis that novel
phylogenetic diversity correlates with novel functional diversity,
in this study we applied genome-resolved metagenomics to
investigate the diversity and functional potential of the dolphin
oral microbiome. The results hint at the wealth of evolutionary
and biochemical diversity that remains uncharted within previ-
ously unexplored environments, including mammalian micro-
biomes, and will contribute to future comparative studies of
host-associated versus non-host-associated candidate phyla
bacteria.

<Middle> RESULTS.
Dolphin Oral Microbiota Composition and Structure
Swab samples were collected from the gingival sulcus of
healthy bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) under the pur-
view of the U.S. Navy’s Marine Mammal Program in San Diego
Bay, California. Samples from two dolphins were selected for
shotgun sequencing based on the ﬁndings of Bik et al. [12],
which indicated that
these two samples (DolJOral78 and
DolZOral124) contained representatives from nine candidate
phyla at relative abundances of R0.05% (Table S1). Paired-
end Illumina HiSeq reads were generated, ﬁltered, assembled,
and used to recover microbial genomes, as described in STAR
Methods.

From >63 Gbp of ﬁltered paired-end sequences, we recovered
107 draft-quality genomes from 24 previously described
bacterial phyla and one circular genome from a candidate Sac-
charibacteria (TM7) phage (presented below). These genomes
derived from 22 organisms afﬁliated with the candidate phyla
Absconditabacteria (SR1), Campbellbacteria (OD1), Cloacimo-
netes (WWE1), Delongbacteria, Fermentibacteria (Hyd24-12),
Gracilibacteria (BD1-5/GN02), Modulibacteria (KSB3), and Mor-
anbacteria (OD1), and the Saccharibacteria (TM7) phylum.
Phylum-level assignments (or lack thereof, as was the case for
three of our genomes) were determined by constructing a phy-
logeny based on an alignment of 15 concatenated ribosomal
proteins (Figure 1; Data S1; see STAR Methods). Of note, we
were able to link a 16S rRNA gene sequence to a member of
the Delongbacteria phylum, which previously consisted of a sin-
gle genome for which no 16S rRNA gene had been recovered [2].
Additionally, low-coverage (%33) archaeal genome fragments
were recovered from two members of the Woesearcheota
phylum. Similar sequences have been recovered from host-
associated environments (see SILVA database [13–15]), such
as coral heads [16] and human skin [17], but were not originally
recognized as afﬁliated with the Woesearcheota phylum or
placed within a comprehensive phylogeny.

Bacterial community composition and structure inferred
from the same DNA preparations differed depending on the
survey method: genome-resolved metagenomics (this study)
versus 16S rRNA gene ampliﬁcation [12] (Figure 2; Figure S1;
Table S1). Notably, the 16S rRNA gene that was associated
with the highest-coverage genome in both samples (17% and
4% relative abundance in DolJOral78 and DolZOral124, respec-
tively; Figure 2) was barely detected in the amplicon-based sur-
vey (not detected in DolJOral78; 0.04% relative abundance in
DolZOral124). This is surprising, because the PCR primers
match the assembled sequence perfectly, the GC content of
the gene is 58%, and it contains no unusual
insertions. The
two genomes are from the same species of Actinobacteria (order

Micrococcales), and the GC content of the genome is 68%.
Furthermore, members of the CPR were greatly under-detected
using the amplicon-based approach. From the metagenomic as-
semblies, we detected 16 unique CPR species-level genomes,
some of which ranked among the highest-coverage genomes
recovered (Figure 2). For example, the fourth most abundant
bacterial organism in the DolJOral78 sample was a member of
the Saccharibacteria phylum (4% relative abundance), although
no Saccharibacteria representatives were detected in the
DolJOral78 sample in the previous 16S rRNA gene amplicon sur-
vey. In the amplicon-based study [12], only nine unique opera-
tional taxonomic units (OTUs) from the CPR were identiﬁed
from both samples combined, with a maximum relative abun-
dance of 0.24%. This discrepancy can be explained at least
partially by primer mismatches, consistent with previous reports
on the CPR [4]. Of the 21 unique CPR 16S rRNA genes assem-
bled and identiﬁed in the metagenomic data, nine span the re-
gion between the commonly used 338F and 906R bacterial
primers (also used in Bik et al. [12]) and have sufﬁcient read
coverage to validate the assembly. Eight of these have 1–3 mis-
matches in at least one primer site. In the amplicon study, eight
of the nine OTUs were detected among all samples, although
only the one OTU with no primer site mismatches was detected
in the two samples studied here.

Given the breadth of novel bacterial diversity in the dolphin
oral samples, we next searched for novel phage diversity.
Using a stringent set of criteria (see STAR Methods), we iden-
tiﬁed a set of 33 and 55 sequences from DolJOral78 and
DolZOral124, respectively, for which we had high conﬁdence
in their derivation from phage genomes. These sequences
range in length from 1,583 to 119,885 bp (average 19,363
and 21,462; SD 13,243 and 19,615 bp). To assess overlap
between samples, we performed a reciprocal best-hit BLAST
[18, 19] search between phage sequences from the two
samples. We identiﬁed 14 phage genome fragments that
were present (or had close relatives present) in both samples.
To evaluate the degree of phage genome novelty, we BLASTed
[18, 19] phage sequences against the NCBI non-redundant
nucleotide
(https://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nucleotide).
Only three alignments were longer than 1,000 bp, the longest
of which was only 2,919 bp. These alignments corresponded
to 2.3%, 3.8%, and 8.2% of the lengths of the respective
phage scaffolds. This suggests that phages in the dolphin
mouth are only distantly related to phages for which genomic
fragments have previously been recovered, as one would
expect under the hypothesis that novel bacterial diversity be-
gets novel phage diversity.

database

Novel, Deeply Divergent Phylum-Level Lineages
The concatenated ribosomal protein tree enabled determination
of the phylum-level identity of recovered genomes (Figure 1).
Within this tree, three genomes belonging to two deep-branch-
ing lineages eluded identiﬁcation. To evaluate whether these
two lineages were representative of previously undescribed
phyla, we examined whether (1) they formed monophyletic line-
ages in both the concatenated ribosomal protein phylogeny and
the 16S rRNA gene phylogeny, and (2) the 16S rRNA gene se-
quences of such lineages were at least 25% divergent from
those of known phyla (i.e., the threshold used by Yarza et al. [20]).
lowest

One lineage, for which we propose the name ‘‘Delphibacteria’’
(rationale in Supplemental Discussion),
is afﬁliated with the
Fibrobacteres-Chlorobi-Bacteroidetes (FCB) superphylum and
is represented by genomes DolJOral78_Bacteria_63_78 and
DolZOral124_Bacteria_64_63. The names refer, for example, to
sample DolZOral124,
taxonomic resolution Bacteria,
GC content of 64%, coverage of 633). The 16S rRNA gene
sequence from the Delphibacteria lineage clusters with se-
quences from what is currently recognized as the Latescibacte-
ria phylum in the SILVA database [13–15] (see Supplemental
Discussion, Figure S2, and Data S1). The diversity encompassed
by this ‘‘phylum’’ was recently found to be an assemblage of at
least two phylum-level lineages: Latescibacteria and the newly
proposed Eisenbacteria [2]. Nearly all members of the Delphi-
bacteria lineage share <75% sequence identity across the 16S
rRNA gene with members of the Eisenbacteria phylum (Fig-
ure S2A) and <78.5% sequence identity with members of the
Latescibacteria phylum (Figure S2B). Predicted proteins in the
near-complete genome from this lineage were most similar to

those from the Deltaproteobacteria phylum (Figure S3A).
Notably, the Delphibacteria lineage was detected in 41 oral sam-
ples from 15 of 33 U.S. Navy dolphins and one of ten wild dol-
phins surveyed with 16S rRNA gene amplicon pyrosequencing
in Bik et al. [12], although it was classiﬁed as a member of the
Latescibacteria phylum. In the DolJOral78 sample, two Delphi-
bacteria genomes were detected at relative abundances of
1.6% and 1.2%, while in the DolZOral124 sample one Delphi-
bacteria genome was detected at a relative abundance of 0.7%.
The second previously uncharacterized lineage, for which we
propose the name ‘‘Fertabacteria’’ (rationale in Supplemental
Discussion), is afﬁliated with the CPR and is represented by
the genome DolZOral124_Bacteria_38_8. The 16S rRNA gene
sequence from Fertabacteria clusters with sequences from
what is currently recognized as the Peregrinibacteria (PER)
phylum in the SILVA database (see Supplemental Discussion
and Data S1). It is part of a well-supported clade with <75%
sequence identity to the rest of the PER phylum, including
PER-ii (Figure S2C). Predicted proteins from this lineage are
most similar to those from the Peregrinibacteria phylum (Fig-
ure S3B), yet the 16S rRNA gene sequence identity argues
against its inclusion in this group. Out of all samples surveyed
with 16S rRNA gene pyrosequencing in Bik et al. [12], only a sin-
gle Fertabacteria amplicon was detected. The amplicon was
generated from a sample of forcefully expired air (‘‘chuff’’) from
the dolphin respiratory tract collected on sterile ﬁlter paper,
and was originally classiﬁed as a member of the Gracilibacteria
phylum. The 906R primer used in Bik et al. [12] had two mis-
matches to the corresponding priming site, and therefore this
organism may have been widely under-detected in the ampli-
con-based survey. The Fertabacteria genome is one of the
lowest-coverage genomes (83) in this study, with a relative
abundance of 0.09% in the DolZOral124 sample.

Functional Proﬁle of the Delphibacteria Lineage
Due to the abundance and prevalence of Delphibacteria organ-
isms in the dolphin oral samples, we investigated the metabolic
potential of
the near-complete DolZOral124_Bacteria_64_63
genome. The genome dataset contained 49 of 51 universal bac-
terial single-copy genes used to assess completeness [21].
It comprised 3,362,850 bp and is predicted to contain 3,011 pro-
tein-coding genes. It appears to utilize a variety of compounds as
carbon and energy sources, including polysaccharides such as
starch/glycogen, acetate, acetaldehyde, ethanol, and butyrate
(Figure 3; Data S2). DolZOral124_Bacteria_64_63 carries the
potential to ferment to acetate, with ethanol and acetaldehyde
being produced during regeneration of NAD+ required for glycol-
ysis. Two of the three genes speciﬁc to gluconeogenesis are also
present, as are those involved in the non-oxidative pentose
phosphate pathway. The genome includes the capacity for
amylose synthesis and possibly GDP-L-rhamnose synthesis.

The complete gene complement required for running the
forward tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle is present. Accordingly,
the DolZOral124_Bacteria_64_63 genome is predicted to
support aerobic respiration and possibly also anaerobic respi-
ration using nitrogen compounds as terminal electron accep-
tors. The catalytic subunit of a periplasmic nitrate reductase
was detected (napA), as were accessory periplasmic nitrate
reductase subunits. The catalytic subunit of a nitric oxide
reductase (norB) and the terminal nitrous oxide reductase
(nosZ) were also detected. Nitrite reductase genes (nirK
or nirS) were not identiﬁed, nor were many of the subunits
typically associated with the above reductases. Nonetheless,
the presence of catalytic subunits for three out of the four
steps involved in converting nitrate to dinitrogen suggests
that this Delphibacteria representative is capable of denitriﬁ-
cation. We detected another mechanism for generating proton
motive force in the form of a pumping pyrophosphatase,
indicating that DolZOral124_Bacteria_64_63 may be able
to utilize pyrophosphate as an alternative chemical energy
carrier to ATP.

DolZOral124_Bacteria_64_63 is most likely a lipopolysaccha-
ride-producing bacterial species with ﬂagella and type IV pili and
capable of chemotaxis. We identiﬁed ten acriﬂavin resistance
proteins, which are typically involved in efﬂux of cationic antimi-
crobial peptides. Overall, we infer that this is a heterotrophic
organism that has the genomic potential for oxygen and most
likely nitrate reduction.

given the large size of the BGC. Based on the prominence of
this Actinobacterium in both dolphin oral microbiotas and the
size of this genomic region (3% of the genome), the peptide
product is likely to be advantageous to the organism, and may
facilitate interactions within the community and/or with the host.

Large Biosynthetic Gene Cluster in the Dominant
Actinobacteria Genome
One of the two highest-coverage bins in both samples contained
scaffolds that nearly exclusively encoded genes that were part of
a small-molecule biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC). The products
of BGCs are diverse and often act as mediators in bacteria-host
or bacteria-bacteria interactions [22, 23]. On ﬁrst inspection, the
BGC was not assigned to any draft-quality genomes from these
samples. Extension of the BGC-associated scaffold revealed
that it is part of the genome of the most abundant species in
both samples (Actinobacteria phylum). The BGC is located
within an 80,484-bp-long region of the genome ﬂanked by mo-
bile elements and has a relatively high GC content (74% versus
68% for the rest of the genome) (Figure S4A) and a distinct tet-
ranucleotide composition (Figure S4B). Its read coverage is
consistent with the rest of the genome (Figure S4C). These ﬁnd-
ings suggest that the BGC was acquired through a relatively
recent horizontal gene transfer event. Notably, the BGC is pre-
dicted to produce a relatively long non-ribosomal peptide
(NRP) of 17 amino acids (Figure 4). NRPs are synthesized by
NRP synthetase enzyme complexes, independent of the ribo-
some. In the MIBiG database [27], the average size of NRPs
synthesized by BGCs is only 6 amino acids long (SD ±4.5) (Fig-
ure S4D). Because the BGC does not have signiﬁcant similarity
to known BGCs and its predicted product does not resemble
any known peptide, elucidation of the function of this BGC prod-
uct will require heterologous expression—a daunting challenge

Novel Cas9 Diversity
Given the wealth of both novel bacterial and phage genomes, we
attempted to link phage sequences to bacterial hosts. We
ﬁrst identiﬁed CRISPR-Cas systems and, in doing so, discov-
ered surprising CRISPR-Cas9 diversity (see Supplemental
Discussion, Figure S5, and Data S3 and S4). We identiﬁed a
total of 67 unique predicted Cas9 proteins (see STAR Methods).
Interestingly, two are longer than all Cas9 protein sequences
in the RefSeq database [28]
(accessed December 2016)
(Figure 5A) (DolZOral124_scaffold_19676_2: 1,895 amino acids;
DolZOral124_scaffold_953_34: 1,794 amino acids). Neither was
assigned to any of the recovered genomes. Another Cas9 con-
tains a large insertion in the RuvC-III domain (DolZOral124_
scaffold_26_62, also unassigned). We aligned all three novel
Cas9 amino acid sequences against AnaCas9 from Actinomyces
naeslundii (Figure 5B). AnaCas9 was selected as a reference
because it has a resolved crystal structure and it is a type II-C
Cas9, as are the three novel predicted proteins in the present
study (Figure S6; Data S1). We found that the largest insertions
in the two long Cas9 proteins are concentrated in regions
that align with the a-helical, b-hairpin, and RuvC-III domains
of AnaCas9. The DolZOral124_scaffold_26_62 Cas9 has a
304-amino acid insertion in the RuvC-III domain when compared
with AnaCas9. This insertion has signiﬁcant homology (R30%
identity over 100% sequence length; e value < 1e-10) to seven
other Cas9 proteins in the NCBI non-redundant protein database
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/). Attempts to infer the
function of the insertion were inconclusive (see Supplemental
Discussion) [29, 30].

Saccharibacteria Type II CRISPR-Cas Systems and a
Saccharibacteria-Infecting Phage
CRISPR-Cas systems are exceedingly rare within the CPR. In a
survey of 354 high-quality draft genomes from the CPR, Burstein
et al. [31] found that only ﬁve genomes (1.4%) contained a
CRISPR-Cas system, and none contained a type II system. We
found complete type II CRISPR-Cas systems in two out of ﬁve
Saccharibacteria (CPR) genomes (see Supplemental Discus-
sion). The Saccharibacteria genomes are not closely related to
each other; the ribosomal protein S3 sequences share 67%
amino acid identity, which is less than expected for genomes
in the same family [32]. Although the two complete Saccharibacteria Cas9 proteins are afﬁliated with a single clade of type II-C
Cas9 proteins (Figure S6), neither of the CRISPR-Cas loci en-
codes a Cas4 protein, as would be expected for a type II-C
system.

The ability to identify phages that infect CPR bacteria is
important to understanding CPR bacterial evolution and the con-
straints that they face in their natural settings. However, it is rare
to identify phages that infect the CPR [31, 33, 34]. Using
CRISPRFinder [35] and Crass [36], we identiﬁed a total of 42
unique spacers from Saccharibacteria CRISPR arrays (see Sup-
plemental Discussion and Data S4). Of the Saccharibacteria
spacers, only one (from the sole CRISPR array associated with
DolZOral124_Saccharibacteria_55_12_B) matched a genomic
fragment that was identiﬁable as a phage genome (DolZOral124_
Phage_53_65). The phage and Saccharibacteria genomes were
originally binned together based on tetranucleotide frequency.
Convergence of tetranucleotide frequency is suggestive of a his-
tory of co-evolution between a phage and its bacterial host [37].
The phage genome is circular and 38,841 bp long, with a GC
content of 52%. No read pairs mapped to both the phage and
Saccharibacteria genomes. Consequently, we infer that the
phage was not integrated into the host genome at the time of
sampling. The phage genome contains 50 predicted open
reading frames (ORFs) and no tRNAs (Figure 6; Data S5). Pre-
dicted functions of these ORFs include host cell lysis, phage
packaging, and DNA recombination.

<Conclusion> DISCUSSION.
We used genome-resolved metagenomics to study the micro-
bial communities of
two dolphin oral samples in order to
explore the unusual evolutionary and functional diversity pre-
dicted by a previous 16S rRNA gene-based survey [12]. Of
note, we detected and characterized novel
lineages distantly
related to and reproducibly unafﬁliated with known phyla. We
propose that they represent phylum-level
lineages for which
we put forth the names Candidatus Delphibacteria and Candi-
datus Fertabacteria. The Delphibacteria representative charac-
terized here is predicted to denitrify, which is a process that
may impact dolphin health and physiology. For example, in hu-
mans, denitriﬁcation by oral bacteria can affect oral and gastric
blood ﬂow, signaling in bacteria-bacteria and bacteria-host
interactions, and mucus thickness in the stomach [38, 39]. It
is unclear whether bacteria in the Delphibacteria candidate
phylum remain uncultured due to intrinsic biological factors or
due to the absence of a systematic effort to culture and identify
them using traditional methods. Regardless, our genomic anal-
ysis may provide insights into the conditions required for
successful cultivation of these and closely related bacteria,
especially with regard to oxygen conditions and potential en-
ergy and carbon sources.

In addition, we recovered genomes from candidate phyla
whose members are seldom associated with animals. These ge-
nomes will be a valuable resource for future comparative studies
aimed at understanding how such bacteria adapt to a mamma-
lian environment. Interestingly, we detected members of the
Saccharibacteria phylum. Members of this phylum have been
associated with human oral disease [40]. At least one Sacchari-
bacteria strain, an obligate endobiont of an Actinobacterium, has
the ability to modify human immune responses in vitro [9]. This
may aid Saccharibacteria and potentially also their microbial
host/s in avoiding clearance by the human immune system. It
remains unclear whether oral Saccharibacteria are detrimental
to dolphin health, and whether they may be associated with
Actinobacteria in this setting.

An interesting aspect of our community composition analysis
was that the highest-coverage genome was from an Actinobac-
terium that went virtually undetected in the previously published
16S rRNA amplicon survey. The underlying reasons for this
discrepancy remain unknown. This ﬁnding highlights the fact
that even among relatively well characterized phyla there exist
unexplored branches represented by organisms with unusual
predicted properties that are inherently distinct from the bacteria
we are accustomed to studying.

By exploring the microbiology of the dolphin mouth, we
uncovered an unexpected diversity of CRISPR systems
that are related to those used in recently developed CRISPR-
Cas9-based genome editing methods [41]. At this time, the
potential technological value of divergent proteins from class 2
CRISPR-Cas systems (those with single-subunit CRISPR RNA
(crRNA)-effector molecules) remains relatively unexplored and
so the signiﬁcance of the ﬁndings remains unclear. However,
the ﬁndings further establish the potential importance of genes
discovered in the genomes of bacteria newly characterized by
cultivation-independent metagenomics [10].

Previously unexplored environments, such as the marine
mammal oral cavity, contain a wealth of phylogenetic and func-
tional novelty of which we have only just scratched the surface.
Populating the tree of life with genomes from poorly understood
or previously unsampled microbial lineages from diverse envi-
ronments, and characterizing the phages that infect them, is an
important step toward creating a comprehensive picture of the
evolutionary history of life on Earth.

References