
1. Introduction

Is Friday ‘right’ and Monday ‘left’? Some individuals experience vivid
spatial forms for non-numerical sequences such as the weekdays, and most
would agree on a left-to-right arrangement, at least in Western societies
reading from left-to-right. In fact, psychological experiments show that the
cognitive representation of sequence includes a spatial component: In
natural sequences such as numbers, months and weekdays (Dehaene,
Bossini, & Giraux, 1993; Gevers, Reynvoet, & Fias, 2003; Gevers,
Reynvoet, & Fias, 2004), but also in just rehearsed artiﬁcial sequences of
random numbers or objects (van Dijck & Fias, 2011), the primary/ﬁnal
items are mentally arranged to the left/right by healthy participants and
corresponding left-hand and right-hand responses are relatively faster in
simple classiﬁcation tasks. Seeing these resembling behavioral patterns, a
concise theory could assume that the same neurocognitive process un-
derlies the tendency to project all enumerable objects mentally onto space.
The SNARC eﬀect (spatial-numerical associations of response codes)
oﬀers a reliable and insightful testbed for exploring spatial associations
and the eﬀect was originally observed in judgments of numerical symbols.
Numerous studies replicated its central ﬁnding of relatively faster left-side
than right-side responding to smaller numbers, and vice versa for larger
numbers (Dehaene et al., 1993; see Wood, Willmes, Nuerk, & Fischer,
2008 for a meta-analysis). Originally, the SNARC eﬀect was understood as
a long-term spatial representation of numerical magnitude resembling a
mental number line (Pinel, Piazza, Bihan, & Dehaene, 2004; Restle, 1970).
However, this classical account would assume that a distinct spatial
representation would produce SNARC eﬀects with non-numerical se-
quences such as letters or weekdays.
Notably, although SNARC and SNARC-like eﬀects were documented
for both numerical and non-numerical sequences (Dehaene et al., 1993;
Fias, Brysbaert, Geypens, & D’Ydewalle, 1996; Gevers et al., 2004), se-
quences such as the weekdays expose a clear ordinal structure with ad-
ditional cyclic component (Zamarian, Egger, & Delazer, 2007) whereas the
number sequence includes mixed ordinal and cardinal magnitude features.
For instance, the single-digit ‘2’ could refer to the second item in a row
(ordinality), but the same digit ‘2’ could also imply twice the amount of
something (cardinality). In contrast, ‘Tuesday’ only refers to the second
day of the week and never implies the summed-up amount of two days. A
conceptual controversy among numerical cognition researchers regards
therefore the distinction between number magnitude and sequential order
information (e.g., Fitousi, 2010) and their respective roles in forming
spatial representations in the SNARC eﬀect
(e.g., Nathan, Shaki,
Salti, & Algom, 2009). A potentially unifying account was recently pro-
moted by experimentally disentangling the cardinal and ordinal properties
of number: In a delayed working memory (WM) paradigm, participants
were asked to maintain randomized number sequences (e.g., 4-1-6-8-3)
and performed a SNARC task on the memorized numbers in a delay
period. In this experiment (and in several follow-up studies), it turned out
that spatial-numerical associations were based on the sequential order and
not on the semantic magnitude information of the numbers (van Dijck,
Abrahamse, Acar, Ketels, & Fias, 2014; van Dijck & Fias, 2011). This
ﬁnding led to the WM account of the SNARC eﬀect: Here, numbers are
thought to elicit spontaneous adaptations of a general cognitive process to
arrange the present sequence with a spatial layout at the level of WM to
temporarily built an eﬀective (spatial) mental representation (Abrahamse,
van Dijck, & Fias, 2016). The important contribution of verbal WM to the
SNARC eﬀect was highlighted even before in diﬀerent studies that showed
reversals of SNARC eﬀects by verbal labels positioned at physically in-
compatible locations (Gevers, Verguts, Reynvoet, Caessens, & Fias, 2006;
Gevers et al., 2010). Moreover, compatibility eﬀects were observed be-
tween the parity concept and spatial responding in the MARC eﬀect
(Berch, Foley, Hill, & Ryan, 1999; Iversen, Nuerk, Jäger, & Willmes, 2006;
Iversen, Nuerk, & Willmes, 2004; Nuerk,
Iversen, & Willmes, 2004;
Schroeder & Pﬁster, 2015). The assumption of the MARC eﬀect is based on
the principle of markedness: Linguistically, there is a default member in
opposite pairs which is deﬁned by semantic, distributional, or formal
characteristics. If a classiﬁcation involves stimulus and response features
that share their markedness status, this can lead to faster performance than
when one feature is marked and the other is not. This behavior can also
account for the standard numerical SNARC eﬀect because response fea-
tures and verbal magnitude categorization share the marked members
(small-left) or unmarked linguistic members (large-right) in compatible
trials, which usually yield faster responses than incompatible trials. In less
detail, the verbally mediated categorical correspondence principle is also
compatible with the proposal of polarity correspondence (Proctor & Cho,
2006) and the involvement of verbal circuits for magnitude processing
(Dehaene, Piazza, Pinel, & Cohen, 2003).

Regarding the underlying functional neuroanatomy, the uniﬁed
theory also invites shifting the focus from the parietal regions bolstering
numerical representations and operations (Cohen Kadosh & Walsh,
2009; Dehaene et al., 2003; Piazza, Pinel, Le Bihan, & Dehaene, 2007)
to prefrontal cortex regions and their contributions to the processing of
sequential order (Marshuetz, Smith, Jonides, DeGutis, & Chenevert,
2000; Shimamura, Janowsky, & Squire, 1990), most likely in conjunc-
tion with distributed WM systems (Baddeley, 2000; D’Esposito & Postle,
2015; Hurlstone, Hitch, & Baddeley, 2014). Furthermore, previous re-
search identiﬁed especially frontoparietal networks for abstract quan-
tity representations in non-human primates, possibly along a hier-
archical gradient (Nieder, 2016; Tudusciuc & Nieder, 2009). Prefrontal
activations were also often found in early neuroimaging studies of
number processing; however, they were often interpreted as subserving
only or predominantly non-numerical processes and were thus not (or
less) considered in neurofunctional models (e.g., Dehaene et al., 2003).
Disruption of the frontoparietal number circuits in human participants
with transcranial magnetic stimulation over right frontal eye ﬁeld and
inferior frontal gyrus, but not over parietal regions, reduced spatial-
numerical associations (Rusconi, Dervinis, Verbruggen, & Chambers,
2013). Furthermore, functional and structural connectivities between
neuroanatomically distinct frontal and parietal areas corroborate verbal
and non-verbal processing of numerical magnitude (Klein et al., 2016).
By administering transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) to the
left prefrontal cortex, we recently demonstrated polarity-dependent mod-
ulations of SNARC eﬀects in a sham-controlled setting (Schroeder, Pﬁster,
Kunde, Nuerk, & Plewnia, 2016). Originally, this tDCS conﬁguration was
motivated by the possibility to modulate WM processes with cathodal tDCS
(e.g., Wolkenstein, Zeiller, Kanske, & Plewnia, 2014; Zaehle, Sandmann,
Thorne, Jäncke, & Herrmann, 2011), and a recent publication demonstrated
the selectivity of left-hemispheric tDCS on a verbal letter n-back WM tasks
and right-hemispheric tDCS on a visuospatial n-back task (Ruf,
Fallgatter, & Plewnia, 2017). Similar modulations of number processing by
prefrontal tDCS were also observed in number bisection and clock drawing
tasks (Arshad et al., 2016). Transcranial brain stimulation with tDCS directs
weak currents in the range of 1–2 mA to targeted brain regions and its
eﬀects are best deﬁned by the current polarity, which produces pre-
dominant excitation underneath the ‘anodal’ electrode and inhibition un-
derneath the ‘cathodal’ electrode (Nitsche & Paulus, 2000). The eﬀects of
tDCS are thought
to depend on the current network activity
(Fertonani & Miniussi, 2016), as neural structures are not entirely blocked,
but resting membrane potentials are shifted and thus ﬁring thresholds are
reduced (anodal tDCS) or increased (cathodal tDCS). However, cathodal
tDCS can also modulate resting-state connectivity (Keeser et al., 2011) and
engagement of task-speciﬁc fronto-parietal networks in arithmetic proces-
sing (Hauser et al., 2016) and in verbal ﬂuency (Ehlis, Haeussinger, Gastel,
Fallgatter, & Plewnia, 2015). Thus, the method is ideally suited to modulate
SNARC-related network activity, including left-hemispheric verbal WM
(Gevers et al., 2010; van Dijck & Fias, 2011). Nevertheless, it is mandatory
to highlight that the mechanisms of tDCS are not yet clearly understood and
its eﬃcacy is rather controversial (Horvath, Forte, & Carter, 2015). In be-
havioral tasks, it should be further acknowledged that internal consistency
and test-retest reliability for reaction time measurements can be fairly low
[e.g., r1/2 = .698 for SNARC regression slopes (Cipora & Nuerk, 2013)].
Finally, behavioral eﬀects of tDCS can be observed best when a task implies
a targeted region, and stimulation eﬀects were most pronounced for the
most active task instructions (Gill, Shah-basak, & Hamilton, 2015; Zwissler
et al., 2014).

In separate experiments involving parity and magnitude judgment,
we recently observed a reduction of SNARC eﬀects by cathodal tDCS to
the left prefrontal cortex (Schroeder et al., 2016). However, the mere
correspondence between WM-implied areas and neuromodulation re-
sults only provided suggestive evidence for a WM account of the SNARC
eﬀect, and alternative explanations such as a modulation of subthres-
hold conﬂict detection processes still required further empirical vali-
dation (Schroeder et al., 2016). Moreover, the tested single-digit stimuli
could not diﬀerentiate whether the modulation of SNARC eﬀects by
prefrontal tDCS depended on numerical magnitude or sequential order
information, because numbers convey simultaneous ordinal and car-
dinal magnitude information, as noted above. However, the uniﬁed
ordinal WM account would predict comparable behavioral changes
from the same manipulation of neurocognitive activity in both ordinal,
non-numerical sequences as well as in cardinal, numerical sequences
with magnitude information.

Thus, following up on the previously reported eﬀects of tDCS on
spatial-numerical processing (Arshad et al., 2016; Schroeder et al.,
2016), the current study set out to also investigate modulations of the
spatial associations of a non-numerical sequence by the identical left-
hemispheric prefrontal tDCS conﬁguration. More precisely, to address
whether the same neurocognitive mechanism is involved in mentally
aligning numerical and non-numerical sequences spatially, we tested
two groups of healthy participants before and concurrent to anodal or
cathodal tDCS in a series of classiﬁcation tasks. From the previous re-
sults, we expected that the stimulation would attenuate (cathodal
group) or emphasize (anodal group) the associations between space and
sequence positions for a single-digit numerical sequence (1–5) and we
expected the same behavior for a non-numerical weekday sequence
(Monday-Friday). Thus, the design tested the presence of a generalized
neurocognitive mechanism that would predict similar stimulation ef-
fects from the spontaneous arrangement of order along a spatial tem-
plate.

In a separate control experiment conducted in the same participants on
the same testing day, we also asked whether stimulation eﬀects could
persist even in cases where the target concept (e.g., numerical or non-nu-
merical sequence) is only weakly activated. We therefore tested partici-
pants’ performance with the same stimuli on a task variant that does not
require active processing of the sequence (font color classiﬁcation). In the
order-irrelevant tasks, SNARC-like eﬀects are less substantial (Gevers et al.,
2003, 2004) or even abolished due to involvement of SNARC-irrelevant
neural circuits in color classiﬁcation (Fias, Lauwereyns, & Lammertyn,
2001). Thus, given that sequence information is here available to somewhat
smaller extents, this task variant tested the possibility of subthreshold de-
tection modulations (Schroeder et al., 2016) as opposed to the state de-
pendency principle of tDCS (Gill et al., 2015; Zwissler et al., 2014). The
subthreshold detection hypothesis would anticipate greater neuromodula-
tion eﬀects in the color judgment tasks in the sense that a response conﬂict
between the spatial code extracted from numerical/ordinal information and
spatial responding would become behaviorally relevant only concurrent to
tDCS when capacities are enhanced, but the state dependency principle
would anticipate greater neuromodulation eﬀects in the order-relevant
judgment tasks.

The main prediction, however, was that the relatively faster left-
hand responses for small and early items and relatively faster right-
hand responses for large and late items would assemble substantial
SNARC eﬀects in both groups and both tested sequences during the
baseline measurement. Moreover, in line with a uniﬁed account of the
SNARC eﬀect, we hypothesized that this link between space and order
would become less pronounced during cathodal tDCS and stronger
during anodal tDCS irrespective of the tested sequence.

<Middle> Materials and methods.
2.1. Participants.
Forty-eight healthy right-handed participants were tested twice,
before (baseline performance) and during 1 mA tDCS (stimulation
performance) either with anodal polarity (n = 24; mean age: 22.4 y,
range: 18–30 y, 4 male) or with cathodal polarity (n = 24; mean age:
23.0 y, range: 18–27 y, 5 male). The two groups were matched in terms
of age, p = .463, gender, p = .719, handedness score, p = .726, years
of education, p = .381 (mean: 16.17 y, range: 12.5–22 y), and verbal
intelligence, p = 721 (assessed with a brief German vocabulary test;
Lehrl, 2005). All participants gave written informed consent and re-
ceived monetary compensation or course credits for their attendance.
Ethical agreement was obtained from University Hospital Tuebingen
Ethical Commision (NO: 701/2015BO2). Participants were eligible for
the study if they were native German speakers without neurological or
psychiatric impairment (explicitly including epilepsy, developmental
disorders, as well as synesthesia and color blindness), and if they
complied with safety regulation (no metallic implants, pregnancy,
medication or use of recreational drugs, cardiac pacemaker, according
to participant self-reports).

2.2. Procedure

Participants were randomly assigned to the anodal or cathodal tDCS
group. Except for the administered stimulation polarity, all procedures for

the two groups were identical. All participants completed both the order-
relevant experiment as well as the order-irrelevant control experiment.
After completion of the baseline performance phase, participants com-
pleted an unrelated cognitive test (beads task), rated their mood (Watson,
Clark, & Tellegen, 1988) and were equipped with tDCS. A resting phase of
5 min after stimulation onset preceded repeated testing of SNARC and
SNARC-like eﬀects with numerical and non-numerical sequences in order-
relevant comparison tasks and also in order-irrelevant classiﬁcation tasks
(control experiment). Participants from both groups (anodal and cathodal)
completed all tasks in both experiments. The orders of experiments and
tasks within experiments were counterbalanced across participants. In the
order-relevant experiment, participants had to decide whether a weekday
came before or after ‘Wednesday’ (ordinal sequence) or whether a number
was smaller or greater than the referent ‘3’ (cardinal sequence). Two
keyboard buttons (covert ‘s’ and ‘l’ on a QWERTZ-keyboard) were oper-
ated by left-hand and right-hand index ﬁnger presses and response-map-
pings were switched within the tasks in counterbalanced order across
participants. In the control experiment, the task was to indicate font colors
by left-hand or right-hand index ﬁnger key presses and to ignore in se-
parate blocks weekday names (Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday),
number symbols (1, 2, 4, 5), and color words in a control Stroop task (blue,
green) that was included to assess automatic color-word interference and
possible tDCS modulations of executive functions (Stroop, 1935). The
same weekday and number stimuli appeared in both order-relevant and
order-irrelevant experiments.

All single tasks were preceded by a brief training block (16 trials) and
an error count emphasized correct responding. Corresponding to previous
studies with weekday stimuli (Gevers et al., 2004), the experimental
procedure comprised 20 target repetitions in each task, with 300 ms
ﬁxation hash (#), 2 s target presentation (or until response), and 300 ms
error feedback (German words ‘Fehler’ [error] or ‘Bitte schneller an-
tworten’ [please respond faster]) or a blank inter-trial interval.

2.3. Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS)

2015;

Fallgatter, & Plewnia,

Direct current was generated by a CE-certiﬁed stimulator (DC-
STIMULATOR MC, NeuroConn, Ilmenau, Germany). The active electrode
(anode or cathode in the respective groups) was placed over the left PFC
(F3), the return electrode was ﬁxed to the right upper arm (Schroeder,
Ehlis, Wolkenstein,
Vandermeeren,
Jamart, & Ossemann, 2010; Wolkenstein & Plewnia, 2013; Zwissler et al.,
2014). Both 5 × 7 cm rubber electrodes were covered with adhesive paste
(10/20 conductive EEG paste, Kappamedical, USA) and impedances were
kept below 10 kΩ. 1 mA direct current was faded in with a 5 s ramp and a
5 min idle time preceded task initiation, with a stimulation duration of
25 min. Participants were told to relax during the idle time before the task
and the experimenter announced the beginning of classiﬁcation tasks with
initiation of written instructions on the computer screen. Fig. 1 displays a
current ﬂow model with standard conductivity values of the used elec-
trode montage (Thielscher, Antunes, & Saturnino, 2015), which empha-
sizes a relatively dense ﬁeld in lateral PFC, but not in parietal regions. In
the stimulation phase, all tasks were completed concurrent to active tDCS.
Participants rated adverse eﬀects (Brunoni et al., 2011) as well as mood
(Watson et al., 1988) after completion of the stimulation protocol. Sti-
mulation polarity (anodal, cathodal) was randomly assigned and balanced
across participants to create equally sized groups.

2.4. Data treatment

The current data were collected as part of a larger project on the
cognitive foundations of numerical and non-numerical spatial associa-
tions. Results from the baseline sessions are also reported in another
paper which examines in greater detail individual diﬀerences, psycho-
metric properties, and construct validity of diﬀerent spatial associations
(Schroeder, Nuerk, & Plewnia, in press). The eﬀects of tDCS are ana-
lysed for the ﬁrst time in the current manuscript.
SNARC and SNARC-like eﬀects are indicated by an interaction
(ANOVA) of the repeated measures factors hand (left hand, right hand)
and position (which corresponds to increasing magnitudes in number sti-
muli: 1,2,4,5; weekdays: Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday), as re-
commended by Tzelgov, Zohar-Shai, and Nuerk (2013). The repeated
measures factor set (numbers, weekdays) was further introduced to dif-
ferentiate numerical and non-numerical sequence items. Polarity-depen-
dent eﬀects of the stimulation denoted the factor combination of time
(baseline performance, stimulation performance) with the inter-subjects
factor tDCS polarity (anodal, cathodal). For brevity, we refer to these
critical two-way interactions as SNARC (position × hand) and stimulation
(polarity x time).

In a second step, as recommended in SNARC research, individual re-
gression coeﬃcients were extracted for a quantiﬁcation of SNARC eﬀects,
and for follow-up tests of its modulations by prefrontal tDCS, following the
method introduced by Lorch and Myers (1990). To that end, response-
hand latency diﬀerences (dRT = left hand–right hand) were regressed on
the individual sequence positions (see Fig. 2). From this procedure, a
single negative coeﬃcient signals the typical mapping of numbers and
weekdays onto space: With increasing sequence position, right-hand re-
sponses become relatively faster than left-hand responses. We ran LSD
simple eﬀects interaction analyses and student’s t-tests to isolate signiﬁcant
results of ANOVA on these regression coeﬃcients.

Finally, in the order-irrelevant control experiment, we additionally
report modulations in the Stroop task in terms of a repeated measures
ANOVA comprising the factor Stroop (compatible, incompatible) and
the factor stimulation (considered as the interaction term between sti-
mulation polarity and time, as above). Trials in the Stroop task were
regarded compatible if font color and written color were identical.

We considered only correct responses for response times analyses
(94.4% of all trials) and latencies deviating more than 3SDs of the corre-
sponding cell mean were discarded as outliers (1.7%). Greenhouse-Geisser
corrected df- and p-values are reported upon violations of sphericity.

3. Results

3.1. Stimulation adverse eﬀects and mood

Common and moderate sensations of tingling and discomfort at
stimulation sites were reported, but there were no signiﬁcant polarity
diﬀerences (ps > .48). Detailed adverse eﬀect ratings from both ex-
periments are reported in Table 1. Positive and negative aﬀect were not
signiﬁcantly modulated by stimulation, Fs(1,46) < 1, ps > .33.

3.2. Order-relevant magnitude classiﬁcation tasks

3.2.1. ANOVA

In the order-relevant comparison tasks, the anticipated two-way
interaction between hand and position – indicating the presence of
SNARC eﬀects – was signiﬁcant, F(2.14,138) = 10.55, p < .001,
ηp2 = 0.19. The main eﬀect of time was signiﬁcant F(1,46) = 24.73,
p < .001, ηp2 = 0.35, and mean responses were faster during anodal
or cathodal tDCS (523 ms) than in the preceding baseline session
(543 ms), but this was irrespective of stimulation polarity as rated by
the absence of signiﬁcance in the time × polarity interaction, F
(1,46) < 0.01, p = .950. In line with general eﬀects of word length
and familiarity (e.g., Gernsbacher, 1984), we observed generally faster
responses to numerical symbols (502 ms) than to letter strings (563 ms)
in a signiﬁcant main eﬀect of set, F(1,46) = 242.55, p < .001,
ηp2 = 0.84. This observation is in line with previous within-participant
designs that also found much faster responses (42ms–87 ms) for Arabic
number symbols (Nuerk et al., 2004; Nuerk, Wood, & Willmes, 2005).
Most importantly, a ﬁve-way interaction of set with hand x position
(henceforth: SNARC) and with time x polarity (henceforth: stimulation)
was signiﬁcant, F(2.27,138) = 5.66, p = .003, ηp2 = 0.11. This result
points to diﬀerential modulations of spatial associations in weekday
and number sequences by prefrontal tDCS. To more precisely interpret
the eﬀect of tDCS, we next quantiﬁed the obtained SNARC eﬀects by
linear regressions for the diﬀerent tasks and stimulation conditions.

Since response hand diﬀerences are aggregated in SNARC slopes, we
also checked in the ANOVA whether there was a more basic modulation
of hand by tDCS. At least one study suggested such modulations to re-
sult from tDCS over sensorimotor cortex (Minarik et al., 2016). In our
results, a signiﬁcant hand main eﬀect signaled faster right-hand
(526 ms) than left-hand key presses (540 ms), F(1,46) = 30.73,
p < .001, ηp2 = 0.40, as expected for a right-handed population. The
interaction term for hand with stimulation was not signiﬁcant, F
(1,46) < 1, p = .707, and there were also no signiﬁcantly faster re-
sponses in general from tDCS, F(1,46) < 1 p = .950, as expected from
our electrode placement and current ﬂow model (cf. Fig. 1). We
reasoned not to consider generally modulated response speed mean-
ingful with our data and resumed with the analyses of diﬀerent SNARC
modulations.

3.2.2. Regression coeﬃcient analyses: quantiﬁcation of SNARC eﬀects and
their modulations by prefrontal tDCS

Mean response hand diﬀerences as a function of sequence position
for all experimental conditions are displayed in Fig. 2 (top row). The
unstandardized and standardized regression coeﬃcients resulting from
linear regression for both stimulation conditions are reported in Table 2
including test statistics. To quantify the observed polarity- and sti-
mulus-dependent stimulation eﬀects, coeﬃcients of the order-relevant
SNARC tasks were submitted to a repeated measures ANOVA com-
prising the factors set and stimulation, as above, followed up by simple
eﬀects analyses for signiﬁcant interaction terms.

The analysis revealed diﬀerent tDCS modulations of SNARC eﬀects
for numbers and weekdays, as indicated by a signiﬁcant interaction
term between set and stimulation, F(1,46) = 14.01, p < .001,
ηp2 = 0.23. Thus, this analysis based on extracted regression coeﬃ-
cients reproduced the previously obtained dissociative result. For the
baseline session only, the main eﬀect of set was not signiﬁcant, F(1,47)
= 0.37, p = .544, suggesting that the SNARC regression slopes for
numerical and non-numerical stimuli were comparable in terms of their
intensity. For numbers, interaction analyses revealed that a diﬀerence
between SNARC slopes was signiﬁcant already during the baseline
session, F(1,46) = 4.69, p = .036, ηp2 = 0.09. However, the diﬀerence
between groups vanished for the stimulation session, F(1,46) < 1,
p = .952, most likely due to the attenuation of numerical SNARC eﬀects
by cathodal tDCS and ampliﬁcation of numerical SNARC eﬀects by
anodal tDCS (Fig. 2), as observed before in sham-controlled experi-
ments (cf. Schroeder et al., 2016). In contrast to the sham-controlled
results, the direct comparisons of SNARC slopes before and concurrent
to tDCS were not signiﬁcant for the cathodal group, t(23) = 1.23,

p = .230, or for the anodal group, t(23) = 1.19, p = .248. In all con-
ditions, negative signed coeﬃcients implied left-to-right oriented
mental number representations during both cathodal and anodal sti-
mulation (see Table 2).

For the ordinal weekday sequence, the pattern of results was essentially
reversed (Fig. 2): No diﬀerences were detected during the baseline session, F
(1,46) < 1, p = .932. However, a clear and highly signiﬁcant group dif-
ference emerged for the stimulation session, F(1,46) = 16.74, p < .001,
ηp2 = 0.27, driven by a reversal of SNARC directionality during anodal
tDCS. In this case, a positive signed coeﬃcient emerged during anodal sti-
mulation, indicative of a reversed right-to-left representation of the
weekday order, and opposite in directionality as compared to both baseline
performance within the same participants,
t(23) = 3.54, p = .002,
d = 0.95, and as also compared to stimulation performance in the cathodal
tDCS group, t(46) = 3.43, p < .001, d = 0.99.
3.2.3. Error rates

In total, participants made relatively few errors (5.6%). When we
analyzed error rates with ANOVA, the SNARC eﬀect was not signiﬁcant,
F(2.81,138) = 1.98, p = .124. The interaction terms of SNARC with set
and stimulation were not signiﬁcant as well, ps > .60.

3.3. Control experiment: order-irrelevant font color classiﬁcation tasks

3.3.1. ANOVA

Mean response hand diﬀerences as a function of sequence position
for all experimental conditions are displayed in Fig. 2 (bottom row). In
the color judgment tasks, weekday order and number magnitude in-
formation was less active, because the task required only a classiﬁcation
of the stimulus font color. Nevertheless, a trend for an overall SNARC
eﬀect was detected, F(2.67,138) = 2.26, p = .092, ηp2 = 0.05.
In
striking contrast to the main results from the order-relevant classiﬁca-
tions, there was no further modulation of SNARC by stimulation nor by
set, all ps > .200. Also, the previously signiﬁcant interaction between
SNARC, set, and stimulation did not approach signiﬁcance in the order-
irrelevant color judgment task, F(2.51,138) < 1, p = .599.

Also in these tasks, we observed generally faster responses to nu-
merical symbols (462 ms) than to letter strings (506 ms) in a signiﬁcant
main eﬀect of set, F(1,46) = 115.89, p < .001, ηp2 = 0.72. The main
eﬀect of time was not signiﬁcant in the order-irrelevant tasks, F
(1,46) < 0.01, p = .967. In particular, there was no time × polarity
interaction, F(1,46) = 0.18, p = .676.

3.3.2. Error rates

The SNARC eﬀect was not signiﬁcant, F(2.20,138) = 1.09,
p = .346. The interaction terms of SNARC with set and stimulation were
not signiﬁcant as well, ps > .54.
The Stroop task was included as a control measure for both auto-
matic reading in color judgment and modulation of executive functions
by tDCS. RTs were submitted to ANOVA comprising the factors Stroop
(compatible, incompatible) and stimulation as reported above. There
was no signiﬁcant interaction of Stroop and stimulation, F(1,46) < 1,
p = .879, and a main eﬀect of Stroop signaled reliable color-word in-
terference from automatic
reading, F(1,46) = 17.63, p < .001,
ηp2 = 0.28. This manipulation check indicates i) that the signiﬁcant
ﬁndings from order-relevant classiﬁcations are not accounted for by a
general modulation of executive functions as captured by Stroop (e.g.,
inhibition), and ii) that diﬀerent stimulation eﬀects between the two
experiments are not due to a lack of automatic reading in the color
judgment task.

3.5. Comparison of stimulation eﬀects on order-relevant and order-
irrelevant classiﬁcation tasks

A ﬁnal ANOVA was performed including all experimental factors to
resolve whether the diﬀerent results from the two experimental tasks
(order-relevant comparison vs. order-irrelevant color classiﬁcation)
were statistically signiﬁcant. Overall, the analysis again detected sig-
niﬁcant SNARC eﬀects, F(2.03,138) = 13.37, p < .001, ηp2 = 0.23.
Critically, the anticipated six-way interaction of task, set, stimulation
(polarity × time) and SNARC (position × hand) was signiﬁcant, F
(2.44,138) = 6.30, p = .001, ηp2 = 0.12, corroborating the orthogonal
and polarity-speciﬁc stimulation eﬀects for the two tasks and sequence
sets. This result substantiates our previous observation of diﬀerent
modulations in the order-relevant tasks, but no systematic modulations
in the order-irrelevant color judgment tasks. In addition, we also ob-
tained an interaction of SNARC with task, F(2.44,138) = 3.52,
p = .025, ηp2 = 0.07, in line with the observation that SNARC eﬀect
sizes were relatively larger in the order-relevant tasks (ηp2 = 0.19 as
compared to ηp2 = 0.05), as also reported in previous research (Fias
et al., 2001; Gevers et al., 2003). Thus, a modulation of spatial asso-
ciations by prefrontal tDCS was not only dependent on the stimulation
polarity and the currently employed sequence set, but also on the task-
induced activation of the sequence.

<Conclusion> Discussion.
In the current study, the neuromodulatory eﬀect of transcranial
direct current stimulation (tDCS) was employed to investigate a pre-
frontal circuit linking space with numerical and non-numerical se-
quence information. Participants compared number magnitude and
weekday positions in a baseline session without stimulation followed by
another session paralleled by either anodal or cathodal tDCS. We hy-
pothesized to observe similar modulations of spatial associations
(SNARC eﬀects) in both of the tested sequences from the recent pro-
posal of a uniﬁed WM mechanism, that was thought to generally pair
sequence information with a spatial template to build up eﬀective
mental representationsin space (Abrahamse et al., 2016; van
Dijck & Fias, 2011).
However, the results clearly demonstrated dissociative eﬀects of the
prefrontal stimulation in task- and polarity-dependent structure:
Whereas spatial-numerical associations maintained a rightwards di-
rection with increased prefrontal activity, the spatial alignment of
weekdays reversed to a leftwards direction with anodal, excitability
increasing stimulation. More precisely, during anodal tDCS, partici-
pants accomplished relatively faster right-hand than left-hand re-
sponses for the primary weekdays (Monday, Tuesday), and vice versa
for the later weekdays (Thursday, Friday), whereas the mental align-
ment of numbers tended to follow a left-to-right directional alignment,
with diﬀerent intensities, in all remaining conditions. Thus, we ob-
served a neurobehavioral dissociation of number and weekday spatial
associations during anodal tDCS in the same participants.

Before drawing inferences on the underlying theories, some aspects
need to be highlighted. First, the polarity-speciﬁc stimulation eﬀects on
spatial-numerical associations in the current data were additionally
pronounced due to group diﬀerences
in the baseline session.
Speciﬁcally, in the anodal tDCS group, the SNARC eﬀect for numbers
was not signiﬁcant before stimulation, but only concurrent to anodal
tDCS (see Table 2). Thus, although results are suggestive of reductions
of numerical SNARC eﬀects by cathodal tDCS and ampliﬁcations
thereof by anodal tDCS, as observed before (Schroeder et al., 2016), the
current results alone provide insuﬃcient evidence of this behavior due
to the a priori group diﬀerences and lack of signiﬁcance in within-group
comparison tests. In contrast, both groups exhibited comparable spatial
associations of the weekday sequence in the baseline measurements,
but stimulation eﬀects in the ordinal sequence were eﬀectively ortho-
gonal and statistically signiﬁcant for both within-group and between-
group comparisons.

Stimulation eﬀects emerged only for the order-relevant comparison
tasks, but not in a control experiment testing the eﬀects of font color
classiﬁcation. Moreover, color-word interference was present in all
stimulation conditions which suggests automatic reading at least for
words; we did not implement a speciﬁc test for automatic number
magnitude extraction (Dehaene et al., 1993; Henik & Tzelgov, 1982).
This demonstration of task selectivity is in line with reduced SNARC
eﬀects in order-irrelevant tasks (Gevers et al., 2003, 2004) that do not
necessarily overlap with number-related neural activations (Fias et al.,
2001). Thus, the additional result underlines the notion that tDCS
modulations of behavior are dependent on task-related activations (i.e.,
state-dependency principle of transcranial brain stimulation; Gill et al.,
2015; Silvanto & Pascual-Leone, 2008; Zwissler et al., 2014). In con-
trast, however, results from the order-irrelevant task do not permit to
nullify the possibility of subthreshold conﬂict detection modulations by
tDCS, but rather suggest that such eﬀects are negligible in the current
set of tasks as compared to the modulating eﬀects of stimuli and in-
struction. Regarding clinical applications of tDCS, the results highlight
how the selection of stimuli and tasks (beyond conﬁguration and in-
dividualization of stimulation parameters) can invert the outcome of a
stimulation. Consideration and further examination of this complex
interaction between stimulation, task, and individual could render
targeted stimulation treatments for neuropsychiatric conditions and
possibly for deﬁcits in numerical processing more eﬀective. However,
at the moment we would like to handle such interpretation with great
care, especially since the SNARC eﬀect is not consistently linked to
arithmetic achievement and performance (Cipora & Nuerk, 2013;
Cipora, Patro, & Nuerk, 2015). Because tDCS is still a relatively novel
and controversial technique, it remains mandatory to investigate its
basic principles and also challenge the reliability of seemingly solid
ﬁndings. For example, in an inﬂuential quantitative review, evaluation
of single-session tDCS eﬀects on cognitive eﬀects revealed no signiﬁcant
stimulation eﬀects (Horvath et al., 2015). We believe that this result in
general emphasizes the need for more precision and careful
implementation of tDCS mechanisms in the research ﬁeld.
The malleability of SNARC by prefrontal neuromodulation complements
previous studies (Arshad et al., 2016; Schroeder et al., 2016), but the results
challenge the uniﬁed conception of spatial representations. Given the ap-
parent incompatibility with the WM account (Abrahamse et al., 2016; van
Dijck & Fias, 2011), it is important to point out that the obtained tDCS
dissociation appears to be consistent with evidence from neuropsycholo-
gical patient studies. For instance, prefrontal damage could alter the re-
presentation of physical and mental number lines diﬀerentially (Doricchi,
Guariglia, Gasparini, & Tomaiuolo, 2005). But also for reproduction of a
non-numerical verbal list, frontal lobe lesions across diﬀerent patient groups
appeared related to disproportionate deﬁcits for organizing ordered in-
formation, even despite normal item memory in some groups (Shimamura
et al., 1990). Interestingly, neglect patients (after right parietal lesion)
usually demonstrate a rightward bias when bisecting physical lines (thus the
exact midpoint is actually more to the left than the declared bisection), but
also when bisecting numeric intervals, which is consistent with their visuo-
spatial deﬁcit. In contrast, the same neglect patients exhibited an opposite
leftward bias for bisections of non-numerical intervals such as months
(Zorzi, Priftis, Meneghello, Marenzi, & Umiltà, 2006) and also the weekday
sequence (Zamarian et al., 2007). Theoretically, in number line bisection
tasks, the cyclic nature of non-numerical sequences such as weekdays and
months could drive this reversal in patients’ representational space ex-
ploration, comparable to results from imagining numbers on a clockface
(Vuilleumier, Ortigue, & Brugger, 2004). However, Zorzi et al. (2006) also
found that neglect patients’ bias was independent of interval length and
thus argued for a categorical verbal-spatial process. In the following, we
motivate one possible explanation for the observed reversal by drawing on
linguistic markedness principles (MARC eﬀect) as one of multiple spatial
codes that can compete for diﬀerent directionalities observed in SNARC
eﬀects. In this framework, the biasing eﬀect of left-hemispheric anodal tDCS
towards markedness correspondence accounts for the observed reversal of
the spatial association of the weekday sequence.

4.1. Towards a linguistic processing account: SNARC becomes MARC

Further empirical evidence supports the involvement of verbal-
spatial coding in the SNARC eﬀect. For instance, spatial-numerical as-
sociations can be obtained without involvement of a physically later-
alized response by asking participants to respond verbally to centrally
presented numbers by naming spatial labels (e.g., by saying ‘left’ and
‘right’ for odd and even digits; Gevers et al., 2010). Such verbal-spatial
labels furthermore determined the direction of spatial-numerical

associations when they were conﬁgured contrarily to a physical later-
alization (e.g., the left display side was labelled as ‘right’) (Gevers et al.,
2010; Gevers et al., 2006). Similar SNARC eﬀects from verbal-spatial
codes were already documented to replace the physical shaping of vi-
sual spatial-numerical information in experiments with 10-year-old
children (Imbo, Brauwer, Fias, & Gevers, 2012). Moreover, regular
SNARC eﬀects were observed in neglect patients who, paradoxically,
also showed impaired number bisection performance (Priftis, Zorzi,
Meneghello, Marenzi, & Umiltà, 2006; Zorzi et al., 2006). This result
also supports the hypothesis of (auxiliary) verbal-spatial coding that
enables spatial representations with otherwise impaired system.

In principle, the availability of a verbal-spatial code is consistent
with the dual-coding theory of mental representations (Paivio, 1986)
and also more speciﬁcally with the triple-code model of magnitude
representation, which proposes that numerical representations also in-
clude left-hemispheric verbal codes among (visuo-)spatial and non-
symbolic analogue magnitude codes (Dehaene et al., 2003). In line with
these multiple codes, we can inspect in more depth why anodal tDCS
could have induced a bias towards a verbal-spatial code, which could
have produced the observed reversal in the weekday sequence by
drawing on linguistic markedness.

More precisely, regarding the verbal codes for non-numerical se-
quence representations, it is mandatory which categorical relation is
being mapped by means of the task instruction.

For instance, smaller/larger and earlier/later judgments in numer-
ical and non-numerical sequences might draw on diﬀerent linguistic
categorical dimensions. From a linguistic perspective, this precise
verbal distinction is highly relevant because it determines the linguistic
markedness of the categorical dimension, that is: the positive, un-
marked (+polar) and negative, marked (-polar) endpoints of the lin-
guistic continuum (Jakobson, 1984; Lakens, 2012). Linguistically, the
marked form of complementary terms is determined either by formal,
distributional, or semantic characteristics. For instance, the marked
endpoint of a dimension may include a pre- or suﬃx (formal), have less
frequent use cases (distributional), or its meaning is more speciﬁc (se-
mantic; Lyons, 1977). Psycholinguistically, across many diﬀerent do-
mains, classiﬁcation responses are faster when linguistic markedness
poles are identical across the continuums implied in a task, including
number, time, and space (Clark, 1969; Lakens, 2012; Proctor & Cho,
2006). For instance, by requiring left-hand and right-hand responses in
typical SNARC tasks, a second, spatial dimension is superimposed on
classiﬁcations of numerical magnitude or sequential order. The spatial
dimension similarly involves a default, unmarked (‘right’) and linguis-
tically marked (‘left’) feature polarity (Zimmer, 1964), which could
possibly be body-speciﬁc for right-handers, in addition (Casasanto,
2009). Furthermore, ‘large’ is the semantically unmarked form of the
verbal magnitude dimension because of its syntactic distribution and
default occurrence in the neutral question form (e.g., how large is
something; Jakobson, 1984; Lehrer, 2008). Thus, faster responses
should emerge for aligning large numbers with right-hand responses, as
typically evidenced by the SNARC eﬀect. This complex linguistically
motivated behavior was termed MARC eﬀect and it becomes proto-
typically apparent in parity judgment tasks, where a correspondence
between even and un-even (i.e., odd) digits with right-hand and left-
hand responses can be observed (Berch et al., 1999; Nuerk et al., 2004).
Regarding judgments on the sequential continuum, critically, the
‘before–after’ dichotomy is lexically diﬀerent from the ‘larger −
smaller’ classiﬁcation (Clark, 1969). According to linguistic markedness
principles, temporal propositions such as ‘earlier’ and ‘later’ both de-
viate from the unmarked standard moment in time (‘now’), yet judg-
ments on ‘earlier’ are easier (and faster) than judgments on ‘later’
(Handel, DeSoto, & London, 1968). Moreover, the principle of temporal
iconicity predicts ‘earlier’ to be coordinated lexically ﬁrst (Renner,
2014), comparable to the lexically unmarked member of com-
plementary adjective pairs. Also following Greenberg’s criteria of lex-
ical marking, it can be concluded that ‘early’ is the unmarked positive
polarity (Clark, 1973; Greenberg, 2005). This becomes apparent in
frequency of before-after, ﬁrst-later, and primary-ﬁnally constellations
in usual sentence constructions (Landsberg, 1995). As a result, and most
critical for the results obtained with sequential stimuli in the present
study, the preferred linguistic processing of ‘before’ and ‘large’ over
‘after’ and ‘small’ would qualitatively predict diﬀerent orientations of
correspondence eﬀects with spatial response dimensions (e.g., SNARC
eﬀects). More precisely, both ‘large’ and ‘before’ would constitute the
positive form as opposed to ‘small’ and ‘after’ (Clark, 1973), and
markedness correspondence would thus actually predict opposed sti-
mulus-response compatibility eﬀects (Nuerk et al., 2004) for numerical
magnitude and temporal relation judgments as observed in the current
study during anodal, but not cathodal tDCS.

From these considerations, we propose that the enhancement of left-
hemispheric prefrontal activity by anodal tDCS in the current study
eﬀectively biased cognitive processing in the weekday stimuli towards a
‘before-right’ linguistic markedness correspondence (e.g., MARC eﬀect).
As a consequence,
the rightwards directed spatial association of
weekdays during cathodal tDCS and baseline performance eﬀectively
reversed during anodal tDCS, which could indicate a switch towards
linguistic markedness correspondence following prefrontal excitation.
Importantly, the same proposed mechanism would produce numerical
‘large-right’ MARC eﬀects in the numerical sequence, but in the present
results, we could not distinguish the regular markedness mapping for
numbers from the diﬀerent coding strategies such as suggested by the
WM processes. Fig. 3 summarizes the multiple-coding framework that
would allow for such ﬂexible coding implementations resulting in the
directionality of a SNARC eﬀect.

Note that this is only one possible (yet rather exhaustive) explana-
tion for the observed reversal, but that the verbal markedness corre-
spondence alone does not account for regular left-to-right orientations
during baseline performance. Instead, diﬀerent explanations may ac-
count for the emergence of a linguistically incompatible mapping
without tDCS: For instance, cultural practices (e.g., reading habits) or
certain trainings can produce diﬀerent directions of spatial associations
(Göbel, Shaki, & Fischer, 2011; Notebaert, Gevers, Verguts, & Fias,
2006). Similarly, continuous sensorimotor interactions with sequence
stimuli in predeﬁned manner can shape a mental representation thereof
(Fischer, 2012). Already in children, space-number associations are
malleable by brief directional training procedures (Patro, Fischer,
Nuerk, & Cress, 2015), and spatial correspondences are additionally
utilized by metaphorical thinking, since only selected spatial schemas
produce behaviorally relevant eﬀects (Dolscheid & Casasanto, 2015). In
any case, the mapping of weekdays prior to tDCS is not accounted for by
the markedness correspondence principle, but rather by any of the
described mapping eﬀects.

The possibility of multiple spatial codes for numerical representa-
tions, however, was already acknowledged in early theories (Dehaene
et al., 2003) and has been – in lesser detail – previously proposed ac-
counting for parity eﬀects (e.g. Iversen et al., 2006, Fig. 3, pp.
735–736). The current paper generalizes this account to magnitude,
sequences, and any marked entity. Additionally, we provide a neuro-
functional test of this account allowing for integration in neurocogni-
tive models of number processing.

4.2. Marked SNARC eﬀects in other domains

The presented elaboration of contrary spatial associations from lin-
guistic processes in diﬀerent tasks and sequences is also consistent with
other previous empirical results not directly related to above results,
thereby suggesting generalizability of the account. For example, the
asymmetrical exploration of numerical and non-numerical spatial re-
presentations in neglect (Zamarian et al., 2007; Zorzi et al., 2006) can be
accounted for by considering contrarily oriented spatial representations
from linguistic markedness correspondence (and when the regular code
that arranges weekdays from left-to-right is presumably not available).
More precisely, leftward shifts by left-spatial neglect patients in some or-
dinal, but never in numerical sequences could result from compensatory
verbal-spatial processing and correspondence between verbal spatial labels
and ordinal properties, if a visuospatial simulation in neglected space is
not available or impaired. Furthermore, the vivid spatial representation of
months in a single-case synesthesia report switched for diﬀerent modality
presentations: For instance, the written word ‘January’ was aligned to the
left whereas its auditory presentation was aligned to the right (Jarick,
Dixon, Stewart, Maxwell, & Smilek, 2009). This result is highly consistent
with our account if the dominance of verbal-spatial codes is activated by
verbal auditory presentation and activation of visuospatial codes is en-
hanced by visual presentation. But also the original speculations are
compatible with our integrative account if her month series learning as a
child was indeed facilitated by mapping ‘January’ to the right, as it was
reported (Jarick et al., 2009).

Finally, when ascending and descending number and letter sequences
were judged, only numbers (with consistent markedness) were spatially
coordinated along with the direction instruction (Cheung & Lourenco,
2016). Likewise, linguistic markedness could also contribute to the re-
versal of SNARC eﬀects in earlier vs. later numerical judgments on ima-
gined clockfaces (Bächtold, Baumüller, & Brugger, 1998; Vuilleumier
et al., 2004).

Neurophysiologically, it appears as if the prefrontal stimulation
administered here induced a switch from the default dominance of a
visuospatial code (with left-to-right orientation of magnitude and or-
dinal position) to the verbal network. Here, a consistent linguistic
markededness correspondence of magnitude (small–large) with spatial
codes (left–right) exists in number, but an opposite MARC eﬀect in the
weekday-sequence (late–early) reverses SNARC eﬀects with non-nu-
merical items. Thus, tDCS may have increased verbal-spatial coding by
either drawing on prefrontal (Miller & Cohen, 2001) or inferior frontal
structures (Costafreda et al., 2006), as also conﬁrmed by our electric
ﬁeld modelling (cf. Fig. 1). However, future research is required to
empirically validate the assumed neurophysiological eﬀects of tDCS,
which are best qualiﬁed by modulation of a verbal-numerical left
hemispheric network, possibly including superior fasciculus long-
itudinalis III (Klein et al., 2016). Cross-cortical eﬀects from prefrontal
neuromodulation on parietal activity patterns could underlie the switch
from a dominant SNARC to a MARC eﬀect, but concurrent imaging is
necessary to verify the precise neurophysiological network eﬀects of
tDCS.

4.3. Alternative accounts

The presented hybrid model of two or more (competing) codes in-
volved in the generation of spatial associations (Fig. 3) can fully ac-
count for the current empirical observations, but it is mandatory to
highlight that this model is only one plausible explanation out of many
other possibilities.1 Most importantly, it may be possible that diﬀerent
cognitive processes underlie the SNARC eﬀect for weekdays and num-
bers, or that SNARC eﬀects for numbers arise from a diﬀerent under-
lying prefrontal mechanism (e.g., WM account) than the SNARC eﬀects
for weekdays (e.g., verbal-spatial processes). Actually, our results point
to multiple (verbal and visuo-spatial) processes underlying the SNARC
eﬀect (see Iversen et al., 2006, for similar suggestions in deaf partici-
pants), which may diﬀer for numbers and other orders and whose
weight might diﬀer depending on stimuli and stimulation. Since the
direction of stimulation eﬀects would be identical for a WM account
and a linguistic markedness account for numbers, pinpointing this
matter requires additional experimental evidence in future studies.

Conceptually, although other explanations are possible, the linguistic
markedness correspondence principle can be used to test precise predic-
tions on the theory in the future. For example, the observed eﬀects of
reversal should be also observed in other non-numerical ordinal sequences
(e.g., Gevers et al., 2003), but not for numerical stimuli in another nota-
tion, and future research will bring about corresponding tests of this
model. Moreover, although the outlined principle is in general agreement
with a polarity correspondence account (Proctor & Cho, 2006), the speci-
ﬁcations of linguistic markedness have the advantage of directionality
here; i.e., they can transparently explain why and when a positive or ne-
gative polarity is assigned.

Moreover, it needs to be acknowledged that number stimuli ne-
cessarily bring about a whole series of diﬀerent (linguistic) features that
discriminate them from other stimuli, such as the consistent length of
syllables (e.g., one syllable and four characters for all number words
1–5, but 2–3 syllables and 6–10 characters for all weekday names in the
German language), the frequency with which numbers are used in
ubiquitous situations, but also the extraordinary ancient origin of
simple counting words (1–5) across diﬀerent languages (Pagel & Meade,
in press).2 Future research may investigate in more detail how these
potentially isolated linguistic characteristics come together in forming
psychologically meaningful spatial associations.

Finally, it is important to note that the current markedness account is
not principally incompatible with an augmented WM account, but the
linguistic markedness correspondence account can provide a well-deﬁned
description of its verbally mediated compartments. For instance, recent
amendments to the WM account of the SNARC eﬀect speciﬁed the possi-
bility of multiple spatial codes that could even co-exist in parallel
(Abrahamse et al., 2016; Ginsburg & Gevers, 2015) and spatial-numerical
processing may be biased towards verbal or visual coding mechanisms by
context-guided task instructions (Georges, Schiltz, & Hoﬀmann, 2014).
Indeed, in a recent study, both sequence position and numerical magni-
tude were demonstrated to produce diﬀerent associations with space
during maintenance of a random number sequence (Huber, Klein,
Moeller, & Willmes, 2016). These recent results suggest multiple spatial
coding mechanisms, highly consistent with our proposed multiple-coding
framework involving linguistic processes.

In sum, we believe that the verbal-spatial markedness account may
be surprising at first and the account may certainly not be the only
possible explanation for the data, but upon a closer look at the literature,
it is actually astonishingly consistent with the current results,
previous patient studies, with previous postulates of multiple spatial
codes, and also with recent results suggesting an augmented WM account
allowing for visuospatial and verbal-spatial associations.
5. Conclusion
By administration of transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS), we
demonstrate that increasing left-hemispheric prefrontal activity can reverse
the mental alignment of the weekday sequence, but not the mental
number line. Moreover, polarity-dependent stimulation effects are activity-
dependent and only observed in order-relevant comparison tasks,
but not in font color classification. The observed reversal of SNARC effects
with weekday stimuli can also be accounted for by a generalized markedness
account for number and sequences, suggesting opposed correspondence
between the linguistic markedness of spatial dimension with
large-small and before-after (MARC effect). Alternatively, the observed
dissociation could imply different underlying prefrontal mechanisms for
SNARC effects obtained in different stimuli. Furthermore, the current data
provide a basis for the neurofunctional implementation of markedness
correspondence. Switching to consistently MARC-driven spatial representations
was related to the enhancement of prefrontal and lefthemispheric
processing by anodal tDCS, which is in line with current
number processing networks ideas where connectivity between parietal
and frontal areas are crucially considered (Klein et al., 2016).

References