1. Introduction

Examining dimensions of social processing at multiple levels of
analysis (e.g., self-report, behavior, physiology, circuits) has the po-
tential to inform understanding of both typical and atypical develop-
ment (e.g., Morris & Cuthbert, 2012). Yet, measurement of social pro-
cesses, such as aﬃliation and attachment (National Institute of Mental
Health, 2017), poses unique challenges for multi-method assessment.
That is, special consideration is needed in order to develop methods
that simulate real-world social interactions while also allowing for the
collection of levels of data that require specialized equipment (e.g.,
electroencephalogram [EEG] or functional magnetic resonance imaging
[fMRI]).

Adolescence marks a period of increasing importance of peer re-
lationships and the development of more supportive, close friendships
(Steinberg & Morris, 2001). In addition, risk for many internalizing
disorders increases in adolescence (Costello, Egger, & Angold, 2005;
Kessler, Avenevoli, & Ries Merikangas, 2001), and extensive data sup-
port a connection between social processes and the development of
both depression and anxiety. For example, positive peer relationships
appear protective against the development of symptoms, whereas in-
terpersonal stressors, including maladaptive social interactions, peer
victimization, and loss of relationships are consistently linked to risk for
internalizing symptoms (Hammen, 2005; Hawker & Boulton, 2000; La
Greca & Harrison, 2005; Vrshek-Schallhorn et al., 2015).

There has been growing interest in tasks to assess social processes in
youth at the neural level. Some of the earliest work on brain circuits
used the Cyberball task, a computerized ball-tossing game that elicits
reactivity to social exclusion Eisenberger, Lieberman, & Williams, 2003;
Williams, Cheung, & Choi, 2000), with more recently developed fMRI
tasks involving the exchange of personal information and pretense of
more direct feedback from peers. For example, in the Chat Room task,
participants rate how interested they are in participating in an online
chat with peers, and then receive feedback regarding whether those
peers were interested in chatting with them (Guyer et al., 2008). In the
Social Network Aggression Task, participants are told that peers re-
viewed their personal proﬁles, and then receive positive, negative, and
neutral feedback on their proﬁles, followed by the chance to retaliate
against simulated peers (Achterberg et al., 2017). In the Virtual School
Paradigm, participants create personal proﬁles and avatars that they
then use to interact live with simulated peers who direct both positive
and negative evaluative comments to the participant (Jarcho et al.,
2016). Findings from these task have begun to reveal circuits involved
in social feedback processing, including regions of the anterior cingu-
late cortex (ACC), medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), insula, striatum and
amygdala (Achterberg et al., 2017; Guyer, Choate, Pine, & Nelson,
2012; Jarcho et al., 2016).

Though still in the early stages, evidence from neuroimaging sug-
gests that social feedback tasks may be useful for examining altered
social processing in relation to depression and anxiety in youth. For
example, youth with major depressive disorder (MDD) have been
shown to exhibit altered patterns of neural activation to rejection in the
Chat Room Interact task (Silk et al., 2014), and preliminary evidence
indicates that youth at risk for depression show blunted responses to
social acceptance in reward processing regions such as the ventral
striatum (Olino, Silk, Osterritter, & Forbes, 2015). There is also some
evidence to suggest that anxiety and anxiety risk are associated with
altered patterns of brain activation during anticipation and receipt of
negative peer feedback (Jarcho et al., 2013, 2016; Lau et al., 2012), and
social feedback tasks may be particularly relevant to the development
of social anxiety (Jarcho et al., 2013).
EEG and event-related potentials (ERPs) are neurophysiological
measures that are economically assessed across development, can
provide insight into the temporal dynamics of social processing,
and may be particularly useful for clinical applications
(Banaschewski & Brandeis,
2017;
Nelson & McCleery, 2008). Yet, little work has examined EEG measures
of social feedback processing in youth. The reward positivity (RewP),
also known as the feedback negativity, is an ERP component that ap-
pears as a relative positivity in response to positive or rewarding
feedback compared to negative feedback approximately 300 ms after
feedback over frontocentral sites (Foti, Weinberg, Dien, & Hajcak, 2011;
Gehring & Willoughby, 2002). In monetary reward tasks, RewP is re-
liably assessed across development (Bress, Meyer, & Proudﬁt, 2015) and
correlates with activation in reward-related brain regions, including
ventral striatum and mPFC (Becker, Nitsch, Miltner, & Straube, 2014;
Carlson, Foti, Mujica-Parodi, Harmon-Jones, & Hajcak, 2011), as well
as self-report and behavioral measures of reward sensitivity
(Bress & Hajcak, 2013). RewP to monetary rewards appears to be al-
tered in those higher in internalizing symptoms, with evidence of a
blunted reward response in youth with elevated symptoms of depres-
sion and some evidence of an enhanced RewP in children with elevated
symptoms of social anxiety (Bress et al., 2015; Kessel, Kujawa,
Proudﬁt, & Klein, 2015).
We developed a novel task called Island Getaway to measure ERPs
including RewP to social acceptance and rejection feedback in youth
(Kujawa, Arfer, Klein, & Proudﬁt, 2014). During the task, participants
vote to reject and accept simulated co-players, while also receiving a
combination of rejection and acceptance feedback from peers. To si-
mulate real
life interactions, participants and co-players exchange
personal information (e.g., photograph, likes/dislikes, and interests)
throughout the task, and participants are led to believe that peer
feedback may be based on this information. Following the task, parti-
cipants complete a self-report measure of task engagement. Our initial
pilot study (N = 19) indicated that an enhanced RewP was observable
following social acceptance feedback, a pattern that has also been ob-
served in adult studies of social feedback processing (Dekkers, van der
Molen, Moor, van der Veen, & van der Molen, 2014; van der Molen,
Dekkers, Westenberg, van der Veen, & van der Molen, 2016). Moreover,
our preliminary correlations indicated that this task may be useful for
examining eﬀects of depression and social anxiety on social feedback
processing. Though these eﬀects were limited by the small sample size,
greater socieal anxiety symptoms correlated with a larger RewP to ac-
ceptance feedback, and greater depressive symptoms were associated
with a trend for a blunted RewP to acceptance (Kujawa, Arfer et al.,
2014).

The goals of the current study were to replicate and extend our
previous ﬁndings in a large sample of young adolescents (N = 412) and
reﬁne methods for applying ERPs to understanding social processes
across development. Given limited data on ERPs to social feedback in
youth, our ﬁrst goal was to use principal components analysis (PCA) to
identify distinct components sensitive to social feedback and to better
characterize the timing and scalp distribution of the RewP in response
to social feedback. Building on our previous work (Kujawa, Arfer et al.,
2014), our second goal was to evaluate correlations between neuro-
physiological measures of sensitivity to social feedback (i.e., RewP),
self-report (i.e., task engagement), and behavioral measures (i.e., ten-
dency to reject peers) from the Island Getaway task. Our ﬁnal goal was
to test the relevance of these measures to individual diﬀerences by
examining correlations with symptoms of depression and social anxiety.

<Middle> Materials and methods.
2.1. Participants.
Participants were part of a larger community sample of children
initially recruited when the children were 3 or 6 years old (Kujawa,
Proudﬁt, & Klein, 2014; Olino, Klein, Dyson, Rose, & Durbin, 2010).
Participants were invited back to the laboratory when they were ap-
proximately 12 years old and completed a series of EEG tasks in a
counterbalanced order (descriptions and results of other tasks will be
presented in future manuscripts). A total of 439 youth completed the
social feedback task. Informed consent was obtained from all parents
and assent was obtained from participants. Data were unavailable for 4
participants due to technical errors and 23 were excluded for excessive
noise in the EEG data, leaving data for 412 participants. The mean age
was 12.64 years (SD = 0.47 years), and the sample was 46.8% female,
13.1% Hispanic/Latino, 89.1% Caucasian, 7.8% African American,
2.4% Asian American, 0.2% Native American, and 0.5% other race.

2.2. Measures

2.2.1. Social feedback task

2.2.1. Social feedback task
Participants completed the Island Getaway task (modified from
Kujawa, Arfer et al., 2014) while EEG data were recorded. The task
code is available at: http://arfer.net/projects/survivor. Participants
were told that they would be playing a game with eleven age-matched
co-players in which they would be travelling in the Hawaiian Islands,
and at each island, they would have to vote whether they wanted each
co-player to continue on with them to the next island and would then
receive feedback on how co-players voted for them. Trials were divided
into 6 rounds. In the first round, participants created a profile including
their photograph and demographic information and reviewed profiles
of computerized co-players. In subsequent rounds, participants first
responded to a poll question (e.g., “Who do you most admire?”) and
reviewed co-player responses in order to facilitate an exchange of
personal information for the remaining voting and feedback phases (see
Kujawa, Arfer et al., 2014 for a depiction of the poll phase).
Following review of profiles and poll responses in each round,
participants completed a voting and feedback phase (Fig. 1). Participants
were prompted to vote to either accept (“Keep”) or reject (“Kick
out”) each co-player, and after each vote, they then saw feedback indicating
whether that co-player had voted to accept or reject them.
Acceptance feedback was indicated by an image of a green “thumbs up”
and rejection feedback was indicated by a red “thumbs down.” Each
voting trial began with a co-player profile presented until participants
voted. To simulate variation in co-player response speed, a co-player
voting time was selected for each trial based on actual variability in
participants’ voting speeds from previously collected data. If participants
voted faster than the simulated voting time for that co-player, the
message “Waiting for [co-player’s name] to vote…” was displayed.
Lastly, a fixation “+” was presented for 1000 ms, followed by feedback
displayed for 2000 ms. A blank screen was presented for 1500 ms before
the start of the next trial.
Co-players were randomly assigned a voting pattern for each participant,
such that 2 co-players rejected the participant on most (4 or 5
out of 6) rounds, 2 co-players accepted the participant on most rounds,
and the remaining 7 co-players were equally likely to accept or reject
the participant. To increase unpredictability of feedback, all co-players
voted both to keep and kick out the participant at least once (with the
exception of the co-player excluded after the first round). Variability in
co-player voting patterns allows for examining participant voting behavior
in response to distinct patterns of peer feedback, but the task did
not include enough feedback trials to examine average ERP responses to
feedback from specific co-players.
After each of the rounds, participants were told that one of the coplayers
had been sent home, and after completing the sixth, participants
were informed that they made it to the “Big Island.” The task included a
total of 51 feedback trials split evenly between acceptance and rejection,
with the last trial type determined randomly, though the proportion
of rejection and acceptance feedback in each round varied slightly
across participants. The number of feedback trials in each round matched
the number of co-players remaining in the game (e.g., 11 in Round
1, 10 in Round 2).
2.2.2. EEG data collection and processing
Continuous EEG was recorded using a 34-electrode cap (32 channels
with the addition of FCz and Iz) and a BioSemi system (BioSemi,
Amsterdam, Netherlands). The electrooculogram (EOG) generated from
eye movements and blinks was recorded using facial electrodes placed
approximately 1 cm above and below the eye and 1 cm from the outer
corners of the eyes. Electrodes were also placed on the left and right
mastoids. Recordings were digitized with a sampling rate of 1024 Hz.
Offline processing was conducted using BrainVision Analyzer software
(Brain Products, Munich, Germany). Data were referenced to an
average of the recordings from left and right mastoids, band-pass filtered
with cutoffs of 0.1 and 30 Hz, and segmented for each trial
200 ms before feedback, continuing for 1000 ms after feedback onset.
Eye-blink correction (Gratton, Coles, & Donchin, 1983) and semi-automatic
artifact rejection procedures were conducted. Criteria of a voltage
step of 50 μV between sample points, a maximum voltage difference of
300 μV within a 200 ms interval, and minimum activity of 0.5 μV
within 100 ms intervals were used to automatically detect artifacts,
with additional artifacts removed by visual inspection. ERPs were
averaged for acceptance and rejection feedback, and baseline corrected
to activity 200 ms prior to feedback.
2.2.3. Behavioral and self-report measures of social processing

During the task, participants were instructed to vote oﬀ a minimum
of 1 co-player per round, but were free to vote oﬀ as many co-players as
they chose. Percentage of votes to reject peers was evaluated as a be-
havioral measure of social processing. Similar to previous ERP research
using the Cyberball task (Kujawa, Arfer et al., 2014; McPartland et al.,
2011), following completion of the task, participants responded to 3
self-report items rated on a 5-point scale to assess engagement in the
task (i.e., “I really wanted to stay in the game,” “I would’ve liked to play
this game again,” and “After a while I lost interest in staying in the
game” [reverse scored]). Scores on each item were averaged to derive a
combined measure of task engagement ranging from 1 to 5, with higher
scores indicating greater engagement. Behavioral and self-report data
from Island Getaway were unavailable for 3 participants due to tech-
nical errors.

2.2.4. Internalizing symptoms

To measure current depressive symptoms, adolescents completed
the 27-item self-report version of the Children’s Depression Inventory
(CDI) (Kovacs, 1992). Three participants chose not to respond to more
than 9 items on the CDI and were excluded from analyses of depressive
symptoms. Cronbach’s alpha for the CDI in this sample was 0.82. To
measure anxiety, adolescents completed the 41-item self-report version
of the Screen for Child Anxiety Related Disorders (SCARED) (Birmaher
et al., 1997). Consistent with our prior work (Kujawa, Arfer et al., 2014)
and theory that symptoms of social anxiety may be particularly relevant
to social feedback processing, analyses focused on the 7-item social
anxiety subscale. Cronbach’s alpha for the social anxiety subscale was
0.77.

2.3. Data analysis

2.3.1. PCA
Temporospatial PCA on averaged ERP data was conducted using the
ERP PCA Toolkit (Dien, 2010b). First, temporal PCA was conducted
using all time points from each participant’s averaged data as variables,
and participants, trial types, and recording sites as observations. A
Promax rotation was used to rotate to simple structure in the temporal
domain (Dien, 2010a; Dien, Khoe, & Mangun, 2007). A parallel test
(Horn, 1965) was conducted on the resulting Scree plot (Cattell, 1966)
in which the Scree of the actual dataset was compared to a Scree derived
from a fully random dataset. The largest number of factors accounting
for a greater proportion of variance than the random dataset
were retained (Dien, 2010a). Based on this criterion, 10 temporal factors
(TF) were retained. Following the temporal PCA, a spatial PCA was
conducted on each temporal factor (Dien, 2010a; Dien et al., 2007).
Variables consisted of all recording sites, and observations included
participants, trial types, and temporal factor scores. Infomax was used
to rotate the spatial factors to independence (Dien, 2010a). Based on
the results of the parallel test, 4 spatial factors (SF) were extracted. The
temporospatial PCA resulted in 40 factor combinations, with combined
unique variance accounting for 32.5% of variance in the ERP data. To
aid in interpretation, factor score were translated into voltages using
the ERP PCA Toolkit (Dien, 2012), and robust analysis of variance
(ANOVA; Keselman, Wilcox, & Lix, 2003) was conducted on factors
accounting for greater than 1% of unique variance in order to identify
components that significantly differentiated acceptance and rejection
feedback.
2.3.2. Correlations between measures and with symptoms
Subsequent analyses on microvolt-scaled factor scores exported by
ERP PCA Toolkit were conducted using SPSS 23. Bivariate correlations
were computed to examine associations between ERP, self-report, behavioral
measures, and symptoms of depression and social anxiety.

3. Results

3.1. PCA

Average ERPs to acceptance and rejection feedback at Cz prior to
PCA are presented in Fig. 2. PCA revealed 7 temporospatial factors
accounting for a minimum of 1% unique variance in the ERP. Of these,
5 components signiﬁcantly diﬀerentiated acceptance from rejection
feedback in robust ANOVA (Table 1; Fig. 3). These components in-
cluded an early negativity, followed by a series of relative positivities
for acceptance feedback. The early negativity component (TF4/SF1)
appeared similar to an N1 component, possibly reﬂecting attentional
processing (Coch & Gullick, 2012), and was enhanced (i.e., more ne-
gative) for rejection compared to acceptance feedback. TF2/SF1,
maximal at Cz, appeared the most consistent with the RewP in terms of
timing and scalp distribution, though the distribution was somewhat
more posterior than observed in monetary reward tasks (Foti et al.,
2011). The remaining 3 positive components were similar to P300 and
late positive potential (LPP), and were consistent with observations in
adults of a series of P300/LPP responses to emotional images and
monetary rewards beginning around 300 ms after stimulus onset and
emerging across stimulus duration (Foti, Hajcak, & Dien, 2009; Foti
et al., 2011). All of the positivities in the current PCA were enhanced
for acceptance relative to rejection feedback.

Consistent with our previous work on social feedback processing
(Kujawa, Arfer et al., 2014) and to reduce the number of analyses
performed, further analyses of correlations between measures focused
on the microvolt-scaled factor score corresponding with the RewP
component (TF2/SF1). Given recent recommendations (Meyer, Lerner,
de los Reyes, Laird, & Hajcak, 2017), residual scores were computed for
the RewP factor score to acceptance adjusting for responses to rejection,
producing a diﬀerence measure that is uncorrelated with RewP to re-
jection feedback.

3.2. Correlations between ERP, self-report and behavioral measures from
Island getaway

Descriptive statistics and correlations between demographic vari-
ables, social processing measures, and symptoms are presented in
Table 2. Measures derived from Island Getaway were not signiﬁcantly
correlated with age or sex. On average, participants reported relatively
high levels of engagement and voted more often to accept than reject
co-players. The proportion of participant rejection votes was greater for
co-players who had rejected the participant in the previous round
(M = 45.2%; SD = 20.7%) than for co-players who had accepted the
participant in the previous round (41.1%; SD = 20.2%), t(408) = 5.79,
p < 0.001. Youth who reported more engagement in the task exhibited
a lower proportion of votes to reject peers and a larger RewP compo-
nent. Proportion of rejection votes was not signiﬁcantly correlated with
RewP.

3.3. Correlations with symptoms of depression and social anxiety

Greater depressive symptoms were associated with less self-reported
engagement in the task and a blunted RewP component to social ac-
ceptance (Fig. 4). Depressive symptoms were not signiﬁcantly corre-
lated with residual scores for RewP to rejection adjusting for responses
to acceptance, r(407) = 0.06, p = 0.21. Symptoms of social anxiety
were not signiﬁcantly correlated with RewP, behavioral, or self-report
measures from the task (ps > 0.13).1

Given the correlation between depressive symptoms and the com-
ponent consistent with RewP, additional exploratory correlations ex-
amined associations between depressive symptoms and residual scores
for the remaining PCA-derived factor scores. Greater depressive symp-
toms also predicted a blunted TF2/SF2 component (i.e., P300) to ac-
ceptance, r(407) = −0.15, p < 0.01. No signiﬁcant correlations were
observed for the remaining components.

<Conclusion> Discussion.
The goal of the current study was to extend our pilot study of the
Island Getaway task to a large sample of young adolescents and reﬁne
methods for examining ERPs to social feedback. Speciﬁc goals were to
identify distinct ERP components that are sensitive to social feedback,
examine associations of ERP measures of sensitivity to social feedback
with self-reported task engagement and propensity to reject peers, and
examine correlations between social feedback processing measures and
symptoms of depression and social anxiety. Five ERP components
emerged as sensitive to social feedback and these components appeared
temporally and spatially similar to ERP components previously
identified in response to monetary rewards and emotional images (e.g.,
N1, RewP, P300, LPP; Foti et al., 2009, 2011). Self-reported task engagement
was modestly but significantly correlated with behavioral
and ERP measures, such that youth who reported more engagement in
the task were less likely to reject peers and showed a larger RewP to
acceptance feedback. Finally, modest correlations were observed with
depressive symptoms, such that youth with elevated symptoms of depression
exhibited a blunted RewP to acceptance feedback and less
engagement in the task. Taken together, these results support the utility
of the Island Getaway task in eliciting neurophysiological, behavioral,
and self-report measures of social processes.
Our primary correlational analyses focused on the component most
closely corresponding with RewP, but PCA results revealed a number of
ERP components that warrant further study. In particular, the series of
positivities observed in the ERP wave likely reflect components of the
P300 and LPP, which reflect attention towards and sustained processing
of salient information and may be relevant to the development of both
internalizing and externalizing symptoms in youth (Cuthbert, Schupp,
Bradley, Birbaumer, & Lang, 2000; Foti et al., 2009; Kujawa et al., 2016;
Kujawa, Hajcak, Torpey, Kim, & Klein, 2012; Kujawa, MacNamara,
Fitzgerald, Monk, & Phan, 2015). Although our exploratory analyses did
not reveal significant associations between depressive symptoms and
the component consistent with LPP, we did observe an association with
P300 to acceptance. Importantly, the current community sample reported
relatively low levels of symptoms on average, and it is possible
that effects of the LPP on symptoms may be more apparent in clinical
samples or as a vulnerability for the later emergence of symptoms (e.g.,
Kujawa et al., 2016, 2015).
Consistent with previous ﬁndings in monetary reward tasks (Bress
et al., 2015; Bress, Smith, Foti, Klein, & Hajcak, 2012), the component
consistent with RewP tended to be more blunted in response to social
feedback among youth with higher levels of depressive symptoms. This
ﬁnding suggests that altered reward processing in depression may ex-
tend to social reward, and future research is needed to evaluate the
unique eﬀects of depression on both social and monetary reward pro-
cessing. The correlation between RewP and depressive symptoms was
small in magnitude, which is consistent with observations of small ef-
fects sizes when relating physiological to self-report measures in large
samples (Patrick et al., 2013) and may also be attributed to relatively
low levels of depressive symptoms in this young sample. Growing evi-
dence supports the possibility that blunted monetary reward processing
may be a vulnerability for the later emergence of depressive symptoms
(Bress, Foti, Kotov, Klein, & Hajcak, 2013; Nelson, Perlman, Klein,
Kotov, & Hajcak, 2016); thus, it is possible the eﬀects of RewP to social
feedback will become more apparent when examining increases in
depressive symptoms across development. Although the eﬀect of de-
pressive symptoms on RewP was consistent with trends observed in our
pilot study, we did not replicate the correlation between social anxiety
and RewP to social feedback (Kujawa, Arfer et al., 2014), possibly be-
cause studies with small samples may be more susceptible to error
(Leon, Davis, & Kraemer, 2011). Nonetheless, it is also possible that
distinct patterns of associations between RewP to social feedback and
symptoms of depression and anxiety may emerge when evaluating
these measures in clinical samples and across development, particularly
later in adolescence and young adulthood.

Analyses of correspondence between the component consistent with
RewP and self-report and behavioral measures obtained from the Island
Getaway task revealed some modest associations but also indicated that
they measure distinct aspects of social processing. For example, while
RewP provides an early measure of reactivity to positive and negative
feedback, self-reported task engagement likely reﬂects a broader ex-
perience of motivation and interest in the task. Although we previously
observed an association between RewP and voting patterns (Kujawa,
Arfer et al., 2014), this correlation was not signiﬁcant in the current
study, nor were voting patterns signiﬁcantly related to symptoms. In
the previous version of the task, participants ﬁrst voted on all co-players
before passively viewing a block of feedback from peers. To increase
attention to feedback in the current version, participants voted on a
single co-player before receiving feedback from that co-player and then
moved on to the next co-player. With this design, trial by trial feedback
may have more of an eﬀect on voting patterns, and as such, average rate
of rejection votes may be a less sensitive measure of individual diﬀer-
ences.

A few additional limitations and future directions should be noted.
First, previous work suggests that expectations modulate responses to
social
feedback (Somerville, Heatherton, & Kelley, 2006; Sun & Yu,
2014); however, as the current task did not assess participant’s ex-
pectations for each trial, we were unable to evaluate the potential
effects of expectancy on RewP. Relatedly, it is possible that feedback
from co-players in the previous round may influence the magnitude of
RewP, such that consistent and inconsistent feedback across trials may
be characterized by somewhat distinct brain responses. Unfortunately,
the current task does not include enough trials to test this possibility. In
addition, because participants’ voting behavior varied considerably
across individuals and recent evidence suggest that approximately
10–15 trials are needed for a stable measure of RewP (Levinson, Speed,
Infantolino, & Hajcak, 2017), the majority of participants did not have
sufficient trials to reliably evaluate ERP responses to positive and negative
feedback as a function of participant votes (e.g., more desirable
vs. less desirable peers). Future work is needed to apply alternative
statistical approaches or develop modified versions of this task that may
provide insight into the effects of expectancy and participant votes on
ERP measures. For example, this may be accomplished by lengthening
the task or fixing the proportion of acceptance and rejection votes the
participant is required to make. In addition to ERPs in response to peer
feedback, brain responses when providing feedback to peers or anticipating
peer feedback may be relevant to the development of psychopathology.
As such, additional research is need to identify ERPs that
may be sensitive to participants voting to reject vs. accept peers, as well
as those that may me modulated by anticipation of feedback from more
or less desirable peers and/or the possibility of acceptance or rejection.
Lastly, analytical approaches such as time frequency analyses (van der
Molen et al., 2016; van Noordt, White, Wu, Mayes, & Crowley, 2015),
should be considered in future work in order to further inform understanding
of neurophysiological measures of social processing.
The current study is among the first to examine ERP components
sensitive to peer acceptance and rejection in youth, providing insight
into a range of components modulated by social feedback and to the
temporal dynamics of social feedback processing. This study extends
understanding of the RewP component as a measure of social feedback
processing and suggests that, as observed in monetary reward tasks
(Bress, Meyer, & Hajcak, 2013; Bress et al., 2015), RewP to social acceptance
may be blunted among youth with elevated symptoms of
depression, possibly reflecting broad deficits in reward-related brain
function. With future research, ERP, self-report, and behavioral measures
elicited by Island Getaway and similar tasks have the potential to
inform understanding of social development across adolescence, as well
as the role of social processes in the development of psychopathology.

References