
1. Introduction

Cognitive control includes the capacity to enhance the activation of
task-relevant processes while suppressing distracting ones.
In the
Stroop paradigm [1], a typical cognitive control task, one has to name
the font color of words and ignore their meaning. Color naming time
and errors increase when the word color and meaning are incongruent
(e.g., BLUE written in red) relative to when they are congruent (e.g.,
BLUE written in blue) or neutral (e.g., BLUE written in black). Classical
explanations suggest that, to combat interference during incongruent
conditions, cognitive control processes suppress a habitual reading
mode and activate controlled color naming [2,3].

Cognitive control requires the complementary activation of the
anterior cingulate and lateral prefrontal cortex, as demonstrated in
functional neuroimaging studies [4,5]. Speciﬁcally, verbal Stroop-re-
lated activations have been observed in the dorso- and ventro-lateral

prefrontal cortex, predominantly in the left hemisphere (e.g., [6,7]; also
see Ref. [8], for a recent example of converging neuropsychological
evidence of a left prefrontal involvement in verbal Stroop). Thus, based
on functional neuroimaging (and neuropsychological) data, one could
hypothesize that a leftward hemispheric asymmetry in the lateral pre-
frontal cortex helps to combat Stroop interference. However, left and
right hemispheric activations are not usually compared through direct
statistical tests. Moreover, a diﬀerent scenario seems to emerge with
structural neuroimaging evidence. In a recent voxel-based morpho-
metry study, it was found that regional grey matter volume in the
anterior cingulate cortex, cerebellum and, importantly, right ventro-
lateral prefrontal cortex was negatively related to the amount of verbal
Stroop interference [9]. Thus, if structural MRI data are taken into
consideration, one could posit diverging expectations regarding which
direction of frontal asymmetry supports better Stroop performance.

Another region that may be involved in verbal Stroop performance
is the so-called Visual Word Form Area (VWFA), a word-sensitive region
located in the left inferior posterior temporal cortex [10,11]. Evidence
from functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies shows that
activity in the VWFA and Broca's area is modulated by Stroop inter-
ference (e.g., [12]). Another fMRI study also found diﬀerential activity
in a region proximal to the VWFA in the incongruent vs. congruent
contrast for a verbal Stroop version but not for a spatial one [13].
Collectively, these works corroborate the hypothesis that the VWFA
integrates feed-forward visual processing with top-down inﬂuences
from more anterior areas controlling phonological and semantic pro-
cessing during written word recognition [14]. The fact that this region
is speciﬁcally involved in the Stroop eﬀect in some studies [12,13],
however, suggests that it could also be more speciﬁcally involved in
cognitive conﬂict resolution, at least for verbal material. According to a
recent magnetoencephalography study [15], the VWFA is recruited not
only early on for lower-level word processing [16], but also at later
stages for gating lexico-semantic processing (see also Refs. [17–19]),
arguably the stage where interference occurs in word-color Stroop in-
congruency.

The present study aimed to understand whether grey matter struc-
tural characteristics in healthy young participants could explain in-
dividual diﬀerences in Stroop performance in regions previously found
to be functionally involved in Stroop interference, including the left
lateral prefrontal cortex (e.g., Broca’s area) and the VWFA. This goal
was achieved by assessing complementary surface-based measures of
grey matter structure, in particular, cortical thickness and surface area.
Since relationships between cortical structure and function are still
unclear (e.g., [20]) and in order to minimize the risk of diluting subtle
regional diﬀerences, we opted for a whole-brain approach instead of
selectively analyzing a priori deﬁned brain regions. Moreover, given the
strong left lateralization obtained in fMRI studies of verbal Stroop tasks,
we particularly focused on (left vs. right) brain asymmetries as a pos-
sible ﬁne-grained way to explain inter-individual diﬀerences (cf., [21])
in the performance on this cognitive control task.

To our knowledge, there is only one recent study [22] that in-
vestigated the relationship between structural brain asymmetries and
performance on a Stroop task. By using voxel-based morphometry, it
was found that a leftward asymmetry in the thalamus was associated
with better performance on a paper-and-pencil version of the Stroop
test, at least in male participants. However, that study examined a
heterogeneous sample of older adults (mean age: 65.2 ± 8.0 years).
Thus, its results cannot be easily generalized to a healthier and younger
population.

We additionally employed a spatial version of the Stroop paradigm
(e.g., [23]) as a “control” task. The spatial Stroop task could however be
interesting in and of itself. On the one hand, an association between left
lateralization and the spatial Stroop eﬀect may be predicted as a ben-
eﬁcial role of leftward intrinsic functional lateralization in the middle
frontal gyrus, assessed with resting state electroencephalography
(EEG), has been shown for both the verbal and spatial Stroop eﬀects
[24]. On the other hand, one could envisage mirrored patterns for the
verbal and spatial tasks based on recent neuropsychological literature
showing that the lateralization of prefrontal regions critical for the
performance of conﬂict tasks is domain-dependent [25]. Speciﬁcally, an
increased verbal Stroop eﬀect resulted after left ventro-lateral pre-
frontal lesions, while the performance on a spatial conﬂict task (i.e., the
ﬂanker task) was impaired following right ventro-lateral prefrontal le-
sions (also see Ref. [6], for recent meta-analytic evidence).

<Middle> Materials and methods.
2.1. Participants.
A total of 111 university students voluntarily took part in the ex-
periment (79 females, 32 males; mean age = 22.4 years,
SD = 1.4 years, range: 19–26 years). Right-handedness was used as an
inclusion criterion. This was conﬁrmed for all participants with the
Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (Ref. [27]; mean score = 85.9,
SD = 15.3, range: 30–100). Further, all participants had normal or
corrected-to-normal visual acuity and reported having normal color
vision and no history of any neurological or psychiatric disease. Parti-
cipants were compensated for their time and gave written informed
consent prior to participation. This study was approved by the Bioe-
thical Committee of the Azienda Ospedaliera of Padova, Italy, and the
ethical committee of the Scuola Internazionale Superiore di Studi
Avanzati (SISSA) in Trieste, Italy.

2.2. Behavioral tasks and procedures

Participants were tested individually on two computerized versions
of the Stroop task, as well as additional tasks not reported here. The two
Stroop tasks were presented in a counterbalanced order across parti-
cipants.

2.3. Verbal Stroop

Stimuli consisted of four Italian color words (BLU-blue, ROSSO-red,
VERDE-green, GIALLO-yellow) presented individually in one of four
colors (blue, red, green, yellow). Participants were asked to ignore the
word and identify the ink color through a button press as quickly and
accurately as possible. Participants used their index and middle ﬁngers
of both hands to provide the responses; the exact color-to-ﬁnger map-
pings were counterbalanced across the participants (mapping 1: left
middle-blue,
left index-red, right index-green, right middle-yellow;
mapping 2: left middle-yellow, left index-green, right index-red, right
middle-blue). Each stimulus was categorized as congruent (e.g., BLU
presented in blue) or incongruent (e.g., BLU in red).

The task consisted of two blocks of 64 trials each with a short break
between the blocks. Congruent and incongruent trials were randomly
and equally distributed. To minimize both positive and negative
priming confounds, only complete alternation sequences were em-
ployed, meaning that neither the color nor the word presented on trial n
were used in either way (color or word) on trial n + 1 (see Ref. [26], for
details). Trials consisted of stimulus presentation in the center of the
screen for 500 ms, a 2000 ms blank response screen, and an additional
blank screen beyond the response time limit, which was jittered ran-
domly and continuously between 250 and 700 ms. Prior to the ex-
perimental blocks, participants completed a training block to ensure
that they understood the task. This training block was composed of 16
items representing all possible word-color combinations. Items were
presented on screen until a response was given. Feedback about accu-
racy and speed followed the response and lasted on screen for 1200 ms,
followed by a 500 ms inter-trial interval. Participants moved on to the
experimental blocks after performing at least 10 correct trials out of 16
(one participant repeated the training block twice to reach this cri-
terion).

2.4. Spatial Stroop

This paradigm was similar to that used in previous studies [23].
Stimuli consisted of arrows pointing to the upper-left, upper-right,
lower-left, and lower-right corners presented in one of the four quad-
rants of the screen. Participants were asked to ignore the position and
indicate the direction of the arrow through a spatially compatible key
press (R, O, V, M) as quickly and accurately as possible by using the
index and middle ﬁngers of both hands. As in the verbal Stroop task,
stimuli were categorized as congruent (e.g., upper-right pointing arrow
in the upper-right quadrant) or incongruent (e.g., upper-right pointing
arrow in the lower-right quadrant). The details of the task and training
procedures were identical to the ones used in the verbal Stroop task.
Three participants repeated the training block twice, and another par-
ticipant repeated it three times to reach the criterion to begin the
experimental trials (i.e., 10/16 correct trials).

2.5. Behavioral data analyses

Analyses were conducted to verify the presence of a Stroop eﬀect,
that is, worse performance on incongruent than congruent trials, in the
accuracy and response time (RT) data. For the accuracy data, Wilcoxon
signed-ranked tests were used to compare the trial types, with the ﬁrst
item of each block excluded. For the RT data, the ﬁrst item of each
block, error trials and trials following an error, to avoid confounds of
post-error slowing (e.g., [28]), were excluded. Additionally, for each
participant, trials with an RT more than 3 standard deviations (SD)
from their individual mean were excluded. Paired samples t-tests were
used to compare performance on congruent and incongruent trials.

2.6. Neuroimaging procedures

Participants completed a neuroimaging session that included the
acquisition of T1-weighted images, as well as other sequences, which
are not considered here.

2.7. MRI acquisition

Images were acquired for 54 participants on a 3-T Philips Achieva
whole-body scanner at the Santa Maria della Misericordia Hospital in
Udine, Italy. T1-weighted images were acquired using an 8-channel
head coil and a 3D ultrafast gradient echo sequence (TR = 8.2050 ms,
TE = 3.78 ms, ﬂip angle = 8°, ﬁeld of view = 240 mm, acquisition
matrix = 240 × 240, voxel size = 1 mm3, 190 axial slices). Images for
the remaining 57 participants were acquired using a 3-T Philips Ingenia
whole-body scanner with a 32-channel head-coil at the Neuroradiology
Unit, University-Hospital of Padova, Italy. The scanning parameters for
21 participants of this Padova group were as follow: TR = 8.1194 ms,
TE = 3.71 ms, ﬂip angle = 8°, ﬁeld of view = 220 mm, acquisition
matrix = 220 × 220, voxel size = 0.49 × 0.49 × 1 mm, 180 sagittal
they were:
slices; while
TR = 8.1194 ms,
of
view = 240 mm,
si-
ze = 1 mm3, 180 sagittal slices.

the
remaining 36 participants
TE = 3.71 ms,
angle = 8°,
acquisition matrix = 240 × 220,

for

ﬂip

ﬁeld
voxel

2.8. MRI data analysis

We used both cortical thickness and surface area as two com-
plementary measures of grey matter microstructure, since they are
genetically and phenotypically independent [29,30], with the surface
area showing more inter-subject variability [30]. Cortical surface area
depends on the number of columns, whereas cortical thickness is in-
ﬂuenced by the number and size of cells within a column, by their
packing density, as well as by the number and myelination level of
connections [31,32]. It therefore follows that cortical thickness and
surface areas should be considered separately, since they are in-
dependent neuroanatomical features.

In our study, surface area and cortical thickness estimations as well
as statistical analysis were carried out using the FreeSurfer software
suite version 5.3.0 (Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School; http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu) [33].
Image processing
was performed according to the standard pipeline described in previous
publications [34–36]. Brieﬂy, images were registered with an aﬃne
transformation to the MNI305 atlas and resampled to 1 mm isotropic
voxels, corrected for the bias ﬁeld and stripped of the skull. During this
step, a tessellated ellipsoidal template was deformed into the shape of
the inner surface of the skull taking into account a priori knowledge
about the smoothness of this surface. The deformed template was then
used to remove all voxels outside the inner surface of the skull from the
MRI volume. Based on voxel intensity and neighbor constraints, images
were segmented into subcortical white matter and deep gray matter
structures. Two cutting planes were used to separate the hemispheres
and remove subcortical structures. This was followed by white matter
surface tessellation and automated topology correction. The tessellated
white matter surface was used as the starting point during the surface
deformation step, which employed the intensity gradients to optimally
place the gray/white interface and pial surface at the location where
the greatest shift in intensity deﬁned the transition between tissue
classes.

Cortical thickness was quantiﬁed at each vertex of the cortex as the
shortest distance between the white and pial surface, whereas the area
of a vertex on the tessellated pial surface was deﬁned as the average
area of the triangles of which the vertex was a member. Following
Greve et al. [37], individual right and left hemisphere surface maps
were registered to a symmetric template (fsaverage_sym) by the Free-
Surfer spherical registration algorithm. We then smoothed the maps on
the surface using a Gaussian kernel with a full-width at half-maximum
of 15 mm. For each subject, the Laterality Indices (LI) for both the
surface area and the cortical thickness at each vertex was computed
according to the formula (L − R)/(L + R) [37].

2.9. MRI statistical analysis

In the following paragraph, we shall describe the procedure to as-
sess correlations between surface MRI measures and behavioral data.
First, the mean accuracy data of each participant for the congruent and
incongruent conditions of both the verbal and spatial Stroop tasks were
arcsin square-root transformed to improve normality. We then took
their diﬀerence as a measure of the accuracy Stroop eﬀect. The diﬀer-
ences between the mean RT for the incongruent and congruent condi-
tions of both the verbal and spatial Stroop tasks (i.e., the RT Stroop
eﬀects) were mean-centered with respect to the corresponding mean
value of all the participants. Statistical surface maps were generated by
contrast analysis based on general linear models (GLM) for the RT and
accuracy Stroop eﬀect measures at each vertex of the cortical surface
model, with either thickness or area LI as the dependent variable.
Covariates describing the three diﬀerent acquisition procedures were
also added to the GLM. In order to minimize Type I errors, all the MRI
analyses were corrected for multiple comparisons using cluster size
inference by means of the Monte Carlo Null-Z simulation method
adapted for cortical surface analysis, as implemented in FreeSurfer
[38,39]. The null distribution was developed across 10,000 iterations of
simulation. Only clusters with cluster-wise corrected p-values < 0.05
with respect to the simulated null distribution were considered as sig-
niﬁcant and reported.

3. Results

3.1. Behavioral results

Table 1 reports the behavioral results. The analysis on accuracy data
revealed that, for both the verbal and spatial Stroop tasks, the partici-
pants’ performance was signiﬁcantly worse on incongruent than con-
gruent trials, thus resulting in signiﬁcant verbal and spatial Stroop
eﬀects (respectively, mean = 2.6% and 7.2%, SD = 4.9% and 7.5%,
Wilcoxon T = 1223.5 and 56.5,
z = 4.786 and 8.716, both
ps < 0.001)

The analyses on the RT data revealed the same pattern of results; for
both the verbal and spatial Stroop tasks, response times were sig-
niﬁcantly longer on incongruent than congruent trials. Again, this re-
sulted in signiﬁcant verbal and spatial Stroop eﬀects (respectively,
mean = 70 and 105 ms, SD = 55 and 46 ms;
t(110) = 13.102 and
23.835, both ps < 0.001).

3.2. Cortical thickness and surface area results

The analysis on the surface area revealed a cortical region showing a
signiﬁcant relation between the area LI and the verbal RT Stroop eﬀect.
Fig. 1 shows the corresponding signiﬁcant cluster, corrected for mul-
tiple comparisons, resulting from the GLM testing the linear eﬀect of
verbal RT Stroop eﬀect on area LI
(cluster-wise corrected p-
value = 0.032). The cluster was located in the middle-posterior tem-
poral lobe (cluster size: 1688.15 mm2, range: x = −64.2 to −47.9,
y = −63.5 to 28.3, z = −23.6 to −0.4, maximum vertex: x = −58.4,
y = −48.0, z = −8.4, in Talairach coordinates) and was partially
overlapping with the so-called VWFA. Speciﬁcally, the posterior region
of the signiﬁcant cluster (accounting for approximately 46% of the
cluster extent and including the maximum vertex) overlapped with the
VWFA region identiﬁed by an automated term-based meta-analysis of
98 functional studies performed using Neurosynth (reverse inference
map FDR-corrected at a 0.01 level; http://neurosynth.org; [41]). In this
cortical region, the higher the area LI was, the smaller the verbal RT
Stroop eﬀect was. In other words, participants who had a more ex-
tended surface area for this cluster in the left hemisphere, as compared
to the right one, showed better performance on the verbal Stroop task.2
Fig. 2A shows the linear relationship between the area LI and the
verbal RT Stroop eﬀect at the vertex corresponding to the minimum p-
value in that cluster after regressing out the eﬀect of the three acqui-
sition procedures. There was a signiﬁcant negative Pearson correlation
(r = −0.33, p < 0.001) between the variables. To test if this result
was driven by potential bivariate outliers, we assessed their presence
using the boxplot rule and then performed a skipped correlation using
the robust correlation toolbox for Matlab [42]. This analysis conﬁrmed
the presence of a signiﬁcant correlation (r = −0.25, p < 0.001). We
also computed the Spearman correlation to evaluate if the result would
hold with a non-parametric test that did not assume data normality.
Again, this analysis conﬁrmed the result reported above (ρ = −0.31,
p = 0.001 for the regular Spearman correlation, ρ = −0.26, p = 0.002
for the skipped Spearman correlation), indicating that it was unbiased.
Diﬀerently from what observed for the verbal RT Stroop eﬀect, the
analysis on the surface area failed to reveal cortical regions showing a
signiﬁcant relation between the area LI and the spatial RT Stroop eﬀect.
Additionally, no regions showed a relation between area LI and either
the verbal or spatial accuracy Stroop eﬀect. The analyses on the cortical
thickness also failed to ﬁnd any cortical region showing a signiﬁcant
relation between the thickness LI and any of the behavioral measures
from the verbal and spatial Stroop tasks after correction for multiple
comparisons.

In order to further assess the speciﬁcity of the signiﬁcant result we
found for the verbal (but not spatial) RT Stroop eﬀect, we carried out a
direct statistical comparison of the correlations between area LI and the
RT Stroop eﬀect in the verbal and spatial tasks. Speciﬁcally, we used the
procedure for comparing two overlapping correlations from dependent
groups, that is, two pairwise correlations that have a term in common
(i.e. AB vs. AC; [43]). This analysis revealed that the correlation for the
verbal RT Stroop eﬀect (Fig. 2A) was signiﬁcantly stronger than that for
the spatial one (Fig. 2B) (r = −0.110; Meng’s z = −1.65, p < 0.050,
see Ref. [44]), indicating that the signiﬁcant relation between the area
LI in our temporal cluster and the RT Stroop eﬀect reported above was
speciﬁc for the verbal domain.

We also assessed the potential impact of the participants’ handed-
ness on our results. The participants’ area LI in the peak vertex of the
temporal cluster was not related to their EHI score (r = −0.066,
p = 0.492). Moreover, the correlation between the area LI and the
verbal Stroop eﬀect presented above was not modulated by the parti-
cipants' degree of handedness (see Ref. [45]). In fact, a Fisher’s z test for
the diﬀerence between correlations in independent groups [46] re-
vealed that the correlation between area LI and verbal Stroop eﬀect in
consistent
those with an EHI
score ≥ 80, see Ref. [45]; r = −0.478, n = 35) was not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent (Fisher’s z = −1.287, p = 0.198) from that found in incon-
sistent right-handed participants (i.e., those with an EHI score < 80;
r = −0.242, n = 76). However, our sample did not include left-han-
ders, which prevents us from making strong conclusions on the role of
handedness in our study.

right-handed participants

(i.e.,

Similarly, we investigated whether participants’ overall eﬃciency in
performing our tasks aﬀected the results we found for the verbal RT
Stroop eﬀect. Indeed, the overall eﬃciency (computed as the mean of
the RTs in congruent and incongruent trials in both verbal and spatial
Stroop tasks) was signiﬁcantly and positively related to both spatial and
verbal Stroop eﬀects (respectively, r = 0.466 and 0.603, t(109) = 5.50
and 7.89, both ps < 0.001). We thus carried out a multiple regression
analysis with the RT Stroop eﬀect as dependent variable and both the
area LI and the overall eﬃciency measure as continuous predictors.
This analysis revealed that the relation between area LI and verbal
(β = −0.212,
Stroop eﬀect was signiﬁcant, albeit reduced
t(108) = −2.50, p = 0.014), even after controlling for the (signiﬁcant)
eﬀect of the overall eﬃciency (β = 0.419, t(108) = 4.94, p < 0.001),
thus conﬁrming that our results showing a relation between area LI and
verbal RT Stroop eﬀect were not due to the eﬀect of participants’
overall eﬃciency on their Stroop performance.
Finally, to further investigate whether the signiﬁcant result invol-
ving the verbal Stroop eﬀect in this area was mainly due to the parti-
cipants’ performance on the incongruent (vs. congruent) condition, we
carried out a direct statistical comparison of the correlations between
area LI and verbal RT on both the congruent and incongruent trials.
This analysis showed that the correlation between area LI and RTs on
incongruent trials (r = −0.26, p = 0.005) was signiﬁcantly stronger
than that between area LI and RTs on congruent trials (r = −0.19,
p = 0.04) (Meng’s z = 2.64, p = 0.008, see Ref. [44]). To illustrate this
point visually, Fig. 3 shows the overlap between the cluster that re-
sulted signiﬁcant in the correlation between verbal Stroop eﬀect and
surface area LI (p < 0.05, cluster-wise corrected) and those voxels that
resulted signiﬁcant in the temporal lobe for the same correlation be-
tween area LI and the RTs on congruent (Fig. 3A) and incongruent
conditions (Fig. 3B) (p < 0.05, uncorrected). As Fig. 3 shows, the
verbal Stroop eﬀect cluster overlaps to a much greater extent with the
incongruent RT-related cluster (62.2%) than with the congruent one
(12.8%). This result suggests that the correlation between area LI and
verbal Stroop eﬀect may be mostly due to interference-related pro-
cesses.

Similar correlation analyses were carried out for the spatial Stroop
eﬀect. No result concerning the spatial task was signiﬁcant when cor-
rected for multiple comparisons.

<Conclusion> Discussion.
In this study, structural asymmetries in an inferior posterior tem-
poral cluster including the VWFA predicted performance on a verbal
version of the Stroop task, in that a leftward laterality score was asso-
ciated with a smaller Stroop eﬀect. This eﬀect was measure-speciﬁc,
since it was present only for the surface area and not for the cortical
thickness, possibly because the former shows more inter-individual
variability [30]. Our study thus conﬁrms that the two measures oﬀer
complementary information about the relationship between behavior
and structural cortical features (also see Ref. [37], for a similar dis-
sociation on a diﬀerent paradigm). Control analyses suggested that the
correlation between area LI in the inferior posterior temporal cortex
and verbal Stroop eﬀect may be mostly due to interference-related
processes (which are involved in the Stroop incongruent condition)
rather than to facilitation-related ones (related to the congruent con-
dition).

The eﬀect was also task-speciﬁc, since it was only present for the
classic Stroop paradigm and not for a spatial version of this task. In
general, this main ﬁnding ﬁts well with left hemispheric dominance in
the processing of verbal information, including the management of
semantic competition, as shown by behavioral (e.g., [47]), electro-
physiological (e.g., [48]), and neuropsychological [25] evidence.
Weekes and Zaidel [47], for instance, demonstrated this dominance by
using a lateralized version of the Stroop task in which color words and
color patches were presented separately. These authors showed greater
Stroop interference when color words were displayed in the right
hemiﬁeld (and processed by the left hemisphere) than in the left
hemiﬁeld (processed by the right hemisphere), independently of whe-
ther the color patch was presented within the same hemiﬁeld or in the
opposite one (cf. [49]).

Our structural asymmetry results are also compatible with previous
fMRI literature that more speciﬁcally focuses on the role of VWFA in
integrating feed-forward visual processing with top-down inﬂuences
from more anterior areas, not only during written word recognition
[14], but also when interference has to be resolved as in the Stroop task,
at least for visuo-verbal material [12]. To further corroborate the hy-
pothesis that the so-called VWFA is not only involved in the recognition
of visual word forms but also in control processes, a resting state
functional connectivity study showed that the VWFA has stronger
correlations with regions of the dorsal attention network than regions
related to the reading activity [50].

The fact that it is the left versus right grey matter structural asym-
metry that predicts the verbal Stroop performance suggests that inter-
hemispheric rivalry among homologous regions might be important to
combat the interference that automatized word-reading produces on
task-relevant color-naming in this task (also see Ref. [51]). It is however
diﬃcult to infer precise functional mechanisms from structural data. A
possible interpretation of these ﬁndings is that a larger surface area of
the VWFA in the left hemisphere than its homologous region might help
to implement task-speciﬁc cognitive control more eﬃciently by sup-
pressing potentially distracting activity coming from the opposite
hemisphere (cf., [52,53]). In support of a role that structural char-
acteristics of this region may play in verbal-related cognitive control,
Greve and colleagues [37] found a positive correlation between the
laterality index measured for verbal dichotic listening and the surface
area asymmetry in a ventral occipito-temporal region, which included
the VWFA.

The present results are in apparent contrast with those of another
study [9], which analyzed structural-behavioral relationships in the
Stroop task using voxel-based morphometry. That study found no re-
lation between Stroop interference and gray/white matter volume in a
lateral occipital ROI built by merging the mask images of regions of the
superior occipital gyrus, middle occipital gyrus, and inferior occipital
gyrus. However, this mask did not include the inferior temporal cortex
that was found to be crucial here. Moreover, the mask used was very
extensive and bilateral, and no laterality (left vs. right) measure was
employed in that work. These study features might have hidden any
possible relationship between structural characteristics of more speciﬁc
(e.g., unilateral, asymmetric) sub-regions and Stroop interference
measures.

The absence of a relationship between a structural asymmetry at the
prefrontal level and verbal Stroop performance seems in contrast with
the often observed left-lateralization of prefrontal activations with the
verbal Stroop task in many neuroimaging studies (e.g., [7,54–58]), al-
though it should be noted that these previous studies all examined
functional data (usually without direct statistical assessments of left-
right asymmetries), while the results here refer to structural measures.
However, a closer look at the literature makes this null eﬀect less sur-
prising. Contrary to what can be intuitively expected based on the
classical Stroop literature, the already cited meta-analysis [6] showed
that the activations in the inferior frontal cortex associated to the
Stroop task are bilateral although, as already noted in the introduction,
these are more widespread in the left hemisphere; the same meta-
analysis showed that the Stroop task, if considered in conjunction with
other cognitive control tasks such as go-nogo, stop-signal and spatial
interference tasks, predominantly involves right-dominant cingulo-in-
sular-inferior frontal regions [6]. Moreover, previous evidence [59,60]
showed that the recruitment of right prefrontal cortex (and anterior
cingulate cortex) may occur in Stroop tasks, speciﬁcally when there is a
conﬂict at the response level, like in our task, in which each color could
be used either as the relevant or the to-be-ignored information. These
ﬁndings may partially explain our null eﬀects in terms of asymmetries
in the lateral prefrontal region.

Our null results regarding the spatial Stroop performance were also
somewhat unexpected given some previous works. Recent neu-
ropsychological data, for instance, showed that performance on a fairly
similar spatial conﬂict task (i.e., Eriksen’s ﬂanker task) was impaired
after lesions to the right ventro-lateral prefrontal cortex [25] (but see

Ref. [24], for conﬂicting resting-state electrophysiological evidence).
Moreover, as already stated previously, functional neuroimaging meta-
analytic evidence show that various types of conﬂict tasks (both spatial
and non-spatial) activate right lateral prefrontal regions [6]. In the light
of this evidence, we might speculate that larger prefrontal structures in
the right hemisphere than in the left one would facilitate performance
on the spatial Stroop task, thanks to the presence of extra neural re-
sources in the relevant hemisphere; however, the null evidence re-
ported in our study did not support this reasonable speculation.

More generally, it is noteworthy that evidence gathered from ana-
tomical data, on the one side, and functional neuroimaging, on the
other side, does not necessarily match and, even when it does, it is not
warranted that these data could in turn predict cognitive performance
(e.g., [61]). To mention a speciﬁc example from a diﬀerent domain, the
well-known structural asymmetry (left-more-than-right) of the planum
temporale, despite its generally good correspondence with neuro-
functional data [62], does not always correlate with behavioral later-
alization indices in dichotic listening tasks with verbal stimuli [63].
Thus, further investigations, perhaps with multimodal structural-func-
tional within-subject studies (e.g., [64]), should help in clarifying this
well-known issue concerning the incongruence of structural-functional
results.

In summary, the present study shows how structural hemispheric
asymmetries might provide a complementary route, with respect to
functional neuroimaging, electrophysiological and neuropsychological
data, to understand inter-individual variability in cognitive abilities.
However, the correspondence between structural asymmetry and cog-
nitive performance on the Stroop tasks was not present in the prefrontal
cortex, contrary to possible expectations, but only in a more posterior
region. Speciﬁcally, the present ﬁndings demonstrated that a leftward
hemispheric bias in the surface area of the inferior temporal cortex
including the VWFA is associated with a smaller Stroop eﬀect, which
was used here as a proxy for eﬃciency in combatting interference from
distracting but strong stimulus-response associations. The speciﬁcity of
the results, which were obtained for the verbal task but not for the
spatial one, suggests that these structure-function relationships are not
underpinned by universal asymmetry mechanisms but could be context-
dependent.



Acknowledgments
