

INTRODUCTION

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is an incurable, relentlessly
progressing neurodegenerative disease, leading to death within
3–5 years of diagnosis in most cases [1, 2]. In ALS, the degener-
ation of upper and lower motor neurons leads to muscle atrophy,
weakness, and eventually paralysis. Although predominantly a

motor disorder, 20% of ALS cases also develop cognitive def-
icits that resemble those seen in frontotemporal dementia (FTD).
Strikingly, ALS and select FTD subtypes share the pathological
hallmark of ubiquitinated inclusions composed of TDP-43 pro-
tein, encoded by the TARDBP gene [3].

The discovery of TARDBP mutations in ALS and FTD [4, 5]
demonstrates that TDP-43 plays causal roles in the pathogen-
esis of these diseases. Therefore, understanding the molecular
events underlying TDP-43 toxicity is of special
importance.
Indeed, abnormal TDP-43 levels and localization are toxic to
neurons [6], elicit endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress [7], and
impair multiple cellular processes, including axonal transport
[8], mitochondrial function [9], and RNA metabolism [10]. TDP-
43 is a ubiquitously expressed RNA- and DNA-binding protein,
with primarily nuclear localization. Interestingly, TDP-43 was
originally identiﬁed as a transcriptional
repressor [11], but DNA-related functions of TDP-43 remain largely unexplored.
Proper chromatin regulation is critical for gene expression in
the brain [12, 13], and various epigenetic mechanisms including
DNA methylation [14], histone acetylation [15], and histone
variant exchange [16] have been shown to control memory for-
mation and consolidation. Recent observations also point to
possible altered histone methylation and acetylation having a
role during brain degeneration in Alzheimer’s disease [17] and
in models of tauopathies [18]. Chromatin remodeling is carried
out by a large family of ATP-dependent enzymes that modify
chromatin structure by depositing, sliding, and evicting histones
[19]. Mutations in multiple chromatin remodelers are associated
with human mental disorders, suggesting that imbalance of
neuronal chromatin structure and the ensuing alterations in
gene expression are detrimental to brain function [20]. The
CHD family of chromatin remodelers is characterized by tandem
chromodomains in the N-terminal region and a central catalytic
domain with homology to the canonical SNF2-like ATPase
domain. Vertebrates contain CHD1 and CHD2, which form a
unique subfamily due to the presence of a C-terminal DNA-bind-
ing domain [21], whereas in invertebrates only one gene, Chd1,
exists.

Here we took an unbiased screening approach to ask
to whether chromatin regulatory proteins might be critical
neurodegeneration. We ﬁnd an unexpected role of TDP-43 in im-
pairing Chd1-dependent chromatin dynamics at stress genes,
thus reducing the protective stress response and promoting
neurodegeneration. We also ﬁnd a striking loss of CHD2 in hu-
man FTD cortex, indicating that impaired chromatin remodeling
may be a key event in ALS/FTD.

<Middle> RESULTS.
TDP-43 Toxicity Is Modulated by H3K4me3-Related
Genes in Drosophila
We performed an in vivo RNAi screen in which we reduced
expression of 84 genes related to various aspects of chromatin
regulation in a Drosophila model of ALS/FTD (Table S1; genes
were selected as in [22]). The gene set included histone methyl-
transferases, demethylases, acetyltransferases (HATs), and de-
acetylases (HDACs), as well as associated factors, histones, and
chromatin remodelers. We expressed TDP-43 in the ﬂy eye with
the binary GAL4/UAS expression system. Such ﬂies show pro-
gressive retinal deterioration that can be visualized externally,
providing a simple and rapid readout of TDP-43 toxicity and
potential gene enhancers or suppressors [23]. We followed the
screen with secondary tests using a model of TDP-43-mediated
brain degeneration.

Following exclusion of RNAi lines that affected eye integrity on
their own, the screen uncovered 31 modiﬁers, 4 of which we
classiﬁed as ‘‘strong’’ and 27 as ‘‘mild’’ based on eye structure
(Figure 1A). The modiﬁers, both enhancers and suppressors of
TDP-43 toxicity, included a range of genes from most of the
tested functional categories. However, we noted that six modi-
ﬁers were related to histone H3 trimethyl lysine 4 (H3K4me3; Fig-
ure 1A), a mark associated with active gene expression [24]. Two
strong modiﬁers were lid and Chd1 (Figures 1B and 1C): knock-
down of lid, an H3K4me3 demethylase [25], strongly suppressed
TDP-43 toxicity, whereas knockdown of Chd1, a chromatin ATP-
dependent remodeling factor associated with H3K4me3 [26],
enhanced TDP-43 toxicity (Figures 1B and 1C). Knockdown of
three components of COMPASS (conserved multiprotein com-
plexes that mediate methylation of H3K4 [27]) showed mild
enhancement of TDP-43 toxicity. These were Set1, the major
H3K4me3 lysine methyltransferase [28], and the subunits ash2
and Wdr82 (Figure S1A). Taken together, these genetic interac-
tions suggested that gain of H3K4 methylation suppressed
toxicity, whereas toxicity was enhanced by loss of H3K4 methyl-
ation or function.

To assess the speciﬁcity of these interactions, we manipulated
other chromatin marks and examined TDP-43-mediated degen-
eration. These data showed that modulation of genes that alter
methylation of H3K9, H3K27, H3K36, or H3K79 had no effect
on TDP-43 toxicity (Figure S1B). Furthermore, knockdown of
Su(var)3-3, which demethylates mono and dimethyl H3K4 [29],
also had little effect on TDP-43 toxicity (Figure S1A).

The efﬁciency of lid and Chd1 knockdown was conﬁrmed us-
ing real-time qRT-PCR (Figure S1C). We focused additional an-
alyses on lid and Chd1 because of their strong modulation of
TDP43. Modulation by lid and Chd1 was speciﬁc to TDP-43,
because reduction of lid or Chd1 on their own did not affect
integrity of the eye (Figure S1D) and did not impact the toxicity
of another neurodegenerative disease protein, Tau (Figure S1D).

Furthermore, lid and Chd1 knockdown did not alter TDP-43
levels or nuclear/cytoplasmic partitioning (Figures S1E and
S1F). Thus, the screen identiﬁed a selective genetic interaction
between TDP-43 and chromatin factors related speciﬁcally to
the H3K4me3 chromatin mark.

We next tested whether manipulation of lid and Chd1 could
alter TDP-43 toxicity in the nervous system. Expression of
TDP-43 using the neuronal driver elav-Gal4 shortened lifespan
and impaired motor abilities (chamber wall climbing). Knock-
down of Chd1 further shortened lifespan and further impaired
motor function, whereas lid knockdown prolonged lifespan and
mitigated motor dysfunction (Figure 1D; Figure S1G). Impor-
tantly, Chd1 and lid knockdown on their own had no effect on
lifespan (Figure 1E).
We considered the possibility that TDP-43 expression itself
affected the level of the H3K4me3 mark. We therefore exam-
ined the levels of H3K4me3 in brains of animals expressing
TDP-43, compared to knockdown of lid and Set1, the
H3K4me3 demethylase and methyltransferase, respectively.
Although there was a striking effect of both lid and Set1 in
modulating brain H3K4me3 levels, TDP-43 expression had no
effect (Figure 1F). Chd1 depletion does not affect H3K4me3
levels [30]. Furthermore, in the background of TDP-43 expres-
sion, knockdown of lid, Set1, and Chd1 exerted similar effects
on H3K4me3 as they did in control ﬂies (Figure S1H). These
data suggested that it is not the level of H3K4me3 that is
important but rather functional
interactions, for example the
recruitment of remodeling factors to chromatin that might be
especially relevant, given the identiﬁcation of Chd1 as a strong
TDP-43 modiﬁer.

TDP-43 Mediates Stress Response Impairments
via Chd1
Chd1 is a nucleosome remodeling enzyme of the SNF2 family;
human CHD1 speciﬁcally binds to H3K4me3 [26], and
Drosophila Chd1 largely overlaps with H3K4me3 on chromatin
[31]. However, given that global levels of H3K4me3 were unaf-
fected by TDP-43, our ﬁndings raised the possibility that select
targets of Chd1 might be of special importance to TDP-43-asso-
ciated toxicity. Intriguingly, Chd1 is linked to gene induction
following stress [30, 32], and molecular chaperones are crucial
in neurodegenerative processes [33–35]. TDP-43, like numerous
other degenerative disease proteins, is aggregation prone, and
several heat shock proteins protect against its toxicity [36–40].
In accordance with these studies, we found that upregulation
of Hsc4 and Hsp68 suppressed TDP-43 toxicity (Figures S2A
and S2B). We conﬁrmed that Chd1 loss impairs the induction
of heat shock genes in adult ﬂies, as shown previously in larvae
[30] (Figure S2C). These data raised the possibility that the Chd1
and TDP-43 genetic interaction may involve stress pathways,
and that impaired Chd1 function could limit the cellular stress
response to various insults.

During stress, TDP-43 accumulates in stress granules (SGs),
which are cytoplasmic, non-membrane-bound assemblies of
proteins and mRNAs and that are stalled in translation initiation
[41]. Therapeutic inhibition of SGs mitigates TDP-43-mediated
neurodegeneration [42]. We therefore tested whether Chd1
might be involved in SG formation. We used Drosophila S2R+
cells [43], and developed an automated SG analysis pipeline
(Figure 2B) to allow quantitative analysis. Knockdown of Chd1
(Figure 2A) did not induce SG formation on its own (Figure 2C).
However, upon treatment with 0.2 mM sodium arsenite, a well-
characterized inducer of SG formation, Chd1 knockdown signif-
icantly increased the number of SGs per cell, SG size, and per-
centage of cells that exhibit visible SGs (Figures 2C and 2D;
highly sensitive to paraquat-induced
oxidative stress as well as to starvation
(Figure S2D), suggesting that TDP-43
induced severe impairments to multiple
stress response pathways. These data
further indicated that the Chd1 and TDP-
43 genetic interaction may reﬂect modu-
lation of stress response genes.

To examine the molecular basis of
this sensitivity, we subjected animals to
heat shock and analyzed the dynamics
of gene expression of the molecular chap-
erones. Without added stress, TDP-43
caused a moderate and signiﬁcant
upregulation of several heat shock genes
(Figure 3F). Upon heat stress, the expression of these genes
increased dramatically. However, the mRNA levels of Hsp23,
Hsp27, Hsp40, Hsp68, Hsp70 loci, and Hsp83 were consistently
lower in TDP-43 animals compared to controls following stress
(Figures 3F and 3G; Figures S2H and S2I; data are presented
relative to control non-heat shock). Thus, induction of heat shock
gene expression is impaired by TDP-43. Upregulation of Chd1
could restore stress gene induction to animals expressing
TDP-43: importantly, the level of gene expression returned to
nearly control levels in TDP-43 + Chd1-OE (Figure 3G; Figures
S2H and S2I), consistent with the ability of Chd1 to protect
TDP-43 animals from physiological heat stress (Figure 3C). The
induction of several Hsps, such as Hsp67, was unaltered by
TDP-43 (Figure S2E), showing speciﬁcity in effects. Supporting
the unique role of the stress response in TDP-43 toxicity, ﬂies ex-
pressing Tau (wild-type or R406W mutant) had normal heat
shock gene induction (Figure S2G).

To determine whether these effects of TDP-43 were conserved
in mammalian cells, we utilized human embryonic kidney
(HEK) 293T cells that express GFP-tagged wild-type TDP-43

Figure S3). These data conﬁrmed that Chd1 function may be crit-
ical during the stress response.

To examine the functional importance of Chd1 during stress,
we subjected Chd1 homozygous null ﬂies to 2 hr of heat stress

C and allowed them to recover overnight (Figure 3A).
at 40
Control animals recovered almost completely, whereas loss of
Chd1 dramatically impaired survival (Figure 3B). Knockdown of
Chd1 similarly resulted in impaired survival following stress (Fig-
ure 3B). We then asked whether stress sensitivity is a feature of
animals expressing TDP-43. Strikingly, conditional expression of
TDP-43 in adult animals also resulted in hypersensitivity to heat
stress, with high lethality after overnight recovery (Figure 3C);
Chd1 knockdown further increased lethality, whereas increased
expression of Chd1 (Chd1-OE) dramatically reduced lethality of
TDP-43 ﬂies (Figure 3C). The increased sensitivity of TDP-43 an-
imals to stress was selective, and not a general feature of ani-
mals undergoing neurodegeneration, because expression of
the neurodegenerative disease protein Tau (wild-type or the
FTD-Tau-related mutation R406W) did not result in sensitivity
to heat stress (Figures 3D and 3E). TDP-43 animals were also
(GFP-TDP-43) or GFP alone conditionally via the TetON system.
GFP-TDP-43 or GFP was placed under the tetracycline-respon-
sive promoter element
(TRE) and induced by the reverse
tetracycline-controlled transactivator (rtTA). Six days following

C for
doxycycline induction, the cells were heat stressed at 46
1 hr. RNA was extracted after 6 and 8 hr, and the expression of
10 prototypical members of the heat shock protein family was
assessed. We found that TDP-43 dramatically impaired the
induction of HSPB5 (Crystallin Alpha B; CYRAB), DNAJB1
(HSP40 member B1), HSPA1A (HSP70 protein 1A), and HSPA6
(HSP70 protein 6) (Figure 3H; Figure S2F). Our data indicate
that in both Drosophila and mammalian cells, TDP-43 impairs
the induction of major stress genes, notably HSP70.

TDP-43 Impairs Chromatin Dynamics
The ability of a chromatin remodeling factor, Chd1, to modulate
TDP-43-mediated impairments in stress gene induction raised
the possibility that TDP-43 may impact chromatin structure at
these genes. We focused on Hsp70 because it is a highly
induced, canonical stress gene. Upon heat shock, nucleosomes
along the gene body are rapidly removed to allow transcription
by paused RNA polymerase II [44]. We therefore tested whether
these nucleosome dynamics are impacted by TDP-43. Using
micrococcal nuclease protection followed by qPCR (MNase-
qPCR; Figure 4A), we conﬁrmed that histones are rapidly cleared
(approximately 4-fold decrease) over the Hsp70 gene body upon
heat shock of adult Drosophila (Figure 4B). We then conditionally
expressed TDP-43 and analyzed nucleosomal positioning under
ambient temperatures or following 10 min of heat stress. Without
heat stress, TDP-43 caused a mild but signiﬁcant clearance of
nucleosomes (Figure 4B), in accordance with its effects on
gene expression (see Figure 3F). Strikingly, under stress, TDP-
43 induced a strong impairment in histone clearance along the
Hsp70 gene body (Figure 4B), which was also consistent with
the reduction in gene expression in TDP-43-expressing animals
at this time point. In accordance with the ability of Chd1-OE to
rescue heat shock sensitivity and gene induction in TDP-43-ex-
pressing animals, added Chd1 restored histone clearance (Fig-
ure 4B). Analysis of a second locus, Hsp40, yielded similar
effects (Figure S4A). These data suggest that TDP-43 impairs in TetON-HEK293 cells (Figure 3H), we performed MNase pro-
tection to ask whether nucleosomal dynamics was also affected
in human cells. Chromatin clearance ahead of RNA polymerase
has been previously described for human HSP70 in response to
heat stress of cultured cells [45], suggesting that this gene is a
suitable system with which to study chromatin dynamics in
C and 1-hr
mammalian cells. Following a 1-hr heat stress at 46
recovery at 37
C, we found reduced nucleosomal occupancy
at the promoter and gene body of HSPA6 and HSPA1A, two hu-
man HSP70 genes (Figure S4E). Expression of TDP-43 impaired
the clearance of nucleosomes at both of these genes (Fig-
ure S4E). Therefore, impaired chromatin dynamics by TDP-43
is conserved in mammalian cells.
TDP-43 Impairs Recruitment of Chd1 to Chromatin
Chd1 is recruited to heat shock loci and associates with regions
of high transcriptional activity [46]. In light of our ﬁndings, we hy-
pothesized that TDP-43 may impact recruitment of Chd1 to
chromatin. To test this, we employed a hemagglutinin (HA)-
tagged Chd1 genomic transgene expressed via the endogenous
Chd1 promoter and followed in vivo chromatin association of
Chd1 utilizing an anti-HA antibody. ChIP-qPCR analysis across
the Hsp70 gene conﬁrmed that Chd1-HA recruitment over the
Hsp70 gene body coincided with the clearance of histone H3
(Figures S4F and S4G), consistent with the role of Chd1 in nucle-
osome remodeling at Hsp70 [30]. We then used ChIP-qPCR to
compare Chd1 association with the Hsp70 gene between control
ﬂies and ﬂies expressing TDP-43. Whereas the association of
Chd1 with the Hsp70 gene body was normally robust upon
stress, the presence of TDP-43 resulted in a signiﬁcant reduction
in Chd1 association (Figure 4E), despite normal overall levels of
Chd1 (Figures S5A and S5B). Taken together with the impaired
eviction of nucleosomes and the hypersensitivity of TDP-43 an-
imals to stress, these data suggest that reduced levels of Chd1
on Hsp gene bodies during stress impair chromatin dynamics,
leading to reduced transcription of Hsp genes. Thus, animals
with sub-optimal levels of stress response gene expression will
be hypersensitive to insult, which will manifest in increased
mortality.

TDP-43 and Drosophila Chd1/Human CHD2 Physically
Interact
A mechanism underlying reduced Chd1 recruitment to chromatin
might involve physical interactions between TDP-43 and Chd1.
We examined interactions in soluble and chromatin fractions, us-
ing co-immunoprecipitation (coIP) in extracts derived from whole
ﬂies. Intriguingly, TDP-43 coIP Chd1-HA primarily in the soluble
fraction (Figure 5B), although TDP-43 was localized to both the
soluble and chromatin fractions (Figure 5B). IP with an IgG control
as well as western immunoblot against b-tubulin demonstrated
the selectivity of the interaction. coIPs with anti-TDP-43 anti-
bodies in ﬂies that do not express TDP-43 did not pull down
Chd1-HA, conﬁrming speciﬁcity (Figure S5C). These data sug-
gest that TDP-43 may physically prevent proper recruitment of
Chd1 to stress genes, and are consistent with TDP-43-depen-
dent compromise of nucleosome remodeling (see Figure 4) and
dampened stress-related gene expression (see Figure 3).

Vertebrates, including humans, encode two orthologs of
Chd1: CHD1 and CHD2 (Figure 5A). Between these, mutations
chromatin dynamics, largely downstream of the transcription
start site (TSS) within the transcribed gene body, and that these
impairments are restored by added Chd1.

To conﬁrm these ﬁndings using an independent assay, we
used chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) of histone H3 in
adult ﬂies (Figure 4C), as the opening of chromatin structure is
accompanied by reduced occupancy of histone H3 [44]. In
accordance with the MNase data, heat shock resulted in loss
of the H3 signal, and clearance of H3 was impaired by TDP-43
(Figure 4D). Here as well, Chd1-OE rescued TDP-43-mediated
impairments in nucleosomal clearance (Figure 4D). To obtain a
quantitative measure of the dynamic ability of speciﬁc regions
within the Hsp70 locus to clear nucleosomes upon stress, we
calculated the ratio of non-heat shock to heat shock values for
both the MNase and H3 ChIP experiments (Figures S4C and
S4D). This analysis further supported a role for TDP-43 in impair-
ing chromatin dynamics. We further conﬁrmed that TDP-43 did
not alter H3K4me3 levels at the Hsp70 promoter/TSS region,
underscoring that TDP-43 interferes with chromatin remodeling
but does not affect H3K4me3 levels (Figure S4B). Moreover,
because TDP-43 impaired the induction of human HSP genes
in CHD2 are associated with neurological disorders, including in-
tellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, and epileptic
encephalopathies [47–54], whereas loss of CHD1 in mouse em-
bryonic stem cells leads to neural differentiation, suggesting that
CHD1 impairs neural fate [55]. Thus, we focused on CHD2 as the
relevant homolog in the brain.

Using HEK293 cells, which endogenously express both TDP-
43 and CHD2, we determined whether TDP-43 and CHD2 phys-
ically interacted by coIP. Cells were fractionated into soluble and
chromatin fractions, and anti-TDP-43 antibody was utilized for
IP. CHD2 was selectively pulled down by TDP-43 (Figure 5C),
and, as in Drosophila, CHD2 and TDP-43 interacted primarily in
the soluble fraction, whereas TDP-43 was detected in both
fractions (Figure 5C). IP with an IgG control as well as western
immunoblot against b-tubulin conﬁrmed the speciﬁcity of the
interaction. We conﬁrmed a robust and selective interaction be-
tween TDP-43 and CHD2 by reverse IP with CHD2 and immuno-
blot against TDP-43 (Figure 5D). Importantly, endogenous CHD2
and TDP-43 were coIPed without overexpression of these pro-
teins, supporting a strong interaction. To examine whether this
interaction was mediated by RNA, we repeated the IP with sam-
ples treated with RNase A. Surprisingly, we detected an increase
in the association of CHD2 and TDP-43 (Figure S5D). Mutations
in the TDP-43 RNA recognition motifs induce nuclear accumula-
tions of TDP-43 [23, 56]. We therefore suggest that upon aggre-
gation, TDP-43 increases its interaction with CHD2. Of note,
however, RNase A treatment also promoted an interaction of
TDP-43 with b-tubulin, which is not bound under native condi-
tions (Figure S5D). Taken together, these data indicate that dis-
ruptions to the function of Chd1/CHD2 may be mediated by
interaction with TDP-43.

Cytoplasmic TDP-43 Accumulations Are Associated
with Reduced CHD2 Levels in Cultured Cells and in
Human FTD Cortex
Given the interactions between TDP-43 and Chd1/CHD2, we
analyzed CHD2 expression using immunohistochemistry in
TetOn-GFP-TDP-43 and control cells (Figure 6A). These data
showed that TetOn-GFP-TDP-43 cells had an 20% reduction
in CHD2 protein levels (Figure 6B). Similar reduction was also de-
tected by western immunoblot (Figure S5E). We further noted
that 15% of cells expressing GFP-TDP-43 exhibited abnormal
accumulations of cytoplasmic TDP-43, reminiscent of ALS and
FTD (Figure 6C). CHD2 levels were reduced in those cells with
cytoplasmic TDP-43 accumulations (Figures 6C and 6D), sug-
gesting that TDP-43 mislocalization is correlated with reduced
CHD2 levels.

These results prompted us to examine CHD2 levels in the hu-
man brain. CHD2 immunolabeling of temporal cortex showed
staining that appeared exclusively nuclear (Figure 6E), as in
cultured cells. We then compared CHD2 immunolabeling be-
tween tissue from controls and FTD cases with TDP-43 pathol-
ogy (FTD-TDP). These data revealed that CHD2 levels were
dramatically reduced in FTD-TDP (Figures 6E and 6F). Further,
when comparing CHD2 levels within FTD brain cells based on
nuclear or cytoplasmic TDP-43 localization, reduced CHD2
was associated with cells bearing abnormal cytoplasmic locali-
zation of TDP-43 (Figure 6G). Therefore, in both cultured cells
and human post-mortem disease brain tissue, CHD2 protein
levels are negatively associated with abnormal cytoplasmic
TDP-43 accumulations.

To systematically determine whether the relative abundance
of multiple histone post-translational modiﬁcations was altered
in the FTD post-mortem brain, we extracted histones from tem-
poral cortex samples and analyzed histone H3 and histone H4
modiﬁcations by liquid chromatography tandem mass spec-
trometry (LC-MS/MS [57]). We found no signiﬁcant alterations
in the abundance of 44 acetylation or methylation marks on his-
tones H3 and H4 between controls and FTD cases (Figures S6A
and S6B). We also speciﬁcally analyzed H3K4me3 levels by
immunoblot, and again found no signiﬁcant changes between
controls and FTD cases (Figure S6C), as in Drosophila. There-
fore, reduced levels of CHD2 in the FTD brain are not associated
with a global change in histone modiﬁcations in general, or
H3K4me3 in particular.

Taken together, our data support a model whereby TDP-43
compromises chromatin dynamics at least in part by interfering
with Chd1 (in Drosophila)/CHD2 (in humans) recruitment to
genes such as stress response genes. Reduced clearance of nu-
cleosomes is expected to interfere with the ability of the tran-
scriptional machinery to allow optimal gene expression upon
exposure to stressful stimuli (Figure 6H). This reduced ability to
upregulate stress genes will
impair the cellular capacity to
resolve stress insults and thus contribute to the progression of
neurodegeneration.

<Conclusion> DISCUSSION.
An in vivo RNAi screen in Drosophila identiﬁed Chd1 and several
H3K4me3-related factors as strikingly selective modiﬁers of
TDP-43-induced neurodegeneration. Detailed investigation re-
vealed an interaction between TDP-43 and the chromatin re-
modeler Chd1. We ﬁnd that upon stress, TDP-43 ﬂies are
impaired in their ability to upregulate Hsp gene expression and
are highly sensitive to deleterious actions of stress (see Figure 3).
We ﬁnd that these effects are mediated by Chd1: TDP-43
impaired Chd1 recruitment to chromatin upon exposure to
heat stress, resulting in reduced ability to clear nucleosomes
from the gene body of Hsp70 and Hsp40 (see Figures 4 and
S4). Importantly, TDP-43 animals were also sensitive to paraquat
and starvation, suggesting general stress sensitivity. We antici-
pate that similar impairments of chromatin dynamics at stress
response genes will also occur under these situations. We
extended our ﬁndings to show that CHD2 levels are markedly
reduced in FTD-TDP cortex. Our studies raise the possibility
that TDP-43 toxicity is associated with impaired chromatin re-
modeling, at least in part due to compromise of CHD2 levels
and function. Approaches to promote chromatin dynamics
and/or restore CHD2 levels may be promising therapeutics.
Our screen also identiﬁed lid as a suppressor of TDP-43 toxicity,
although we focused on Chd1 function because we did not
observe a change in global levels of H3K4me3 in the FTD brain
or in our animal model following TDP-43 expression. We cannot
rule out that local changes in H3K4me3 abundance may occur at
speciﬁc genomic locations, although we did not detect such a
change at Hsp70.

Interestingly, TDP-43 caused a 20% reduction in CHD2 pro-
tein levels in HEK293 cells but did not alter Chd1 protein levels
or nuclear/cytoplasmic partitioning in ﬂies. The more drastic
reduction observed in the FTD brain suggests that additional,
most likely aging-dependent mechanisms are involved. Further-
more, as Drosophila bears a single Chd1 gene whereas the
human CHD1 family also contains CHD2, it is possible that the
expression of ﬂy Chd1 is subject to tighter regulation. The pre-
cise mechanism by which TDP-43 impairs chromatin recruitment
of Chd1 requires future studies, but we hypothesize that it will
involve physical association between these proteins.

Our studies highlight impaired stress gene dynamics. This un-
expected result, that TDP-43 impairs the induction of molecular
chaperones—the very factors needed for resolution of cellular
stress—may help to explain the difﬁculty neurons have in
resolving TDP-43-mediated toxicity in ALS/FTD. Given that in-
duction of chaperone gene expression is considered a therapeu-
tic approach for neurodegenerative diseases [58], a detailed
understanding of the mechanisms that govern chaperone gene
expression in the brain is warranted. Indeed, reduced protein
levels of several Hsps are reported in the spinal cord of TDP-
43 mouse models and human ALS cases [40]. Similarly, HSP70
levels were found to be reduced in neural derived plasma exo-
somes from FTD patients as compared with controls [59]. Our
ﬁndings suggest that TDP-43 may impair the stress response
at the chromatin level, implicating chromatin remodelers as crit-
ical factors in this impact.

Interestingly, the human CHD2 gene, but not human CHD1, is
mutated in a variety of neurodevelopmental disorders [47–54].
CHD2, therefore, appears to be of special
importance to the
brain. In contrast to CHD2, human CHD1 did not physically asso-
ciate with TDP-43 (data not shown), further underscoring that the
relevant ortholog in humans is CHD2. Our ﬁndings suggest that
in addition to critical
functions during brain development,
CHD2 may also be important in maintenance of adult brain func-
tion and integrity. Indeed, a relevant target of CHD2 is REST [60],
which is an important regulator of neuronal gene expression dur-
ing development yet that also regulates stress-related gene
expression in the aging brain [61]. REST levels fail to become up-
regulated in FTD, Alzheimer’s disease, and dementia with Lewy
bodies,
like they are during healthy aging, suggesting that
reduced REST levels may contribute to neurodegeneration.
Reduced CHD2 levels are predicted to reduce REST levels,
further promoting stress sensitivity and degeneration.
Mutations in multiple different genes are associated with ALS
and FTD, but only a minority (10%) of patients show a clear

Current Biology 27, 3579–3590, December 4, 2017 3587

inheritance pattern. It is therefore striking that pathologically
abnormal TDP-43 accumulations widely characterize most fa-
milial and sporadic disease, indicating that multiple toxic path-
ways converge on TDP-43. TDP-43-mediated impairments in
stress pathways, which are critical for protection from degener-
ative disease, could contribute to the toxicity of multiple genes
associated with familial and sporadic ALS/FTD. Our study
highlights altered chromatin remodeling as an important and
previously unrecognized impact of TDP-43, and indicates that
approaches to promoting chromatin dynamics and/or restoring
CHD2 levels may be an effective therapeutic avenue to pursue
for degenerative disease.

References