
INTRODUCTION
Photosynthetic eukaryotes possibly originated 1.9 billion years
ago following an endosymbiotic event in which a heterotrophic
ancestor of the Archaeplastida engulfed a cyanobacterium that
became stably integrated and evolved into a membrane-bound
organelle, the plastid [1, 2]. Following this primary endosymbi-
osis, an intricate history of plastid acquisition via eukaryote-
eukaryote endosymbioses resulted in the spread of plastids to
distantly related eukaryotic lineages [3].

Plastids have retained a reduced version of the genome in-
herited from their cyanobacterial ancestor. A core set of genes
involved in the light reactions of photosynthesis, ATP generation,
and functions related to transcription and translation is typically
retained [4]. Many genes have been lost or transferred to the nu-
clear genome and, as a result, plastids are dependent on nu-
clear-encoded, plastid-targeted proteins for the maintenance
of essential biochemical pathways and other functions such as
genome replication, gene expression, and DNA repair [5]. Nearly
all plastid genomes consist of a single circular-mapping chromo-
some, typically between 100 and 200 kb and encoding circa
80–250 genes [4, 6]. Diversity in size, gene content, density,
and organization of plastid genomes among different eukaryotic
lineages [7–9] is by and large limited, especially when compared
to mitochondria.

Whereas fragmented mitochondrial genomes evolved several
times independently during the evolution of eukaryotes [8, 10],
fragmented plastid genomes are only known in dinoﬂagellates
[11] and a single green algal species [12]. In peridinin-containing
dinoﬂagellates,
the chloroplast genome is fragmented into
DNA minicircles of 2–3 kb, most of which carry one gene only
[11, 13]. Larger minicircles of up to 12 kb have also been
described [14], as well as minicircles containing two genes [15]
and ‘‘empty’’ minicircles without genes [16]. The genes located
on these minicircles mostly encode key components of the major
plasmid-like DNA that has been observed
in the chloroplasts of several species
[29, 30]. These plasmid-like DNA mole-
cules represent a low-molecular-weight
(LMW) DNA fraction, visible on agarose
gels of total DNA extracts (Figure 1D). Pio-
neering work revealed that these struc-
tures are single-stranded DNA (ssDNA)
molecules of 1.5–3.0 kb that fold into a
hairpin conﬁguration and lack sequence
similarity to the nuclear DNA [31, 32].
Some of
the hairpin-like DNAs contain
putatively transcribed sequences with
similarity to chloroplast genes encoding
(psaB, psbB, psbC, and

subunits of photosystems I and II
psbF) [31].

Here we describe intriguing features of the plastid genome of
Cladophorales, focusing on Boodlea composita. Through the
integration of different DNA sequencing methods, combined
with RNA sequencing, we found that chloroplast protein-coding
genes are highly expressed and encoded on 1- to 7-kb linear
ssDNA molecules. Due to the widespread presence of inverted
repeats, these molecules fold into a hairpin conﬁguration. A chlo-
roplast genome that is composed only of linear DNA molecules is
unprecedented among eukaryotes, and highlights unexpected
variation in plastid genome architecture.

<Middle> RESULTS AND DISCUSSION.
DNA and RNA Sequencing Data
Our reconstruction of the chloroplast genome of B. composita is
based on different high-throughput DNA sequencing methods
(Figure S1; STAR Methods). The choice of short-read DNA
sequencing of isolated intact chloroplasts (chloroplast-enriched
fraction) using Roche 454 technology was based on comparable
sequencing approaches in other plants and algae that success-
fully resulted in assembly of chloroplast genomes [25]. To over-
come possible assembly artifacts in a hypothetical scenario of
an inﬂated chloroplast genome bloated by repetitive elements,
long-read sequencing of
(HMW)
DNA fraction using the Paciﬁc Biosciences Single-Molecule
Real-Time (SMRT) method was applied, whereas long-read
sequencing of the LMW DNA fraction allowed characterization
of the previously observed plasmid-like DNA in the chloroplast
[29, 30]. To allow comparison of the results of Boodlea with

the high-molecular-weight

photosynthetic complexes, including subunits of photosystems I
and II, the cytochrome b6f complex, and ATP synthase, as well
as rRNAs and a few tRNAs [11]. The only other alga with a frag-
mented chloroplast genome is the green alga Koshicola spirode-
lophila, but here the level of fragmentation is minor: the plastid
genome is divided into three large circular chromosomes totaling
385 kb, with a gene content comparable to other green algae
[12]. In addition, plastid minicircles that coexist with a conven-
tional plastid genome have been observed in a few algae,
including dinoﬂagellates with haptophyte-derived plastids [17]
and the green alga Acetabularia [18, 19].

Although plastid genomes generally assemble as circular-
mapping DNAs, they can take multiple complex conformations
in vivo, including multigenomic, linear-branched structures with
discrete termini [20, 21]. The alveolate Chromera velia is the
only known alga with a linear-mapping plastid genome with telo-
meric arrangement [22], and is also atypical in that several core
photosynthesis genes are fragmented. Linear plastid genomes,
however, may be more widespread, as several plastid genomes
currently do not map as a circle [23].

Currently, and in stark contrast to other algae [9, 24–26], little
is known about the gene content and structure of the chloro-
plast genome in the Cladophorales (Ulvophyceae), an ecologi-
cally important group of marine and freshwater green algae,
which includes several hundreds of species. These macro-
scopic multicellular algae have giant, multinucleate cells con-
taining numerous chloroplasts (Figures 1A–1C). Most attempts
to amplify common chloroplast genes have failed [27], with only
one highly divergent rbcL sequence published thus far for
Chaetomorpha valida [28]. An atypical plastid genome in
the Cladophorales is suggested by the presence of abundant
other species of Cladophorales, we generated additional DNA
sequence data from nine other species using Illumina HiSeq 2000
technology. Finally, two deep-coverage RNA-seq (sequencing)
libraries, a total-RNA library, and an mRNA library enriched for
nuclear transcripts were generated to conﬁrm the transcription
of genes and to inform whether genes are nuclear versus plastid
encoded.

A Prodigious Chloroplast Genome with a Reduced
Gene Set
Assembly of the chloroplast-enriched DNA reads generated us-
ing Roche 454 technology did not result in a typical circular chlo-
roplast genome. Instead, 21 chloroplast protein-coding genes
were found on 58 short contigs (1,203–5,426 bp): atpA, atpB,
atpH, atpI, petA, petB, petD, psaA, psaB, psaC, psbA, psbB,
psbC, psbD, psbE, psbF, psbJ, psbK, psbL, psbT, and rbcL.
All but the rbcL gene code for components of the major thylakoid
transmembrane protein complexes (ATP synthase, cytochrome
b6f, and photosystems I and II). The contigs contained inverted
repeats at their termini and, despite high coverage by sequence
reads, could not be extended by iterative contig extension.
Sequence similarity searches and a metagenomic binning
approach (distribution analysis of 4-mers) demonstrated that
the inverted repeats were also found on contigs with no
sequence similarity to known proteins, raising the number of
contigs of chloroplast origin to 136. These contigs are further
referred to as ‘‘chloroplast 454 contigs.’’ The length distribution
of the chloroplast 454 contigs was consistent with the size of the
LMW DNA fraction as estimated by agarose gel electrophoresis
of Boodlea genomic DNA (Figure 1D; Figures S6A and S6B).

The failure to assemble a circular chloroplast genome might be
due to repetitive elements that impair the performance of short-
read assemblers [33]. Inﬂated chloroplast genomes bloated by
repetitive elements have been documented in several green
algae [34–36]. To overcome assembly artifacts and close puta-
tive gaps in the chloroplast 454 contigs, we applied SMRT
sequencing to the HMW and LMW DNA fractions. Only 22
HMW DNA reads (ca. 0.044%) harbored protein-coding genes
commonly present in chloroplast genomes of Archaeplastida
(Figure 2A). All but three of these genes (psbA, psbB, and
psbC, which likely correspond to carry-over LMW DNA) con-
tained spliceosomal introns, were absent in the chloroplast 454
contigs, and revealed a high ratio between mapped mRNA and
total-RNA reads, altogether suggesting that they are encoded
in the nucleus (Figure S2A). Conversely, 22 chloroplast genes
(that is, the 21 protein-coding genes identiﬁed in chloroplast
454 contigs as well as the 16S rRNA gene) were found in the
LMW DNA reads (Figure 2A). An orthology-guided assembly,

where the chloroplast 454 contigs harboring protein-coding
genes guided the assembly of LMW DNA reads with sequence
similarity to chloroplast genes, resulted in 34 contigs between
1,179 and 6,925 bp in length, henceforth referred to as the ‘‘chlo-
roplast genome’’ (Figure 2B; Table S1).

Four contigs of the Boodlea chloroplast genome (contigs 10,
19, 32, and 33) display long palindromic sequences that include
full-length coding sequences (CDSs) and a less conserved tail
region (Figure 2B). The remaining contigs have similar palin-
dromic structures but appear to be not completely assembled.
Such palindromes allow regions of the single-stranded LMW
DNA molecules to fold into hairpin-like secondary structures.
Additional smaller inverted repeats were identiﬁed in many of
the contigs (Figure 2B), which may result in more complex sec-
ondary structures.

Chloroplast 454 contigs could not be scaffolded with long
HMW DNA reads, nor did a hybrid assembly between chloro-
plast 454 contigs and long HMW DNA reads generate a circular
chloroplast genome (Figure S1; STAR Methods). The LMW DNA
reads are concordant and consistent with the palindromic se-
quences of the assembled chloroplast genome, indicating that
the palindromes are not a result of assembly artifacts (Figure 3;
Table S1). As a consequence, we conclude that the chloroplast
genome is not a single large molecule but that it is instead frag-
mented into several molecules in the LMW DNA.

A chloroplast genome that is entirely fragmented into hairpin
chromosomes is in line with earlier observations of abundant
LMW DNA in chloroplasts of several species of Cladophorales
[29]. The hairpin conﬁguration of the chromosomes derived
from our sequence data corresponds to earlier data based on
electron microscopy, endo- and exonuclease digestion experi-
ments, acridine orange staining, and denaturing gel electropho-
resis [29, 32]. Fluorescence in situ hybridization and Southern
blot hybridization indicated that these plasmid-like DNA mole-
cules are present within the chloroplast only [30], supporting
the congruence between chloroplast 454 contigs and se-
quences from the LMW fraction (Figure 3; Figure S7A).

The chloroplast genome contigs of Boodlea feature an excep-
tionally high GC content, ranging from 54% to 60% in the gene-
containing contigs (average 57%) (Table S1). These values are
concordant with the high density of the LMW fraction observed
in CsCl/bisbenzimide gradients [29], and also with sequence
data from cloned plasmids of Ernodesmis (51%–59% GC) [31].
Plastid genomes are generally AT rich and, in green algal spe-
cies, GC content typically ranges between 26% and 43%
[9, 37]. GC-rich plastid genomes are very rare, but higher values
have been reported for the trebouxiophycean green algae Coc-
comyxa subellipsoidea, Paradoxia multiseta (both 51% GC), and
Trebouxiophyceae sp. MX-AZ01 (58%)
however, feature standard plastid genome architectures.

[24]. These species,

The size of the Boodlea chloroplast genome could not be esti-
mated by inspection of k-mer frequency distributions of the
reads in the 454 library nor from those of the uncorrected and

corrected LMW DNA reads [38]. Histograms of k-mer frequency
distributions revealed several small peaks, indicating a hetero-
geneous population of molecules present in different stoichiom-
etries, and the signal-to-noise ratio was too small to make a
comfortable estimation of the sizes (Figure S3). The cumulative
length of the 34 Boodlea chloroplast genome contigs is 91 kb
(Table S3). However, if we consider the large and heterogeneous
population of LMW DNA reads bearing no similarity to protein-
coding genes (empty hairpin chromosomes; see below) as part
of the chloroplast genome, its size could be regarded as much
larger.
The largest known circular-mapping chloroplast genomes
have been documented in the red algae Bulboplastis apyrenoi-
dosa (610 kb) and Corynoplastis japonica (1.127 Mb), where
the genomes are bloated by group II introns and include trans-
posable elements of possible bacterial origin [8]. Within green
algae, expanded chloroplast genomes have been reported in
two distinct clades: the Chlorophyceae and the Ulvophyceae.
Inﬂation of the 521-kb chloroplast genome of Floydiella terrestris
(Chlorophyceae)
resulted mainly from the proliferation of
dispersed, heterogeneous repeats (>30 bp) in intergenic regions,
representing more than half of the genome length [36]. Intergenic
regions of the Volvox carteri
(Chlorophyceae) chloroplast
genome, instead, are populated with short palindromic repeats
(average size of 50 bp) that constitute ca. 64% of the predicted
525-kb genome [34]. The mechanisms by which such palin-
dromic selﬁsh DNA spreads throughout the Volvox chloroplast
genome are not clear, but the presence of a reverse transcrip-
tase and endonuclease may point toward retrotranscription
[34, 39]. For Acetabularia acetabulum (Ulvophyceae),
the
chloroplast genome was sequenced only partially and its size
was estimated to exceed 1 Mb; it has exceptionally long inter-
genic regions and features long repetitive elements (>10 kb)
arranged in tandem [35, 40]. The Boodlea chloroplast genome
is rich as well
in non-coding DNA, constituting 92.2% of the
136 chloroplast 454 contigs and 72.8% of the assembled chloro-
plast genome, comparable to that
in inﬂated chloroplast
genomes of other green algae (F. terrestris, 82.1%; V. carteri,
ca. 80%; A. acetabulum, ca. 87% of the sequenced chloroplast
genome) [34, 35].

The non-coding DNA (ncDNA) regions of the hairpins showed
high sequence similarity among one another (52.5%–100%
sequence similarity). Within the ncDNA, we identiﬁed six
conserved motifs, 20–35 bp in length and with a GC content
ranging from 36% to 84%, which lack similarity to known regu-
latory elements (Figure 4). Motifs 1, 2, and 5 were always present
upstream of the start codon of the chloroplast genes, occasion-
ally in more than one copy. Although their distances from the
start codon were variable, their orientations relative to the gene
were conserved, indicating a potential function as a regulatory
element of gene expression and/or replication of the hairpin
chromosomes.

These motifs were also present in 1,966 (ca. 1.8%) LMW DNA
reads lacking genes. This observation supports earlier ﬁndings
of abundant non-coding LMW DNA molecules in the Cladophor-
ales [29, 31]. In contrast, a very small fraction of the HMW DNA
reads (15 corrected reads) displayed the same ncDNA motifs,
and these were present exclusively on long terminal repeat retro-
transposons (RT-LTRs) (Figures S2D and S2E). RT-LTRs were
also abundant in the 454 contigs (Figure S6D). The abundance
of RT-LTRs in the 454 contigs and the presence of ncDNA motifs
in both the Boodlea chloroplast genome and nuclear RT-LTRs
are suggestive of DNA transfer between the nucleus and chloro-
plast and may allude to the origin of the hairpin chromosomes.
Hypothetically, an invasion of nuclear RT-LTRs in the chloroplast
genome may have resulted in an expansion of the chloroplast
genome and its subsequent fragmentation into hairpin chromo-
somes during replication. Chloroplast genome fragmentation
could be caused by recombination between repetitive elements
and displacement of the palindromic sequences from the lagging
strand during the chloroplast genome replication [41, 42], and is
consistent with the expectation that recombination and cleavage
of repetitive DNA will produce a heterogeneous population of
molecules, as observed in dinoﬂagellate plastid genomes [11]
and in the Boodlea LMW DNA.

A Fragmented Chloroplast Genome Is a Common
Feature of Cladophorales
DNA sequence data were obtained from 9 additional Cladophor-
ales species, representing the main lineages of the order:
Chaetomorpha aerea, Cladophora albida, Cladophora socialis,
Cladophora vadorum, Dictyosphaeria cavernosa, Pithophora
sp., Siphonocladus tropicus, Struvea elegans, and Valonia
was not conserved, and therefore the
amino acid coded by the UGA codon could
not be determined with certainty.

utricularis (Tables S2 and S4). Although comparable sequencing
approaches resulted in the assembly of circular chloroplast ge-
nomes for other algae, including green seaweeds [43, 44], only
short chloroplast contigs (ca. 200–8,000 bp) were assembled
from these libraries, similar to B. composita. Interestingly, a
similar set of chloroplast genes was identiﬁed in all sequenced
Cladophorales species (Table S5). In contrast to the genes found
in the Boodlea hairpin chromosomes, however, most of the chlo-
roplast genes identiﬁed in the additional Cladophorales libraries
were fragmented, possibly due to assembly of the shorter
Illumina reads (Table S3). These ﬁndings support the idea that
fragmentation of the chloroplast genome occurred before or
early in the evolution of the Cladophorales.

Highly Divergent Chloroplast Genes
The 21 chloroplast protein-coding genes of Boodlea and the
other species of Cladophorales display extremely high sequence
divergence compared to orthologous genes in other photosyn-
thetic organisms (Figure 5). A maximum-likelihood phylogenetic
tree based on a concatenated amino acid alignment of 19 chlo-
roplast genes from Archaeplastida and Cyanobacteria species
(Figure 5) shows that despite their high divergence, the Clado-
phorales sequences form a monophyletic group within the core
Chlorophyta (Figure S4), a position that is supported by phyloge-
netic analyses of nuclear genes [45]. The high sequence diver-
gence of chloroplast genes in the Cladophorales supports the
notion that organellar genomes with extremely derived architec-
tures, including those of peridinin-containing dinoﬂagellates,
also tend to fall at the extreme ends of the range observed at
the mutation rate (or gene sequence divergence) level [7, 46].

For some Boodlea chloroplast genes, the identiﬁcation of start
and stop codons was uncertain and a non-canonical genetic
code was identiﬁed (Figure 6). The canonical stop codon UGA
was found 11 times internally in six genes (petA, psaA, psaB,
psaC, psbC, and rbcL) but was also present as a genuine termi-
nation codon in several genes, petA and psaA included. At seven
of these 11 positions, the corresponding amino acid residue in
orthologous genes was conserved (i.e., present in more than
75% of the taxa in the alignment), but different amino acids
were observed at these positions: V, Q, I, L, and C (Figure 6).
The reassignment of the stop codon UGA to C has been docu-
mented in the nuclear genetic code of several species of ciliates
[47]. For the remaining positions, the amino acid in the alignment

Deviations from the universal genetic code are widespread
among mitochondrial genomes, and include loss of start
and stop codons in some groups,
including dinoﬂagellates
[11, 48, 49].
In contrast, non-canonical genetic codes are
much rarer in plastid genomes, and up to now have only been
detected in the apicomplexans Neospora caninum [50], C. velia
[22], and the dinoﬂagellate Lepidodinium chlorophorum [51]. In
genomes of primary plastids, a non-canonical genetic code is
unprecedented.

Dual meaning of UGA as both stop and sense codons has
recently been reported from a number of unrelated protists
[47, 52, 53]. Although in Saccharomyces cerevisiae the tetranu-
cleotide UGA-C allows increased incorporation of the near-
cognate Cys-tRNA for the UGA premature termination codon
[54], such preference was not observed in the Boodlea chloro-
plasts.
Importantly, a non-canonical genetic code has also
been described for Cladophorales nuclear genes, where UAG
and UAA codons are reassigned to glutamine [55], which implies
two independent departures from the standard genetic code in a
single organism.

Unexpectedly, we found that the 16S rRNA gene in the Boo-
dlea chloroplast genome is split across two distinct hairpin chro-
mosomes and that its size is much smaller compared to its algal
and bacterial homologs (Figures 2B and 7). Fragmentation of
rRNA genes has been observed in organellar genomes, including
Apicomplexa, dinoﬂagellates, and many green algae [10]. In gen-
eral, fragmentation of protein-coding and rRNA genes is more
common in mitochondrial genomes than in plastid genomes
[17, 22, 56]. Despite considerable effort, we could not detect
the 23S rRNA gene nor the 5S rRNA gene.

The transcription of the aberrant chloroplast genes was
conﬁrmed using RNA-seq, and is concordant with previous re-
sults of northern blots [31]. Transcripts of 21 chloroplast genes
(that is, 20 protein-coding genes as well as the 16S rRNA
gene) were identical to the genes encoded by the chloroplast
454 contigs (Figures 2A and 3; Figure S5), providing evidence
for the absence of RNA editing and corroborating the use of a
non-canonical genetic code (Figure S5). Lack of RNA editing
was also evidenced for the 11 internal occurrences of UGA (Fig-
ure S5). This observation, in combination with conservation of
the sequence after the UGA codon, serves as evidence that it
is not a termination codon but an alternative code. The high
total-RNA-to-mRNA ratio observed for reads that mapped to
the chloroplast 454 contigs conﬁrmed that these genes were not
transcribed in the nucleus (Figure S6C). All coding sequences of
the same protein-coding genes found on different contigs of the
Boodlea chloroplast genome were expressed, despite minor dif-
ferences in their nucleotide sequences (Table S1).

Additional transcripts of 66 genes that have been located in
the chloroplast in other Archaeplastida were identiﬁed (Fig-
ure 2A). Although their subcellular origin was not determined
experimentally, they are probably all nuclear encoded, based
on high mRNA-to-total-RNA read ratios and their presence on
high molecular weight (HMW) DNA reads.

<Conclusion> Conclusions.
We collected several lines of evidence indicating that B. compo-
sita lacks a typical large circular chloroplast genome. The chlo-
roplast genome is instead fragmented into multiple linear hairpin
chromosomes, and has a highly reduced gene repertoire
compared to other chloroplast genomes. Thirty-four hairpin
chromosomes were identiﬁed, harboring 21 protein-coding
genes and the 16S rRNA gene, which are highly divergent in
sequence compared to orthologs in other algae and display an
alternative genetic code. The exact set of Boodlea chloroplast
genes remains elusive, but at least 19 genes coding for chloro-
plast products appear to be nuclear encoded, of which nine
are always chloroplast encoded in related green algae (Fig-
ure 2A). This suggests that fragmentation of a conventional chlo-
roplast genome in the Cladophorales has been accompanied by
an elevated transfer of genes to the nucleus, similar to the situa-
tion in peridinin-containing dinoﬂagellates [11], with plastid ge-
nomes encoding about 12 genes or fewer [11, 57]. Notably, the
two distantly related algal groups have converged on a very
similar gene distribution: chloroplast genes code only for the
subunits of photosynthetic complexes (and also for Rubisco in
Boodlea), whereas the expression machinery appears to be fully
nuclear encoded (Figure 2A). Other nonstandard chloroplast
genome architectures have recently been observed, such as
a monomeric linear chromosome in the alveolate microalga
C. velia [22] and three circular chromosomes in the green alga
K. spirodelophila [12], but these represent relatively small devia-
tions from the paradigm, when compared to the chloroplast
genome of the Cladophorales. The highly fragmented chloro-
plast genome in the Cladophorales is wholly unprecedented,
and will be of signiﬁcance to understanding processes driving
organellar genome fragmentation and gene reduction, endo-
symbiotic gene transfer, and the minimal functional chloroplast
gene set.

References