
1. Introduction

The term pessimism (pessimistic judgement bias) refers to a ﬁxation
on the darker aspects of a situation or event, to the expectation of a
negative outcome, or to a lack of hope for the future [1,2]. Those who
tend towards pessimism may also feel helpless and believe that any
actions taken are unlikely to have an impact on their future. The role of
pessimism has been emphasized in the aetiology of aﬀective disorders.
In cognitive theories, information processing biases, including pessi-
mistic judgement bias, are considered as a vulnerability factor for the
aetiology, maintenance and recurrence of depression [3–6]. This vul-
nerability has been conceptualized as a trait-like latent endogenous
process reactive to the eﬀects of stress, which reside in genetic, biolo-
gical, and psychological variables [7]. However, to date, there have
been very few studies that directly support this theoretical claim. Re-
cent development of the ACI test, a task that can be used to measure
cognitive judgement bias (‘optimism’ and ‘pessimism’) in animals
[8–10], enabled the investigation of cognitive vulnerability to depres-
sion in an animal model.

In our research, we assumed that in animals, similar to the case in
humans, cognitive judgement bias has components of both an enduring

trait and a transient state [11]. A trait represents a stable individual
diﬀerence in the level of pessimism/optimism that is generally experi-
enced, whereas the state includes the pessimism/optimism that may
change on the basis of the situation or contextual factors. Following this
assumption and on the basis of a number of ACI tests, we are now able
to isolate two groups of animals that signiﬁcantly and persistently diﬀer
in their cognitive judgement bias index over time. In other words, we
are able to identify animals displaying stable and enduring ‘pessimistic’
and ‘optimistic’ traits.

Recent research conducted in our laboratory revealed that the trait
‘pessimism’ in rats is linked with higher vulnerability to stress-induced
anhedonia [12]. We also demonstrated that ‘pessimistic’ rats are more
sensitive to negative performance feedback in the probabilistic reversal-
learning task [13] and less motivated to work for a reward in a pro-
gressive ratio schedule of reinforcement [14]. Other studies revealed
the interrelation between the traits ‘pessimism’ and ‘optimism’ and
risky decision making in an animal model of slot machine gambling
where rats classiﬁed as ‘optimists’ were more likely to gamble for a
reward on clearly losing outcomes than were the ‘pessimists’ [15].
Another study, which assessed the inﬂuence of cognitive judgement
bias on decision-making under uncertainty, reported that ‘pessimistic’
rats take risks signiﬁcantly less often than their ‘optimistic’ counterparts
but that this only occurred in hopeless situations when the probability
of gaining a reward was extremely low [16].

One of the remaining unanswered questions is whether ‘pessi-
mistic’/‘optimistic’ judgement bias could inﬂuence the way individuals
adjust their behaviour to changing aspects of the environment (cogni-
tive ﬂexibility). Such an interaction is not unlikely since deﬁcits in
cognitive ﬂexibility have been identiﬁed in psychiatric conditions that
are associated with pessimistic judgements [17–19].

One of the aspects of cognitive ﬂexibility that can be investigated
both in humans and in laboratory animals is their ability to initially
learn a rule and form an attentional set within the same stimulus di-
mensions and then to switch their attention to a new, previously irre-
levant stimulus dimension. This aspect of cognitive ﬂexibility, asso-
ciated with aﬀective disorders and controlled by the prefrontal cortex
(PFC), is commonly assessed in humans using the Wisconsin Card
Sorting Test (WCST) [20] and in rats using the Attentional Set Shifting
Task (ASST) [21]. In the latter, the animals have to select a bowl
containing a food reward, based on their ability to discriminate the
odours and the media covering the bait. The ASST requires rats to in-
itially learn a rule and form an attentional set within the same stimulus
dimensions. In the extra-dimensional (ED) shift, the crucial part of the
test, the subjects have to switch their attention to a new, previously
irrelevant stimulus dimension (e.g., from the odours to the media
covering the bait). The ED component is impaired by lesions of the
medial prefrontal cortex [21] as well as by chronic stress [22,23].

The present study was designed to investigate the interaction be-
tween cognitive judgement bias (‘optimism’/‘pessimism’) and cognitive
ﬂexibility in an animal model of depression based on chronic restraint
stress. For this, ﬁrst, we trained and tested the rats in a series of am-
biguous-cue interpretation tests, which allowed us to classify them as
‘optimistic’ or ‘pessimistic’. Subsequently, the animals were re-trained
and re-tested on the ASST, which allowed evaluation of the diﬀerences
between ‘optimists’ and ‘pessimists’ in cognitive flexibility.
Additionally, half of the ‘optimistic’ and half of the ‘pessimistic’ rats
were subjected to chronic (2 weeks) restraint stress and were re-evaluated using the ASST.
<Middle> Materials and methods.
2.1. Ethics statement.
These experiments were conducted in accordance with the NIH
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were approved
by the Ethics Committee for Animal Experiments at the Institute of
Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences.

2.2. Subjects and housing

This study used 80 male Sprague Dawley rats (Charles River,
Germany) weighing 175–200 g upon arrival. The rats were group
housed (4 rats/cage) in a temperature-controlled room (21 ± 1 °C)
with 30–40% humidity under a 12/12-h light/dark cycle (lights on at
06:00 h). In all of the experiments, the rats were mildly food restricted
to approximately 85% of their free-feeding weights. This was achieved
by providing 15 g of food per rat per day (standard laboratory chow).
The food restriction started 1 week prior to training. Water was freely
available, except during the test sessions. The behavioural procedures
and testing were performed during the light phase of the light/dark
cycle.

2.3. Ambiguous-cue interpretation test

2.3.1. Apparatus

The behavioural tasks were performed in 24 computer-controlled
Skinner boxes (Med Associates, St Albans, Vermont, USA); each box was

200

equipped with light, a speaker, a liquid dispenser (set to deliver 0.1 ml
of 5% sucrose solution), a grid ﬂoor through which scrambled electric
shocks (0.5 mA) could be delivered, and 2 retractable levers. The levers
were located at opposite sides of the feeder. All of the behavioural
protocols, including the data acquisition and recordings, were pro-
grammed in Med State notation code (Med Associates). The experi-
mental procedures for the ACI test used in this study were modiﬁed
versions of the procedures previously described by Enkel and colleagues
[8] and have been described elsewhere [10].

2.3.2. Behavioural training for the ACI test
2.3.2.1. Positive tone training. During this phase, the rats were trained
to press the lever located on the left side of the feeder to receive the
sucrose solution when a tone (50 s, 2000 Hz at 75 dB sound pressure
level (SPL) or 9000 Hz at 75 dB SPL (counterbalanced)) signalled
reward availability. Due to its association with a palatable reward,
this tone acquired a positive valence and was referred to as the “positive
tone,” and the associated lever was referred to as the “positive lever.” A
reliable active lever pressing for the reward was achieved in 3 training
steps: a) presentations of the positive tone (each lasting 10 s) co-
occurred with the delivery of the sucrose solution and were separated
by 10 s intertrial intervals (ITIs); b) presentations of the positive tone
co-occurred with a left lever extension and were followed by a 10 s ITI
(each lever press during the tone was continuously rewarded by sucrose
solution delivery); and c) was similar to (b) with the exception that
after the ﬁrst lever press and reward delivery, the tone was terminated
and followed by a 10 s ITI. Each training session lasted for 30 min, and
the training sessions continued until the animals attained a stable
performance on each of the training steps (more than 80 responses
maintained over 3 consecutive training sessions during step b and a
minimum of 70% of responses to the positive lever following positive
tone presentation maintained over 3 consecutive sessions during step
c). Positive tone training was followed by negative tone training.
2.3.2.2. Negative tone training. During this stage, the rats were trained
to press the lever located on the right side of the feeder to avoid an
electric shock (0.5 mA, 10 s) when another tone (9000 Hz at 75 dB SPL
or 2000 Hz at 75 dB SPL (counterbalanced)) signalled a forthcoming
punishment. Due to its association with a concomitant punishment, this
tone acquired a negative valence and was referred to as the “negative
tone.” The associated lever was referred to as the “negative lever”. A
reliable active lever press avoidance response was achieved in 2
training steps: a) the presentation of the negative tone was
accompanied by the occurrence of electric shocks unless the rat
pressed the right (negative) lever, which terminated the shock and
tone presentation, and b) the presentation of the negative tone
preceded the occurrence of the electric shocks. The delay from the
tone onset to the electric shock occurrence was progressively increased
from 1 s to 40 s. Pressing the negative lever before the shock onset
terminated the tone and began a 10 s ITI (prevention response).
Pressing the negative lever after the shock onset terminated the tone
and shock and was referred to as the “escape response.” The maximum
duration of the tone/shock-application was 50 s (i.e., 40 s of tone
presentation followed by 10 s of a tone/shock co-occurrence), and the
tone presentations were separated by 10 s ITIs. Daily training sessions
consisted of 30 tone presentations. The animals had to accomplish at
least 70% correct prevention responses maintained over 3 consecutive
training sessions, before proceeding to the discrimination training.

2.3.2.3. Discrimination training. During this phase, the rats were trained
to discriminate between positive and negative tones by responding to
the appropriate levers (as learned in the previous training stages) to
maximize reward and minimize punishment delivery. The tones, which
consisted of 20 positive and 20 negative tones, were presented pseudo-
randomly and separated by 10 s ITIs. Pressing the positive lever during
the positive tone presentation resulted in an instant reward delivery
and initiated the ITI. Pressing the negative lever during the negative
tone presentation resulted in a negative tone termination and initiated
the ITI. Pressing the wrong lever (e.g., pressing the left lever instead of
the right lever in response to a negative tone presentation) as well as
escape responses or response omissions were considered failed trials.
Animals had to achieve a minimum of 70% correct responses with each
lever, maintained over 3 consecutive discrimination sessions,
to proceed to the ACI test.

2.3.3. ACI testing

The ACI testing session consisted of 20 positive, 20 negative, and 10
intermediate (ambiguous) tone presentations. The frequency of the
intermediate tones was set to 5000 Hz at 75 dB. This frequency was
selected on the basis of the protocol described by Enkel and colleagues
[8] and was conﬁrmed to be intermediate in terms of the response
pattern in a pilot experiment (data not shown). The tones were pre-
sented in a pseudo-randomized order and separated by 10 s ITIs. Any
lever press during the ambiguous tone presentation terminated the tone
but had no consequences. If the rat did not respond within 50 s of the
ambiguous tone presentation, the tone was terminated, and a response
omission was scored.

During ACI testing, the responses to each tone (positive, ambiguous
and negative) were scored and analysed as the proportion of the overall
number of responses to a given tone. The proportion of omissions was
analysed separately. To calculate the cognitive bias index, the propor-
tion of negative responses to the ambiguous cues was subtracted from
the proportion of positive responses, resulting in values ranging be-
tween −1 and 1, where values above 0 indicate an overall positive
judgement and ‘optimistic’ interpretation of the ambiguous cue.

2.3.4. Cognitive bias screening

To assess the cognitive judgement bias as a trait, individual rats
were examined in a series of 10 consecutive ACI tests, which were
performed at 3-day intervals. On the basis of the average cognitive
judgement bias index obtained from these 10 ACI tests, the rats were
divided into 2 subgroups of ‘optimistic’ and ‘pessimistic’ animals. The
animals that were classiﬁed as ‘optimistic’ had an average cognitive
judgement bias index equal or above 0, whereas the cognitive judge-
ment bias index in the ‘pessimistic’ group was below 0.

2.4. Attentional set shifting task

2.4.1. Apparatus

Testing was conducted in a custom-made wooden apparatus (length
x width x height: 58 × 39 × 23 cm) with the grid ﬂoor and wooden
board dividing it
into two sections: one large waiting area
(30 × 36 cm) and a testing area (25 × 36 cm). The testing area was
further divided into 2 sections (25 × 18 cm each). During testing, one
glass bowl (8.5 cm internal diameter, 3.5 cm depth) was placed in each
section of the testing area. A pair of cues along with two stimulus di-
mensions deﬁned each bowl. To mark each pot with a distinct odour,
5 ml of a ﬂavouring essence (Dr. Oetker, Poland) was applied to a piece
of blotting paper ﬁxed to the external rim of the pot immediately prior
to use. A diﬀerent pot was used for each combination of digging
medium and odour; only one odour was ever applied to a given bowl.
The bait (one-third of a Honey Nut Cheerio, Nestle®) was placed at the
bottom of the positive/rewarded bowl and buried in the digging
medium. A small amount of powdered Cheerio was added to the dig-
ging medium in the second negative/non-rewarded bowl to prevent the
rat from trying to detect the buried reward by its smell.

2.4.2. Procedure

The procedure was adapted from Birrell and Brown [21] and Niki-

foruk and Popik [23], and consisted of the following 3 steps:

Step 1, habituation: rats were habituated to the testing area and
trained to dig in the pots ﬁlled with sawdust to retrieve the food

201

reward. Rats were transported from the housing facility to the testing
room, where they were presented with two unscented bowls (ﬁlled with
several pieces of Cheerios) in the experimental apparatus. In the fol-
lowing trials, the rats learned to retrieve the reward from both of the
sawdust-ﬁlled baited bowls. With each exposure, the bait was covered
with an increasing amount of sawdust.

Step 2, training: rats were trained on a series of simple dis-
crimination (SD) tasks to a criterion of six consecutive correct trials. For
these trials, rats had to learn to associate the food reward with an odour
cue (e.g., arrack vs. orange, both pots ﬁlled with sawdust) and/or a
digging medium (e.g., plastic balls vs. pebbles, no odour). All rats were
trained using the same pairs of stimuli. The positive and negative cues
for each rat were presented randomly and equally. These training sti-
muli were not used again in subsequent testing trials.

Step 3, testing: rats performed a series of discriminations in a single
test session. The ﬁrst four trials at the beginning of each discrimination
phase were a discovery period (not included in the six criterion trials).
In subsequent trials, an incorrect choice was recorded as an error.

On test days (pre-test and post-test), rats were required to perform
seven sequential stages of discrimination: a simple discrimination (SD),
a compound discrimination (CD), a ﬁrst reversal (REV1), an in-
tradimensional discrimination (ID), a second reversal (REV2), an ex-
tradimensional discrimination (ED), and a ﬁnal reversal (REV3).

In the simple discrimination involving only one stimulus dimension,
the pots diﬀered along one of two dimensions (e.g., digging medium).
For the compound discrimination (CD), the second (irrelevant) di-
mension (i.e., odour) was introduced, but the correct and incorrect
exemplars of the relevant dimension remained constant. For the re-
versal of this discrimination (Rev 1), the exemplars and relevant di-
mension were unchanged, but the previously correct exemplar was now
incorrect, and vice versa. The intra-dimensional (ID) shift was then
presented, consisting of new exemplars of both the relevant and irre-
levant dimensions, with the relevant dimension remaining the same as
before. The ID discrimination was then reversed (Rev 2) such that the
formerly positive exemplar became the negative one. For the extra-di-
mensional (ED) shift, a new pair of exemplars was again introduced, but
this time, a relevant dimension was also changed. Finally, the last phase
was the reversal (Rev 3) of the ED discrimination. The exemplars were
always presented in pairs and varied so that only one animal within
each treatment group received any given combination. The assignment
of each exemplar in a pair as being positive or negative at a given phase
and the left-right positioning of the pots in the test apparatus on each
trial were randomized. The latency to approach the experimental re-
ward was measured for each trial. The latency was deﬁned as the time
from lifting the wooden aperture opening the access to the testing area
to ﬁnding a reward (regardless of whether the rat made the correct or
incorrect choice). Digging was deﬁned as any distinct displacement of
the digging media with either the paw or the nose; the rat could in-
vestigate a digging pot by sniﬃng or touching without displacing ma-
terial. Testing was continued in each phase until the rats reached the
criterion of six consecutive correct trials, after which testing proceeded
to the next phase. Table 1 outlines the progressions through the ASST
phases during the pre-test and posttest, including exemplars of odours
and media used and their assignment into pairs.

2.5. Experimental design and behavioural measures

The experimental design is schematically presented in Fig. 1. After
attaining a stable discrimination performance (more than 70% correct
responses to each tone over 3 consecutive days), each rat was subjected
to the cognitive bias screening procedure as previously described. After
establishing the ‘optimistic’ and ‘pessimistic’ traits in the individual
animals, the rats were re-trained for the ASST, given baseline testing on
the ASST and subsequently divided into 4 experimental groups: ‘Con-
trol-optimistic’,
and
‘Stressed-pessimistic’. The ‘optimistic’ and ‘pessimistic’ animals were

‘Stressed-optimistic’,

‘Control-pessimistic’
assigned to the experimental groups in a way that the stressed rats were
kept only with other stressed animals and controls were kept only with
other controls. This resulted in relatively random distribution of the
‘optimistic’ and ‘pessimistic’ traits across experimental groups.

‘Stressed-optimistic’ and ‘Stressed-pessimistic’ groups of animals
were subjected to chronic restraint stress. The stress paradigm consisted
of 1 h daily immobilization sessions that were performed over 2 con-
secutive weeks. Rats were transferred from a housing facility to the
stress room and then separated into the test room. The animals were
placed into perforated plastic tubes (6.5 cm inner diameter) of ad-
justable length. The restraint permitted normal breathing and limited
movements of the head and limbs. Control animals were handled daily
throughout the experiment.

To assess the eﬀects of chronic stress and cognitive judgement bias
on cognitive ﬂexibility, we tested the rats in the ASST paradigm twice
− before (pretest) and after the 2 weeks of stress or handling proce-
dures (posttest).

All of the ACI testing was automated and did not require blind
testing. An experimenter blind to the experimental groups performed
the ASST.

2.6. Statistics

The data were analysed using SPSS (version 20.0, SPSS Inc.,
Chicago, IL, United States). Distribution of the cognitive bias index data
was tested using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Diﬀerences in the pro-
cessing of the ambiguous-cue and the positive and negative tones be-
tween the ‘optimistic’ and ‘pessimistic’ animals subjected to chronic
restraint stress or control handling were investigated using 4-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the between-subject factors of
Cognitive judgement bias (2 levels: ‘optimistic’ and ‘pessimistic’) and
Stress (Control and Stressed) and the within-subject factors of Lever (2
levels: positive and negative) and Tone (3 levels: positive, ambiguous
and negative). Diﬀerences between experimental groups in the number
of trials required to reach criterion during separate phases of the pretest
and posttest ASST and diﬀerences between experimental groups in the
reward-approach latency during separate phases of the pretest and
posttest ASST were investigated using 4 way ANOVA with the between-
subject factors of Cognitive judgement bias (2 levels: ‘optimistic’ and
‘pessimistic’) and Stress (Control and Stressed) and the within-subject
factors of Test (2 levels: pretest and posttest) and Discrimination phase
(7 levels: SD, CD, Rev 1, ID, Rev 2, ED, Rev 3).

For pair-wise comparisons, the values were adjusted using Sidak’s
correction factor for multiple comparisons [24]. All of the tests of
signiﬁcance were performed at α = 0.05. Homogeneity of variance was
conﬁrmed using Levene’s test. For repeated-measures analyses, the
sphericity was also veriﬁed using Mauchly’s test. The data are presented
as the mean ± SEM.

<Conclusion> Results.
Rats that showed lack of progress during ACI training sessions
(N = 4 during the negative tone training stage and N = 18 during the
discrimination training stage) were excluded from the analysis. Fifty-
eight rats reached the criterion of at least 70% correct responses with
each lever, maintained over three consecutive ACI discrimination ses-
sions, and thus qualiﬁed for cognitive bias screening. Of those rats,
forty-nine animals reached the criteria for the ASST and were tested
after chronic stress or handling procedures. Among those, ﬁve were
‘pessimistic' (OI < 0) and four were ‘optimistic' (OI ≥ 0).

Four more rats were excluded from the experiment based on ROUT
analysis of outliers for the latency data. Out of four excluded outliers,
two belonged to the Control ‘optimistic’ group and another two to the
Stressed ‘pessimistic’ group.

The average cognitive bias index of all of the rats that entered the
ﬁnal part of the experiment, established on the basis of the cognitive
bias screening, was −0.107 ± 0.46.

The distribution of the cognitive bias index data was normal

(Z = 0.101, N = 49, Kolmogorov–Smirnov test).

3.1. ‘Optimistic’ vs. ‘pessimistic’ animals

Results of the cognitive bias screening enabled the separation of two
groups of animals, which were clearly distinct in the interpretation of
the ambiguous cues over time: ‘optimistic’ (N = 17, AVG cognitive bias
index ≥ 0) and ‘pessimistic’ (N = 28, AVG cognitive bias index < 0).
The animals that were classiﬁed as ‘optimistic’ had an average cognitive
bias index ranging from 0.00 to 0.48, whereas the cognitive bias index
in the ‘pessimistic’ group ranged from −0.02 to −0.80.

between

‘optimistic’

bias

‘pessimistic’

and
judgement

Further analysis revealed signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the pattern of
responses
groups
(Lever × Tone × Cognitive
interaction
(F(2,82) = 25.94, p < 0.001)). Compared with their ‘optimistic’ coun-
terparts, ‘pessimistic’ animals responded signiﬁcantly less often to the
positive lever and more often to the negative lever in response to the
ambiguous tone (p < 0.001, Fig. 2A and B). The ‘pessimistic’ animals
also responded less often to the positive lever in response to the positive
tone (p < 0.05, Fig. 2B).

‘Optimistic’ and ‘pessimistic’ rats did not diﬀer in the number of
omissions made (no signiﬁcant eﬀect of cognitive bias or cognitive
bias × tone interaction (F(2,82) = 2.55, NS, Fig. 2C)).

Although the cognitive bias index ﬂuctuated in both groups of an-
imals (signiﬁcant main eﬀect of test (F(9,369) = 2.56, p < 0.01)), the
diﬀerences between ‘optimistic’ and ‘pessimistic’ groups did not sig-
niﬁcantly change across the screening period (no signiﬁcant test × -
cognitive judgement bias interaction; highest F(9,369) = 0.85, NS) in-
dicating stability of the traits (Fig. 3).

Following the cognitive judgement bias screening, the animals were
‘optimistic’ (N = 8),
assigned to 4 experimental groups: Control
stressed ‘optimistic’ (N = 10), Control
‘pessimistic’ (N = 15) and
Stressed ‘pessimistic’ (N = 16). The size of the groups was determined
by the numbers of ‘optimistic’ and ‘pessimistic’ animals and the cage
distribution of stressed animals (stressed rats were caged only with
other stressed individuals).

3.2. Attentional set shifting test

(caption on next page)

Analysis of the number of trials required to reach the criteria for all
discrimination phases revealed no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences
among the 4 experimental groups either at the baseline or following

two weeks of chronic restraint stress (Fig. 4A and B). Analysis of the
number of trials to criterion with data collapsed across all discrimina-
tion phases of the pretest and all discrimination phases of the posttest
revealed a statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect only for the factor Test
(F(1,41) = 4.871, p = 0.035). Rats needed signiﬁcantly (p = 0.035)
fewer trials to fulﬁl the criterion during the posttest compared to the
pretest (Fig. 4C). We observed no statistically signiﬁcant eﬀects of
Stress or Cognitive judgement bias on the number of trials required to
fulﬁl the criterion (Fig. 4C).
Although initial analysis of the bait approach latency data revealed
no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences among the 4 experimental groups
in performing 7 discrimination phases either at the baseline or fol-
lowing two weeks of chronic restraint stress (Fig. 5A and B), analysis of
these data collapsed across all discrimination phases of the pretest and
all discrimination phases of the posttest revealed that ‘pessimistic’ rats
were, in general, slower to approach the bait than their ‘optimistic’
conspeciﬁcs (statistical trend (F(1,41) = 3.307, p = 0.078, Fig. 5C)).
Compared to unstressed controls, we also observed a signiﬁcantly
(p = 0.038) increased approach latency in stressed animals during the
posttest (statistically signiﬁcant Test x Stress interaction
(F(1,41) = 4.377, p = 0.043, Fig. 5C)). Analysis of the eﬀects of cogni-
tive judgement bias revealed that chronically stressed animals dis-
playing the ‘pessimistic’ trait were signiﬁcantly (p = 0.031) slower to
approach the bait than their unstressed conspeciﬁcs (Fig. 5C). Stressed
‘pessimists’ were also the only group that did not show a decreased
latency to approach the reward during the posttest compared to the
pretest (Fig. 5C). Control ‘optimistic’, Stressed ‘optimistic’ and Control
‘pessimistic’ groups of rats approached the bait signiﬁcantly faster
(p = 0.078, p = 0.029 and p = 0.001, respectively) during the posttest
than during the pretest (Fig. 5C). Three way ANOVA revealed statisti-
cally signiﬁcant Stress x Bias x Test
interaction (F(1,41) = 4.096,
p = 0.05). Although the assumption of homogeneity of variance was
slightly violated during the posttest (p = 0.033, Levene’s test), the
larger group (Stressed ‘pessimistic’) had the larger variance than the
smaller group (Control ‘optimistic’), which makes the ANOVA con-
servative and does not inﬂate the type I error rate [25].

4. Discussion

In this study, we used an animal model of depression to examine
whether cognitive judgement bias can interact with the development of
stress-induced cognitive inﬂexibility. Although our results suggest that

Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 199–207

the traits ‘optimism’ and ‘pessimism’ do not interact with cognitive
ﬂexibility, analysis of the changes in the reward-approach latency
during the ASST demonstrated that rats displaying the ‘pessimistic’ trait
were signiﬁcantly more prone to developing stress-induced motiva-
tional deﬁcits than their ‘optimistic’ conspeciﬁcs. Analysis of the
changes in the reward approach latency revealed that chronically
stressed animals were slower to approach the experimental reward than
their unstressed counterparts and that this eﬀect was speciﬁc to ‘pes-
simists’.

Contrary to some of the previous reports, in the present study, we
did not observe stress-induced impairments in the ASST in terms of
either ED set shifting [22,23] or reversal learning [26]. This was sur-
prising, although not completely unexpected, given that the level of
impairment in the ASST seems to diﬀer for various kinds of stress. In-
deed, rats submitted to chronic unpredictable stress [27], chronic re-
straint stress associated with social isolation [23] or severe (6 h/day)
restraint stress [22] seem to be impaired selectively on ED set shifting,
while those submitted to chronic intermittent cold ‘metabolic’ stress are
impaired on reversal learning but not ED performance [26]. The re-
straint stress procedure used in our study was not followed by social
isolation, and this may be the reason we did not detect its eﬀects on
cognitive ﬂexibility in the ASST. It does not mean, however, that the
procedure was ineﬀective. The stress-induced motivational deﬁcit was
displayed exclusively by the chronically stressed rats with the ‘pessi-
mistic’ trait, as indicated by a signiﬁcantly longer latency to approach
the experimental reward compared to the other 3 groups. They were
also the only group that did not decrease the reward-approach latency
during the posttest compared to the pretest. This result is consistent
with our previous observations indicating that the trait ‘pessimism’ is
associated with higher vulnerability to stress-induced anhedonia in rats
[12] and with lower motivation to gain a reward in the progressive
ratio schedule of reinforcement [14]. This result also adds to the theory
that the trait ‘pessimism’ could be considered as a vulnerability factor
for predicting the severity and longevity of stress-induced depressive
symptoms. Indeed, a growing body of experimental evidence suggests
that cognitive judgement bias interacts with many other cognitive
processes that are traditionally associated with aﬀective disorders, such
as sensitivity to performance feedback [13], decision making under
uncertainty [16], decision making under risk [15] and even the eﬀects
of antidepressant drugs [28]. Although further studies are needed to
directly pinpoint the neurobiological correlates of the observed inter-
actions between cognitive judgement bias, stress and motivational
processes, our results may be at least partially explained using the
framework of Beck’s developmental model of depression [4]. In this
model, genetic factors cause hyperreactivity of the amygdala to the
external stimuli, resulting in cognitive bias and an exaggeration of
stressful events and hyperactivity of the HPA axis. This, in turn, results
in the dominance of limbic activity over prefrontal function and the
development of depressive symptoms − in this case, motivational
deﬁcits. Indeed, our recent studies indicated that lesion-induced hy-
poactivity within the orbitofrontal cortex causes ‘pessimism’ in rats
[29].

While interpreting the present results, we assumed that an increased
latency to approach the experimental reward mainly indicates moti-
vational deﬁcits. Considering the results of our previous studies de-
monstrating ‘pessimism-associated’ increased vulnerability to the stress-
induced anhedonia [12] and decreased approach motivation [14], this
seems to be the most plausible explanation, although we cannot exclude
other possibilities. These could include, for example, reduction of the
subjective incentive value of the experimental reward, which does not
contradict our assumption, since reduced motivation would then be a

derivative of the reduced incentive value of the reward. Noticeably,
since in a number of ACI paradigms, longer latency to approach a re-
ward following ambiguous-cue indicates ‘pessimistic’ bias [30,31],
present results clearly demonstrate an interaction between cognitive
judgement bias, motivation and hedonic status of animals.

Finally, although in the present experiment a number of animals
have been excluded from analysis, the distribution of the ‘optimistic’
and ‘pessimistic’ traits in this group was almost equal. Out of 13 animals
that have been excluded after the cognitive bias screening, 6 rats were
‘optimistic’ and 7 were ‘pessimistic’, what suggests that cognitive jud-
gement bias did not interact with e.g. ability to learn the tasks.

To summarize, although we were unable to detect statistically sig-
niﬁcant diﬀerences between ‘optimistic’ and ‘pessimistic’ animals in
cognitive ﬂexibility measured using the ASST, we have demonstrated,
for the ﬁrst time, that the trait ‘pessimism’ could be a vulnerability
factor in the development of the stress-induced motivational deﬁcit.
This observation, together with the results of our previous studies,
strongly suggests that the trait ‘pessimism’ may be a cognitive bio-
marker of vulnerability to stress or stress-induced depression.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the Polish National Science Center
(Research grant DEC-2014/13/B/NZ4/00214 to RR) and the statutory
funds of the Institute of Pharmacology Polish Academy of Sciences. We
thank Dr Agnieszka Nikiforuk for her help with performing the ASST
and Agata Leszczynska for graphical support.

Conﬂict of interest

References

The authors declare that there were no conﬂicts of interest in this

study.

[1] C.S. Carver, M.F. Scheier, Dispositional optimism, Trends Cogn. Sci. 18 (2014)

293–299.

[2] D. Hecht, The neural basis of optimism and pessimism, Exp. Neurobiol. 22 (2013)

206

R. Drozd et al.

173–199.

[3] A.T. Beck, Cognitive models of depression, J. Cogn. Psychother. 1 (1987) 5–37.
[4] A.T. Beck, The evolution of the cognitive model of depression and its neurobiolo-

gical correlates, Am. J. Psychiatry 165 (2008) 969–977.

[5] D.A. Clark, A.T. Beck, B.A. Alford, Scientiﬁc Foundations of Cognitive Theory and

Therapy of Depression, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1999.

[6] L. Clark, S.R. Chamberlain, B.J. Sahakian, Neurocognitive mechanisms in depres-

sion: implications for treatment, Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 32 (2009) 57–74.

[7] R. De Raedt, E.H. Koster, Understanding vulnerability for depression from a cog-

nitive neuroscience perspective: a reappraisal of attentional factors and a new
conceptual framework, Cogn. Aﬀect Behav. Neurosci. 10 (2010) 50–70.

[8] T. Enkel, D. Gholizadeh, von Bohlen Und Halbach O, Sanchis-Segura C, Hurlemann
R, Spanagel R, et al. Ambiguous-cue interpretation is biased under stress- and de-
pression-like states in rats, Neuropsychopharmacology 35 (2010) 1008–1015.

[9] E.J. Harding, E.S. Paul, M. Mendl, Animal behaviour: cognitive bias and aﬀective

state, Nature 427 (2004) 312.

Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 199–207

[19] J.V. Taylor Tavares, W.C. Drevets, B.J. Sahakian, Cognition in mania and depres-

sion, Psychol. Med. 33 (2003) 959–967.

[20] E.A. Berg, A simple objective technique for measuring ﬂexibility in thinking, J. Gen.

Psychol. 39 (1948) 15–22.

[21] J.M. Birrell, V.J. Brown, Medial frontal cortex mediates perceptual attentional set

shifting in the rat, J. Neurosci. 20 (2000) 4320–4324.

[22] C. Liston, M.M. Miller, D.S. Goldwater, J.J. Radley, A.B. Rocher, P.R. Hof, et al.,
Stress-induced alterations in prefrontal cortical dendritic morphology predict se-
lective impairments in perceptual attentional set-shifting, J. Neurosci. 26 (2006)
7870–7874.

[23] A. Nikiforuk, P. Popik, Long-lasting cognitive deﬁcit induced by stress is alleviated
by acute administration of antidepressants, Psychoneuroendocrinology 36 (2011)
28–39.

[24] D.C. Howell, Statistical Methods for Psychology, 4th ed., Wadsworth Belmont,

California, 1997.

[25] R.N. Cardinal, M.R. Aitken, ANOVA for Behavioural Sciences Researcher, Lawrence

[10] R. Rygula, H. Pluta, P. Popik, Laughing rats are optimistic, PLoS One 7 (2012)

Erlbaum Associates Inc., Mahwah, New Jersey, USA, 2006.

e51959.

[11] D.L. Kluemper, L. LM, T. DeGroot, State or trait: eﬀects of state optimism on job-

related outcomes, J. Organiz. Behav. 30 (2009) 209–231.

[12] R. Rygula, J. Papciak, P. Popik, Trait pessimism predicts vulnerability to stress-

induced anhedonia in rats, Neuropsychopharmacology 38 (2013) 2188–2196.
[13] R. Rygula, Popik P. Trait, pessimism is associated with increased sensitivity to
negative feedback in rats, Cogn. Aﬀect Behav. Neurosci. 16 (2016) 516–526.

[14] R. Rygula, J. Golebiowska, J. Kregiel, J. Kubik, P. Popik, Eﬀects of optimism on

motivation in rats, Front. Behav. Neurosci. 9 (2015) 32.

[15] D. Rafa, J. Kregiel, P. Popik, R. Rygula, Eﬀects of optimism on gambling in the rat

slot machine task, Behav. Brain Res. 300 (2016) 97–105.

[16] R. Drozd, P.E. Cieslak, M. Rychlik, J. Rodriguez Parkitna, R. Rygula, Cognitive

judgment bias interacts with risk based decision making and sensitivity to dopa-
minergic challenge in male rats, Front. Behav. Neurosci. 10 (2016) 163.

[17] S.R. Chamberlain, B.J. Sahakian, Cognition in mania and depression: psychological

models and clinical implications, Curr. Psychiatry Rep. 6 (2004) 451–458.

[18] Y. Paelecke-Habermann, J. Pohl, B. Leplow, Attention and executive functions in

remitted major depression patients, J. Aﬀect. Disord. 89 (2005) 125–135.

[26] M.D. Lapiz-Bluhm, A.E. Soto-Pina, J.G. Hensler, D.A. Morilak, Chronic intermittent

cold stress and serotonin depletion induce deﬁcits of reversal learning in an at-
tentional set-shifting test in rats, Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 202 (2009) 329–341.

[27] C.O. Bondi, G. Rodriguez, G.G. Gould, A. Frazer, D.A. Morilak, Chronic un-

predictable stress induces a cognitive deﬁcit and anxiety-like behavior in rats that is
prevented by chronic antidepressant drug treatment, Neuropsychopharmacology 33
(2008) 320–331.

[28] J. Golebiowska, R. Rygula, Eﬀects of acute dopaminergic and serotonergic manip-
ulations in the ACI paradigm depend on the basal valence of cognitive judgement
bias in rats, Behav. Brain Res. 327 (2017) 133–143.

[29] J. Golebiowska, R. Rygula, Lesions of the orbitofrontal but not medial prefrontal

cortex aﬀect cognitive judgment bias in rats, Front. Behav. Neurosci. 11 (2017) 51.
[30] M. Mendl, J. Brooks, C. Basse, O. Burman, E. Paul, E. Blackwell, et al., Dogs showing

separation-related behaviour exhibit a ‘pessimistic’ cognitive bias, Curr. Biol. 20
(2010) R839–40.

[31] S.H. Richter, A. Schick, C. Hoyer, K. Lankisch, P. Gass, B. Vollmayr, A glass full of
optimism: enrichment eﬀects on cognitive bias in a rat model of depression, Cogn.
Aﬀect Behav. Neurosci. 12 (2012) 527–542.

207


