
INTRODUCTION

Topographic maps are a common organizational motif in neuro-
biology and are crucial for the ability of animals to accurately

perceive and respond to their external environment. These
maps are characterized by an arrangement of neurons in which
neighbor-neighbor relationships are preserved between cell
bodies and axon targets, creating representations of the outside
world inside the brain [1]. The best-studied topographic maps
form through a spatial patterning process, where precise pat-
terns of gene expression in neurons and their target areas direct
axons to the proper location in a point-to-point matching system
[2, 3]. For example, in the retinotopic map, gradients of EphA re-
ceptor expression in the retina and EphrinA ligand expression in
the tectum are matched such that high and low EphA-expressing
neurons innervate opposite regions of the tectum while neighbor
neurons expressing similar EphA levels innervate the same
region [4–9]. Similarly, in the spinal musculotopic map, dorsal
and ventral limb-innervating neurons occupy spatially distinct lo-
cations and reach their respective targets due to the presence of
repulsive ligands expressed by the inappropriate targets [10–14].
Thus, spatial patterning mechanisms underlie topographic map
development in both sensory and motor systems.

In addition to classic spatial patterning, previous studies have
also proposed a temporal mechanism of topographic map
development. In the Drosophila photoreceptor map, sequential
expression of a temporal identity transcription factor during neu-
rogenesis directs targeting to different layers of the medulla [15].
Additionally, in the mouse olfactory topographic map, cell posi-
tion correlates with birth order and therefore with time of axon
arrival
in the target region [16, 17]. However, though these
studies demonstrate correlations between temporal patterning
and topographic connectivity, timing-based mechanisms for
topographic map formation have been difﬁcult to explicitly test,
as they require live imaging and the ability to manipulate the tem-
poral environment.

Here, to dissect the relative contributions of both spatial and
temporal mechanisms of topographic map development, we
focus on vagus motor neurons (motor neurons of cranial
nerve X, or mX neurons) in the zebraﬁsh embryo as a model of
topographic map development. In all vertebrates, mX neurons
are located in the most posterior segment of the hindbrain, rhom-
bomere 8 (r8) [18]. In humans, mX neurons innervate pharyngeal-
arch-derived muscles important for speech and swallowing.
In ﬁsh, mX neurons innervate homologous muscles to move
the pharynx, gills, and pharyngeal
In both ﬁsh and
humans, the vagus also supplies preganglionic parasympathetic
innervation of visceral targets [19, 20]. Previous studies in ﬁsh
and mammals have shown that mX neurons in the adult animal
are arranged topographically, with anterior neurons innervating
more anterior pharyngeal arches and posterior neurons inner-
vating posterior pharyngeal arches and visceral
targets
[21, 22]. However, it is unclear how the vagus topographic map
is established during development.

We describe two parallel and independent mechanisms for
vagus topographic map development. First, we show that
hox5 genes are expressed in posterior mX neurons and direct
mX neuron targeting toward posterior targets. Second, we
demonstrate that temporal regulation of axon initiation inﬂu-
ences axon targeting. Whereas anterior and posterior mX neu-
rons are born at the same time, axons emerge from posterior
mX neurons later than from anterior mX neurons and late
axon arrival in the peripheral target area directs axons to pos-
terior targets. Finally, we demonstrate that these two mecha-
nisms are independent. This work therefore establishes a new
temporal mechanism that acts in parallel with hox-dependent
spatial patterning mechanisms to govern the robust develop-
ment of a topographic map.

<Middle> RESULTS.
Characterization of Embryonic Vagus Motor Neuron
Topographic Map
Vagus (mX) neurons, detectable with isl1-driven ﬂuorescent pro-
teins [23], are born ventrally in hindbrain r8 and migrate dorsolat-
erally to form the vagus motor nucleus by 36 hr post-fertilization
(hpf) [24]. Axons emerge basally, ﬁrst exiting the hindbrain at
27 hpf, and travel anteriorly in a single fascicle before making
a characteristic ventral turn at the otic vesicle toward the pharyn-
geal arches (PAs) (Figure 1A) [25]. The axons divide peripherally
into 5 branches, which are all present by 3 days post-fertilization
(dpf): 4 branches innervate PA4, 5, 6, and 7 and a 5th posterior
branch innervates visceral targets (Figure 1A) [23]. In time-lapse
movies, the axon branches appear sequentially in anterior-to-
posterior order, with the PA4 branch emerging ﬁrst and the
PA7 and visceral branches emerging last (Figure 1B; Movie S1).
To simultaneously visualize the appearance of mX axons
and their PA targets, we time-lapsed embryos expressing
Tg(isl1:eGFPCAAX) and Tg(tcf21:mCherry), which marks the
progenitors of the PA muscles that are the targets of branchio-
motor innervation [26, 27]. Tcf21:mCherry+ cells appear in an
anterior-to-posterior sequence, with each PA emerging about
6–8 hr before mX axon innervation (Figure 1C; Movie S2). Thus,
the sequential outgrowth of mX branches correlates with the
sequential appearance of their PA targets.

To understand how the mX neuron topographic map is estab-
lished, we ﬁrst determined whether it is detectable in the zebra-
ﬁsh embryo. We injected single-cell-stage embryos expressing
Tg(isl1:mRFP) with isl1:eGFPCAAX, titrated to a low level such
that only a single mX neuron was labeled with eGFPCAAX. We
divided the mX territory into 10 equal-length bins and determined
the axon target of each single mX neuron based upon its relative
position in the mX territory (Figures 1D–1H). We note that single
mX neurons only ever project into a single PA (n = 57/57). We
found that mX neurons in bin 1 exclusively innervated PA4 and
PA5, whereas mX neurons in bins 4–10 exclusively innervate
PA7 and the viscera (Figure 1I). We conﬁrmed this single-cell
mapping approach with photoconversion experiments using
Tg(isl1:Kaede), photoconverting deﬁned regions of the mX terri-
tory and subsequently visualizing the photoconverted Kaede in
the peripheral branches (anterograde labeling), and conversely
photoconverting speciﬁc branches and subsequently visualizing
the photoconverted Kaede in cell bodies (retrograde labeling;
Figure S1). Whereas we observed overlap between mX neurons
innervating neighboring PAs, our single-neuron and photocon-
version mapping approaches consistently describe a vagus
topographic map at 3 dpf that is sufﬁciently resolved to allow
us to investigate its developmental basis.

Vagus Motor Neuron Position Determines Axon Target
We ﬁrst asked whether the position of an mX neuron in r8 deter-
mines its axon target. To address this question, we used single-
neuron transplantation to manipulate the spatial environment of
individual postmitotic neurons [28]. At 27 hpf, when postmitotic
mX neurons are present along the anterior-posterior axis of r8
but before they have extended axons, we transplanted postmi-
totic mX neurons from a Tg(isl1:Kaede) donor to the same
(homotopic) or different (heterotopic) position in r8 of a Tg(isl1:
GFP) host embryo. To ensure accurate developmental age, we
used the precise ‘‘prim staging’’ method to stage all embryos
at the time of transplantation [29] (see STAR Methods for details).
We transplanted 1–5 mX neurons (median = 2) into each host
embryo and then assessed targeting of the donor neuron(s)
at 3 dpf (Figure 2A). Singly transplanted neurons only projected
into a single PA, similar to our earlier single-cell labeling experi-
ments (n = 8/8 embryos; e.g., Figures 2B and 2E). As expected,
in control anterior / anterior homotopic transplants, donor neu-
rons innervated primarily anterior targets (Figures 2B and 2F),
and in control posterior / posterior homotopic transplants,
donor neurons innervated primarily posterior targets (Figures
2D and 2F). In heterotopic anterior / posterior transplants,
donor neurons innervated primarily posterior targets (Figures
in heterotopic posterior / anterior
2C and 2F). Likewise,
transplants, donor neurons innervated primarily anterior targets
(Figures 2E and 2F). These results show that the anterior-poste-
rior position of an mX neuron in r8 determines its peripheral
target.

hox5 Expression Distinguishes Anterior and Posterior
mX Neurons
To understand how cell position determines axon target, we
sought to identify differences between anterior and posterior
mX neurons. Hox genes are well-known for their role in ante-
rior-posterior patterning of the vertebrate hindbrain, including
motor neurons; however, a role in vagus-speciﬁc topographic
mapping has not been described [30]. We therefore sought to
determine whether hox4, hox5, and hox6 paralogs, which are
known to have anterior expression limits in the posterior hind-
brain and anterior spinal cord [31–34], were differentially ex-
pressed in anterior versus posterior mX neurons by RNA in situ
hybridization at 27 hpf. We found that hox4 genes have anterior
limits anterior to the mX territory, and hox6 genes have anterior
limits posterior to the mX territory (Figure S2). However, hoxa5a,
hoxb5a, and hoxb5b all have diffuse anterior limits of expression
within the mX territory (Figures 3A and S2E–S2G).

To visualize hox5 expression and motor neurons together with
high resolution in live embryos, we targeted GFP to the endoge-
nous hoxb5a locus [35] (see STAR Methods for details) and
examined expression of hoxb5aGFP at 1–3 dpf (Figures 3B–3D).
Consistent with RNA in situ expression data, hoxb5aGFP is
expressed in a graded pattern, with GFP-negative cells at the
anterior end of
the mX territory (corresponding to regions
1 and 2 from Figure S1), whereas 100% of cells in the posterior
mX territory (regions 3, 4, and 5) are GFP positive (Figure 3B;
data not shown). The anterior limit of hoxb5aGFP expression is
more anterior than the corresponding hoxb5a mRNA expression
domain (compare Figure 3A to 3B). This difference most likely
reﬂects the different sensitivity of the detection methods, as
well GFP perdurance: hoxb5aGFP marks every cell that ever
expressed hoxb5a, whereas the mRNA in situ detects the
expression domain at the moment of ﬁxation. hoxb5aGFP is
also expressed in PA6 and PA7 (Figure 3E). Thus, hox5 genes
are expressed in posterior mX neurons and their posterior PA
targets, suggesting that hox5 expression may direct posterior
mX axon targeting.

Vagus Motor Neuron Position Determines hox5
Expression
Our expression experiments demonstrated that mX neuron posi-
tion correlates with hox5 expression. We next asked whether mX
neuron position determines hox5 expression by transplanting
postmitotic mX neurons at 27 hpf from hoxb5aGFP-positive donor
embryos into hoxb5aGFP-negative host embryos and assessing
GFP expression in donor-derived mX neurons at 3 dpf. Host
embryos expressed Tg(isl1:mRFP) so that we could correlate
hoxb5aGFP expression in the transplanted neuron(s) with their
position in the host mX territory. As expected, 100% of donor
mX neurons (n = 13 neurons) maintained GFP expression in con-
trol homotopic posterior / posterior transplants (Figure 3H).
Also as expected, in control anterior / anterior transplants,
only 23% of donor mX neurons (n = 22 neurons) were GFP+ (Fig-
ures 3F and 3H). However, when anterior mX neurons were

3816 Current Biology 27, 3812–3825, December 18, 2017

transplanted heterotopically into posterior r8, 64% (n = 28
neurons; p = 0.0046 by Fisher’s exact test compared to ante-
rior / anterior) of the donor mX neurons were GFP+ (Figures
3G and 3H). Due to GFP perdurance, we were not able to assess
hoxb5a downregulation in posterior / anterior transplants.
These results suggest that the position of an mX neuron in r8 de-
termines its hox5 expression. The ability of transplanted postmi-
totic neurons to turn on expression of hoxb5a (Figure 3) and to
change their axon targeting after transplantation (Figure 2) indi-
cates that mX neuron fate remains plastic after birth.

hox5 Expression Drives Posterior Axon Targeting
Our
transplant experiments demonstrated that both hox5
expression and posterior PA targeting are induced in an ante-
rior mX neuron that is placed in the posterior mX territory. We
therefore sought to test whether hox5 expression causes pos-
terior PA targeting. Given that there are three hox5 genes
with overlapping expression in posterior r8 in zebraﬁsh and
that Hox5 genes are known to act redundantly in other pro-
cesses [36], we reasoned that a targeted gain-of-function
approach would most efﬁciently allow us to test the ability of
hox5 genes to impact mX axon targeting. We constructed plas-
mids encoding UAS:hox5gene-p2a-eGFPCAAX and injected
the DNA into single-cell stage Tg(isl1:Gal4);Tg(isl1:mRFP) em-
bryos. This strategy allowed us to generate embryos with mem-
brane-GFP-labeled hox5-expressing mX neurons scattered
sparsely throughout the vagus territory (Figures 4A–4E).
If
hox5 expression directs axons toward posterior targets, we
predicted that hox5-expressing mX neurons would innervate
posterior targets with a higher than expected frequency. We
found that, whereas hox5 expression had no effect on
the overall distribution of mX neurons compared to control
eGFPCAAX expression (Figure 4E), hox5-expressing neurons
were biased toward innervating more posterior PAs compared
to eGFPCAAX-expressing control neurons (Figures 4A–4D
and 4F). This was true for neurons expressing any of the three
hox5 genes: hoxa5a, hoxb5a, or hoxb5b, though the effect of
hoxb5b expression was less dramatic.
To further examine how hox5 expression instructs the forma-
tion of the mX topographic map, we focused on embryos with
hox5-expressing neurons in the anterior-most region of the mX
territory that normally exclusively innervates PA4 and PA5
(bin 1 in Figure 1I). In control experiments, 100% of embryos
with labeled cells in bin 1 also had labeled axons in the PA4 or
PA5 branch, consistent with the single-neuron mapping data
(Figure 4G). However, in embryos with hoxb5a-expressing neu-
rons in bin 1, only 27% of the embryos had labeled axons in
the PA4 or PA5 branch (p = 0.0014; Figure 4G). The effect of
ectopic hoxa5a or hoxb5b expression in bin 1 neurons was
less dramatic, with 88% and 81%, respectively, of embryos
having labeled axons in the PA4 or PA5 branch (Figure 4G).
Together, these results strongly suggest that hox5 expression
biases mX axon targeting to posterior targets.

Axon Formation and Arrival in the Periphery Are Delayed
in Posterior mX Neurons.
The anterior-posterior sequence of PA innervation by mX neu-
rons (Figures 1B and 1C; Movies S1 and S2) suggested that there
may be earlier developmental differences between anterior and
posterior mX neurons that impact axon targeting. We crossed
the Tg(isl1:Gal4) line to the variegated Tg(UAS:Kaede) line to
mosaically label mX neurons and then photoconverted posterior
mX neurons and time lapsed starting at 29 hpf, when mX neurons
are present throughout r8 but axons have only just begun to
emerge (Figure 5A; Movie S3). Anterior mX axons exit the brain
and turn ventrally to extend into the periphery at 29 ± 1.9 hpf

(95% conﬁdence interval
[CI] = 26.71–32.6 hpf), consistent
with previous literature [24]. However, posterior mX neurons,
which were also present at the beginning of the time lapse,
show extensive protrusive activity but remain multipolar until
axons are ﬁnally detected at 37.7 ± 2.7 hpf (95% CI = 35.9–
39.5 hpf), when anterior mX axons had already extended into
the PAs (Figures 5A and 5B; Movie S3). Posterior growth cones
then extend quickly, following tracts of previously extended
anterior mX axons (Movie S3). This suggests that the delayed
appearance of posterior mX axons is due to delayed axon initia-
tion rather than slower extension.
One explanation for the observed delay in posterior mX axon
formation could be that posterior mX neurons are born later
than anterior ones. To test this possibility, we birthdated mX
0
-ﬂuoro-5-ethynyluridine (EdU).
neurons with (2
We added EdU to Tg(isl1:GFP) embryos at 10, 14, 18, 22, or 28
hpf and ﬁxed embryos at 48 hpf. We then identiﬁed mX neurons
by GFP expression and determined whether each neuron under-
 
) or after (EdU+) the time point
went its last division before (EdU
at which EdU was added. We divided the mX territory into 5
 
equal-length regions and determined the proportion of EdU
neurons in each region for each treatment
time (Figures
5C–5E). If time of axon formation correlates with time of birth,
we would expect EdU mX neurons to appear progressively
from anterior to posterior. However,
this is not what we observed: postmitotic (EdU
) mX neurons appear at all anterior-posterior levels of the motor nucleus between 10 and
28 hpf, with no signiﬁcant difference in the onset of neurogenesis
between the ﬁve regions assayed (Figure 5E; p = not signiﬁcant
[ns] by one-way ANOVA of all regions at 14 hpf). Surprisingly,
therefore, the delayed axon initiation by posterior mX neurons
does not reﬂect a later birthdate. We conclude that timing of
axon formation is an independently regulated event along the
anterior-posterior axis of the mX territory.

Vagus Motor Neuron Position Determines Time of Axon
Formation
Given that cell position correlates with time of axon formation, we
sought to test whether cell position could determine time of axon
formation. We therefore applied time-lapse imaging to our post-
mitotic mX neuron transplant approach, after mX neurons were
transplanted homotopically or heterotopically at 27 hpf. In control
anterior / anterior transplants, mX neurons initiated axons
6.3 ± 2.1 hr post-transplantation (hpt) (95% CI = 5.1–7.5 hpt; Fig-
ures 5F and 5J; Movie S4). However, transplanting mX neurons
heterotopically from anterior / posterior delayed time of axon
formation, with axons appearing 8.6 ± 2 hpt (95% CI = 7.4–9.8
hpt; Figures 5G and 5J; Movie S4; p = 0.0067 by unpaired
t test). Consistent with this result, in control posterior / posterior
transplants, mX neurons initiated axons late (8.2 ± 1.3 hpt; 95%
CI = 6.9–9.6 hpt), whereas transplanting neurons heterotopically
from posterior / anterior hastened time of axon formation
(6.1 ± 0.8 hpt; 95% CI = 5.3–6.9 hpt; Figures 5H–5J; Movie S5;
p = 0.0051 by unpaired t test). Whereas the difference in time of
axon formation between control and heterotopic transplants
was smaller than that observed between endogenous anterior
and posterior mX neurons (most likely due to the transplantation
procedure itself), these results suggest that the position of an
mX neuron within r8 determines its time of axon formation.

Time of Axon Arrival in the Periphery Determines Axon
Targeting
Our transplant experiments demonstrated that mX neurons posi-
tioned in anterior r8 will initiate axon formation early (Figure 5)
and will innervate anterior axon targets (Figure 2). Conversely,
mX neurons positioned in posterior r8 will initiate axon formation
late and will
innervate posterior axon targets. We therefore
sought to test the hypothesis that in addition to hox5 expression,
time of axon formation also inﬂuences mX axon targeting. We
simulated a delay in axon initiation by transplanting anterior
mX neurons from a younger donor (25.9 ± 2 hpf) to the anterior
mX territory of an older host (31.8 ± 2.1 hpf) such that the extend-
ing axon of the transplanted neuron joins the fascicle with late-
arriving posterior mX axons (Figure 6A). If axon targeting is
determined by anterior-posterior position alone, then this trans-
planted mX neuron should innervate anterior targets. Alter-
natively, if timing of axon outgrowth inﬂuences axon targeting
independently of position, then it should innervate a posterior
target. We found that compared to stage-matched transplants,
where donor-derived anterior mX neurons innervated primarily
anterior PAs (Figures 2B, 6B, and 6D), anterior mX neurons trans-
planted homotopically but heterochronically into older host em-
bryos innervated primarily posterior PAs (Figures 6C and 6D).
This change in axon targeting is not due to induction of ectopic
hox5 expression, because when we did the equivalent hetero-
chronic transplant using our hoxb5aGFP line as a donor, we did

not see induction of GFP expression in the transplanted neurons
(Figures 6E and 6F). These results indicate that, surprisingly,
delaying axon growth into the periphery is sufﬁcient to shift
axon targeting to posterior targets.

hox5 Expression and Time of Axon Initiation Direct mX
Axon Targeting Independently
Our experiments demonstrate that the spatiotemporal environ-
ment of mX neurons inﬂuences their topographic mapping to
the PAs. Position along the anterior-posterior axis of r8 deter-
mines hox5 expression and time of axon formation, and both
hox5 expression and delayed axon initiation can target axons
to more posterior PAs. We asked whether hox5 expression is
responsible for delayed axon initiation, which in turn drives pos-
terior PA targeting, or whether the two are independent. If hox5
expression delays axon initiation, we expected that,
in our
hox5 ectopic expression approach, hox5-expressing mX neu-
rons in the anterior mX territory would initiate axon formation
late, at a time appropriate for posterior mX neurons. We therefore
used our injection strategy to ectopically express hox5 genes
sparsely throughout the mX territory and then imaged and quan-
tiﬁed the time of axon formation in ectopic hox5-expressing mX
neurons within the anterior-most quarter of the mX territory. Con-
trol anterior mX neurons expressing isl1:eGFPCAAX formed
axons at 29.8 ± 1.6 hpf (95% CI = 28.4–31.05 hpf), consistent
with our earlier results (Figures 5B, 7A, and 7E; Movie S6). Sur-
prisingly, we observed no signiﬁcant difference in the time of
axon initiation by anterior mX neurons expressing hoxa5a,
hoxb5a, or hoxb5b compared to the control construct (Figures
7B–7E; Movies S7, S8, and S9). Thus, regardless of hox5 expres-
sion, anterior mX neurons initiate axon formation by approxi-
mately 30 hpf, an average of approximately 8 hr before posterior
mX neurons do. Together, these results indicate that delayed
axon initiation guides axons to posterior targets independently
of hox5 expression and hox5 expression guides axons to poste-
rior targets independently of timing of axon initiation.

<Conclusion> DISCUSSION.
Topographic maps are of high interest to neurobiologists, given
their functional importance and prevalence throughout the CNS
[1, 37]. Here, we identify a vagus motor neuron topographic map
in the zebraﬁsh embryo and present two mechanisms that
function in parallel to govern its initial
formation. First, we
demonstrate that hox5 gene expression in posterior mX neurons
drives posterior axon targeting. Second, we introduce a novel
mechanism of topographic map development dependent upon
delayed axon formation and outgrowth by posterior mX neurons
(Figure 7F). We note that the embryonic vagus map is not highly
resolved, in that adjacent neurons can innervate different PAs.
It is likely that, as for other topographic maps, later competition-
and/or activity-dependent mechanisms further resolve the vagus
map [1].

hox5 Expression Drives Posterior Axon Targeting
A major ﬁnding from our work is that hox5 genes are expressed in
posterior mX neurons and posterior PAs and direct posterior mX
axons to posterior targets. Hox transcription factors are known
to play roles in specifying neuron identity and axon targeting
[30] and to function in topographic map development in both mo-
tor and sensory systems [38–40]. Hox genes affect axon target-
ing through both intermediate transcription factors and direct
regulation of cell-surface guidance and adhesion molecules
[30]. However, hox5 target genes that direct targeting of poste-
rior mX neurons remain unknown. Given the expression of
hoxb5a in both the posterior mX neurons and their target region,
an intriguing possibility is that hox5 acts through regulation of a
homophilic adhesion molecule. Homophilic cadherin interac-
tions have been shown to affect connectivity in the Drosophila
visual system [15, 41]. In vertebrates, cadherins also affect
axon targeting decisions in the visual system, though they are

thought to act heterophilically [42]. An important goal of future
experiments will be to identify genes that direct posterior mX
axon targeting downstream of hox5.

Time of Axon Initiation Is Regulated Independently of
Birth Order
A second major ﬁnding from our work is that axon initiation is de-
layed in posterior mX neurons despite the fact that anterior and
posterior mX neurons have similar birth times and that this differ-
ence in timing plays a critical role in the formation of the topo-
graphic map. Differential timing of axon outgrowth has been
proposed to direct axon targeting to different regions of the brain
[43] or to different targets within a topographic map [15, 16].
However, in these cases, temporal mechanisms for topographic
map formation have been difﬁcult to test directly without the
means of manipulating the temporal environment of projecting
neurons. Furthermore,
in these examples, differences in
neuron birthdate underlie differences in timing of axon formation
[15, 17, 44]. Our system is the ﬁrst we are aware of where topo-
graphic mapping depends on the timing of axon outgrowth inde-
pendently of neuron birthdate.

Our ﬁndings raise the question of how timing of axon initiation
is controlled in mX neurons. Axon initiation is a complex process
that can vary between neuron types. Some neurons inherit
polarity information from progenitor cells that determines the
subcellular site of axon speciﬁcation [45, 46]. Others, including
cortical neurons, adopt a multipolar morphology during migra-
tion before transitioning to a bipolar morphology, following which
one neurite, typically the trailing process, is speciﬁed as an axon
[47–49]. Many studies of axon initiation have elucidated intracel-
lular signaling pathways that ultimately result in localized micro-
tubule stabilization to specify one neurite as the future axon
[50–57]. These cell-autonomous events can be biased by local-
ized extracellular cues, including diffusible signaling molecules
such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and trans-
forming growth factor beta (TGF-b), as well as contact-mediated
cues in the neuronal microenvironment [49, 53, 58, 59].

In our system, we see that both anterior and posterior mX
neurons complete their dorsal migration and exhibit extensive
multipolar protrusions before axon formation. Our transplant ex-
periments suggest that the difference in axon initiation between
anterior and posterior mX neurons is most likely due to a local-
ized non-cell-autonomous cue that either promotes axon initia-
tion in anterior mX neurons, similar to BDNF and TGF-b signaling
in mammalian hippocampal and cortical neurons [53, 58], or pre-
vents axon initiation in posterior mX neurons, similar to the role of
Semaphorin3A in rat cortical neurons [60]. Determining the
nature of this cue is an important goal for future work.

Late Axon Arrival in the Periphery Drives Posterior Axon
Targeting
Posterior mX axons arrive in the periphery later than anterior mX
axons due to the delay in axon initiation. Our heterochronic
transplant experiments demonstrate that late-arriving axons
are guided to posterior targets, but how this guidance occurs
is unclear. Our favored hypothesis is that the PAs exhibit short,
sequential competence windows for innervation, perhaps medi-
ated by sequential expression of an attractive guidance cue in
each PA during their successive anterior-posterior development
[20]. The best candidate for a PA-derived mX guidance cue is he-
patocyte growth factor (HGF), which is expressed in the PAs and
signals as a chemoattractant through the Met receptor on cranial
motor axons [61]. Future research will determine whether HGF-
Met signaling is required for PA innervation in zebraﬁsh and
whether HGF is transiently expressed at a critical stage of PA
development as our model predicts.

Temporal and Spatial Mechanisms Act in Parallel to
Direct Topographic Map Development
Our ﬁndings suggest that hox5 expression and delayed axon
outgrowth function in parallel
in a ‘‘belt-and-suspenders’’
manner to promote the robust targeting of posterior mX axons
to posterior PAs and the viscera, thereby generating the vagus
topographic map. Timing of mX axon outgrowth could direct

initial targeting of axons to PAs that are accessible at the time
axons reach the periphery, and a hox5-dependent mechanism
could act to ensure that axons of posterior hox5+ mX neurons
 
do not innervate anterior (hox5
) PAs. The work we present
here demonstrates that two mechanisms act in parallel to
instruct the development of the vagus topographic map, and
future studies will elucidate whether and how the spatial hox5-
dependent mechanism and temporal axon outgrowth-depen-
dent mechanism cooperate in topographic map development.

References