
The world has known for over a century an important economic
development.  Industrial developments, the increase in the number of
vehicles and domestic equipments have led to a signiﬁcant increase in
energy demand.  Energy is an essential basis for social and economic
development.  States must ensure adequate supply of energy for their
citizens while ensuring the sustainability of that supply.  Energy supply
is a permanent challenge for our societies, especially as the need for
states continues to increase.  Overall, the SMCs are facing rapid population growth coupled with relatively low incomes, as well as an accelerated pace of urbanization, added to signiﬁcant needs of socio-economic
development.  This is reﬂected in a growing demand for energy services
and associated infrastructure.  Indeed, in all SMCs, energy demand is
constantly increasing.  To meet their energy needs, the SMCs use about
95% of fossil fuels.  If the trend observed has continued for 30 years,
energy consumption could increase by 65% between 2000 and 2025
and be 97% would be satisﬁed by fossil energies in 2025.  Such a scenario
will have many consequences, such as: increased energy dependency
and insecurity, high energy bills (importing countries), reduced export
proﬁts (exporting countries), vulnerability of the production and
distribution system, high local air pollution and as well as climate
change.  In the same context, the question of ﬁnancing goes far beyond
that of mobilizing the ﬁnancial resources of international cooperation. 
The ﬁnancial development can provide efﬁcient ﬁnancial service for
foreign banking markets, and improve the access of both foreign and
domestic ﬁrms to ﬁnancial goods and services (Dasgupta Name, 2001;
Barth Name, 2004; Lee and Chang, 2008).  According to Karanﬁl (2008)
and (2009), the causality between economic growth and energy consumption is not justiﬁed just by a simple bivariate model.  He suggested
adding one of the ﬁnancial variables such as domestic credit to private
sector, stock market capitalization or liquid liabilities into the model. 
He also argued that interest rate and exchange rate can affect the energy
consumption through energy prices.  Furthermore, Fung (2009) study
found that an efﬁcient ﬁnancial system creates more products, and
the inputs for these products increase the demand for energy.  Thus,
ﬁnancial development is a factor which should be taken into account
in energy consumption.  (See Fig.  1. )
Sadorsky (2011) pointed three effective channels of ﬁnancial
development over energy consumption.  First, there is a direct effect. 
When the ﬁnancial development improves, consumers can borrow
easier and cheaper in order to buy durable goods which consume a lot
of energy.  Secondly, improved ﬁnancial development helps businesses
to access to ﬁnancial capital easily and less costly.  Additionally, stock
market development can also affect businesses by providing them
with additional funding source.  These ones can let businesses expand
(business effect).  Thirdly, the wealth effect: increased stock market
activity usually affects the conﬁdence of consumers and businesses by
creating wealth effect.  Increased economic conﬁdence may expand
the economy and promote energy demand.  The relationship between
ﬁnancial development and energy consumption has been discussed in
recent previous studies (Mielnik and Goldemberg, 2002; Sadorsky,
2011; Islam Name, 2013; Shahbaza Name, 2016).  The econometric
approach of empirical studies often is based on a linear dynamic panel
model (Sadorsky, 2010; Ozturk and Al-Mulali, 2015; Shahbaz Name,
2017), autoregressive distributed lag (ARDL) bounds (Fuinhas and
Marques, 2012; Shahbaza Name, 2016; Bekhet Name, 2017), a
cointegration model (Islam Name, 2013; Mahalik Name, 2017), or Granger
causality (Dan and Lijun, 2009; Furuoka, 2015).  Energy is seen as the indispensable tool for sustainable development.  In these circumstances,
determining the causal link between energy consumption, ﬁnancial
development and economic growth is of particular importance to
researchers and decision-makers.  Indeed, it allows deducing the implications of adequate energy, economic and ﬁnancial policies to achieve
the objective of economic development.  To the best of our knowledge,
there has never been an attempt to investigate the short and long run
causality among economic growth, energy consumption and ﬁnancial
development for SMCs.  There are few studies available in the existing
literature investigating the causal relationship between economic
growth, energy consumption and ﬁnancial development (Alam Name,
2015; Mahalik Name, 2017; Bekhet Name, 2017).  According to the conclusion derived from these studies, the previous literature that focuses on
the cointegration and causal relationship between growth, energy and
ﬁnancial development is not conclusive to provide policy recommendation that can be applied across countries.  This paper therefore aims at
fulﬁlling this gap and contributing to empirical literature.  The purpose
of this study is to investigate the relationship between economic
growth, energy consumption and ﬁnancial development in the 6 SMCs
for the period 1995–2015 using multi-steps methodology: Stationary,
Co-integration tests, autoregressive distributed lag (hereafter ARDL)
and vector error correction model (hereafter VECM).  The ARDL bounds
testing approach investigates short run as well as long run parameter
instantaneously. 
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 provides a literature review on ﬁnancial development, energy consumption and
economic growth.  Section 3 describes empirical methodology for this
study.  Section 4 reveals empirical ﬁndings and discussion.  Section 5
concludes with a summary of the main ﬁndings and policy implications. 
2.  Literature review. 
In the past few years, the causal link between energy consumption
and economic growth has gained increasing attention in the recent
literature (Islam Name, 2013; Khan Name, 2014; Shahbaz and Lean,
2012; Shahbaz Name, 2013a, 2013b; Omri and Kahouli, 2014a, 2014b;
Mahalik Name, 2017; Bekhet Name, 2017).  The empirical ﬁndings of the
existing energy literature are not unambiguous due to the use of various
econometric approaches such as correlation analysis, simple regressions, bivariate causality, unit root tests, multivariate cointegration,
panel cointegration, VECM, ARDL, inter alia.  However, the empirical
studies that examine the relationship between ﬁnancial development,
energy consumption and economic growth in a systematic manner
still lack.  As Table 1 demonstrates, the ﬁndings of these studies are inconclusive.  These empirical studies show a range of conﬂicting results:
vary vastly in terms of signs, magnitudes and signiﬁcance.  Some
researchers have found a negative relationship and no causal relationship between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption (Mielnik
and Goldemberg, 2002; Dan and Lijun, 2009; Shahbaz Name, 2013a,
2013b), while others detected a positive and a bidirectional causality between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption (Sadorsky, 2011;
Al-Mulali and Sab, 2012a, 2012b; Islam Name, 2013; Khan Name, 2014;
Omri and Kahouli, 2014a, 2014b; Alam Name, 2015; Bekhet Name, 2017). 
To be more speciﬁc, Dan and Lijun (2009) apply Granger causality to
test the relationship between energy consumption and ﬁnancial development in China's Guangdong province.  They showed that ﬁnancial
development failed to increase energy consumption.  Furthermore,
Sadorsky (2010) detected a direct link between ﬁnancial development
and energy consumption by using the dynamic panel method in 22 developing countries for the period of 1990–2006.  His ﬁndings indicated
that there was a signiﬁcant positive relationship between ﬁnancial
development and energy consumption.  In addition, Sadorsky (2011)
examined the impact of ﬁnancial development on energy consumption
in a sample of 9 Central and Eastern European frontier economies.  The
empirical results, obtained from dynamic panel demand models, show
a positive and statistically signiﬁcant relationship between ﬁnancial
development and energy consumption.  In a similar way, Xu (2012)
investigated the nexus between ﬁnancial development and energy
consumption during the period 1999–2009 with a panel data set in 29
provinces of China, using system-GMM.  The results indicated a positive
as well as signiﬁcant relationship between ﬁnancial development and
energy consumption. 
In the same context, Shahbaz and Lean (2012) examined the relationship between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption in Tunisia
for the period of 1971–2008.  The researchers adopted the ARDL and the
Johansen cointegration method for their empirical analysis.  The ﬁndings
indicated that there was a long run cointegration relationship between
ﬁnancial development and energy consumption.  In addition, the two
variables had a bidirectional causal relationship.  By using panel data
method, Al-Mulali and Sab (2012a) examined the ﬁnance-energy
nexus in 30 Sub-Saharan African countries between 1980 and 2008, reported that there was bidirectional causality between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption.  Furthermore, Al-Mulali and Sab (2012b)
analyzed the ﬁnance-energy relationship in 19 countries for the period of
1980–2008.  They concluded that there was no causal relationship between the variables.  Focusing on Malaysia, Islam Name (2013) investigated the effects of ﬁnancial development on energy consumption between
1971 and 2009.  Their ﬁndings revealed mutually reinforcing bidirectional causality between the ﬁnancial development and the energy consumption.  Shahbaz Name (2013a) analyzed the ﬁnance-energy nexus in
China for the period of 1971–2011.  The ARDL bounds testing approach
to cointegration was applied to examine long run relationship among
the series while stationarity properties of the variables was tested by applying structural break test.  The results indicated that there was no causal relationship between the variables.  In a similar way, Shahbaz Name
(2013b) did not detect any causal relationship between the ﬁnancial development and the energy consumption in Indonesia over the period
from 1975 to 2011.  In further studies, Shahbaz Name (2013a) demonstrated that ﬁnancial development resulted in increased energy consumption
and conﬁrmed that energy use and ﬁnancial development have a positive impact on economic growth in China.  Islam Name (2013) examined
a long run relationship among consumption of energy, ﬁnancial development and economic growth for Malaysia over the 1971–2009 periods by
implementing the ARDL approach to cointegration; and tested the
direction of causality using the VECM.  The results suggest that energy
consumption is inﬂuenced by ﬁnancial development, both in the short
and the long run. 
In another study, Omri and Kahouli (2014a, 2014b) used the dynamic panel method to examine the ﬁnance-energy nexus in 65 countries
for the period of 1990–2011.  The researchers detected a positive relationship between the ﬁnancial development and the energy consumption.  More recently, Komal and Abbas (2015) explored the ﬁnancegrowth-energy nexus for Pakistan over the 1972–2012 periods, by
employing the system GMM estimation technique.  The study tried to
capture the impact of ﬁnancial development on energy consumption
through economic growth channel.  The study found positive and significant impact of ﬁnancial development on energy consumption through
the economic growth channel.  Indeed, Furuoka (2015) examined the relationships between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption in
Asia for the period of 1980–2012.  The ﬁndings of the panel cointegration
test indicated that there was a long run equilibrium relationship
between ﬁnance and energy consumption in the region.  Moreover, the
heterogeneous panel causality test detected an unidirectional causality
from energy consumption to ﬁnancial development but not vice versa. 
These results indicate that an expansion of energy usage could be a driving force behind ﬁnancial development in Asia.  Lending support to this
argument, Alam Name (2015) examined the relationship among energy
consumption and different ﬁnancial development indicators in the
panel of selected SAARC countries over a period of 1975–2011.  Panel
cointegration test suggested that the variables were cointegrated and
had a long-run relationship between them.  The ﬁxed effect model
shows that there is a signiﬁcant relationship among energy consumption, economic growth and ﬁnancial development.  In another study,
Mahalik Name (2017) investigated the relationship between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption for Saudi Arabia by using annual
data for the period 1971–2011.  The evidence of unidirectional causality
running from ﬁnancial development to energy demand is found.  By
contrast, Bekhet Name (2017) examined the relationships among CO2
emissions, ﬁnancial development, energy consumption, and economic
growth in GCC countries.  To test the long-term relationship among the
above variables, the study employed the ARDL bounds testing approach
for the period of 1980–2011.  The empirical results proved the existence
of a long-term equilibrium relationship among energy consumption and
ﬁnancial development in all Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries
except UAE. 
Generally, the literature review on the causality relationship
between economic growth, energy consumption and ﬁnancial development is based on Engle and Granger (1987), Johansen (1991) and
Johansen and Juselius (1990) cointegration techniques.  However,
using the same methods with the same variables has no more potential
of any original contribution, because it increases only the number of
conﬂicting results with varying time periods and we have serious
doubts about the economic, energy and ﬁnancial policies.  In the next
section, we use VECM and the ARDL model to avoid this problem. 
None of the studies, according to best of our knowledge, available for
SMCs used the VECM and the ARDL estimators for testing the energygrowth-ﬁnancial nexus. 
<Middle> Data and methodology. 
3. 1.  Data. 
The analysis covers the SMCs, which includes six countries: Algeria,
Egypt, Israel, Lebanon, Morocco and Tunisia.  The selection of the starting
period (1995–2015) was constrained by the availability of data.  The
main variables of the analysis are ﬁnancial development, real GDP per
capita and energy consumption per capita.  Data are taken from the
World Development Indicators database (World Development Indicators (WDI, 2016)).  GDP per capita is expressed in US dollars (constant
2010 US$) determined the economic growth, energy consumption
(EC) is expressed in kg of oil equivalent per capita, ﬁnancial development (FD) is explained by real domestic credit to private sector as
share of GDP.  I take the logarithm of these variables.  On the one hand,
this transformation in logarithm facilitates the interpretation of the estimated coefﬁcients which are read as elasticities.  On the other hand it
can control the heteroscedasticity problem.  Indeed, the logarithmic
transformation makes it possible to solve or reduce the differences between the variables linked to the differences in their units of measure. 
Indeed, there are several other variables that may affect this relationship.  In this study, we use some important control variables, like international trade (% of exports and imports of GDP), real per capita gross
ﬁxed capital formation (constant 2010 US$) as a proxy of capital stock
and urbanization (% of population).  Theoretically, capital and labor are
used as potential inputs in the process of producing real economic output.  In turn these inputs are also helping producers of an economy to
demand for EC and FD.  It is in the sense that the higher the capital use,
the higher will be the economic growth, EC and FD.  This positive causal
linkage between capital stock the three variables mainly happens due to
the very nature of capital intensive.  Similarly, GDP, EC and FD are positively linked with evolution of urbanization in the economy.  It means
that the greater degree of growing urban population need higher
amounts of energy for their daily life and accelerate growth.  Likewise,
the relationship between trade openness and economic growth is a
long debated issue in the theoretical and empirical literature of economics (Omri and Kahouli, 2014a, 2014b; Furuoka, 2015; Kahouli and Omri,
2017).  However, the inconclusive results imply that the results of trade
openness may not be generalized for SMCs.  Therefore, we include it in
our regression for quantifying its impact on the case of SMCs.  Moreover,
with the help of above theoretical set up, we have included these variables (e. g.  trade, capital stock and urbanization) in the analysis which
contribute to GDP, EC and FD in SMCs and therefore it is expected to
provide meaningful insights for policy implications at the aggregate
level highlighted in the concluding sections of this study. 
Variables used for estimation purpose with their measurement,
deﬁnition, source, and expected sign are mentioned in Appendix 1. 
The summary statistics (mean value and standard deviation) and the
correlation matrix of GDP per capita, energy consumption per capita,
ﬁnancial development, trade openness, capital and urbanization are presented in Appendix 1.  The mean GDP per capita ranges from 2447. 738 in
Morocco to 28,211. 79 in Israel.  As for the per capita energy consumption,
Morocco has the lowest energy usage (445. 91), whereas Israel has the
highest (2898. 214).  Concerning ﬁnancial development, Algeria has
the lowest ﬁnancial development, whereas Lebanon has the highest. 
The correlation matrix is reported to check for multicollinearity among
variables.  By looking at the results, the major observations that should
be highlighted are as follows: there is a signiﬁcant correlation between
all variables at 5% level. 
3. 2.  Methodology. 
The study is concerned mainly with examining the short and
long-run relationship between economic growth, EC and FD.  Following
the work of Omri and Kahouli (2014a, 2014b), Begum Name (2015)
and Ali Name (2017) we derived the empirical model based on the
standard Cobb-Douglas production function having constant returns
and the aggregate output function with time t, can be displayed as
follows. 
Where, Y represent GDP, EC denote energy consumption and e the
error term.  α1,α2 and α3 are the output elasticities respectively with respect to domestic capital, labor force, and energy consumption.  In this
paper we allow technology to be endogenously determined by ﬁnancial
development and we integrated trade, capital and urbanization (proxy
of labor) an augmented Cobb-Douglas production function (Omri and
Kahouli, 2014a and b).  Financial development represents an important
variable as correlates with the degree of capital ﬂows in ﬁnancial institutions, capital markets, and foreign direct investment (Chang, 2015). 
Therefore,
Where, θ is time-invariant constant.  Substituting Eq.  (2) into
By taking log, the linearized production function can be given as
follows. 
Empirically, to examine the relation between economic growth,
energy consumption and ﬁnancial development (three-way linkages),
we specify the model following multiple equations, Eqs.  (5), (6) and (7)
respectively. 
Where, lnGDP is the logarithm of GDP per capita, lnEC is the logarithm of energy consumption energy per capita and lnFDis the logarithm
of ﬁnancial development.  lnTrade lnK and lnURB are the logarithm of
trade, capital stock and urbanization, respectively. 
In this study, multi-steps methodology will be used to test this relationship based essentially on ARDL bounds testing approach (Pesaran
and Shin, 1999; Pesaran Name, 2001) and VECM Granger causality approach.  The ARDL approach has numerous advantages.  First, the ARDL
procedure can be applied whether the time series variables are I(0),
I(1) or frictionally integrated (Pesaran Name, 2001).  Second, endogeneity
problems can be avoided and small sample properties of ARDL approach
are more reliable than that of Johansen and Juselius's cointegration
methodology.  Third, the ARDL procedure captures appropriate number
of lags in data generating process particularly in general to speciﬁc process.  Fourth, the ARDL procedure employs a single reduced form equation, while the conventional cointegration procedures estimate the
long-run relationships within a context of system equations.  In this
study, the ARDL model will be employed through several steps: The
ﬁrst step of our analysis is to make sure of the stationarity of the series
or of the order of integration of each of them.  Therefore, two unit root
tests are implemented: Augmented-Dickey-Fuller (ADF) of Dickey and
Fuller (1981) and Phillips-Perron (PP) of Phillips and Perron (1988). 
ADF and PP test the null hypothesis of the presence of a unit root
(non-stationarity) against the alternative hypothesis of absence of unit
root (stationarity).  The results of the tests are given in Table 2 below
for the six SMCs considered here. 
After getting assured about the order of integration of the variables,
we apply the ARDL bounds testing approach to investigate cointegration
for a long-run relationship between economic growth, EC and FD for 6
SMCs (step 2).  The ARDL model is expressed as follows. 
In Eq.  (8), the 1st difference operator is shown by Δ; β1i,χ1i,δ1i, ε1i,ϕ1i,φ1i are error correction dynamics, a1,b1,c1,d1,e1,f1 are the optimal lag length to be used.  η11 to η16represents the long run
relationship among the variables in the model, and ε1tare the error
terms.  ARDL approach based on Wald F-Statistic is applied to check
the long-run cointegration among the variables of the concern with
the null of no co-integration as H0:ηj1=ηj2=ηj3=ηj4=ηj5=ηj6=0
and alternative as H1:ηj1=ηj2=ηj3=ηj4=ηj5=ηj6≠0.  However, in
this study we are only interested in studying the following hypothesis:
H0: ηj1 =ηj2 =ηj3= 0 and alternative as H1: ηj1 =ηj2 =ηj3 ≠0.  In the
similar way, other equations (Eqs.  (9)–(13)) can be explained. 
Pesaran Name (2001) generated two asymptotic critical values
i. e.  upper critical bound (UCB) and lower critical bound (LCB) they are
used to take decisions whether cointegration exists or not between the
series.  The lower critical bound is used to test cointegration if all the
series are integrated at I(0) otherwise we use an upper critical bound
(UCB).  The long-run relationship between the variables exists if our
calculated F-statistic is greater than upper critical bound (UCB).  There
is no cointegration between the series, if our calculated F-statistic
does not exceed lower critical bound (LCB).  Our decision regarding
cointegration is inconclusive if calculated F-statistic falls between LCB
and UCB.  In such an environment, an error correction method is an
easy and suitable way to investigate cointegration between the variables. 
We have used critical bounds generated by Narayan (2005) to test
cointegration rather than Pesaran Name (2001) and Turner (2006). 
After conﬁrming the presence of cointegration between the variables,
we apply the VECM Granger causality approach to investigate the direction of causality between them (Third step).  The VECM is a restriction of
VAR.  It contains a cointegration term represented by an error correction
term (ECT) and constrains the endogenous variables to converge to the
cointegration relationships while allowing for short-term dynamic adjustments.  The ECT implies that the variations of the endogenous variables are a function of the level of imbalance in the cointegration
relation that it recovers.  The VECM makes it possible to estimate the
short-term relationships and to indicate the existence of long-term relationships through the signiﬁcance of the ECT.  The procedure is done in
two steps.  The ﬁrst is to estimate the models (5) to (7) and to recover
the residues corresponding to the deviations from the equilibrium.  The
second step corresponds to the estimation of Eqs.  (14) to (19) which
contain the recovered residues.  This step estimates the coefﬁcients that
correspond to the short-term adjustments as well as to the long-term adjustment rates.  The VECM equations are modeled as follows. 
Where, zj0,κj,λj,μ j,νj,οj,πj (j=1,…,6) are parameters to be estimated;
ξjt(j=1,…,6)are white noise error terms; ECT is the error correction term
derived from the corresponding long-run equilibrium relationship; the
coefﬁcients ωj (j =1,…, 6)of the ECT represent the deviation of the
dependent variables from the long-run equilibrium. 
<Conclusion> Results and discussion. 
Before estimating the relationships between variables, it is necessary
to determine the order of integration of each variable in order to avoid
making misleading estimates.  To do this, we apply the unit root tests to
the logarithm of the variables used in terms of level and ﬁrst difference. 
Typically, the results in Table 2 indicate that most of the variables used
are integrated of I (1).  On the one hand, the ADF and PP tests, with constant and/or trend, generally, do not allow to reject the null hypothesis of
the presence of a unit root.  The GDP per capita, ﬁnancial development,
energy consumption per capita, trade, capital and urbanization in level
are not stationary.  On the other hand, the null hypothesis of the presence
of a unit root is rejected, unanimously for all series in ﬁrst difference. 
The Bounds testing approach was employed to determine the presence of cointegration among variables.  This requires us to calculate
the value of the F-statistics and compare it with the critical values
(Table 3).  The optimum lag is selected relying on minimizing the Akaike
Information Criterion (AIC) and Shwarz Criteria (SIC).  For both models,
lag 2 is found to be the optimal lag length for our study.  Apparently, the
bounds testing approach reveals mitigated results.  In most cases, the
F-statistics lies above, at least, the 10% upper bound in the 4 SMCs
conﬁrming the presence of long-run equilibrium relationships.  For
Algeria, we ﬁnd that the null hypothesis of no cointegration are rejected
when EC, FD, trade, capital and urbanization are the forcing variables at
lag 2 with F-value at 10. 855 exceeding the upper bound value at 1% as
well as when growth, energy, trade, capital and urbanization are the
forcing variables at lag 2 with F-value at 4. 25 at 10%.  This indicates the
presence of cointegration among the variables, which suggest a longrun relationship among the variables.  For Egypt, Since F statistic is higher
than the upper critical values by Pesaran Name (2001) and Narayan
(2005), it was concluded that there is a cointegration which means a
long-run relationship among the series.  Indeed, we ﬁnd that the null hypothesis of no cointegration for Israel and Tunisia are accepted when EC
as dependent variable, this indicates the absence of cointegration among
the variables.  Nevertheless, the results conﬁrm the presence of
cointegration among the variables for GDP and FD.  In the case of
Lebanon, we ﬁnd that the null hypothesis of no cointegration are rejected
when growth, ﬁnancial development, trade, capital and urbanization are
the forcing variables at lag 2 with F-value at 5. 163 exceeding the upper
bound value at 1% as well as when growth, energy, trade, capital and urbanization are the forcing variables at lag 2 with F-value at 7. 304 at 10%. 
This indicates the presence of cointegration among the variables.  For
Morocco, we ﬁnd that the null hypothesis of no cointegration are
rejected when energy, ﬁnancial development, trade, capital and urbanization are the forcing variables at lag 2 with F-value at 3. 874 exceeding
the upper bound value at 5% as well as when growth, ﬁnancial development, trade, capital and urbanization are the forcing variables at lag 2
with F-value at 4. 12 at 10%.  This indicates the presence of cointegration
among the variables, which suggest a long-run relationship among the
variables. 
In most cases, the results conﬁrm the existence of cointegration relationship.  Breusch-Godfrey serial correlation LM test was performed and
detected no serial correlation for the residuals of this model.  The same
as the analyses above, all the models are free from heteroscedasticity
(ARCH test), and the error terms are normally distributed and every
model is well speciﬁed (Table 4).  On the other hand, the stability of
ARDL parameters is checked by using CUSUM and CUSUMQ tests. 
These two last help in testing the gradual changes in parameters.  The
expected value of recursive residual is zero leads to accept that null
hypothesis of parameter constancy (Brown Name, 1975).  The plots of
both CUSUM and CUSUMQ shown by Figs.  A. 3 and A. 4 at 5% level of
signiﬁcance.  From these ﬁgures, statistics are between the critical
bounds which imply the stability of the coefﬁcients. 
Once the bounds testing approach conﬁrms the existence of
cointegration for most models, the long-and short-run coefﬁcients
may be estimated.  Table 5 shows the empirical results of the long-run
estimates using the ARDL modelling.  For the ﬁrst model (GDP as dependent variable), we ﬁnd that the effect of independent variables vary
among the SMCs.  The results for Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Morocco and
Tunisia show that EC and FD have signiﬁcant long run impact on GDP. 
For Algeria, the coefﬁcient of EC and FD, which are 0. 165 and 0. 196,
implies that 1% increase in EC leads to 0. 15% and 0. 19% increase in
GDP and FD, respectively in the long run.  The ﬁnding conﬁrms that EC
and FD contribute to the improvements of the economic growth
(Fuinhas and Marques, 2012; Shahbaz Name, 2017).  Furthermore, the
results for Tunisia and Lebanon reveal that an increase in energy
consumption by 1%, on average GDP will increase by 0. 55% and 0. 22%,
respectively.  However, our results show that the impact of FD on GDP
is insigniﬁcant for both countries.  The results of our study are in line
with the recent empirical studies, for example, Kahsai Name (2012),
Coers and Sanders (2013) which have a stance of energy led growth. 
Concerning the control variables, the coefﬁcient of trade implies that a
1% increase in the volume of international trade will lead to 0. 06% and
0. 02% rise in real per capita GDP for Israel and Algeria, respectively. 
The results of the present study are consistent with Jalil and Feridun
(2011), Omri and Kahouli (2014a, 2014b), and Kahouli and Omri
(2017), which have a stance that the improvement in the international
trade will lead to higher level of output.  On the other hand, trade has no
long run impact on GDP for the other countries.  In the case of capital
stock, the long-run results show a positive and signiﬁcant impact of capital on GDP during the study period in Algeria, Israel and Morocco.  For
instance, the coefﬁcient of capital implies that 1% increase in physical
capital contributes to GDP of almost 0. 38% for Israel.  The magnitude is
showing diminishing marginal returns to capital which is consistent
with the neo classical school of thought (Jalil & Feridun, 2011).  For the
other countries, our results show that the impact of capital stock on
GDP is insigniﬁcant.  Moreover for urbanization, the results for Algeria,
Israel and Lebanon show that urbanization has no signiﬁcant long run
impact on per capita real GDP.  In the case of Egypt, Morocco and
Tunisia, we ﬁnd that urbanization have a signiﬁcant positive impact
on per capita real GDP in the long run.  An increase in urbanization by 1%
will rise by 7. 78%. 
For the second model (EC as dependent variable), the results indicates that GDP has a long-run positive impact on EC for Algeria, Israel,
Morocco and Tunisia.  The ﬁnding results show that a 1% increase in
GDP will lead to increase EC by 0. 59% over the long-run.  Our ﬁndings
are also consistent with Costantini and Martini (2010), Kahsai Name
(2012) and Coers and Sanders (2013) who documented that GDP has
statistically signiﬁcant positive impact on EC.  The empirical economic
literature provides an inconclusive debate on the long run relationship
of FD and EC.  For example, Farhani and Solarin (2017), Khan Name
(2014), Bekhet Name (2017) show a negative relationship between FD
and EC.  While Sadorsky (2010), Chang (2015), Mahalik Name (2017),
and Ahmed (2017) report positive link between them.  Our results
favor the stance of Chang (2015), Mahalik Name (2017), Ahmed
(2017) in the case of Israel, Morocco and Tunisia.  Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd
a statistically signiﬁcant negative sign with a magnitude of 0. 16 for
Egypt.  This implies that ﬁnancial sector development can reduce energy
consumption, and this decrease can be further augmented by providing
funds to explore new forms of energies.  In the case of Algeria and
Lebanon, FD is insigniﬁcant linked with EC. 
In the same context, the results of the trade indicate a small, but
positive, relationship with EC in the long-run in Algeria and Israel.  For
more detail, a 1% increase in trade will increase EC by 0. 06% in Israel,
which is signiﬁcant at the 5% level.  Trade openness leads to an increase
of economic output and therefore an increase of EC.  Our ﬁndings are
broadly consistent with Omri and Kahouli (2014a, 2014b), Sebri and
Ben-Salha (2014) and Kahouli and Omri (2017).  Indeed, our results
show that both capital stock and per capita energy consumption are insigniﬁcant for SMCs.  The results for Egypt, Israel, Morocco and Tunisia
reveal that urbanization has a signiﬁcant positive impact on per capita
energy consumption. 