
Business risks stemming from a firm's business model and operating environment are important determinants of its cost of
equity capital (Modigliani and Miller, 1958).  One characteristic that regulators, researchers, and practitioners view as important in
assessing the risks inherent in a firm's current and future cash flows is the concentration of the firm's customer base.  For instance,
Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No.  131 (previously SFAS No.  14) requires firms to disclose information about
major customers because these customers represent “a significant concentration of risk. ” The SEC under Regulation S-K Item 101
also has similar disclosure requirements.  Further, anecdotal evidence suggests that firms explicitly recognize this risk. 4 While
approximately 45% of public firms report relying on at least one customer for a sizeable portion of revenues (Ellis Name, 2012),
there is surprisingly little empirical evidence on whether customer concentration risk affects firms’ financing costs.  In this study,
we aim to fill this gap by investigating the relation between the concentration of a supplier’s customer base and its cost of equity. 
Depending on a major customer for a large portion of sales can be risky for a supplier for two primary reasons. 5 First, a
supplier faces the risk of losing substantial future sales if a major customer becomes financially distressed or declares bankruptcy,
switches to a different supplier, or decides to develop products internally.  Consistent with this notion, Hertzel Name (2008) and
Kolay Name (2015) document negative supplier abnormal stock returns to the announcement that a major customer declares
bankruptcy. 6,7 Further, a customer's weak financial condition or actions could signal inherent problems about the supplier’s
viability to its remaining customers and lead to compounding losses in sales.  Second, a supplier faces the risk of losing
anticipated cash flows from being unable to collect outstanding receivables if the customer goes bankrupt. 8 This assertion is
consistent with the finding that suppliers offering customers more trade credit experience larger negative abnormal stock
returns around the announcement of a customer filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy (Jorion and Zhang, 2009; Kolay Name, 2015). 
While the above evidence suggests that a concentrated customer base can increase a supplier’s risk, whether this risk is
priced into a supplier’s cost of equity is unclear and thus an empirical question.  To test the relation between customer
concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity, we first create three measures that capture various dimensions of customer
concentration over the years 1981–2011.  Next, we follow prior research and measure a supplier’s cost of equity as the
average of several implied cost of equity estimates derived from analysts’ earnings forecasts (e. g. , Hail and Leuz, 2006; Li,
2010).  In our empirical tests, we control for omitted variables that can affect all suppliers in the same industry during any
given year and several characteristics known to impact a supplier’s cost of equity. 
Across all three measures of customer concentration, we find evidence that greater risk associated with a concentrated
customer base results in a higher cost of equity.  Our findings suggest that a supplier that depends on one or more major customers
for at least 10% of its annual revenues has a cost of equity that is 21. 2 basis points higher, which represents an additional annual cost
of $7. 99 million for the average supplier to finance with equity.  This effect is economically significant relative to our other control
variables, such as measures of information asymmetry.  For instance, the effect of depending on sales from a major customer on a
supplier’s cost of equity is equivalent to the effect of a 1. 5 standard deviation increase in analyst forecast dispersion. 
We also document a positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s systematic risk, as measured by
the supplier’s equity beta.  This finding is consistent with traditional asset pricing theories that suggest that customer
concentration risk would have to be related to systematic risk in order to be non-diversifiable and therefore priced into a
supplier’s cost of equity (e. g. , Lambert Name, 2007; Lintner, 1965; Sharpe, 1964).  Further, this result supports the conclusion
that the risk associated with having a concentrated customer base is in part non-diversifiable. 9
We also conduct several cross-sectional tests that exploit settings where the risk associated with having a concentrated
customer base is predictably larger.  If greater customer concentration increases a supplier's risk, then the positive relation
between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity should be especially strong when these relationships are
predictably riskier.  Specifically, this relation should be stronger when a supplier has a major customer that is more likely to
default or declare bankruptcy or a major customer that has fewer barriers to switching to a different supplier.  This relation
should also be more pronounced for a supplier that is more likely to have unpaid invoices if a major customer defaults and
for a supplier that lacks a diverse stream of revenues that can coinsure against the loss of a major customer.  We use several
measures to proxy for these situations and find evidence that is consistent with all four predictions. 
Our estimates of the effect of customer concentration on a supplier's cost of equity could suffer from an omitted variable
bias.  In particular, our control variables may insufficiently account for differences between suppliers that do and do not have
concentrated customer bases.  Thus, the estimated effect of customer concentration on a supplier's cost of equity could
be picking up nonlinear effects of our control variables.  We are also unable to observe the extent to which different
customer–supplier relationships are governed by implicit versus explicit contracts as well as the extent to which
managerial-specific relationships between customers and suppliers affect the risk of losing a major customer.  To help
alleviate these endogeneity concerns, we perform a propensity score matched sample analysis and implement an
instrumental variables approach.  The results from both analyses continue to show that a supplier with a more concentrated
customer base has a higher cost of equity, suggesting a causal link from customer concentration to a supplier's cost of equity. 
The focus of our paper is on the relation between a concentrated base of corporate customers and a supplier's cost of
equity.  Yet, a supplier can also be highly dependent on revenues from the U. S.  federal government.  Unlike corporate
customers, however, federal government customers are much less likely to default or declare bankruptcy, and government
purchases are typically regulated by longer-term procurement contracts (Goldman Name, 2013), which reduce the risk that
government customers will switch suppliers.  As such, a supplier that depends on the federal government for a large portion
of revenues gains operational efficiencies from selling to a major customer but does not bear many of the risks associated
with relying on a major corporate customer.  Consequently, we expect a negative relation between federal government
customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity.  We find that the cost of equity is 19. 1 basis points lower for a supplier
that depends on the federal government for at least 10% of its annual revenues. 
In our last set of analyses, we examine the relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of debt.  If a
supplier with a concentrated base of corporate customers loses a major customer, the financial losses the supplier incurs
could limit its ability to service debt payments.  As such, we expect that creditors demand a higher rate of return on loans
made to a supplier with a more concentrated customer base.  We measure a supplier’s cost of debt using loan spreads on
new issues of both bank loans and public bonds.  Our results show that a supplier that depends on at least one major
corporate customer has 5. 0–6. 0% higher borrowing costs on bank debt and 7. 0–9. 9% higher borrowing costs on public bonds. 
Thus, a concentrated customer base increases a supplier’s cost of accessing not only external equity but also debt capital. 
We provide new empirical evidence that the concentration of a supplier’s customer base impacts its cost of equity. 
Broadly, this finding contributes to the literature investigating the determinants of a firm's cost of equity.  Prior work
predominantly focuses on how various forms of information risk affect firms' cost of equity, including voluntary financial
and nonfinancial disclosure (Botosan, 1997; Dhaliwal Name, 2011; Francis Name, 2008), earnings transparency (Barth Name,
2013), and internal control quality (Ashbaugh-Skaife Name, 2009).  While studies find that business risks stemming from a
firm’s operating environment and business model tend to have a larger impact than managerial discretion on a firm’s cost of
equity (Bhattacharya Name, 2012; Francis Name, 2005), they do not identify the sources of such business risks.  Our work
extends this literature by documenting how a prevalent source of business risk—a concentrated customer base—impacts a
firm’s financing costs.  Our findings also validate the inclusion of a “customer concentration risk premium” as an input in
practitioner models of a firm’s cost of equity (e. g. , Duff & Phelps). 10,11
Our findings also extend the literature that examines how the concentration of a supplier’s customer base affects its characteristics
and financial policies.  While prior work shows that suppliers with a concentrated base of customers tend to be more profitable because
they realize operational efficiencies (Cen Name, 2013; Kalwani and Narayandas, 1995; Patatoukas, 2012), our findings imply that a
concentrated customer base raises suppliers’ risk and financing costs.  Thus, our paper relates to work documenting that a concentrated
customer base is associated with higher idiosyncratic risk and a greater likelihood of receiving a going-concern opinion (Albuquerque
Name, 2014; Dhaliwal Name, 2014).  Last, several other studies find that suppliers with greater customer concentration tend to maintain
lower financial leverage ratios (Banerjee Name, 2008; Kale and Shahrur, 2007), recognize bad news sooner (Hui Name, 2012), have more
discretionary accruals (Raman and Shahrur, 2008), hold more cash (Itzkowitz, 2013), and pay fewer dividends (Wang, 2012). 
Finally, our study contributes to literature showing that nonfinancial stakeholders have a significant impact on a firm’s financing
costs.  For instance, Chen Name (2011) show that labor unions increase labor adjustment costs and make wages stickier, resulting in
higher operating leverage and a higher cost of equity.  Yet, Chen Name (2012) find that unionization lowers a firm’s cost of debt.  In
addition to showing that major customers impact a firm’s financing costs, we show that the type of customer exposes suppliers to
differential business risks.  Specifically, we show that a supplier with a major corporate customer has a higher cost of equity and
debt, while a supplier with a major federal government customer has a lower cost of equity but not a lower cost of debt. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 describes our data and empirical methodology.  Section 3
reports our empirical findings.  Section 4 documents the results of additional robustness tests.  Section 5 concludes. 
<Middle> Data and empirical methodology. 
2. 1.  Sample selection. 
We obtain data to estimate the implied cost of equity capital from the Institutional Brokers’ Estimate System (IBES),
customer–supplier data from Compustat’s segment customer files, financial statement data from Compustat, and stock
return data from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) files.  The intersection of these databases creates our main
sample that consists of 44,218 supplier-year observations.  This sample includes industrial firms that have publicly-traded
stock over the 1981–2011 period, are incorporated in the U. S. , and have non-missing data for the main variables of interest. 
We exclude utilities (SIC 4900–4999) and financial firms (SIC 6000–6999).  We winsorize continuous variables at their 1st
and 99th percentiles to reduce the influence of outliers and express all dollar values in 2009 dollars. Implied cost of equity capital estimates
We empirically estimate the cost of equity that is implied in current stock prices and analysts’ earnings forecasts using
IBES data as of June in the following year and four cost of equity models introduced by Claus and Thomas (2001), Gebhardt
Name (2001), Easton (2004), and Ohlson and Juettner-Nauroth (2005).  The first two models are based on Ohlson's (1995)
residual income valuation model, and the latter two models are based on Ohlson and Juettner-Nauroth’s abnormal earnings
growth valuation model.  Appendix A provides a detailed description of the cost of equity estimates.  There is little consensus
in the literature on which models perform best or how the models should be evaluated (Botosan and Plumlee, 2005; Gode
and Mohanram, 2003; Guay Name, 2011).  Therefore, we follow prior literature and use the mean of the estimates from the
four models as our measure of the cost of equity to mitigate the effect of measurement errors associated with one particular
model (Hail and Leuz, 2006; Li, 2010). 
Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics and the correlation matrix for the cost of equity estimates.  As seen in Panel A, the
Ohlson and Juettner-Nauroth (OJN) method generates the highest average estimated cost of equity with a mean of 12. 94% and a
median of 12. 12%.  The Gebhardt Name (GLS) method produces the lowest average estimated cost of equity with a mean of 7. 33%
and a median of 7. 05%.  Panel B of Table 1 presents the pairwise Pearson (below the diagonal) and the Spearman (above the
diagonal) correlations between the four estimates, which are all positive.  The lowest observed Pearson (Spearman) correlation is
between the GLS method and the Easton (MPEG) method with a value of 0. 473 (0. 459).  The highest observed Pearson
(Spearman) correlation is between the OJN method and the MPEG method with a value of 0. 885 (0. 863).  Overall, our ex ante cost
of equity estimates are comparable to those in prior studies (Botosan and Plumlee, 2005; Chen, Chen, and Wei, 2011). 
2. 3.  Measures of customer concentration
We use Compustat’s segment customer files to identify suppliers that disclose sales to major corporate customers.  Since
1976, the Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No.  14 (SFAS 14) of the Financial Accounting Standard Board (FASB) has
required a supplier to disclose external customers that individually account for 10% or more of its revenues.  FAS 131
superseded SFAS 14 in 1997, and the requirement to report such customers remains intact for public companies under SEC
Regulation S-K Item 101.  Although regulations require suppliers to identify customers accounting for at least 10% of revenues,
suppliers often voluntarily report customers that account for less than 10% of sales.  Because these disclosures are voluntary, we
do not include these customers in our concentration calculations to reduce concerns of a potential selection bias. 12
We create three measures to capture the extent to which a supplier’s customer base is concentrated.  Panel C of Table 1
presents summary statistics for these three concentration measures.  For our first measure of customer concentration, we
create an indicator variable that is set to one if a supplier discloses at least one corporate customer that accounts for 10% or
more of its annual revenues and zero otherwise (Major Customer).  In 26% of our observations, a supplier reports that at least
one major customer accounts for 10% or more of revenues. 
For our second measure, we follow Patatoukas (2012) and use an application of the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index to
capture customer concentration (Customer HHI).  This measure accounts for both the number of major customers identified
by the supplier and the importance of those major customers to the supplier’s annual revenues.  Thus, we measure supplier
i’s customer concentration in year t across the supplier’s J major customers as this, where Salesijt represents supplier i’s sales to major customer j in year t, and Salesit represents supplier i’s total sales in year t. 
This variable ranges between zero and one, with higher values corresponding to a more concentrated customer base. 
In particular, this measure takes a value of zero for a supplier that does not disclose sales to any major customers and takes a
value of one for a supplier that depends on a single major customer for all annual revenues. 
Our last measure follows Banerjee Name (2008) and Dhaliwal Name (2014) who define Total Major Customer Sales as the
fraction of a supplier’s annual total sales captured by all customers that account for at least 10% of the supplier’s annual
revenues.  For the subset of suppliers that disclose at least one major customer, mean sales to all major customers account for
31% of these suppliers’ total revenues. 
2. 4.  General empirical methodology
To examine the relation between customer concentration and the implied cost of equity at the supplier-year level, we estimate the following panel regression model,
where Cost of Equityit is our measure of the estimated implied cost of equity in excess of the risk-free rate, as measured by
the yield on 10-year Treasury bonds, for supplier i in year t.  Customer Concentration is one of our three measures of customer
concentration.  Xit is a set of control variables, and βr  βt are interactions of industry and year fixed effects. 14 Our controls
include financial variables commonly found in implied cost of equity regressions (Campbell Name, 2012; Chen Name, 2011). 
These variables include stock return beta and idiosyncratic risk, log market value of equity, the book-to-market ratio, book
leverage, return momentum, log analyst forecast dispersion, the forecasted long-term growth rate, and return on assets. 
Panel C of Table 1 presents summary statistics and detailed definitions for these variables.  To ease the interpretation and
independent variables (except customer
comparability of coefficient estimates across variables, we standardize all
concentration measures) to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one in multivariate regressions. 
We define industries at the 2-digit SIC level.  The interaction of industry and year fixed effects (industry  year fixed
effects) controls for omitted industry characteristics within a 2-digit SIC industry in a given year.  Thus, these fixed effects
account for transitory industry-wide factors, such as industry demand shocks, which could affect a supplier’s cost of equity
and customer concentration risk in any particular year. 15 The estimated standard errors in all regressions are corrected for
heteroskedasticity and are clustered at the supplier level to correct for serial correlation within supplier groupings. 
3.  Empirical results
3. 1.  Customer concentration and the cost of equity capital
We begin our analysis by examining whether a concentrated customer base impacts a supplier’s cost of equity.  Table 2
presents the results of this analysis.  The dependent variable in columns 1–6 is the average implied cost of equity in excess of
the risk-free rate (in the remainder of the paper, all models use the implied cost of equity in excess of the risk-free rate, and
we refer to it as simply the implied cost of equity). 
Columns 1–3 report the results from regression models that include all control variables, except equity beta and idiosyncratic
risk.  The results show a positive and statistically significant relation between a concentrated customer base and a supplier’s cost
of equity across all three measures of customer concentration.  In terms of economic significance, the coefficient estimate on
Major Customer in column 1 implies that a supplier with at least one major customer has a cost of equity that is 21. 2 basis points
higher.  Given that the sample mean of the implied cost of equity in excess of the risk-free rate is 4. 44%, this 21. 2 basis point
increase translates into a 4. 8% (¼0. 212/4. 44) rise in a supplier’s cost of equity relative to the sample mean.  In addition, the mean
(median) supplier has outstanding equity of $3,771 ($779. 6) million.  Thus, a 21. 2 basis point increase in a supplier’s cost of equity
implies an additional annual cost of $7. 99 ($1. 65) million for the mean (median) supplier to finance with equity. 
To compute the economic significance of having a concentrated customer base using the other two measures of customer
concentration in columns 2 and 3, we compare the difference in concentration for suppliers that do not depend on any
major customers to the average supplier that depends on at least one major customer.  The average supplier with at least one
major customer has a customer concentration HHI of 0. 09 and a total percentage of sales to all major customers of 31%.  Since
both measures take the value of zero for suppliers that do not depend on any major customers, the coefficient estimates in
columns 2 and 3 imply that the difference in cost of equity between these two types of suppliers is 8. 4 (¼0. 932 n 0. 09) basis
points and 16. 9 (¼0. 546 n 0. 31) basis points, respectively.  For the remainder of the paper, we only calculate the economic
significance for the variable identifying whether a supplier has at least one major customer. 
Columns 4–6 present the results from the same regression models as those in columns 1–3, but we follow prior literature
and include equity beta and idiosyncratic risk as control variables (e. g. , Ashbaugh-Skaife Name, 2009; Chen Name, 2011).  We
use this model specification throughout the rest of our paper.  We estimate Beta Value-Weighted by regressing daily
individual stock returns over the fiscal year on the contemporaneous CRSP value-weighted market returns and correct the
measure for nonsynchronous trading following Scholes and Williams (1977).  Similarly, we define idiosyncratic risk as the
annualized standard deviation of the residuals from the aforementioned regression that is corrected for nonsynchronous
trading following Scholes and Williams (1977). 
As expected, the results in columns 4–6 show that the inclusion of equity beta and idiosyncratic risk significantly
attenuates the positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity.  Specifically, the coefficient
estimate in column 4 on the indicator variable for whether a supplier has at least one major customer declines from 0. 212 to
0. 121.  In comparison to the coefficient estimates on the control variables in column 4, we note that this 12. 1 basis point
increase in the cost of equity for suppliers with at least one major customer remains economically significant.  For example,
because we standardize all other independent variables to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, a one
standard deviation increase in equity beta and analyst forecast dispersion are associated with a 10. 3 and 9. 1 basis point
higher cost of equity, respectively.  Moreover, the economic effect of customer concentration on a supplier’s cost of equity is
about a quarter of the effects of a one standard deviation change in size, the book-to-market ratio, and book leverage. 
Table 2 also shows that the signs on the estimated coefficients on the control variables are consistent with previous findings in
the literature.  The implied cost of equity is positively related to equity beta, idiosyncratic risk, the book-to-market ratio, book
leverage, and analyst forecast dispersion.  Similar to Dhaliwal Name (2006), we also find that the cost of equity is positively related to
analysts’ forecasted long-term growth rate.  Further, the cost of equity is negatively correlated with firm size, price momentum, and
profitability.  It is worth noting that the economic effects of customer concentration in Table 2 are likely understated, as these results
capture the average effect across all suppliers.  In Section 3. 3, we find that the economic effect of customer concentration is larger for
sub-samples of suppliers with a riskier concentrated customer base.  Overall, the results in Table 2 are consistent with our
hypothesis that a supplier with a more concentrated customer base has a higher cost of equity. 
In untabulated analyses, we rerun the regressions in column 4–6 of Table 2 using the implied cost of equity calculated by
taking the median of the four individual estimates as the dependent variable.  The results are quantitatively and qualitatively
similar to those when the mean of the four individual cost of equity estimates is the dependent variable.  We also rerun the
same regressions for each of the four individual cost of equity estimates separately.  The results show a positive relation
between all three customer concentration measures and each of the cost of equity estimates.  Yet, while we find a positive
and statistically significant relation in all models using the cost of equity estimates following Easton (2004) and Ohlson and
Juettner-Nauroth (2005), the positive relation is statistically insignificant in four out of six regression models using the cost
of equity estimates following Claus and Thomas (2001) and Gebhardt Name (2001). 17
3. 2.  Customer concentration and supplier risk
The finding of a positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity suggests that this risk is
non-diversifiable.  According to traditional asset pricing theories, customer concentration risk would have to be related to a
supplier’s systematic risk to be non-diversifiable and therefore priced into the supplier’s cost of equity because investors can
and should diversify away firm-specific risk (e. g. , Lambert Name, 2007; Lintner, 1965; Sharpe, 1964).  Thus, to provide further
evidence on whether customer concentration risk is non-diversifiable, we next examine the relation between our three
measures of customer concentration and measures of a supplier’s systematic risk.  Specifically, we regress yearly measures of a
supplier’s equity beta on our customer concentration measures.  We calculate supplier equity betas using both value-weighted
and equally-weighted daily market returns over the supplier’s fiscal year, correcting both measures for nonsynchronous
trading following Scholes and Williams (1977). 18
The results in columns 1–3 of Table 3 show a positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s valueweighted beta across all three measures of customer concentration.  The coefficient estimate on Major Customer in column 1
implies that a supplier with at least one major customer has a value-weighted beta that is 0. 069 higher.  Given that the
sample mean of the value-weighted beta is 1. 11, this finding translates into a beta that is 6. 2% (¼0. 069/1. 11) higher relative
to the sample mean.  Columns 4–6 show a statistically and economically similar positive relation between customer
concentration and a supplier’s equally-weighted beta.  For instance, the coefficient estimates in column 4 imply that a
supplier with at least one major customer has an equally-weighted equity beta that is 0. 096 higher.  This finding translates
into an equally-weighted beta that is 7. 6% (¼0. 096/1. 27) higher relative to its sample mean of 1. 27.  Overall, the results in
Table 3 are consistent with a concentrated customer base increasing a supplier’s systematic risk. 19
The findings in Table 3 suggest that the positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity
is in part due to a positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s systematic risk.  However, there is a
growing strand of literature recognizing that market imperfections and investor holding biases often prevent investors from
diversifying their portfolios, resulting in the pricing of firm-specific risk (e. g. , Fu, 2009; Malkiel and Xu, 2004; Spiegel and
Wang, 2005). 20 Further, Taylor and Verrecchia (2014) show that both idiosyncratic and systematic risk factors can be priced
in a rational expectations model that allows individual investors to delegate their trades to a privately informed financial
intermediary, such as an institutional investor.  To provide insight on whether the pricing effect of customer concentration
could stem from firm-specific risk, we next examine the relation between our measures of customer concentration and a
supplier’s idiosyncratic risk.  We define Idiosyncratic Risk the same as in Table 2, which is corrected for nonsynchronous
trading following Scholes and Williams (1977). 
Columns 1–3 of Table 4 show that, across all three measures of customer concentration, there is a positive and statistically
significant relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s idiosyncratic risk. 21 This finding is consistent with
empirical evidence documented in Albuquerque Name (2014).  In terms of economic significance, the coefficient estimates in
column 1 imply that a supplier with at least one major customer has annualized idiosyncratic risk that is 0. 029 higher.  Given
that the sample mean of idiosyncratic risk is 41. 1%, this finding translates into idiosyncratic risk that is 7. 1% (¼0. 029/0. 411)
higher relative to the sample mean. 22
In sum, the results in Tables 3 and 4 show that suppliers with a more concentrated customer base have higher systematic
and idiosyncratic risk.  These findings suggest that the positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s
cost of equity could be driven by systematic or idiosyncratic risk.  However, similar to other studies (e. g. , Ashbaugh-Skaife
Name, 2009; Chen Name, 2011), we control for both types of risk in our cost of equity regressions.  Thus, the customer
concentration risk pricing that we document is over and above our measures of systematic and idiosyncratic risk, which
could be attributed to measurement error in these variables.  In particular, this measurement error arises because investors
should price forward-looking risk and it is implausible if not impossible to perfectly measure these types of risks using
historical return data (Lambert Name, 2007). 
3. 3.  Cross-sectional tests of customer concentration and the cost of equity capital
We next conduct cross-sectional tests that exploit settings that provide variation in the magnitude of risk in customer–supplier
relationships.  Specifically, we examine whether the effect of customer concentration on a supplier’s cost of equity varies
predictability with: (1) the probability that a customer will default or declare bankruptcy, (2) the likelihood that a customer will
switch to a different supplier, (3) the extent of a supplier’s losses if a major customer goes bankrupt, and (4) the extent to which a
supplier can diversify away customer concentration risk.  In addition to shedding light on the economic mechanisms behind our
main results, these tests further alleviate endogeneity concerns and in particular, the concern of an omitted correlated variable.  For
an omitted variable to explain our results, it would also have to explain and be consistent with all of our cross-sectional findings. 
3. 3. 1.  The effect of customer default probability
One of the primary concerns with depending on sales to major customers is the greater risk of significant cash flow losses
in the event that any of these customers default or declare bankruptcy.  Consistent with this notion, suppliers experience
negative abnormal stock returns to the announcement that a major customer declares bankruptcy (Hertzel Name, 2008;
Kolay Name, 2015).  Thus, the positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity should be more
pronounced if one of its major customers has a higher likelihood of defaulting or declaring bankruptcy. 
To test this prediction, we use three measures of default probability to capture the likelihood that a major customer will
default or declare bankruptcy.  Our first measure follows Bharath and Shumway (2008) and is an expected default probability
based on the Merton (1974) bond pricing model.  Our second measure is based on Shumway’s (2001) probability of bankruptcy
that uses both accounting ratios and market-driven variables to predict this probability. 23 Following Kim Name (2011), our last
measure uses the first principal component from Altman’s (1968) Z-score, Ohlson’s (1980) O-score, and Shumway’s (2001)
probability of bankruptcy instead of using these default measures individually. 24
To calculate the default measures for each customer, we first use a matching algorithm similar to Fee and Thomas (2004)
to match reported customer names in the Compustat segment file to their identifiers on CRSP.  To link customer names with
full company data, we use the following procedure.  First, we use an algorithm that determines the likelihood that the
reported customer name matches the historical company name listed on CRSP by comparing the number and order of the
letters of the two names (SAS SPEDIS function).  We then identify the four company names from CRSP that are most likely to
match the reported customer name.  In cases when visual inspection determines an almost certain, distinct match, we link
the name with the CRSP name and permanent identification number. 
For those reported customer names that still lack matches using the above method, we use LexisNexis (mainly the
Directory of Corporate Affiliations database in LexisNexis) to determine if the customer name corresponds to a subsidiary of
a publicly-traded firm.  If it is determined that the reported customer is a subsidiary of a parent company on CRSP, we match
the subsidiary to the parent’s permanent identification number.  Lastly, we keep only suppliers that report an identifiable
customer that accounts for at least 10% of the supplier’s annual revenues and for which we are able to obtain Compustat
data.  This step reduces the sample size from 44,218 to between 5,023 and 5,685 unique supplier-years depending on which
default measure is used in the regression. 
A loss of any major customer can result in material financial losses, and hence, a supplier’s risk of such losses due to a
major customer defaulting or declaring bankruptcy is best measured by the customer with the highest likelihood of
defaulting.  Therefore, we use our three measures of default probability for the customer with the highest likelihood of
defaulting to proxy for a supplier’s risk of having a major customer default or declare bankruptcy. 25 For each of our three
measures of default probability, we create an indicator variable that is set to one if the particular measure is above the
sample median in a given year and zero otherwise.  We then interact these indicator variables with our customer
concentration measures.  Note that both Customer HHI and Total Major Customer Sales are centered by subtracting their
respective sample means before interacting. 
The results in all six columns of Table 5 show that there is no relation between customer concentration and the cost of
equity for suppliers with financially healthy customers.  However, suppliers with a more concentrated customer base and a
major customer with a higher default probability have a significantly higher cost of equity across both measures of customer
concentration.  Further, the joint significance of the customer concentration measures and the interaction terms are
statistically significant in all six models.  Columns 1 and 2 show the results using Bharath and Shumway’s (2008) measure of
customer default probability.  Since this sample is restricted to only suppliers with at least one major customer, we base the
calculations of the economic significance on a one standard deviation increase in Customer HHI of 0. 120 and Total Major
Customer Sales of 0. 213.  The coefficient estimates in columns 1 and 2 imply that, compared to suppliers with financially
healthy customers, a one standard deviation increase in Customer HHI and Total Major Customer Sales for suppliers with a
financially distressed customer results in a 20. 7 (¼1. 721n0. 120) and 21. 6 (¼1. 015n0. 213) basis point higher cost of equity,
respectively. 
Columns 3–4 and 5–6 show the results using Shumway’s (2001) probability of default and the first principal component,
respectively.  The economic and statistical significance of the coefficient estimates on the interaction terms using Customer
HHI in columns 3 and 5 are comparable to those in column 1.  Specifically, a one standard deviation increase in Customer HHI
for suppliers with a financially distressed customer results in a 20. 5 (column 3) and 23. 9 (column 5) basis point higher cost
of equity.  While still economically and statistically significant, the coefficient estimates on the interaction terms using Total
Major Customer Sales in columns 4 and 6 are lower compared to the estimates in column 2.  A one standard deviation
increase in Total Major Customer Sales for suppliers with a financially distressed customer results in a 16. 0 (column 4) and
19. 5 (column 6) basis point higher cost of equity.  Overall, the results in Table 5 are consistent with a concentrated customer
base having a larger effect on the cost of equity for suppliers that have a major customer that is more likely to default or
declare bankruptcy. 
3. 3. 2.  The effect of customer switching costs
Another risk of having a concentrated customer base is that a major customer can switch suppliers, which can result in
material financial losses.  Therefore, we next consider whether the positive relation between customer concentration and a
supplier’s cost of equity varies when a major customer faces lower barriers to switching suppliers.  Prior work shows that
when a supplier has a lower share of industry sales, there are more alternative suppliers that customers can purchase from,
which lowers switching costs and increases the likelihood that customers switch suppliers (Hui Name, 2012; Inderst and
Wey, 2007; Schumacher, 1991; Snyder, 1996).  Also, a customer is less reliant on a supplier and faces lower switching costs if
the supplier provides the customer with a smaller portion of its total inputs.  Thus, the positive relation between customer
concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity should be more pronounced when the supplier has a smaller industry market
share and when a customer’s purchases from the supplier are low relative to its total purchases. 26
To test our prediction, we first create two measures of supplier sales-based industry market share.  The first measure of
supplier market share is the fraction of the supplier’s total 2-digit SIC industry sales captured by the supplier.  Since 2-digit
SIC industries can be coarse industry classifications, suppliers in the same 2-digit industry may not be competing for the
same customers.  Hence, we compute our second measure of supplier market share using the fraction of the supplier’s total
3-digit SIC industry sales captured by the supplier.  To capture a customer’s dependence on a supplier for inputs, we divide
supplier sales to the customer by the customer’s cost of goods sold (e. g. , Banerjee Name, 2008; Fee and Thomas, 2004; Hui
Name, 2012).  For each of the three measures, we create an indicator variable that is set to one if a specific measure is below
the sample median in a given year and zero otherwise.  These indicator variables capture situations when customers have
lower switching costs.  We then interact the three variables with our customer concentration measures. 
The results in all eight columns of Table 6 show that customer concentration is not statistically related to a supplier’s cost of
equity when major customers face above median switching costs.  However, suppliers with a more concentrated customer base
and a major customer that faces below median switching costs have a significantly higher cost of equity across all three measures
of customer concentration.  In addition, the joint significance of the customer concentration measures and the interaction terms
are statistically significant in all eight models.  Columns 1–3 and 4–6 show the results using supplier market share based on 2digit and 3-digit SIC industries, respectively.  The coefficient estimates in columns 1 and 4 suggest that, relative to suppliers with
major customers that face higher switching costs, suppliers with at least one major customer that faces lower switching costs
have a 29. 0 31. 0 basis point higher cost of equity.  Finally, columns 7 and 8 document that a supplier’s cost of equity is greater
when the supplier provides a smaller percentage of a customer’s total inputs.  Overall, the findings in Table 6 suggest that a
concentrated customer base is a riskier business strategy when customers can switch suppliers at a relatively low cost. 
3. 3. 3.  The effect of trade credit and diversification
A supplier also faces the risk that if a customer goes bankrupt, the supplier will have financial losses not only from the loss of
future sales but also from unpaid customer invoices.  Consistent with this assertion, Jorion and Zhang (2009) find that suppliers
offering customers trade credit experience larger negative abnormal stock returns around the announcement of a customer
filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy.  Thus, the positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity
should be more pronounced for suppliers that offer more trade credit to their customers.  To test this prediction, we create an
indicator variable that is set to one if a supplier’s ratio of accounts receivable to book assets is greater than the sample median in
a given year and zero otherwise.  We then interact this variable with our customer concentration measures. 
Columns 1–3 of Table 7 show that there is not a significant relation between customer concentration and the cost of equity
for suppliers that extend little trade credit to customers.  However, across all three measures of customer concentration,
suppliers with a more concentrated customer base and more uncollected invoices have a significantly higher cost of equity.  The
coefficient estimates in column 1 imply that suppliers with a major customer and above median accounts receivable balances
have a 42. 4 basis point higher cost of equity compared to suppliers with a major customer and below median accounts
receivable balances.  Further, the joint significance of the customer concentration measures and the interaction terms are
statistically significant in all three models.  Overall, these findings are consistent with a concentrated customer base having a
larger effect on the cost of equity for suppliers that also face the risk of being unable to collect outstanding invoices from
bankrupt customers. 
A supplier that loses a major customer and operates in only one business segment is also less able to offset a loss in sales. 
This prediction follows from literature suggesting that revenues from multiple business segments can coinsure against the
loss of sales in another segment (Hann Name, 2013).  In addition, to the extent that the loss of a major customer can signal
inherent problems about the supplier’s products to its remaining customers, suppliers with only one product line face a
higher risk of compounded losses.  Thus, the positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity
should be more pronounced when suppliers operate in a single business segment.  To test this prediction, we create an
indicator variable that is set to one if a supplier operates in only one business segment and zero otherwise.  We then interact
this variable with our customer concentration measures. 
Columns 4–6 of Table 7 show that there is not a significant relation between customer concentration and the cost of equity for
suppliers that operate in more than one business segment.  However, across all three measures of customer concentration,
suppliers with a more concentrated customer base that operate in a single business segment have a significantly higher cost of
equity.  The coefficient estimates in column 4 imply that suppliers with a major customer and only one business segment have a
28. 6 basis point higher cost of equity relative to suppliers with a major customer and multiple business segments.  Further, the
joint significance of the customer concentration measures and the interaction terms are statistically significant in all three models. 
In sum, these findings suggest that the risks associated with having a concentrated customer base and its effect on a supplier’s cost
of equity is larger for suppliers with a non-diversified revenue stream. 
3. 4.  The role of relationship-specific investments
When a supplier sells a large portion of its annual revenues to an individual customer, these relationships often involve unique
or specialized products that offer little value outside of these relationships (Titman and Wessels, 1988).  In this section, we
therefore examine how the positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity varies with
relationship-specific investments (RSIs) made by customers and suppliers.  In our context, it is unclear how these RSIs impact the
risk of having a concentrated customer base.  On one hand, a supplier that has made RSIs faces a larger risk of material financial
losses if it is unable to redeploy assets after the loss of a major customer.  In addition, suppliers that invest in relationship-specific
assets are more likely subject to ex-post opportunistic renegotiations by customers, which can also increase risk (Williamson,
1979).  Thus, this reasoning leads to the prediction that the positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost
of equity should be more pronounced when customer–supplier relationships involve more RSIs. 
On the other hand, relationships between suppliers and their major customers are often bilateral (Banerjee Name, 2008). 
When suppliers make RSIs, major customers may also invest in these relationships, such as investing in training suppliers or
modifying production processes (Cen Name, 2013).  These investments made by the customer can increase its cost of
switching suppliers, which would reduce the risk of a concentrated customer base.  Thus, this notion leads to the prediction
that the positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity should be less pronounced when
customer–supplier relationships involve more RSIs. 
To test these two competing predictions, we use several measures of RSIs.  First, Titman and Wessels (1988) and Hui Name
(2012) capture investment in unique assets with a supplier’s SG&A expenses and its advertising expenses.  Thus, we capture
the extent to which a supplier makes RSIs using the sum of supplier SG&A and advertising expenses all scaled by book assets
(Selling Expenses).  For our second measure, we follow Kale and Shahrur (2007) and Raman and Shahrur (2008) and capture
RSIs by a supplier’s R&D expenditures scaled by book assets (R&D Expenditures).  As an alternative to R&D expenditures, we
use NBER patent data to calculate each supplier’s number of patents scaled by book assets (Patents), which is an output from
R&D expenditures.  For each of these measures of RSIs, we create an indicator variable that is set to one if the particular
measure is above the sample median in a given year and zero otherwise.  Lastly, following Banerjee Name (2008), we limit the
sample to only manufacturing firms (SIC 2000–3999) and proxy for RSIs with an indicator variable (Durable Goods) that is
set to one for firms in durable goods industries (SIC 3400–3999).  We then interact these indicator variables with our
customer concentration measures. 
In untabulated results, we find evidence consistent with RSIs simultaneously increasing and decreasing the risks
associated with having a concentrated customer base.  Specifically, in five out of six regressions, we find a positive and
statistically significant relation between our measures of customer concentration and the cost of equity for suppliers when
RSIs are captured with Selling Expenses and Durable Goods.  However, in four out of six regressions, we find a negative and
statistically significant relation between our measures of customer concentration and the cost of equity for suppliers that
make larger RSIs, as measured by R&D Expenditures and Patents.  Overall, the results are highly sensitive to the measure used
to capture RSIs and therefore provide inconclusive evidence on how RSIs impact the risk associated with having a
concentrated customer base. 
3. 5.  Government customers and the cost of equity capital
Our analysis so far has focused on the risk of having a concentrated base of corporate customers.  However, U. S.  federal
government spending is also significant, accounting for 23. 2% of GDP in 2011. 27 Importantly, the federal government is
unlikely to declare bankruptcy, and federal procurement contracts are typically longer-term and explicit, which lowers the
likelihood that the government will switch to a different supplier.  Also, a non-trivial fraction of these contracts use cost-plus
pricing, which assigns more operational risk to the government than the supplier (e. g. , Berrios, 2006; Reichelstein, 1992). 28
Consequently, we expect that a supplier that depends on the federal government for a large portion of annual revenues will
be less risky and therefore have a lower cost of equity. 29
To test this prediction, we use the Compustat segment files to identify suppliers that report a federal government
customer as accounting for at least 10% of total annual revenues.  Examples of such government customers include branches
of the military, Medicare, and Medicaid.  We then create three measures to capture federal government customer
concentration that are defined similarly to our corporate customer concentration measures.  Specifically, Gov’t Major
Customer is an indicator variable set to one if a supplier discloses at least one federal government customer that accounts for
10% or more of its total sales, Gov’t Customer HHI is the federal government customer sales-based Herfindahl-Hirschman
Index, and Gov’t Total Major Customer Sales is the fraction of a supplier’s total sales to all federal government customers that
account for at least 10% of total sales.  In our sample, 7. 6% of suppliers have at least one major federal government customer
that accounts for 10% or more of their annual revenues.  For these suppliers, sales to all federal government customers
account for 47. 8% of annual revenues on average. 
The results in Table 8 show a negative relation between all three measures of government customer concentration and a
supplier’s cost of equity. 31 The coefficient estimate on Gov’t Major Customer in column 1 implies that a supplier with a
federal government customer accounting for at least 10% of annual revenues has a 19. 1 basis point lower cost of equity.  In
sum, the results in Table 8 are consistent with the prediction that suppliers with a more concentrated base of safer
government customers realize benefits in the form of a lower cost of equity. 
3. 6.  Customer concentration and the cost of debt capital
Our arguments for whether a concentrated customer base increases a supplier’s business risk also generate the empirical
prediction of a positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of debt.  To test this prediction, we investigate
the effect of a concentrated base of corporate customers on two measures of a supplier’s borrowing costs: (1) the cost of bank debt
and (2) the cost of public debt.  Since bank debt is the principal source of debt financing used by most firms (Faulkender and Petersen,
2006), we first focus our analysis on the cost of bank debt.  This measure has the advantage of data availability for a larger sample
compared to our second measure.  We obtain U. S. -originated and U. S.  dollar-denominated loan data from Dealscan for our sample of
suppliers.  Since Dealscan begins tracking loans for most firms starting in 1987, we use the sample period from 1987 to 2011. 
Panel A of Table 9 presents the results relating customer concentration to a supplier’s bank loan spreads.  The dependent variable
in columns 1–6 is the natural logarithm of a supplier’s credit spreads, defined as the spread between its interest rate on a bank loan
and LIBOR.  The credit spread is measured as the all-in-spread drawn in Dealscan, defined as the amount the borrower pays in basis
points over LIBOR for each dollar drawn down (including annual fees paid to the bank group).  In columns 1–3, we use a set of control
variables similar to Valta (2012).  Specifically, we control for the natural logarithm of book assets, the market-to-book ratio, return on
assets, the proportion of assets that are fixed, book leverage, and Altman’s Z-score.  In columns 4–6, we also control for the natural
logarithm of the loan maturity (in months), the natural logarithm of the loan amount (in millions), and loan type fixed effects.  In all
six columns, we continue to include industry year fixed effects. 
In all model specifications, the results show a positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of
bank debt.  In terms of economic significance, the coefficient estimates on Major Customer in columns 1 and 4 imply that a
supplier that depends on at least one major corporate customer for 10% or more of its annual revenues has borrowing costs
that are approximately 6. 0% and 5. 0% higher, respectively. 32
Next, we examine the relation between customer concentration and the cost of public debt.  We obtain U. S. -originated,
U. S.  dollar-denominated, and non-convertible public bond issuance data from Thomson-Reuters SDC Spectrum Global New
Issues database for our sample of suppliers over the 1981–2011 period.  To create a cleaner sample of public corporate bonds,
we delete floating rate, private placement, asset backed, and perpetual bonds.  We also remove unit issues that are a
combination of securities, such as common stock and warrants, from our sample. 
Panel B of Table 9 presents the results relating customer concentration to a supplier’s public debt spreads.  The dependent
variable in columns 1–6 of Panel B is the natural logarithm of the amount the borrower pays over the comparable maturity
treasury security in basis points.  The regressions are analogous to those in Panel A.  In all model specifications, the results show
a positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of public debt.  For instance, the coefficient estimates
on Major Customer in columns 1 and 4 imply that a supplier that depends on at least one major corporate customer for 10% or
more of its annual revenues has borrowing costs that are approximately 9. 9% and 7. 0% higher, respectively. 
Overall, the findings in Table 9 provide evidence that suppliers with a concentrated customer base have not only a higher
cost of equity but also a higher cost of debt. 33,34 These findings are also consistent with those documented in Campello and
Gao (2014) who test the effect of the exposure to large customers on a supplier’s creditworthiness.  The authors show that
suppliers with a concentrated customer base have loans with higher interest rate spreads, more restrictive covenants, and
shorter maturities. 
4.  Addressing potential endogeneity
4. 1.  Propensity score matched sample analysis
A potential endogeneity concern is that our models suffer from an omitted variable that is correlated with both customer
concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity (Kennedy, 2008).  In particular, our measures of customer concentration could
be picking up nonlinear effects if the linear controls used throughout our models do not adequately account for differences
between suppliers with a concentrated customer base and those with a diverse customer base.  Therefore, we use a
propensity score matched sample to correct for any endogenous selection on observed variables (Dehejia and Wahba, 2002;
Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983). 
Using a Conditional Logistic Regression model, we first regress the indicator variable for whether a supplier has at least
one major customer on our previously used control variables and estimate the probability (i. e. , the propensity score) that a
supplier sells to a major customer.  Column 1 in Panel A of Table 10 reports the marginal effects from this regression.  Next,
we match each observation when a supplier reports a customer accounting for at least 10% of its annual revenues to an
observation when a supplier does not rely on sales to a major customer with the closest propensity score.  We match without
replacement and require the propensity scores for each matched pair to be within 71. 0% of each other. 35 The resulting
sample consists of 8,926 supplier-years when a supplier is dependent on a major customer matched to 8,926 supplier-years
when a supplier is not dependent on a major customer. 
Following Fang Name (2014), we perform several diagnostic tests to evaluate the successfulness of our matching
procedure.  If the matching procedure is successful, then we should find that: (1) the control variables in the matched sample
do not explain any variation in whether suppliers have major customers, (2) the difference in the propensity scores of
suppliers with and without major customers is negligible, and (3) the means of the matched variables are not statistically
different for suppliers with and without major customers. 
We test these predictions in three ways.  First, we rerun the same model specification as in column 1 of Panel A for the
matched sample and report the results in column 2.  The results show that all of the control variables are statistically
insignificant, and the pseudo-R2 drops to less than 0. 1%, indicating that the control variables do not explain any variation in
whether a supplier has a major customer.  Second, we examine the difference between the propensity scores of a supplier
with and without a major customer and tabulate the results in Panel B.  The mean difference is less than 0. 001 and therefore
trivial.  Third, Panel C reports the univariate comparisons of the means of each matched variable between a supplier with
and without a major customer.  The results show that the means of the matched control variables are statistically the same
across the two samples.  Collectively, these diagnostic tests suggest that the matching procedure is successful. 
The univariate results in Panel C also show that, for the matched sample, suppliers with a major customer have a 16. 4
basis point higher cost of equity.  Panel D presents the multivariate results from our base regressions in columns 4–6 of
Table 2 using the matched sample.  Consistent with earlier findings, the results show that a supplier with a more
concentrated customer base has a higher cost of equity.  Together, the results from this analysis suggest that omitted
variables related to nonlinear forms of our control variables are not likely driving our findings. Instrumental variables regressions
While our previous analysis helps alleviate endogeneity concerns, it is still possible that endogeneity arising from
unobserved omitted variables remains.  For instance, we are unable to observe: (1) whether different customer–supplier
relationships are governed by implicit versus explicit contracts, and (2) the existence of managerial-specific relationships
between customers and suppliers.  The extent to which these factors are more prevalent among major customers and
correlated with a supplier’s cost of equity could bias our findings.  Thus, we next examine the robustness of our main
findings to controlling for endogeneity using an instrumental variables approach.  This approach relies on the notion that our
instrumental variables are correlated with our customer concentration measures but uncorrelated with the error terms. 
Specifically, instrumental variables must satisfy two conditions to be considered valid instruments (e. 