 1.  Introduction The trade-off between risk and return is a fundamental issue in asset pricing theory, which has been given much attention by researchers, market investors and analysts.  In general, investors require a larger expected return from a security that is riskier.  However, after decades of controversy, no consensus exists among researchers on the relation between risk and return across time.  Recently, the volatility implied from options prices is commonly considered as the best volatility forecast and risk measure (Mencia and Sentana, 2013).  Thus, interest in the relations between return and implied volatility has increased to provide new evidence to this debate.  During the 2008 global ﬁnancial crisis, a new implied volatility index (OVX) in the crude oil market was launched by the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE).  the index can measure the market's expectation of the 30-day volatility of crude oil prices by applying the well-known CBOE Volatility Index methodology to options on the United States Oil Fund (Liu et al. , 2013).  This index is the ﬁrst commodity-based implied volatility index.  research on its relations with oil price returns will help investors further improve their trading decisions and will contribute, as well, to the development of energy ﬁnance, which is what the current study hopes to achieve.  Previous empirical literature has been focused on the relations between returns and historical volatility in ﬁnancial markets (Leὁn et al. , 2007.  Wu and Lee, 2015.  Chang, 2016), while there is few research in energy market.  Recently, return–implied volatility relationship has been received extensive attention in traditional ﬁnancial markets, in which the stock market implied volatility index (VIX) is widely investigated (Sarwar, 2012.  Basher and Sadorsky, 2016).  Although much research has been done, no consistent conclusion on positive relations (Fleming et al. , 1995.  Giot, 2005.  Guo and Whitelaw, 2006) or negative relations (Dash and Moran, 2005.  Tanha and Dempsey, 2015) has been achieved.  Furthermore, the conclusion in the stock market cannot be simply applied to OVX because of the more complicated structure of crude oil options (Ji and Fan, 2016).  Research on OVX in the crude oil market has been a research hotspot in the ﬁeld of energy ﬁnance.  Existing research has focused on three aspects.  Firstly, the predictive ability of the implied volatility index in the oil market is investigated (Szakmary et al. , 2003.  Agnolucci, 2009.  Lux et al. , 2016).  Secondly, the spillover effect of the implied volatility indexes between oil and ﬁnancial markets is explored (Liu et al. , 2013.  Maghyereh et al. , 2016.  Bouri et al. , 2017).  Thirdly, the interdependence between oil price returns and the implied volatility index is investigated.  Only three studies have attempted to answer this problem.  Aboura and Chevallier (2013) applied the OLS regression model and found that the inverse leverage effect is the dominant effect that drove the WTI crude oil prices from 2007 to 2011.  Agbeyegbe (2015) used OLS regression to ﬁnd regular feedback and leverage effects between oil price returns and OVX changes, as well as employed the quantile regression copula method to ﬁnd a negative relationship between contemporaneous OVX and oil returns.  Ji and Fan (2016) utilised the time-varying parameter GARCH model and regression analysis to verify the role of OVX as a gauge of investor fear instead of risk preference.  The aforementioned studies mainly focus on a linear relationship, but little information on non-linear dependence and the risk spillovers between OVX and oil price returns is provided.  Although the quantile regression copula method was used by Agbeyegbe (2015), only a static relationship was explored.  The non-linear time-varying dependence between OVX and oil price return is therefore investigated further from the perspective of risk spillover to extend the current literature. 