
Understanding the forces that shape financial reporting outcomes is an important goal in accounting research.  A large
prior literature provides evidence on how financial reporting choices are affected by explicit and implicit contracts.  Explicit
debt contracts with firms’ creditors (Watts and Zimmerman, 1986; DeFond and Jiambalvo, 1994; Dichev and Skinner, 2002),
and compensation contracts with firms’ executives (Healy, 1985), have been shown to influence financial reporting choices. 
Implicit contracts with equity investors as reflected in these investors’ expectations have also been shown to influence
financial reporting choices (Graham Name, 2005; Badertscher Name, 2012).  Relatively less attention has been devoted
however to understanding the potential influence of implicit contracts between firms and rank and file employees. 
Firms sell employees a package of explicit and implicit claims, with explicit claims expressed through explicit
employment contracts and implicit claims expressed through promises about long-run working conditions and employment and advancement opportunities (Cornell and Shapiro, 1987).  The value of the ongoing implicit claims depends on
employee expectations about the firm’s future financial conditions (Bowen Name, 1995).  Firms have an incentive to maximize
the value of the package of explicit and implicit claims they offer by maximizing employees’ perceived value of the ongoing
implicit claims, and this incentive is a potentially important determinant of corporate financial and reporting policies
(Bowen Name, 1995; Agrawal and Matsa, 2013).  In this paper we provide new evidence on whether and how financial
reporting choices are affected by the implicit claims of rank and file employees. 
The prior literature has suggested two ways in which rank and file employees can potentially affect financial reporting. 
The first is in the context of union negotiations.  The hypothesis posited in the literature is that firms are expected to manage
earnings downwards in the short-run during union negotiations in order to justify resistance to union calls for enhanced pay
and benefits.  This hypothesis predicts firm behavior when shareholder-employee conflicts of interest are pronounced and
employees are unionized, and empirical tests of the hypothesis appear to yield mixed results (Liberty and Zimmerman,
1986; DeAngelo and DeAngelo, 1991; D’Souza Name, 2001; Comprix and Muller 2011; Bova Name, 2015). 
The second hypothesis posited in the literature, which is the focus of this paper, is that firms are expected to make longrun earnings-increasing choices in order to project financial security, as this reduces the cost of employee hiring and
retention in competitive labor markets.  The hypothesis is predicted to hold more generally when shareholder-employee
conflicts of interest are not salient, and the hypothesis is not conditioned on the presence of labor unions.  This idea is
advanced in a number of papers in the accounting literature.  Bowen Name (1995), Burgstahler and Dichev (1997), Matsumoto
(2002), and Cheng and Warfield (2005), among others, argue that firms manage their financial statements to make them
appear rosier in order to improve their implicit terms of trade with various stakeholders including employees, and Graham
Name (2005) report consistent evidence from a survey of CFOs. 
As in the prior literature, by long-run earnings-increasing choices (or “long-run earnings management”) we mean
management of cumulative earnings over an extended period that results in a sustained wedge between ‘true’ and reported
cumulative earnings.  Cumulative earnings can potentially be managed through a combination of long-run income increasing
choices such as depreciation, inventory, and bad debt recognition policies, and short-run accrual and real-earningsmanagement choices when the wedge is in jeopardy.  In particular, the upward management of cumulative earnings does
not require upward earnings management in every single reporting period, which makes it relatively more challenging to
detect empirically.  Bowen Name (1995) provide one test of the long-run-earnings management hypothesis by examining
whether firms with high labor intensity are more likely to adopt long-run income-increasing accounting policies, and find
supportive results.  In this paper we adopt a potentially more powerful approach by testing for changes in earnings
management around an exogenous shock to employees’ cost of unemployment. 
A large labor economics literature documents that employees bear substantial costs of involuntary unemployment (e. g. ,
Gibbons and Katz, 1991; Gruber, 1997).  Employees therefore care about the financial security of their employer (Brown and
Matsa, 2013), and one way they assess this is through their employer’s earnings performance (e. g. , Burgstahler and Dichev,
1997; Matsumoto, 2002; Cheng and Warfield, 2005; Graham Name, 2005).  Firms bear at least two costs of exposing workers
to unemployment risk.  First, firms bear ex ante costs of compensating employees for the level of employment risk that exists
at the initiation of employment.  These “compensating differentials” are substantial and can take the form of higher wages
and benefits, and better working conditions (Smith, 1976; Abowd and Ashenfelter, 1981; Topel, 1984; Hamermesh and
Wolfe, 1990).  The economic significance of compensating wage differentials is suggested by empirical estimates that it is up
to 14% of wages (Abowd and Ashenfelter, 1981), and that up to 41% of interindustry variation in wages is explained by
unemployment risk (Li, 1986; Hamermesh and Wolfe, 1990).  Second, firms bear substantial turnover costs as employees
seek more stable employment, and heightened search costs as potential employees shy away (Brown and Matsa, 2013), if
there are significant increases in unemployment risk. 
We expect firms try to mitigate these costs by managing long-run earnings in order to manage employee perceptions of
unemployment risk.  This implies firms’ long-run-earnings management incentives change when employees’ unemployment
risk changes.  Employees’ unemployment risk (and the firm’s cost of exposing employees to unemployment risk) is
increasing in (i) the unemployment probability, (ii) employee risk aversion, and (iii) costs borne by workers during
unemployment (Agrawal and Matsa, 2013).  Our research design exploits exogenous shocks to employees’ unemployment
risk through a decrease in the costs borne by workers during unemployment.  This follows Agrawal and Matsa (2013) who
show that the same exogenous shock affects firms’ financial policies through increased leverage. 
State-level unemployment insurance (UI) programs are intended to lower employees’ unemployment costs by providing
temporary income when they are involuntarily unemployed and actively seeking new employment, and UI has been shown
to have economically significant effects on employee behavior and aggregate labor supply (Topel, 1984; Meyer, 1990, 1995). 
An increase in UI benefits decreases employees’ cost of separation from, and likely therefore their dependence on, their
employers.  When employees are better insured against unemployment we expect they are relatively less sensitive to their
employers’ financial performance.  This observation forms the basis for the empirical tests: for firms in a given U. S.  state, we
examine discretionary earnings decreases around large state-level increases in UI benefits as these state-level changes are
relatively exogenous to the firm. 
One way to view this is that cumulative or long-run earnings management results in a ‘bloated’ balance sheet.  Managers
likely look for opportune moments to partially clean up the bloat, and as long as one determinant of this bloat is managing
employee perceptions of unemployment risk, we expect a reduction in bloat (or partial unwinding of prior upward earnings
management) when there is a reduction in unemployment risk.  As such, we are effectively testing changes in balance sheet
bloat, rather than levels of bloat in the cross-section, which allows a relatively more powerful test of the hypothesis. 
The empirical tests employ a difference-in-differences design by examining earnings management measures before
versus after an exogenous increase in UI benefits, for treatment firms versus control firms.  The treatment firms are those
headquartered in states with a large increase (410%) in maximum UI benefits, while control firms are those headquartered
in matched neighboring states without an increase in benefits.  We find no differences in macroeconomic conditions
between treatment and control states as indicated by state-level GDP growth, unemployment rates, stock returns and stock
return volatilities of firms headquartered in those states, and UI payroll taxes. 
Of the four earnings management measures employed, one is a model-implied estimate of abnormal accruals, while
three are model-free measures.  The abnormal accrual estimate is from the Dechow and Dichev (2002) model, and results are
robust to a variety of other models.  The model-free measures are special items, write downs, and net income-reducing
restatements.  Across all earnings management measures, results suggest significant unwinding of prior upward earnings
management for treatment firms relative to control firms in the year following an increase in UI benefits.  This suggests firms
are relatively more likely to partially unwind prior upward earnings management when employees are better insured
against unemployment, consistent with the main hypothesis.  A battery of further tests examining alternative specifications,
and the potential influence of state-level political forces and unobserved economic conditions, indicate robustness of the
main result. 
A number of cross-sectional predictions are tested.  We expect upward earnings management is more likely at firms
where employees’ perceptions of unemployment risk are relatively more important, such as firms that are more labor
intensive, have higher layoff propensity, and employ relatively more low-wage workers.  Therefore, we expect relatively
greater unwinding of earnings management at these firms following an increase in unemployment benefits.  Further, we
expect partial unwinding is less likely at firms with other strong incentives to maintain the upward earnings management,
such as firms that need to tap the capital markets, meet or beat earnings expectations, avoid debt covenant violations, or
inflate executive compensation.  These tests yield significant and consistent results. 
The evidence in this paper contributes to the accounting literature by providing new evidence on the role of employee
perceptions in shaping financial reporting choices.  The evidence suggests that managing employees’ perception of
unemployment risk is one determinant of firms’ long-run-earnings management.  The prior accounting literature has
largely examined the influence of organized labor unions negotiating explicit contracts.  In contrast, the evidence here sheds
light more generally on the role of rank and file employees and their implicit contract with employers.  The results
contribute to the literature on the determinants of financial reporting choices, and further our understanding of the role
therein of a key factor of production. 
In what follows, Section 2 describes the hypotheses; Section 3 describes the data; Section 4 presents the main results;
Section 5 describes cross-sectional tests; and Section 6 concludes. 
2.  Hypothesis development. 
An extensive literature in labor economics supports the idea that workers bear substantial costs of becoming
involuntarily unemployed, including significant decreases in consumption (Gruber, 1997) and difficulty in finding another
wage-equivalent job (Farber, 2005; Gibbons and Katz, 1991).  As such, employees care deeply about unemployment risk. 
Firms in turn bear significant costs of exposing workers to unemployment risk, including compensating wage differentials
(Abowd and Ashenfelter, 1981; Topel, 1984; Hamermesh and Wolfe, 1990), turnover costs as employees seek more stable
employment, and heightened search costs as potential employees shy away (Brown and Matsa, 2013). 
Reported earnings are useful for employees to assess the likelihood of becoming involuntarily unemployed.  This implicit
use of accounting numbers likely creates ongoing incentives to manage earnings upward, as recognized in a number of prior
papers including Bowen Name (1995).  Burgstahler and Dichev (1997) argue that lowering transactions cost with stakeholders
such as employees is one incentive for upward earnings management.  Matsumoto (2002) and Cheng and Warfield (2005)
hypothesize and find that one incentive for firms to avoid negative earnings surprises stems from the implicit claims of
employees as proxied by labor intensity.  Choudhary Name (2009) hypothesize and find that labor intensity is one incentive
for firms to manage income even absent cash flow effects.  Zechman (2010) hypothesizes that employees’ implicit claims also
present an incentive for balance sheet management.  Finally, Graham Name (2005) indicate a significant majority of surveyed
CFOs agree that managing earnings to manage stakeholder perception is descriptive of actual practice. 
Employees do not necessarily have to be direct consumers of financial statements in order for their perceptions to be
shaped by reported earnings.  As long as earnings are part of the public information set used by the media, analysts, ratings
agencies and other parties to generate forecasts and reports, and employees are consumers of these forecasts, reports and
news, reported earnings can shape employee perceptions of unemployment risk. 
2. 1.  The U. S.  Unemployment Insurance (UI) System. 
The UI system provides temporary income to eligible workers who are involuntarily unemployed and actively seeking
new employment, in order to mitigate the loss of income from unemployment.  The basic framework for insurance
provisions under the joint federal-state system is common across all states, though individual states have the autonomy to
set the program’s parameters: Who is eligible, the duration of benefits, and the amount of weekly unemployment
benefits paid. 
A state’s benefit formula typically calculates the earnings realized by a worker in four of the last five quarters and seeks to
replace approximately half of those wages through weekly payments, subject to minimum and maximum bounds.  Much of
the interstate and intertemporal variation in UI benefits stems from changes to the maximum bounds, and the elasticity of
actual compensation payments to maximum total benefits is approximately one (Agrawal and Matsa, 2013; Hsu Name, 2013). 