 1.  Introduction  In the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (hereafter, the “Dodd–Frank Act”), policymakers made an unprecedented move towards using securities regulation to address issues unrelated to the Securities  and Exchange Commission’s (SEC) core mission of protecting investors and maintaining the fair and eﬃcient functioning  of ﬁnancial markets ( Lynn, 2011 ).  Section 1503 of the Dodd–Frank Act requires SEC-registered ﬁrms to include information regarding mine-safety performance in their ﬁnancial reports.  In this paper, we examine the real effects (i. e. , changes  in mining-related citations, injuries, and labor productivity) of the mandatory inclusion of mine-safety disclosures in the  ﬁnancial reports (“MSD”) of the 151 SEC-registered ﬁrms whose ownership of a U. S.  mine make them subject to Section  1503 of the Dodd–Frank legislation.  A key feature of our setting is that the information provided through MSD is already  publicly available on the Mine Safety and Health Administration’s (MSHA) website.  this allows us to isolate and estimate  the magnitude of the incremental real effects of including information in ﬁnancial reports.   Section 1503 of the Dodd–Frank Act requires reporting citations for violations of mine-safety regulations both periodically in mine owners’ ﬁnancial reports (i. e. , Forms 10K and 10Q) and immediately upon the receipt of an imminent danger  order (IDO) through a Form 8K ﬁling.  MSD advocates make the implicit argument that including this information in ﬁnancial reports has implications that such information does not have when only disclosed on the MSHA website.  However, it  is unclear whether the information included in MSD is news to investors or other interested parties.  One reason the inclusion of safety information in ﬁnancial reports could have an incremental effect is because ﬁnancial reports broadcast the  information to a wide range of interested parties, thereby increasing awareness of ﬁrms’ safety records.   If MSD increases awareness of ﬁrms’ safety records, then political costs, reputational concerns, and/or activism by investors or other parties could provide an incentive for managers to improve mine safety.  For example, if managers anticipate  that the revelation of poor safety performance will have a negative effect on ﬁrm value, they may invest more in safety to  limit such effects.  Investors may react negatively to poor safety performance either because of the future cash ﬂow consequences or because of their non-cash-ﬂow-based preferences.  Cash ﬂow effects could occur, for example, through ﬁnes,  mine closures, or other costs imposed by activists.  Non-cash-ﬂow-based preferences could also lead investors to require  higher returns for ﬁnancing the operations of ﬁrms engaging in activities that conﬂict with those preferences, such as maintaining relatively unsafe working conditions (e. 