
After the equity market collapsed in 2000, many institutions considered commodities a new asset class after the widely publicized
discovery of a negative correlation between commodity returns
and stock returns by Gorton and Rouwenhorst (2006) and Erb and
Harvey (2006).  As a result, billions of investment dollars ﬂowed
into commodity markets from ﬁnancial institutions, insurance
companies, pension funds, foundations, hedge funds, and wealthy
individuals (Wang Name, 2015.  Mi Name, 2017).  A sharp increase in
the popularity of commodity investing in the past decade has triggered
an unprecedented inﬂow of institutional funds into commodity futures
markets, referred to as the ﬁnancialization of commodities (Basak and
Pavlova, 2016).  In recent years, many experts have noticed the
inﬂuence of ﬁnancialization on commodity markets or the correlation
between commodity markets and ﬁnancial markets. 
As stated by Tang and Xiong (2012), the large index investment
ﬂow precipitated a fundamental process of ﬁnancialization among commodity markets, and the vast inﬂows led to a process of integration
of commodity futures markets with other ﬁnancial markets in which
portfolio rebalancing of index investors can cause volatility spillovers
from outside to commodity markets.  Speciﬁcally, they document that
the co-movement between oil and other commodities has risen dramatically following the inﬂow of institutional investors starting fromRecently, Adams and Glück (2015) show that large inﬂows into
commodity investments, i. e. , ﬁnancialization, has changed the behavior
and dependence structure between commodities and the general stock
market, and predict that the spillovers between commodities and the
stock market to remain high in the future, given that institutional investors continue to target funds into commodities.  Basak and Pavlova
(2016) ﬁnd that with ﬁnancialization, i. e. , in the presence of institutional investors, the prices and volatilities of all commodity futures go up,
but more so for the index futures than for non-index ones.  Meanwhile,
the correlations among commodity futures as well as in equitycommodity correlations also increase, with higher increase for index
commodities. 
Some authors focus on the ﬁnancialization related with oil markets. 
Based on the empirical results, Juvenal and Petrella (2015) support the
view that the recent oil price increase is mainly driven by the strength
of global demand but that the ﬁnancialization process of commodity
markets also plays a role.  Yin and Yang (2016) conﬁrm that the
predictive power of technical indicators outperforms the wellknown macroeconomic variables, and their ability to predict the oil
price stems in part from its ability to predict changes in sentiment,
suggesting the ﬁnancialization of oil markets. 
Besides, stronger investor interest in commodities may create
closer integration with conventional asset markets (Babcock, 2012. 
Silvennoinen and Thorp, 2013.  Yao Name, 2017).  as a result, the
ﬁnancialization process also enhances the correlation between commodity markets and ﬁnancial markets.  In order to assess how commodities and ﬁnancial markets are inter-related during 1983–2013, Aboura
and Chevallier (2015) introduce a ‘volatility surprise’ component into
the asymmetric DCC with one exogenous variable (ADCCX) framework,
and ﬁnd that return and volatility spillovers do exist between commodity and ﬁnancial markets and that in turn, their relative impact on each
other is very substantial.  Silvennoinen and Thorp (2013) estimate
sudden and gradual changes in correlation among stocks, bonds and
commodity futures returns, and ﬁnd that most correlations begin the
1990s near zero but closer integration emerges around the early
2000s and reaches peaks during the recent crisis, and higher volatility
index (VIX) also increases commodity returns correlation with equity
returns for about half the pairs, indicating closer integration. 
Due to the wide openness and free movement for investment funds
in the U. S.  stock market, international crude oil and natural gas markets,
a large number of investment funds can swarm into and out of these
markets with limited restrictions and the dynamics of stock market
volatility becomes a crucial impetus for crude oil and natural gas price
ﬂuctuations and investment decisions.  Meanwhile, crude oil and natural
gas play strategic roles in social economic development around the
world, and the extreme volatility of crude oil and natural gas prices
tends to signiﬁcantly affect the economic situation and stock market
returns (Aboura and Chevallier, 2016).  As a result, there can be found
close interaction among these markets.  in particular, the inﬂuence of
stock market instability on crude oil and natural gas markets has
received extensive attention from academics, practitioners and
government (Zhang and Wei, 2011.  Mohanty Name, 2011.  Broadstock
and Filis, 2014.  Bianconi and Yoshino, 2014). 1
Moreover, the degree of investor risk appetite has proven to affect
the volatility of stock market returns (Kim Name, 2014), and caused
the ﬂuctuations of crude oil and natural gas markets.  Consequently,
some authors ﬁnd that stock market investment risk appetite may
have signiﬁcant inﬂuence on crude oil and natural gas markets (Sari
Name, 2011).  The volatility index (VIX) of stock markets is often regarded
as a proxy for risk aversion or investor sentiment (Bekaert Name, 2011. 
Silvennoinen and Thorp, 2013).  Speciﬁcally, the higher of the VIX
becomes, the more uneasy investors would feel about the stock
markets.  Conversely, the lower the VIX appears, the smoother the
changes of stock market index will be.  Among the empirical studies,
Kurov (2010) shows that the market investors' sentiment (using VIX
as one of the proxies) plays a signiﬁcant role in the impact of the
monetary policies on the stock markets, and monetary policy shocks
have strong impact on investors' sentiment in bear markets. 
To dig further on this analysis, we study the relationship and
correlation dynamics between crude oil, natural gas and stock market
risk aversion or investor sentiment as captured by the VIX and
VSTOXX indexes in this paper.  Namely, we investigate whether the
crude oil and natural gas market volatility is inﬂuenced by the VIX in
the stock market or whether these different variables move all together. 
Our objective lies in answering the following research questions.  What
are the interactions between crude oil, natural gas and stock market
VIX.  Do some of these markets move together over time.  Whether
the de-ﬁnancialialization in energy commodities occurs after the 2008
global ﬁnancial crisis.  These questions are essential to understand
whether crude oil and natural gas markets are driven only by their
fundamentals, or whether there is also a systemic component inﬂuenced by the volatility present within the stock markets.  The empirical
results indicate that the turbulent periods coincide with an increase
in cross-market co-movements.  Our ﬁndings support the existence
of contagion from stock market panic on crude oil and natural gas
markets, and show that the ﬁnancialization of crude oil and natural
gas markets remains after the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis, while there is no
de-ﬁnancialization after all. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows.  Section 2 presents the
relevant literature review.  Section 3 gives research methods and data
descriptions in this paper.  Section 4 provides the empirical results and
analyses, and Section 5 concludes. 
2.  Relevant literature review. 
The VIX is a volatility index quoted on the Chicago Board of Option
exchange since 1990 and uses the call and put option of different
maturities with the S&P 500 index as an underlying.  It is computed as
the weighted average on the price of these options (call and put)
and represents the annualized volatility of the last 30 days of the S&P
500 with percentage.  The VIX has often been called the “investor fear”
index.  In fact, it is deducted from the price of the option.  A high option
price means a high price for uncertainty.  This is why the VIX has often
been used as a proxy for market sentiment or as an “investor fear
gauge” by practitioners (as mentioned by Whaley, 2000).  More
generally, it is often used by traders and studies as an index for global
risk perception on the ﬁnancial markets (Sari Name, 2011). 
A growing number of studies argue that there exists obvious impact
of stock market VIX on crude oil and natural gas markets.  For example,
Broadstock and Filis (2014) argue that stock market return is affected by
the VIX and there is signiﬁcant time-varying linkage between crude oil
price and stock returns.  In particular, since the VIX implies the market
risk perception of investors, Sari Name (2011) ﬁnd the long-run equilibrium relationship between global risk perception and world crude oil
price, and oil price may be affected by the short-term negative impact
of the shocks on global investors risk perception. 
The changes of stock market VIX prove to be often inﬂuenced by the
uncertainties of ﬁnancial and economic situation, and then exert some
shocks on crude oil and natural gas markets.  Some literature indicates
that the interaction between the VIX and ﬁnancial risk variables proves
signiﬁcant (Cochran Name, 2012).  as a result, crude oil and natural gas
prices would see signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations when ﬁnancial and economic
environment changes (Kolodziej Name, 2014), and then crude oil and
natural gas market prices would be impacted by the increasing degree
of VIX due to the uncertainty in investment environment.  During the recent ﬁnancial crisis, monetary policies have been adjusted meanwhile
the VIX has also appeared signiﬁcant changes, which is consistent
with the contagion effect and interdependence between crude oil and
stock markets (Wen Name, 2012).  speciﬁcally, when one market is impacted by some new information, the volatility in the other market
would be inﬂuenced as well (Vo, 2011). 
It should be noted that a body of studies have shed light upon
the inﬂuence of the VIX on oil returns, but fewer have been conducted on the impact of
the VIX on natural gas markets. 
Panagioditis and Rutledge (2007) document over a period from
1996 to 2003 that UK crude oil and natural gas markets (Brent
and NBP) are strongly interrelated and cointegrated.  Due to oilformula indexation present in gas contract, to the proximity of
oil and gas reserves and to the substitutability of these two
markets, it is often admitted that these both markets were strongly
interconnected.  However, they have different pricing mechanisms. 
therefore, it is imperative to examine the impact of stock market
VIX on natural gas markets. 
To sum up, the stock market VIX reﬂects the complexity of investors' psychological process, and is inﬂuenced by various factors
simultaneously.  Meanwhile, it has signiﬁcant time-varying property, which causes the spillover effect of the VIX on crude oil and
natural gas markets to be also time-varying.  However, little literature has shed light upon the time-varying spillover effect of stock
market VIX (or VSTOXX from the European side) on crude oil
and natural gas markets.  Besides, unexpected events are very common in stock markets to affect investors' returns, but little literature investigates its inﬂuence and considers the threshold
volatility spillover between stock market VIX and crude oil and
natural gas markets.  In fact, the results based on the volatility
spillover will be helpful to foresee crude oil and natural gas market
ﬂuctuations, so as to effectively design investment portfolios and
address market extreme risks. 
<Middle> Methods and data. 
3. 1.  Methods. 
In order to highlight the spillover effect between stock markets VIX
on commodities, multivariate GARCH-type models have mostly been
used in the literature on volatility transmission as they allow for
the joint modeling of variances and covariances between different
variables.  Among the different speciﬁcations of multivariate GARCH
models, (i. e. , CCC, DCC, VECH and BEKK),2 we propose to use the
methodological framework of the Volatility-Threshold Dynamical
Conditional Correlation (VT-DCC) put forward by Kasch and Caporin
(2013) in this paper.  The econometric procedures unfold for six daily
time series taken from the American and European markets.  Speciﬁcally,
WTI crude oil, Henry Hub natural gas, and the stock market VIX composes the U. S.  markets, while Brent price, Natural Gas Balancing Point
and the VSTOXX form the European markets.  In order to determine
which variables behave similarly, we ﬁrst apply the Zivot and Andrews
(2002) unit root test with endogenous break detection on the raw series. 
This test constitutes our ﬁrst attempt to understand the interactions at
stake among these variables, and to detect clusters.  Then, we proceed
with a GARCH analysis to extract the conditional volatility from the
return series.  After running a threshold search in the quantile of the
conditional volatility series, we analyze violations with respect to
their thresholds.  More precisely, we analyze whether each conditional
volatility series violates its own threshold at the same date as
another series.  Finally, we run a DCC analysis for all the pairs (n = 6,
and [n ∗ (n − 1)] / 2 = 15 in total), and determine whether the correlation peaks occur at the same moment for different pairs.  Our objective
is then to cluster the pairs that are the mostly correlated into blocks, and
to run a Block-DCC type tests considering these blocks in order to check
the robustness of these relationships, and to understand more deeply
the correlation dynamics and volatility peaks. 
The VT-GDCC model is the extension of the DCC model proposed
by Engle (2002) and the Asymmetric DCC (ADCC) by Cappiello
Name (2006).  In the VT-GDCC model, the dynamic correlation depends
on variance values through a threshold structure.  Speciﬁcally,
according to Kasch and Caporin (2013), we consider an n-variate
conditional process εt with zero mean and covariance matrix Ht as
follows. 
εtjFt−1  U 0.  Ht
where εt indicates either a vector of zero mean returns or the vector
of residuals obtained from the return mean model.  Ft − 1 is the
information set available up to time t − 1.  U(•) denotes that εt is
identically distributed following an unspeciﬁed density.  Then the
covariance matrix Ht is decomposed into volatility and correlation
as Eq.  (2). 
where hi, t is the conditional volatility of asset i at time t and obtained from the univariate GARCH model, and Rt is the dynamic conditional correlation (DCC) matrix.  Then the variance standardized
residual series is deﬁned as Eq.  (4). 
In the GDCC model proposed by Cappiello Name (2006), the dynamic
conditional correlation is deﬁned as follows. 
where Q denotes a correlation matrix of dimension n, while A and B are
n × n parameter matrices.  According to Cappiello Name (2006), in order
to restrict the parameter matrices to be diagonal, the individual
elements of Qt are deﬁned as follows where αi and βi are the elements of the parameter matrices A and B,
and i,j=1,2,…n.  Then, we model a threshold structure based on the
volatility levels as follows where νij,t are the elements of a dummy variable matrix Vt, indicating
the threshold violation, and V ¼ E½V t, and γi are the elements of the
diagonal parameter matrix Γ.  The general speciﬁcation of the volatility
threshold dummies νij, t depends on the hypothesis to be tested. 
Consider two alternative designs of νij,t as follows where xi and xj are the volatility thresholds for assets i and j, respectively.  We suggest to deﬁne the volatility threshold as xi=Q i(δi), where δi is
the quantile level (namely, a parameter assuming values between 0 and
1) and Q i(δi) denotes the empirical δi quantile of the conditional
variance process hi,t. 
Besides, we can impose block structures on the parameter matrices
to reduce the parameter space dimension.  For instance, we cluster the
n variables into m b n non-overlapping groups, and the elements of Q t
are shown as Eqs.  (10) and (11), i. e. , the Block-VT-GDCC model
(Kasch and Caporin, 2013). 
where i,j∈l,l=1, 2,…m, and l and k are the groups including assets i
and/or j.  Based on the equations of the Block-VT-GDCC model, we can
deduce the simple VT-DCC speciﬁcation as Eq. 
3. 2.  Data description. 
In order to examine the spillover effect of stock market volatility
index (the VIX of CBOE for the U. S.  stock market while the VSTOXX
for European stock market) on crude oil prices (WTI and Brent) and
natural gas prices (Henry Hub and NBP), six time series are retrieved
from Thomson Financial Datastream from 01/04/1999 to 01/02/2015,
totaling 4175 daily observations.  (1)CBOEVIX is the CBOE SPX
VOLATILITY VIX (NEW) - PRICE INDEX, (2)VSTOXX is the EURO STOXX
50 Volatility, (3)OILBREN is the Crude Oil-Brent Cur.  Month FOB
US$/BBL, (4)CRUDWTC is the Crude Oil WTI FOB Cushing US$/BBL,
(5)NATGHEN is the Natural Gas, Henry Hub US$/MMBTU, and
(6) TRGBNBD is the TR Natural Gas NBP UK 1st Fut.  Day – Settlement
price.  As for the VSTOXX, we begin our sample on January 4, 1999,
because this volatility index is listed only since that date.  When
necessary, the time series have been transformed into USD using
the bilateral exchange rate from the Fed. 
The descriptive statistics of all-time series can be found in Table 1,
which indicate that all of them show the typical non-normality of
ﬁnancial time series and most of the series are positively skewed and
display excess kurtosis. 
Regarding the volatility series, taken in returns form, the average
and standard deviation are really close.  The shape of the distribution
is also similar between these two series.  There exists non-Gaussianity
with a positive asymmetry and a relatively high kurtosis for both
series.  This kurtosis can be seen diagnosed graphically with the
presence of relatively frequent extreme moves.  The crude oil series
highlight the heteroskedasticity phenomenon.  For both series, we
notice high volatility regimes in 2002 or 2008, with subsequent low
volatility regimes in 2013 for instance.  Their standard deviations in
returns forms are very close.  We can also remark that these two series are very close to the Gaussian distribution (Skewness of 0 and
Kurtosis of 3). 
The gas series share some common characteristics, such as low volatility regimes since 2010 and the relatively high frequency of extreme
price movements.  Through the high Kurtosis coefﬁcients (respectively
27. 99 for the European gas and 12. 19 for the American one, in returns),
we record spikes that can be explained by sudden events such as a
disruption of a pipeline or a sudden increase in temperature. 
4.  Results and analyses. 
In this section, we resort to the VT-DCC method by Kasch and
Caporin (2013) to capture the dynamic spillovers of stock market VIX
and VSTOXX on crude oil and natural gas markets. 3
4. 1.  Volatility thresholds. 
We now turn to the estimation of the Volatility Threshold (VT) speciﬁcations for the spillovers of stock markets VIX and VSTOXX on crude
oil and natural gas markets.  In the empirical implementation below,
we follow the threshold calibration approach discussed in Section 3. 1,
i. e. , the estimation of Eq.  (8) employing the VT component deﬁned in
Eq.  (9). 
Various computational steps are required.  First, we calculate the
quantile sq = 0. 50 to 0. 99 of the conditional variance for each series. 
Next, we perform a non-linear threshold grid search in the conditional
variance of each series, as detailed by Kasch and Caporin (2013). 
As shown in Table 2, the threshold identiﬁed by the grid search
algorithm for the VIX is equal to 0. 0826, which corresponds to the 93%
series speciﬁc variance quantile.  The results are broadly similar for the
remaining time series, with thresholds detected above the 90th quantile
of the conditional variance. 
The last step consists in computing the threshold violations, for instance whenever the VIX historical volatility is above the 93% quantile. 
This should enable us to understand if some variables co-move together,
and if abnormal volatility spikes occur at the same time. 
The historical volatilities of GARCH(1,1) models are shown in
Fig.  1 (top panel for each sub-ﬁgure).  These plots enable us take
into account the leptokurtic characteristic of the distribution of each
series.  Besides, the conditional volatilities are needed as an input in
the next step of the VT-DCC methodology, which aims at detecting
the threshold violations.  Further GARCH(1,1) historical volatilities
are displayed in Fig.  1 during the respective sub-periods.  We clearly
identify the pattern of time-varying conditional volatilities during
each sub-period. 
4. 1. 1.  Stock markets variances. 
We examine the conditional volatility of VIX and VSTOXX (see Fig.  1,
bottom panels of (a1), (a2), (b1) and (b2)).  For both volatility series, the
density of threshold violations is higher after the 2008 crisis than before. 
That validates the argument by González-Hermosillo and Hesse (2011)
that the VIX behavior has changed since the global crisis. 
4. 1. 2.  Crude oil variances. 
In the threshold violation ﬁgures (see Fig.  1, bottom panels of (c1),
c(2), (d1) and (d2)), we can ﬁnd that Brent and WTI violate their
thresholds in a very similar way.  Except few differences around the
ﬁnancial crisis period, there is signiﬁcant overlap between these two
series in terms of threshold violations.  Therefore, the historical volatilities seem to be interconnected between two crude oil markets, and to
spread on each other. 
4. 1. 3.  Natural gas variances. 
For the natural gas series, the European NBP (bottom panels of (f1)
and (f2)) seems to have similarities with the two oil series.  In fact, the
density of threshold violations is relatively high before 2010 before
diminishing, which is similar to both oil series.  Their volatility may answer the same common indicators.  For the U. S.  Henry Hub gas (bottom
panels of (e1) and (e2)), the analysis is different as there exists a strong
phase of threshold violations in 2014, which does not occur for the
three other series (Brent, WTI, NBP).  In 2012 and 2013, none of the
gas or oil series' conditional volatilities exceeds their threshold values
at any time.  Hence, the volatilities of these four energy series share
some common characteristics.  Even if the Henry Hub conditional
volatility evolves a bit apart, energy series seem in a certain way to
be intertwined. 
4. 1. 4.  Co-movements. 
What can look surprising is that the abnormal volatility of the VIX
and VSTOXX does not co-move with the energy series.  In contrast, the
very high density of threshold violations for the VIX after the crisis is absolutely not visible for the energy series, where the conditional volatility
nearly never violates their threshold (except two peaks in 2010 and
2014 for the Henry Hub gas).  After the crisis, higher than expected volatility levels for the VIX and VSTOXX move in an opposite way to the oil
and gas series. 
Before the crisis, the similarities are not obvious either.  For the VIX,
we get a relatively high density of threshold violations, which seems
in a certain way to be matched with the high density of threshold violation of the energy series, so the volatility co-movement between these
four series may change after the crisis. 
For the VSTOXX, however, the density of volatility spikes is not
consistent with the volatility of oil series.  Graphically, we may have
the impression that the volatility of the VSTOXX and the gas series
co-move together, which would be surprising particularly between
European volatility index and American gas index, where the volatility
connection seems to be dubious.  When we look closer at the bottom
panels (b) for the VSTOXX and (e)–(f) for both gas series in Fig.  1, it
appears that the dates of the threshold violations are not overlapping
in most cases. 
To sum up, the co-movement of abnormal high level of volatility
among the stock, oil and gas markets reveals several interesting ﬁndings.  First, the conditional volatilities of Brent and WTI evolve in a very
similar way, as judged by their variance quantile threshold violations. 
Oil markets being highly connected and integrated, these variables
answer the same common indicator or information. 
Second, for the gas series, the threshold violations allow us to
identify that their conditional volatilities share globally the same
characteristics as crude oil.  Thus, we could build a block of the four
energy variables.  Given that their conditional volatilities behave
similarly, it is possible to suggest that these four series co-move
together. 
This statement seems accurate, as energy markets are nowadays
strongly connected to each other. 4 Consider for instance that these
four series answer together the same events such as a major geopolitical
event.  When a war explodes in an area of the Middle East, both oil and
gas markets are affected.  This is a reason why their conditional volatility
seems to co-move together.  This ﬁnding conﬁrms the previous results
by Malik and Ewing (2009), who document signiﬁcant connections between the volatility series of oil and gas. 
For the VIX and VSTOXX, their co-movement is less evident to
identify.  If there are some similarities between these two series, there
are very few between the VIX and energy series, and nearly none
between the VSTOXX and energy series.  Further cross-market linkages
between stock and energy markets are to be investigated in the
correlation structures. 
4. 2.  The DCC analysis. 
4. 2. 1.  The DCC estimates. 
We now proceed with the next step of the VT-DCC, as presented in
Section 3.  Our aim is to identify similar behaviors between series in
terms of correlation, and more precisely to understand whether for
some pairs, the peaks of correlation occur at the same time.  To be able
to proceed with this analysis, we run a DCC analysis on every existing
pair, i. e. , [n ∗ (n − 1) / 2] = 15 pairs in total.  After the identiﬁcation
of the correlation similarities between pairs, we run the block-DCCs
with more than two series in case of strong common dynamic in the
correlation of the series. 
The DCC(1,1) coefﬁcients are reproduced in Table A1 of Appendix A,
whereas the time-varying correlations are not displayed to save space,
but can be accessed upon request to the authors.  The DCC models
are correctly speciﬁed for every pair run (when we look at the alpha
and beta coefﬁcient for each pair, we can remark that their sum
never exceeds one).  Besides, the coefﬁcients are statistically signiﬁcant
and positive. 
Thanks to the analysis of the ﬁfteen pairs, we are able to detect
the main trends in the correlation dynamics.  First, in the line of the
threshold violations, the conditional correlations of the four energy
variables are behaving globally in a similar way.  In all the energy
pairs (BRENT/WTI, BRENT/NBP, BRENT/HH, WTI/NBP, WTI/HH and
NBP/HH), we capture a common feature in the correlation structure. 
Indeed, there is a clear change in the correlation dynamics after 2010,
with a peak in correlation between 2008 and 2010, which corresponds
respectively to the dramatic oil price swing and the progressive
economic recovery (mainly driven by growth in emerging countries). 
What we observe more generally in that the conditional correlation is
turbulent before 2008, all these pairs experiencing correlation
peaks as it is the case for the BRENT/WTI and the WTI/NBP pairs
for example.  These correlation peaks are for some energy pairs
(BRENT/HH, BRENT/WTI, WTI/HH) only oriented in a positive way,
whereas the remaining pairs (BRENT/NBP, WTI/NBP, HH/NBP) are
characterized by both negative and positive correlation peaks.  At a
more detailed level, we realize that, when the NBP series is involved
in a pair, the correlation may be negative or positive, experiencing
spikes in both ways.  This singularity vanishes when NBP is not involved. 
We may infer that, before the crisis, the European Gas reacts negatively
to some news involving the other energy series.  Regarding the precise
occurrence of the correlation spike, without NBP, it occurs in the
midst of the ﬁnancial collapse (September 2008), while for the pairs
with NBP series this correlation spike occurs later in 2010.  This means
that the NBP may react later, or differently, to the signals or information
affecting the three other energy series.  Perhaps the NBP series is less
responding to the global economy, but reacts more to the news directly
connected to its fundamentals. 
The second observation lies in the common aspects in the correlation dynamic between the pairs involving volatility series (VIX,
VSTOXX) and the pairs involving oil series (BRENT, WTI).  Indeed, we
can remark that for the 6 pairs involving these variables (BRENT/VIX,
BRENT/VSTOXX, BRENT/WTI, VIX/VSTOXX, WTI/VIX, WTI/VSTOXX),
there are common behaviors in the correlation dynamics.  Before the crisis, there are no correlation peaks, and the level of correlation is relatively low.  In September 2008, the peak of correlation is suddenly extremely
high for all the pairs.  In the aftermath of the crisis, the correlation regime
appears different across pairs.  More scrutiny reveals that the correlation
structure is highly similar among VIX/BRENT, VIX/WTI, VSTOXX/BRENT
and VSTOXX/WTI.  In fact, a few months before September 2008, the correlation of these four pairs slowly increases, suddenly drops and then
recovers simultaneously.  Between 2010 and 2012, and nearly at the
same moment, the correlation peaks recorded are successively negative,
positive and negative again.  This design of correlation structure is more
pronounced for the pairs involving the VIX (VIX/BRENT, VIX/WTI). 
Contrary to the threshold violation analysis, there is here ample
evidence that the VSTOXX behaves in the same fashion as the VIX.  Since
the global economic collapse of 2008, the correlation dynamics seems
experiencing higher peaks than before.  In this context of turbulent economic events spreading to equity and oil markets, this is evidence of contagion.  Oil and equity markets being more and more integrated, a piece of
news impacting one of these markets can affect the other one.  Gas however does not experience the same correlation structure, given its decoupling from oil markets in the recent years.  Gas has a regional exposure,
it is thus more inﬂuenced by physical determinants such as the level of reserves, temperatures or congestions in the system. 
The robustness checks of the DCC(1,1) model are conducted for the
two sub-periods, i. e. , 1999–2008 and 2008–2015.  The detailed coefﬁcients and correlations during the two sub-periods are not displayed for
brevity, but can be accessed upon request.  We ﬁnd that the central results
remain unchanged compared with those for the whole sample period. 
4. 2. 2.  The Block-DCC analysis. 
Given the discussion above, the block composed of energy variables
only corresponds to Tang and Xiong's (2012) deﬁnition of the
ﬁnancialization of commodities, whereby correlations would increase
among commodities (within the same asset class).  The block composed
of oil and stock market volatilities variables corresponds to the second
part of the deﬁnition, whereby correlations increase between traditional
assets and the commodity sphere.  We investigate whether this deﬁnition
holds before and after the ﬁnancial crisis based on the time-varying correlations computed for each block. 
The Block-DCC estimation unfolds from Eqs.  (10) to (12) as detailed
in Section 3. 1.  Parameter estimates are reproduced in Table 3. 
Given the comments above, the four energy series are globally
experiencing strong similarities in terms of correlation dynamics.  That
is why we proceed further with the construction of a Block-DCC of
CRUDWTC-OILBREN-NATGHEN-TRGBNBD, and analyze the correlation
structure.  The second block that we build based on the previous
empirical evidence is one consisting of CBOEVIX-VSTOXX-CRUDWTCOILBREN. 
From the results of time-varying conditional correlation in
Table 3, we can ﬁnd that, not only the correlation between oil and
gas markets, but also that between energy and stock markets has
risen after the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis, which corroborates the occurrence of ﬁnancialization phenomenon mentioned above.  Speciﬁcally,
as for the ﬁrst Block, i. e. , energy market only, the average conditional
correlation went up from 0. 2467 during 1999–2008 to 0. 8825 during
2008–2015.  And for the second Block, we can ﬁnd that the average
conditional correlation increased from 0. 2317 during 1999–2008 to
0. 6400 during 2008–2015.  These results indicate that after the
2008 ﬁnancial crisis, the ﬁnancialization has been strengthened, and
there is no de-ﬁnancialization after all, which corroborates the results
proposed by Adams and Glück (2015), who predict that the spillovers
between commodity and stock markets to remain high after the ﬁnancial
crisis.  In fact, many authors such as Zhang and Li (2016) have established
that the oil and equity markets have similar reactions to speciﬁc shocks,
and are more and more integrated to each other over time.  Besides, as for
the conditional correlation during the overall sample period, we ﬁnd that
the correlation in energy markets outweighs that between energy and
stock markets on average. 
As for the time-varying correlations for the two blocks which are
displayed in Fig.  2, we can also have at least two ﬁndings.  On the one
hand, as for the ﬁrst block, before 2008, the correlation among energy
variables had signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations but it kept a continual increasing
trend after 2008 and the level signiﬁcantly exceeded that before 2008
overall.  In the second block which refers the combination of energy
and stock markets, the results suggest that no matter before or after
2008, the correlation of energy and stock markets was evidently characterized by time-varying feature, but the overall correlation level was
lifted across the ﬁnancial crisis.  That is, the interactions between energy
and stock markets became closer after the crisis, and the ﬁnancialization
phenomena remained all the time and even got enhanced. 
The robustness checks of parameter estimates for all series in the
same Block are listed in Table A2 of Appendix A during the full and
the two sub-periods.  Besides, further graphs of the time-varying
correlations for all series are displayed in Fig.  3. 
4. 2. 3.  The Markov-switching perspective. 
From a general viewpoint, the volatility threshold effects may
be integrated in the different dynamic correlation speciﬁcations
proposed in the literature.  Therefore, the joint use of the volatility
threshold structure and Markov switching dynamics may provide
further richer results for stock market VIX and petroleum markets. 
Speciﬁcally, to further ascertain the reliability of our estimates, we run
the two-regime Markov-switching process suggested by Hamilton
(1989), which can be described as follows, when st=1 and st=2, respectively.  In the business cycles context, state
1 can be associated with contractions while state 2 with expansions. 
In modeling asset prices, we may identify state 1 with bear markets
while state 2 with bull markets.  The effect of the regime st on the variable yt is given by the conditional probability density function p(yt/st). 
st is assumed to be a discrete-valued random variable that can only
assume an integer value, i. e. , {1,2}.  The probability that st equals some
particular value b depends on the past through the most recent
value st − 1 according to the following deﬁnition where pab is equal to the probability that the process moves from
state a at time t − 1 to state b at time t.  As for the pab to deﬁne proper
probabilities, they should be non-negative, while it should also hold
p11+p12=1 and p21+p22=1, which implies that p12=1 − p11 and
p21 = 1 − p22.  The transition probability pbb can be interpreted as a
regime persistence measure. 
This procedure allows us to recover the dates at which the business
cycle is considered in Expansion (EXP) or in Recession (REC).  We run
the Block-DCC analysis separately on the two regimes in order to
understand whether our results are dependent on the business cycle,
or invariant.  To save space, we do not reproduce the full results of the
MS estimates in the text, but they are available in Appendix B of the
web version of this paper.  The main message of the paper is robust
to the Markov-Switching dynamics during expansion or recession
periods only. 
<Conclusion> Conclusions and future work. 
Financial and commodity markets are increasingly connected and
integrated to each other in the past decades.  In this study, we aim
at examining whether American and European oil, gas and stock
market volatility series experience similar behaviors in their price
movements and in their correlation dynamics.  The central research
question consists in understanding whether the energy variables are
affected by stock market VIX, whether there exists volatility transmission, and whether de-ﬁnacialization works out after the 2008 global
ﬁnancial crisis. 
For these purposes, we introduce a VT-DCC model to empirically
examine the spillover effect of stock markets VIX on crude oil and natural gas markets during 1999–2015, and make the correlation dynamic
dependent on variance values through a threshold structure.  The Zivot
and Andrews (2002) test constitutes our ﬁrst attempt to understand
how equity volatility, crude oil and natural gas series interact with
each other.  By detecting one endogenous break point in the raw series,
two clusters were identiﬁable.  one in 2008, and another in 2014. 
The ﬁrst cluster is due to the ﬁnancial crisis, while the second cluster
is driven by the structural low oil prices linked to changing fundamentals.  The U. S.  Henry Hub gas seems to be associated with the volatility
indexes (VIX, VSTOXX), contrary to the European NBP gas, which is
linked to the Brent.  This divergence may be clariﬁed by the regional
aspect of the gas market, and the fact that these two markets can evolve
relatively separately. 
These ﬁndings have been further scrutinized with threshold
violations in variance quantiles, which allow us to detect whether
several series violate a threshold at the same time, and with correlation
dynamics through the VT-DCC model run on all possible pairs/relevant
blocks.  Regarding the volatility behaviors of our series, the four energy
variables violate their thresholds at similar moments, with again less
evidence for the gas series.  The VIX and VSTOXX exhibit logically
similarities.  Co-movements are detectable as well between the VIX
and oil series, when investigating the volatility extracted from the
GARCH model. 
The last step of the VT-DCC model, namely the estimation of
pairwise DCCs, is consistent with our prior ﬁndings, particularly for
the energy variables that experience correlation peaks simultaneously. 
The Block-DCC estimates provide ample evidence of similarities in the
correlation dynamics between the oil and volatility series.  Equity and
oil markets are therefore found to be connected, the oil price reﬂecting
not only its fundamentals, but also market risk aversion or investor
sentiment.  The VIX and VSTOXX constitute broad market indexes
capable of capturing signiﬁcant levels of uncertainty on ﬁnancial
markets. 