
In order to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+), policies could either attempt to reduce the proﬁtability
of agriculture, e. g.  by removing agricultural subsidies, or offer positive
incentives such as payment for environmental services (PES) that aim
to put a price on forest externalities (Angelsen, 2010.  Palmer, 2011). 
The latter have come to dominate both project and nascent jurisdictional-scale REDD+ strategies (see e. g.  Mahanty Name, 2013.  Sills Name,
2014).  Acre State in Brazil, the setting for our paper, is currently at the
forefront of efforts to institutionalize jurisdictional-scale REDD+.  At
an estimated cost of US$260 million, the State government's objective
is to reduce deforestation by 80% by 2020,
thus conserving
5. 5 million ha of forest in order to prevent the release of 62. 5 Mt of
CO2 emissions (Herbert, 2010).  To this end, Acre has established a
‘PES-like’ scheme known as the Incentive System for Environmental
Services (SISA) framework.  Its objective is to internalize values associated with forest carbon, as well as biodiversity and hydrological services,
by incentivizing landowners to conserve forest on their landholdings. 
In this paper, we model a hypothetical SISA payment in order to address two related questions.  First, given the extent of uncertainty in
land-use returns from forest conversion, what is the minimum level of
payment that Acre's government should pay to landowners to ensure
forest conservation with a 90% probability.  Reﬂecting the common
practice of Latin American incentive payment schemes, our payment
is held constant over time.  The ‘90% probability’ is illustrative of a setting
in which there is a relatively strong commitment on the part of the
policymaker to enforce conservation contracts and hence, keep land in
forest.  That said, should alternative land uses become more proﬁtable,
e. g.  due to rising commodity prices, it may not be possible to prevent
contract breach altogether thus reﬂecting imperfect enforcement of
conservation contracts (e. g.  Engel and Palmer, 2008.  MacKenzie Name,
2012.  Jayachandran, 2013). 
Our model is applied to municipality-scale, publicly-available data,
which allows us to estimate the uncertain returns of an ‘average’ landowner within each municipality, one faced with the decision of whether
to keep land in forest or convert it to an alternative land use.  For each of
Acre's municipalities, we estimate the uncertain returns for three alternative land uses.  cattle, corn, and coffee.  These three land uses are
among the most popular ones adopted in Acre and have relatively
good data availability.  We then identify the minimum per hectare cost
to the policymaker of conserving forest in each of Acre's 22 municipalities before ranking the municipalities according to ascending payment
levels, i. e.  moving from the municipalities with the lowest opportunity
costs to those with the highest ones.  The second question we ask is
whether and (if so) how this ranking of municipalities changes when
we consider their carbon stocks.  Finally, our estimates of policy costs
are combined with carbon stock data to give a novel measure of municipality-scale environmental cost-effectiveness.  the minimum relative
cost, in terms of the forgone proﬁts from alternative land uses under uncertainty, per tonne of carbon. 