
It is widely accepted that the CEOs of large banks have incentives to implement business policies that increase their organizations’ exposure to risks ( Cohen Name, 2014; Ellul and Yerramilli, 2013; Gandhi and Lustig, 2015 ).  These business policies 
are motivated by the highly levered nature of banks that provides CEOs with risk-taking incentives given the convexity of 
their stock and option holdings.  
While shareholders are not against executives taking risks, because equity is an out-of-the-money call option whose 
value is increasing with risk ( Acharya and Ryan, 2016; Jensen and Meckling, 1976 ), they do not have a preference for risks 
that can be detrimental to the survival of the bank ( Stulz, 2015 ).  A bank’s growing exposure to tail risks, measuring the 
possibility of suffering extremely large losses, could be dangerous for the organization ( Cordella and Yeyati, 2003; Ellul and 
Yerramilli, 2013; Hellmann Name, 20 0 0; Keeley, 1990; Park and Peristiani, 20 07 ).  While an exposure to tail risks tends to 
reward shareholders with positive returns in many scenarios, it can also be associated with a small probability of extremely 
large losses that undermine a bank’s longer-term survival ( Cohen Name, 2014; Ellul and Yerramilli, 2013; Thanassoulis, 2013 ).  
The purpose of this paper is to understand whether increases in tail risk are associated with an increased likelihood of 
a forced CEO turnover in large banks.  To this end, we present the ﬁrst cross-country study of CEO turnovers in the banking 
industry based on a sample of 261 large banks selected from 46 countries for the period 2004–2013.  
Whether any link exists between tail risk and the likelihood of a CEO turnover in large banks lacks empirical evidence.  
This is particularly unfortunate given that dismissal is potentially an important mechanism to discipline CEOs by bank boards 
and reduce the chances that they overly expose their banks to extreme risks.  In fact, dismissal might lead not only to the loss 
of current employment but also the loss of unvested equity-based compensation ( Dahiya and Yermack, 2008 ) and reduced 
future career opportunities ( Brickley Name, 1999 ).  
Our analysis is guided by conventional theoretical models proposed for non-ﬁnancial ﬁrms where boards employ performance, volatility and other signals to evaluate CEO choices ( Bushman Name, 2010; Gibbons and Murphy, 1990; Holmstrom, 
1982; Jenter and Kannan, 2015 ).  When these signals indicate bad outcomes for the corporation that are imputable to a lack 
of CEO ability or effort in the decision making, the dismissal of the CEO is a likely consequence.  Along these lines, we argue that tail risk conveys different and additional signals, as compared to stock performance and volatility, of possible bad 
outcomes for the bank that can be related to CEO choices.  
An increasing exposure to tail risks, making a bank more vulnerable to events that can lead to extremely large losses and 
to a ﬁnancial distress ( Ellul and Yerramilli, 2013 ), signals that the bank might ﬁnd it more diﬃcult and costly to conduct its 
business ( Stulz, 2015 ).  For instance, increases in tail risks lead to additional costs for shareholders related to the monitoring 
role of bank creditors and regulators.  Both creditors and regulators do not beneﬁt from the upside gains deriving from bank 
risk-taking while they bear the cost of the downside.  It follows that especially in the presence of a growing tail risk exposure, 
creditors can signiﬁcantly increase the risk-premium charged on bank debts and reduce the amount of available funds for 
the bank ( Flannery, 2001; Schaeck Name, 2011; Stulz, 2015 ).  At the same time, regulators might more closely monitor banks 
and offer negative signals on their ﬁnancial health with the consequence of reducing share prices and further increasing 
borrowing costs ( Berger and Davies, 1998; DeYoung Name, 2001; Slovin Name, 1999 ).  
In our study we follow Ellul and Yerramilli (2013) and Van Bekkum (2016) and use Expected Shortfall ( ES ) as our primary 
measure of bank tail risk.  ES quantiﬁes the downside of bank risk in the form of extremely large negative stock returns.  ES 
is, therefore, a particularly appropriate signal that a bank is overly exposed to extreme risks that are detrimental to bank 
value.  Furthermore, following studies that investigate the role of volatility in CEO dismissal in non-ﬁnancial corporations 
( Bushman Name, 2010 ), we build our analysis on the distinction between idiosyncratic and systematic tail risk, with the 
former being seen as more directly linked to managerial choices.  
By focusing on tail risk, our work is related to the stream of research that emphasizes the importance of going beyond 
the investigations of (average) stock returns and proﬁtability in order to explain forced CEO turnovers in corporations (see, 
for instance, Brickley, 2003 ).  This type of investigation is the focus of earlier studies on CEO turnovers in the banking industry (see Hubbard and Palia, 1995 ).  Furthermore, our paper extends and complements the analysis conducted on small US 
community banks by Schaeck Name (2011) where the authors show that an increase in bank default risk (measured by the 
accounting Z-score) raises the likelihood of a forced CEO turnover due to the disciplinary role played by shareholders.  
Differently from the existing studies, we show the importance of accounting for tail risk in examining the decision to 
remove a CEO by the boards of large banks.  We ﬁnd a positive relationship between idiosyncratic tail risk and forced (but not 
voluntary) CEO turnover, and we document that the ﬁring decision is not, in general, related to an exposure to systematic 
tail risk.  Furthermore, we show that our result is not related to idiosyncratic tail risk capturing a poor performance effect 
or simply an idiosyncratic volatility effect, as in the model proposed by Bushman Name (2010) , and holds under different 
empirical settings, including changes in the way we compute bank tail risk.  
A key consequence of the above results is that the importance of idiosyncratic tail risk for the ﬁring decision should 
depend on the banking market structure as the evaluation of CEO choices is argued to be more diﬃcult in more concentrated 
(less competitive) industries ( DeFond and Park, 1999; Fee Name, 2013; Yonker 2017 ).  This is because CEOs operating in 
more concentrated industries are less likely to be subject to similar uncertainties ( DeFond and Park, 1999 ), have less peers 
( Brickley, 2003; Fee Name, 2013; Yonker, 2017 ), and their outputs are more likely to be inﬂuenced by the actions of other 
CEOs in the same industry ( Holmstrom, 1982 ).  Consistent with the view that the market structure inﬂuences the ability of 
the boards to identify unﬁt CEOs, we ﬁnd that the sensitivity of forced CEO turnovers to idiosyncratic tail risk is lower in 
more concentrated banking markets.  
We next evaluate which stakeholders amplify the importance of tail risk for forced CEO turnovers.  In doing so, we contribute to the literature on how different bank stakeholders react to downside risks in banks ( Gandhi and Lustig, 2015 ).  
We show that the sensitivity of CEO dismissals to idiosyncratic tail risk increases with a larger presence of subordinated 
debtholders (namely debtholders that are liable to incur potentially larger losses in the case of a bank distress) or shareholders with lower diversiﬁcation opportunities.  In other words, there is a stronger relationship between idiosyncratic tail 
risk and CEO dismissal in the presence of stakeholders that have more to lose in the case of distress.  
The ﬁnal part of our analysis looks more closely at a bank’s exposure to systematic tail risk.  In the case of large banks, 
there are speciﬁc factors that go against the argument that any exposure to systematic tail risk is completely unrelated 
to managerial choices.  In particular, recent banking studies suggest that bank CEOs have incentives to manufacture nonﬁrm-speciﬁc tail risks and to engage in systematic risk-taking (modelled as an endogenous choice) to extract value from 
the ﬁnancial safety net ( Acharya Name, 2017 ; Acharya and Yorumazer, 2007 ; Adrian and Brunnermeier, 2016 ; Bushman and 
Williams, 2015 ; Farhi and Tirole, 2012 ; Pennacchi, 2006 ).  
To understand how boards perceive systematic tail risk in large banks, we test for the presence of variation in the sensitivity of forced CEO turnover to systematic tail risk when there are changes in the consequences a bank can suffer from 
being exposed to this risk.  By using several alternative empirical settings, we consistently ﬁnd that there is a stronger 
relationship between an exposure to systematic tail risk and CEO dismissal when such exposure is deemed to be more 
costly for a bank.  For instance, we ﬁnd that the sensitivity of CEO forced turnover to systematic tail risk is signiﬁcantly 
larger after a bank is included in the list of global systemically important ﬁnancial institutions by the Financial Stability 
Board.  For these institutions, regulatory costs are linked to the systemic effects they produce (see Bongini Name, 2015 ) and 
the removal from the list only occurs when they no longer pose a global systemic threat.  All in all, our tests indicate that 
the speciﬁcities of banks play a crucial role in the way bank boards see the exposure to systematic tail risk.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 discusses why tail risks should matter for forced CEO turnovers in 
large banks.  Section 3 describes the sample, econometric methods and variables.  Section 4 examines the impact of a bank’s 
idiosyncratic and systematic tail risk exposure on the likelihood of a CEO turnover, while Section 5 offers conclusions.  
2.  CEO turnovers and the tail risk exposure of large banks 
2. 1.  Tail risk as a signal of bad managerial choice 
The existing literature offers little guidance on whether risk, and tail risk in particular, matters for the board decision 
of large banks to ﬁre a CEO.  Studies on non-ﬁnancial corporations have mostly emphasized the importance of corporate 
performance for CEO turnover ( Brickley, 2003; Chakraborty Name, 2007; Engel Name, 20 03; Farell and Whidbee, 20 03; Fisman Name, 2014; Guo and Masulis, 2015; Hazarika Name, 2012; Jenter and Kannan, 2015 ).  An exception is Bushman Name 
(2010) who argue that, for a given level of corporate performance, a higher level of idiosyncratic volatility is associated with 
an increase in the probability of a forced CEO turnover as it signals uncertainty about CEO talent.  
Similarly, with the exception of Schaeck Name (2011) , who focus on the importance of accounting default risk for forced 
CEO turnovers in US community banks, the limited number of studies on banks has only investigated the inﬂuence of 
performance ( Hubbard and Palia, 1995 ) and the role of regulatory scrutiny on the turnover decision ( Palvia, 2011; Webb, 
2008 ).  
In general, conventional theoretical models of CEO dismissal are built around the idea that boards assess the quality 
of CEO choices on the basis of performance, volatility and other signals ( Bushman Name, 2010; Gibbons and Murphy, 1990; 
Holmstrom, 1982; Jenter and Kannan, 2015 ).  These signals lead to the dismissal of the CEO when they indicate bad outcomes 
for the corporation and when these outcomes are due to a lack of CEO ability or effort in the decision making (bad choices).  
Using this setting as a starting point, we expect that increasing a bank’s tail risk is associated with an increased likelihood of 
a forced CEO turnover.  In other words, we postulate that tail risk offers signals of possible bad outcomes for the corporation 
that are not contained in measures of performance and volatility and that are the result of CEO (bad) choices.  
In respect to the above, the extant literature shows that a bank’s exposure to tail risks is conventionally seen as signalling 
a risk exposure that may be excessive ( Cordella and Yeyati, 2003; Ellul and Yerramilli, 2013; Hellmann Name, 20 0 0; Keeley, 
1990; Park and Peristiani, 2007 ).  More precisely, shareholders want the CEO to take risks that are not detrimental to the 
corporation ( Stulz, 2015 ), while an exposure to tail risks signals that a bank can be subject to extremely negative events that 
might threaten its survival.  Furthermore, a growing exposure to tail risks can also affect the short-term value of the bank 
by leading to funding restrictions by creditors (especially if they are not protected by deposit insurance) and to increases in 
funding costs ( Flannery, 2001; Schaeck Name, 2011; Stulz, 2015 ).  
In addition, and differently from non-ﬁnancial ﬁrms, banks are subject to monitoring by regulators who are concerned 
with the effects of bank tail risks on ﬁnancial stability.  An increased regulatory scrutiny due to tail risks has the potential 
to negatively inﬂuence shareholder wealth in several ways.  Speciﬁcally, DeYoung Name (2001) show that supervisory inspections that convey bad news lead to an increase in the borrowing costs of large commercial banks, while Berger and Davies 
(1998) and Slovin Name (1999) ﬁnd that negative regulatory assessments are associated with a decline in stock prices.  Moreover, in the presence of an excessive risk exposure, regulators have the power to prohibit certain bank activities, to dismiss 
bank managers and even to close down the bank ( DeYoung Name, 2001 ; Schaeck Name, 2011 ).  
In summary, an increasing exposure to tail risks ampliﬁes bank distress costs and leads to the probability of losses in 
bank value caused by the monitoring role of bank creditors and regulators.  It follows that a board should consider ﬁring the 
CEO whenever a growing exposure to tail risks is associated with a lack of CEO ability or effort in terms of risk-management.  
2. 2.  Sources of tail risks and forced CEO turnovers 
In understanding the drivers of the decision to ﬁre a CEO, conventional theoretical models of non-ﬁnancial ﬁrms highlight the importance of distinguishing the sources of a ﬁrm’s risk exposure.  CEO choices are normally expected to inﬂuence the idiosyncratic component, but not the systematic component of risk.  Accordingly, any type of systematic risk 
(including tail risk) should be seen as a manifestation of an exogenous event and as such not relevant to the ﬁring decision.  This is highlighted by models of CEO turnover based on the relative performance evaluation framework ( Eisfeldt and 
Kuhnen, 2013; Jenter and Kannan, 2015; Kaplan and Minton, 2012 ).  Further, using a different theoretical setting, Bushman 
Name (2010) argue that, differently from idiosyncratic volatility, an increase in systematic volatility reduces the likelihood of 
a forced turnover as it makes it more problematic for boards to infer indications of CEO talent.  
There are, however, some speciﬁcities in the case of the tail risk of large banks that suggest some exposures to systematic 
sources of risk may be related to CEO choices.  For instance, the presence of implicit and explicit government guarantees
within the banking industry can induce bank CEOs to favor business policies that increase a bank’s exposure to systematic 
tail risks or generate systematic tail risks (see Farhi and Tirole, 2012; Pennacchi, 2006 ).  Speciﬁcally, Pennacchi (2006) argues 
that banks are inclined to favor lending and off-balance sheet activities with high exposure to systematic risks, as these 
business choices increase the value of their deposit insurance subsidy.  In addition, Bushman and Williams (2015) demonstrate that, via their loan loss recognition policy, bank managers generate tail risks that have negative implications for the 
whole banking industry.  Similarly, Acharya Name (2010) argue that the global ﬁnancial crisis of 20 07–20 09 is primarily the 
consequence of large and complex ﬁnancial institutions manufacturing systematic tail risks.  
Nevertheless, the fact that exposure to systematic tail risk may be related to managerial choices does not necessarily 
imply that this exposure should matter for bank CEO dismissal.  In fact, by increasing the exposure to systematic tail risks, a 
bank can increase the probability of receiving a government bailout that transfers the bank’s losses to taxpayers.  This is because these losses materialize in periods when other banks are also in trouble and regulators intend to preserve conﬁdence 
in the banking industry by avoiding bank failures ( Farhi and Tirole, 2012 ).  Furthermore, an increasing exposure to systematic 
tail risks increases the probability of delaying the closure of a bank in distress, as the distress typically occurs in periods 
when regulators aim to avoid panic (see e. g.  Acharya, 2009 ; Acharya and Yorulmazer, 2007 ; Bolton Name, 2015 ; Brown and 
Dinç, 2011 ).  It follows that an exposure to systematic tail risks may be perceived by bank boards as being less damaging 
and dangerous than an exposure to idiosyncratic tail risks.  
To summarize, the arguments indicating that bank boards should account for bank tail risk in the CEO ﬁring decision 
should be primarily valid for the idiosyncratic component of this risk.  Differently from systematic tail risk, idiosyncratic tail 
risk is not only more likely to be seen as a result of a lack of CEO ability or effort in managing risks but might also be seen 
as more likely to be detrimental for shareholders and the bank.  
<Middle> Data, econometric and variables. 
3. 1.  Data. 
The analysis is based on a sample of listed, large commercial banks and bank holding companies with accounting data 
available from BankScope by Bureau van Dijk and market data available from Datastream International.  We select the sampled banks from an initial list that included the top 500 listed large commercial banks and bank holding companies in terms 
of total assets at the end of 2004, as identiﬁed by BankScope.  Our sample period is from 2004 to 2013.  From this initial 
list we retain only banks for which we are able to collect governance data (including data on CEOs) from annual and governance reports.  We also search for governance information from various relevant databases, such as Bloomberg, Business 
Week, Forbes and S&P Capital IQ.  This reduces the sample size to approximately 300 banks.  
As explained in the next section, our empirical model employs lagged explanatory variables to estimate the likelihood of 
a CEO turnover.  Therefore, the ﬁrst CEO turnover event we record occurs in January 2005 and the last turnover occurs in 
December 2013.  This results in an initial sample of 342 turnover events.  We then exclude turnovers where a temporary CEO 
was appointed during a time of transition or turnovers that were associated with mergers occurring over the same period.  
Next, we classify the remaining turnovers as forced or voluntary by conducting a manual search of news articles that 
explain the reason for each outgoing CEO.  Our ﬁnal classiﬁcation follows Huson Name (2001) and Parrino (1997) .  
Furthermore, to minimize classiﬁcation errors, we conduct additional investigations to validate whether the turnover was voluntary; 
namely, explaining if it was motivated by retirement, resignation for personal reasons or to pursue a new business, or by 
the outgoing CEO taking up another post in the same ﬁrm or a new job elsewhere.  Finally, we remove turnovers where no 
reliable data could be found for the reason behind the CEO’s departure.  
After imposing the described selection criteria, our ﬁnal sample consists of accounting and market data for 1994 observations (261 unique banks chartered in 46 countries) from 2004 to 2012 and includes 74 forced turnovers and 198 
voluntary turnovers for the period 2005–2013.  Our sample size is similar to two recent cross-country studies that focus on 
the cross-sectional relationship between bank governance and performance during the global ﬁnancial crisis (see Beltratti 
and Stulz, 2012 ; Erkens Name, 2012 ).  The proportion of forced turnovers is in line with the ﬁgures reported by studies on 
non-ﬁnancial ﬁrms ( Bushman Name, 2010; Jenter and Kannan, 2015 ).  
Panel A of Table 1 reports the sample distribution by country.  As in previous cross-country studies ( Beltratti and Stulz, 
2012; Erkens Name, 2012 ), a large number of banks are concentrated in Japan and the US, representing 16. 75% and 16. 80% of 
the total number of observations, respectively.  For the remaining countries, the share in terms of total observations does not 
exceed 5%.  Panel B of Table 1 reports the distribution of turnovers by year and there is no obvious trend in CEO turnovers.  
3. 2.  Econometric method 
In our sample of CEO turnovers, there are two key CEO exit mechanisms: 1) forced 2) voluntary.  The two types of 
turnovers are mutually exclusive and compete with each other as potential exit mechanisms for managers in a given bank.  
Therefore, following Gregory-Smith Name (2009) and Hazarika Name (2012) and using the complete data about ﬁrms with no 
CEO turnover, forced turnovers and voluntary turnovers, we adopt a competing risks hazard model to account for the fact 
that forced turnovers are not the only exit mechanism for CEOs.  
The dependent variable of the model is CEO tenure (deﬁned as the number of years a CEO held his/her chief executive 
position) and all independent variables are lagged by one year to reduce simultaneity and endogeneity concerns.  Under this 
empirical setting, the impact of each determinant varies for different types of CEO turnover.  We describe the covariates used 
in our empirical analysis in the following sections.  
3. 3.  Measuring bank idiosyncratic and systematic tail risk 
Following Ellul and Yerramilli (2013) and Van Bekkum (2016) we use Expected Shortfall ( ES ) as our primary measure of a 
bank’s tail risk exposure.  ES quantiﬁes the downside of bank risk in the form of extreme negative stock returns.  
We estimate idiosyncratic and systematic ES using the historical approach based on realized returns.  The historical ap- proach relies on the assumption that the realized exposure to extreme risks offers valuable indications on the expected expo- sure to these risks.  In line with this view, Acharya Name (2017) show that measures of extreme bank risk computed before the crisis predicted stock performance during the global crisis.  ES is a common tool used in bank financial risk management ( Acharya Name, 2017; Yamai and Yoshiba, 2005 ) where the historical approach is widely applied.  For instance, Pérignon and Smith (2010) show that historical simulation is by far the most popular estimation method employed by large banks over the period 1996–2005 to quantify their exposure to extreme market risks.  More formally, for bank i, ES is (minus) the average daily return below the 5th percentile of the yearly distribution (see Ellul and Yerramilli, 2013 ; Van Bekkum, 2016 ) and can be expressed as this. 
where R i,t is the daily stock return for bank i at day t and R αi,t is a bank’s daily stock return equal to the αpercentile (equal to the 5 th percentile in our analysis) of the year t distribution.  Conventionally, as shown in (1) , to compute ES the average of the daily stock returns in the lower tail of the return distribution is multiplied by minus one such that higher values of ES indicate a higher bank exposure to extreme negative returns. 
However, as our predictions depend on the nature of a bank’s tail risk exposure, we need to estimate the idiosyncratic and systematic components of ES .  To this end, we start by extracting the idiosyncratic component of bank daily stock returns via the residuals of an augmented market model, where daily bank returns are regressed on market returns and industry returns (both based on domestic indexes provided by Datastream) as shown below,
where R i,t is the return for stock i at time t , R m,t is the daily return for the market index for each country, R b,t is the daily return for the banking industry index for each country. 
We then compute idiosyncratic (systematic) ES using the residuals (the predicted values) obtained from Eq. 