 Introduction This paper examines whether the quality of mergers and acquisitions (M&As) is higher when the acquiring firm and target firm share the same external auditor. 1 Our intuition is that the acquisition process often involves considerable uncertainty, including information asymmetry between bidders and targets regarding their operations, financial health, risk and prospects as well as uncertainty related to post-acquisition operational synergies.  This uncertainty can negatively impact M&A quality by reducing managers' ability to identify the most profitable investment projects (Goodman et al. , 2014).  We argue that when an acquirer and target share a common auditor, the auditor can help reduce uncertainty along several dimensions.  First, auditors accumulate a considerable amount of information about their clients through conducting their audit procedures and through informal discussions with top management, allowing them to be helpful as information intermediaries both before the M&A (e. g. , identifying potential merger counterparties and assisting with due diligence) and after the M&A (e. g. , integrating accounting systems and internal controls).  Second, since each audit firm has its own unique style of interpreting and implementing accounting rules (Kothari et al. , 2010), firms represented by a common auditor are likely to have more comparable financial statements (Francis et al. , 2014), which leads to a reduction in uncertainty (De Franco et al. , 2011).  That is, a merging firm can better understand the assumptions and choices underlying accounting numbers in financial statements from other firms that share the same auditor.  In turn, this leads to a better understanding (i. e. , reduced uncertainty) of those firms' economics, as compared to those of firms using different auditors.  Finally, common auditors may be more likely to limit misreporting that asymmetrically benefits one party over the other.  Prior research indicates that acquirers (Louis, 2004.  Gong et al. , 2008) and targets (Anilowski et al. , 2009) manage earnings before M&As.  Thus, auditors that audit both the acquirer and target face greater litigation risk, as the common auditor may be sued for earnings management undertaken by either party.  Moreover, common auditors likely face greater scrutiny by stakeholders, given the potential for conflicts of interest.  As Agrawal et al.  (2013) show, deals with common M&A advisors attract securities class action lawsuits with greater frequency than deals with separate advisors.  Thus, a common auditor has arguably higher incentives to limit misreporting ex ante, leading to reduced uncertainty regarding the accuracy of the reported numbers.  By reducing uncertainty during the M&A process, common auditors can help firms allocate capital more efficiently, resulting in higher quality acquisitions.  To test whether common auditors are associated with higher quality M&As, we use a sample of 1971 U. S.  acquisitions between 1988 and 2010, where both the acquirer and the target are public firms and the acquirer obtains complete control of the target after the acquisition.  To capture M&A quality, we use the acquisition announcement return following a large body of research (e. g. , Asquith et al. , 1983.  Bradley et al. , 1988.  Cai and Sevilir, 2012.  Agrawal et al. , 2013.  Goodman et al. ,We find that M&As involving firms with a common auditor are of higher quality than M&As involving firms with different auditors. 2 Further, we test and find that the common-auditor effect is stronger when there is greater preacquisition uncertainty, proxied by targets with higher growth, more volatility, greater research and development (R&D) intensity, and larger bid–ask spreads.  Our results are robust to the inclusion of numerous control variables for auditor, firm and deal characteristics, the merging firms' previous business relationships and geographical proximity, the existence of shared M&A advisors and/or directors, and additional testing to address endogeneity concerns related to auditor selection.  Collectively, these results are consistent with common auditors reducing uncertainty during the M&A process, which leads to higher quality M&As.  To get a sense of the economic magnitude of the common auditor effect, consider that the announcement period abnormal returns are 1. 064% points higher in common-auditor deals than those in non-common-auditor deals.  Given that the average market capitalization of an acquirer (target) in our sample is $8. 99 billion ($870 million), this difference in announcement returns translates into an increase in the combined firm's market capitalization of $104. 9 million. 3 We then examine the three mechanisms (discussed above) through which common auditors reduce M&A uncertainty.  (1) discussions with the M&A parties, (2) financial statement comparability, and (3) limited misreporting.  With respect to the first mechanism, we employ two different empirical approaches.  First, we show that the common-auditor effect is larger when the acquirer and target use the same local office of the common auditor, as the auditor can more easily facilitate discussions between these clients if they are all in the same location.  Second, we show that there is an increased probability of an M&A for firms with a common auditor, as the auditor can both better match clients interested in engaging in M&A deals and reduce uncertainties throughout the process that might otherwise derail the deal.  To explore the second mechanism, i. e. , financial statement comparability, we examine whether firms in common-auditor deals have more comparable financial statements than do firms in non-common-auditor deals.  Using differences in yearspecific total accruals (Francis et al. , 2014) and the covariance of earnings across time (Barth et al. , 2012.  De Franco et al. , 2011.  Lang et al. , 2010) as proxies for comparability, we find that acquirers and targets with common auditors have more comparable financial statements than do those with different auditors.  We also find less misreporting for common-auditor mergers, the third mechanism, using performance-matched abnormal accruals (Kothari et al. , 2005) and financial statement restatements (Bens et al. , 2012) as proxies for misreporting.  Combined, these results support our inferences that common auditors reduce uncertainty in the M&A process by improving (public and private) communication channels.  Finally, we examine whether the common-auditor effect is mitigated after the Sarbanes–Oxley Act (SOX).  Section 201 of SOX prohibits auditors from engaging in non-audit services, such as M&A advisory and consulting services.  To the extent auditors were engaged in non-audit services before SOX and common auditors used these services to help their clients engage in better acquisitions, the common-auditor effect should be mitigated post-SOX.  However, we find that the common-auditor effect remains after SOX.  This result suggests that the role of common auditors in reducing uncertainty is unlikely driven by non-audit function communications.  An important caveat to our findings is that, despite all our empirical analyses, discussions between auditors and their clients are unobservable.  Thus, we cannot directly speak to the amount or type of information provided by common auditors during M&As.  Given that American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) Rule 301 prohibits disclosure of confidential information without consent from the client, if auditor discussions do indeed contain relevant private information, it should be approved by the appropriate parties.  that said, we recognize that there is potential for conflicts of interest to arise.  We leave this for future research and regulators to determine. 4 Our study makes several important contributions.  First, we add to the literature that examines the role of auditors in M&As.  Prior studies generally examine the roles of acquirer auditors and target auditors separately.  For example, Louis (2005) studies the role of acquirer auditors in M&A transactions and finds higher acquisition announcement returns for nonBig 4 firms, while other studies find that targets with Big 4 auditors are more likely to get acquired (Xie et al. , 2013) and have greater acquisition synergy and higher acquirer announcement returns (Golubov et al. , 2012).  In this study, we consider both acquirer auditors and target auditors in examining how sharing an auditor influences acquisition performance, providing new insights into the role of auditors in M&As.  Second, our paper contributes to the emerging literature on the real effects of accounting and auditing.  In particular, prior research finds that accounting information facilitates more efficient corporate investment by reducing agency problems caused by information asymmetry (e. g. , Biddle et al. , 2009.  Biddle and Hilary, 2006), by providing peer firms with more information (e. g. , Badertscher et al. , 2013), and by providing information to managers within the firm (Shroff, 2014.  McNichols and Stubben, 2008).  In addition, Kausar et al.  (2014) show that firms' choice to obtain an audit helps lower information asymmetry and leads to more efficient investment.  We contribute to this line of research by showing that common auditors reduce uncertainty in the M&A process, and thus improve M&A quality.  Third, we contribute to the large literature examining the effect of sharing an agent on economic outcomes.  For example, the economics literature analyzes the use of a common agent as a way for competitors to achieve implicit collusion (e. g. , Bernheim and Whinston, 1985.  Gal-Or, 1985, 1986.  Vives, 1990).  In this setting, a common agent behaves passively and information transfers among competitors can be widely observed.  In contrast, Villas-Boas (1994) and Gardiner et al.  (2007) consider a setting where a common agent can act strategically, and examine conflicts that arise from sharing the same advertising agency and sharing the same real estate agent.  More closely related to our study, Agrawal et al.  (2013) examine the role of common investment bank advisors in M&As, and find that such deals are somewhat better for acquirers than they are for targets.  Similarly, Cai and Sevilir (2012) find that board connections favor the acquirer, but the manner of benefit is a function of the type of board connection.  We contribute to this literature by providing evidence on the impact of sharing an auditor on M&A outcomes as well as the mechanisms through which these outcomes manifest.  Finally, our study complements concurrent work by Dhaliwal et al.  (2015), who also examine the role of common auditors in M&A transactions.  Our study delves into the mechanisms through which common auditors affect M&A outcomes.  We find evidence consistent with the common auditor resolving information uncertainty between the parties in the transaction.  Dhaliwal et al.  (2015) examine whether one party reaps greater benefits from the deals and find evidence consistent with the acquirer capturing the benefits, as indicated by higher acquirer event returns.  In addition, Dhaliwal et al. 's study suggests that target firm shareholders may be worse off because target event returns and deal premiums are lower.  While Dhaliwal et al. 's wealth transfer result is certainly interesting, we find that the overall combined announcement return is positive.  We caution, however, that the studies use somewhat different samples and tests, and thus the results cannot be fully interpreted together.  We leave it to future research to further examine the various aspects and consequences of a common auditor in M&A transactions.  The rest of this paper is organized as follows.  In Section 2, we discuss the M&A process as well as how a common auditor can help reduce uncertainties in that process.  Section 3 describes the sample selection process, and Section 4 details the research design and empirical results.  We present additional analyses in Section 5 and conclude in Section 6.  2.  Motivation Mergers and acquisitions represent significant corporate events that involve a thorough and dynamic process that can vary from several months to several years to complete.  In general, the M&A process starts with the identification of potential target candidates, which is a function of the firm's strategic objectives and requires some preliminary screening of the candidates.  After a candidate is chosen, the firm engages in a lengthy due diligence process, which includes developing an extensive understanding of the target value as a stand-alone business as well as the value of potential synergies (Copeland et al. , 2000).  As GE Capital (2012) indicates, “Due diligence is not a courtship, a negotiation, or an inquisition.  it's a fact-finding mission…[y]our business review of the target becomes a true audit, aimed at gaining a thorough understanding of the target's operations, assets, liabilities, and outlook.  Your due diligence team will be looking to confirm the target's representations, validate its valuation, probe any legal, regulatory and compliance concerns, and affirm expected synergies and integration plans. ” After obtaining considerable information through the due diligence phase, negotiations begin between the acquirer and target regarding the acquisition price, the deal structure, etc.  When the negotiations are done and the deal is complete, the firms enter the final phase—the integration of the two firms.  There are numerous factors for the acquiring firm to consider during the integration phase, such as the development and articulation of the vision for the new entity to employees and other stakeholders, legal and tax issues, human resource issues (e. g. , employee retention/severance), and fixed asset allocations.  Further, underlying all of these factors is the integration of the accounting information systems to capture these economic changes.  As becomes apparent through the above discussion of the M&A process, each phase contains significant uncertainty.  From identifying merger partners to conducting due diligence to valuing and negotiating the deal to post-M&A integration, managers face uncertainty throughout the process and its negative impact on firm value.  In particular, extant research indicates that uncertainty negatively affects acquirer announcement returns and post-acquisition performance (McNichols and Stubben, 2015.  Erickson et al. , 2012) and that having more firm-specific target information helps improve acquirer returns and the expected value of combined firms (Martin and Shalev, 2009).  Given that M&As are typically large and important corporate transactions, managerial incentives are strong to combat adverse selection inherent in the identification and valuation of potential deals.  As a result, firms often turn to investment bankers to serve as advisors during the M&A process.  Consistent with uncertainty driving firms' decisions to retain M&A advisors, Servaes and Zenner (1996) find that acquirers hire advisors when the deals are more complex and when the acquirer lacks prior acquisition experience.  Investment banks can help match acquirers with targets, advise acquirers on target valuation, and/or counsel firms in negotiating the deal price and structure (Goodman et al. , 2014).  While firms hire investment banks to reduce uncertainty in an attempt to make better investment decisions, we argue that auditors can also serve to reduce uncertainty in the M&A process, even though they are not explicitly retained by firms to do so.  In particular, auditors that audit both the acquirer and target (i. e. , common auditors) can reduce M&A uncertainty through several channels.  The first, and arguably most important, channel is the direct communication of information between the common auditor and the acquirers and targets, which can happen throughout the M&A process.  As indicated to us in a private conversation with a Big 4 accounting partner, auditors often introduce their clients as potential acquisition partners.  Thus, the auditor can facilitate discussions at the initial stage of the M&A process.  Auditors can also provide considerable value during the due diligence phase, which includes assessing the target firm's financial health, risks, prospects, etc.  After all, many of these assessments (or similar assessments) are made by the auditor during an audit, so they can assist by providing both structure to the due diligence processes/analyses and insights into the target based on their extensive knowledge of the firm.  In fact, further discussion with the Big 4 partner revealed that, with the consent of clients, audit team members of the acquirer and the target often exchange information. 5 These discussions can be very useful in appropriately valuing firms, and thus in negotiating the deal.  The transfer of information between common-auditor clients continues even after the M&A as well.  For example, common auditors can help integrate accounting information systems and internal control systems following deal completion, which is a nontrivial task that is vital to the success of the M&A.  Since common auditors are familiar with these systems for both the acquiring firm and the target firm, they can more efficiently amalgamate the systems to better capture the firm's economics.  Erickson et al.  (2012) report increases in uncertainty after M&As, which contributes to acquirers' post-acquisition wealth losses.  Common auditors can help reduce this uncertainty by assisting with the integration of the accounting information systems to better capture the underlying economics of the firm.  The second channel through which common auditors can reduce uncertainty is via financial statement comparability.  Kothari et al.  (2010) argue that each accounting firm has its own unique set of internal working rules that guide and standardize the audit firm's application of accounting and auditing standards. 6 Francis et al.  (2014) argue that because these systematic differences exist across audit firms, financial statements are more similar for firms with a common auditor than they are for firms with different auditors.  In addition, clients often seek guidance from their auditors when preparing financial reports, which further contributes to increased comparability of financial statements across firms with a common auditor. 7 Consistent with common auditors influencing comparability between firms' financial statements, Francis et al.  (2014) provide evidence that firms audited by the same auditor have more comparable earnings than firms audited by different auditors.  By enhancing financial statement comparability, common auditors indirectly provide their clients information that other (non-client) firms may not be able to efficiently obtain.  In particular, a client firm can better understand the assumptions and accounting choices underlying the financial statement numbers of other client firms.  In turn, this knowledge leads to a reduction in uncertainty regarding those firms' economics.  The third channel through which common auditors can reduce M&A uncertainty is by limiting financial statement misreporting.  Erickson and Wang (1999) find that acquirers boost earnings prior to stock-for-stock acquisitions in an effort to increase their stock price and reduce the number of shares issued in exchange.  Louis (2004) and Gong et al.  (2008) confirm these findings and show that the long-term post-acquisition underperformance of stock-for-stock acquirers and post-acquisition lawsuits can be attributed to pre-acquisition abnormal accruals.  Anilowski et al.  (2009) find that targets also engage in earnings management and sell via auctions to avoid the risk of detection.  The authors also find that such deals result in higher wealth gains to target shareholders.  Given the incentives for both acquirers and targets to manage earnings before M&As, auditors that audit both the acquirer and target face greater litigation risk, as the common auditor may be sued for earnings management undertaken by either party.  Moreover, common auditors likely face greater scrutiny by stakeholders, given their role as a common agent with the opportunity for conflicts of interest.  As Agrawal et al.  (2013) document, deals with common M&A advisors attract securities class action lawsuits with greater frequency than deals with separate advisors.  To the extent common auditors face greater litigation (and potentially reputational) risk, they have greater incentives to limit misreporting that asymmetrically benefits one party over the other, resulting in more transparent financial information and reduced uncertainty.  Collectively, common auditors can help reduce uncertainty throughout the various stages of the M&A process both directly through private communications with the acquirer and target and indirectly through more comparable and more transparent public financial reports.  This reduction in uncertainty regarding the firms' underlying economics facilitates better matching and integration of acquirers with targets, which leads to higher quality investment decisions.  <Middle> Sample selection.  To conduct our analyses, we obtain a sample of acquisitions from the Thomson Reuters Securities Data Company (SDC) U. S.  Mergers and Acquisitions database.  We identify all completed domestic mergers and acquisitions of public acquirers and public targets with announcement dates between 1988 and 2010.  We start our sample period in 1988 because we obtain auditor information from Compustat, and its auditor coverage prior to 1988 is limited to Big 8 auditors.  We exclude small transactions in which the deal value is less than $1 million and/or less than 1% of the acquirer's market capitalization prior to the announcement date.  We also require the acquirer to control less than 50% of the target before the announcement and own 100% after the deal completion to ensure a complete change in control. 8 We further limit our sample to deals in which both the acquirer and the target have daily stock return data from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) and the annual accounting data and auditor information from Compustat for at least one year prior to the deal announcement.  Applying these filters leaves a final sample of 1971 acquisitions, where 547 (1424) acquisitions are classified as common-auditor (non-common-auditor) deals.  Table 1, Panel A presents the distribution of our sample by deal announcement year.  Consistent with the M&A literature, the number of acquisitions drops in the early 2000s from its highest level in the late 1990s.  We also observe a significant slowdown following the 2007–2008 financial crisis.  The patterns of common-auditor deals and non-common-auditor deals across years follow trends similar to that of the overall sample.  Table 1, Panel B shows the industry composition for the acquiring firms in our sample using the Fama and French 48 industry classification (Fama and French, 1997).  Business services, computers, and pharmaceutical products are the most active industries in our sample in terms of the number of acquisitions.  We observe a similar pattern in common-auditor deals and non-common-auditor deals.  Given the variations in merger activity both across time and across industry, as observed in Table 1, we include both year and industry fixed effects in our multivariate analyses.  4.  Research design and empirical results In this section, we discuss our research design and empirical results related to our three main analyses.  First, we examine the relation between common auditors and M&A quality.  Second, we test whether the relation between common auditors and M&A quality is stronger when there is greater pre-M&A uncertainty.  Finally, we analyze the three mechanisms through which common auditors reduce uncertainty in the M&A process, namely via (i) private discussions with the acquirer and target, (ii) enhanced financial statement comparability, and (iii) limited misreporting.  4. 1.  Common auditors and M&A quality 4. 1. 1.  M&A quality measure As discussed earlier, we predict that M&As with a common auditor are of higher quality because common auditors are able to reduce uncertainty throughout the M&A process, which allows the parties to better identify profitable investment opportunities.  We use the acquisition announcement return as our proxy for M&A quality following a large body of research (e. g. , Asquith et al. , 1983.  Bradley et al. , 1988.  Kale et al. , 2003.  Cai and Sevilir, 2012.  Agrawal et al. , 2013.  Goodman et al. , 2014).  In particular, following Bradley et al.  (1988), Kale et al.  (2003) and Cai and Sevilir (2012), we measure portfolio cumulative abnormal returns of the combined portfolio of the acquirer and the target around the acquisition announcement, ANN_CAR.  We obtain the announcement dates from the SDC U. S.  Mergers and Acquisitions database and estimate portfolio abnormal returns using the standard event study method developed by Brown and Warner (1985).  We use the CRSP value-weighted return as the market return and estimate the market model parameters over the 200 trading days ending two months before the merger announcement. 9 For each acquisition, we form a value-weighted portfolio of the acquirer and the target, with the weights based on their market capitalization at two months prior to the acquisition announcement date.  To avoid double counting the acquirer's existing ownership in the target, we subtract the market value of the target equity held by the acquirer from the target's market capitalization.  We then calculate the three-day ANN_CARs over the event window ( 1,þ1), where event day 0 is the acquisition announcement date.  4. 1. 2.  Empirical design – common auditors and M&A quality To test whether acquisitions are of higher quality in common-auditor deals than in non-common-auditor deals, we estimate the following ordinary least squares (OLS) regression model, where the dependent variable, ANN_CAR, is defined above.  Our main variable of interest, Common auditor, is an indicator variable that equals one if the acquirer and the target share a common auditor and zero otherwise.  We include calendar year fixed effects and Fama and French 48 industry fixed effects, and the t-statistics are based on standard errors clustered by acquirer.  Controls represents numerous control variables for auditor, firm, and deal characteristics shown by prior research to impact M&A quality, where all of the control variables are defined in Appendix A.  Specifically, with respect to auditor characteristics, we control for whether the acquirer and/or target have a Big 4 auditor, Big 4 Auditor, as Louis (2004) finds that acquirers audited by non-Big 4 firms outperform those audited by Big 4 firms, and Xie et al.  (2013) and Golubov et al.  (2012) show that target auditor size is associated with various deal outcomes. 10 We also control for the industry dominance of auditors, Auditor industry dominance, as auditors with more industry expertise may lead to better acquisition outcomes (Craswell et al. , 1995.  Hogan and Jeter, 1999.  Solomon et al. , 1999.  Owhoso et al. , 2002).  With respect to firm characteristics, we control for Size, Operating cash flows and Tobin's Q to capture a firm's growth opportunities and financing availability (Moeller et al. , 2004.  Dong et al. , 2006).  We also include Leverage to control for creditor monitoring (Maloney et al. , 1993.  Masulis et al. , 2007) and Pre-announcement stock price run-up (Rosen, 2006) for both the acquirer and target.  Finally, we include several commonly used deal characteristic control variables, i. e. , Relative deal size (Asquith et al. , 1983), Percentage of stock financing (Travlos, 1987.  Moeller et al. , 2004), Tender offer indicator, Hostile bid indicator (Schwert, 2000), Multiple bidders indicator (Mitchell et al. , 2004), and High-tech firms indicator (Masulis et al. , 2007).  In addition to the auditor, firm and deal characteristic controls, we control for several additional variables.  In particular, Morck et al.  (1990) show that when the acquirer and target are similar, the acquisition has greater announcement returns.  If firms with greater similarity tend to hire the same accounting firm as well, firm similarity could be a correlated omitted variable.  Accordingly, we control for whether the deal is a diversifying acquisition, Diversifying acquisition, as well as the daily stock return correlation between the acquirer and the target prior to the acquisition announcement, Corr(stock return), following Fama and French (1992). 11 We also include several controls for M&As where the acquirer and target may already have considerable knowledge of one another.  In particular, we control for whether the acquirer and target have had a previous business relationship (i. e. , strategic alliance or joint venture) in the three years before the acquisition, Previous business relation, as Higgins and Rodriguez (2006) find that acquisitions generate better announcement returns if they are preceded by strategic alliance activity between the acquirer and the target.  In a similar vein, we also control for the acquirer's equity ownership percentage in the target before the deal announcement, Toehold. 12 Finally, we control for whether the acquirer's headquarters are in close geographic proximity to the headquarters of the target, Local deal, as Uysal et al.  (2008) find that acquirer announcement returns in local deals are higher than those in nonlocal deals. 13 4. 1. 3.  Descriptive statistics Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for our M&A quality measure, ANN_CAR, in Panel A as well as our control variables in Panel B.  As indicated in Panel A, the mean and median three-day ANN_CARs for the full sample are 1. 91% and 1. 22%, respectively, and both are statistically significant at the 1% level.  These positive portfolio returns are consistent with prior research (e. g. , Andrade et al. , 2001.  Wang and Xie, 2009).  Columns 2 and 3 present the subsample statistics where we split the full sample into common-auditor deals and non-common-auditor deals.  As shown, the mean (median) difference in three-day ANN_CAR between common-auditor deals and non-common-auditor deals is 1. 06% (0. 30%), which is statistically significantly at the 1% (5%) level.  To ensure that these results are not sensitive to the length of the return window, we also examine five-day and seven-day announcement windows and continue to find significantly higher ANN_CARs in commonauditor deals than in non-common-auditor deals.  For our main analyses, we report the results using the three-day ANN_CAR for brevity.  As shown in Panel B of Table 2, the majority of acquirers (97%) and targets (94%) in our sample have Big 4 auditors.  Moreover, common-auditor deals are more likely than non-common-auditor deals to involve Big 4 auditors for both the acquirer and the target.  Target firms' auditors in common-auditor deals have more industry expertise, as they are more likely to be the dominant auditor in the two-digit standard industrial classification (SIC) industry.  We also find that target firms are associated with lower Operating cash flows in common-auditor deals and that such acquisitions are less likely to be hostile takeovers and less likely to have competing bidders.  In addition, acquirer and target returns are more highly correlated, acquirers own more of the targets' stock prior to the acquisitions, and acquirer and target headquarters are more likely to be located in the same geographical area in common-auditor deals than in non-common-auditor deals.  We control for these auditor, firm, and deal characteristics in our analyses.  4. 1. 4.  Multivariate analysis – common auditors and M&A quality Table 3 presents the results from estimating Eq.  (1) using OLS.  In Column 1, we do not include any control variables and find that common auditors have a positive and significant effect on ANN_CAR.  In Column 2, we include auditor, firm, and deal characteristic control variables as well as controls for firm similarity, previous business relations, and geographic proximity.  Our baseline finding continues to hold with these control variables.  the coefficient estimate for Common auditor is 1. 064 and statistically significant at the 1% level, suggesting that M&As involving firms with a common auditor are of higher quality.  The coefficients for the control variables are also consistent with findings in the literature.  For example, we observe a negative correlation between acquirer size and announcement returns (Kimbrough and Louis, 2011.  Golubov et al. , 2012), acquisitions with greater relative deal size have higher announcement returns (Louis and Sun, 2010), highly stock-financed deals are associated with lower announcement returns (Louis, 2005), announcement returns are higher in tender offers (Golubov et al. , 2012.  Cai and Sevilir, 2012), and deals in which the acquirer and the target are in different industries are associated with lower announcement returns (Morck et al. , 1990).  4. 2.  Common-auditor effect and uncertainty We next examine the impact of common auditors on M&A quality conditioned on the amount of pre-M&A uncertainty.  If common auditors are associated with higher quality M&As because they reduce uncertainty in the M&A process, then we should observe a larger common-auditor effect when there is a greater degree of uncertainty before the M&A.  To test this prediction, we adjust Eq.  (1) to include a proxy of uncertainty and interact it with the common-auditor indicator, as shown below, where ANN_CAR and Common auditor are defined previously.  We predict that β3 is positive, as this indicates that the common-auditor effect is larger when there is greater pre-M&A uncertainty.  We focus on the acquirer's uncertainty regarding the target (rather than vice versa), because while the target faces some uncertainty regarding its asking price and the associated contract terms, the acquirer faces significant uncertainty regarding the target valuation in addition to determining its bid price and associated contract terms.  Moreover, while the target no longer exists after the merger, the acquirer still faces considerable post-acquisition uncertainty associated with synergistic incorporation of the target (as outlined in Section 2).  Thus, common auditors can be much more helpful for acquirers than they can for targets in reducing uncertainty.  Accordingly, we focus on uncertainty regarding the target.  Our first proxy for uncertainty is based on the target firm's sales growth.  Smith and Watts (1992) argue that high growth firms are associated with a higher degree of information asymmetry.  Thus we expect uncertainty regarding the target to be more severe, and thus the common-auditor effect on acquisition quality to be more pronounced, when the target is growing at a more rapid pace.  We define Target sales growth as the percentage change in the target's sales from the previous year.  Our second proxy for uncertainty is the stock return volatility of the target firm.  Estimating the true underlying value of target firms that have higher stock return volatilities is more difficult (Officer et al. , 2009.  McNichols and Stubben, 2015), and common auditors could play a more important role in such deals.  We define Target stock return volatility as the daily stock return volatility of the target over the one-year period ending two months prior to the deal announcement.  Our third measure of uncertainty is based on the target firm's R&D intensity (Aboody and Lev, 2000.  Huddart and Ke, 2010.  Chen et al. , 2010).  Aboody and Lev (2000) argue that interpreting financial information is difficult for firms with high R&D intensity because (i) R&D investments are more unique than investments in tangible assets, (ii) no liquid market exists for R&D investments, and (iii) the information necessary to determine the value of assets that emerge from R&D investments is harder to obtain.  We define Target R&D intensity as the ratio of current year R&D expenditure to sales in the year prior to the deal announcement.  Our fourth measure of uncertainty is the bid–ask spread of the target firm.  The bid–ask spread is a proxy for the degree of information asymmetry because it represents one way that market makers protect themselves from expected losses in trading with more informed traders (Leuz and Verrecchia, 2000).  Following LaFond and Watts (2008) and Khan and Watts (2009), we obtain daily bid–ask spread from CRSP and scale it by the midpoint of the spread.  We define Target bid–ask spread as the average of the daily spreads of the target firm over the one-year period ending two months prior to the deal announcement. 14 Table 4 presents the results from estimating Eq.  (2), where the results are based on using Target sales growth, Target stock return volatility, Target R&D intensity, and Target bid–ask spread as proxies for uncertainty in Column 1, 2, 3 and 4, respectively.  In particular, the coefficient estimate for the interaction of Common auditor and the uncertainty proxies (i. e, β3) is positive and statistically significant at the 5% level or better across all four specifications.  The evidence in Table 4 suggests that common auditors have a greater impact on M&A quality when there is more uncertainty before the acquisition. 15 4. 3.  Mechanisms of reductions in uncertainty Next, we examine the three main channels through which common auditors reduce uncertainty in the M&A process.  (i) discussions with the acquirer and target regarding the M&A, (ii) enhanced financial statement comparability, and (iii) increased reporting transparency.  4. 3. 1.  Primary information channel – discussions regarding M&A The primary channel through which common auditors can reduce M&A uncertainty is via direct discussions with the acquirer and target.  As discussed in Section 2, common auditors can help reduce uncertainty throughout the M&A process, from assistance in the identification and matching of potential M&A targets to help during the due diligence phase with valuing the target to post-acquisition integration of information systems.  Unfortunately, these discussions are not observable.  as such, we employ two different empirical approaches.  First, we examine whether the common-auditor effect is larger when the acquirer and target use the same local office of the common auditor.  The intuition is that the auditor can more easily facilitate discussions between clients if they are in the same location as both the acquirer and the target.  Second, we examine whether there is an increased probability of an M&A for firms with a common auditor.  Since an auditor is much more knowledgeable about its own clients, it can not only better match clients interested in engaging in M&A transactions, but also reduce uncertainties throughout the process that might otherwise derail the M&A.  Accordingly, we predict that if common auditors help facilitate information flow via discussions with their clients, there should be a higher probability of an M&A with other firms that share the same auditor.  To conduct our first analysis (i. e. , same-office test), we collect auditor office location data from Audit Analytics, which provides audit office location data starting in 2002.  For deals announced before 2002 and/or with missing auditor office data in Audit Analytics, we manually collect the data from the audit report in Form 10-K filings.  Because Form 10-K filings are unavailable in the SEC EDGAR system before 1996, our sample is reduced to 1591 observations.  Of the 1591 observations, 459 deals (28. 8%) involve a common auditor, and 120 deals (7. 5%) consist of a common auditor in the same local office.  Using these data, we adapt Eq.  (1) by splitting Common auditor into two measures, Same-office common auditor and Different-office common auditor, where Same-office common auditor is an indicator equal to one if the acquirer and the target share a common auditor from the same local office and zero otherwise, and Different-office common auditor is an indicator equal to one if the acquirer and the target share a common auditor from different local offices and zero otherwise.  We report the results on same-office common auditors in Table 5.  Column 1 reports the results from estimating Eq.  (1) using the reduced sample.  We find that common auditors are associated with significantly higher combined announcement returns, consistent with the results in Table 3.  In Column 2, we report the results from estimating Eq.  (1), where we split Common auditor into the two measures.  Same-office common auditor and Different-office common auditor.  While the coefficients on both variables are significantly positive, the coefficient on Same-office common auditor is greater than the coefficient on Different-office common auditor, and this difference is statistically significant at the 10% level.  This result suggests that while common auditors can enhance M&A quality, they are more effective at doing so when the acquirer and target are audited by the same local audit office.  To conduct our second analysis (i. e. , common-auditor M&A likelihood test), we follow a method similar to that in Bodnaruk et al.  (2009) in examining the probability of two firms engaging in M&A activities.  Specifically, for each actual acquirer, we define the set of all potential acquirers as those covered by Compustat in the same three-digit SIC industry and of a similar size (within a 20% band of market capitalization). 16 We perform the same procedure for each actual target firm and find its corresponding set of potential target firms.  We then identify whether a common auditor exists between each potential acquirer and each potential target, and we create an indicator variable, Common auditor, that equals one if the potential acquirer and the potential target in a given deal share the same auditor at the time of the deal announcement and zero otherwise.  We then estimate a probit model in which the dependent variable is an indicator variable that equals one if an acquisition takes place between the potential acquirer and the potential target and zero otherwise.  Table 6 reports the marginal effects from estimating the probit regression.  Column 1 includes only the year and industry fixed effects.  In Column 2, we follow Bodnaruk et al.  (2009) and include a number of control variables, including firm size, Tobin's Q, leverage ratio, ROA, sales growth, stock return, stock return volatility, and industry Herfindahl index of the potential merging firms.  In both models, we find that sharing a common auditor significantly increases the likelihood of an acquisition.  After controlling for other determinants of acquisition likelihood, sharing a common auditor increases the likelihood of an M&A between clients by 0. 2% points, which is sizable given that the sample mean of the probability of an M&A is 0. 7%.  4. 3. 2.  Secondary information channel – financial statement comparability The second channel through which common auditors can reduce M&A uncertainty is via enhanced financial statement comparability.  As discussed above, because each audit firm has a unique style of interpreting and implementing accounting rules (Francis et al. , 2014.  Blacconiere et al. , 2011), firms can better understand the assumptions and choices underlying accounting numbers in financial statements from firms that share the same auditor.  In turn, this leads to a better understanding of those firms' economics, relative to that of firms using different auditors.  To determine whether common-auditor firms engaged in an M&A have greater financial statement comparability, we conduct two analyses.  First, we use the difference in the firms' year-specific total accruals as a proxy for comparability following Francis et al.  (2014).  In particular, we calculate the absolute value of the difference in total accruals between the acquirer and the target in the year prior to acquisition announcement (Diff_Total_Accruals), where total accruals are calculated as the difference between income before extraordinary items and cash flows from operations, scaled by beginning of year total assets. 17 We then regress Diff_Total_Accruals on Common auditor and several control variables.  Specifically, following Francis et al.  (2014), we control for the minimum values and differences in size, leverage, market-to-book, cash flow from operations, losses, standard deviation of sales, standard deviation of cash flow from operations, and standard deviation of sales growth.  We also exclude financial institutions because characteristics of accruals differ in these firms (Louis, 2004).  Eliminating observations with data restrictions and financial institutions reduces our sample size to 1679 observations.  Second, as an alternate proxy for financial statement comparability, we use the firms' covariance of earnings across time (Barth et al. , 2012.  De Franco et al. , 2011.  Lang et al. , 2010).  Specifically, we estimate the earnings co-movement between the acquirer and the target in the 16 quarters prior to acquisition announcement (ECOMP_COV), where we measure the level of covariance as the adjusted R2 from the regression of the acquirer's income before extraordinary items scaled by total assets on the target's income before extraordinary items scaled by total assets.  We then regress ECOMP_COV on Common auditor and several control variables.  In particular, we include the same control variables used in the total accruals analysis, plus we control for cash flow comovement and return comovement across 16 consecutive quarters (Francis et al. , 2014).  We require at least 10 quarters of data available for both the acquirer and the target in estimating earnings comovement.  These data restrictions reduce the sample size to 1513 observations. 18 Table 7 reports the results from the estimation of the comparability tests.  In particular, Column 1 (2) shows the results from our comparability analysis using differences in total accruals (earnings comovement) as our proxy for financial statement comparability.  As indicated in both columns, the coefficient estimate for Common auditor is statistically significant in the predicted directions.  Specifically, in column 1, the coefficient for Common auditor ( 0. 020) is negative and significant at the 5% level, suggesting that there are smaller differences in total accruals between acquirers and targets in common-auditor M&As, as compared to those in non-common-auditor M&As.  In column 2, the coefficient for Common auditor (0. 026) is positive and significant at the 10% level, indicating greater earnings comovement for acquirers and targets in common-auditor M&As relative to those in non-commonauditor M&As.  Combined, the results in Table 7 provide support for the notion that the financial statements of acquirers and targets are more comparable in common-auditor M&As than they are in non-common-auditor M&As.  4. 3. 3.  Secondary information channel – limited misreporting The third channel through which common auditors can reduce M&A uncertainty is by limiting misreporting and/or increasing the confidence of the acquirer (target) that the target's (acquirer's) financial statements are accurate.  As discussed above, both acquirers and targets have incentives to manage earnings.  Thus, auditors that audit both the acquirer and the target face greater litigation risk as well as greater scrutiny by stakeholders, given their role as a common agent with the opportunity for conflicts of interest.  To the extent common auditors face greater litigation (and potentially reputational) risk, they have greater incentives to limit misreporting that asymmetrically benefits one party over the other, resulting in more transparent financial information and reduced uncertainty.  To determine whether there is less misreporting for common-auditor M&As relative to non-common-auditor M&As, we use performance-matched abnormal accruals (Kothari et al. , 2005) and financial statement restatements (Bens et al. , 2012) as proxies for misreporting.  For the accrual analysis, we examine both acquirer and target accruals.  however, for the restatement analysis, we examine restatements made by the newly merged firm.  Since our sample of acquisitions consists of acquirers obtaining 100% ownership, the new company is a combination of the acquirer and target.  As such, when a restatement is announced, we cannot identify whether it was the acquirer or the target that initiated the earnings management.  That is, the restatements are announced for the new company rather than the acquirer or target separately, as consolidated statements are presented for those earlier (pre-M&A) years.  For our first misreporting analysis, we estimate quarterly unexpected accruals in the spirit of Erickson and Wang (1999).  Following Louis (2004) and Gong et al.  (2008), we focus on current accruals because long-term accruals are less susceptible to manipulation in the short run (Healy, 1985).  Following the suggestion of Kothari et al.  (2005), we control for firm performance by matching on contemporaneous ROA (calculated as income before extraordinary items scaled by lagged total assets). 19 Specifically, quarterly unexpected accruals are the residuals from the estimation of the following model, where CACCit represents current accruals for firm i in quarter t, ATit 1 is total assets for firm i in quarter t 1, ΔREVit is the change in revenue for firm i in quarter t, and Q1 (Q2, Q3, Q4) is an indicator that equals one for the first (second, third, fourth) fiscal quarter and zero otherwise.  All indicator variables are deflated by lagged total assets.  We estimate the model for each two-digit SIC industry.  We follow Erickson and Wang (1999) and focus on three quarters, q 2, q 1, and q0, where q0 is the last quarter for which earnings are announced prior to the acquisition announcement.  Unexpected accruals (UA), our proxy for earnings management, is the sum of q 2, q 1, and q0 unexpected accruals minus unexpected accruals of the industryand-performance-matched firm. 20 Table 8 provides the results from regressing UA on the Common auditor indicator.  We report the acquirers' UA in Columns 1 and 2 and targets' UA in Columns 3 and 4.  We include only year and industry fixed effects in Columns 1 and 3, and we include the full set of control variables (as in Eq.  (1)) in Columns 2 and 4.  The number of observations for this analysis is smaller (i. e. , 1526 and 1508 observations in the acquirer and target analyses, respectively) than that used in our main analyses because we exclude financial firms for this analysis and unexpected accruals are not estimable for some observations due to data restrictions.  The coefficient estimates for Common auditor are negative and statistically significant in Columns 1 and 2, supporting our conjecture that acquirers engage in less earnings management prior to the acquisition when they share a common auditor with the target.  While the coefficient estimates for Common auditor are negative also in Columns 3 and 4, they are statistically insignificant. 21 Erickson and Wang (1999) show that acquiring firms manage earnings upward in the three quarters prior to the merger, but they do not find evidence of earnings management in target firms, potentially because many target firms often have little time to respond to M&A offers.  Thus, our weaker findings for the disciplining effect of common auditors on misreporting by targets may be a function of lower power.  For our second misreporting analysis, we examine whether the merging firms are less likely to restate earnings if the acquirer and the target share a common auditor.  We focus on restatements filed by the newly merged firm for misreporting made within two years before the merger completion.  This two-year window generally covers the fiscal year prior to the merger announcement as well as the fiscal year between the merger announcement and the deal completion, as more than 90% of the acquisitions in our sample complete the deal within one year from the merger announcement.  We collect earnings restatements from Audit Analytics.  Scholz (2008) argues that Audit Analytics is a more expansive database than other restatement data sources, as the Audit Analytics software extracts information from all EDGAR filings, which leads to a more efficient identification of restatements filed without being announced in a press release or a Form 8K.  Audit Analytics includes only restatements that correct misstated financial statements and exclude other financial statement changes.  Following Bens et al.  (2012), we eliminate all clerical application errors and include only accounting rule application failures and financial fraud to ensure that our sample includes material GAAP misapplications and not unintentional reporting errors.  We use information about the beginning date of the misstatement period to identify earnings misstatements within a two-year window before the merger completion.  Columns 5 and 6 of Table 8 present the marginal effects from the probit regression of Restatement on Common auditor without and with control variables, respectively, where Restatement is an indicator that equals one if the beginning date of the misstatement period falls within a two-year window before the merger completion and zero otherwise.  The number of observations for this analysis drops to 1356 because the coverage of restatements in Audit Analytics starts in 1996 and we use a two-year window to identify misreporting before the deal completion.  As indicated in Column 5 (6), a common auditor M&A is associated with a 3. 4% (3. 1%) point reduction in the likelihood of earnings restatements, as compared to a non-common-auditor M&A, and this marginal effect is statistically significant at the 5% (10%) level.  Given that the sample mean of the restatement probability is 8. 04%, the effect of common auditors in reducing the restatement probability is economically meaningful.  Combined, the results in Tables 5–8 support our inferences that common auditors reduce uncertainty in the M&A process by improving (public and private) communication channels.  5.  Additional analyses 5. 1.  Strategic selection of auditor One potential concern with our finding is the endogenous choice of auditors by the acquirer and the target.  In particular, either party may strategically hire a common auditor prior to the acquisition announcement to influence deal outcomes or for other reasons that lead to better M&A outcomes.  To address this potential issue, we examine the tenure of the auditor.  Our intuition is that for auditor selection to be a concern, there must be a change in auditor shortly before the acquisition.  That is, it is highly unlikely that firms switch auditors many years before an intended M&A to obtain the benefits of having a common auditor.  We find that acquirer (target) auditors have an average tenure of 10. 06 (7. 23) years in common-auditor deals and 9. 79 (7. 46) years in non-common-auditor deals.  Further, the acquirer (target) auditor's tenure is less than three years in 15. 2% (18. 3%) of the common-auditor sample, and in 16. 5% (19. 0%) of the non-common-auditor sample.  Hence, merging firms do not appear to strategically select auditors for M&As.  Nonetheless, we address the concern of strategic auditor selection using two additional tests.  First, we create indicator variables that equal one if the acquirer's or target's auditor has a tenure less than three years and zero otherwise, and then include interaction terms of Common auditor and these two indicator variables.  If firms are being strategic in the appointment of common auditors, we should expect the common-auditor effect on M&A outcomes to be more pronounced for shorter-tenured auditors.  In untabulated results neither of the interaction terms is significant, and the coefficient of Common auditor continues to be positive and statistically significant at the 1% level.  Second, we rerun our analysis on a subsample of acquisitions in which both the acquirer's auditor and the target's auditor have been with the firms for at least three years.  The untabulated result is qualitatively and quantitatively similar to those with the full sample. 22 5. 2.  Non-market based M&A quality measures In our main analyses, we use the acquisition announcement return as our proxy for M&A quality.  In this section, we use two non-market based measures that have also been used in the literature for M&A quality.  (1) post-acquisition change in ROA, ΔROA (Healy et al. , 1992.  Chen et al. , 2007.  Wang and Xie, 2009.  Lin et al. , 2011.  Fu et al. , 2013.  Goodman et al. , 2014), and (2) the probability of a post-acquisition goodwill impairment, Prob_GW_Impair (Doellman and Ryngaert, 2010.  Gu and Lev, 2011.  Goodman et al. , 2014).  The advantages of these measures are that they are not as susceptible to market biases and they represent ex post (as opposed to ex ante) measures of M&A quality.  ROA represents the actual economic benefits generated by the assets, as opposed to the market's perception of the increase in value.  Further, a goodwill impairment recorded in the post-acquisition period represents instances where the premium paid for the target's assets is no longer justified.  However, the main drawback of these measures lies in the difficulty in isolating the performance effects directly related to the acquisition from those of the rest of the firm.  Therefore, we focus on acquisition announcement returns in our main analyses and provide supporting evidence using these ex post, non-market based measures in this section.  We rerun our main analyses, i. e. , Eqs.  (1) and (2), where we substitute ΔROA and Prob_GW_Impair as the dependent variables and estimate the models using OLS estimation and a probit regression, respectively.  ΔROA is measured as the three-year change in ROA, and Prob_GW_Impair is an indicator equal to one if there is a goodwill impairment in the threeyear period following an acquisition that generates a large increase in goodwill (i. e. , an increase in goodwill greater or equal to 1% of total assets), and zero otherwise.  Due to data restrictions, our change in ROA sample declines from 1971 to 1684, but there is no sample attrition for the goodwill impairment analysis.  In untabulated results, we find that when we rerun Eq. 