 
The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) oversight process involves a range of activities, from advice and monitoring to enforcement actions.  Enforcement actions have been studied in the prior literature to understand both their determinants and consequences.  A ﬁrm’s political connections (PC) in particular are hypothesized from capture theory (e. g. , Stigler, 
1971 ) to bias downward the likelihood of enforcement actions and the magnitude of penalties, as politicians can interfere 
2 Empirical 
with SEC investigations, use budget allocations to control the SEC, or affect SEC oﬃcials’ careers ( Weingast, 1984 ).  
evidence suggestive of SEC capture by politically connected ﬁrms is reported in Correia (2014) and Yu and Yu (2011) , who 
ﬁnd a negative relation between ﬁrm PC and enforcement actions (which are pursued by the SEC’s Division of Enforcement 
or DOE).  
Interpreting the results in the prior literature as evidence of lax SEC oversight of PC ﬁrms is complicated by the fact that 
SEC oversight involves more than enforcement actions.  In particular, the agency also routinely reviews ﬁrms’ SEC ﬁlings to 
monitor and enhance ﬁrms’ compliance with disclosure and accounting regulation ( SEC, (2015b )).  SEC questions and concerns in the course of these reviews are communicated to ﬁrms through comment letters (CLs) that require response and 
remediation.  In this paper, we examine the relation between ﬁrm PC and the likelihood of receiving CLs to shed fuller light 
on the relation between corporate political connectedness and SEC oversight.  
The CL review process is conducted by the SEC’s Division of Corporation Finance (DCF).  The volume of CLs is large, as 
between 20% and 40% of U. S.  listed ﬁrms have received a CL in each year between 2005 and 2012.  In contrast, enforcement 
actions are relatively infrequent.  CLs are issued on a variety of topics (e. g. , revenue recognition, goodwill impairment) depending on the nature of the SEC concern generated by its review.  The initial CL might request clariﬁcation and disclosure 
of further information that leads to a sequence of “rounds” of communication between the SEC and the ﬁrm.  The CL process 
concludes when the DCF is satisﬁed with compliance and issues a “no further comment” letter, or when the DCF refers the 
matter to the SEC’s DOE.  CLs therefore are an important part of SEC oversight.  In this light, a number of recent studies have 
investigated the determinants and consequences of CLs (e. g. , Cassell Name, 2013; Bozanic Name, 2015; Johnston and Petacchi 
2014; Dechow Name, 2016 ).  These studies have not, however, examined the relation between ﬁrm PC and the likelihood of 
receiving CLs.  
SOX Section 408, paragraph (b), identiﬁes some ﬁrm characteristics (“factors”) for the SEC to consider in its CL reviews.  
This guidance concludes by stating that “any other factors that the Commission may consider relevant” can also be used in 
determining which ﬁrms are reviewed, suggesting that the SEC is given some discretion.  If ﬁrms’ political connections are 
one such discretionary factor, then we expect a signiﬁcant relation between ﬁrm PC and CL review likelihood.  Moreover, if 
the SEC is captured as suggested in the prior literature, and such capture is manifested through lax oversight, we expect 
this relation to be negative.  
On the other hand, there are reasons to expect a positive relation between these variables.  For example, the SEC’s CL 
review process may not be captured (and, in fact, prior claims of SEC capture, which are based on small samples of ﬁrms 
facing enforcement actions, may be overstated).  If so, and if ﬁrm PC is a distinct risk factor for ﬁnancial-reporting issues, we 
would expect a positive relation between ﬁrm PC and CL reviews.  
To investigate the relation between ﬁrm PC and CL reviews we obtain all comment letters from the Audit Analytics 
database for 2005–2012 and retain those related to ﬁrms’ 10-K ﬁlings.  PC ﬁrms are identiﬁed through contemporaneous 
contributions to Political Action Committees (PAC) or alternatively through their lobbying expenditures.  Results indicate that 
PC ﬁrms are more likely to receive a CL after controlling for a host of CL determinants identiﬁed in the prior literature.  The 
controls include accounting quality and complexity proxies, such as accounting restatements, internal control weaknesses, 
the length and linguistic complexity of ﬁnancial statements, and the number of SEC ﬁlings made by each ﬁrm during the 
year.  Our results on PC contrast with prior ﬁndings of a negative association between PC and SEC enforcement actions and 
suggest SEC capture by PC ﬁrms is not indicated in the CL review process.  We return to a discussion of this primary ﬁnding 
shortly.  
We conduct a range of tests that collectively are intended to mitigate endogeneity concerns and examine the robustness 
of  the  primary  result.   First,  we  estimate  the  tests  in  a  propensity-score-matched  sample  wherein  PC  and  non-PC  ﬁrms 
are matched by year, the speciﬁc SEC oﬃce conducting the review, and all covariates in the regression model ( Ho Name, 
2007 ).  Results indicate PC ﬁrms are more likely to receive a CL: for instance, we ﬁnd that while ﬁrms making political 
contributions have a 38. 5% probability of receiving a CL, matched non-contributing ﬁrms have a probability of 33. 7%, a 
statistically signiﬁcant difference that also appears to be economically substantive.  
Second, we conduct cross-sectional tests exploiting variation in the targets of ﬁrms’ political activities.  Speciﬁcally, we 
examine the relation between CL and ﬁrms that have either lobbied the SEC directly or are top contributors to legislators 
serving on SEC oversight committees.  We ﬁnd that such ﬁrms are signiﬁcantly more likely to receive CL reviews, providing 
further support to the primary result.  
Third, to further mitigate more general endogeneity concerns we use an instrumental-variables (IV) approach.  As in prior 
research (e. g. , Blackburne, 2014; Correia, 2014 ), our instruments for a ﬁrm’s PAC and lobbying expenditures are, respectively, 
the sum of PAC and lobbying expenditures made by other ﬁrms in the same 4-digit SIC industry and the same size decile.  
These industry-size peer contributions are likely to be associated with the political contributions of a given ﬁrm due to peer 
effects driving political activity (e. g. , Grier Name, 1994; Kim, 2008 ), but they are less likely to directly drive the likelihood 
of that ﬁrm receiving a comment letter.  IV results are consistent with our main ﬁndings.  We additionally use a new IV: 
state-level voter turnout.  State turnout rates capture the state population’s political engagement and are therefore likely to 
be associated with the political contributions of a given ﬁrm (the ﬁrm is more likely to be politically engaged), but turnout 
rates are less likely to drive the likelihood of that ﬁrm receiving a comment letter.  The results using this IV are consistent 
with the main ﬁndings.  
The ﬁnal set of tests examines the substantive characteristics of CL reviews of PC versus non-PC ﬁrms.  We examine 
four characteristics, the ﬁrst three of which are from prior literature ( Cassell Name, 2013 ): (i) the number of core and noncore earnings topics in the CL; (ii) the number of days between the initial receipt of a CL and the receipt of a “no further 
comment” letter; (iii) the number of communication rounds between the SEC and ﬁrms; and (iv) the involvement of an 
SEC supervisor in a ﬁrm’s comment-letter review.  We ﬁnd that PC ﬁrms receive more substantive reviews along all these 
dimensions, indicating that the SEC’s CL reviews of PC ﬁrms are not perfunctory.  
We offer some potential explanations for our primary ﬁnding of a positive association between ﬁrm PC and SEC CL 
reviews in comparison to the prior ﬁnding of a negative relation between ﬁrm PC and enforcement.  First, it is possible that 
both the DOE and DCF are captured and coordinate such that the DCF proactively “works with” PC ﬁrms in the CL stage 
to actively remediate issues and preempt escalation to the enforcement stage.  However, this explanation faces two major 
hurdles: (i) it requires a more elaborate coordination between different divisions of the SEC than is reported (anecdotally) 
3 and (ii) it does not explain why PC ﬁrms that have ostensibly captured the SEC could 
by current and former SEC oﬃcials; 
not simply hire former SEC oﬃcials to vet their ﬁnancial statements prior to submission, thereby lowering the likelihood of 
being subject to a publicly visible CL review process.  We therefore do not view this as a likely explanation.  
Another potential explanation is that only the DOE, which pursues enforcement actions, but not the DCF, which conducts 
the CL reviews, is politically captured.  For instance, the politically appointed Commissioners vote in a closed meeting on the 
DOE staff’s enforcement recommendation, but Commissioners do not directly inﬂuence the issuance of a comment letter by 
the DCF.  However, this argument of targeted capture of the DOE does not in itself explain a positive relation (as opposed 
to no relation) between PC and the likelihood and substantive characteristics of CL as we document.  Thus, this explanation 
alone cannot account for our results.  
A related explanation is that the SEC DCF actively targets PC ﬁrms in the CL review stage.  This account does not require 
an anti-political vendetta on part of the SEC’s DCF; it may simply be that political connectedness is a useful heuristic for 
issues the DCF seeks to address at the CL stage.  Our identiﬁcation tests allay concerns that ﬁrm PC proxies for known and 
latent ﬁnancial-reporting risk characteristics; the tests suggest that the DCF may view ﬁrm PC as a distinct risk indicator.  
If true, then the remediation of issues at the CL stage can explain in part the lower likelihood of subsequent enforcement 
action against PC ﬁrms documented in the prior literature.  This explanation, which is inconsistent with the SEC capture 
hypothesis, appears most likely to us.  
A fourth possibility is that the PC measures used in the literature to establish a negative association between ﬁrm political connectedness and SEC enforcement are noisy or biased representations of ﬁrms’ true political connections.  In particular, 
the fraud-prone ﬁrms that are more likely to receive SEC scrutiny at the enforcement stage may underreport their political 
contributions (e. g. , to diffuse media scrutiny), yielding the negative result in the prior literature.  Since all ﬁrms, not just 
fraud-prone ﬁrms, are subject to SEC scrutiny at the CL stage, the concern about underreporting of political contributions is 
less likely to apply in our sample.  Put differently, if fraud-prone ﬁrms underreport PC, our sample is less biased than those 
used in prior tests, and the true relation between ﬁrm PC and SEC oversight (even at the enforcement stage) is positive, 
inconsistent with SEC capture.  While we do not necessarily view this data issue as the most likely explanation for results in 
the prior literature, exploring this concern about the prior literature’s measures of PC is an opportunity for future research.  
Our ﬁndings give new impetus for such research.  
The simple conclusion we draw from our results is that it is diﬃcult to infer that SEC oversight of PC ﬁrms is captured or 
lax as is suggested in prior literature.  Rather, our results suggest a more nuanced relation between PC and SEC oversight in 
that SEC capture, if it exists, may be less blatant or pronounced than previously thought.  The maintained assumption here, 
as in the prior literature, is that some SEC oﬃcials are at least nominally aware of ﬁrms’ political connectedness.  Anecdotal 
descriptions of the DCF’s review process are supportive of this idea: senior SEC oﬃcials, who are more likely to be politically 
astute, allocate and oversee staff reviews of ﬁrms.  Moreover, our ﬁnding that more senior SEC oﬃcials are involved in CL 
reviews of PC ﬁrms is consistent with this notion. 