 Introduction The auditor's report is the primary channel through which auditors communicate with financial statement users information discovered during the auditing process.  Financial analysts and regulators have criticized the existing auditor's reporting model as having little communicative value, and additional disclosures have been proposed to enhance the value of the audit report (Church et al. , 2008.  PCAOB, 2013). 1 Under the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) requirement and Generally Accepted Auditing Standards (GAAS), the auditor's reporting options are to issue either an unqualified opinion or an unqualified opinion with explanatory language, commonly called a modified audit opinion (MAO). 2 This inclusion of discretionary explanatory language, such as citing a lack of accounting consistency, emphasizing a material uncertainty, or expressing a going concern (GC) opinion, is the only difference between a standard clean opinion and an MAO. 3 In fact, an MAO is the sole way for auditors to communicate audit-specific information to outsiders. 4 There is still debate, however, about the extent to which the auditor's report communicates relevant information to financial statement users (Church et al. , 2008.  DeFond and Zhang, 2014).  In this study, we empirically investigate the relevance of MAOs in private debt contracting.  A large portion of the prior research that studied modified opinions focuses on the market reaction to the auditor's report and provides evidence that equity investors react negatively to the issuance of a nonstandard opinion, especially to a GC opinion (e. g.  Loudder et al. , 1992.  Fleak and Wilson, 1994.  Menon and Williams, 2010).  We investigate the relevance of auditor reporting from the perspective of debtholders for several reasons.  First, accounting information is often a direct input in debt contracting.  for example, debt covenants may rely on accounting numbers to monitor firm performance.  If an MAO indicates low financial reporting quality, lenders will change the relative use of accounting-based covenants and general covenants in loans issued after MAOs.  Second, debt contracts provide multi-dimensional information about borrowers.  loan contracts allow us to investigate the effects of audit opinions on both price and non-price costs of debt, including loan covenants, loan size, loan maturity, and collateral requirements.  Finally, debtholders, whose payoffs are concave in relation to firm value, demand a timely shift of control rights in order to discipline managers in the case of poor firm performance (Dewatripont and Tirole, 1994.  Ball et al. , 2008).  This implies that debtholders should react to information in MAOs for both pricing and monitoring purposes, because MAOs are likely to communicate negative news about clients’ financial reporting quality and credit worthiness.  Thus, examining lenders’ responses to MAOs can enhance our understanding of the usefulness of auditor reporting.  Lenders are likely to find the audit report relevant and useful in two ways.  First, through the audit opinion and associated explanatory language, the auditor communicates information about the quality of financial reports for debt contracting purposes.  The relevance of MAOs in debt contracting depends on the severity of the auditor's concern as expressed in the explanatory language.  Second, MAOs communicate private information about clients’ credit risk to lenders that is not available elsewhere.  Therefore, we expect the relevance of MAOs to lenders varies with the risks conveyed in the MAO.  To analyze the relevance of MAOs in debt contracting, we first categorize audit opinions into clean and modified opinions.  If an MAO indicates low financial reporting quality and potential credit risk, we predict that loans issued to firms after an MAO will be associated with a higher cost of debt, reflected across different contract terms.  To examine the incremental relevance of explanatory language, we classify MAOs into two general types, which we further partition into four groups by their cause.  Inconsistency opinions are caused by an Accounting Change or a Restatement.  and Inadequacy opinions are caused by Material Uncertainty or a GC Opinion. 5 MAOs issued because of an accounting Inconsistency alert financial statement users about the incomparability of data contained in the financial statements.  MAOs issued for Inadequacy reasons express auditors’ more serious concerns about the quality of the financial statements because of unrecognized losses or risk.  Material uncertainty concerns are related to the resolution of future economically relevant unknowns (e. g. , contingent liabilities, litigation risk, and business uncertainty), and GC opinions indicate that a key assumption of the accounting model is violated (i. e. , that the firm will continue as a going concern for at least one year).  The severity of the auditor's concern is greater in Inadequacy opinions than in Inconsistency opinions.  Among the four types of MAOs, GC opinions require the most auditor judgment and, therefore, are likely to convey more of auditors’ private information than other types of MAOs. 6 We find that loans initiated after MAOs have higher loan spreads (on average, 17 basis points higher) compared to loans initiated after clean opinions, controlling for other determinants of the interest rate.  In addition, the effects of MAOs on loan spreads vary significantly depending on the type of explanatory language.  The loan spread effect increases from 0 basis points after an Accounting Change to 25, 49, and 107 basis points, on average, after Restatement, Material Uncertainty, and GC Opinions, respectively.  These results support our prediction that interest rates increase after an MAO and that the effect varies with the type of MAO.  We also find that lenders decrease the use of financial covenants and increase the use of general covenants in loans initiated after an MAO.  Specifically, lenders decrease the use of financial covenants by 3. 8% and increase the use of general covenants (such as restrictions on dividend payouts or on the uses of borrowed funds) by 4. 2%, on average, after an MAO.  Again, the relevance of an MAO depends on the type of modification.  We find that Inconsistency MAOs have a smaller, but still significant, effect on the use of financial and general covenants than do Inadequacy MAOs.  Within Inadequacy MAOs, Material Uncertainty opinions are associated with an average increase of 18. 2% in the use of general covenants but have no effect on the use of financial covenants.  In contrast, GC opinions are associated with an average decrease of 9. 1% in the number of included financial covenants and an average increase of 12. 3% in the number of included general covenants.  The results from the debt covenant tests suggest that MAOs convey relevant information to lenders and that the use of the financial reports in debt contracting varies with the type of concern expressed by the auditor in the MAO.  We provide further evidence on the relevance of MAOs on other loan terms including loan size, the likelihood of requiring collateral, and loan maturity.  Consistent with our predictions, we find that lenders reduce loan sizes and increase the likelihood of requiring collateral following an MAO.  The results on loan maturity show a significant decrease in loan maturities after a GC opinion, which is consistent with GC opinions communicating the auditor's information about the client's credit risk to lenders.  The overall decrease in loan term favorability and the variation of the effects of MAOs suggest that MAOs communicate information useful to lenders in negotiating debt contracts.  Following our main empirical analysis, we perform two separate analyses on our sample of observations with GC opinions.  First, following Menon and Williams (2010), we classify GC opinions as being related to firm performance, financing concerns, or other issues and investigate the effects of each type of GC opinion on the loan contract terms previously tested.  We find that each type of GC opinion has a unique effect on loan spread and other loan terms.  this finding reinforces the usefulness of information provided in the auditor's report.  Second, we test whether GC opinions communicate private information about a client's credit risk that is not available elsewhere.  We do so by matching firms with GC opinions to similar firms based on the determinants of receiving a GC opinion using variables from prior studies (DeFond et al. , 2002), but that received clean opinions in their audit reports.  If GC opinions simply capture the probability of financial distress or bankruptcy, as predicted by publically observable information, they should have no incremental effect on loan contract terms in the matched-sample specifications.  We find, however, that GC opinions continue to have a significant effect on all of the loans terms examined except financial covenants.  Overall, these results are consistent with a GC opinion communicating the auditor’ private information regarding the client's credit risk to lenders.  It stands to reason that managers of firms preparing to secure financing are likely to be in contact with potential lenders preceding a loan issuance, but we are unable to directly control for information that managers privately provide to lenders.  To alleviate the concern that our empirical results regarding the association between MAOs and loan terms may pick up unobservable public and private communication channels, we include a new indicator variable, Before_MAO, that takes a value of 1 if a loan is issued in the 12 months preceding an MAO, and zero otherwise.  If the private information conveyed by the auditor is actually preempted elsewhere (by managers communicating to lenders or other public information) before an MAO, then we would expect a significant coefficient on this new variable.  In tests of each of the contract terms we investigate, however, Before_MAO is insignificant, which provides further support that our results capture the effects of audit opinions.  Our study makes several contributions to the existing literature.  First, our study investigates the usefulness of the audit report to lenders in debt contracting by incorporating the auditor's explanatory language.  The empirical results provide evidence that MAOs are informative to lenders in negotiating loan agreements, but more importantly, that the different types of MAOs communicate different concerns to lenders about financial reporting quality and credit risk.  While prior studies show that the voluntary use of auditing or the employment of Big N auditors is associated with a lower cost of debt (Fortin and Pittman, 2007.  Lennox and Pittman, 2011.  Minnis, 2011), we provide evidence on the incremental value of audit reporting to lenders.  For regulators, our empirical results may be useful in informing the current debate on regulatory initiatives to include disclosures of “critical audit matters” in the audit report (PCAOB, 2013.  DeFond and Zhang, 2014).  Second, our study is related to the literature on the role of financial reporting quality in debt contracting.  Bharath et al.  (2008) provided evidence that the quality of a borrower's accounting information can affect their access to the private versus public debt market and the included loan terms.  Costello and Wittenberg-Moerman (2011) documented that lenders alter debt contracts when a borrower reports an internal control weakness.  These studies, however, do not address the specific role of the audit report within financial reporting.  Our study provides empirical evidence that audit opinions are incrementally informative to lenders in the private debt market.  Lastly, our empirical results on the usefulness of GC opinions in debt contracting contribute to the vast auditing literature on GC opinions.  Prior studies report evidence that GC opinions are useful in predicting subsequent bankruptcies and are associated with negative stock market reactions (Hopwood et al. , 1989.  Raghunandan and Rama, 1995.  Chen and Church, 1996.  Menon and Williams, 2010.  Kaplan and Williams, 2013), but these studies examine the relevance of GC opinions independent of other MAOs.  Our empirical results on the effect of GC opinions on various loan terms, relative to the effect of other MAOs, shed light on the unique value of the auditor's information that is not available in the financial statements or through other channels accessible to sophisticated lenders (Mutchler, 1985.  Menon and Schwartz, 1987).  In the next section we develop our hypotheses.  We describe the sample selection procedures and variables used in this study in Section 3.  Section 4 presents the main empirical results, and Section 5 presents the results of additional analyses.  A summary and conclusions are provided in Section 6.  2.  Background and hypothesis development.  As capital providers, lenders are interested in ensuring the timely repayment of the loan and interest that are claims on the borrower's future cash flow and assets.  When contemplating a potential loan recipient, banks and other lenders analyze the risk of default, estimate the market value and liquidation values of assets, and evaluate the management's character and ability (Tirole, 2007).  If lenders decide to initiate a loan after the credit analysis, they negotiate the price and non-price terms of the debt contract, which compensate them for risk and allow them to monitor the borrower's performance over the life of the loan. 