 Introduction The auditor's report is the primary channel through which auditors communicate with financial statement users information discovered during the auditing process.  Financial analysts and regulators have criticized the existing auditor's reporting model as having little communicative value, and additional disclosures have been proposed to enhance the value of the audit report (Church et al. , 2008.  PCAOB, 2013). 1 Under the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) requirement and Generally Accepted Auditing Standards (GAAS), the auditor's reporting options are to issue either an unqualified opinion or an unqualified opinion with explanatory language, commonly called a modified audit opinion (MAO). 2 This inclusion of discretionary explanatory language, such as citing a lack of accounting consistency, emphasizing a material uncertainty, or expressing a going concern (GC) opinion, is the only difference between a standard clean opinion and an MAO. 3 In fact, an MAO is the sole way for auditors to communicate audit-specific information to outsiders. 4 There is still debate, however, about the extent to which the auditor's report communicates relevant information to financial statement users (Church et al. , 2008.  DeFond and Zhang, 2014).  In this study, we empirically investigate the relevance of MAOs in private debt contracting.  A large portion of the prior research that studied modified opinions focuses on the market reaction to the auditor's report and provides evidence that equity investors react negatively to the issuance of a nonstandard opinion, especially to a GC opinion (e. g.  Loudder et al. , 1992.  Fleak and Wilson, 1994.  Menon and Williams, 2010).  We investigate the relevance of auditor reporting from the perspective of debtholders for several reasons.  First, accounting information is often a direct input in debt contracting.  for example, debt covenants may rely on accounting numbers to monitor firm performance.  If an MAO indicates low financial reporting quality, lenders will change the relative use of accounting-based covenants and general covenants in loans issued after MAOs. 