 1.  Introduction The environment has attracted unprecedented attention from ecologists, researchers and policymakers in recent years.  While the objective of the diverse stakeholders is to maintain a high standard of living and reduce global poverty, which can be considered justiﬁable ends in their own right, an unrestricted exploitation of natural resources could also cause an irrevocable loss to the biosphere and hurt the world's long-term economic and social development objectives.  The catch lies in the fact that the environment cannot be sustained without sacriﬁcing at least some of the long-term growth and development objectives.  Consequently, to satisfy basic human needs, some damage to the environment is inevitable.  Attitudes towards the environment vary substantially, particularly among policymakers.  Even if the biosphere can be exploited in a variety of ways which lead to a range of consequences, many ecologists believe that the ecosystem could be managed in a way that it can adapt itself to continuously changing conditions (El Kholy et al. , 2012).  The environmental Kuznets curve (EKC), a theory of the relationship between economic development and environmental quality, hypothesizes that over time there will be a reduction in the level of emissions for most countries.  This reduction can take place possibly because well developed economies should develop and raise sufﬁcient revenues in the long-run to afford newer and cleaner technologies that can help abate pollution.  Environmental degradation sustains a heavy price in terms of health and life sacriﬁces.  According to recent estimates, outdoor pollution kills more than three million people in the world every year, while many more people suffer from a range of diseases (OECD, 2014).  The prospects of long-term development are also hurt by the degradation of the quality of natural resources.  Fisheries for example are damaged because of water pollution, and deforestation leads to erosion siltation, disrupts the hydrological cycle of major watersheds and reduces the productivity and returns of natural resources such as forests, agricultural lands and ﬁsheries translate (Dixon et al. , 2013).  The catch lies in the fact that the objectives of sustainable development are often inconsistent with the goals of maintaining the afﬂuent lifestyle of the developed world and reducing the poverty of the burgeoning masses in the developing world (See Daly, 1991.  Arrow et al. , 1995).  Economic growth is a precondition for effective poverty reduction initiatives (Bourguignon, 2004.  Suryahadi et al. , 2012.  Thorbecke, 2013), but the increased revenues resulting from higher growth are used to pursue overly redistributive policies (Bhagwati and Panagariya, 2014).  However, the existing development paradigm is unsustainable because it favors a level of prosperity, which invariably results in more consumption and greater pressure on natural resources (Aşıcı, 2013).  Sustainable economic growth depends on the availability of renewable energy sources, and the integrated development of such sources is essential for an environmentally friendly development of countries or regions.  One of the widely used sources of renewable energy in the United States is biomass which is any organic (decomposable) matter derived from plants or animals, and hence is available on a renewable basis.  Biomass includes wood and agricultural crops, herbaceous and woody energy crops and municipal organic wastes as well as manure.  This renewable energy source contains a complex mix of carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen and oxygen.  Unlike the conventional fossil fuels such as petroleum and coal, biomass is a source of renewable energy based on the carbon cycle.  Thus, in virtue of its abundant sources, biomass is likely to be a prevalent option for generating electricity in the future.  The study examines the short- and long-run relationship between carbon emissions and their determinants in the presence of structural breaks and determines whether biomass energy consumption improves environmental quality by reducing carbon pollutants.  It particularly seeks to discern whether the EKC hypothesis for economic growth and carbon exists in the presence of biomass consumption and trade openness.  Finally, it strives to examine the causality between biomass energy consumption, trade openness and carbon emissions.  To our knowledge, these multifaceted relationships of biomass energy consumption have not been addressed adequately in the existing literature.  This paper makes the following ﬁve-fold contributions to the existing literature.  (i) It uses biomass energy consumption as an indicator of renewable energy in an augmented carbon emissions function.  (ii) It investigates the quadratic and cubic association between economic growth and carbon emissions in the presence of biomass energy and trade variables.  (iii) It applies the single and double unknown structural break unit root test to estimate the unit root properties of the variables.  (iv) It uses the bounds testing approach to cointegration that accommodates structural breaks in the series to test whether cointegration exists or not.  (v) It checks the causality between the variables by applying the VECM Granger causality test in the presence of structural breaks in the series. 