
Empirical research on conditional conservatism documents a piecewise linear relation between earnings and stock
returns and often attributes this pattern to a more timely recognition of bad news than good news (e. g. , Basu, 1997). 
However, we argue that a similar asymmetric relation can arise from a fundamentally different source—cost stickiness.  Cost
stickiness refers to the asymmetric response of costs to sales increases versus decreases, which is a widely documented
finding in the research on cost behavior (e. g. , Anderson Name, 2003).  We show that cost stickiness can be mistaken for
conditional conservatism in standard models, distorting inferences about both the average level of conservatism and the
extent of cross-sectional variation in conservatism.  To reduce the likelihood of spurious inference, we develop new
empirical tests that separate conservatism from the confounding effect of sticky costs. 
Conditional conservatism implies that bad news (the usual proxy for which is negative stock returns) is recognized in
earnings more quickly and more fully than good news (measured by positive returns).  Therefore, the contemporaneous
association between earnings and stock returns should be stronger for negative returns than for positive returns (Basu,
1997).  Numerous studies find results consistent with this prediction and infer the presence of conditional conservatism (e. g. ,
Pope and Walker, 1999; Ball Name, 2000; Watts, 2003b; Ball Name, 2013a). 
The research on sticky costs documents an asymmetric behavior of costs and attributes it to operational decisions by
managers who face adjustment costs, such as severance payments to dismissed workers and disposal costs for property, plant,
and equipment (e. g. , Anderson Name, 2003).  To avoid adjustment costs, managers retain some unused resources when sales
fall.  By contrast, when sales rise, managers have to add sufficient resources to meet the demand.  Because of this operational
asymmetry, costs are “sticky” on average—they rise more in response to sales increases than they fall for sales decreases. 
The cost asymmetry implies that, on average, earnings respond more to sales decreases than to sales increases.  Because
sales changes and concurrent stock returns are positively correlated, cost stickiness leads to an asymmetric relation between
earnings and stock returns, which is stronger for negative returns than for positive returns.  Therefore, the standard
estimates of asymmetric timeliness are likely biased upwards on average when sticky costs are prevalent.  Further, because
cost stickiness varies systematically (e. g. , Weiss, 2010), it leads to variation in the bias, which is likely to distort inferences
about the extent of cross-sectional variation in conservatism.  To control for this confounding effect, we incorporate cost
stickiness in standard conservatism models. 
We use data for publicly traded US firms from 1987 to 2007 to examine the confounding effect of cost stickiness in the
Basu (1997), Ball Name (2013b), and Collins Name (2014) models. 1 Controlling for the asymmetric effect of sales changes
reveals an average bias in conservatism estimates of more than 25%.  Further tests confirm that the confounding asymmetry
for sales changes is consistent with manifestations of cost stickiness and is distinct from conservatism.  Thus, the upward
bias in the standard conservatism measures arises because the measures mistake cost stickiness for conditional
conservatism.  We also find that controlling for the variation in cost stickiness has a large impact on estimates of the
variation in conservatism.  For example, the correlation between industry-level conservatism estimates (at the three-digit
SIC level) with and without controls for cost stickiness is just 51. 3%, and the difference between the two estimates is
statistically significant in 49% of the industries.  Thus, the use of standard models leads to mistaken inferences not only about
the average degree of conservatism but also about how much conservatism varies cross-sectionally. 
Cost stickiness also confounds inferences about the correlates of conservatism.  For example, we find that the standard
estimates of the association between managerial stock ownership and conditional conservatism contain a large bias.  These
estimates become statistically insignificant when we mitigate the bias.  Controlling for cost stickiness also significantly changes
the estimated effects of the standard proxies of the demand for conservatism, such as size, leverage, and the book-to-market
ratio.  Thus, recognizing the confounding effect of cost stickiness is essential to ensure accurate inferences in future research. 
In Section 2, we develop our argument for the correlated omitted variable bias and formulate the hypotheses.  In Section 3,
we describe the data and the estimation models.  Section 4 presents our main empirical results and the additional validation
tests.  Section 5 further illustrates the confounding effect of cost stickiness.  Section 6 concludes. 
2.  Hypothesis development. 
We build on both the research on conservatism in financial accounting (e. g. , Basu, 1997; Pope and Walker, 1999; Ball
Name, 2000) and the research on sticky costs in cost accounting (e. g. , Anderson Name, 2003; Weiss, 2010; Chen Name, 2012). 
Conservatism and sticky costs are fundamentally different phenomena: conservatism is asymmetry in the information
system that translates economic activity into accounting data, whereas cost stickiness is asymmetry in the economic activity
itself.  Because the asymmetry in reported earnings can arise from either conservatism or cost stickiness, empirical models
should account for both phenomena to ensure accurate inferences. 
Financial accounting interprets conditional conservatism as the higher degree of verification of good news as gains than
bad news as losses (Basu, 1997; Watts, 2003a).  Conservatism implies that earnings incorporate bad news about future cash
flows more quickly than good news.  Basu (1997) bases his primary measure of asymmetric timeliness on a regression of net
income on stock returns with separate slopes for positive and negative returns (proxies for good and bad news,
respectively).  He finds that the slope coefficient and the R2 are higher for negative returns than for positive returns, which
is consistent with his predictions.  His model has been widely used to document the prevalence of conservatism, measured
by average asymmetric timeliness, and to examine theories about the causes and correlates of conservatism, tested by
analyzing systematic variation in asymmetric timeliness (see Watts (2003b) and Qiang (2007), for reviews). 