
Environmental sustainability, climate change and global warming
have attracted increasing public awareness (Bloch Name, 2012.  Ma,
2015).  Many countries have set and ratiﬁed nationally determined
contributions in the recent Paris agreement, targeting to keep the global
average temperature increase well below 2 °C above pre-industrial
levels.  China, who accounts for half of the world coal consumption
and contributes to 25% of the world carbon dioxide emission (Energy
Information Administration, 2016), in particular, sets a goal of achieving
the peak before 2030, lowering the emission per unit of GDP by 60–65%
from its 2005 level, and increasing the non-fossil fuel share in the primary energy consumption to 20%.  A sweeping energy evolution is called
for in China since 2014 with new priority placed on environmental goals
and the deployment of clean energy. 1 However, it remains a challenge
to meet the goal considering the uneven distribution of energy
resources and unbalanced economic growth with a high degree of
inequality (Herrerias Name, 2013.  Song and Zheng, 2012).  For China
to align the long-term low carbon energy strategy with economic development goals, the central government has set and broken down the carbon and energy intensity reduction target at the level of individual
provinces.  Motivated by the context characterized by heterogeneous
energy strategy and economic development paths in each of these provinces, this paper addresses three main questions.  1) does energy play a
role in promoting provincial growth together with the physical and
human capital.  2) how and to what extent the disaggregate energy
source is responsible for economic growth.  and 3) what is the causal
direction between total and disaggregate energy use and growth of
economy in each of these provinces, if any.  The answers will provide
rich policy implications for a better understanding of interaction between localized development path and energy conservation to set an
implementable emission reduction target for sustainable development. 
In the literature, many scholars examine the cointegration and Granger causal link between energy use and economic development in China
using national time series data (Shiu and Lam, 2004.  Zhang and Cheng,
2009.  Bloch Name, 2012).  While country level studies provide some insights on the relationship between energy consumption and economic
growth, they have at least two major limitations.  In terms of method,
the power of unit root and cointegration tests in time series studies is low
due to a short time span (Campbell and Perron, 1991).  the conventional
causality tests using time series have a high risk of wrongly rejecting the
null hypothesis of no cointegration (Yalta and Cakar, 2012) and therefore
can lead to inaccurate conclusions on the direction of causality.  In addition, previous studies using national-level time series ignore the signiﬁcant heterogeneity and interdependence across Chinese provinces.  The
endowments of energy resources in China are unevenly distributed.  for
example, coal is mainly reserved in Shanxi, while oil and natural gas are
mainly in Xinjiang and Sichuan. 2 The economic structure and energy intensity have large variations across provinces as well.  Fig.  1 illustrates
the provincial differences in economic structure and energy intensity in
year 2014.  The blue, red and green bars indicate the share of gross output
values from the primary, the secondary and the tertiary industry, respectively.  The purple solid line depicts the energy intensity for each of the 30
provinces (Tibet excluded).  The stacked bar chart shows that output from
the tertiary industry exceeds that from the primary and the secondary
industries for coastal rich provinces such as Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin,
Hainan, Jiangsu and Zhejiang.  Among the 30 provinces, there are eight
resource-rich provinces such as Hebei, Shanxi, Inner Mongolia, Guizhou,
Gansu, Qinghai, Ningxia and Xinjiang with energy intensity above the average which is indicated by “*”.  Compared with existing studies, by using
the provincial panel, our study offers improved test power over conventional time series methods, which also enables us to account for marked
heterogeneity in economic structure and energy distribution across provinces.  The growth-energy nexus analysis at a disaggregated level matters
for local regulators to evaluate and act on differentiated strategies of energy conservation and efﬁciency enhancement, and is also vital for the
central government to coordinate the regional development and efforts
in reducing resource costs and emissions for speciﬁc energy source. 
A limited but growing number of studies recently exploit provincial
data and panel techniques to investigate the energy-growth nexus in
China, albeit producing mixed results (S. S.  Wang Name, 2011.  Fei Name,
2011.  Zhang and Xu, 2012.  Herrerias Name, 2013).  For example, using
data from 28 provinces over the period 1995–2007, Y.  Wang Name
(2011) and S. S.  Wang Name (2011) ﬁnd a uni-directional causal relationship from GDP to energy consumption.  Zhang and Xu (2012) identify
the bidirectional linkage for the eastern region, while Fei Name (2011)
conclude the growth effect that energy consumption leads to economic
development for the same part of China.  While no consensus has been
obtained, results from the panel analysis are relatively more reliable
than that from national studies.  One shortcoming of these studies is,
however, that they did not explore the impact of disaggregate energy
sources on the province-speciﬁc economic growth.  therefore, conclusions made on the analysis of aggregate energy cannot be generalized to disaggregate energy within each of the administrative boundary,
that is, the nexus between total energy use and local growth may not
hold and be equally applied to disaggregate energy source across provinces, and thus policy suggestions based on this body of studies are hard
to implement (Soytas and Sari, 2006). 
The brief review highlights the importance to account for provincial
heterogeneity and examine not only the aggregate energy but also the
disaggregate energy sources.  This paper ﬁlls the gap that little empirical
work has been conducted to examine the causal relationship between
economic development and energy consumption at both the aggregate
and disaggregate levels using provincial data and most recent panel
econometric methods within a human-capital augmented production
framework. 
Furthermore, this paper is one of the ﬁrst studies that incorporate
sub-national level human capital in the multivariate framework with
a focus in China.  Despite the fact that human capital is a crucial input
to economic growth, it only attracts attention in the broad energygrowth nexus literature very recently (Pablo-Romero and SánchezBraza, 2015.  Fang and Chang, 2016.  Fang Name, forthcoming), probably
due to lack of quality human capital data. 3 Theoretically, human capital
can be linked to energy consumption through multiple channels.  First,
human capital can increase income, which may then cause more energy
consumption.  Second, human capital can stimulate R&D of new energy
and accelerate the transition to energy-efﬁcient technologies (Li and
Lin, 2016).  This mechanism contributes to the negative association between human capital and energy.  Third, if human capital is accumulated
through education and campaign on energy conservative awareness
among the common people, more human capital is linked to less energy
consumption (Fang Name, forthcoming).  Lastly, economic structure also
matters.  With the development of human capital, economies that experience rapid industrialization and urbanization may see huge reliance
on energy.  but when the country develops to a service-led economy,
energy reliance may be reduced with further development of human
capital (Arbex and Perobelli, 2010).  By and large, the relationship between energy and human capital is uncertain and a rigorous analysis
is required. 
Our contributions to the existing energy-growth nexus literature
lie in three aspects.  First, we incorporate the input of human capital
to the energy-augmented neoclassical production function. 