 This paper examines the relation between industry-wide and firm-specific information contained in earnings and the extent to which this information is reflected in stock prices.  Economic theory suggests that firm performance determined by industry fundamentals (e. g. , consumer taste, production technology, and regulatory environment) is relatively long-lasting.  On the other hand, performance that deviates from industry norms tends to dissipate more quickly because learning and imitation improve industry losers’ performance but erode industry winners’ competitive edge (e. g. , Mueller, 1977, 1986, 1990.  Waring, 1996).  To the extent that accounting earnings are a (noisy) measure of economic profits, we expect the industry-wide component of earnings to be more persistent than the firm-specific component.  Prior research suggests that investors tend to fixate on reported earnings, however, not fully recognizing differences in the persistence of its components (e. g. , Sloan, 1996).  As a result, we expect the market to underreact to the higher persistence of the industry-wide component of earnings.  Predicting greater persistence of the industry-wide component of earnings inherently assumes industry homogeneity and stationarity.  Firms in homogeneous industries face relatively similar economic forces, and thus industry-wide earnings should be more persistent than in heterogeneous industries.  Earnings components should also be more persistent in stable industries than in those disrupted by business shocks.  The effect of business shocks, however, should be smaller on industry-wide earnings than on firm-specific earnings if, as expected, industry-wide earnings are more stationary in general.  Investors that underestimate the persistence of industry-wide earnings are thus more likely to do so for homogeneous industries and in the presence of a large industry-wide business shock.  Our focus on economic fundamentals represents a departure from Sloan’s (1996) work on accruals and cash flows, which are components of earnings defined by accounting systems (Dechow, 1994.  Subramanyam, 1996).  He shows that even though the accrual component is less persistent than the cash flow component, stock prices act as if investors fail to fully appreciate this difference.  Thus, we also gauge the differential persistence and pricing of earnings components classified by both economic forces and accounting constructs.  We decompose industry-wide and firm-specific earnings into their respective cash flow and accrual components.  Considering both economic fundamentals and accounting constructs suggests that industry-wide cash flows is the most persistent component of earnings, while at the other extreme firm-specific accruals is the least persistent.  The relative persistence of the other two components – industry-wide accruals and firmspecific cash flows – is less clear.  On the one hand, there is robust prior evidence that cash flows are more persistent than accruals.  On the other hand, economic theory suggests that industry-wide performance is more persistent than firm-specific performance.  We test our empirical predictions over the period 1988–2011.  Following Bhojraj et al.  (2003), we use Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS) industry codes and define industry-wide earnings as average earnings (scaled by assets) of all firms in the same eight-digit GICS industry.  We define firm-specific earnings as the difference between a firm’s reported earnings (scaled by assets) and the industry-wide earnings.  Consistent with predictions, we find that industry-wide earnings are significantly more persistent than firm-specific earnings.  However, investors fail to fully distinguish this differential persistence as stock prices place similar weights on these two earnings components in forecasting one-year-ahead earnings.  In other words, the market underreacts to the persistence of industry-wide earnings and overreacts to the persistence of firm-specific earnings.  To further test the implications of industry fundamentals on the persistence and pricing of earnings components, we partition the sample using three alternative proxies for industry homogeneity, i. e. , within-industry similarity in size, operating activities, or the number of business segments.  As expected, industry-wide earnings are significantly more persistent in homogenous industries compared to heterogeneous industries.  In contrast, the persistence of firm-specific earnings does not vary with industry homogeneity.  Further, the market fails to understand the consequences of industry homogeneity for the relative persistence of industry-wide earnings.  In fact, the underreaction to industry-wide earnings is significant only in homogeneous industries.  In a similar vein, we find that the market fails to understand the consequences of business model shocks on the persistence of earnings components.  We identify large industry-wide business shocks following Guay et al.  (2014) and firmspecific business shocks following Owens et al.  (2014).  Although these business shocks reduce the persistence of industrywide and firm-specific earnings, respectively, the effect is significantly lower for industry-wide earnings, consistent with this being the more persistent earnings component in general.  The market, however, appears to overestimate the effect of the business shock on the persistence of industry-wide earnings, and thus overreacts to its effect on industry-wide earnings.  Finally, consistent with predictions, we find that industry-wide cash flows is the most persistent component of earnings while firm-specific accruals is the least persistent.  Thus, the higher (lower) persistence of cash flows (accruals) documented in prior research is attributable primarily to the industry-wide (firm-specific) component and it is these specific components that we expect to drive mispricing.  The results confirm that stock prices significantly underweight the persistence of industry-wide cash flows and significantly overweight the persistence of firm-specific accruals.  Our results are robust to several alternative industry classifications, including Standard Industry Classification (SIC) and North America Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes, and industry-size portfolios.  Importantly, our results do not replicate in a pseudo-industry classification, suggesting that our findings cannot be explained as a mechanical artifact attributable to the aggregation of data across firms.  Our results are also robust to defining industry-wide earnings as the sales- or market-value-weighted average of firms in the industry.  Additional tests show that industry-wide earnings are a significant predictor of future stock returns, consistent with investor underreaction.  The spread between the annualized returns of the highest and lowest deciles of industry-wide earnings is 9. 5% (4. 9%) in the first (second) year after portfolio formation, both statistically and economically significant. 1 Moreover, the spread is negative in only one year of our twenty four-year sample period, indicating that the results are stable over time.  Findings from regression analyses show that these results are robust to controlling for a variety of other factors that may be correlated with industry-wide earnings and future abnormal stock returns.  This paper contributes to the literature on earnings persistence and its role in equity valuation.  Over the past two decades there has been a substantial amount of research focusing on the persistence of total earnings and its accounting components (i. e. , cash flows and accruals), leading Dechow et al.  (2010) to call for more extensive study on how economic fundamentals as well as their interaction with accounting rules affect earnings persistence.  This paper provides an initial step in this important direction.  Our findings also have implications for the literature on the determinants of earnings quality, for which persistence is a commonly used proxy.  Prior research in this area focuses almost exclusively on firm-level determinants of earnings quality.  More recently, however, accounting academics have recognized the importance of studying the role of economic fundamentals in the earnings generating process and its effects on earnings quality (e. g. , Owens et al. , 2014).  Thus, our findings more generally illustrate the importance of considering economic fundamentals in modeling earnings quality.  We focus our attention on industry fundamentals as a key driver of earnings persistence.  Financial statement analysis texts typically emphasize the importance of industry analysis in assessing firm performance (e. g. , Wahlen et al. , 2015), and survey data indicates that financial professionals view industry fundamentals as one of the most important factors affecting the sustainability of earnings at their company (Dichev et al. , 2013).  However, as yet there is limited empirical evidence on the role of industry fundamentals, and innate factors in general, on the persistence of reported earnings.  Early work by Brown and Ball (1967) and Magee (1974) finds that a significant portion of the variability of a firm’s earnings can be explained by industry-level news.  Lev (1983) reports a significant association between earnings persistence and economic factors including product type and industry competition.  We provide new evidence documenting the differential persistence of industry-wide and firm-specific earnings, and how these persistence parameters vary predictably with several economic fundamentals as well as interact with the accounting constructs of accruals and cash flows.  Finally, we contribute to the literature examining market participants’ use of industry-related earnings information in evaluating performance and valuing the firm.  Prior work examines how quickly industry-wide earnings information is impounded in stock prices, with mixed results (e. g. , Ayers and Freeman, 1997.  Elgers et al. , 2008).  Other research shows that analysts increase the relative amount of industry-wide earnings news incorporated into stock prices (Piotroski and Roulstone, 2004), even though investors' underreact to the industry-wide earnings news contained in analysts’ industry reports (Hui and Yeung, 2013).  Extending our analysis of earnings persistence, we contribute to this research by showing that investors not only underreact to the higher persistence of industry-wide earnings in general but also overreact to the lower persistence of firm-specific earnings.  Moreover, these effects are exacerbated by other economic fundamentals (e. g. , industry homogeneity, business model shocks) that investors also fail to fully understand.  The remainder of our paper proceeds as follows.  Section 2 outlines our sample and the measurement of our test variables.  Section 3 reports our primary tests regarding industry-wide and firm-specific earnings.  Section 4 extends this analysis to examine the cash flow and accrual components of industry-wide and firm-specific earnings, while Section 5 reports the results of several additional analyses.  Section 6 concludes.  <Middle> Data and variable measurement.  2. 1.  Sample.  Our sample selection strategy proceeds in two steps.  First, we impose only those data requirements necessary to calculate industry-wide earnings (as well as industry-wide accruals and cash flows) to ensure that we have the most representative measures of these variables for our analyses.  Thus, our sample selection starts with the 127,178 firms-years in the Compustat universe that have common shares listed on one of the three major U. S.  stock exchanges (NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ) and a GICS code during the period 1988–2011. 2 From this initial sample, we exclude financial institutions (two-digit GICS code¼40) because the nature of accruals for financial institutions differs from that for industrial firms, leaving 101,688 observations.  Next, we require each eight-digit GICS industry to have at least two firms with Compustat data on earnings and cash flows from the Statement of Cash Flows.  We use the remaining 81,415 observations to calculate the industry-wide measures of earnings, cash flows, and accruals defined in Section 2. 2.  In the second step of our sample selection strategy we obtain the final sample of observations for our empirical tests by merging the preliminary sample with the CRSP stock files, leaving 71,843 observations.  We then drop observations without the requisite data to calculate the measures of business model shocks, reducing our sample to 68,368 firm-years.  Lastly, to implement the Mishkin tests for market rationality, we further require one-year-ahead earnings, accruals, and stock returns data, leaving 60,259 firm-year observations in our final sample. 3 Panel A of Table 1 shows the average number of firms in our final sample for each five-year window in our sample period (except for the last window which is only four years).  There are fewer firms, on average, in the first window of the sample period, consistent with the general trend observed in Compustat.  Panel B shows the number of firms across NYSE size deciles.  As expected, the sample leans slightly toward small firms (e. g. , Fama and French, 2008).  Panel C shows the number and frequency of sample firm-years in each major industry sector defined by the two-digit GICS code, as well as the frequency of all firms in the Compustat-CRSP population.  This comparison shows that the industry composition of our sample is similar to that of the Compustat-CRSP population.  The largest sectors in the sample are information technology (20. 00%) industrials (19. 94%), consumer discretionary (19. 27%), and health care (13. 24%).  2. 2.  Computation of main variables and descriptive statistics.  Our tests require partitioning earnings into industry-wide and firm-specific components.  Following prior studies (e. g. , Brown and Ball, 1967.  Ayers and Freeman, 1997.  Hui and Yeung, 2013), industry-wide earnings represent the common component of earnings for all firms in the same industry, while firm-specific earnings are the deviations of individual firms' earnings from the industry average. 4 Specifically, let Earni,j,t denote the earnings of firm i in industry j for year t, measured as operating income after depreciation scaled by average assets (Sloan, 1996). 5 Assuming there are N firms in industry j, the industry-wide earnings of industry j for year t is defined as and firm-specific earnings of firm i in industry j for year t is defined as this.  Following the same approach, we also decompose industry-wide earnings (IndEt) into industry-wide operating cash flows (IndCFt) and industry-wide accruals (IndAcct), where IndCFt is the average of operating cash flows scaled by average assets (CFt) for all firms in the same industry, and IndAcct is the difference between IndEt and IndCFt.  Similarly, we decompose firm-specific earnings (FirmEt) into firm-specific operating cash flows (FirmCFt) and firm-specific accruals (FirmAcct), where FirmCFt is the difference between CFt and IndCFt, and FirmAcct is the difference between FirmEt and FirmCFt.  Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for the key variables of interest.  The median of Earn is 0. 044, indicating that return on assets for the typical firm in our sample is approximately 4. 4%.  The standard deviation of FirmE is almost twice that of IndE, consistent with our expectation that firm-specific profitability is more volatile than industry-wide profitability.  Turning to the accounting components of earnings, cash flows are positive (0. 073), on average, and accruals are negative ( 0. 058), consistent with prior work.  The statistics also indicate that the variation in cash flows and accruals is mainly driven by their firm-specific components.  The standard deviations of FirmCF and FirmAcc are approximately twice as large as the standard deviations of IndCF and IndAcc, respectively.  3.  Analysis of industry-wide and ﬁrm-speciﬁc earnings 3. 1.  Univariate results of differential persistence The basic premise of our paper is that the industry-wide component of earnings is more persistent than the firm-specific component.  To provide initial evidence on this issue, Fig.  1A (1B) displays time-series plots of average earnings for the top and bottom deciles of IndEt (FirmEt) over a [t 3, tþ3] window, where year zero is the year in which firms are ranked into the extreme deciles. 6 Fig.  1A shows that earnings performance is generally quite persistent for IndE, although there is some mean reversion for negative IndE.  In contrast, Fig.  1B shows a conspicuous pattern of mean reversion in earnings for both positive and negative FirmE, consistent with our expectation that the firm-specific component of earnings dissipates more rapidly than the industry-wide component.  More specifically, we find that earnings of firms in the bottom (top) decile of IndE are significantly more persistent than earnings of firms in the bottom (top) decile of FirmE (po0. 01). 7 3. 2.  Mispricing of industry-wide and firm-specific earnings components, To test the joint proposition that the industry-wide component of earnings is more persistent than firm-specific earnings but investors fail to fully appreciate this difference, we follow prior research (e. g. , Abarbanell and Bernard, 1992.  Sloan, 1996) and use the Mishkin (1983) approach to estimate the implicit weights placed on these earnings components in prices. 8 We first test whether the industry-wide component of earnings is more persistent than the firm-specific component by estimating the following ordinary least square (OLS) regression, where Earntþ 1 is reported earnings for year tþ1, and IndEt and FirmEt are the industry-wide and firm-specific components of earnings for year t, respectively.  We expect that the association between industry-wide earnings and future earnings is greater than the association between firm-specific earnings and future earnings (i. e. , a14a2).  To estimate the weights implicit in stock prices on the two earnings components in predicting one-year-ahead earnings, we use the following Mishkin non-linear generalized least square pricing regression model, where CARtþ 1 is the (size-adjusted) abnormal return for year tþ1 (i. e. , starting the fourth month after the end of fiscal year t), and Multiple is the earnings response coefficient. 9 If stock prices behave as if investors fail to fully appreciate the differential persistence of the earnings components, we expect α1¼α2 in model (5b).  Further, comparing coefficient estimates across models (5a) and (5b), we expect a14α1 and a2oα2.  Before we discuss the results of these estimations, panel A of Table 3 shows baseline regressions that forecast one-yearahead earnings with current total earnings in column (1) and the forecasting equation implicit in stock returns in column (2).  We find in column (1) that the estimated coefficient on current earnings (Earnt) is 0. 536.  Consistent with the market on average correctly pricing the persistence of total earnings, we find in column (2) that the implied weight on Earnt is 0. 534, which is statistically indistinguishable from the estimated persistence of earnings (p¼0. 95).  Turning to the main findings, column (1) of panel B presents the results of estimating Eq.  (5a).  The estimated coefficient on industry-wide earnings (IndE) is 0. 760, significantly greater than the 0. 487 estimated coefficient on firm-specific earnings (FirmE) (po0. 01).  Thus, as predicted, the evidence indicates that the industry-wide component of earnings is significantly more persistent than the firm-specific component. 10 Column (2) of panel B shows the estimated weights on industry-wide and firm-specific earnings implicit in stock prices.  The estimated coefficients on IndE (0. 587) and FirmE (0. 523) are not significantly different from each other (p¼0. 60).  Furthermore, the χ2 tests comparing estimated coefficients in columns (1) and (2) indicate that stock prices significantly underweight IndE (i. e. , 0. 587o0. 760, po0. 01) but overweight FirmE (i. e. , 0. 52340. 487, p¼0. 04). 11 Taken together, these results support our prediction that investors fixate on reported earnings without recognizing the higher (lower) persistence of performance attributable to the industry-wide (firm-specific) component of earnings. 12 3. 3.  Cross-sectional tests.  In this section, we report the results of two additional tests exploring potentially important sources of cross-sectional variation in the persistence of industry-wide and firm-specific earnings.  Specifically, we consider whether industry homogeneity (Section 3. 3. 1) or business model shocks (Section 3. 3. 2) affect the persistence of earnings components and their pricing by investors.  3. 3. 1.  Industry homogeneity.  When firms in an industry are relatively homogeneous (i. e. , they transact in similar factor and product markets and employ similar production technologies), their performance is more likely to be influenced by the same set of underlying economic forces.  As a result, industry-wide earnings should be more informative about firms’ future earnings than in industries where firms are relatively heterogeneous.  If investors fail to distinguish the higher persistence of the industrywide component of earnings, and if this effect is exacerbated by industry homogeneity, then we expect the results reported above to be stronger for more homogeneous industries.  To examine the effects of industry homogeneity, in Table 4 we repeat our primary tests partitioning the sample using three alternative proxies for industry homogeneity13.  In panel A, an industry is regarded as homogeneous if the firms in the industry are of similar size (e. g. , Albuquerque, 2009.  Ecker et al. , 2013).  We define an industry as homogeneous (heterogeneous) if the standard deviation of market value of firms in the industry in a given year is below (above) the median standard deviation of all industries in our sample in that year.  The results reveal three notable differences between homogeneous and heterogeneous industries.  First, the forecasting equation has significantly greater explanatory power in homogeneous industries (adjusted R2¼49. 01%) compared to heterogeneous industries (adjusted R2¼37. 96%) (po0. 01).  Second, the estimated persistence of IndE in homogeneous industries (0. 789) is significantly greater than in heterogeneous industries (0. 664) (p¼0. 03).  In contrast, there is relatively little difference in the estimated persistence of FirmE across homogeneous (0. 498) and heterogeneous industries (0. 462) (p¼0. 36).  Taken together, these effects result in a larger differential persistence (p¼0. 09) between industry-wide earnings and firm-specific earnings in homogeneous industries than in heterogeneous industries.  Third, building on these results, the market underreaction to industry-wide earnings is significant only in homogeneous industries (po0. 01).  The results reported in panel A thus support our contention that industry homogeneity contributes not only to greater persistence of the industry-wide component of earnings, but also to greater mispricing of this component by investors.  Our second proxy classifies an industry as homogeneous if the operating activities of firms in that industry have similar characteristics.  In panel B of Table 4, an industry is homogeneous (heterogeneous) if the dispersion of firms’ operating activities in that industry in a given year is below (above) the median dispersion of all industries in our sample in that year.  14 Our third proxy for industry homogeneity is the dispersion in the number of business segments.  In panel C of Table 4, an industry is homogeneous (heterogeneous) if the average number of business segments of firms in the industry in a given year is below (above) the median of all industries in our sample in that year.  The results using either of these alternative proxies for industry homogeneity are consistent with those reported in panel A.  Specifically, the earnings components have greater explanatory power for forecasting future earnings in homogenous industries, driven by a relatively high persistence of industry-wide earnings compared to firm-specific earnings for firms in these industries.  Moreover, the market underreaction to industry-wide earnings is significant only in homogeneous industries.  In sum, the results in Table 4 show that our main finding that industry-wide earnings are more persistent and investors fail to understand this property is stronger for homogeneous industries, as expected.  3. 3. 2.  Business model shocks.  The persistence of earnings should be highly influenced by the economic environment in which firms operate.  When there is a shock to that environment, earnings persistence is likely to diminish.  Industry-wide business shocks, such as changing customer tastes, likely affect the persistence of industry-wide earnings.  Firms in the same industry, however, may react differently to business shocks or experience a firm-specific shock, such as a technological innovation, thus affecting the persistence of firm-specific earnings.  We test whether industry-wide (firm-specific) shocks reduce the persistence of industry-wide (firm-specific) earnings by estimating the following OLS regression, where IndShockt (FirmShockt) is an indicator variable representing the presence of a large industry (firm) business shock in year t.  We expect negative coefficient estimates for the interaction variables IndEt  IndShockt and FirmEt  FirmShockt (i. e. 