
Environmental sustainability, climate change and global warming
have attracted increasing public awareness (Bloch Name, 2012.  Ma,
2015).  Many countries have set and ratiﬁed nationally determined
contributions in the recent Paris agreement, targeting to keep the global
average temperature increase well below 2 °C above pre-industrial
levels.  China, who accounts for half of the world coal consumption
and contributes to 25% of the world carbon dioxide emission (Energy
Information Administration, 2016), in particular, sets a goal of achieving
the peak before 2030, lowering the emission per unit of GDP by 60–65%
from its 2005 level, and increasing the non-fossil fuel share in the primary energy consumption to 20%.  A sweeping energy evolution is called
for in China since 2014 with new priority placed on environmental goals
and the deployment of clean energy. 1 However, it remains a challenge
to meet the goal considering the uneven distribution of energy
resources and unbalanced economic growth with a high degree of
inequality (Herrerias Name, 2013.  Song and Zheng, 2012).  For China
to align the long-term low carbon energy strategy with economic development goals, the central government has set and broken down the carbon and energy intensity reduction target at the level of individual
provinces.  Motivated by the context characterized by heterogeneous
energy strategy and economic development paths in each of these provinces, this paper addresses three main questions.  1) does energy play a
role in promoting provincial growth together with the physical and
human capital.  2) how and to what extent the disaggregate energy
source is responsible for economic growth.  and 3) what is the causal
direction between total and disaggregate energy use and growth of
economy in each of these provinces, if any.  The answers will provide
rich policy implications for a better understanding of interaction between localized development path and energy conservation to set an
implementable emission reduction target for sustainable development. 
In the literature, many scholars examine the cointegration and Granger causal link between energy use and economic development in China
using national time series data (Shiu and Lam, 2004.  Zhang and Cheng,
2009.  Bloch Name, 2012).  While country level studies provide some insights on the relationship between energy consumption and economic
growth, they have at least two major limitations.  In terms of method,
the power of unit root and cointegration tests in time series studies is low
due to a short time span (Campbell and Perron, 1991).  the conventional
causality tests using time series have a high risk of wrongly rejecting the
null hypothesis of no cointegration (Yalta and Cakar, 2012) and therefore
can lead to inaccurate conclusions on the direction of causality.  In addition, previous studies using national-level time series ignore the signiﬁcant heterogeneity and interdependence across Chinese provinces.  The
endowments of energy resources in China are unevenly distributed.  for
example, coal is mainly reserved in Shanxi, while oil and natural gas are
mainly in Xinjiang and Sichuan. 2 The economic structure and energy intensity have large variations across provinces as well.  Fig.  1 illustrates
the provincial differences in economic structure and energy intensity in
year 2014.  The blue, red and green bars indicate the share of gross output
values from the primary, the secondary and the tertiary industry, respectively.  The purple solid line depicts the energy intensity for each of the 30
provinces (Tibet excluded).  The stacked bar chart shows that output from
the tertiary industry exceeds that from the primary and the secondary
industries for coastal rich provinces such as Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin,
Hainan, Jiangsu and Zhejiang.  Among the 30 provinces, there are eight
resource-rich provinces such as Hebei, Shanxi, Inner Mongolia, Guizhou,
Gansu, Qinghai, Ningxia and Xinjiang with energy intensity above the average which is indicated by “*”.  Compared with existing studies, by using
the provincial panel, our study offers improved test power over conventional time series methods, which also enables us to account for marked
heterogeneity in economic structure and energy distribution across provinces.  The growth-energy nexus analysis at a disaggregated level matters
for local regulators to evaluate and act on differentiated strategies of energy conservation and efﬁciency enhancement, and is also vital for the
central government to coordinate the regional development and efforts
in reducing resource costs and emissions for speciﬁc energy source. 
A limited but growing number of studies recently exploit provincial
data and panel techniques to investigate the energy-growth nexus in
China, albeit producing mixed results (S. S.  Wang Name, 2011.  Fei Name,
2011.  Zhang and Xu, 2012.  Herrerias Name, 2013).  For example, using
data from 28 provinces over the period 1995–2007, Y.  Wang Name
(2011) and S. S.  Wang Name (2011) ﬁnd a uni-directional causal relationship from GDP to energy consumption.  Zhang and Xu (2012) identify
the bidirectional linkage for the eastern region, while Fei Name (2011)
conclude the growth effect that energy consumption leads to economic
development for the same part of China.  While no consensus has been
obtained, results from the panel analysis are relatively more reliable
than that from national studies.  One shortcoming of these studies is,
however, that they did not explore the impact of disaggregate energy
sources on the province-speciﬁc economic growth.  therefore, conclusions made on the analysis of aggregate energy cannot be generalized to disaggregate energy within each of the administrative boundary,
that is, the nexus between total energy use and local growth may not
hold and be equally applied to disaggregate energy source across provinces, and thus policy suggestions based on this body of studies are hard
to implement (Soytas and Sari, 2006). 
The brief review highlights the importance to account for provincial
heterogeneity and examine not only the aggregate energy but also the
disaggregate energy sources.  This paper ﬁlls the gap that little empirical
work has been conducted to examine the causal relationship between
economic development and energy consumption at both the aggregate
and disaggregate levels using provincial data and most recent panel
econometric methods within a human-capital augmented production
framework. 
Furthermore, this paper is one of the ﬁrst studies that incorporate
sub-national level human capital in the multivariate framework with
a focus in China.  Despite the fact that human capital is a crucial input
to economic growth, it only attracts attention in the broad energygrowth nexus literature very recently (Pablo-Romero and SánchezBraza, 2015.  Fang and Chang, 2016.  Fang Name, forthcoming), probably
due to lack of quality human capital data. 3 Theoretically, human capital
can be linked to energy consumption through multiple channels.  First,
human capital can increase income, which may then cause more energy
consumption.  Second, human capital can stimulate R&D of new energy
and accelerate the transition to energy-efﬁcient technologies (Li and
Lin, 2016).  This mechanism contributes to the negative association between human capital and energy.  Third, if human capital is accumulated
through education and campaign on energy conservative awareness
among the common people, more human capital is linked to less energy
consumption (Fang Name, forthcoming).  Lastly, economic structure also
matters.  With the development of human capital, economies that experience rapid industrialization and urbanization may see huge reliance
on energy.  but when the country develops to a service-led economy,
energy reliance may be reduced with further development of human
capital (Arbex and Perobelli, 2010).  By and large, the relationship between energy and human capital is uncertain and a rigorous analysis
is required. 
Our contributions to the existing energy-growth nexus literature
lie in three aspects.  First, we incorporate the input of human capital
to the energy-augmented neoclassical production function.  Due to
reasons mentioned above, human capital should not be ignored in
the multivariate framework for the energy-growth analysis.  However, due to data availability or other reasons, we do not ﬁnd many
studies employing this framework.  At Chinese provincial level, the
data availability, particularly that for a quality measure of human
capital, is even more problematic.  Fortunately, the Chinese human
capital database established by the China Center for Human Capital
and Labor Market Research of Central University of Finance and
Economics makes this research possible.  It includes national and
provincial human capital stock in both the nominal and real terms
for years starting from 1985 to 2014.  The uniqueness of the data
makes our paper the ﬁrst of its kind. 
Second, this paper takes into consideration the cross-sectional
dependence and provincial heterogeneity using the advanced panel
econometric techniques and provides more reliable test results and
fresh empirical evidences on the nature of the relation between
economic growth and energy consumption.  Speciﬁcally, the crosssectionally augmented IPS (CIPS) test proposed by Pesaran (2007) is
used to check the stationarity of the data.  Westerlund (2007)’s errorcorrection based test is bootstrapped to examine the presence of
cointegrating relationship relaxing the assumption of cross-sectional
independence.  Furthermore, we adopt the continuously-updated
fully-modiﬁed OLS approach (Bai Name, 2009) which is valid under the
cross-sectional dependence rather than the panel heterogeneous
FMOLS (Pedroni, 2001) and DOLS (Stock and Watson, 1993) to estimate
the coefﬁcients of the long-run relationship.  None of the existing studies
on China have employed these toolkits to avoid lack of test power and
biasness of estimates when there are strong interdependences across
provinces.  The presence and direction of the causality between variables
are also examined using a panel bootstrap method (Emirmahmutoglu
and Kose, 2011) that allows for heterogeneity and cross-sectional
dependence. 
Third, we examine the causal relationship between economic
growth and both aggregate and disaggregate energy sources that are
available from the China Energy Statistical Yearbooks (various years
1995–2014), including raw coal, coke, crude oil, petroleum products
(fuel oil, gasoline, diesel, kerosene), natural gas, and electricity.  This is
one of the few studies that comprehensively investigate the disaggregate energy consumption types.  Rich policy recommendations based
on these results are thus credibly provided. 
Our results indicate strong cross-sectional dependence in the provincial panel, and we conﬁrm the presence of cointegration relationship
between GDP, investment, human capital and various energy variables
even after taking into consideration interdependence across provinces. 
Using a continuously updated fully modiﬁed estimation proposed by
Bai Name (2009), we ﬁnd that human capital is a crucial factor input
which exerts about 2–3 times effects that investment has on GDP. 
energy, both in aggregate or disaggregate forms as coal, crude oil,
petroleum products, natural gas and electricity, plays a signiﬁcant role
in economic development in China as well.  Therefore, both human capital and energy are indispensable in stimulating economic growth. 
Using the bootstrap panel Granger causality test which is appropriate
within the cross-sectional dependence framework, we ﬁnd Granger
causal relationships running from GDP to petroleum products and
electricity, and bi-directional relationship between GDP and coal,
coke, natural gas and total energy consumption in the whole China. 
For individual provinces, causal relationships vary signiﬁcantly.  This
has important policy implications to especially local governments in
the sense that while following the macro- and strategic policies from
the central government, local governments should take initiatives and
evaluate their unique stages of economic development and energy status as well as the causal relationship between the two before taking
micro- and speciﬁc measures. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2
reviews the energy proﬁle for China as a whole and the energy balance
structure of the primary energy sources for each of the 30 provinces as
well as the energy-growth nexus literature with a focus on China. 
Section 3 provides data descriptions and a preliminary analysis.  Econometric methods are discussed in Section 4.  Main results are presented
and discussed in Section 5 and the last section concludes with policy
recommendations. 
<Middle> An overview of Chinese energy proﬁle and energy-growth
nexus studies. 
2. 1.  Energy proﬁle in China. 
As the world's most populous country with a fast-growing economy,
China becomes increasingly inﬂuential in the world energy market with
rapidly rising energy demand because of the swiftly modernizing economy and sizeable industrialization.  China becomes the world's largest
global energy consumer in 2011.  It is also the world's top coal producer,
consumer and the world's second-largest oil consumer behind the
United States (Energy Information Administration, 2015).  This subsection ﬁrst provides an overview of the energy proﬁle for China as
a whole.  Subsequently, by exploiting information from the energy
balance table of the primary energy sources4 for individual provinces,
we show the link of production, consumption and inter-province
trade of coal, oil, gas, and electricity, using the annual average values
during the period of 1995–2014. 
Fig.  2 shows the annual growth rate of GDP and total energy
consumption from 1980 to 2015.  Two observations are drawn from
the ﬁgure.  First, there seems to be a co-movement of growth in output
and energy consumption.  speciﬁcally, energy consumption growth
before 1995 is slightly lagging behind economic growth, while afterwards the growth cycle in energy is moving ahead of economic growth. 
To rigorously examine the relationship between the two variables, a
cointegration analysis is necessary.  Second, the ﬁgure shows that the
growth rate of energy consumption is slower than GDP growth rate
until 2002 and later exceeds GDP growth rate within a short period of
time during 2003–2005.  this suggests a clear downward trend of energy
intensity (deﬁned as the ratio of energy consumption to GDP) with an
interruption during 2003–2005. 
The driving forces governing energy intensity change in China have
been widely debated in the literature. 5 First, China's industrial structure
has shifted from energy-intensive heavy industries toward export- and
consumption-oriented tertiary industries (Kambara, 1992.  Huang,
1993).  Using the decomposition analysis, Song and Zheng (2012) ﬁnd
that the structural change does not play a major role in reducing energy
intensity while Garbaccio Name (1999) reach the opposite conclusion. 
Using the econometric analysis and a panel dataset of 30 provinces
from 2000 to 2012, Yan (2015) concludes that the structural change
toward more energy-intensive industries explains the rise in energy
intensity.  Zeng Name (2014) show that the slight increase in energy
intensity since 2002 to 2005 is associated with the construction boom
across the nation as well as the heavy industrialization strategy for
provinces along the coast, which leads to the boosted production of
energy-intensive products such as aluminum, cement and steel.  Second,
though the role played by structural change in reducing energy intensity remains controversial, the previous studies seem to agree on the
role played by technological progress which lowers energy consumption required to produce a speciﬁc product in a particular sector
(Fisher-Vanden Name, 2004.  Li and Lin, 2014.  Wang Name, 2013). 
Third, the market reform in the energy sector (Liao Name, 2007.  He
and Wang, 2007) improves energy efﬁciency and incentivizes the
deployment of new material (Sinton and Fridley, 2000.  Wu, 2012). 
Glomsrød and Wei (2005) point out since 1994 the dual-price system
in the energy sector was gradually reformed and there is a deep level
of marketization since then.  In addition to the main driving forces,
several other studies identify alternate inﬂuential factors such as urbanization, total population, export and sectoral ownership structure to
explain the nature and causes of energy intensity change in China
(Yan, 2015.  Yang Name, 2016.  Zheng Name, 2011.  Yu, 2012). 
Fig.  3 presents the consumption dynamics of three major energy
sources—coal, crude oil and natural gas for 1980–2015.  We can see
that China's energy consumption is dominated by coal, the energy
source that China can increase in the short term and is available in
many provinces.  The demand for energy increases tremendously after
2000s since joining the World Trade Organization (WTO).  This leads
to an export-oriented industrial expansion and the associated rise in demands for energy, especially for coal.  An alternative driving force of the
rise in energy demand, primarily for oil, is the exponential growth of
motor vehicles.  From 2001 to 2014, the privately-owned cars increase
from 7. 7 million to 123. 4 million, at a rate of 24% per annum (National
Bureau of Statistics, 2016). 
Fig.  4 portrays the shares of disaggregate energy sources in total
energy consumption from 1980 to 2015.  Before the occurrence of ﬁnancial crisis in China, fossil fuels including coal, crude oil and natural gas
account for 92. 5% of China's energy consumption in year 2007, followed
by hydro-, nuclear and wind power.  In 2009, China pledged to cut
its carbon intensity by 40%–45% by 2020 compared with the 2005
level of carbon emission per unit of GDP under pressure from international climate change negotiations.  To meet this voluntary emission
reduction target, there is an upward trend in the consumption of natural
gas, a relative cleaner burning alternate compared to coal and petroleum products in the industrial sector.  In fact, the share of natural gas
consumption in the total energy consumption has been tripled from
1. 9% to 5. 7% during the period 1994–2014.  In comparison, the share of
coal consumption has been declined from 75% to 65. 6% within the
same period.  The declining trend of coal consumption, on one hand,
comes from energy efﬁciency and the China's goal to increase environmental sustainability when the Chinese government plans to cap coal
use to 62% of total primary energy consumption by 2020 in the commitment to reduce air pollution and carbon emission (Energy Information
Administration, 2015).  On the other hand, it might be attributed to
slower economic growth especially since 2012 as ﬁxed asset investment, industrial production and exports declined (Cattaneo Name,Next, we present the energy balance tables detailing production,
consumption and trade for each of the primary disaggregate energy
sources—coal, oil, natural gas and electricity— individually so as to lay
out the background information before the empirical analysis. 
2. 1. 1.  Coal. 
The underpricing of coal products and abundant domestic stocks
during the central planning era6 leads China to rely heavily on coal
consumption (Crompton and Wu, 2005), with the share of coal in
total energy consumption hovering around 70% during 1985–2011. 
The share starts to shrink from the beginning of the eleventh Five Year
Plan (2006–2010).  As mentioned above, this might be attributed to
much of China's effort to promote energy efﬁciency and emission reduction by clamping down on its downstream user (mainly heavy industry)
and limiting the growth of coal use. 7 The downward trend in the share
of coal consumption is also associated with the economic slowdown in
coal-consuming sectors, moderate demand growth of electricity, and
price reform in the coal market. 
Table A1 in the appendix presents the annual average supply, demand, and trade of coal during the period of 1995–2014 across Chinese
provinces located in seven different regions. 8 There are three balance
relationships.  (1) The total primary energy supply equals the sum of
indigenous production, trade balance and the stock change, where the
trade balance measures the difference between imports and exports. 
(2) The total energy consumption equals loss plus end energy consumption less of the net input value during the transformation process. 
(3) The statistical difference accounts for the error between total supply
and total consumption.  The last column reports the annual average ratio
of trade balance to the total energy supply during 1995–2014.  A negative value implies that on average a province is the producer and exporter of coal.  a positive value shows that a province is scarce of and highly
dependent on coal imports.  Among the 30 provinces, Shanxi, Shaanxi,
Inner Mongolia, Xinjiang, Ningxia and Henan in the northern and
central part of China contain and export most of their coal resources. 
Guizhou is the only southern province which has abundant coal
resources.  In comparison, Hainan, Shanghai, Tianjin, Guangdong and
Zhejiang located along the eastern coastal line are economically developed, but N90% of supply of coal depends on imports from inland
provinces. 
2. 1. 2.  Oil. 
Although coal is the dominant energy source, oil and petroleum
products are also essential.  China's oil demand growth is boosted
by several factors, such as economic growth, trade, reﬁning capabilities,
petroleum inventory building and shift of transportation sector (Energy
Information Administration, 2015).  The increase in the number of
passenger vehicles with the rising middle class in China, along with
expansion of petrochemical industries might be one of the most important factors driving the consumption of oil and petroleum products in
China, among which diesel and gasoline dominate other oil types such
as fuel oil and kerosene (see Fig.  5). 
The share of oil in the total energy consumption, as shown in Fig.  4,
peaks at 22% in year 2000.  After 2010 the annual growth of oil consumption slows down, reﬂecting the impacts of global ﬁnancial crisis and
economic downturn as well as China's efforts to reduce capacity overbuilding and excessive investment in pollution-intensive industries. 
Different from the coal consumption met by the indigenous production,
China as the world's second largest oil consuming country (Energy
Information Administration, 2016), heavily relies on oil imports and
searching for new reserves in Tarim Basin in the northwest and offshore
in the South China Sea.  Fig. 