
Accounting covenants are widely used in private lending agreements to mitigate conﬂicts of interest between shareholders and lenders.  These covenants increase contracting eﬃciency by providing the basis for the optimal allocation of control 
rights when contracts are incomplete ( Watts and Zimmerman, 1986; Roberts and Suﬁ, 2009a; Christensen and Nikolaev, 
1 Auditors are required to check borrowers’ compliance with covenants in private lending 
2012; Christensen Name, 2016 ).  
agreements under GAAP.  In particular, accounting and auditing standards require auditors to conﬁrm the going concern assumption and to ensure the appropriate classiﬁcation of debt as current or non-current, which entails checking covenant 
compliance.  In addition to these standard obligations to verify compliance, however, auditors may offer a letter providing 
speciﬁc negative assurance directly to lenders by certifying that they have no knowledge of any default.  What is unclear 
is whether this additional covenant compliance assurance occurs at random, or whether it can be explained by eﬃcient 
contracting.  To date, the literature has been largely silent on the conditions under which lenders seek such assurance from 
auditors.  We seek to address this question in this paper.  
The fact that auditors report on borrowers’ covenant compliance directly to lenders may be economically important 
because of its effects on auditor liability.  Under the GAAP regime, auditors are not liable to lenders because lenders are 
regarded as non-contractual third parties to standard audit arrangements.  Nevertheless, auditors may become liable to third 
parties depending on whether auditors are aware that ﬁnancial statements are to be used for particular purposes by known 
parties, and whether there is any conduct by the auditors linking them to third parties ( Feinman, 2015 ).  Because they require 
auditors to write to lenders to state they have no knowledge of any defaults on the covenants, auditor covenant compliance 
assurance clauses are likely to extend auditors’ liability to lenders, even though there is no contract between them.  This is 
because it will be more diﬃcult for auditors to convince a court that they were not aware who they were reporting to and 
what their reports were to be used for. 