
The last decade has seen increasing application of efﬁciency frontier
models taking the material1 balance principle (MBP) into account to
measure ﬁrm and regional level environmental performance and obtain
both environmental information and economic outcomes (Coelli Name,
2007.  Hoang and Coelli, 2011.  Reinhard Name, 2000).  The main acknowledged advantage of the MBP approach over other methods is that it is
founded upon on the Law of the Conservation of Matter (Lauwers,
2009).  According to this law, pollutant emissions from production activities are considered waste residuals (Ayres, 1995.  Ayres and Kneese,
1969.  Pethig, 2006), and are measured as the balance between the potentially pollutant materials that enter the production system (nutrients
from agricultural fertilizers, for example) and the materials that are
transformed into ﬁnal goods (the nutrients that plants draw from the
soil, for example).  From this perspective, it is of signiﬁcant importance
to control the quantity and composition of inputs in the production process when dealing with the problem of environmental degradation,
because the pollution generated in producing a given level of output
will vary according to the quality and quantity of the inputs. 
Following this logic, several authors (Lauwers, 2009.  Van Meensel Name, 2010a.  Welch and Barnum, 2009) have shown that the integration of
the MBP into efﬁciency models also has major implications for decision
makers.  They show that a strategy for a more efﬁcient management of inputs to reduce pollution generation may provide “win-win” outcomes,
that conciliate the economic interest of ﬁrms with the environmental
concern of society.  For instance, reducing the overuse of inputs by improving technical efﬁciency has a twofold beneﬁt, since it reduces both
production costs and environmental pressure.  Likewise, it is implicit in
the MBP approach that part of the improvement in environmental
allocative efﬁciency can be achieved while decreasing costs.  For example,
Lauwers (2009) and Van Meensel Name (2010a, 2010b) measure environmental economic trade-offs in a sample of farms, and ﬁnd half the
sample able to achieve simultaneous improvements in cost allocation efﬁciency and environmental efﬁciency, by changing the proportions of
their input factors to combinations that are both more environmentally
friendly and less costly.  Similarly, Welch and Barnum (2009), in a sample
of electricity generation plants, ﬁnd some that are able to achieve joint
cost and environmental beneﬁts, by moving from the technical efﬁciency
point to the minimum cost point or to the point of lowest pollution.  Evidence obtained by Nguyen Name (2012) also suggests that there exists a
positive economic–environmental trade-off path for allocative efﬁciency. 
Despite this evidence, typical MBP measures of environmental
allocative efﬁciency (Coelli Name, 2007.  Nguyen Name, 2012) do not
integrate production costs.  just as cost-efﬁciency measures do not
consider environmental pressure.  They compute the maximum potential reduction in environmental damage without considering
cost and the maximum potential cost reduction irrespective of environmental performance.  In this paper, we propose to integrate cost and environmental pressure into two alternative measures of cross-constrained
allocative efﬁciency.  We see this integration as beneﬁcial from two perspectives.  The ﬁrst advantage of the cost-constrained approach, is that
the proposed environmental allocative efﬁciency measure will seek pollution reduction input recombination consistent both with continued
production of given outputs and with a given cost.  This makes these
measures particularly useful for assessing pollution-reduction potential
in a setting where there is reluctance to compromise economic performance.  The second beneﬁt, from the environmentally-constrained perspective, is that the cost allocative efﬁciency measures will also show
the maximum feasible improvement in cost allocative efﬁciency that
can be obtained while maintaining given environmental standards.  The
value added of the cross-constrained method is that it will also bring
into the analysis feasible intermediate options for efﬁcient substitution
of inputs between the minimum cost and the minimum pollutant material input that could potentially lead to environmental gains (economic
gains) without detriment to the economic (environmental) outcome. 
Moreover, by extending the standard MBP cost-environment efﬁciency model to include these measures, we are able to distinguish
improvements in allocative efﬁciency that traditionally involve no
detriment neither to the ﬁrm's cost performance nor its environmental
performance (constrained measures) from those that involve a positive
or negative trade-off.  In this way, it provides information for environmental planning strategies.  It allows a distinction between environmental objectives that could be achieved while safeguarding or improving
economic competitiveness and policies that would restrict economic activity.  The standard MBP model of cost and environmental efﬁciency do
not provide this information. 
To integrate costs and environmental in cross-constrained efﬁciency
measures, we apply the constrained multi-objective optimization method, which is extensively used to map efﬁcient solutions in multi-criteria
analysis (Chankong and Haimes, 1983.  Haimes Name, 1971.  Marler and
Arora, 2004).  The advantage of this method is that it identiﬁes efﬁcient
solutions without requiring ex ante speciﬁcation of a utility function. 
Our work adapts the variation proposed by Mavrotas (2009) to ﬁnd
the optimal pollutant material input-to-cost ratio.  The efﬁciency indices
are computed from these optimal values. 
To illustrate the usefulness of this method, we apply the efﬁciency
measures to a sample of greenhouse horticultural farms in Spain.  In
doing so, we focus on the environmental pressure exerted by the use
of nitrogen fertilizers.  Our approach enables quantiﬁcation of the potential reduction in nitrogen input that can be achieved with no increase
(and even a potential reduction) in costs, by improving both technical
and allocative efﬁciency. 
The paper is organized as follows.  In the next section, we describe the
methodology.  Section 3 presents the sample description and empirical
results, and the subsequent sections contain a discussion of the results
and the conclusions to be drawn from them. 
<Middle> Methodology. 
In this section we reproduce the standard MBP joint cost and environmental efﬁciency model (Coelli Name, 2007) and extend it to include
some new cross-constrained allocative efﬁciency indicators.  Our costconstrained environmental allocative efﬁciency indexes are computed
with given outputs and given costs.  The environment-constrained cost
allocative efﬁciency indicator is determined analogously.  Finally, a decomposition of allocative efﬁciency makes a distinction between environmental (cost) allocative efﬁciency gains involving no economic
(environmental) trade-off and those resulting in a cost increase (environmental degradation). 
2. 1.  Standard MBP Cost and Environmental Efﬁciency ModelConsider a set of ﬁrms that use N inputs, x Є R+
N to produce M outputs
M using a technology that may be represented by the feasible production as. 
Assume that the production technology satisﬁes the standard axioms
(Shephard, 1970), including convexity and free disposability of inputs
and outputs. 