Introduction Accounting research has long shown that managers face pressure to meet earnings benchmarks and that they react to this pressure by manipulating accruals and real activities when their firm is at risk of missing benchmarks (e. g. , Dechow et al.  2010, §5. 5).  Survey evidence suggests that, in order to meet benchmarks, managers prefer taking real actions over manipulating accruals (Graham et al. , 2005).  Empirical studies provide strong evidence for real activities management (e. g.  Roychowdhury, 2006.  Cohen et al. , 2008).  Importantly, real activities management is difficult for investors to detect in the short run (Kothari et al. , 2016) but potentially has negative consequences for firms’ long-run performance (e. g. , Bhojraj et al. , 2009.  Cohen and Zarowin, 2010).  In this study, we provide evidence of a previously undocumented consequence of real activities management to meet earnings benchmarks – compromises in workplace safety.  In particular, we show that benchmark beating is associated with higher workplace injuries and that the strength of this association varies with employee workloads and discretionary expenses that include safety-related expenditures.  Earnings benchmarks can relate to workplace safety in at least two ways.  First, if managers believe that the firm may miss expectations under the ordinary course of business, they may increase employees’ workloads or pressure them to work faster.  In response, employees can compromise safety by overexerting themselves or by circumventing safety procedures that slow the flow of work.  Second, managers may cut explicit and implicit safety costs, such as the costs of maintaining equipment and training employees, in their attempts to report higher earnings.  Along these lines, Graham et al.  (2005) report that some CFOs admit to cutting maintenance spending in order to meet earnings benchmarks.  To the extent managers take such actions, workplace safety will deteriorate when firms struggle to meet expectations.  We examine whether firms suspected of managing earnings to meet expectations exhibit higher workplace injury rates than other firms.  We follow prior research on earnings management and define firms that meet or just beat expectations as suspect firms (e. g. , Burgstahler and Dichev, 1997.  Degeorge et al. , 1999).  Using establishment-level (e. g. , store or factory) injury data from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) for the 2002–2011 period, we find that about one in every 24 employees is injured in firms that meet or just beat analyst earnings forecasts, compared to about one in 27 in firms that miss or comfortably beat forecasts.  In multivariate analyses, where we control for a variety of establishmentand firm-level characteristics as well as establishment (or firm) and year fixed effects to account for unobservable factors, we find that the association between benchmark beating and injury rates remains statistically and economically significant.  For example, controlling for other factors, injury rates are five to fifteen percent higher in periods where a firm meets or just beats analyst forecasts than in other periods.  We provide evidence that the relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety likely stems from two types of real actions that managers take.  high workloads and cuts to safety-related expenditures.  We utilize production per employee and revenue per employee as measures of employee workloads, and abnormal discretionary expenses per employee to gauge cuts to safety-related expenditures.  We find that injury rates are more strongly associated with production per employee in firms that meet or just beat forecasts.  We also find evidence that injury rates are higher when firms that meet or just beat forecasts have abnormally low per-employee discretionary expenditures. 1 Taken together, the evidence suggests that both pressure to increase worker productivity and cuts to safety-related expenditures contribute to the relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety.  We use three settings to examine cross-sectional variation in the relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety.  First, we find that the relation is weaker in industries with high union membership.  This is consistent with unions’ aim to ensure reasonable workloads, work speed, and safety (Kaufman, 2005).  It is also consistent with the findings in the literature that, compared to non-union workers, union workers are less likely to perceive that taking risks is a part of their job (Gillen et al. , 2002), and unionization leads to fewer workplace injuries (Morantz, 2013).  Consistent with unions’ goal of workplace safety, our evidence suggests that unions mitigate the extent to which pressure to meet earnings expectations translates into reduced safety.  Second, we find a weaker relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety when workers’ compensation insurance premiums are more sensitive to injury claims.  Workers’ compensation insurance is a state-mandated program and its premiums are primarily determined by state requirements.  Insurance premiums depend, in part, on a multiplier based on the employer's workplace safety record.  A given change in the multiplier thus has a greater dollar impact on premiums when the baseline insurance premium is higher.  We test and find that the association between benchmark beating and workplace safety is weaker in establishments that are located in states where each additional injury has a higher impact on workers’ compensation premium.  Third, we utilize government contracting as an incentive for keeping safer work environments.  Government contracts typically include terms that prohibit bids from firms deemed to have unsafe work environments.  Consistent with the government contractors’ heightened focus on safety, we find that the relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety is weaker for firms that do more business with the government.  In our main analyses, we focus on analyst forecasts as our measure of earnings expectations since prior research indicates that meeting analyst forecasts is a more important benchmark than meeting prior year's earnings or avoiding losses (Dechow et al. , 2003), and that the market perceives missing analyst forecasts as a more negative signal than a decrease in yearover-year earnings (Brown and Caylor, 2005). 