 1.  Introduction  This paper examines whether and when the information environment of peer ﬁrms in  an industry affects the cost of capital for other ﬁrms in the industry.  We predict and ﬁnd  that the peer information environment is negatively associated with a ﬁrm’s cost of capital  when there is less publicly available ﬁrm-speciﬁc information and this negative association  shrinks as the amount of ﬁrm-speciﬁc information increases.  This paper provides evidence  that information about peer-ﬁrms has externalities on the cost of capital for related ﬁrms  and that these externalities are time-varying.   We examine whether the information environment of peer ﬁrms (henceforth, peer information) affects the cost of capital  for related ﬁrms in an industry and whether the importance of this effect depends on the amount of information available  directly from the related ﬁrm (henceforth, ﬁrm information).  Speciﬁcally, we hypothesize that peer information has a larger  economic effect on a ﬁrm’s cost of capital when ﬁrm information is scarce, and that these externalities reduce when the  amount of ﬁrm information increases and substitutes for peer information.  Recent research ﬁnds evidence that a ﬁrm’s disclosure has important economic consequences for its peers.  For example, a ﬁrm’s disclosure inﬂuences peer ﬁrms’ (i)  stock prices, (ii) stock liquidity, and (iii) investment decisions (e. g. , Foster, 1981.  Bushee and Leuz, 2005.  Badertscher et al. ,  2013 ).  We extend this literature by examining temporal changes in the importance of peer effects from when ﬁrms are  newly public with limited ﬁrm information to when ﬁrms have a longer history of public disclosure and relatively more  ﬁrm information.   Our hypothesis is based on the idea that ﬁrms in an industry are affected by similar economic forces (e. g. , common  demand/supply shocks).  Thus, peer disclosures have spillover effects that reduce information asymmetry between managers  and investors, as well as among investors, for all ﬁrms operating in that industry.  Such reductions in information asymmetry  can reduce ﬁnancing costs (in both debt and equity markets), as illustrated in corporate ﬁnance models with adverse selection ( Leland and Pyle, 1977.  Myers and Majluf, 1984.  Rock, 1986 ) and in asset pricing models with imperfect competition  ( Lambert et al. , 2012 ).   To the extent peer information affects information asymmetry and ﬁnancing costs, we predict that such externalities vary  over time as a function of the amount of ﬁrm information available to investors.  Our intuition is similar to that presented in  other streams of literature.  For example, models in the executive compensation literature (e. g. , Banker and Datar, 1989 ) show  that the weights placed on different performance evaluation signals are proportional to relative “signal-to-noise” ratios.  In  our setting, we expect investors to put less weight on peer information (the “noisy” signal) as more information becomes  2 Nevertheless, ex ante there are several reasons why ﬁrm discloavailable from the disclosing ﬁrm (the “precise” signal).   sures might not substitute for peer information.  For example, ﬁrm disclosures are often affected by managerial incentives to  manipulate them, which can make them noisy and potentially less reliable than peer information.  or peer disclosures could  complement (rather than substitute for) ﬁrm disclosures by providing richer context to interpret ﬁrm disclosures ( Section 2  expands on these arguments).   We test our hypothesis using private ﬁrms that raise public capital (debt or equity) for the ﬁrst time.  A principal beneﬁt  of our setting is that private ﬁrms are not subject to SEC reporting requirements until they raise public capital.  as a result,  there is (i) little publicly available ﬁrm information prior to the capital issuance and (ii) a large increase in the amount of  publicly available ﬁrm information in the years immediately following the capital issuance.  Thus, this setting is especially  powerful for studying the substitution between peer information and ﬁrm information as the amount of ﬁrm information  rapidly increases while the amount of peer information stays relatively constant.  In addition, the relative lack of ﬁrm information in the initial year of capital issuance makes it more likely that peer information has a ﬁrst-order effect on the cost  of capital.   Drawing from the theoretical models of disclosure externalities (e. g. , Dye, 1990.  Admati and Pﬂeiderer, 20 0 0 ), we construct our measure of peer information to capture.  (i) the relevance of peer ﬁrms’ disclosures to non-disclosing ﬁrms and  (ii) the aggregate amount of information available about peer ﬁrms.  We proxy for the relevance of peer information within  an industry using the degree of earnings synchronicity in the industry.  Our intuition is that ﬁrms in industries with greater  earnings synchronicity are more likely to be economically linked and therefore information about one ﬁrm’s future prospects  is more likely to convey information about peer ﬁrms’ prospects.  We proxy for the aggregate amount of industry information  available about peer ﬁrms using two proxies.  Our ﬁrst proxy is the percentage of public ﬁrms (relative to the total number  of ﬁrms, public plus private) operating in the industry ( Badertscher et al. , 2013 ).  Since publicly owned ﬁrms disclose both  mandatory and voluntary information to the public and are analyzed by information intermediaries, there is an extensive  amount of public information about these ﬁrms that is not available for private ﬁrms.  Therefore, the composition of public  and private ﬁrms in an industry affects the information environment in that industry.  Our second proxy for aggregate industry information is the analyst coverage for ﬁrms in the industry (measured as the average number of forecasts per ﬁrm).   Prior research ﬁnds that analysts not only supply information about ﬁrm prospects but also demand a greater quantity and  quality of information from the ﬁrms they cover (see Beyer et al. , 2010 for a review of the literature), thereby improving the  industry information environment.   We initially focus on the public debt issuances of private ﬁrms because proxies for the cost of debt (such as bond yield  spreads) are relatively less subject to measurement error concerns than proxies for the cost of equity capital, which are  notoriously noisy ( Elton, 1999.  Easton and Monahan, 2005 ).  We ﬁnd that peer information is negatively associated with bond yield spreads (henceforth, “bond yields” for expositional ease) at the time of issuance, but this association gradually  declines over time.  Speciﬁcally, a one standard deviation increase in our proxy for peer information lowers bond yields by  17% in the ﬁrst year of issuance.  The effect declines to 3% in the third year after the bond issuance.  Similarly, when we  break down our data into quarterly, rather than annual, observations, we observe a gradual decline in the relation between  peer information and bond yields over the 12 quarters following the bond issuance.  These results are consistent with our  prediction that peer information lowers the cost of capital for other ﬁrms in the industry when ﬁrm information is scarce  and this effect declines as ﬁrm information increases.   Next, we conduct two cross-sectional tests to further validate our inference that peer information and ﬁrm information  serve as substitutes.  Speciﬁcally, we examine whether the effect of peer information on bond yields is smaller for ﬁrms with  richer initial ﬁrm-speciﬁc information environments.  We proxy for the amount of ﬁrm information using (i) the level of  disaggregation in ﬁrms’ ﬁnancial statements immediately before the bond issuance ( Chen et al. , 2015 ), and (ii) bond trading  volume in the ﬁrst quarter of its issuance, which proxies for the amount of private information aggregated into prices via  the trading process (e. g. , Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980.  Kyle, 1985 ).  Consistent with our prediction that peer information  serves as a substitute for ﬁrm information, we ﬁnd that the effect of peer information on bond yields is smaller when ﬁrms  have richer ﬁrm-speciﬁc information environments.   There are two primary concerns with our analyses thus far.  First, our proxy for peer information, which is constructed at  the industry-year level and is fairly constant over time, could be picking up industry characteristics (besides peer information) that affect the cost of capital.  Second, our analyses focus on endogenous capital raising events and thus our inferences  could be confounded by a correlation between our proxy for peer information and ﬁrms’ capital raising incentives.  We  conduct three tests in the bond setting to mitigate these concerns.  The common theme of these tests is that we focus on  settings in which ﬁrm information is rich and, as a result, peer information is predicted to be less important.  Showing that  peer information matters less in certain settings mitigates the concern that our proxy for peer information is associated  with bond yields due to an omitted correlated variable or a mechanical effect.   First, we compare the effect of peer information on bond yields for our sample of private ﬁrms to that observed for  a matched sample of public ﬁrms that issue bonds in the same industry-year, thereby holding peer information constant.   Since public ﬁrms have richer information environments due to SEC disclosure requirements, voluntary disclosures, and  information intermediary coverage, the importance of peer information for public ﬁrms is likely to be lower than that for  observably similar private ﬁrms.  Consistent with this prediction, we ﬁnd that peer information has an insigniﬁcant effect on  the yields of bonds issued by public ﬁrms.   Second, we focus on a subsample of private ﬁrms that simultaneously issue both public bonds and bank loans.  Unlike  bond markets, bank ﬁnancing is characterized by relationships between lenders and borrowers, where lenders have significant access to (hard and soft) non-public information about the borrowing ﬁrm (e. g. , Diamond, 1984.  Boot, 20 0 0 ).  As a  result, peer information is likely less relevant to pricing private debt than to public debt.  This is precisely what we ﬁnd.   peer information is not related to the cost of private debt but is related to the cost of public debt, holding the borrower and  year constant.   Third, we exploit an institutional feature of our sample which consists of bonds issued under Rule 144A.  Bonds issued  under Rule 144A are initially marketed to institutional investors as private placements and are only subsequently registered  with the SEC.  As a result, ﬁrms issuing bonds under Rule 144A are not required to comply with SEC disclosure requirements  until they register the bond with the SEC.  If the temporal change in the relation between peer information and bond yields  is due to changes in the amount of ﬁrm information available to investors (as we predict), we should not observe a decay  in the relation between peer information and bond yields between the time of the bond’s issuance and its SEC registration.   Rather, the decay in this relation should occur only after the bond is registered with the SEC.  Consistent with this prediction,  we ﬁnd that the effect of peer information on bond yields begins to fade only following SEC registration.   We next turn to the equity market tests.  We ﬁrst examine a sample of private ﬁrms that issue public equity for the ﬁrst  time.  Similar to the bond setting, initial public offering (IPO) ﬁrms are also subject to SEC disclosure requirements only after  their equity issuance and, as a result, experience a substantial increase in ﬁrm information post-IPO.  We document three  results that parallel the ﬁndings above.  First, we ﬁnd that peer information is negatively associated with bid-ask spreads  (our proxy for the adverse selection component of the cost of capital) in the ﬁrst year of a ﬁrm’s IPO, but that this relation  monotonically decreases over time in the three years subsequent to the IPO.  Second, the effect of peer information on bidask spreads in the ﬁrst year of a ﬁrm’s IPO is smaller in the cross-section of IPOs with richer initial ﬁrm-speciﬁc information  environments.  Third, analogous to our test comparing private ﬁrms issuing bonds to public ﬁrms issuing bonds, we predict  and ﬁnd that peer information affects the bid-ask spreads of IPO ﬁrms (and that this effect decays over time), but there is  no such effect for a matched sample of seasoned equity offering (SEO) ﬁrms.   To further alleviate endogeneity concerns, we test whether the effect of peer information on bid-ask spreads increases as  ﬁrm information decreases during pre-SEO quiet periods.  The Securities Act of 1933 restricted ﬁrms from disclosing information prior to their equity offering, which is popularly known as “gun-jumping” regulation.   Consistent with this regulation affecting disclosure behavior, prior research ﬁnds that ﬁrms reduce their voluntary disclosure activity before SEOs (i. e. , during the SEO quiet period) and bid-ask spreads increase during this period ( Shroff et al. , 2013 ).  We predict and ﬁnd that  the increase in bid-ask spreads during SEO quiet periods documented in prior research is signiﬁcantly smaller for ﬁrms  with richer peer information environments.  Importantly, the effect of peer information on bid-ask spreads during the quiet  period disappears after the SEC relaxed quiet period disclosure restrictions with the Securities Offering Reform in 2005.   This paper contributes to the literature on the externalities or peer effects of disclosure.  Early evidence documents the  presence of intra-industry information transfers (i. e. , instances where one ﬁrm’s disclosures affect the stock prices of other,  related ﬁrms).  For example, prior studies document information transfers arising from news contained in earnings announcements ( Foster, 1981 ), management forecasts ( Baginski, 1987.  Han et al. , 1989 ), and transfers between buyers and suppliers  in the same supply chain ( Olsen and Dietrich, 1985.  Pandit et al. , 2011 ).  More recent studies tackle the question of whether  disclosures generate positive or negative externalities related to ﬁnancing and investment decisions (see e. g. , Gleason et al. ,  2008.  Durnev and Mangen, 2009.  Badertscher et al. , 2013.  Chen et al. , 2013.  Shroff et al. , 2014 ).  Our paper builds on prior  research by focusing on a speciﬁc idea that has been overlooked by past studies.  Speciﬁcally, we hypothesize and show  that the importance of externalities from peer-ﬁrm disclosures varies over time and is a function of the relative amounts  of ﬁrm-speciﬁc vs.  peer information available to investors.  This focus on dynamic effects is in contrast to prior research,  which assumes that the economic importance of externalities is constant over time.  Our evidence informs the debate on the  merits of ﬁnancial reporting regulation because the presence of externalities is one of the primary rationales for disclosure  regulation ( Leuz and Wysocki, 2016.  Minnis and Shroff, 2017 ).   Our paper is also related to recent research examining the substitutive nature of ﬁrm- and peer-disclosures.  For example,  Baginski and Hinson (2016) document that the cessation of quarterly management forecasts by a ﬁrm is associated with a  subsequent inception of quarterly management forecasts by peer ﬁrms, suggesting that ﬁrm- and peer-earnings forecasts are  substitutes.  Similarly, Arif and De George (2017) ﬁnd that European ﬁrms that report on a semi-annual basis have greater  information transfers from their U. S.  peers during (European ﬁrms’) non-reporting quarters than during their reporting quarters, which is also evidence consistent with a substitutive relation between ﬁrm- and peer-disclosure.   Finally, our paper is related to a nascent stream of literature examining how the market learns about an agent’s ability by observing the agent’s behavior over time (see e. g. , Pan et al. , 2015.  Hermalin and Weisbach, 2017 ).  For example,  Pan et al.  (2015) show that when a new CEO takes oﬃce, uncertainty about the quality of the new leadership is high, and  thus news about the ﬁrm contains information about the CEO’s unknown ability (in addition to cash ﬂows news), magnifying stock return volatility.  Over time, as the CEO’s ability and ﬁt within the company becomes better known to investors, the  market’s update from a particular signal of her quality becomes smaller, leading volatility to decline.  In our setting, a greater  reliance on ﬁrm information in place of peer information over time is consistent with the idea that investors/markets learn  about the disclosure practices of a ﬁrm by observing a longer time-series of the ﬁrm’s disclosure following its ﬁrst capital  raising event (see also Lang, 1991 ).  While our goal in this paper is not to test whether investor learning is the sole (or  even primary) driver of the documented evidence, our ﬁndings are consistent with such a learning hypothesis and we hope  future research can provide further evidence speciﬁc to the learning hypothesis.   2.  Hypothesis development.   Our hypothesis is predicated on three arguments.  (i) adverse selection concerns inﬂuence ﬁnancing costs, (ii) peer information reduces adverse selection costs, and (iii) ﬁrm information is more informative than peer information with respect  to valuing a company.  We discuss each of these arguments in more detail below to motivate our hypothesis but note that  insofar as any of them are untrue, we might not ﬁnd evidence supporting our hypothesis.   The idea that adverse selection affects ﬁnancing costs is well founded in the corporate ﬁnance literature.  In the context of IPOs, Beatty and Ritter (1986) and Rock (1986) show that information asymmetry among investors creates uncertainty that is priced in equilibrium and increases ﬁnancing costs.  In a similar vein, Myers and Majluf (1984) show that  adverse selection affects ﬁnancing costs in secondary offerings as well as in debt offerings.  Subsequent work shows that  information asymmetry can also raise the cost of capital in an “asset pricing” model with multiple securities.  For example,  Lambert et al.  (2012) show that in imperfectly competitive settings, information asymmetry between investors creates adverse selection costs, which increase expected returns.  These theoretical arguments are supported by numerous empirical  papers (see Beyer et al.  (2010) and Dechow et al.  (2010) for reviews of the literature).   The second argument underlying our hypothesis is that peer information reduces the adverse selection costs of related  ﬁrms.  The idea is that, to the extent that ﬁrms in an industry are affected by similar economic forces, greater disclosure  by peer ﬁrms can have spillover effects for all ﬁrms operating in that industry.  For example, Dye (1990) and Admati and  Pﬂeiderer (20 0 0) develop analytical models that show positive externalities in the form of liquidity spillovers in capital  markets.  Speciﬁcally, they show that if ﬁrm values and cash ﬂows are correlated, the disclosures of one ﬁrm are useful to  6 Overall, prior analytical studies  investors in valuing other ﬁrms and increase investors’ demand for shares in other ﬁrms.   provide evidence that peer information helps reduce information asymmetry in other ﬁrms, suggesting that it can have  positive capital market effects.   The  ﬁnal  argument  underlying  our  hypothesis  is  that  the  relative  importance  of  peer  information  is  a  function  of  the  amount  of  ﬁrm  information  available  to  help  reduce  adverse  selection  costs.   In  the  context  of  ﬁrm  information,  Lang (1991) shows that as investors observe a longer time-series of earnings (i. e. , “more ﬁrm information” in the parlance  of our paper), uncertainty about future earnings is reduced and investors respond more strongly to ﬁrm information.  To  the extent that ﬁrm information and peer information are substitutes, we expect the importance of peer information to decrease as the amount of ﬁrm information increases.  This argument is similar in spirit to the relative signal-to-noise ratio of  the performance measures established in the compensation literature ( Banker and Datar, 1989 ).  Speciﬁcally, we argue that  with respect to assessing a ﬁrm’s future prospects, disclosures directly provided by a ﬁrm have a higher signal-to-noise ratio  than does peer information and, as a result, investors would rely less on peer information as the amount of ﬁrm information  increases.   Our hypothesis, motivated by the discussion above, is as follows.   H.  Peer information is negatively associated with the cost of capital when ﬁrm information is scarce and this negative  association weakens as the amount of ﬁrm information increases.   Notwithstanding the above discussion, whether peer information affects the cost of capital of related ﬁrms and whether  this association decays as the amount of ﬁrm information increases is ultimately an empirical question.  First, a large literature ﬁnds that ﬁrm disclosures can be affected by managerial incentives to increase stock prices and their compensation (see  Dechow et al.  (2010) for a review of the literature).  Thus, even in the presence of a rich ﬁrm-speciﬁc disclosure environment,  peer information could help reduce adverse selection costs since they are unlikely to be affected by the managerial incentives of related ﬁrms in the industry.  Second, while we assume that ﬁrm information and peer information are substitutes,  it is also conceivable that they are complements and help reinforce each other.  As mosaic theory describes, many individual  information items that might not be particularly relevant individually can, when joined together, be especially valuable to  analysis.  Speciﬁcally, Pozen (2005, p.  639) states that “the signiﬁcance of one item of information may frequently depend  upon knowledge of many other items of information. ” Likewise, peer information can provide additional context for evaluating ﬁrm information, which can make these two sources of information complements rather than substitutes.  The use  of benchmarking in investment valuation exercises is an example consistent with the idea that ﬁrm and peer information  might be complements.   <Middle> Research setting, sample selection and research design.  3. 1.  Research setting.  We test our prediction in two settings where ﬁrms raise public capital for the ﬁrst time.  The primary beneﬁt of examining ﬁrst-time capital issuers is that private ﬁrms are not required to publicly disclose any information (in the U. S. ).  As a   result, little is known about the operations and performance of private ﬁrms before they raise public capital.  However, once a private ﬁrm decides to raise public capital (debt or equity), it is required to comply with the SEC’s mandatory disclosure  requirements, such as 10-K, 10-Q and 8-K ﬁlings, which contain enormous amounts of information about ﬁrms and their  operating environments.  In addition, public capital is typically traded on secondary markets and the trading process transmits private information acquired by traders for their own speculative trading into market prices ( Grossman and Stiglitz,  1980.  Glosten and Milgrom, 1985.  Kyle, 1985 ).  The idea that market prices are a useful source of information goes back to  Hayek (1945) , who suggests that stock prices aggregate diverse pieces of information from different traders that might even  be informative to managers (e. g. , see Zuo (2016) for empirical evidence in the context of management forecasts).  Thus, the  amount of publicly available ﬁrm-speciﬁc information about a private ﬁrm signiﬁcantly increases following its public capital  issuance, thereby serving as a powerful setting for testing the changing role of peer information in mitigating information  asymmetry and adverse selection costs.   We ﬁrst examine the public debt issuances of private ﬁrms before they begin complying with the SEC’s ongoing disclosure requirements.  Compared to the cost of capital measures available for equities, the debt market setting allows us to employ a relatively clean and observable measure of the cost of capital.  bond yield spreads.  Easton and Monahan (2005) evaluate a number of proxies for the cost of equity capital and conclude that most available proxies are unreliable and typically  do not have a positive association with realized returns, even after controlling for the bias and noise in returns.  Nevertheless, one potential drawback of the debt setting is that there are relatively few instances of private ﬁrms raising public debt.   Thus, we also examine ﬁrms raising equity capital for the ﬁrst time via initial public offerings (IPOs).  IPOs occur far more  frequently compared to public debt issuances by private ﬁrms, thereby allowing for greater generalizability of our inferences.   Fig.  1 provides a graphical representation of our research setting.  We expect peer information to be relatively constant  around public capital issuances but the amount of ﬁrm information to signiﬁcantly increase in the years following a ﬁrm’s  ﬁrst public debt/equity offering (see Panel A).  Our prediction (depicted in Panel B of the ﬁgure) is that the effect of peer information on the cost of capital (the “Peer Effect”) is stronger when ﬁrm information is scarce and gradually declines as the  amount of ﬁrm information increases.  Our research setting then exploits cross-sectional variation in peer information across  industries, as well as cross-sectional and time-series variation in ﬁrm information to isolate these effects.  Appendixes A and  B provide evidence supporting our premise that peer information is fairly stable over time and ﬁrm information increases  following ﬁrms’ ﬁrst capital raising events ( Sections 3. 4 and 3. 5 discuss the evidence in the appendixes).   Fig.  1 provides a graphical representation of our research setting.  We expect peer information to be relatively constant around public capital issuances but the amount of firm information to significantly increase in the years following a firm’s first public debt/equity offering (see Panel A).  Our prediction (depicted in Panel B of the figure) is that the effect of peer in- formation on the cost of capital (the “Peer Effect”) is stronger when firm information is scarce and gradually declines as the amount of firm information increases.  Our research setting then exploits cross-sectional variation in peer information across industries, as well as cross-sectional and time-series variation in firm information to isolate these effects.  Appendixes A and B provide evidence supporting our premise that peer information is fairly stable over time and firm information increases following firms’ first capital raising events ( Sections 3. 4 and 3. 5 discuss the evidence in the appendixes).  3. 2.  Sample selection.  Our bond sample consists of private ﬁrms that issue public debt between 1995 and 2012.  We begin our sample selection  in 1995 because the process we use to identify private ﬁrms that have public bonds requires data from EDGAR.  we end our  sample in 2012 because our tests of changes in externalities over time uses three years of market data post-bond issuance  and 2012 is the latest year with three years of subsequent market data.  Following the procedure in Katz (2009) , we construct  a sample of 517 private ﬁrms that issued 1044 public bonds between 1995 and 2012 ( Table 1 provides a detailed outline  of the sample selection procedure).  Requiring observations to have non-missing data for the variables used in our analyses  further reduces our sample to 316 private ﬁrms that issue 578 public bonds.   We obtain daily bond yields from the Bloomberg terminal.  Requiring Bloomberg data leaves us with a sample of 165  private ﬁrms and 278 bonds with traded yield data.  Since our primary interest is in ﬁrms raising capital for the ﬁrst time  (when ﬁrm information is scarce), we retain only those bonds issued within the ﬁrst ﬁling period of the ﬁrm.  That is, we  retain the bonds issued by a ﬁrm before its ﬁrst annual ﬁling with the SEC.  This further reduces the sample to 165 private  ﬁrms and 209 bonds.  Finally, our tests of the temporal changes in the association between peer information and bond  yields require three consecutive years of traded bond yields following the bond issuance.  This requirement reduces our  ﬁnal sample to 210 bond-year observations and 70 traded bonds.  By restricting our sample to bonds with three consecutive  years of yield data, we ensure that changes in the sample composition over time and survivorship biases do not affect our  inferences.  Table 1 , Panel A outlines our sample selection procedure in detail and Table 2 shows the distribution of bonds  by year and by industry.   Table 1 , Panel B explains the sample selection for our tests using IPOs.  We collect a sample of IPOs from 1995 to 2009  from the Thomson Financial Securities Data Corporation (SDC) new issues database and follow Loughran and Ritter’s (2004)  sample selection criteria.  Our IPO sample ends in 2009 because we use the relative effective spread using TAQ data, and we  could obtain this measure only through 2012.  Since we require three years of spread data following the IPO, we end our  IPO sample in 2009.  For our SEO sample selection (for the quiet period analyses), we follow Shroff et al.  (2013) and focus  on the three year periods centered on the 2005 Securities Offering Reform (see Table 1 , Panel C).   We estimate regressions of the following form to test our prediction, where i, t , and ind index ﬁrms, years, and industries, respectively.   are year and (1-digit NAICS) industry ﬁxed  effects.  The subscript k equals zero, one or two and represents the number of years since the capital raising event.  We proxy  for the Cost of Capital using Bond Yield or Bid-Ask Spread.  Bond Yield is the excess of a bond’s yield-to-maturity over that of a  matched Treasury bond with similar remaining time-to-maturity and coupon rate ( Bharath et al. , 2008.  Mansi et al. , 2011 ).   We use the average traded yield in year ‘ t ’ to compute Bond Yield t .  Bid-Ask Spread is the relative effective bid-ask spread.   Peer Info is our proxy for peer information and X is a vector of control variables based on prior research (e. g. , Bharath et al.   (2008), Guedhami and Pittman (2008) in the bond setting and Daske et al.  (2013) in the equity setting).  These variables  are described in detail in the Variable Appendix.  Year 1 ( Year 2, Year 3 ) is an indicator variable that equals one for the  11 Note that these indicator variables are unique to the bond/equity  ﬁrst (second, third) year following the capital issuance.   security issued and thus are not subsumed by year ﬁxed effects.  The intuition for including them in our regressions is to  capture systematic changes in bond yields/bid-ask spreads in the years following the capital issuance (e. g. , to capture any  market timing effects).  The main effect of Year 3 cannot be included in the model because it is perfectly collinear with Year  1 and Year 2 .  Standard errors are clustered at the year and 3-digit NAICS industry levels.  Continuous variables are winsorized  at the 2. 5% and 97. 5% levels.   Eq.  (1 ) is used to test the change in the effect of peer information on the cost of capital over time.  The variables of  × Year 3 .  We predict that the coeﬃcient for Peer  × Year 1 will be negative, implying that an increase in Peer Info is associated with a decrease in the cost of capital in  × Year 1 will be smaller (i. e. , more negative) than that  × Year 3 , implying that the relation between Peer Info and  interest in Eq.  (1 ) are Peer Info the ﬁrst year of capital issuance, and that the coeﬃcient for Peer Info  for Peer Info  the cost of capital decays over time.   × Year 2 , which will be smaller than that for Peer Info  × Year 2 , and Peer Info  × Year 1, Peer Info  3. 4.  Peer information.  Drawing from the theoretical models on disclosure externalities (e. g. , Dye, 1990.  Admati and Pﬂeiderer, 20 0 0 ), we construct our measure of peer information to capture.  (i) the relevance of peer ﬁrms’ disclosures to non-disclosing ﬁrms, and  (ii) the amount of information disclosed by peer ﬁrms in aggregate as well as the amount of peer information produced by  information intermediaries.  Speciﬁcally, we measure peer information ( Peer Info ) by taking the average values of (i) the  earnings synchronicity in an industry ( Earnings Sync ) (ii) the percentage of public ﬁrms operating in the industry ( %Public )  and (iii) the average analyst coverage for ﬁrms in the industry ( #Analysts ).   We measure Earnings Sync as the average adjusted R-squared obtained from estimating time-series regressions of a ﬁrm’s  quarterly earnings on the aggregate quarterly earnings in its NAICS 3-digit industry.  We use sixteen quarters of earnings  data to estimate these regressions (the Variable Appendix provides a detailed description of the computation of this proxy).   This proxy is based on the premise that a ﬁrm’s earnings will be more synchronous with the earnings of other ﬁrms in  the industry when they are affected by similar economic forces.  Since a ﬁrm’s earnings is not only affected by economic  events idiosyncratic to a ﬁrm but also by industry- and market-wide economic events, greater earnings synchronicity in an  industry indicates a greater inﬂuence of industry-/market-wide factors in determining a ﬁrm’s earnings.  Thus we use the  average earnings synchronicity in an industry to capture the strength of the economic ties among ﬁrms operating in the  industry and the relevance of peer disclosures to non-disclosing ﬁrms.   We measure %Public following Badertscher et al.  (2013) .  We obtain data on the total number of ﬁrms within each 3digit NAICS industry from the Census Bureau, and proxy for the number of public ﬁrms in each industry using Compustat.   Thus, our deﬁnition of private ﬁrms is any ﬁrm that is not subject to SEC disclosure requirements, which we proxy for  using ﬁrms not on Compustat.  %Public is the number of public ﬁrms scaled by the total number of ﬁrms within an industry.   The  intuition  for  this  measure  is  that  the  composition  of  private  and  public  ﬁrms  in  an  industry  affects  the  industry’s  information environment because public ﬁrms are subject to numerous mandatory disclosure requirements (and also have  voluntary disclosure incentives) but private ﬁrms are not subject to such disclosure requirements (and do not share the  same disclosure incentives).  As a result, industries composed of a greater percentage of public ﬁrms have a richer and more  transparent information environment than industries composed of a smaller percentage of public ﬁrms.   We measure #Analysts as the average number of analyst forecasts for each public ﬁrm-year in an NAICS 3-digit industry  in a year.  We focus on analyst forecasts (rather than a count of the number of analysts) to ensure that our analyst coverage  proxy picks up only analysts that are “active” in their coverage of ﬁrms.  Firms without coverage in I/B/E/S are assumed  to have no analyst coverage ( Badertscher et al. , 2013.  Shroff et al. , 2014 ).  Financial analysts serve a monitoring role where  they demand disclosures from ﬁrms as well as an information role where they process and disseminate ﬁrm disclosures  (see Beyer et al.  2010 for a literature review).  Prior research ﬁnds that analyst coverage is associated with better earnings  and disclosure quality ( Lang and Lundholm, 1996.  Lang et al. , 2004 ), lower uncertainty ( Zhang, 2006 ), greater industry-wide  information transfer ( Piotroski and Roulstone, 2004 ) and lower information asymmetry ( Kelly and Ljungqvist, 2012 ).  Prior  research also ﬁnds that equity analysts help inform debt market participants and that equity analyst coverage affects the cost  of debt.  For example, Cheng and Subramanyam (2008) ﬁnd that analyst coverage is positively associated with ﬁrms’ credit  ratings and Mansi et al.  (2011) ﬁnd that analyst earnings forecast characteristics affect ﬁrms’ bond yields.  Thus, greater  analyst coverage of ﬁrms in an industry is likely to translate into a richer information environment for all ﬁrms in that  industry.   We convert all three variables, Earnings Sync, %Public , and #Analysts into quintile ranks (re-scaled to range from zero  to one) by year.  We then average the quintile ranks of Earnings Sync, %Public , and #Analysts to construct our proxy for  14 Appendix A provides descriptive information about Peer Info and its individual components.   peer information ( Peer Info ).   Panel A provides average values by 2-digit NAICS industries and Panel B tabulates pair-wise correlations.  Panel C shows  −1 to year t and well as the ﬁrst order autocorrelation.  Consistent with our  the transition matrix for Peer Info from year t  depiction of the research setting in Fig.  1 , we ﬁnd that Peer Info is fairly stable over time with a ﬁrst-order autocorrelation  coeﬃcient of 0. 88.  The transition matrix shows, for example, that 75% (0%) of the industries in the ﬁrst quintile of Peer Info  −1 to year t .  Finally, Panel D provides the descriptions of  remain in (move to) the ﬁrst (ﬁfth) quintile of Peer Info from year t  industries with the highest and lowest values of Peer Info and its components.  Industries such as metal manufacturing and  air transportation have richer peer information environments.  Examples of ﬁrms in such industries are.  Alcoa Inc. , American  Airlines, and Delta.  Industries such as repair and maintenance and social assistance have low levels of peer information.   Examples of ﬁrms in these industries are.  Monro Muﬄer Brake Inc.  and Bright Horizons Family Solutions.   3. 5.  Firm information.  We test our prediction using a sample of ﬁrms that raise public capital, assuming that the amount of ﬁrm information  increases over time from a ﬁrm’s ﬁrst year of capital issuance to the subsequent years.  To validate this assumption, we  examine whether there is an increase in the number of SEC ﬁlings, the size of 10-K ﬁlings, and the level of disaggregation  of accounting data in ﬁrms’ ﬁnancial statements following ﬁrms’ capital issuances.  Fig.  A in Appendix B plots the number of  SEC ﬁlings of companies in the year before and the two years after their initial bond issuances and IPOs.  Both ﬁgures show  a steady increase in the amount of ﬁrm information over time following ﬁrms’ capital raising events.  Fig.  B breaks down  the trend in the number of SEC ﬁlings by category.  The ﬁgure shows that the number of 10-Ks and 10-Qs are stable over  time (as expected) and the number of 8-Ks and Forms 3/4 increase over time.  Fig.  C shows that there is a sharp increase  in the 10-K ﬁle sizes following ﬁrms’ bond and equity issuances, which we interpret as ﬁrms providing more information.   Fig.  D plots the level of disaggregation in ﬁrms’ income statements and balance sheets ( Chen et al. , 2015 ) around the time of  public capital issuances, which we refer to as Firm Info .  Again, the ﬁgure shows a steady increase in the number of ﬁnancial  statement line items disclosed following both initial bond issuances and IPOs.  Finally, Fig.  E in the appendix shows that the  average analyst coverage received by ﬁrms over time signiﬁcantly increases in both years following their IPOs.  The private  ﬁrms raising public debt (in our sample) do not receive any bond or equity analyst coverage.   Overall, the ﬁgures in Appendix B show that there is a steady increase in the amount of ﬁrm-speciﬁc information following a ﬁrm’s initial bond issuance and IPO.  It is also worth noting that aside from information disclosed by ﬁrms via SEC  ﬁlings, the amount of ﬁrm-speciﬁc information also increases because the bonds/equity issued by ﬁrms are traded in secondary markets.  Secondary market trading incentivizes traders to acquire private information that is eventually aggregated  in the price of the security.   4.  Results.  4. 1.  Descriptive statistics.  Table 3 presents the descriptive statistics for the variables used in our analyses.  Panel A presents descriptive statistics  for the sample of 70 bonds with three years of yield data in each of their ﬁrst three years of public trading.  The average  (median) ﬁrm has total assets of $2. 2 (0. 8) billion, a leverage ratio (long-term debt scaled by total assets) of 0. 65 (0. 64),  and a tangible asset ratio of 0. 40 (0. 29).  Further, the average ﬁrm in our sample is fairly proﬁtable with an EBITDA to sales  small and thus not truly “peers” of the ﬁrms in our sample, we verify the robustness of our results to value weighting %Public by sales.  We do not use  value-weighted %Public in our tests tabulated in the paper because Census data on aggregate sales for private and public ﬁrms is available only beginning  1997 and is updated only once every ﬁve years.  However, we ﬁnd that the correlation between sales-weighted %Public and equal-weighted %Public is 0. 65.   ratio of 0. 15 (0. 13), and a growth rate of 9% (6%) in sales.   over a matched sample of Treasury yields, the average bond has a maturity of 103 months, and the average loan amount  is $341 million.  These characteristics are largely consistent with those found in prior research examining private ﬁrms with  public debt, such as Katz (2009), Givoly et al.  (2010) , and Badertscher et al.  (2014) .  Panel B presents the correlation matrix.   −0. 30), indicating that peer information is  The Pearson (Spearman) correlation between Bond Yield and Peer Info is  negatively associated with the cost of debt capital, consistent with our expectation.   4. 2.  Temporal changes in the relation between peer information and the cost of debt.  Table 4 presents the results from regressions of bond yields on peer information and control variables ( Eq.  1 ).  To facilitate comparison of the coefficients, we standardize all the independent variables to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one.  As a result, the estimated coefficients represent the change in bond yield for a standard deviation change in a given variable.  We present results where we proxy for peer information using the combined proxy, Peer Info , as well as its three individual components –Earnings Sync, %Public , and #Analysts .  The coefficients for Peer Info Proxy ×Year 1 is negative and statistically significant at 10% level or better irrespective of the proxy we use for peer information.  This result is consistent with our prediction that peer information lowers the cost of capital of related firms in the industry when firm information is scarce.  Importantly, the coefficient estimate for Peer Info Proxy monotonically decreases from Year 1 to Year 3 in all the regressions presented.  For example, the coefficient for Peer Info ×Year 1 ( Peer Info ×Year 2.  Peer Info ×Year 3 ) is −1. 295 ( −1. 005, −0. 242) in column 4.  An F-test shows that the coefficient for Peer Info ×Year 1 and Peer Info ×Year 3 are statistically different than each other ( p -value = 0. 07).  These results are robust to controlling for the amount of information disclosed by the capital raising firm, which we proxy for using the level of disaggregation in a firm’s income statement and balance sheet ( Firm Info .  Chen et al. , 2015 ).   sheet ( Firm Info .  Chen et al. , 2015 ).  16 The coefficients for the other control variables are also largely consistent with prior research (e. g. , larger, more profitable and cash rich firms have lower yields).  17 A noteworthy observation in Table 4 is that the coefficient for Year 1 is negative and statistically significant and the co- efficient for Year 2 is negative (albeit statistically insignificant) in all regressions.  These coefficients indicate that the average Bond Yield increases from the first to the third year after the bond issuance.  This result is consistent with both (i) firms timing the market and issuing bonds when yields are relatively low (e. g. , Baker and Wurgler, 2002, Bolton et al.  2013 ) and (ii) corporate financing events occurring in waves in response to economic growth (e. g. , Dittmar and Dittmar, 2008 ).  18 In terms of economic magnitude, the coefficient of -1. 295 for Peer Info ×Year 1 implies that a one standard deviation increase in Peer Info is associated with a 129. 5 basis point decrease in bond yield in the first year of its issuance (which equals 17. 2% of the average yield in our sample), and this association fades to 24 basis points (or 3. 2% of the average yield) by the third year following the bond issuance.  To put these results in perspective, we note that firms in our sample are very opaque and risky.  For example, the average bond spread in our sample of private firms is 751 basis points in excess of treasury, more than 85% of these bonds have below investment grade ratings and 9% are unrated.  The economic magnitude of the peer-firm effect is smaller than that of size and profitability, and comparable to that of other variables such as cash holdings.  Further, the economic magnitudes we document are similar to those in Badertscher et al.  (2015) , who show that the cost of debt for private firms issuing bonds is 147 basis points higher than for public firms issuing bonds.  To provide more granularity in our dynamic tests, we repeat our analyses using quarterly data.  Fig.  2 presents estimates of the relation between Peer Info and Bond Yield in the first 12 quarters following firms’ bond issuances.  Panel A shows that the relation between peer information and bond yields is initially negative and significant but approaches zero over the 12 quarters following a private firm’s first bond issuance.  This pattern is confirmed in Panel B, which plots the relation between Peer Info and Bond Yield along with a linear trend line.  Overall, the results in Table 4 and Fig.  2 support our hypothesis that peer information affects the cost of capital when firm information is scarce but this effect declines as the amount of firm information increases.  Since firm information sig- nificantly increases from the time a firm initially raises public debt to the subsequent years post-issuance (as discussed in Section 3. 5 ), we attribute the decay in the relation between peer information and bond yields to the increase in firm information.  4. 3.  Cross-sectional tests of the relation between peer information and the cost of debt.  Our hypothesis is that the decay in the relation between peer information and bond yields is due to increases in ﬁrm  information over time.  In this section, we conduct two cross-sectional tests to explore the validity of this inference.  Specifically, we examine whether the relation between peer information and bond yields depends on the amount of ﬁrm information available at the issuance time and predict that peer information has a smaller effect on the cost of debt in the  cross-section of ﬁrms with richer ﬁrm-speciﬁc information environments.   We exploit cross-sectional variation in two primary sources of ﬁrm information at the time of a private ﬁrm’s bond  issuance.  (i) disclosures in ﬁrms’ SEC ﬁlings and (ii) information aggregated in the ﬁrm’s bond price via trading.  Speciﬁcally,  we partition ﬁrms into two groups based on the level of disaggregation in ﬁnancial statements at the time of the bond  issuance, and the trading volume in a ﬁrm’s bond in the ﬁrst quarter of its issuance (based on the idea that bond prices are  more informative when there is greater trading in the bond ( Kyle, 1985 )).   Table 5 presents the results from regressions estimating Eq.  1 after partitioning the sample into two groups based on the  amount of disclosure disaggregation at the time of bond issuance (Low vs.  High Firm Info ) and based on the volume of trade  in the ﬁrm’s bond in the ﬁrst quarter of its issuance (Low vs.  High Trade Volume ).  The table shows that the coeﬃcient for  × Year 1 is larger for ﬁrms with low disclosure disaggregation than for ﬁrms with high disclosure disaggregation  Peer Info × Year 1 is signiﬁcantly larger for ﬁrms with low Trade Volume than that  ( p -value   0. 09).  Similarly, the coeﬃcient for Peer Info 20 These results are consistent with our hypothesis that peer information  for ﬁrms with high Trade Volume ( p -value  has a large effect on adverse selection costs for ﬁrms with less ﬁrm information.    0. 01).   4. 4.  Endogeneity.  There are two primary endogeneity concerns with our analyses thus far that could bias our inferences.  First, since our  proxy for peer information is constructed at the industry-year level, it is plausible that our results are affected by other  industry characteristics that are correlated with the cost of debt.  For example, Amiram et al.  (2016) ﬁnd that industrylevel characteristics such as growth, sensitivity to external shocks and industry structure affect debt pricing through risk  premiums.  Second, since our research setting is ﬁrms raising capital (by issuing public debt/equity) and the timing of such  capital raising events is not exogenous to the cost of capital, a potential concern with our analyses is that our proxy for peer  information is correlated with the changes in the cost of capital or growth opportunities in the industry.   We conduct three tests to mitigate these endogeneity concerns.  First, we compare the effect of peer information on the  cost of capital for our sample of private ﬁrms issuing bonds to a matched sample of public ﬁrms issuing bonds in the same  industry and year.  Second, we compare the effect of peer information on debt pricing for a subset of private ﬁrms that  simultaneously raise both public debt (by issuing bonds) and private debt (from banks).  Finally, we compare the effect of  peer information on debt pricing of bonds when they are initially issued as a private placement to institutional investors  under Rule 144A to when they are subsequently registered with the SEC and begin public trading.  These tests are described  in detail below but the overarching theme in the following analyses is that we examine the effect of peer information on  the cost of debt capital by (i) holding the industry and year (as well as the incentives to raise capital) constant, (ii) holding  the ﬁrm and year constant, and (iii) holding the security issued by the ﬁrm constant.  The takeaway from the tests below is  that peer information helps lower adverse selection costs when ﬁrm information is scarce but not in counterfactual samples  where ﬁrm information is more abundant.   4. 4. 1.  Peer information and cost of debt for public vs.  private ﬁrms.  We ﬁrst compare the relation between peer information and the cost of debt for our sample of private ﬁrms that issue  bonds to two matched samples of public ﬁrms that issue bonds.  We predict that peer information has a weaker effect on  the bond yields of public ﬁrms because they have signiﬁcantly richer ﬁrm-speciﬁc information environments.  Public ﬁrms  are subject to signiﬁcant mandatory disclosure requirements, they disclose information voluntarily, and are often followed  by information intermediaries.  As a result, peer information is likely to have a signiﬁcantly smaller role in reducing the  adverse selection costs for public ﬁrms, relative to private ﬁrms that raise public capital for the ﬁrst time (because these  private ﬁrms have no history of public disclosure as well as no secondary market trading in their securities).   To test our prediction, we identify two matched samples of public ﬁrms that also issue bonds.  We use two matching  techniques.   entropy  balanced  matching  and  propensity  score  matching.   Entropy  balancing  reweights  observations  in  the  control  sample  such  that  the  moments  of  the  distributions  of  the  matching  variables  for  the  reweighted  control  sample  are  indistinguishable  from  the  moments  of  the  distributions  of  these  variables  for  the  treatment  sample  ( Hainmueller, 2012.  McMullin and Schonberger, 2015 ).  That is, each observation in the control sample receives a weight  such that the mean, variance, and skewness of the distribution for each matched variable in the control sample is similar  to its counterpart in the treatment sample.  Designating our sample of 70 private ﬁrm bonds as the treated group, we use  entropy balancing to reweight a sample of 5,120 public ﬁrm bonds (the control group).  We match ﬁrms on peer information  ( Peer Info ), size ( Log(Assets) ), Proﬁtability (measured as EBITDA scaled by sales), cash holdings ( Log(Cash) ), Tangible Assets , the  21 Our choice of matching  loan amount ( Log(Loan Amount) ), loan maturity ( Log(Maturity) ) and an index for the bond rating.   variables follows prior research (e. g. , Saunders and Steffen, 2011.  Gao et al. , 2013.  Badertscher et al. , 2015 ).  Table 6 , Panel A  shows that the matching procedure results in the treatment and control groups having almost identical distributions for the  matching variables.   We also employ propensity score matching to identify control ﬁrms that are observably similar to our treatment ﬁrms.   We match each private ﬁrm bond issuance to a public ﬁrm bond issuance in the same 3-digit NAICS industry and year.   That is, within each industry and year, we match our sample of private ﬁrms that issue bonds to public ﬁrms that issue  bonds.  To construct propensity scores, we estimate a probit regression where the dependent variable is an indicator equal  to one (zero) for private (public) ﬁrms issuing bonds, and the independent variables are the same as that used for the  entropy balancing approach (except for Peer Info , which is identical for treatment and control ﬁrms by construction because  we estimate propensity scores within each industry-year ).  We use nearest neighbor matching within caliper (set at 0. 10).   Table 6 , Panel B shows that the matching procedure results in no signiﬁcant difference in any of the matching variables  between the treatment and control samples.   Table 6 , Panel C presents the regression results.  The table shows that irrespective of the matching procedure employed,  Peer Info is negatively associated with Bond Yield for the bonds issued by private ﬁrms.  In contrast, Peer Info is not signiﬁcantly associated with Bond Yield in the sample of public ﬁrms that issue bonds.  For example, the coeﬃcient for Peer Info  −1. 16 in the sample of private ﬁrms issuing bonds, which contrasts with a coeﬃcient of 0. 10 for the entropy balanced control sample of public ﬁrms issuing bonds.  The differences in the coeﬃcient for Peer Info for the private and public ﬁrm  samples are statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level.   4. 4. 2.  Peer information and cost of public vs.  private debt.  Next, we examine whether peer information has a differential effect on the pricing of public and private debt.  A deﬁning  feature of private debt markets is that lenders, typically commercial banks, have access to conﬁdential information about  borrowing ﬁrms because private debt markets are not subject to securities regulation.  Lenders in the private debt market establish relationships with borrowing ﬁrms such that the lender gains extensive hard and soft information about the  borrower’s operations and develops private channels of communication with ﬁrms (see Boot (20 0 0) for a review of the literature).  For example, lenders gain access to private information about borrowers such as their ﬁnancial projections, covenant  compliance data, loan amendments, waiver requests, acquisition plans, as well as signiﬁcant soft information related to the  management teams’ ability and trustworthiness.  Given this characteristic of private debt markets, peer information is likely  to be less relevant for the pricing of private loans when compared to public debt, which is based on arm’s length transactions and features almost no private communication between bondholders and ﬁrms.   We predict that peer information lowers the cost of capital in public debt issuances but not private debt issuances,  holding  constant  the  ﬁrm  and  year.   To  test  our  prediction,  we  examine  a  subset  of  50  ﬁrms  in  our  sample  of  private  ﬁrms that raise capital from the public and private debt markets in the same ﬁscal period.  Following prior research (e. g. ,  Bharath et al. , 2008.  Saunders and Steffen, 2011 ), we proxy for the cost of private debt using the all-in-spread-drawn ( Loan  Spread ), which is the annual cost to a borrower for drawn funds, inclusive of all fees.  The all-in-spread-drawn is deﬁned  as a mark-up over LIBOR.  Table 7 presents the results from regressions of Loan Spread and Bond Yield on Peer Info for the  subset of ﬁrms that raise both public and private debt.  The table shows that Peer Info is not signiﬁcantly associated with  Loan Spread irrespective of whether we include or exclude year ﬁxed effects.  In contrast, Peer Info is negatively associated  with Bond Yield for the same sample of ﬁrm-years, in both regression speciﬁcations presented (i. e. , including and excluding  year ﬁxed effects).   4. 4. 3.  Peer information and cost of debt in the 144A market vs.  secondary market.  Finally, we exploit an institutional feature of the bond market setting to further examine whether the association between peer information and bond yields is indeed a function of the amount of ﬁrm information available to investors.   Speciﬁcally, in 1990, the SEC approved Rule 144A, a reform allowing ﬁrms to raise capital from “Qualiﬁed Institutional Buyers” (QIBs) without requiring registration of the securities and compliance with SEC disclosure requirements.  One of the  primary beneﬁts of this rule is that ﬁrms issuing securities under Rule 144A are not required to comply with the SEC’s ongoing disclosure requirements.  Since the rule’s passage, the vast majority of bonds that have been initially issued as private  placements via Rule 144A to QIBs are subsequently registered with the SEC to facilitate public trading ( Fenn, 20 0 0 ).   We ﬁnd that our entire sample of bond issuances ﬁrst takes place in the 144A market and are subsequently registered with the  SEC (typically six months after the initial issuance.  see Fig.  3 for a timeline of events).   We exploit this feature of the bond market setting by comparing the effect of peer information on bond yields when the  bond is initially issued on the 144A market to when it is subsequently re-issued to the public following its SEC registration.   Since ﬁrms issuing Rule 144A bonds are not required to comply with SEC disclosure requirements until they register with  the SEC, the amount of ﬁrm information available to investors is largely unchanged between the date of issuance and the  subsequent registration date.  Thus, if the dynamic effect of peer information on bond yields is due to changes in the amount  of ﬁrm information, as we hypothesize, we should not observe a decline in the relation between peer information and bond  yields between the date of issuance on the 144A market and the time of SEC registration.   × Year 1 is negative and statistically signiﬁcant (coef.  = × Issue Date is negative but statistically insigniﬁcant (coef.   −0. 43.  t-stat.  −1. 95).   −1. 41.  t-stat.  We present results from regressions testing the above prediction in Table 8 .  The ﬁrst column in Table 8 shows that the  −0. 96) but the coeﬃcient  coeﬃcient for Peer Info  25 These coeﬃcients are consistent  for Peer Info  with both predictions discussed above.  (i) peer information does not have a signiﬁcant effect on bond yields at the time  of the 144A issuance, which is consistent with the 144A market having lower adverse selection costs as a result of the  sophistication and expertise of the investors in that market.  and (ii) the relation between peer information and bond yields  does not decay from the time of initial issuance on the 144A market to the subsequent re-issuance on the public market  post-SEC registration, which we interpret to be because ﬁrm information does not increase from the time the bond is issued  privately to the time of the SEC registration.   Column two in Table 8 expands our initial regression from the ﬁrst column by including additional variables to capture  the effect of Peer Info on Bond Yield in the second and third years after the bond is registered with the SEC.  Consistent  with our results up to this point, we ﬁnd that.  (i) peer information is not signiﬁcantly associated with yields when the  bond is issued on the 144A market, (ii) peer information is negatively associated with bond yields in the ﬁrst year following  the bond’s SEC registration, and (iii) the effect of peer information on bond yields decays from the ﬁrst to the third year following the bond’s SEC registration ( p -value   0. 04).   A potentially puzzling observation in Table 8 is that peer information has a signiﬁcantly smaller effect on bond yields  at the time of the bond issuance on the 144A market relative to the time of SEC registration (i. e. , the coeﬃcient for Peer  × Issue Date is signiﬁcantly smaller than that for Peer Info  × Year 1 .  note that our prediction is that these coeﬃcients are not statistically different).  At ﬁrst glance, this suggests that the sophisticated investors in the 144A market do not price  the future adverse selection costs that they would have to incur when they trade the bond on the secondary market.  In  other words, it is surprising that adverse selection costs in the secondary market do not fold back into the primary market.   A potential explanation for this ﬁnding is that many of the initial 144A investors do not trade the bonds on the secondary  market since they hold the bond until maturity.  To further explore this point, we test and ﬁnd that the average bond in our  sample trades only 64 days in its ﬁrst year post-SEC registration, and the average trade size in the ﬁrst year is $1. 85 million  (untabulated).  These numbers imply that the average ﬂoat of traded bonds is 35% of the proceeds raised.  Table 8 shows that  × Year 1 , which is consistent with the idea that  the coeﬃcient for Peer Info  only one-third of the 144A market investors trade the bond in the secondary market.   4. 5.  Peer effects in the equity market.  Thus far, our tests focus on the relation between peer information and the cost of capital in a bond market setting.  To  further validate our inferences and increase the generalizability of our results, we re-test our hypothesis using a sample of  private ﬁrms raising public equity capital (IPO ﬁrms).  As before, our analyses focus on private ﬁrms for whom the amount  of ﬁrm information signiﬁcantly increases subsequent to the IPO.  We predict that peer information is negatively associated  with the cost of equity capital in the ﬁrst year following a ﬁrm’s IPO and that this association fades over time as the  Following prior amount of ﬁrm information increases.  We proxy for the cost of capital using the effective bid-ask spread.   research (e. g. , Daske et al. , 2013 ), we control for the natural log of assets, price, volume, and return variability.  However,  since  we  examine  ﬁrms  in  the  ﬁrst  year  after  their  IPO,  we  control  for  the  contemporaneous  values  of  these  variables  rather than the lagged values.  We also control for the amount of information disclosed by the capital raising ﬁrm using the  Chen et al.  (2015) proxy, Firm Info .  Details on the construction of the variables can be found in the Variable Appendix.   −2. 23) and larger than the coeﬃcient for Peer Info  Table 9 presents the results of our analyses.  We ﬁnd that the coeﬃcient for Peer Info monotonically declines from Year  × Year 1 is negative and statistically signiﬁcant at the 5% level (coef.  1 to Year 3 .  For example, the coeﬃcient for Peer Info  −0. 45).  however, the  −0. 05.  t-stat.  = difference between these coeﬃcients is marginally insigniﬁcant ( p -value   0. 14).  These coeﬃcients suggest that peer information helps lower bid-ask spreads in the initial year following an IPO but this effect declines over the subsequent two  years.  In economic terms, a one standard deviation increase in peer information is associated with a 3. 77% (0. 82%) lower  bid-ask spread in the ﬁrst (third) year following the IPO.   × Year 3 (coef.  −0. 01.  t-stat.  Columns 2–5 in Table 9 present regressions where we partition the IPO sample into two groups based on the level of  disaggregation in ﬁrms’ ﬁnancial statements at the time of the IPO (Low vs.  High Firm Info ), and the trading volume in a  ﬁrm’s equity in the ﬁrst quarter of its IPO (Low vs.  High Trade Volume ).  These cross-sectional tests parallel the tests in the bond setting (which are tabulated in Table 5 ).  Consistent with our prediction, we ﬁnd that the coeﬃcient for Peer Info 1 is larger for ﬁrms with low disclosure disaggregation than for ﬁrms with high disclosure disaggregation ( p -value   0. 04).   × Year 1 is larger for ﬁrms with low Trade Volume than that for ﬁrms with high Trade  Similarly, the coeﬃcient for Peer Info Volume ( p -value   0. 09).  These results are consistent with our hypothesis that peer information has a large effect on adverse  selection costs for ﬁrms with less ﬁrm information.   Fig.  4 plots the coeﬃcient estimates for Peer Info from regressions of Bid-Ask Spread using quarterly data following the  IPO.  Panel A shows that the negative relation between peer information and bid-ask spreads converges to zero over the 12  quarters following an IPO.  As in the bond setting, this ﬁgure shows that during the ﬁrst four quarters of year 1 (when ﬁrm  information is poor) peer information has a negative effect on bid-ask spreads.  In contrast, by the last four quarters in year  3 (when ﬁrm information is relatively richer) peer information is not associated with bid-ask spread.  Panel B conﬁrms this  trend by plotting the relation between Peer Info and Bid-Ask Spread along with a linear trend line.   To mitigate concerns that the above results are confounded by unobserved industry conditions that affect our proxy for  peer information and the cost of equity capital, we benchmark the association between peer information and the cost of  capital (and its deterioration over time) for IPO ﬁrms that have relatively poor ﬁrm information environments to a matched  sample of SEO ﬁrms that have signiﬁcantly richer information environments.  Similar to our analyses in the bond setting, we  use both entropy balanced matching and propensity score matching. 