
1. 1.  The problem. 
A popular product sold by energy companies to medium-to-large
customers is one where an unspeciﬁed amount of power can be
bought at a ﬁxed price during a certain time-interval.  We call this a
ﬁxed price, unspeciﬁed consumption contract or simply a ﬁxed price
agreement.  The business-to-business electricity market in Denmark
in 2014 was 23. 1 TWh, about MEUR 800 million in monetary terms. 
60% was sold as ﬁxed price agreements in some form. 
Having entered into the ﬁxed price agreement, the energy
company must asses and manage the risks associated with the
obligations of the contract.  This is challenging for several reasons.  If
the seller faced only the risk from price-ﬂuctuations, he could simply buy forward contracts to set up a full, perfect hedge.  However,
with a criterion function that takes into account both (expected)
gains and losses, this is expensive if forward-prices are typically
above expected future spot-prices.  This so-called contango is the
norm in Nordic power markets, as demonstrated by both Botterud
Name (2002) and our analysis in Section 5. 1. 
Another complicating factor is quantity risk.  If the consumer’s
quantity choice were all-or-nothing, the contract would have payoff akin to call options.  Handling that would require modelling the
price randomness of the electricity market which has several characteristics that are different from standard ﬁnancial markets such
as stocks and exchange rates.  But the consumer has more ﬂexibility
and because energy demand is created by physical use, her choice
will not be all-or-nothing.  Demand will be positively correlated with
the price as high demand drives up the price.  For the contract seller
that creates what in other areas of ﬁnance would be known as
wrong-way risk.  He will have to deliver a lot of energy for a ﬁxed
price when buying it in the spot market is expensive. 
In this paper, we will deal with these risks with a joint model of
spot-price and consumption load. 
1. 2.  Previous work, related literature. 
The non-storability of electricity is a key complicating factor in
energy markets.  It makes physical hedging inoperable and it causes
highly volatile spot-markets with structural price jumps, see for
instance Benth Name (2008).  As a consequence, the problem of
joint quantity and price risk on electricity markets is commonly
studied in the literature and it stresses the importance of incorporating price–quantity correlation into the models.  For an example,
Bessembinder and Lemmon (2002) consider an equilibrium market
model for which the correlation has a signiﬁcant impact on optimal hedging strategies in forward markets.  Their model has been
extended by, for instance, Willems and Morbee (2010) who study the
effect of including options onto the market.  From the retailer’s perspective with an exogenously given spot and forward market, Oum
Name (2006) use utility maximisation to derive optimal hedge strategies that exploit the correlation to manage price–quantity risk in a
single period setting.  As another example, Boroumand Name (2015)
address the problem of price–quantity risk on an intra-day scale and
demonstrate with a simulation approach that intra-day hedging outperforms daily and longer term portfolios.  We also take the retailer’s
perspective and model the spot-price/consumption-load correlation
with a bivariate model where both the spot and load have temporal dependency.  Based on that model, we set out to hedge the
price–quantity risk of a ﬁxed price agreement with forward contracts.  In relation to our approach, Coulon Name (2013) develop an
intricate three-factor model and consider hedging strategies based
on options that are priced with closed form expressions.  In contrast,
we do not consider the problem of pricing derivatives under our
model, but concentrate on a operational hedging approach based on
exogenously given market forward-price data. 
1. 3.  Structure, contributions, and ﬁndings. 
The rest of the paper is organised as follows.  In Section 2, we formulate a dynamic model for electricity spot-price and consumptionload — a two-dimensional Gaussian Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model with
a seasonality component.  In Section 3, we analyse expected loss
minimisation.  Looking speciﬁcally at static hedging strategies with
forward contracts, a main contribution of the paper is the derivation
of explicit formulas for optimal hedge portfolios based on three different loss functions.  the square, the exponential, and the “hockey
stick”. 