 1.  Introduction  Prior theoretical research posits that private lenders have comparative advantages over other debt market participants at  monitoring borrowers’ current and likely future compliance with ﬁnancial covenants and other loan contract terms (hereafter, “loan contract monitoring”) ( Diamond, 1984.  Fama, 1985.  Diamond, 1991 ).  Prior empirical research ﬁnds that commercial borrowers provide lenders with private information to facilitate loan contract monitoring ( Acharya and Johnson,  2007.  Bushman et al. , 2010.  Frankel et al. , 2011.  Ivashina and Sun, 2011, Massoud et al. , 2011.  Minnis and Sutherland, 2017 ).   However, with the notable exception of Minnis and Sutherland (2017) , these prior studies do not identify the speciﬁc mechanisms by which lenders obtain such information or types of information obtained.  This limits the insight provided about  how lenders obtain and use accounting-related borrower private information for monitoring, a natural question for accounting research.   We  examine  whether  lenders’  demand  for  information  for  loan  contract  monitoring  explains  the  existence  of  loan  covenants that commit borrowers to disclose accounting-related private information (hereafter, “borrower private information”) periodically after loan origination to lenders.  We also examine the effects of these covenants on the frequency of loan  contract amendments and on informed trading by lenders in secondary loan markets.  To conduct these analyses, we collect  a sample of 3309 original private loan contracts, both single-lender and syndicated loans, ﬁled as exhibits to public borrowers’ Form 10K/Q and 8K ﬁlings.  These contracts generally include a category within the aﬃrmative covenant section that  speciﬁes borrower ﬁnancial reporting covenants.  We identify two types of borrower private information speciﬁed in these  covenants.  (1) projected ﬁnancial statements for future periods (hereafter “projected ﬁnancial statements”) and (2) more  frequent than quarterly (usually monthly) and not yet publicly available historical ﬁnancial statements (hereafter, “monthly  ﬁnancial statements”).  Almost half (47%) of the loan contracts in our sample include one or both of these covenants, with  projected ﬁnancial statements being required almost twice as often as monthly ﬁnancial statements (40% versus 21% of contracts, respectively).  Despite their prevalence, to our knowledge prior researchers have not examined or even been aware of  these contractual requirements for borrowers to disclose these types of private information.   We argue that loan contracts include borrower private information covenants only when their loan contract monitoring  beneﬁts exceed their costs Lenders may receive beneﬁts from these covenants through (1) improved loan contract monitoring, (2) more eﬃcient loan contract amendment, and (3) trading on the information.  Borrowers beneﬁt to the extent  that competition induces lenders to pass along some of their beneﬁts by offering lower interest rates or other terms more  desirable to borrowers.  Such passing along of beneﬁts is essentially necessary to induce ﬁrms seeking to borrow to commit  contractually to provide their private information, because borrowers primarily bear the costs of these covenants.  Actual or  perceived costs to borrowers may arise from (1) the production of the information.  (2) lenders using the information to  obtain more favorable loan contract terms, i. e. , the “hold-up” problem.  (3) trading by lenders leading to broader dissemination of borrower private information and thus proprietary (e. g. , competitive) costs.  (4) borrowers missing performance  projections.  and (5) borrowers making economically shortsighted decisions to manage their within-quarter performance.   We  provide  two  sets  of  evidence  regarding  the  beneﬁts  of  borrower  private  information  covenants  for  lenders’  loan  contract monitoring.  First, prior research shows that the beneﬁts of monitoring increase with (1) borrower credit risk and  uncertainty, as long as these factors are not so large that monitoring is not cost effective ( Diamond, 1991.  Minnis and  Sutherland, 2017.  Nikolaev, 2016 ).  (2) borrower-lender information asymmetry ( Minnis and Sutherland, 2017.  Suﬁ, 2007 ).   and (3) loan contract terms that reallocate control rights, adjust loan contract terms, or require borrowers to take some  action in lenders’ favor when borrowers are determined to violate the terms ( Asquith et al. , 2005.  Christensen and Nikolaev, 2012.  Flannery and Wang, 2011.  Nikolaev, 2016.  Rajan and Winton, 1995, Minnis and Sutherland, 2017 ).  Motivated by  this research, we hypothesize and provide descriptive evidence that loan contracts more frequently include borrower private  information covenants when borrowers have higher credit risk and uncertainty, when borrower-lender information asymmetry is higher, and when the contracts include ﬁnancial covenants or other terms for which this information enhances loan  contract monitoring.  We further predict and ﬁnd that loan contracts more frequently require projected (monthly) ﬁnancial  statements when additional or more timely information about borrowers’ future (historical) accounting performance is more  important.   Second, prior research shows that loan contract amendments occur when lenders receive and evaluate information after  loan origination that resolves uncertainty about borrowers’ credit quality and alternative borrowing opportunities ( Nikolaev,  2016.   Roberts  and  Suﬁ,  2009 ).   Information  may  resolve  uncertainty  either  unfavorably  or  favorably,  transferring  control  rights or bargaining power either to the lender or the borrower, and thus may lead to amendments that beneﬁt either  the lender or the borrower.  Motivated by this prior literature, we hypothesize and provide evidence that borrower private  information covenants are positively associated with the frequency of amendments.  We further predict and ﬁnd that the  two types of covenants exhibit distinct associations with the timing of the ﬁrst amendments of loan contracts.  Borrowers  required to provide monthly ﬁnancial statements do so multiple times each quarter prior to the public release of their  quarterly ﬁnancial information, which incorporates the three most recent monthly ﬁnancial statements.  Hence, we predict  and ﬁnd that the provision of monthly ﬁnancial statements is most associated with ﬁrst amendments in the quarter after  loan origination, i. e. , very timely amendments.  In contrast, borrowers required to provide projected ﬁnancial statements  generally do so only once annually around the ﬁscal year end.  Hence, we predict and ﬁnd that the provision of projected  ﬁnancial statements is most associated with ﬁrst amendments around the provision of the projections, which typically is  beyond the quarter after loan origination, i. e. , less but still fairly timely amendments.   In order to link borrower private information covenants to amendments, or any other loan contract monitoring-related  outcome, the covenants must provide lenders with valuable information about borrowers, and lenders must process and  use that information.  To further conﬁrm that these conditions are met, we examine whether lenders trade on the two  types  of  borrower  private  information  in  the  secondary  loan  market.   Although  lenders  generally  are  expected  to  keep  borrower private information conﬁdential, prior research ﬁnds that lenders trade on this information in various markets  ( Acharya and Johnson, 2007.  Bushman et al. , 2010.  Ivashina and Sun, 2011.  Massoud et al. , 2011 ).  We examine the secondary loan market because.  (1) Informed trading by lenders is most likely to occur in this market, since private loans  are not public securities governed by the Securities Acts of 1933 and 1934.  and (2) loan contracts should include borrower  private information covenants when that information is value-relevant for the loans involved.  Because loan contracts require borrowers to provide the two types of borrower private information at different periodicities, we propose and test  distinct hypotheses as to when lenders’ trading on each type of information is reﬂected in borrowers’ loan returns.  We  predict and ﬁnd that abnormal loan returns over various windows leading up to and including the contractually required  delivery date of projected ﬁnancial statements, but not over randomly selected windows of equal length, are signiﬁcantly  positively associated with the subsequently reported change in operating cash ﬂows for the following year.  We predict and  ﬁnd that the intraquarter speed of price discovery in the secondary loan market, measured following Bushman et al.  (2010) ,  is faster when loan contracts require borrowers to provide monthly ﬁnancial statements.  We emphasize that these results  only indicate that the borrower private information provided to existing lenders ﬁnds its way into secondary loan prices,  not necessarily that the informational playing ﬁeld in secondary loan markets favors those lenders.   Our study is most directly related to Minnis and Sutherland (2017) , who examine a sample of lender requests for two  types of accounting-related private information—annual or interim ﬁnancial statements and tax returns—to small commercial  borrowers provided by a proprietary data source.  Minnis and Sutherland (2017) provide evidence that these requests.  (1)  Exhibit an inverse U-shaped relation with borrower credit risk, being highest for borrowers with intermediate credit risk.   (2) fall with the length of the lending relationship.  and (3) rise with collateral for non-real estate loans in lender friendly  states with laws that make collateral more readily available to lenders.  They further ﬁnd that ﬁnancial statements and tax  returns can be either substitutes or complements, depending on borrower characteristics and the degree of borrower-lender  information asymmetry.   Our study both is complementary to and generates signiﬁcant additional results beyond Minnis and Sutherland (2017) in  four primary respects.  First, we identify and examine only borrowers’ contractual commitments to provide speciﬁc types  of private information to lenders, whereas their proprietary data source does not indicate whether information requests  stem from loan contracts.  Second, the availability of ﬁnancial reports (including loan contract exhibits) and other public  information for our sample of public borrowers enables us to examine a richer set of determinants of borrower private  information covenants (e. g. , borrower characteristics and a more extensive set of loan contract terms) than is possible with  their  proprietary  data  source.   This  increases  the  statistical  power  of  our  tests  of  these  determinants.   It  also  enables  us  to document two important effects of borrower private information covenants.  loan contract amendments and trading by  lenders in secondary loan markets upon the receipt of borrower private information.   Third, we examine public and relatively large borrowers who ﬁle ﬁnancial reports each period with the SEC, whose equity and other securities typically trade in reasonably liquid markets, and for which lending eﬃciency is most likely to be  promoted by ﬁnancial covenants and other contractual incentives for lenders to monitor ( Rajan and Winton, 1995 ).  Hence,  borrower private information covenants involve different beneﬁts and costs for our borrowers than for Minnis and Sutherland’s (2017) private borrowers, for which lending eﬃciency is most likely to be promoted by enhancing lending relationships and borrower credit reputation ( Diamond, 1991 ).  For example, public borrowers’ more extensive public information  likely reduces the beneﬁts of borrower private information covenants for loan contract monitoring.  These borrowers’ greater  access to securities markets likely also reduces borrowers’ costs associated with the hold-up problem, although it may also  enable informed investors to better infer borrower private information from lenders’ trading.   Fourth, we examine projected and monthly ﬁnancial statements, which yields various new predictions and results.  For  example, we predict and ﬁnd that borrowers’ provision of projected ﬁnancial statements is positively associated with.  (1)  accounting-based performance covenants and performance pricing, loan contract features that have been a focus of prior  accounting  research (e. g. ,  Asquith  et  al. ,  2005.   Christensen and Nikolaev,  2012.  Nikolaev,  2016 ).  (2) longer-horizon loan  contract amendments.  and (3) informed trading by lenders in secondary loan markets in advance of the public release of  the realization of the projected information.   Like Minnis and Sutherland (2017) , we provide evidence that lenders’ collection of borrower private information serves  various purposes beyond strict enforcement of ﬁnancial covenants and contractual transfer of control rights to lenders upon  covenant violations by borrowers, the focuses of most prior accounting research on debt contracting.  These purposes include facilitating loan contract amendment prior to borrowers’ violation of ﬁnancial covenants.  In fact, such purposes must  motivate covenants that require borrowers to provide projected ﬁnancial statements, which are unveriﬁable information  about borrowers’ future prospects that cannot be used by lenders to evaluate borrowers’ current compliance with ﬁnancial  covenants or to transfer control rights.   Our  study  is  subject  to  a  number  of  caveats.   Most  importantly,  we  document  interesting  and  heretofore largely  unknown  associations,  not  causal  relations,  between  borrower  private  information  covenants  and  borrower  characteristics,  borrower-lender information asymmetry, loan contract terms, loan contract amendment frequency and timing, and trading  by lenders on borrower private information in secondary loan markets.  While our analysis is motivated by prior research,  these covenants are jointly determined with other loan contract terms and the loan contract setting ( Armstrong et al. , 2010 ),  and they constitute only one of many possible mechanisms for lenders to obtain and borrowers to supply borrower private  information.  We discuss the caveats to our study, and the opportunities they constitute for future research, further in the  conclusion.   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 discusses the motivation, supporting theory, and related  empirical research.  Section 3 describes the data and summary statistics.  Section 4 outlines the research design and presents  the empirical results.  Section 5 concludes.   2.  Motivation and background.  2. 1.  Loan contract monitoring and borrower private information covenants.  Lenders’ primary goal is to ensure that they earn adequate returns on their loans.  To help achieve this goal, loan contracts  often include ﬁnancial covenants and other terms that, upon violation by the borrower or in other speciﬁed circumstances,  transfer control rights to lenders, adjust loan contract terms, or require borrowers to take some action in lenders’ favor  ( Asquith et al. , 2005.  Christensen and Nikolaev, 2012.  Flannery and Wang, 2011.  Minnis and Sutherland, 2017.  Nikolaev,  2016.  Rajan and Winton, 1995 ).  Although considerable empirical research beginning with Booth (1992) examines banks’ role  in loan contract monitoring, relatively little is known about what activities are involved in monitoring and thus what information lenders use in performing these activities.  We argue that lenders monitor borrowers’ current and likely future  compliance with loan contract terms for three primary reasons.  (1) To determine when and how to exercise their contractual rights, (2) to motivate borrowers to act in ways that do not require lenders to exercise their rights, and (3) to promote  lending relationships through timely (e. g. , pre-violation) loan contract amendment.  Lenders likely also monitor their significant borrowers for ﬁrm-level credit risk management, accounting, and regulatory purposes.  Lastly, lenders may trade on  information obtained from monitoring.   It may not be necessary for loan contracts to include borrower private information covenants in order for lenders to be  able to monitor borrowers’ compliance with the contract terms effectively.  Lenders have various alternative means to obtain  desired information.  Public borrowers ﬁle ﬁnancial reports each quarter with the SEC that contain detailed and standardized  historical ﬁnancial statement information.  Most loan contracts require that borrowers satisfy reasonable information requests  from lenders (see Appendix A for an example), allowing lenders to request information on an as needed basis.  Loan contracts  with ﬁnancial covenants typically require borrowers to provide covenant compliance reports.   Finally, lenders may obtain desired information through established lending and non-lending relationships with borrowers ( Bharath et al. , 2007.  Boot,  20 0 0.  Fama, 1985.  Mester et al. , 2007 ).   We expect borrower private information covenants to enhance lenders’ ability to monitor borrowers’ compliance with  loan contract terms, for several reasons.  First, under the non-contractual alternatives discussed above, borrowers may be  unwilling to disclose unfavorable information or may not have the information systems in place to satisfy lenders’ ad hoc  information requests, and negotiations regarding information requests may be costly or delay the provision of useful information.  Second, the theoretical disclosure literature suggests that commitments to disclose enhance eﬃciency compared  to the alternative of discretionary disclosure of private information.  For example, Verrecchia (2001) develops a series of  modeling examples that collectively support his conclusion that “often arrangements in which managers are granted the  discretion to disclose ex post are ineﬃcient in comparison to arrangements in which the ﬁrms (or managers) precommit ex  ante” (p.  146).  Third, in the loan contracting setting, covenants that require borrowers to provide information in each period  over the loan contract term should help reduce information asymmetry between the lender and borrower over that term.   Roberts (2015) emphasizes the “importance of the attenuation of information asymmetry over the loan contract term. ” We expect loan contracts to contain borrower private information covenants only when the loan contract monitoring  beneﬁts of these contractual commitments to disclose exceed their costs.  Naturally, these covenants can only provide beneﬁts to the extent that (1) they require information incremental to that available to lenders through the alternative means  described above (e. g. , are not simply lender-speciﬁc boilerplate), and (2) lenders process the information provided and use  it to monitor borrowers.   Borrower private information covenants can provide incremental information to lenders in three primary, non-mutually  exclusive ways.  First, the speciﬁed borrower private information may be more timely than the other information available  to lenders, being provided at more closely spaced intervals (as in the case of monthly ﬁnancial statements) or with shorter  reporting lag.  More timely information should improve the timeliness of lenders’ loan contract monitoring.  Second, the speciﬁed information may disaggregate (e. g. , by ﬁnancial statement line item) or indicate the quality of the available information.   Such supplemental information should improve the accuracy of lenders’ loan contract monitoring.  Third, the speciﬁed information may be more forward-looking than the available information (as in the case of projected ﬁnancial statements).   More forward-looking information should improve lenders’ ability to predict borrowers’ future compliance with loan contract terms.   Prior  debt  contracting  research  suggests  that  lenders  can  beneﬁt  from  borrower  private  information  covenants  through (1) improved loan contract monitoring, which reduces borrower moral hazard ( Diamond, 1984.  Fama, 1985 ).  (2)  more  eﬃcient  loan  contract  amendment  ( Nikolaev,  2016.   Roberts  and  Suﬁ,  2009 ).   and  (3)  trading  on  the  information  ( Acharya and Johnson, 2007.  Bushman et al. , 2010.  Ivashina and Sun, 2011.  Massoud et al. , 2011 ).  Borrowers beneﬁt to  the extent that competition induces lenders to pass along some of their beneﬁts by offering lower interest rates or other  terms more desirable to borrowers.  Such passing along of beneﬁts is essentially necessary to induce ﬁrms seeking to borrow  to commit contractually to provide their private information, because borrowers primarily bear the costs of these covenants.   Borrower private information covenants may entail various costs for borrowers.  Borrowers may bear direct costs to produce the information.  The provision of borrower private information to lenders may exacerbate the “hold-up” problem in  which existing lenders exploit their superior information to obtain higher interest rates or other more favorable contract  5 Although borrowers can reasonably expect lenders to keep the speciﬁc determs ( Rajan, 1992.  Santos and Winton, 2008 ).   tails of the information conﬁdential, trading by lenders on borrower private information may disseminate the information  more broadly, which may yield proprietary or other costs for the borrower.  Kim et al.  (2015) provide an example of such  other costs, showing that an active CDS market referencing borrowers’ debt facilitates informed trading by lenders, which  leads borrowers to increase disclosure of bad news to avoid litigation and other costs.  Actual or perceived costs may arise  from borrowers missing performance projections or making suboptimal decisions to manage their within-quarter performance.   2. 2.  Determinants of borrower private information covenants.  Prior research suggests that three general sets of factors are associated with the beneﬁts of borrower private information  covenants.  borrower characteristics, borrower-lender information asymmetry, and loan contract terms.  We discuss these sets  of factors in turn.   First, prior research shows that lenders’ loan contract monitoring and related acquisition of borrower private information  are positively associated with borrower credit risk as long as that risk is not too large for monitoring to be cost effective  ( Diamond, 1984.  Lee and Mullineaux, 2004, Minnis and Sutherland, 2017 ).  An important reason for lenders to monitor borrowers’ compliance with loan contract terms is to amend contracts when they become ineﬃcient.  This reason is more likely  to be a primary motivation for monitoring borrowers with higher uncertainty about future outcomes, for which it is more  diﬃcult to design loan contracts that remain eﬃcient over time ( Nikolaev, 2016.  Roberts, 2015 ).  On the other hand, borrowers with more growth options and other intangible assets tend to exhibit higher uncertainty, but these assets are diﬃcult  for alternate lenders to evaluate and so tend to exacerbate the hold up problem, reducing the frequency of amendments  and the beneﬁts of related monitoring ( Nikolaev, 2016 ).   Second, prior research shows that lenders’ loan contract monitoring and related acquisition of borrower private information generally are positively associated with borrower-lender information asymmetry ( Minnis and Sutherland, 2017.  Suﬁ,  2007 ).   Borrower-lender  information  asymmetry  is  reduced  by  borrowers’  prior  borrowing  experience,  both  general  and  lender-speciﬁc ( Diamond, 1991 ).  Borrowers that pay their loan obligations consistently over time develop reputations for  reliable payment that reduce lenders’ incentives to monitor ( Suﬁ, 2007 ), while borrowers that do not meet these obligations are subject to more restrictive loan contract terms and enhanced monitoring ( Nini et al. , 2012 ).  Relationship lenders  accumulate borrower information over time, reducing borrower-lender information asymmetry and thus the beneﬁts of loan  contract monitoring ( Boot and Thakor, 1994.  Petersen and Rajan, 1994 ).   Third, lenders should more closely monitor loan contracts with terms that expose them to greater risk, such as larger loan  amount and longer loan maturity.  Hence, we expect contracts that include such terms are more likely to include borrower  private information covenants.  Also, ﬁnancial covenants, collateral requirements, and various other loan contract terms increase lenders’ incentive to monitor ( Rajan and Winton, 1995 ), and we expect that loan contracts with such terms are more  likely to include borrower private information covenants.  For example, interest coverage covenants require measures of borrowers’ net income and interest expense, while collateral requirements require valuations of borrowers’ pledged assets.   The following hypothesis summarizes the discussion above.   H1.   Borrower  private  information  covenants  are  positively  associated  with  borrower  credit  risk  and  uncertainty,  borrower-lender information asymmetry, and loan contract terms that expose lenders to greater risk or involve borrower ﬁnancial information.   Although we expect this hypothesis to hold for both types of borrower private information covenants, we expect these  types to exhibit distinct associations with certain factors.  We discuss these expectations along with the empirical results in  Section 4 .   2. 3.  Borrower private information covenants and loan contract amendment.  Prior research shows that loan contract amendments occur when lenders receive and evaluate information after loan  origination that resolves uncertainty about borrower credit quality and alternative borrowing opportunities ( Nikolaev, 2016.   Roberts and Suﬁ, 2009 ).  Amendments may occur due to violations of ﬁnancial covenants or other loan contract terms, which  are fairly common.  In most cases, however, amendments occur without such violations.  Loan contract amendments may  also result from the original contracts having myopic features intended to protect one of the contracting parties against  harmful actions by the other party for a period of time shorter than the contract term.  these features are eliminated or  amended once the potential for harm is suﬃciently reduced ( Huberman and Kahn, 1988 ).   Information may resolve uncertainty either unfavorably or favorably, transferring control rights or bargaining power either to the lender or the borrower, and thus may lead to amendments that beneﬁt either the lender or the borrower.  For  example, Minnis and Sutherland (2017) argue that the ongoing collection and analysis of borrowers’ ﬁnancial information  helps lenders to identify whether borrowers currently violate or might experience diﬃculties in complying with ﬁnancial  covenants, and to evaluate the severity and persistence of those diﬃculties.  More severe or persistent compliance diﬃculties,  8 On the  if not so great as to merit lenders calling loans, typically yield amendments that more strongly beneﬁt the lender.   other hand, favorable changes in borrower credit risk and alternative borrowing opportunities typically lead to amendments  that favor borrowers ( Roberts and Suﬁ, 2009 ).   In Section 2. 1 , we provide several reasons why borrower private information covenants enhance lenders’ ability to monitor borrowers’ compliance with loan contract terms, compared to the alternatives of discretionary disclosure by borrowers  and ad hoc information requests by lenders.  For similar reasons, we expect that borrower private information covenants  increase the timeliness and frequency of loan contract amendments compared to these alternatives.  Prior research shows  that ﬁnancial covenants and other loan contract terms that allocate decision rights to lenders in the event of borrower  non-compliance  with  ﬁnancial  covenants  and  other  loan  contract  terms  are  positively  associated  with  the  frequency  of  amendments ( Christensen and Nikolaev, 2012.  Nini et al. , 2012, Nikolaev, 2016 ).  As borrowers typically have the incentive to avoid or delay the conveyance of unfavorable information to lenders, we expect covenants that require borrowers to  provide monthly ﬁnancial statements (i. e. , timelier historical information than ﬁrms’ public quarterly ﬁnancial statements)  to increase the timeliness of lenders’ awareness of near-term approaching violations of ﬁnancial covenants and associated  amendments.   Similarly, we expect that covenants that require borrowers to provide projected ﬁnancial statements facilitate amendments in advance of longer-term approaching violations.  We also expect that these covenants reduce uncertainty and increase ﬂexibility regarding borrowers’ ﬁnancing of their planned operating decisions.  For example, lenders may relax ﬁnancial covenants to enable borrowers to make positive present value investments that would otherwise trigger covenant  violations.  Lastly, we expect these borrower private information covenants to facilitate amendments that reﬂect improvements in borrower performance and solvency or lenders’ improved understanding of borrowers.  For example, a borrower  that provides a credible projection of substantially improved ﬁnancial performance may induce its lender to amend the loan  contract rather than to wait for the performance improvement to be realized, at which point the borrower would be more  likely to explore alternative funding sources.  Of course, in this case the borrower would have the incentive to convey the  favorable information to the lender.  However, lenders should be more willing to act on favorable projections provided by  borrowers when (1) borrowers have previously provided lenders with projections that have been consistent with borrowers’ realized performance and (2) borrowers are contractually required to continue to provide the lenders with timely and  9  Both of these conditions are more likely to exist when loan contracts  potentially unfavorable information in the future.   include covenants that require borrowers to provide projected ﬁnancial statements.   Summarizing the discussion above, our second hypothesis is.   H2.  Borrower private information covenants are positively associated with the frequency of loan contract amendments.   While we expect this hypothesis to hold to some extent for both types of borrower private information covenant, we  expect these types to exhibit distinct associations with the timing of ﬁrst amendments of loan contracts.  Covenants that  require borrowers to provide monthly ﬁnancial statements specify that they do so multiple times each quarter prior to  the public release of their quarterly ﬁnancial information, which subsumes the previously provided monthly information.   Hence, we expect that the provision of monthly ﬁnancial statements is most associated with the frequency of ﬁrst amendments in the quarter after loan origination.  This prediction exhibits considerable tension, because borrowers likely provide  lenders with extensive information prior to loan origination.  However, loan contracts would not require borrowers to provide  monthly ﬁnancial statements unless their circumstances could change rapidly.   In contrast, covenants that require borrowers to provide projected ﬁnancial statements generally specify that they do so  only once annually around the ﬁscal year end.  Hence, we predict that the provision of projected ﬁnancial statements is  most associated with the frequency of ﬁrst amendments around the provision of the projections, which typically is beyond  the quarter after loan origination.  The timing of such amendments depends on the date of the delivery of the ﬁrst annual  projection relative to loan origination, which depends on when the loan was originated during the ﬁscal year and on the  frequency with which lenders compare projected ﬁnancial statements to borrowers’ reported performance (e. g. , quarterly or  annually).   As discussed in the introduction, the direction of causality may run in both directions for all our hypotheses, but particularly for this hypothesis.  Loan contracts that are more likely to be amended ex ante likely include more borrower private  information covenants, which ex post facilitate loan contract amendment.  However, our analysis of the differential associations of the two types of borrower private information with ﬁrst amendments in different windows after loan origination  mitigates this concern.   2. 4.  Borrower private information covenants and informed trading by lenders.  To further conﬁrm that borrower private information covenants provide lenders with valuable information about borrowers, and that lenders process and use that information, we examine lenders’ trading on borrower private information.   Borrower private information transferred to lenders is protected by conﬁdentiality agreements and thus is not subject to  11 Perhaps for this reason, prior research provides evidence that lenders  SEC Regulation Fair Disclosure under Rule 100(b)(2).   trade on borrower private information in various markets.  We examine the secondary loan market for two primary reasons.   (1) informed trading by lenders is particularly likely in this market because private loans are not public securities governed  by the Securities Acts of 1933 and 1934.  and (2) loan contracts should require borrowers to provide private information  when it is value-relevant for the loans involved, e. g. , might affect lenders’ decisions to acquire more of or to dispose of the Because the two types of borrower private information covenants require borrowers to provide projected ﬁnancial statements  and  monthly  ﬁnancial  statements  at  different  periodicities,  we  propose  and  test  distinct  predictions  as  to  when  lenders’ trading on each type of information is reﬂected in borrowers’ loan returns.  Borrowers generally provide projected  ﬁnancial statements only once a year, and these statements constitute forward-looking information about borrowers’ future  performance.  If lenders trade in the secondary loan market upon their receipt of projected ﬁnancial statements , abnormal  loan returns at that time should be positively associated with borrowers’ subsequently reported performance.  Hence, we  predict that abnormal loan returns around borrowers’ provision of these statements to lenders is positively associated with  the subsequently reported changes in operating cash ﬂows for the following year.   Because we cannot observe the date that borrowers provide lenders with projected ﬁnancial statements, which may occur before the contractually required date,  we examine various windows leading up to and including the contractually required date.  We thus hypothesize that.   H3A.  Borrowers’ abnormal loan returns in windows leading up to and including the contractually required delivery  dates of projected ﬁnancial statements are positively associated with their subsequently reported changes in operating  cash ﬂows for the following year.   Borrowers  usually  provide  monthly  ﬁnancial  statements  once  a  month.   These  statements  provide  timely  information  about borrowers’ historical accounting proﬁtability that borrowers ﬁrst disclose publicly in an aggregated form at the subsequent quarterly earnings announcement or SEC ﬁling date.  If lenders trade in the secondary loan market upon their receipt  of monthly ﬁnancial statements, the intraquarter speed of price discovery in that market should increase.  Consistent with  this intuition, Bushman et al.  (2010) provide evidence that lenders’ possession of borrower private information increases  the intraquarter speed of price discovery in the secondary loan market and, when institutional investors hold pieces of  syndicated loans, in the equity market as well.  We thus hypothesize that.   H3B.  Covenants that require borrowers to provide monthly ﬁnancial statements are positively associated with the  intraquarter speed of price discovery in the secondary loan market.   <Middle> Borrower private information covenants and sample selection.  3. 1.  Identiﬁcation and types of borrower private information covenants.  The  aﬃrmative  covenant  section  of  nearly  all  loan  contracts  includes  a  subsection  specifying  borrower  reporting  covenants.  We categorize a type of information speciﬁed in these covenants as borrower private information if the type  exhibits all three of the following characteristics.  (1) it is useful for lenders’ evaluation of borrowers’ historical ﬁnancial  statements or prediction of borrowers’ future ﬁnancial statements, (2) it is not publicly available when provided to lenders,  and (3) it is provided at ﬁxed intervals.  This categorization excludes certain information that is often speciﬁed in reporting  covenants, such as periodically produced public information (e. g. , Form 10-K/Q) and ad hoc notiﬁcations of the occurrence  of speciﬁed signiﬁcant events (e. g. , default, litigation, and reportable pension plan changes under ERISA).  It also excludes the  common umbrella requirement that borrowers satisfy reasonable information requests by lenders.   We manually examined a sample of public borrowers’ loan contracts to identify borrower reporting covenants and the  types of borrower private information that these covenants specify with reasonable frequency.  Based on this examination,  we collected two distinct types of borrower private information covenants.  projected ﬁnancial statements for future ﬁscal  13 Appendix A contains experiods and historical ﬁnancial statements for periods shorter than a quarter (typically months).   amples of the two types of covenants, which help address different loan contracting problems.  Forward-looking projected  ﬁnancial statements help lenders predict borrowers’ future compliance with ﬁnancial covenants.  They also facilitate lenders’  evaluation of borrowers’ management by enabling comparison of management’s ﬁnancial projections to the borrower’s subsequently realized performance.  Frequently provided monthly ﬁnancial statements enhance the timeliness of lenders’ evaluations of changes in borrowers’ accounting performance and of the valuations of assets pledged as collateral or included in  borrowing bases.   We denote covenants that require borrowers to provide lenders with projected ﬁnancial statements and monthly ﬁnancial  statements by the indicator variables ProjFinStat and MonthlyFinStat , respectively.  Each of these variables takes a value of one  for loan contracts that include the corresponding type of borrower private information covenant and zero otherwise.  We also  examine a composite borrower private information covenant measure , Private N , the sum of ProjFinStat and MonthlyFinStat .   We refer to ProjFinStat, MonthlyFinStat , and Private N collectively as Private.   To accurately and eﬃciently identify the borrower private information covenants included in each loan contract in our  sample (described in the following section), we developed Python code using the following steps.  First, we read the borrower  reporting covenant sections of 110 loan contracts randomly drawn from the sample examined by Nini et al.  (2009) to identify  the speciﬁc words and context used in each borrower private information covenant.  We hand coded the borrower private  information covenants in these contract sections.  Second, we wrote Python code that accurately identiﬁed these covenants  in these sections.  Third, we read and hand-coded the borrower private information covenants in the reporting covenant  sections of a separate random sample of 110 loan contracts.  Fourth, we tested the ability of the Python code to identify each  type of borrower private information covenant in the second sample, ﬁnding that the code identiﬁed each type of covenant  14 Lastly, we used the validated code to identify the borrower private information covenants  with greater than 97% accuracy.   included in the entire sample of loan contracts.   3. 2.  Loan contract sample .  We limit the sample to original loan contracts, meaning the initial contracts in lending arrangements, not amendments of  existing contracts.  We do this because we primarily examine the role of borrower private information covenants in lenders’  15 As discussed above, however, we also examine whether the borrower  initial decisions to lend to and monitor borrowers.   private information covenants included in original loan contracts affect the frequency of amendments of those contracts.   We constructed the sample beginning with 2534 original loan contracts initiated during the years 1996–2005 within  the sample examined by Nini et al.  (2009) , which they matched to DealScan.  Using the same identiﬁcation algorithm as  Nini et al.  (2009) , we then collected all available original loan contracts on SEC EDGAR initiated during the years 2006– 16 We identiﬁed borrower private information covenants for 1613 of these  2011 and matched these contracts to DealScan.   contracts.  Combining the pre- and post-2006 samples yields 4147 loan contracts during the years 1996–2011.  We obtain  loan characteristics such as amounts, maturities, interest rates, and covenants from DealScan.  Excluding ﬁnancial ﬁrms and  utilities and requiring the borrower and loan characteristics included in our models to be available yields the ﬁnal sample  of 3309 original loan contracts for public borrowers during the years 1996–2011.   Loan contracts specify the terms of a deal, which can include multiple individual loans.  Because borrower private information covenants are speciﬁed and monitored at the deal level, we conduct our tests using deals as the unit of observation.   For deals with multiple loans, we aggregate the terms of the individual loans in the deal to construct deal-level terms.  The  deal-level loan amount equals the sum of the amounts of funded loans and the maximum amounts of unfunded loan commitments in the deal.  The deal-level maturity equals the maximum maturity of all loans in the deal.  Indicator variables for  revolvers, borrowing bases, collateral requirements, and performance pricing take a value of one if they exist for at least one  loan in the deal.  Hereafter, we use “loan” synonymously with “deal. ” 3. 3.  Borrower private information covenant summary statistics.  Table 1 reports the means of ProjFinStat, MonthlyFinStat , and Private N for the full sample and for the subsamples exhibiting the four possible combinations of values of ProjFinStat and MonthlyFinStat (i. e. , 0,0.  0,1.  1,0.  and 1,1).  Of the 3309 loan  contracts in the sample, 47% include at least one type of borrower private information covenant.  The sample loan contracts  include ProjFinStat (40% of contracts) more frequently than MonthlyFinStat (21% of contracts), with 14% of the contracts including both types of borrower private information covenant.  Fig.  1 depicts the means of ProjFinStat, MonthlyFinStat , and  Private N in each year during the sample period.  These means vary considerably over time.  typically, additional borrower  private information covenants (most commonly MonthlyFinStat ) are included in loan contracts in bad economic times (such  as the 2001 recession and the 20 07–20 09 ﬁnancial crisis) and then are dropped as times improve.  4.  Empirical models and results.  4. 1.  Determinants of borrower private information covenants  We test H1 using the following empirical model.   The independent variables in Eq.  (1) are borrower characteristics, borrower-lender information asymmetry measures, and  loan contract terms that prior research suggests are associated with lenders’ beneﬁts from loan contract monitoring.  While  we intend each independent variable to capture one construct, some likely capture other constructs as well.  We use intuitive  variable names and provide complete deﬁnitions of all variables in Appendix B.  The equation also includes loan purpose,  industry, and calendar year ﬁxed effects.   We proxy for borrowers’ credit risk-related ﬁnancial condition using Size, ROA , and Leverage.  Size is particularly likely to  capture other constructs.  We proxy for borrowers’ uncertainty using Return Volatility and Cash Flow Volatility .  We proxy for  the availability of public information about borrowers using the indicator Rated , for borrowers’ growth options using the  Market-to-Book ratio of assets, for borrowers’ unrecognized intangible assets using R&D , and for the composition of borrowers’ recognized assets using Tangibility.  Market-to-Book may also capture borrowers’ ﬁnancial condition, and Market-to-Book  and R&D may also capture proprietary costs.  We proxy for borrower-lender information asymmetry using a simpliﬁed version of Maskara and Mullineaux’s (2011) composite measure of the information asymmetry between borrowers and outside  19 as well as borrowers’ prior borrowing experience with any lender ( Borrower History ) and with  investors ( Info Asymmetry ),  any of the lead arrangers of the current loan ( Relationship ).  The values of all borrower characteristics and borrower-lender  information asymmetry measures are as of the end of the year prior to loan origination.   We proxy for the major loan contract terms using Loan Size, Maturity , and the indicator Revolver .  We proxy for loan terms  whose effectiveness depends on lenders’ monitoring of borrowers’ current valuations of assets using indicators for whether  the loan is collateralized ( Secured ) or the maximum amount borrowable is tied to a speciﬁed pool of assets ( Borrowing  Base ).  We proxy for ﬁnancial covenants whose effectiveness depends on lenders’ monitoring of borrowers’ accounting performance and solvency using the number of accounting-based Performance Covenants and Capital Covenants , respectively.   Performance covenants serve as tripwires for transfers of control rights and are sensitive to changes in borrower income  statement variables, such as net income, whereas capital covenants help align the interests of lenders and shareholders and  are sensitive to changes in borrowers’ balance sheet variables, such as net worth ( Christensen and Nikolaev, 2012 ).  We proxy  for loan pricing terms whose effectiveness depends on lenders’ monitoring of borrowers’ performance using indicators for  performance pricing provisions tied to credit ratings ( Performance Pricing-Rating ) versus tied to other, generally accounting21 The effectiveness of Performance Pricing-Rating depends on  based, performance measures ( Performance Pricing-Accounting ).   monitoring of borrowers by credit rating agencies, whereas the effectiveness of Performance Pricing-Accounting depends on  monitoring by lenders.  Hence, we expect borrower private information covenants to provide greater beneﬁts for the latter  form of performance pricing.   We refrain from providing a tedious and hard-to-digest discussion of the (comprehensively tabulated) results for the  many  conceptually  and  statistically  interrelated  proxies  for  each  of  the  determinants  of  borrower  private  information  covenants included in Eq.  (1) .  Instead, we illustrate these determinants sharply and intuitively by focusing the exposition  of the descriptive analysis and tests related to H1 on three intuitive speciﬁc predictions.  First, we predict that the loan  contract features whose application depends most on borrowers’ future accounting performance, Performance Covenants and  Performance Pricing-Accounting , are positively associated with ProjFinStat but have little or no association with MonthlyFinStat .  Second, we predict that the measures of the volatility of borrowers’ historical economic and accounting performance,  Return Volatility and Cash Flow Volatility , are positively associated with MonthlyFinStat but have little or no association with  ProjFinStat .  Third, we predict that the borrower-lender information asymmetry measures, Info Asymmetry (Borrower History  and Relationship ), are positively (negatively) associated with both types of borrower private information covenant.   Table 1 reports the means of the borrower characteristics, borrower-lender information asymmetry measures, and loan  contract terms in Eq.  (1) for the full sample and for the four subsamples exhibiting the possible combinations of ProjFinStat  and MonthlyFinStat .  Unless indicated otherwise, we refer to mean differences, coeﬃcients, and other statistics as signiﬁcant  if they differ from zero at the 5% level or better in two-tailed tests.  Means of variables in the three subsamples with at  least one borrower private information covenant (i. e. , 0,1.  1,0.  and 1,1) that are signiﬁcantly different from the means of the  same variables in the subsample without any covenants (i. e. , 0,0) are indicated in boldface.  To isolate the effect of a given  type of borrower private information, we discuss only the differences of the means for the 0,1 and 1,0 subsamples versus  the 0,0 subsample.  Most of these means differences are signiﬁcant in the direction predicted by H1.  That is, compared to  the subsample of loan contracts without borrower private information covenants, the subsamples of contracts that include  one or more of these covenants usually involve borrowers with higher credit risk and uncertainty, greater borrower-lender  information asymmetry, and loan contract terms that impose more risk on lenders or whose effectiveness beneﬁts from  monitoring by lenders.   We discuss only the means differences related to the three speciﬁc predictions based on H1 that are our focus.  First,  compared to the subsample of loan contracts without borrower private information covenants, the means of Performance  Covenants  and  Performance  Pricing-Accounting  signiﬁcantly  increase  when  ProjFinStat  increases  from  zero  to  one,  consistent with forward-looking information about borrowers’ future accounting performance facilitating the application of these  accounting-performance-related loan contract terms.  By comparison, the mean of Performance Covenants does not significantly change and the mean of Performance Pricing-Accounting increases much less when MonthlyFinStat increases from  zero to one, consistent with more timely information about borrowers’ historical accounting performance being less useful for applying these terms.  Second, the means of Return Volatility and Cash Flow Volatility are signiﬁcantly higher when  MonthlyFinStat increases from zero to one, consistent with timely information about borrowers’ historical accounting performance being more useful when borrowers have experienced more volatile historical economic and accounting performance.   By comparison, the mean of Cash Flow Volatility does not signiﬁcantly change and the mean of Return Volatility increases  much less when ProjFinStat increases from zero to one, consistent with forward-looking information about future accounting performance being less useful for borrowers with highly uncertain performance.  Lastly, the mean of Info Asymmetry is  signiﬁcantly higher and the means of Borrower History and Relationship are signiﬁcantly lower when each of ProjFinStat and  MonthlyFinStat increases from zero to one, consistent with both types of borrower private information covenant being more  useful when borrower-lender information asymmetry is higher.   Table 3 presents the pooled sample estimation of Eq.  (1) .  Columns (1)–(3) of the table present the marginal effects  of each independent variable, holding the other variables at their means, in (ordered) logit estimations with ProjFinStat,  MonthlyFinStat , or (Private N) , respectively, as the dependent variable.  All continuous independent variables in the equation  are winsorized at the top and bottom percentiles.  We calculate standard errors clustering observations by ﬁrm.   The coeﬃcients reported in Table 3 largely correspond to the predictions in H1 and the differences in the means across  the borrower private information covenant subsamples in Table 1 discussed above.  Speciﬁcally, the coeﬃcients on Performance Covenants and Performance Pricing-Accounting are signiﬁcantly positive in the ProjFinStat and Private N models but  are insigniﬁcant in the MonthlyFinStat model, consistent with the application of these accounting performance-related contract terms beneﬁting more from information about borrowers’ future accounting performance than from timely information  23 The coeﬃcients on Return Volatility and Cash Flow Volatility are signiﬁcantly  about their historical accounting performance.   positive in the MonthlyFinStat and Private N models but are insigniﬁcant in the ProjFinStat model, consistent with timely  information about historical performance being relatively more important for more volatile borrowers.  The coeﬃcients on  Info Asymmetry are signiﬁcantly positive for all three borrower private information covenant measures, and the coeﬃcients  on Relationship are signiﬁcantly negative for two out of the three measures, consistent with both types of borrower private  information being more important when borrower-lender information asymmetry is higher .   In addition, the results reported in Table 3 reinforce certain ﬁndings reported in Minnis and Sutherland (2017) .  Speciﬁcally, the table reports signiﬁcant positive coeﬃcients on Secured in all columns and on Borrowing Base in the MonthlyFinStat  and Private N models, but not in the ProjFinStat model.  These ﬁndings are consistent with timely historical accounting information enhancing lenders’ monitoring of the asset valuations underlying collateral and borrowing base loan contract terms,  akin to Minnis and Sutherland’s (2017) ﬁndings that lenders’ interim ﬁnancial statement requests increase with collateral,  particularly in lender-friendly states.   In summary, the results reported in Table 3 generally support the predictions in H1 that loan contracts are more likely to  include borrower private information covenants when borrowers exhibit higher credit risk and uncertainty, borrower-lender  information asymmetry is higher, and loan contract terms expose lenders to greater risk or involve borrower ﬁnancial information.  Moreover, the speciﬁc types of covenants included depend on borrower characteristics, borrower-lender information  asymmetry, and loan contract terms.  These results support the idea that borrower private information facilitates lenders’  loan contract monitoring.   4. 2.  Borrower private information covenants and loan contract amendment.  In this section, we test H2 that borrower private information covenants are positively associated with the frequency  of loan contract amendment.  As discussed in Section 2. 3 , the direction of causality could go in either direction for this  hypothesis.  Hence, it is essentially arbitrary whether we test the hypothesis by regressing borrower private information  covenants on loan contract amendments or vice-versa.  As it is more consistent with the prior literature on amendments  (e. g. , Roberts and Suﬁ, 2009, Nikolaev, 2016 ), we chose the latter approach.  As discussed below, however, in untabulated  analysis we use the former approach and obtain identical inferences.   We test H2 using the following empirical model.   where Amended Ind indicates whether a loan contract is amended prior to its maturity.  The test variable in Eq.  (2) , Private ,  denotes one of ProjFinStat, MonthlyFinStat , and Private N .  Eq.  (2) also includes all of the borrower and lending relationship  characteristics, loan contract terms, and loan purpose, industry, and calendar year ﬁxed effects included in Eq.  (1) .  to conserve space, we do not tabulate the coeﬃcients on the control variables.  We estimate Eq.  (2) using logit.   of 2975 loans that are not amended within the ﬁrst 90 days of loan origination, we replace the dependent variable with  the number of days from 90 days after loan origination to the ﬁrst amendment, denoted Amend Days - 90 .  We also estimate this model using the Cox proportional hazard approach.  The estimation of this model captures the associations of  the two borrower private information covenant measures with the hazard rate for the ﬁrst amendment more than 90 days  after loan origination conditional on loans not having been amended within 90 days after origination.  Because this overall  hazard rate is more affected by ﬁrst amendments that occur sooner after 90 days after loan origination, we expect this conditional hazard rate to be higher for ProjFinStat than for MonthlyFinStat.  To conﬁrm that these two alternative approaches  capture the intuitions indicated, we also conduct descriptive analysis that illustrates time variation in the amendment hazard To identify ﬁrst loan contract amendments, we collected all Form 10K/Q and 8K ﬁlings from loan origination to 2015 for  all borrowers in our sample of 3309 original loan contracts, locating the loan contract exhibits attached to these ﬁlings.   To be deemed an amendment rather than an original loan contract, we require a loan contract exhibit to indicate that it is an  amendment and to mention the date of one of the borrower’s original loan contracts.   Although the SEC requires borrowers to attach material loan contracts, including amendments, as exhibits to SEC ﬁlings, the ﬁled loan contract exhibits that we  identiﬁed as amendments in some cases indicate prior amendments that borrowers did not attach to ﬁlings.  In these cases,  we searched the ﬁled exhibits for the ﬁrst ﬁled or unﬁled amendments.   For a loan contract to be included in the sample for the amendment analysis, it must survive the following two ﬁlters.  First, we exclude 92 original loan contracts with maturities less than 364 days, because very short-maturity loans are  27  Second, to ensure that loan contract amendments are observable, we exclude 55 original loan  unlikely to be amended.   contracts for which we are unable to observe ﬁlings for borrowers for the year following loan origination.  These ﬁlters  reduce the number of contracts in the amendment sample to 3162.   As reported in Table 4 , the resulting sample includes observed amendments for 1781 of 3162 original loan contracts, for  a 56% amendment rate.  This rate is less than the 73% amendment rate reported by Roberts (2015) , primarily because we  do not treat “rollovers”, i. e. , new loan contracts with overlap in lenders that are issued prior to the end of the original loan  contract term, as amendments.  The amendments include a variety of covenant, interest rate, commitment size, and term  modiﬁcations.   Table 4 presents the mean of Amended Ind for all loan contracts in the sample and the mean of Amend Days for amended  loans in the sample for each possible value of ProjFinStat, MonthlyFinStat, and Private N.  Amended Ind reliably increases with  the inclusion and number of borrower private information covenants in loan contracts.  For example, the mean of Amended  Ind rises monotonically from 47% for contracts with Private N   2.  The frequency  of amendments is higher for loan contracts that require MonthlyFinStat (72%) than for those that require ProjFinStat (66%).   The time to ﬁrst amendment reliably decreases with the number of borrower private information covenants.  For example, the mean of Amend Days falls monotonically from 401 days for contracts with Private N   0 to 309 days for contracts with   0 to 74% for contracts with Private N.  Private N  2.  that require ProjFinStat (350 days).    The time to ﬁrst amendment is lower for loan contracts that require MonthlyFinStat (305 days) than for those  H2 predicts that borrower private information covenants are positively associated with the frequency of loan contract  amendments.  To test this hypothesis, Table 5 reports logit estimations of Eq.  (2) with Amended Ind as the dependent variable and including Private N (column (1)), ProjFinStat (column (2)), MonthlyFinStat (column (3)) , and both ProjFinStat and  MonthlyFinStat (column (4)) as the test variables.  The table reports the marginal effects of these variables, holding the other  independent variables at their means.  The reported marginal effects indicate that loan contracts that include borrower private information covenants are more likely to be amended.  For example, the signiﬁcantly positive marginal effect of Private  N reported in column 1 indicates that the requirement of an additional type (both types) of borrower private information  covenant increases this probability by 4. 2% (8. 4%).  Column (2) reports a signiﬁcant (10% level) positive marginal effect for  ProjFinStat and column (3) reports a signiﬁcant positive marginal effect for MonthlyFinStat , consistent with both types of  borrower information covenant increasing the likelihood that loan contracts are amended.  When the two types of borrower  private information covenant are included in the same regression in column (4), however, only the marginal effect of MonthlyFinStat is signiﬁcant.   We now test our predictions that the two types of borrower private information covenants are most associated with  ﬁrst loan contract amendments in different windows after loan origination.  Table 5 , column (5) reports the Cox proportional  hazard estimation of the alternative version of Eq.  (2) with Amend Days as the dependent variable and with both ProjFinStat  and MonthlyFinStat included as test variables.  The estimated hazard ratio for MonthlyFinStat is 1. 167 (implying a hazard rate  16. 7% above normal) and signiﬁcant, while the estimated hazard ratio for ProjFinStat is 1. 082 (implying a hazard rate 8. 2%  above normal) but insigniﬁcant.  Column (6) of the table reports the Cox proportional hazard estimation of the alternative  version of Eq.  (2) with Amend Days-90 as the dependent variable and with both ProjFinStat and MonthlyFinStat included as  test variables for the subsample of loans that are not amended in the ﬁrst 90 days after loan origination.  The estimated  hazard ratio for MonthlyFinStat is 1. 062 (implying a hazard rate 6. 2% above normal) but insigniﬁcant, while the estimated  hazard ratio for ProjFinStat is 1. 120 (implying a hazard rate 12. 0% above normal) and signiﬁcant at the 10% level.  These  results are consistent with our prediction that MonthlyFinStat is most associated with the frequency of ﬁrst amendments  of loan contracts in the quarter after loan origination, whereas ProjFinStat is most associated with the frequency of ﬁrst  amendments after that quarter.   To provide additional support for these predictions, Fig.  2 reports the incremental cumulative probability of ﬁrst loan  contract amendment, measured as the Kaplan–Meier failure rate,  for each day from 0 to 500 days after loan origination for  contracts  that  require one or  both  of  ProjFinStat and  MonthlyFinStat  above the corresponding cumulative  probability  for contracts that require neither ProjFinStat nor MonthlyFinStat.  The cumulative probability rises particularly sharply with  MonthlyFinStat , with or without ProjFinStat , in the window from about 60 to 100 days after origination.  The cumulative  probability  rises  gradually  with  ProjFinStat ,  particularly  with  MonthlyFinStat ,  in  the  window  from  about  90  to  300  days  after origination. 