 1.  Introduction Being “green” has become much easier for households with the evolution of technology, such as electric vehicles (EVs) and solar photovoltaic (PV) panels.  These technologies allow consumers to maintain a traditional lifestyle while also reducing their environmental impact by reducing fossil-fuel consumption either on the electricity grid or from internal combustion vehicles.  Governments recognize the environmental beneﬁts of these technologies and thus have implemented myriad policies to spur their deployment.  However, the question remains as to what degree these technologies improve environmental outcomes as they depend on multiple complex factors including the time- and location-speciﬁc emission characteristics of the electricity generation displaced by solar PV or consumed by EVs.  For example, an EV's environmental impact will depend on when and where the customer charges it.  Similarly, the environmental impact of a household's solar PV system will vary depending on the type of generation from the electricity grid that is displaced.  The temporal and spatial variation of these technologies' environmental impacts means that households can inﬂuence the magnitude of environmental beneﬁts by engaging in certain behaviors associated with these technologies.  Utilizing household energy consumption and generation data from the Mueller residential neighborhood in Austin, TX and hourly generation data for the Texas electricity grid, we analyze how household solar PV and EV utilization patterns impact the CO2 emissions and water consumption associated with consuming electricity from the grid.  We then explore how the use of these technologies can be adjusted to maximize environmental beneﬁts and whether these optimizing actions are indeed being taken.  Though several papers have investigated the environmental and electric system impacts of EVs (see Hadley and Tsvetkova, 2009.  Doucette and McCulloch, 2011.  Holland et al. , 2016.  Huo et al. , 2015.  Rangaraju et al. , 2015) or solar PV (Spiegel et al. , 2000.  Connors et al. , 2004.  Sivaraman and Keoleian, 2010.  Zhai et al. , 2012), our paper's detailed, hourly household level dataset on energy consumption, PV generation, and EV charging ﬁlls several gaps in the literature.  First, it allows us to identify hourly environmental impacts from actual charging patterns and identify whether households are charging during environmentally friendly times of day. 