 Introduction Multinational entities (MNEs) face tax incentives to shift taxable income from high-tax jurisdictions to low-tax jurisdictions by strategically valuing intercompany transactions.  To mitigate tax-motivated transfer prices for goods, services, intellectual property, and debt, tax authorities require that transfer prices be “arm’s length,” or comparable to prices charged between independent enterprises (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 2010a).  Because arm’s length contractual prices are generally unobservable, MNEs often benchmark transfer prices by identifying a set of observable, economically comparable, and independent companies that use similar accounting standards to compare profit margins (PWC, 2006).  Specifically, taxpayers calculate the observable range of book profit rates reported by comparable firms and demonstrate that affiliate taxable profits are within this benchmark range (McKinley and Owsley, 2013).  Adoption across jurisdictions of a common set of accounting standards, such as International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), expands the set of potential benchmark firms and could allow MNEs more flexibility to support taxadvantaged transfer prices.  However, tax authorities could use a larger set of benchmarks to enforce tighter comparability standards, resulting in narrower profit ranges.  In this paper, I examine tax-motivated income shifting across jurisdictions following affiliate adoption of a common set of accounting standards for unconsolidated financial reporting.  Unconsolidated financial reporting provides separate entity accounts for each affiliate of a MNE group.  In contrast to the 2005 mandated use of IFRS for consolidated financial reporting in the European Union (EU), countries varied in mandating or permitting IFRS for unconsolidated financial reporting.  As of 2014, 14 of the 27 EU member states require IFRS for unconsolidated financial reporting for certain types of firms, nine countries allow IFRS for certain firms, and four countries do not allow IFRS.  This significant variation in unconsolidated IFRS reporting rules by country, year and entity type across the EU makes the EU a powerful setting to address whether unifying GAAP at the affiliate level increases MNE flexibility when selecting comparable companies to use in benchmarking transfer prices.  My study contributes to the literature by exploiting institutional details of intercompany transfer pricing to investigate a tax consequence of countries permitting or requiring IFRS for unconsolidated financial reporting.  I consider how an accounting change interacts with tax incentives to affect managerial behavior, thereby addressing an important new intersection between financial accounting and tax planning.  All EU member countries follow guidance published by the OECD for substantiating intercompany transfer prices. 1 These Transfer Pricing Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and Tax Administrations state that, for the purposes of benchmarking intercompany prices, an “important aspect of comparability is accounting consistency” (OECD, 2010a, p.  72). 