
In recent decades, the phenomenon of global warming caused by
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions has become extremely serious,
resulting in more frequent and intense extreme weather and natural disasters.  As well known, the carbon emissions from fossil fuel consumption are the nuclear source of the GHG emissions.  Therefore, mitigating
carbon emissions has become a global assignment to realize low carbon
sustainable development.  In response to climate change, many countries have reached basic agreements on mitigating carbon emissions. 
The Paris Climate Agreement and the Kyoto Protocol show the world's determination to cope with climate change issue.  As the largest developing country and the largest carbon emitter, China enacted the energy
intensity target policy and a series of binding policies during the 11th
“Five-Year Plan” (FYP) (2006–2010) and achieved a success in energy
saving and energy intensity reduction (Cao and Karplus, 2014.  Fujii
Name, 2016).  In 2009, China has ofﬁcially raised the carbon intensity
constraint target that carbon emissions per GDP (i. e. , carbon intensity)
would be reduced by 40%–45% in 2020 than the 2005 level.  Such a target
has been considered in the mid-long term plans of the national economic and social development. 
In 2011, China's 12th FYP explicitly proposed a sub-target of the CICP
that carbon emissions per GDP would drop by 17% in than that in 2010. 
This is the ﬁrst time for China to propose carbon intensity constraint target in the FYP.  Subsequently, the Chinese central government allocated
the carbon intensity reduction task to each provincial region, and stipulated that such a task must be incorporated into the local economic and
social development plans.  Thus, the carbon intensity reduction target
must be reﬂected in the performance assessment of the local government.  To fulﬁl such a target, the Chinese central government and local
governments have formulated a series of relevant supporting policies
and measures, and have carried out a “lasting battle” strategy for energy
saving and carbon reduction.  They have released a serious of documents
to declare that the government should endeavor to expedite industrial
structure adjustment, support energy conservation and the development of low carbon energy, increase carbon sinks, control non-energyrelated GHG emissions, and facilitate the substitution of high carbon
productions. 
China's industrial sector is not only a crucial engine of economic
growth, but also responsible for the largest share of the country's energy
consumption and carbon emissions.  The decline of carbon intensity in
the industrial sector plays a decisive role in achieving the overall carbon
intensity reduction target.  As a vital part of carbon reduction polices, a
number of speciﬁc measures focused on carbon reduction in the industrial sector, mainly including 6 aspects as follows.  (1) In 2009, the Chinese government ofﬁcially introduced the Standard for Sector-integrate
Eco-industrial Parks, standardizing the construction, management, and
assessment of sector-integrate eco-industrial parks.  In the same year,
for the enterprises in the eco-industrial parks, the speciﬁc requirements
for promoting the development of low carbon economy were put forward.  (2) In 2010, the Chinese government published a list of enterprises in 18 industrial sub-sectors (especially energy-intensive
industries), targeted at eliminating the backward production capacity. 
(3) China conducted a national resource tax reform for oil and gas in
2011, shifting from a volume-based tax to an ad valorem tax with a
tax rate of 5%–10% (Shi Name, 2015).  The resource tax reform on coal,
rare earths, tungsten, and molybdenum followed the reform of the oil
and gas tax.  Compared with the volume-based resource tax system,
the tax rate in proportion to the market price will increase the costs of
resource use in the overheated market (Liu Name, 2017), which is beneﬁcial for energy conservation and carbon reduction.  (4) The 12th FiveYear Plan for Energy Saving and Emission Reduction stipulated the direction of restructuring the key industries, and promoted mergers and acquisitions in eight major industries, such as automobiles, steel, and
cement.  (5) The 12th Five-Year Plan for Energy Saving and Emission Reduction speciﬁed the targets and assignment of energy conservation
for the energy-intensive industrial sectors.  (6) In 2011, the Chinese government issued a catalogue of industrial restructuring guidance to limit
the expansion of some industries, such as coal, petrochemical and
chemical industries. 
The speciﬁc measures in the industrial sector contribute to industrial
carbon reduction.  However, under the ongoing tightening pressure of
carbon reduction, some provinces begin to implement some administrative mandatory measures like power rationing,1 attempting to
achieve the energy-saving and emission-reduction targets in a shortterm by the way of limiting enterprises' production.  The central government also continues to give pressure to the key industries and enterprises, in order to realize the emission-reduction targets.  Obviously,
whether or not the CICP can achieve the “double dividend” of carbon reduction and industrial growth is signiﬁcant for achieving China's
low carbon sustainable development, because industrial sector is the
biggest emitter, as well as the important engine of economic growth. 
Moreover, in 2015, China submitted its intended nationally determined
contribution (INDC) and released its pledge in GHG reduction.  This
brings a new challenge for China to integrate climate change mitigation
into other national priorities.  The investigation on the effects of the CICP
can provide necessary decision-making reference for coordinating carbon reduction with economic development. 