 1.  Introduction  Prior theoretical research posits that private lenders have comparative advantages over other debt market participants at  monitoring borrowers’ current and likely future compliance with ﬁnancial covenants and other loan contract terms (hereafter, “loan contract monitoring”) ( Diamond, 1984.  Fama, 1985.  Diamond, 1991 ).  Prior empirical research ﬁnds that commercial borrowers provide lenders with private information to facilitate loan contract monitoring ( Acharya and Johnson,  2007.  Bushman et al. , 2010.  Frankel et al. , 2011.  Ivashina and Sun, 2011, Massoud et al. , 2011.  Minnis and Sutherland, 2017 ).   However, with the notable exception of Minnis and Sutherland (2017) , these prior studies do not identify the speciﬁc mechanisms by which lenders obtain such information or types of information obtained.  This limits the insight provided about  how lenders obtain and use accounting-related borrower private information for monitoring, a natural question for accounting research.   We  examine  whether  lenders’  demand  for  information  for  loan  contract  monitoring  explains  the  existence  of  loan  covenants that commit borrowers to disclose accounting-related private information (hereafter, “borrower private information”) periodically after loan origination to lenders.  We also examine the effects of these covenants on the frequency of loan  contract amendments and on informed trading by lenders in secondary loan markets.  To conduct these analyses, we collect  a sample of 3309 original private loan contracts, both single-lender and syndicated loans, ﬁled as exhibits to public borrowers’ Form 10K/Q and 8K ﬁlings.  These contracts generally include a category within the aﬃrmative covenant section that  speciﬁes borrower ﬁnancial reporting covenants.  We identify two types of borrower private information speciﬁed in these  covenants.  (1) projected ﬁnancial statements for future periods (hereafter “projected ﬁnancial statements”) and (2) more  frequent than quarterly (usually monthly) and not yet publicly available historical ﬁnancial statements (hereafter, “monthly  ﬁnancial statements”).  Almost half (47%) of the loan contracts in our sample include one or both of these covenants, with  projected ﬁnancial statements being required almost twice as often as monthly ﬁnancial statements (40% versus 21% of contracts, respectively).  Despite their prevalence, to our knowledge prior researchers have not examined or even been aware of  these contractual requirements for borrowers to disclose these types of private information.   We argue that loan contracts include borrower private information covenants only when their loan contract monitoring  beneﬁts exceed their costs Lenders may receive beneﬁts from these covenants through (1) improved loan contract monitoring, (2) more eﬃcient loan contract amendment, and (3) trading on the information.  Borrowers beneﬁt to the extent  that competition induces lenders to pass along some of their beneﬁts by offering lower interest rates or other terms more  desirable to borrowers.  Such passing along of beneﬁts is essentially necessary to induce ﬁrms seeking to borrow to commit  contractually to provide their private information, because borrowers primarily bear the costs of these covenants.  Actual or  perceived costs to borrowers may arise from (1) the production of the information.  (2) lenders using the information to  obtain more favorable loan contract terms, i. e. , the “hold-up” problem.  (3) trading by lenders leading to broader dissemination of borrower private information and thus proprietary (e. g. , competitive) costs.  (4) borrowers missing performance  projections.  and (5) borrowers making economically shortsighted decisions to manage their within-quarter performance.   We  provide  two  sets  of  evidence  regarding  the  beneﬁts  of  borrower  private  information  covenants  for  lenders’  loan  contract monitoring.  First, prior research shows that the beneﬁts of monitoring increase with (1) borrower credit risk and  uncertainty, as long as these factors are not so large that monitoring is not cost effective ( Diamond, 1991.  Minnis and  Sutherland, 2017.  Nikolaev, 2016 ).  (2) borrower-lender information asymmetry ( Minnis and Sutherland, 2017.  Suﬁ, 2007 ).   and (3) loan contract terms that reallocate control rights, adjust loan contract terms, or require borrowers to take some  action in lenders’ favor when borrowers are determined to violate the terms ( Asquith et al. , 2005.  Christensen and Nikolaev, 2012.  Flannery and Wang, 2011.  Nikolaev, 2016.  Rajan and Winton, 1995, Minnis and Sutherland, 2017 ).  Motivated by  this research, we hypothesize and provide descriptive evidence that loan contracts more frequently include borrower private  information covenants when borrowers have higher credit risk and uncertainty, when borrower-lender information asymmetry is higher, and when the contracts include ﬁnancial covenants or other terms for which this information enhances loan  contract monitoring.  We further predict and ﬁnd that loan contracts more frequently require projected (monthly) ﬁnancial  statements when additional or more timely information about borrowers’ future (historical) accounting performance is more  important.   Second, prior research shows that loan contract amendments occur when lenders receive and evaluate information after  loan origination that resolves uncertainty about borrowers’ credit quality and alternative borrowing opportunities ( Nikolaev,  2016.   Roberts  and  Suﬁ,  2009 ). 