 Introduction We examine acquisition outcomes when the same auditor audits the financial statements of both a bidder and a target firm prior to an acquisition.  We hypothesize that shared auditors facilitate the flow of information between bidders and targets, and that the benefits of such mitigated information asymmetry accrue primarily to the acquiring firm.  External auditors have unique access to senior executives, participate in audit committee meetings, and have access to board meeting minutes and general information about a firm in the conduct of their audits.  This access to senior executives combined with information gathered during an audit provides auditors with an opportunity to discuss strategic initiatives with their clients including, among others, the acquisition or disposition of assets.  Communication about such initiatives may be in the form of “soft talk”.  Because auditors contract with a variety of companies, auditors have the potential to become information intermediaries between prospective targets and acquirers, whether intentional or otherwise.  As shared auditors are incentivized to align with the interests of larger clients, we anticipate a potential bias in favor of acquisitive clients over target clients.  Hence, bidders that share an audit firm with a potential target could have an information advantage relative to others in the process of bidding, and we anticipate that this advantage will manifest itself in an increased likelihood of submitting a bid for a target.  The impact of shared auditors likely extends beyond the point of bidding and target selection.  If shared-auditor bidders have an informational advantage relative to competing bidders, bidders with shared auditors can leverage this advantage into a better bargaining position with the target.  As other bidders have less information, they have less incentive to bid, thus reducing bid competition.  With lower bid competition, an acquirer with a shared auditor has the opportunity to negotiate a more favorable price for the target firm, thus reducing premiums paid.  The opportunity for a shared auditor to become an information intermediary is likely increased if an acquirer and target contract with the same auditor office.  This is due to a higher likelihood of overlap of audit personnel on client engagement teams and increased informal contact between audit teams of the target and acquirer, i. e. , “water cooler” talk among auditors in the same practice office.  Therefore, we expect the shared auditor effect on deal outcomes to be more pronounced if the bidder and acquirer contract with the same auditor practice office.  We anticipate that shared auditors may favor acquisitive clients over targets for at least two reasons.  First, an auditor's long-term incentives (even within an auditor's practice office) are more closely aligned with those of their acquisitive clients.  Our intuition follows that applied to shared investment bank advisors who are more likely to favor acquiring firms when representing both a target and an acquirer in the same deal (Agrawal et al. , 2013).  As audit firms and their practice offices have an incentive to foster and maintain ongoing relationships with larger, more acquisitive clients, we anticipate shared information at the auditor office level will benefit acquirers more so than targets.  Second, with a shared auditor, target auditors may be more forthcoming in the due diligence process, as target auditors may be more willing to disclose information to co-workers rather than auditors from another audit firm, especially when the information is concentrated within an auditor's practice.  We hence anticipate that bidders that share auditor offices with their targets will gain superior acquisition-related information about their targets and experience lower bid competition for those targets.  Both effects would yield favorable transaction outcomes for acquirers.  As sharing confidential information about target clients with acquirer clients appears to be a violation of conflict of interest rules, we expect that higher (lower) quality auditors would be less (more) likely to act as information intermediaries in merger and acquisition deals.  Further, as the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX) strengthened auditor independence rules and increased awareness of auditor independence concerns, we expect the shared-auditor effect on M&A deals to be stronger prior to SOX.  Using data on public transactions from 1985 to 2010, we examine the impact of shared auditors on the outcomes of all acquisitions and the subset of acquisitions between targets and acquirers who are audited by Big-N audit firms.  We find that over this period approximately 26% of all acquisitions among clients of Big-N audit firms have a shared auditor.  The substantial percentage of deals with shared auditors suggests that auditors facilitate acquisitions among client firms.  We also find that deals with shared auditors have fewer bidders relative to deals without, consistent with increased bargaining power for acquirers with shared auditors.  We further find that premiums paid by acquirers in shared-auditor deals are nearly 4. 2% lower than deals in which the target and acquirer have different auditors.  This finding is economically significant as it represents a reduction of 9. 2% in the average premium of 45. 8%, or an average discount of $36 million U. S.  dollars in the purchase price. 1 We also find that average announcement day returns are 1. 80% lower for targets and 0. 70% higher for acquirers in deals with shared auditors.  We find that this shared-auditor effect on premiums, target returns, and deal completion rates is driven by deals with shared-auditor offices as the shared-auditor effect increases nearly twofold (as compared to magnitudes noted above) if the target and the acquirer are audited by the same auditor practice office. 2 This result is consistent with our expectation as the opportunity to transfer information in violation of conflict of interest rules is stronger within an auditor's practice office, likely due to the higher probability of auditor personnel overlap and opportunity for “water cooler” talk.  These results are robust to controls for geographic distance between the target and acquirer, for the involvement of shared directors or of shared advisors, as well as for other control variables that prior studies have shown to influence acquisition outcomes (Uysal et al. , 2008.  Agrawal et al. , 2013.  Cai and Sevilir, 2012).  These results are also robust to concerns of endogeneity arising from the potential endogenous choice of an auditor by the target and acquirer.  We next examine whether this shared-auditor effect is less pronounced for auditors that are anticipated to be of higher quality.  We measure auditor quality with two proxies following prior literature (see DeFond and Zhang, 2014, for an extensive review).  First, we start with the size of the target.  We expect auditors would be more likely to cater to larger target clients in the transaction process relative to smaller target clients as prior research has shown that auditors provide lower audit quality to smaller clients (Reynolds and Francis, 2000).  Correspondingly, we anticipate shared auditors will be less likely to favor an acquirer of a large target relative to a small target as large target managers are more likely to take prominent roles at the acquirer following the acquisition.  Therefore, we expect the shared auditor effect to be less pronounced for acquisitions of larger targets.  Second, as prior literature suggests longer tenured auditors provide higher quality audits (e. g.  Myers et al. , 2003), we anticipate longer tenured auditors will be less likely to favor acquirers at the expense of target shareholders.  We find the shared-auditor effect on deal outcomes is concentrated in deals with smaller targets consistent with shared auditors being less willing to cater to acquirers of larger targets.  We also find that longer tenured auditors appear less likely to cater to acquirers at the expense of target shareholders.  Again, these results are robust to controls for geographic proximity, the presence of shared directors, and the presence of shared advisors.  Lastly, we find that the shared-auditor effect is stronger in the pre-SOX period relative to the post-SOX period.  However, subsequent to SOX, deals with shared auditor's offices still reduce deal premiums and target announcement returns in the subsample of deals within the Big-N.  We interpret these findings to suggest that the impact of shared auditors (offices) on transaction outcomes is reduced, but not eliminated, with the passage of SOX.  Our study makes three contributions.  First, we provide evidence that acquirers benefit from sharing an auditor's office with a target, largely at the expense of target shareholders, and this result appears concentrated in acquisitions of smaller target clients.  Therefore, our result suggests that auditors frequently violate their duty to put the interests of their clients ahead of their own in what appears to be a failure to protect confidential client information within their practice offices. 3 Consequently, while shared auditors may aid in deal identification, target shareholders appear to be are harmed in such deals.  Therefore, these results suggest necessary changes in audit firm policies to safeguard confidential client information within practice offices.  Further, audit clients should be aware of the risk of information leakage within auditor's practice offices.  This study contributes to the literature by providing evidence consistent with violations of conflict of interest rules by auditors that benefit one client at the expense of another.  Prior research and regulator concerns regarding auditor's conflicts of interests focus on an auditor's independence from a client and the effect of an independence breach on the quality of that client's audit.  In contrast, our study documents a novel conflict of interest as it relates to the auditor's client portfolio and suggests auditors benefit acquisitive clients at the expense of target clients.  The effect on audit quality of such clients is unexamined in our work and is left for future research. 4 Second, our results also add to prior studies that show that auditors impact their clients beyond the scope of the auditing relationship (e. g.  Louis, 2005.  Beatty, 1989).  While prior work has exclusively focused on the effect of audit firm size (i. e.  BigN vs.  non-Big-N) on client outcomes, our findings shed light on the effect of shared auditors (offices) within the group of Big-N auditors and their impact on client M&A outcomes.  Third, by providing evidence that shared auditor offices impact the acquisition process and deal outcomes, this study contributes to prior literature on information asymmetry and the form of payment, the probability of receiving a bid, the contractual provisions in merger agreements, and the price reactions to merger and acquisition announcements.  This study also contributes to the literature on shared intermediaries and their role in reducing information asymmetry in the acquisition process. 5 The identified shared-auditor practice office effect on acquisition outcomes is one potential mechanism to partially explain the geographic proximity effect on acquisition outcomes found in prior studies (e. g.  Uysal et al. , 2008).  Our study complements a concurrent paper by Cai et al.  (2014) who also examine the effect of shared auditors on acquisitions.  Our study examines an auditor's conflict of interest in shared auditor transactions, while that study examines overall acquisition quality of shared auditor deals.  Cai et al.  (2014) suggest that shared auditors reduce uncertainty in the deal process which results in higher quality acquisitions.  Our results suggest that this benefit of uncertainty reduction accrues to the acquiring firm and that this benefit is driven by deals that involve shared auditor offices.  As a caveat, our study examines all acquisitions with greater than 50% change in control, while Cai et al.  (2014) examine only acquisitions with a 100% change in control.  Therefore, given the differences in sample criteria, caution should be taken in making direct comparisons of the results of these two studies.  However both studies, while using differing sample selection criteria, suggest that shared auditors impact target identification and audit client M&A outcomes which is outside the scope of an auditor–client relationship.  The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 discusses prior literature and hypothesis development.  Section 3 describes our data, including statistics on the probability of a shared-auditor bid.  Section 4 provides our empirical results on the effect of shared auditors on acquisition outcomes.  Section 5 provides supplementary analysis of the effect of SOX on the relation between shared auditors and acquisition outcomes.  Section 6 addresses selection concerns in the multivariate analysis.  Section 7 concludes.  2.  Prior literature and hypothesis development.  2. 1.  Prior related literature.  Prior research shows that auditors influence merger and acquisition activity, even though they are not specifically contracted to advise on acquisition decisions, unlike investment banks or transaction attorneys.  Specifically, smaller auditors appear to provide greater service and advice to their acquisitive clients, and this advice translates into higher acquirer announcement date returns (Louis, 2005).  Also, Big-N auditors of targets are associated with a higher likelihood of a firm being acquired, higher bidder announcement returns and premiums paid, and lower target announcement returns (Bugeja, 2011.  Niemi et al. , 2012.  Xie et al. , 2013).  For private targets, valuation multiples are higher if they are audited by a Big-4 auditor (De Franco et al. , 2011).  These prior studies consistently use auditor size (i. e. , the separation between Big-N and non-Big-N auditors) to examine the effect of auditors on acquisition outcomes.  In contrast, in this paper we focus on a complementary characteristic of audit firms – the case in which the audit firm has been separately contracted by both the target and acquirer for audit services – and its effect on deal outcomes.  Importantly, such focus permits us to exploit the heterogeneity in auditor choice between target and acquirer within the group of Big-N-only acquisitions, heterogeneity that has been previously unexamined in the merger and acquisition setting.  Another literature focuses on the impact of shared advisors in the acquisition process.  Agrawal et al.  (2013) show that deal outcomes favor acquiring firms and disfavor target firms in transactions in which both parties contract with the same investment advisor.  The authors suggest that a likely cause for the observed effects is that a shared advisor anticipates future fees from the acquirer, but does not anticipate such future income from the target.  Prior literature also finds that acquirers have higher announcement returns and pay lower premiums if a director is on the board of both an acquirer and target, which suggests that shared directors influence deal outcomes by sharing acquisition-relevant information that favors the acquiring firm (Cai and Sevilir, 2012).  Overall, this literature shows that shared intermediaries can mitigate information asymmetry between the parties and can influence acquisition outcomes.  2. 2.  Hypothesis development.  In the conduct of an audit, auditors have frequent confidential communications with senior management alongside access to material private information about current corporate performance.  Furthermore, auditors review board meeting minutes, participate in audit committee meetings, and gain an overall understanding of the condition and state of the business during an audit.  Auditors are also required to evaluate the company's ability to continue as a going concern, which entails an evaluation of anticipated future cash flows and operations for the company.  Further, auditors assess the intended future use of assets when testing valuation assertions in the financial statements.  Although auditors are limited on the services they can provide to audit clients for a fee, they are still incentivized to provide value to the client beyond the scope of the audit to retain the client and associated fees.  One way an auditor can create value is by providing information that is beneficial to management's overall information set. 6 To the extent that clients of an auditor are looking to acquire or dispose of corporate assets, this information may be shared in a relatively benign manner within the auditor's network of clients. 7 In the extreme, an individual audit partner may have a pair of clients that are correspondingly looking to dispose and to acquire assets, in which case it would appear infeasible for the auditor to not share confidential client information.  If shared auditors provide information that helps bidder or target clients identify potential acquisition opportunities and reduce information asymmetry, we expect that shared auditors increase the probability of an acquirer making a bid.  We state our first formal hypothesis below.  Hypothesis 1.  Shared auditors increase the probability of a firm receiving a bid.  Through the due diligence process the acquirer validates the offer price and the value of the target's assets (Skaife and Wangerin, 2013).  This process includes gathering non-public information from the target to reduce information risk and to reduce the risk of overpaying or otherwise entering into an unfavorable transaction. 8 We anticipate that a shared auditor lowers information risk and improves acquisition outcomes for acquiring firms.  There are several reasons for such anticipated effect.  If shared-auditor bidders have an informational advantage relative to other competing bidders, the former can leverage this advantage into a better bargaining position with the target.  As other potential bidders have less information, they are less likely to bid, thus reducing bid competition.  With lower bid competition, an acquirer with a shared auditor has the opportunity to negotiate a more favorable price for the target firm, thus reducing premiums.  Given the multi-year nature of auditor–client relationships, auditors of target firms may prefer acquisition bids to be withdrawn rather than succeed as the acquisition of a target client results in the loss of future fees.  To the contrary, auditors of acquirer firms have incentives for a client deal to complete, as the acquisition of a target will increase the size of the acquiring firm, thereby increasing the reputation of the auditor for auditing larger firms and consequently incrementally increasing audit fees. 9 In a setting in which both target and acquirer contract with the same auditor prior to an acquisition, a shared auditor is likely to favor the acquiring client at the expense of the target client, to foster an ongoing relationship with the surviving client after the acquisition.  This is consistent with the argument in Agrawal et al.  (2013) that shared advisors appear to favor acquiring clients in an acquisition.  Further, target auditors may be more willing to share information about the target's assets and liabilities when they audit both target and acquirer. 10 Such increased willingness to share information coupled with incentives to favor the acquiring firm would increase the informational advantage of the acquirer. 11 Therefore, we expect acquisition outcomes with shared auditors to favor acquiring firms.  We formally state our second hypothesis as follows.  Hypothesis 2.  Shared-auditor deals are more favorable to acquirers (as compared to targets) than non-shared-auditor deals.  Audit firms are organized into local practice offices, and prior research has shown that individual auditor practice offices have a significant impact on client outcomes. 12 More importantly, the auditor practice office is where information about clients is concentrated, the auditor network is strongest, and the opportunity to share information about clients is likely highest. 13 Further, local practice offices have a greater likelihood of overlapping personnel assigned to the audits of targets and acquirers, which further facilitates the concentration and potential dissemination of information. 