 National oil companies (NOCs), that have the government as their major ownership, control most of the international oil reserves.  In the early 1970s, NOCs controlled slightly more than 10% of the world’s oil and gas reserves (Leis et al. , 2012).  By the end of 2000s, NOCs controlled 73% of oil reserves and 65% of gas reserves (Victor et al. , 2011).  The nature of the NOC’s ownership alters its objectives, and directly inﬂuence the public policies and incentives faced by company’s managers (Vickers and Yarrow, 1988).  Despite the importance of the effects of ownership, research on oil and gas companies is limited.  In fact, the literature has compared the technical eﬃciency between NOCs and IOCs.  Al-Obaidan and Scully (1992) state that NOCs generate between 61% and 65% of the IOCs’ revenues with the same inputs.  Victor (2007) ﬁnds that revenues from their main commercial objective are generated with more eﬃciency by IOCs than NOCs.  This author attributes these ineﬃciencies to several factors, in particular, employment policy and subsidies for delivered products, among others.  Wolf and Pollitt (2008) estimate a 3. 6% increase in return on sales, a 35% drop in employment and an average of 15% increase in total production when an NOC becomes an IOC.  Wolf (2009) ﬁnds that IOCs encourage superior performance compared to NOCs in terms of output eﬃciency and proﬁtability.  Eller et al.  (2011) ﬁnd that NOCs are less eﬃcient than IOCs, which can be mainly explained by the differences in the ﬁrms’ objectives.  Likewise, Shleifer and Vishny (1994), Hartley and Medlock (2008), Eller et al.  (2011) and Hartley et al.  (2012) ﬁnd empirical evidence that non-commercial objectives, such as domestic fuel subsidies and employment – which represent high levels of employment, unproﬁtable projects, or non-necessary expenditures – are major sources of reduced economic eﬃciency for many NOCs.  NOCs’commercialobjectiveisverymuchlikethoseofinternational oil companies (IOCs), seeking to generate wealth for their owners – the citizens.  Nevertheless, governments include non-commercial objectives in NOCs missions.  While IOCs seek to maximize shareholder value, NOCs often have a wider range of objectives, such as providing domestic fuel price subsidies, fostering domestic employment, wealth re-distribution, economic development, and energy security (Shleifer and Vishny, 1994.  Hartley and Medlock, 2008.  Eller et al. , 2011.  Hartley et al. , 2012).  The different objectives between NOCs and IOCs are even deeper at the managerial level, due to their different ownership and/or shareholding.  In IOCs, so far as they are publicly traded, ownership means – in principle – a direct claim on the proﬁts generated by the ﬁrms commercial activities.  Any fundamental changes in IOC’s governance ultimately require the shareholders’ majority approval, according with their by-laws.  This structure poses well known problems related to managerial incentives, mainly studied through the principal-agent paradigm (Jensen and Meckling, 1976.  Harris and Raviv, 1978).  In practice, this agency problem is countered by the existence of a market for ownership rights, the threat of takeover, the threat of bankruptcy, and a managerial labor market (Jensen and Meckling, 1976.  Harris and Raviv, 1978).  A widespread incentive practice has been to align management’s interests with those of stockholders, through partial compensation with stocks and stock options (Holmström, 1999).  There is also a principal–agent relationship between the government and IOC, in which the government (principal) could design an incentive contract that induces the IOC (agent) to undertake actions that will maximize the government’s welfare through taxes and royalties (Pongsiri, 2004).  Oil reserves are owned by the state, which may offer access to them while IOCs can offer access to capital, expertise in recovery and management skill (Marcel, 2006).  Under concession licenses or contractual arrangements, the state has to offer economically attractive contract terms for the IOC to take the implicit risk of this industry (Pongsiri,In the case of NOCs, ownership is closer to a representative form, where oﬃcials act in the name of the public at large.  Thus, the governance arrangement is a two-stage principal–agent relationship.  the manager (agent)–government (principal) relationship, and the government (agent)–citizen (principal) relationship.  This places governments as intermediaries between NOCs and the citizens.  Government, as a principal to the NOC’s manager, is in the position to hire, ﬁre or reward, according to some expected performance, but the relationship usually lacks most of the mechanisms and incentives listed in the case of IOCs (Villalonga, 2000).  Besides, the State is the guarantor of the NOC’s debt, which shields it from the effects of ﬁnancial distress or bankruptcy (Laffont and Tirole, 1991).  As a consequence, NOC’s managers are likely to be monitored less strictly than their counterparts in IOCs (Hartley and Medlock, 2008).  On the other hand, government, as the principal, may inﬂuence the allocation of ﬁnal production, production decisions, employment, and reinvestments (exploration and recovery).  Some of these decisions are clearly guided by the Government’s dual role as the agent to the citizens.  A given outcome may occur because Government might be tempted to prioritize non-commercial objectives with the purpose of increasing its own political beneﬁts (Karl, 1997).  Since government oﬃcials are but temporary administrators of the state, elected by the citizens, their incentive is to extract as much as possible from the NOC, within sustainable limits.  Direct comparisons among oil companies is a major challenge, given the substantial variations in geological characteristics, petrochemical properties of oil and gas, taxes and royalty systems, and logistic factors.  In light of these diﬃculties, and taking cues from an operational model developed by Pindyck (1978), Hartley and Medlock (2008) introduce a dynamic optimization model of the operation and development of an NOC in which the authors propose a multiplicative production function that depends on the oil reserves, the productivity of labor, and past exploration.  The authors consider the operational effects of increased non-commercial objectives, such as the political discount premium, the employment incentive and the domestic fuel subsidy, suggestion although the model proposed on this paper does not consider new recovery technologies such as enhanced oil recovery (EOR).  To address this deﬁciency, we develop an extension of Pindyck (1978), explicitly incorporating the effects of exploration and enhanced oil recovery (EOR).  The model assesses the tradeoff between decisions on employment and subsidized domestic fuel price and ﬁnancial-operational performance measures such as market value, production and reinvestment (exploration and recovery).  The developed methodology seems to be relevant when the ratio of oil reserves to production is less than 15 years, such as Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Norway, Oman, United Kingdom and US (BP, 2017).  This means that these countries cannot maintain their actual production in the long term unless they add new reserves.  These new reserves may come from exploration and/or EOR.  The rest of this paper is structured as follows.  Section 2 compares the operational and ﬁnancial performance of NOCs and IOCs during the ﬁrst decade of this century, therein seeking to elicit some stylized facts, such as differences of revenue per employee and revenue per produced barrel.  Section 3 introduces a model to obtain the optimal production and reinvestment path for IOCs.  Section 4 applies this model to evaluate the consequences of employment and domestic subsidized fuel price on the operational and ﬁnancial performance of an NOC.  Section 5 illustrates these implications in the Colombian NOC, Ecopetrol.  Finally, Section 6 provides the main conclusions.  <Middle> Comparing national oil companies and international oil companies.  Research on ownership effects in the oil and gas industry is hindered by the poor disclosure of NOCs.  Many of them are not standardized.  This means that information is scattered or varies depending on the source.  Based on Hartley et al.  (2012), we calculate basic statistics of the top 61 oil and gas companies, which represent approximate 80% of world oil production.  In a more extended survey, Victor et al.  (2011) reported that NOCs produced 61% of the world oil supply and 52% of the world gas supply in 2008, while holding more than 85% of world oil reserves and more than 65% of world gas reserves.  Al-Obaidan and Scully (1992), Victor (2007), Wolf and Pollitt (2008), Wolf (2009), Eller et al.  (2011), andHartley et al.  (2012) propose the use of revenue per employee and revenue per produced barrel as a basic measure of economic eﬃciency.  The average revenue is US$ 1440 per NOC employee versus US$ 1925 per IOC employee, as shown in Table 1.  If we assume similar technology, cost structure, and workforce quality across companies, the ineﬃciencies in NOCs relative to IOCs may be explained by their employment policy (Victor, 2007.  Hartley and Medlock, 2008.  Eller et al. , 2011.  Hartley et al. , 2012).  As a second basic measure of economic eﬃciency, we use a proxy of revenue per produced barrel.  Oil companies may sell their oil and gas production to international or domestic oil market.  There is no evidence of signiﬁcant differences between the international oil prices taken by NOCs vis-à-vis the IOCs (Bernard and Weiner, 1996).  Nevertheless, the averages of domestic gasoline and diesel prices in countries with NOCs were signiﬁcantly lower than those without NOCs, as shown in Fig.  1.  Gasoline and diesel prices in countries with NOCs were on average 34% and 45% below those with only IOCs, respectively.  These ﬁndings are aligned with the hypothesis of Eller et al.  (2011) and Hartley et al.  (2012) that governments, who are the principals in their relation with an NOC management, are more likely to redistribute income through subsidized domestic fuel prices.  Cheon et al.  (2013) note that major oil producing countries with weak institutional capacities tend to subsidize domestic fuel prices.  In general, NOC eﬃciency measures are affected by employment policies and domestic fuel subsidies, which may affect their production and reinvestment decisions.  We propose a model including exploration and enhanced oil recovery that provides an operative and ﬁnancial benchmark to assess the effects of these non-commercial objectives.  3.  Production and reinvestment of international oil companies.  An IOC can distribute its proﬁts among shareholders through dividends and stock repurchases, once reinvestment decisions have been made.  Such reinvestment is deployed mainly via exploration and recovery (Fig.  2), allocated to each item depending on the company’s objectives, reserves, and time horizon.  The general approach to investigating management’s optimal reinvestment decisions, and their consequences, will follow the wellestablished principle of maximization of shareholder value.  In what follows we simplify matters in the following ways.  i) IOC managers maximize the net present value of the free cash ﬂows going to equity, paid out only in the form of dividends.  ii) The IOC ﬁnances all its activities exclusively from internally generated funds.  It has no debt outstanding.  iii) For ease of computation and further interpretation, the formulation is continuous-time.  Our proxy of the market value of equity is given by the net present value of free cash ﬂow, where q(t) represents the oil extraction rate, w(t) denotes the exploration investment rate, z(t) represents the enhanced oil recovery (EOR) investment rate, p(t) is the oil price, c(q(t)) is the production cost per barrel, cF(t) represents all ﬁxed costs that are independent of the production rate, and d is a constant discount rate.  We also assume that the IOC takes the oil price as given (price-taker).  Pindyck (1978) argues that the production cost per barrel is an inverse function of the remaining reserves.  instead, we assume that the production cost per barrel depends on the production rate.  Based on the break-even cost, Exploration and Production (E&P) companies ﬁrst rely on low-cost oil wells and then high-cost oil wells.  Therefore, the production cost per barrel is the weighted average of the production cost of each producing well.  If the company wants to increase its production rate, they will need to drill and/or develop over higher cost oil wells.  Therefore, we assume that the production cost per barrel is increasing in q(t), so that cq > 01.  Depending of the reserves/production ratio of E&P companies, there exist incentives to invest in exploration and/or EOR.  Oil production in reservoirs might include three distinct phases, which are not necessarily sequential.  primary, secondary, and enhanced oil recoveries (tertiary recoveries)2.  The original oil in place (OOIP) is the total oil volume stored in reservoirs prior to production (Terry and Rogers, 2013), and the recovery factor (RF) is the percentage of the OOIP that can be produced, depending on the recovery phase3.  Therefore, the oil reserves at time t, R(t), are then given by Eq.  (2).  R(t) =OOIP (t) ∗ RF(t).  The model proposed by Pindyck (1978) contains three pooled components of reserve additions.  new discovery, extensions and revisions.  However, besides these pooled additions, we independently consider exploration and EOR, which means that our model considers two explicitly different ways to add reserves.  by expanding the OOIP(t) via exploration and by increasing the RF(t) via EOR, as shown in Eqs, where f(w, X) is the rate of addition to reserves by exploration, which depends on the exploration investment rate w(t) and the cumulative exploration reserve additions X(t), as Pindyck (1978) proposes.  f is assumed to be non-decreasing and strictly concave in w (fw ≥ 0 and fww < 0) and monotonically decreasing in X (fX < 0).  g is the rate of addition to reserves by EOR, which depends on the recovery investment rate z, and the cumulative recovery investment Z, given an OOIP.  We assume that g(z, Z) is non-decreasing and strictly concave in z (gz ≥ 0 andg zz < 0) and monotonically increasing in Z (gZ > 0). 