
In order to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+), policies could either attempt to reduce the proﬁtability
of agriculture, e. g.  by removing agricultural subsidies, or offer positive
incentives such as payment for environmental services (PES) that aim
to put a price on forest externalities (Angelsen, 2010.  Palmer, 2011). 
The latter have come to dominate both project and nascent jurisdictional-scale REDD+ strategies (see e. g.  Mahanty Name, 2013.  Sills Name,
2014).  Acre State in Brazil, the setting for our paper, is currently at the
forefront of efforts to institutionalize jurisdictional-scale REDD+.  At
an estimated cost of US$260 million, the State government's objective
is to reduce deforestation by 80% by 2020,
thus conserving
5. 5 million ha of forest in order to prevent the release of 62. 5 Mt of
CO2 emissions (Herbert, 2010).  To this end, Acre has established a
‘PES-like’ scheme known as the Incentive System for Environmental
Services (SISA) framework.  Its objective is to internalize values associated with forest carbon, as well as biodiversity and hydrological services,
by incentivizing landowners to conserve forest on their landholdings. 
In this paper, we model a hypothetical SISA payment in order to address two related questions.  First, given the extent of uncertainty in
land-use returns from forest conversion, what is the minimum level of
payment that Acre's government should pay to landowners to ensure
forest conservation with a 90% probability.  Reﬂecting the common
practice of Latin American incentive payment schemes, our payment
is held constant over time.  The ‘90% probability’ is illustrative of a setting
in which there is a relatively strong commitment on the part of the
policymaker to enforce conservation contracts and hence, keep land in
forest.  That said, should alternative land uses become more proﬁtable,
e. g.  due to rising commodity prices, it may not be possible to prevent
contract breach altogether thus reﬂecting imperfect enforcement of
conservation contracts (e. g.  Engel and Palmer, 2008.  MacKenzie Name,
2012.  Jayachandran, 2013). 
Our model is applied to municipality-scale, publicly-available data,
which allows us to estimate the uncertain returns of an ‘average’ landowner within each municipality, one faced with the decision of whether
to keep land in forest or convert it to an alternative land use.  For each of
Acre's municipalities, we estimate the uncertain returns for three alternative land uses.  cattle, corn, and coffee.  These three land uses are
among the most popular ones adopted in Acre and have relatively
good data availability.  We then identify the minimum per hectare cost
to the policymaker of conserving forest in each of Acre's 22 municipalities before ranking the municipalities according to ascending payment
levels, i. e.  moving from the municipalities with the lowest opportunity
costs to those with the highest ones.  The second question we ask is
whether and (if so) how this ranking of municipalities changes when
we consider their carbon stocks.  Finally, our estimates of policy costs
are combined with carbon stock data to give a novel measure of municipality-scale environmental cost-effectiveness.  the minimum relative
cost, in terms of the forgone proﬁts from alternative land uses under uncertainty, per tonne of carbon. 
In studies that evaluate the cost-effectiveness and efﬁciency of PES,
two key assumptions are typically made.  First, it is often assumed that
future returns from forest conversion are known with certainty (e. g. 
Ferraro and Simpson, 2002.  Börner Name, 2010.  Groom and Palmer,
2010.  Palmer and Silber, 2012.  Curran Name, 2016).  Yet, up-front investments combined with greater uncertainty in agricultural returns create
incentives to delay the decision to convert forest to an alternative use
(Schatzki, 2003).  This implies that a lower level of incentive would be
required to prevent forest conversion.  In general, a failure to consider
uncertainty in future agricultural returns results in estimates of the opportunity costs of forest conservation that are biased upwards.  The consequence is that payment levels would be set higher than necessary in
order to incentivize forest conservation. 
Second, it is also commonly assumed that the environmental beneﬁts from conserving forest are homogenous across space.  However, it
has become increasingly clear that this assumption is erroneous.  For example, Saatchi Name (2011) demonstrate wide variation in forest carbon
stocks, even at the local scale, e. g.  within municipalities.  A failure to consider heterogeneity in forests and their corresponding eco-system services can thus lead to under- or over-estimates of beneﬁts from
conservation (see Vincent, 2016). 
In Acre, funds for SISA remain dependent on public sources of funding
despite a Memorandum of Understanding signed in 2010 with the US
State of California to provide REDD+ credits.  There is currently little
scope for the use of carbon markets and offsetting to augment Acre's conservation budget.  Given this limited budget, the basic idea behind our
analysis is to identify municipalities in Acre where it might be possible
to conserve a lot of carbon at relatively low cost.  Our paper contributes
to Acre's ongoing efforts to design an efﬁcient and effective set of forest
conservation institutions, particularly with respect to jurisdictional
REDD+, which are described in Section 2.  We do so by adapting the
model of uncertain land-use returns by Engel Name (2015), in Section 3. 
First, we adapt their model so that it is more consistent with most Latin
American PES schemes, namely by changing the incentive from a variable
to a ﬁxed, area-based payment and by creating a shorter payments period
(ﬁve years instead of 30).  Second, in examining three different land uses
and with 22 different starting points, i. e.  one for each municipality in
Acre, we move away from their focus on a single alternative land use
and a single starting point for estimating policy costs. 
We exploit spatial heterogeneity in land-use returns and model these
returns over time using publicly available data, which are described in
Section 4.  Since similar data are increasingly available for other tropical
countries, in addition to other Brazilian States, our model can easily be applied to other settings and land uses.  Further, we exploit the spatial variation in forest carbon stocks across the State and by comparing these with
the relative land use returns, provide an economic rationale for the
targeting of REDD+ payments.  Building upon Engel Name (2015), our
analysis therefore not only estimates the spatial variation in the cost of
keeping forests standing but also integrates these costs with forest carbon
stock data in order to derive a measure of cost-effectiveness across municipalities.  In sum, our model offers a novel and straightforward way of allocating scarce conservation resources and while our focus is on forest
climate beneﬁts, it can easily be expanded to accommodate other ecosystem services and biodiversity. 
Presented in Section 5 and discussed in Section 6, our results suggest
that although pasture and cattle ranching is not particularly proﬁtable, it
is the land use which results in the highest (relative) returns to landowners under uncertainty, in 19 out of 22 municipalities.  With relatively low conversion costs and little volatility in its returns process, pasture
determines the minimum payment level in these areas.  Upon ranking
municipalities by payment level and by carbon stock, we ﬁnd that
cheaper municipalities tend not to have higher stocks.  However, this
type of ranking masks wide differences among municipalities.  Our empirical exercise demonstrates evidence of substantial, economicallymeaningful and policy-relevant variation among municipalities.  On
the basis of cost per tonne of carbon, we identify 13 municipalities in
which it might be possible to obtain a substantially larger ‘carbon
bang’ for one's ‘buck’ in contrast to the other nine municipalities. 
2.  Background to Acre State, BRAZIL. 
Acre in western Brazil has become a world leader in reducing deforestation while growing its economy (Schwartzman, 2015).  The State is
home to around 750,000 people.  Almost half live in the capital, Rio
Branco, while the remainder resides among its 22 municipalities.  Since
the election of The Acre Workers Party and their allies The Popular
Front in 1998, the State government has followed the vision of legendary rubber tapper and environmental activist Chico Mendes towards a
sustainable development pathway for the State. 
About 14. 3 million ha (143,000 km2) of intact, richly diverse forest, approximately 87% of its total area, is found within State borders.  Primary
forest makes up over 85% of forest cover.  The majority of this forest is covered by some form of protection, whether indigenous territory, parks or
reserves.  Deforestation has fallen over recent years, from an average annual deforestation rate of 60,200 ha (602 km2) per year between 1996
and 2005, to 49,600 ha (496 km2) per year between 2001 and 2010. 
Acre State set itself two main deforestation goals, to reduce levels by
60% of the 1990–2005 average by 2012, and by 80% by 2020.  Total emissions for the State were estimated at 22. 7 Mt CO2e in 2010, of which 97%
came from deforestation and land degradation.  The reduction in deforestation rates has meant that Acre has managed to move forward in issuing veriﬁed emission reduction credits to the tune of 11. 5 Mt CO2e
through the Markit registry (Forest Trends, 2015).  In order to meet
the State's deforestation goals and achieve veriﬁable emission reductions it has created the SISA framework, along with operational principles for a system of incentives, not only for forest carbon but also
biodiversity and hydrological services. 
The majority of deforested lands are now pasture (TerraClass, 2011)
and this is representative of the typology of the agricultural sector in
Acre.  Pasture lands make up approximately 8% of total land area of the
State.  By contrast, temporary crops take up 1% of total land area, of
which cassava and corn account for the greatest share.  The acreage of
permanent crops is much smaller, just 0. 1% of land area.  The largest permanent crop is banana, approximately 60% of the total, followed by rubber and coffee, at around 11% each. 
Acre has 22 municipalities.  A major land-zoning exercise in 2006, focusing on both economic and ecological concerns, created four major
land-use zones (Governo do Estado do Acre, 2011).  Zone 1 (25% of State
land) is private land or agricultural settlements of which approximately
half is deforested.  Zone 2 (49%) is intact primary or managed forests in indigenous territories, sustainable use reserves, settlement projects, state
and national production forests, and strictly protected areas.  Zone 3
(26%) has largely intact forest cover but has land tenure that is unclear
or where claims overlap.  and, Zone 4 (0. 2%) is deﬁned as urban. 
<Middle> Model. 
Engel developed a general model of a conservation payment scheme with ﬁxed and variable components in which the latter is
either indexed to the value of one or more services provided by forest,
e. g.  carbon, or to the expected net returns from forest conversion, e. g. 
soya bean production.  By tracking carbon or soya prices, this variable
component thus allows the payment to vary over time.  The scheme's
objective is to provide sufﬁcient incentives to keep land in forest rather
than convert it to an alternative use.  In this paper, we retain their objective and basic model but adapt the latter in three ways. 
First, since shorter contracts are typically found in Latin American
payment for environmental services (PES) schemes, e. g.  in Costa Rica
(Pagiola, 2008), we model a conservation contract of ﬁve rather than
30 years.  Second, also in common with many Latin American PES
schemes, we model a payment that is not indexed but instead is ﬁxed
and unchanging over time.  Finally, although our payment
is characterised as an incentive provided by Acre's government to conserve forest carbon stocks (a generic ‘REDD+ payment’), it does not reﬂect the social value of the carbon in a given hectare of forest.  Rather, it
is calculated as the minimum payment required to keep forest standing
when the net returns from alternative land uses are uncertain.  Below,
we reproduce the model of Engel Name (2015) and intuitively explain
the theory underlying our adaptation of their model. 
3. 1.  Landowner's decision. 
For a single hectare of land, proﬁts can be generated from one of two
alternative uses.  forest (F) or agriculture (A).  For simplicity, we do not
specify A in this section, although as explained in Section 4 it can be pasture (cattle), corn, or coffee.  Whenever land use is changed from F to A,
conversion costs, CCFA, are sunk immediately.  Proﬁts to a landowner
from forest conservation are generated by a REDD+ payment scheme
implemented by Acre's State government.  This payment is paid annually and is ﬁxed at F, i. e.  future returns from forest are certain.  Net proﬁts
from agriculture are generated from crop sales1 and future returns from
agriculture are uncertain. 
In theory, the presence of uncertainty in agricultural returns should
delay land conversion until the value of non-use beneﬁts equals the
value of land in the next-best alternative use plus conversion costs
plus an option value.  Our aim is to identify an F that makes this option
value sufﬁciently large to deter land conversion for a total of ﬁve years. 
New information about the uncertain returns from agriculture is assumed to become available at various times such that they may be
modelled as a stochastic process (e. g.  geometric Brownian motion,
GBM).  The net returns from agriculture to the land owner, A, is private
information which evolves as a function of the constant trend parameter μA and the (positive) constant uncertainty parameter A where dWA=ϵ√dt with ϵ distributed as a standard normal random variable, e. g.  ϵ∈N(0,1).  A positive (negative) μA indicates that net agricultural proﬁts are, on average, increasing (decreasing).  In Section 5, we
parameterize the agricultural returns processes. 
On each day, dt, a landowner receives Fdt if the land is in forest or Adt
if the land is in agriculture.  With a starting point of land in forest, the
landowner decides, every six months, whether to continue conserving
forest or to convert the forest to agriculture.  The decision to change
land use generates instantaneous proﬁts net of conversion costs.  Alternatively, the landowner can delay the decision to deforest and continue
to receive REDD+ payments.  Thus, the value of a single hectare of forest
is this. 
The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of Eq.  (2) describes the
returns if the land is kept in forest.  In this case, the landowner receives a payment of Fdt and the discounted future expected returns
from forest conservation.  Therefore, πF represents the sum of the
landowner's returns from non-use beneﬁts of the forest (current
land use) and the future value of land in the next-best alternative
use (forest or agriculture) where E is the expectation operator.  All returns are valued by
discounting their expected values at the constant, continuously
compounded, risk-free discount rate r.  The second term of Eq.  (2)
represents the returns when the land is converted from forest to agriculture.  The landowner incurs sunk conversion costs equal to
{CCFA}.  Using the same line of reasoning and with a starting point of
land in agriculture, we can obtain the equation that describes the
returns if the land is kept in agriculture, g(F,A,t) and the expression
πA that represents the sum of landowner's returns from agriculturalTo solve the land use change problem, we ﬁrst evaluate the optimal
conversion boundaries as in Engel Name (2015).  These depend upon the
parameters of the returns from forest F and agriculture A, respectively,
the conversion costs {CCFA} and the discount rate r. 