 
The information contained in earnings announcements plays an important role in the determination of stock prices.  
Despite its importance, numerous studies show that stock prices do not immediately and fully incorporate all of the information in earnings announcements and that various accounting-based measures and ﬁnancial statement components have 
the ability to predict future stock prices.  Among the reasons offered for these apparent ineﬃciencies are limits on investor 
attention, which lead investors to focus on subsets of information, and investors’ inability to fully understand the complexities of the information contained in earnings reports (e. g. , Bartov Name, 20 0 0 ; Hirshleifer Name, 2011 ; Doyle Name, 2006 ; 
DellaVigna and Pollet, 2009 ; You and Zhang, 2009 ).  
Prior research has shown that bond prices, like stock prices, react to earnings news.  
This literature, though, does not examine whether corporate bonds incorporate earnings news more eﬃciently than stocks.  The reason why they might is that 
the bond market is more heavily dominated by sophisticated investors than is the stock market ( Bessembinder Name, 2009 ; 
De Franco Name, 2009 ; Ronen and Zhou, 2013 ).  These investors have greater resources at their disposal to analyze earnings 
reports and are arguably less constrained than are individual investors by either limited attention or diﬃculties in interpreting the information in earnings announcements.  This is supported by Bartov Name (20 0 0) and Doyle Name (2006) who 
show that greater sophisticated investor presence enhances the ability of share prices to quickly incorporate the information 
contained in earnings announcements and to mitigate the post-earnings announcement drift.  Consistent with this, Campbell 
Name (2009) show that institutions trade aggressively to exploit the post-earnings announcement drift.  These results suggest 
that if sophisticated investors are more dominant in the bond market than in the stock market, then earnings news would 
be incorporated more quickly into bond prices than into stock prices.  Consequently, the bond price reaction to earnings 
announcements would, similar to a number of accounting-based measures, have predictive power for future stock returns.  
Counterbalancing this is the fact that bonds are typically less liquid and less actively traded than stocks. 