
OPEC has a fragile cartel structure.  It does not have a formal
enforcement mechanism in place (except for the occasional price war)
to incentivize its members to comply with their quota allocations
(Alhajji and Huettner, 2000).  As a result, non-compliance to the quota
has become a norm among OPEC members over the past decades. 
In every single quarter from 1993 to 2005, total OPEC production
exceeded the sum of its members’ quotas.  In this period, an OPEC
member over-produced its quota by an average of 6. 7%.  In this paper,
we provide a framework to explain such a persistent non-compliance
pattern based on strategic interactions among members inside OPEC. 
Quota violations vary signiﬁcantly among different countries.  For
example, Saudi Arabia’s overproduction averaged around 3. 2% from
1995 to 2007 but Qatar’s overproduction averaged around 18. 5% during the same period.  In extreme cases, some members overproduce
their quotas by a large margin.  For example, in the second quarter of 1998, OPEC requested that Qatar cut its production to reach a
quota of 384 thousand bpd due to falling oil prices, but Qatar kept its
production level at 670 thousand bpd–a 75% quota non-compliance. 
Another extreme example is Algeria who overproduced its quota by
more than 50% in 13 out of 24 quarters between 2002 and 2006. 
Moreover, as suggested by a large body of theoretical literature1, the
diﬃculty of supporting collusion varies with the economic state of
the market.  Based on these preliminary observations, we ask the following.  is non-compliance related to oil market conditions.  If so, is
it a pro-cyclical or a counter-cyclical behavior.  How does the degree
of non-compliance differ for smaller vs.  larger producers.  To what
extent does OPEC rely on the quota system. 
There are a number of prominent empirical studies on OPEC
behavior, but the majority of them focus on whether OPEC behaves
as a cartel or not, rather than analyzing the nature of quotas and
violations.  To name a few, Griﬃn (1985), tests the market-sharing
hypothesis by looking at the co-movement of each country’s production with that of the rest of OPEC.  He concludes that “OPEC is a looser
cartel” given that market sharing considerations only partially affect
production decisions.  Gülen (1996) uses a similar intuition to test
for parallel movements in members’ output levels.  He ﬁnds evidence
of coordination among members, especially during the rationing
period, 1982–1993.  Dahl and Yücel (1991) ﬁnd no evidence in support of several hypotheses for OPEC behavior including dynamic
optimization, target revenue, cartel, competitive, and swing producers.  Therefore, they conclude that “loose coordination or duopoly” is
the closest description to OPEC behavior.  However, as pointed out
by Smith (2005), there are serious concerns regarding the low power
of the statistical tests employed in these studies and the extent to
which they are capable of distinguishing between collusive and competitive behavior within OPEC.  He describes OPEC as “much more
than a non-cooperative oligopoly, but less than a friction-less cartel. ”
Instead of calling this strand of literature inconclusive, we prefer
the conclusion that some of the studies reach—such as Geroski Name
(1987), Almoguera Name (2011) and Kaufmann Name (2008)—that
OPEC behavior cannot be ﬁtted into a single model, but rather it
follows a varying-conduct model that switches between collusive
and non-cooperative behavior over time.  We use the same notion
in our theory model by formulating the proposed framework as a
combination of a cooperative game and a non-cooperative behavior. 
Although the empirical evidence for OPEC’s collusion behavior
is mixed, the ﬁeld of industrial organization provides a sharp predictions for one of the factors affecting collusion.  the link between
market conditions and the incentive to cheat in a cartel.  The standard
approach in this literature is to repeat game models in which cartel members interact via their choice of production levels or prices. 
In this approach, members choose to cooperate or cheat in each
period by comparing the net value of cooperation vs.  that of deviation.  If they cooperate, they receive a moderate period payoff for
cooperation with a continuation of this payoff in the future.  However, if they decide to cheat, they will enjoy a high period payoff
but will face punishment in the future.  The prediction of this literature is that it’s harder to collude in booms because the incentive to
cheat is higher2.  For example, Rotemberg and Saloner (1986) show
that with an i. i. d.  demand structure collusion is harder to support in
booms, simply because the net gains of deviation are higher.  Assuming a cyclical demand, Haltiwanger and Harrington Jr (1991) show
that the incentive to cheat is stronger at the end of a boom when
the demand is about to fall.  This is because with falling demand the
value of cooperation is at its lowest.  Consistent with Rotemberg and
Saloner (1986), Kandori (1991) and Bagwell and Staiger (1995) generalize this result for the cases of serially correlated and Markov
demand shocks respectively.  Overall, the theory predicts a monotonic relationship between market conditions and the incentives to
cheat.  the more favorable the market conditions, the more diﬃcult
it is to support collusion. 3 Staiger and Wolak (1992) introduce the
capacity-constraints features to previous models and show that large
excess capacities can result in severe price wars. 
We use a less complex economy to characterize the noncompliance behavior of an OPEC-like cartel.  Our model consists of
a small and a large capacity country.  We use a simple multistage
model where in the ﬁrst period countries choose their optimal level
of capacity.  In the second stage the optimal aggregate production
of the cartel and the quota level for each member are determined
through maximizing the joint proﬁt of the cartel members.  In the
third stage countries decide their production level and in the fourth
stage possible deviations from the quota might be punished. 
The model implies that OPEC members take into account the
investment cost of building capacity with the possible beneﬁt of
obtaining a larger quota.  We show that for the small member, the
endogenously chosen capacity work as an implicit quota enforcement mechanism in good times and leaves very little room for
non-compliance.  Therefore, we predict that OPEC relies on its quota
and punishment system more in bad times than in good times. 
We also allow the punishment reaction of the cartel’s police (Saudi
Arabia) to vary in a range (between very weak enforcement to a
full enforcement) to study the reaction of investment and production decisions of small members to changes in the stringency of the
punishment mechanism.  We show that while more stringent punishment results in lower quota violations, it increases investment in
capacity expansion. 
The key feature of our theoretical framework is to model the
decision making process by the cartel members inside and outside
of OPEC.  We do this by highlighting the role of an important variable, under-emphasized in literature, as the key variable explaining
the compliance behavior of cartel members.  More speciﬁcally, we
emphasize the role of capacity as the fundamental heterogeneity
among cartel members in three ways.  First, empirical and anecdotal evidence support the idea of a direct link between the production
capacity of a country and its share of total quota.  Second, we introduce convex capacity building costs, which pin down the optimal
maximum production capacity for each member.  We argue that the
marginal cost of oil production is much smaller than the initial cost
of building capacity, as pointed out by Gault Name (1999).  Therefore, some of results are driven by the capacity limits.  Third, larger
capacity provides the option to produce in high-demand states for
the larger member in the production game that follows the quota
allocations. 
Our empirical analysis supports these predictions.  Using quarterly data for the period of 1995 to 2007, during when OPEC had a
stable structure, we build a panel data model to test the statistical
signiﬁcance of the predictions of our theory model.  We use Instrumental Variable approach to control for potential endogeneity of
the size measure, Capacity.  Consistent with the notion that capacity
constraint works as an enforcement mechanism in good times, we
ﬁnd that unlike the police that always holds spare capacity to keep
the potential punishment credible, other OPEC members become
more capacity constrained when oil prices are higher.  Next, consistent with OPEC relying on quota system in bad times, we ﬁnd that
OPEC meets more frequently when oil prices are lower.  Moreover,
consistent with a size-dependent punishment mechanism, we provide empirical evidence that shows non-compliance relative to quota
levels is more common among the smaller countries especially in badThree things distinguish our paper from earlier studies on OPEC
non-compliance.  First, our paper is one of the few studies that
look into strategic interactions and cheating behavior inside OPEC,
instead of looking at the behavior of OPEC as a whole.  Second, unlike
the bulk of the literature on OPEC that are merely empirical (e. g. ,
Molchanov, 2003), we provide a theoretical model that is tuned to
resemble the OPEC decision-making process and delivers empirically
testable predictions along with our empirical analysis.  Third, we offer
a more universal framework that integrates the effects of general
market conditions (e. g. , demand ﬂuctuations) and country-speciﬁc
characteristics (e. g. , cost of capacity building) on quota violations
into a single framework.  This is in contrast to other studies such as
Dibooglu and AlGudhea (2007) and Kaufmann Name (2008) that look
at cheating behavior on a country-by-country basis. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 1 presents
the theory model in two stages.  the cooperative quota-setting stage
and the non-cooperative production game.  Section 2 describes the
empirical design and the data.  Section 3 illustrates empirical analysis
and estimation results, and Section 4 contains the conclusion. 
2.  Theoretical model. 
This section introduces a series of stylized models of OPEC members’ behavior.  The objective of the modeling exercise is to identify
major determinants of capacity building and production decisions,
which can potentially include a deviation from the assigned quota
(among other factors).  The model highlights trade-offs between
members investment and production decisions. 
In its most complete form, our theoretical model consists of a
four-stage game.  In the ﬁrst stage countries endogenously choose the
optimal level of capacity investment.  In the second stage production
quotas are allocated (taking into account the installed capacities). 
Countries make decisions regarding the actual production (and possible deviations from quotas) in the third stage.  We do not assume
that the third stage’s production plans fully follows the allocated
quotas because endogenous deviations from quotas are allowed.  The
fourth stage includes monitoring the actual performance of members
by the large producer (aka the police) and potentially implementing
a random punishment strategy.  In our model capacity levels, quota
allocation, actual production, quota violations, and punishment are
all endogenous. 
2. 1.  Key components and assumptions of the model. 
OPEC is a sophisticated and non-transparent organization.  A lot
of politics is involved in OPEC. s bargaining, agreements, and decision making.  We recognize that a stylized model, such as the one
presented in this paper, cannot fully capture all aspects of OPEC’s
dynamics.  Moreover, given the size limitations of the current paper
we have to make certain assumptions and take a pragmatic approach
for building and solving the model in order to come up with empirically testable hypothesis. 
2. 1. 1.  Focus on the key message related to the empirical section of the2. 1. 1. 1.  Objectives and functions of OPEC.  OPEC acts as a cartel maximizing the total proﬁt of its members4.  OPEC’s objective in reality
is a mix of proﬁt-maximizing and price-stabilizing goals.  Especially
in recent years, OPEC has tried to keep the crude oil prices around
a reasonable bound (appx $50–$60) to reduce the incentives of the
demand side to invest in alternative forms of energy5.  We model
OPEC only as a proﬁt-maximizing cartel6. 
2. 1. 1. 2.  Cartel members.  The cartel consists of a large producer (aka
the police, who monitors other members production and their deviations from quotas) and a fringe of small producers.  We assume the
production capacity of the police is K1 and the aggregate production
capacity of all fringe members together is K2.  To keep the algebra
simple we solve the game between one large producer and one
representative small player.  Thus, we abstract from strategic interactions between small producers.  Since the interest of the paper is in
quota violations of non-police members, we only model the endogenous capacity investment, quota allocation, and production decisions
of the representative small producer.  The production capacity of the
police is exogenous. 
2. 1. 1. 3.  Cartel’s police.  In order to preserve the stability of a cartel,
there should be some credible punishment strategies vis-a-vis noncomplying members.  We assume Saudi Arabia is the de facto police
of the OPEC cartel.  No other member has the production or ﬁscal
capacity to punish defying members.  We assume the police holds
an exogenously-speciﬁed level of excess capacity beyond the levels
of any other OPEC member to support a credible threat against
deviations from the cartel allocations7. 
2. 1. 1. 4.  Demand.  The demand for crude oil has a standard linear
functional form.  P = h − cQ.  Hereh is the demand shift parameter
and c is the ﬁxed parameter representing the sensitivity of prices to
quantities.  We will ﬁrst solve a deterministic model and then introduce a stochastic demand.  The stochastic demand shift parameter
includes two states which follow a discrete i. i. d distribution of hH
(high demand) and hL (low demand), with probabilities of pH and pL,
respectively. 
2. 1. 1. 5.  Capacity building costs.  OPEC members face convex capacity
building costs.  This assumption is in line with the order of extraction hypothesis in the resource economics literature (Amigues Name,
1998).  According to the order of extraction theory, resource holders
(OPEC members here) ﬁrst extract the most eﬃcient resource base
and then move to ﬁelds with higher costs (less eﬃcient ﬁelds or types
of reserves such as offshore, and deep water) if the demand is highWe assume that the marginal cost of production is zero8.  The
major component of the total cost function is the ﬁxed cost of building capacity.  The capacity cost is modeled as a stream of annualized
payments (i. e. , all equipment are perpetually leased).  The limiting
case of the convex capacity cost is a hard capacity constraint, which
is equivalent to a locally inﬁnite marginal cost (i. e.  a vertical part of
the cost curve).  However, countries have different levels and curvatures in their cost curves.  This heterogeneity for the size and quality
of reserves distinguishes a large producer such as Saudi Arabia from
a small producer like Gabon or Qatar.  Fig.  1 shows a stylized view of
this model. 
Under an eﬃcient planner solution the country with a lower
capacity building cost (i. e.  cost curve to the right) will optimally build
a larger capacity and receive a higher production quota. 
2. 1. 1. 6.  Allocation rule of OPEC.  The theoretical foundations for the
internal allocation of aggregate production to cartel members is a
matter of debate (see Cave and Salant, 1995).  We assume that the cartel uses a two-layer allocation rule.  In the strategic layer the allocation
rule minimizes the cartel’s production cost (surplus maximization
strategy) for capacity investment.  In the production layer (when
capacities are not binding due to a low demand) the rule suggests
an allocation proportional to existing capacities.  Anecdotal evidences
suggest that the established capacity is a key factor in assigning initial
quotas to OPEC members.  In the strategic version of the model we
will discuss how a proportional allocation rule incentivizes member
countries to build excess capacity.  Sandrea (2003) suggests that the
following eight factors have been used in the initial stage.  reserves,
production capacity, historical production share, domestic oil consumption,
production costs, population, dependence on oil exports,
and external debt.  Reynolds and Pippenger (2010) use Venezuela as
an example and shows that in the long-run, production capacity and
actual productions of countries Granger-cause their OPEC quotas. 
2. 1. 1. 7.  Punishment.  In reality, constant deviations from assigned
quotas occur for multiple reasons.  First, countries are typically not
content with the officially assigned quota and prefer to produce
more.  Second, it is both difficult and costly for OPEC to constantly
punish non-complying members. 
The problem with the standard definition of punishment in cartels
(i. e the strategy of flooding the market with overproduction and thus
reducing the price) is that it not only punishes the non-compliant
member but also other “innocent” members (including the police
itself)9. 
This causes the punishment strategy to be ex-post sub game perfect
but not negotiation-proof.  We are not aware of other credible
punishment mechanisms (such as trade embargoes), which have
been used by OPEC members.  During important historical incidents
(e. g.  the oil price war of 1986) Saudi Arabia overproduced to punish
the other members.  In order to have a credible punishment strategy,
cartel members need to have enough spare capacity, able to identify
the deviant member (Green and Porter, 1984), and not be jammed by
demand uncertainty noises. 
2. 1. 1. 8.  Punishment technology.  Punishment in our model is random
and the probability of punishment (conditional on cheating) is m ∈A special case is the size-independent punishment technology,
which will react to all positive deviations with a constant probability
m.  The random punishment can be interpreted as a mixed strategy
played by the police. 
In the case of size-independent punishment, when m → 1 the
punishment is very effective, and when m → 0 the ability or the
incentive to punish is very weak.  When m → 0 the non-police
members are conﬁdent that the cartel will never punish their quota
violations. 
The inability to accurately observe members’ actual production,
the lack of a political will to punish the deviating member, or internal
disagreements within the OPEC are several frictions that can result
in a partially effective punishment technology.  We summarize all of
these forces using the single parameter m. 
2. 2.  Four versions of the model. 
A step-by-step development of cartel models is presented in the
following order. 
1.  A planer’s11 solution for a cartel with a convex capacitybuilding costs under certainty
2.  A planer’s solution for a cartel with a convex capacity-building
costs under uncertainty
3.  A cartel with quota allocation and full enforcement of quotas
4.  A cartel with quota allocation, possibility of quota violation,
and endogenous punishment for quota violation. 
2. 3.  Model 1.  eﬃcient allocation under certainty. 
The benchmark case is a two-country cartel problem with asymmetric convex capacity building cost curves c(Ki) = 1
i , where 0i
is the coeﬃcient of resource eﬃciency and Ki is the installed capacity. 
For countries with a larger resource base, 0 is a smaller parameter. 
We also assume a full enforcement of OPEC quota rules (through
a planner).  We ﬁrst introduce this benchmark to provide the key
intuitions from an eﬃcient allocation and then will move to a more
realistic case with capacity limits and incentives to cheat. 
We assume that the two countries choose the optimal production
capacity based on an eﬃcient internal allocation mechanism.  Since
the capacity has not been built, one can treat the annualized cost
of capacity like marginal cost.  Members of the cartel are bound by
their maximum capacity.  thus, even if the operational marginal cost
is zero, they will not be able to deviate upward from the eﬃcient
solution.  Moreover, no party has an incentive to build more capacity
than what we recommend here because the marginal cost of building
an additional unit of capacity exceeds the marginal beneﬁts (taking
the behavior of the other members as given). 
The optimal cartel solution is here where c(K1) and c(K2) are the total cost of building K1 and K2 units of capacity. 
The cartel problem in this version of the model is the same as
the standard multi-plant monopolist problem, which maximizes the
joint proﬁt of all plants.  The FOCs of the cartel problem results in
the following system of equation, in which the marginal cost of each
member is equal to the marginal revenue of the cartel. 
Given that the right hand sides are equal, we immediately observe
that c(cid. 4)(K1) = c(cid. 