
Behavioral research indicates that arbitrary differences in contextual
information can lead to preference changes in otherwise identical
choice tasks (Tversky and Kahneman, 1986), contrary to the principle
of ‘invariance’ proposed by Neumann and Morgenstern (1947).  These
empirical observations have given rise to the concepts of ‘framing’ and
‘framing effects’ which are deﬁned as “subtle alterations in the statement or presentation of judgment and choice problems and […] changes in decision outcomes resulting from these alterations” (Iyengar,
1994, p.  11).  Building on the pioneering work of Tversky and
Kahneman (1981), a large body of research in psychology and behavioral economics has advanced the knowledge base on framing and developed typologies of different framing effects (Levin Name, 2002; Levin Name, 1998).  A parallel stream of literature in policy research, most notably
driven by Druckman (2001), has applied insights from framing theory
in the ﬁelds of policy design (e. g.  Madrian, 2014) and policy implementation, particularly regarding the communication of policy measures
(Chong and Druckman, 2007a; Klar Name, 2013). 
Consistent with literature on individual differences (e. g.  LeBoeuf and
Shaﬁr, 2003; Smith and Levin, 1996), policy researchers have shown
that the strength of framing effects depends on various moderating factors; in particular political orientation (Chong and Druckman, 2012;
Faricy and Ellis, 2014).  The concept of political orientation is typically
structured along a uni-dimensional model from liberal to conservative
or from right-wing to left-wing (Jost Name, 2003), or along a two-dimensional model encompassing a social and an economic dimension (e. g. 
Duckitt, 2001; Feldman and Johnston, 2014; Jost Name, 2009;
Zumbrunnen and Gangl, 2008).  Despite an increasing amount of research on the impact of political orientation on policy framing effects,
empirical evidence in the ﬁeld of environmental policy, while growing,
is still in its early stages.  This research gap seems surprising, given that
the inﬂuence of political orientation could be particularly relevant to
framing effects related to environmental policy instruments, which
are often subject to ideological public discourses (Bornstein and Lanz,
2008; Söderbaum, 1999).  Drawing on the theory of motivated
reasoning (Slothuus and De Vreese, 2010; Taber Name, 2009; Taber Name,
2001), this paper contributes to the few existing studies (e. g.  Hardisty Name, 2010) by analyzing whether the impact of frames in both policy design and communication is contingent on political orientation.  To the
authors' knowledge, this paper ranks among the ﬁrst analyses of the inﬂuence of political orientation on framing effects in environmentalIn addition, this paper makes a contribution to existing literature by
analyzing how political orientation inﬂuences the stability of framing
effects over time.  Despite some pioneering longitudinal studies on framing effects (Druckman Name, 2012), research on the inﬂuence of political
orientation on the stability of framing effects in the ﬁeld of environmental policy is scant.  Given that many environmental policy programs require political commitments over longer time horizons, it is important
to understand the temporal dynamics of policy evaluation. 
The empirical part of this paper consists of three independent but
closely related experiments in the context of a residential energy conservation program.  In contrast to many previous studies in the ﬁeld of policy
framing effects that rely on student samples (e. g.  Faricy and Ellis, 2014),
the experiments described herein strive to create a more realistic choice
setting.  To do so, both potential beneﬁciaries of a speciﬁc policy measure
and a broader population are surveyed, given that policies need not only
to be favorably evaluated by the general population but also to be effective at inﬂuencing potential beneﬁciaries to favor their uptake. 
In the ﬁrst experiment, the delivery mechanism for a government
beneﬁt for an energy conservation measure is described as either a
‘tax rebate’ or a ‘subsidy’.  The experiment analyzes how political orientation moderates the impact of the framing of the delivery mechanism
on the perceived importance of the beneﬁt among potential beneﬁciaries.  In the second experiment, the frames of a policy program for energy conservation measures highlight either economic or environmental
aspects of the policy.  The experiment analyzes how citizens' political
orientation moderates the impact of each of the frames on their policy
evaluations.  The third experiment investigates whether the framing effect induced by the second experiment diminishes after reasoning about
government spending and, if so, whether political orientation inﬂuences
the degree of change in opinion over time. 
Overall, this paper contributes to knowledge about an important
issue in environmental policy: the built environment, which
includes residential, industrial and commercial buildings, is responsible for approximately 40% of total global energy consumption and
30% of global greenhouse gas emissions (Sbci, 2009).  Given the environmental impact of energy consumption, reducing the energy demand of buildings is one of the key objectives in contemporary
environmental policy (BFE, 2013b).  To increase the effectiveness of
the communication of sustainable energy policy, it is important to
understand whether and how people react (a) to different delivery
mechanisms of a government beneﬁt and (b) to different communication frames.  The ﬁndings of this study can help policy makers design better ‘tailored’ messages, similar to customer segmentation
strategies in business and marketing. 
2.  Theory and Hypotheses. 
2. 1.  Political Orientation and Framing Effects. 
group (Kahan, 2013).  A closely related stream of literature suggests
that motivated reasoning can lead to belief polarization, a process by
which individuals with diverging prior beliefs update their opinions in
opposite directions when presented with the same information (Cook
and Lewandowsky, 2016).  Some pioneering studies demonstrate an interplay between the mechanisms of motivated reasoning and framing
effects; in particular, frames on politically contentious issues can activate political predispositions and thus induce individuals to interpret
messages from the perspective of their pre-existing political beliefs
(e. g.  Hart and Nisbet, 2012; Slothuus and De Vreese, 2010).  Extending
these studies, the current work assesses how political orientation moderates the inﬂuence of framing effects on policy evaluations among both
potential beneﬁciaries and the public.  In particular, the authors analyze
how frames related to the policy delivery mechanism inﬂuence policy
uptake in the former and how communication frames affect policy support in the latter. 
2. 