 Introduction We examine acquisition outcomes when the same auditor audits the financial statements of both a bidder and a target firm prior to an acquisition.  We hypothesize that shared auditors facilitate the flow of information between bidders and targets, and that the benefits of such mitigated information asymmetry accrue primarily to the acquiring firm.  External auditors have unique access to senior executives, participate in audit committee meetings, and have access to board meeting minutes and general information about a firm in the conduct of their audits.  This access to senior executives combined with information gathered during an audit provides auditors with an opportunity to discuss strategic initiatives with their clients including, among others, the acquisition or disposition of assets.  Communication about such initiatives may be in the form of “soft talk”.  Because auditors contract with a variety of companies, auditors have the potential to become information intermediaries between prospective targets and acquirers, whether intentional or otherwise.  As shared auditors are incentivized to align with the interests of larger clients, we anticipate a potential bias in favor of acquisitive clients over target clients.  Hence, bidders that share an audit firm with a potential target could have an information advantage relative to others in the process of bidding, and we anticipate that this advantage will manifest itself in an increased likelihood of submitting a bid for a target.  The impact of shared auditors likely extends beyond the point of bidding and target selection.  If shared-auditor bidders have an informational advantage relative to competing bidders, bidders with shared auditors can leverage this advantage into a better bargaining position with the target.  As other bidders have less information, they have less incentive to bid, thus reducing bid competition.  With lower bid competition, an acquirer with a shared auditor has the opportunity to negotiate a more favorable price for the target firm, thus reducing premiums paid.  The opportunity for a shared auditor to become an information intermediary is likely increased if an acquirer and target contract with the same auditor office. 