 1.  Introduction The notion of ecosystem services has been accompanied by valuation methods to identify human preferences and priorities concerning nature.  Valuation studies are believed to draw decision makers' attention to the goods and services provided by natural processes (Laurans and Mermet, 2014).  Following the popularity of valuation the scientiﬁc practice of evaluating the goodness of nature - the questions of value and valuing - the process through which people assign value to objects - have gained increasing attention in literature.  Also critical perspectives have emerged.  The critics of utilitarian welfare economics have argued that the richness of what is acknowledged as good or valuable is missed in the existing monetary accounts of nature values (Polishchuk and Rauschmayer, 2012).  Monetary values, as revealed and stated preferences of self-regarding, narrowly rational individuals, are not considered to sufﬁciently reﬂect social importance (Laurans et al. , 2013.  Parks and Gowdy, 2013).  Assigning only economic value to ecosystem services is argued to make the multiplicity and nuances of human-nature relationships invisible by reducing the dimensions of importance, worth and meaning (Kosoy and Corbera, 2010.  Bowker, 2005).  In reality, the critics argue, things, beings and places matter to people for different and often incommensurable reasons (Maris, 2014).  As a response, non-monetary valuation methods have been developed to enlarge the value categories taken into account from purely economic to social and cultural values (e. g.  Tengberg et al. , 2012.  Kelemen et al. , 2014).  Often based on qualitative approaches, these methods broaden the type of information regarded as evidence of nature's significance to humans.  In addition, deliberative valuation methods move beyond individual values and address values as collective outcomes (e. g.  Maynard et al. , 2015.  Parks and Gowdy, 2013).  Despite the broadening scope, the debate has largely remained ignorant of the nature of valuing as a dynamical and situated process.  Human preferences are never set in stone but constantly transforming (Parks and Gowdy, 2013.  Gomez-Baggethun et al. , 2010).  Mapping environmental values at a particular moment, valuation studies pay little attention to how human preferences emerge from place and time speciﬁc, historical and political relations and events (Ernstson and Sörlin, 2013.  Bieling, 2014). 