 1.  Introduction  Various business and political leaders in the United States have expressed concerns that the U. S.  system of taxing multinationals effectively subsidizes foreign takeovers ( White, 2014 .  Hatch, 2014 ).  Prior research on mergers and acquisitions  (M&A) demonstrates how variation in tax rates ( Scholes and Wolfson, 1990, Arulampalam et al. , 2010 ) and in tax systems  ( Huizinga and Voget, 2009 .  Feld et al. , 2016 ) impact the market for corporate control.  As a result, ﬁrms under a worldwide  tax system are tax-disadvantaged acquirers .  Furthering this line of inquiry, we posit that ﬁrms under a worldwide tax system  are also tax-favored targets of foreign acquirers.  We ﬁnd that U. S.  ﬁrms with locked-out earnings are tax-favored to foreign  acquirers (or equivalently tax-disfavored to U. S.  acquirers).   Foreign earnings “lockout” results when ﬁrms avoid or delay foreign earnings repatriation.  Under the U. S.  worldwide tax  system, taxes owing to the U. S.  government on the earnings of foreign subsidiaries are deferred until those earnings are  repatriated to the U. S.  Consequently, ﬁrms’ repatriation decisions are sensitive to the level of repatriation taxes ( Desai et  al. , 2001.  Hines and Hubbard, 1990 ) and tax incentives lead to higher overseas cash holdings ( Foley et al. , 2007 ).  Hanlon  et al.  (2015) and Edwards et al.  (2016) demonstrate that ﬁrms use “trapped cash” to make suboptimal foreign investments,  increasing total lockout.  A foreign acquirer may be able to free a target’s foreign subsidiaries’ locked-out earnings from the  U. S.  worldwide tax system using “out-from-under” strategies, utilizing trapped cash elsewhere and liquidating suboptimal  foreign investments so the proceeds may be more eﬃciently redeployed.   To test this hypothesized relation between tax lockout in target U. S.  ﬁrms and the nationality of acquirers – foreign  versus U. S.  – we use a sample of 4611 majority acquisitions of U. S.  public company target ﬁrms from 1995 to 2010.  We  measure lockout using the hand-collected balance of permanently reinvested earnings (PRE) reported in the tax footnote.   Employing a probit model, we observe a positive association between the target ﬁrm’s level of PRE and the probability that  the acquirer is foreign.  The effect is economically signiﬁcant.  a standard deviation increase in PRE is associated with a 12%  relative increase in the likelihood that an acquirer is foreign.  These ﬁndings suggest that potential U. S. -based acquirers of  U. S.  targets with trapped cash and suboptimal foreign investments are losing out to foreign acquirers.   Building upon these initial ﬁndings and improving identiﬁcation of our main hypothesized effect, we posit that foreign  acquirers of U. S.  target ﬁrms with higher levels of tax lockout are more likely to be residents of countries that use territorial  tax systems.  In a territorial system, foreign earnings are subject to low or no home country tax, thereby eliminating the  lockout effect.  Categorizing acquisitions according to acquirer tax systems, we observe a signiﬁcant association between  our lockout measures and foreign acquisitions occurring under the territorial (as opposed to worldwide) tax regime. 