 1.  Introduction Freshwater availability in suﬃcient quality and quantity is one of the major challenges that society will face this century.  Freshwater represents just 2. 5% of Earth’s water and is increasingly threatened by human (economic) activity and climate change.  Many studies have conﬁrmed that water scarcity will increase signiﬁcantly over the coming decades and this will bring problems for food security, environmental sustainability, and economic development (Alcamo et al. , 2007.  Ercin and Hoekstra, 2012.  Hoekstra, 2014a,b).  The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reported that unabated climate change has the potential to strongly impact freshwater resources with wide ranging consequences for societies and ecosystems (Murray et al. , 2012.  Pachauri and Meyer, 2014).  At present about two-thirds of the global population presently live in conditions of severe water scarcity for at least 1 month of the year and half a billion people face severe water scarcity all year round (Mekonnen and Hoekstra, 2016).  Climate change is predicted to exacerbate water scarcity even further.  Hydrological cycles are predicted to undergo large changes and cause global shifts in precipitation patterns as well as increase the frequency and severity of extreme events (Bates and Kundzewicz, 2008).  Signiﬁcant regional differences exist across the globe leading to simultaneous increases and decreases in land-surface run-off depending on latitude, altitude, and other geographic factors.  In general, wet areas will tend to get wetter and dry areas will get dryer, leading to less reliable water availability (Kumar et al. , 2013).  While there is considerable uncertainty in modelled precipitation and evapotranspiration projections at high resolution, regional trends allow the comparison of different climate change scenarios over time.  The frequency of heavy precipitation over most areas is predicted to increase with the consequences of rain-generated ﬂoods potentially overwhelming existing infrastructure leaving little opportunity for water storage.  The likelihood of extreme droughts is also predicted to increase with a tendency for continental interiors to dry during the summer, especially in the sub-tropics and low and midlatitudes.  One recent example that has been attributed to global warming was the 2003 heat-wave in Europe (Schar et al. , 2004) contributing to annual precipitation deﬁcits of up to 300 mm and an estimated 30% drop in gross primary production of terrestrial ecosystems (Ciais et al. , 2005).  Events like this highlight the signiﬁcant impact that water scarcity can have on economic productivity.  Changes to the atmospheric water content, intensity of extremes, reduced snow cover, widespread melting of ice, changes in soil moisture and droughts are therefore predicted to exacerbate water scarcity problems in the 21st century (Bates and Kundzewicz, 2008) This analysis uses the latest scientiﬁc evidence for quantifying the likely effects of climate change on water scarcity across the globe under different climate change scenarios (i. e. , IPCC AR5).  However, there are other dynamic factors that must also be considered, these include economic growth, technological progress, national water endowment, structure of production (at sectoral level), international trade, and population growth.  This analysis captures the dynamic interaction of these different factors on water scarcity out to 2100.  While most of the existing literature has focused on the link between water scarcity and economic activity this work highlights the importance of considering water scarcity in the context of climate change.  The novelty introduced by the present study is given by the combination of two measures of water scarcity, which take into account the social needs (i. e. , providing enough water for social and economic requirements) and the physical constraints imposed by water availability, driven by climate change.  We assess the social and economic effects of water scarcity by country and by sector, applying a multi-regional input-output model (MRIO), extended with water intensity coeﬃcients.  It goes beyond the previous global water demand scenario studies because the MRIO approach allows the recovery of the whole supply-chain, both at national and global levels, and to calculate both the direct and indirect feedback effects due to inter-industrial linkages in the global economy, between now and 2100.  In the analysis that follows we disentangle these different effects and identify the main drivers of water scarcity over the next century.  Using four different climate change scenarios and data on global trading patterns we assess the respective social and economic effects of water scarcity by country and by sector.  We proceed with a multi-regional input-output model (MRIO) extended with water intensity coeﬃcients and calculate both direct and indirect water consumption between now and 2100.  We then apply sectoral production functions to describe the trade and production relationships for 35 sectors across all major OECD countries, their major trading partners and a selection of large emerging economies.  The main research questions we aim at answering include (i) what are the main drivers of water scarcity over this century. , (ii) what effect will climate change have on water scarcity. , (iii) can virtual water trade and technological progress stem the economic impacts of scarce water. , and (iv) what sectors and regions are most impacted by water scarcity.  The paper proceeds in Section 2 with a short review of the literature.  Section 3 describes the main methods that were used and Section 4 gives details on the data and various deﬁnitions.  The mathematical models are derived and presented in Section 5.  The discussion of the results is given in Section 6, while Section 7 develops the sustainability assessment and it provides the implied technological progress.  Section 8 brieﬂy explains the main uncertainties and limitations.  Finally, Section 9 discusses the implications of the main results for future water management and policy.  2.  Review of Literature.  Existing studies have largely used the concepts of virtual waterintroduced by Allan (1993), and “water footprint” (WF) (Hoekstra et al. , 2011) to study the changing global landscape and the embodied trade of scarce water resources.  The former (VW) returns the water embodied in traded goods outside national borders and excludes domestic consumption.  The latter (WF) includes the water embodied in goods throughout the entire supply chain on a consumption basis.  One commonly used method to calculate VW trade and WF is the multi-regional input-output (MRIO) model.  IO tables express the monetary value of economic transactions occurring across sectors of an economy to account for sectoral interdependencies in the economic system.  MRIO models have been widely used to calculate the consequences of international trade on regional water footprints (e. g. , Antonelli et al. , 2012.  Duarte and Yang, 2011.  Lenzen et al. , 2013).  These studies are particularly useful as they assess the effect of international trade on domestic water resources, the effect of water availability on international trade, and the consequences of international trade to improve or worsen the effects of global water scarcity (Hoekstra et al. , 2011).  Recently, the attention is shifted from an ex-post static calculation towards an ex-ante scenario analysis for enhancing the policy relevance of water scarcity under different climate change scenarios.  Alcamo et al.  (2007) analysed the change in blue water (surface and groundwater) withdrawals for two alternative trajectories for population and economic growth, based on the A2 and B2 IPCC scenarios, ﬁnding that the principal cause of increasing water stress is growing domestic water use stimulated by income growth.  De Fraiture (2007) elaborated four alternatives scenarios for 115 countries in order to provide alternative strategies for meeting the increasing demands for water and food by 2050.  Energy production, local action, and climate change were found to be the most crucial variables for improved water management.  Ercin and Hoekstra (2012) developed four water footprint scenarios, until 2050, based on population and economic growth, production/trade patterns, consumption patterns, and technological development.  They stated that reducing humanity’s water footprint, to sustainable levels, is still possible even under the assumptions of increasing population, provided that consumption patterns change.  Dalin  (2012) estimated the evolution of the virtual water trade network, using as control variables GDP, rainfall on agricultural area and population.  They found that few importing countries are likely to concentrate a signiﬁcant portion of virtual water trade through food commodities.  Konar et al.  (2016) projected international staple crop trade and the related water footprint under climate and policy scenarios for the year 2030.  They found that trade liberalization should lead to increasing water exploitations with higher WF.  In the context of IO modeling, most of the scenario analyses have been devoted to the estimation of future carbon emissions (e. g. , Koning et al. , 2016.  Lutz and Wiebe, 2012.  Scott et al. , 2013), to the economic effects of climate change (e. g. , Dellink, 2013), or to the impact of the power sector on water resources (e. g. , Wan et al. , 2016).  The aim of this paper is to apply the MRIO approach to compare future scenarios (e. g. , Duchin and Levine, 2016) on scarce water resources.  To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time an MRIO model has been used to assess the sustainability water resources considering the multiple confounding factors of economic growth, technological progress, water availability, population dynamic, and climate change based on the most recent IPCC AR5 projections.  <Middle> Method.  In line with best practice in climate change research, we use pre-deﬁned IPCC climate change scenarios to explore the long-term relationships between complex socio-ecological and economic conditions under uncertainty.  The scenarios adopted in this paper are consistent with those from the ﬁfth assessment report (AR5) and the results produced from the CMIP5 multi-model ensemble analysis.  The new scenario framework adopted in the latest IPCC assessment allows for an internally consistent and integrated analysis1.  Within this framework the so called Shared Socioeconomic Pathways2 (SSPs) (Rozenberg et al. , 2013.  Ruijven et al. , 2013) and Shared Policy Assumptions (SPAs) relate directly to one of the four radiative forcing concentration pathways (van Vuuren et al. , 2012).  Each of the four different IPCC economic-climate scenarios are compared using the most recent projections of GDP and population growth from the latest OECD projections.  The OECD model, ENVgrowth, places special emphasis on the drivers of GDP growth over the projection period rather than projecting convergence directly on income levels.  The ENV-growth model features additional inputspeciﬁc factor productivity for labour and energy. , out to 2100, and explicitly accounts for the variation of total renewable freshwater resources over time.  This study takes into account all the major OECD countries, their major trading partners, and a selection of large emerging economies.  In particular we take into account the heterogeneous impacts of climate change across the globe on precipitation (P) and evapotranspiration (PET) and their effect on renewable fresh-water resources.  We report both social and physical water stress indices and express water scarcity in terms of the direct and indirect water needs on production and consumption requirements within an economy.  When demand for water exceeds renewable fresh-water availability we derive the technological progress that is required to meet economic growth projections under this scenario3.  In addition, we assess the conditions under which international virtual water trade (VWT) is able to redistribute scarce water resources between water rich and water scarce countries under different climate change scenarios.  Finally we disaggregate the virtual water scarcity index into 35 major economic sectors and quantify the impacts of population growth, economic productivity, environmental degradation and climate change.  4.  Data and Deﬁnitions.  Climate change projections from four climate change scenarios (RCP26, RCP45, RCP60 and RCP85) are taken from the CMIP5 multimodel ensemble HadGEM2-ES (Jones, 2011)4.  Monthly total precipitation and evapotranspiration values were extracted over the period 2005 to 2100 for each of the four climate change scenarios.  Annual total values were then estimated for precipitation (P) and evapotranspiration (PET) by summing over the year for each geographic area.  The net ﬂux of water at land surface is estimated as precipitation minus evapotranspiration P − PET (Seager et al. , 2007).  Using this well established relationship we develop an index representing the relative water availability at land surface as precipitation over evapotranspiration P/PET.  The mean of P/PET for the base period (2005–2015) is used to normalise future changes in this index, making it possible to estimate the relative expected change in landsurface run-off over the modelling period (see Fig.  1).  Each pixel on the map, shown in Fig.  1, represents the expected change in the P/PET index over the modelling period.  For each P/PET pixel located within a country a distribution of the index is ﬁtted giving the expected change in land-surface run-off for that country.  There are 116 countries in this database where the expected change in landsurface run-off and the corresponding 95% conﬁdence intervals can be estimated for each of the four scenarios.  We structure our simulations on the so called Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs) (Rozenberg et al. , 2013.  Ruijven et al. , 2013) and Shared Policy Assumptions (SPAs).  These scenarios are consistent with the ﬁfth assessment report (AR5) and with the results produced by the CMIP5 multi-model ensemble analysis.  They allow the exploration of future vulnerabilities to climate impacts (Hibbard et al. , 2007.  Taylor et al. , 2011) under different GHG emission trajectories.  Each scenario is based on the stabilisation of a particular level of radiative forcing occurring as a result of different atmospheric GHG concentrations.  This approach provides a method for systematically analysing the growing complexity of social economic systems (e. g. , technological progress, and climate policy) within an internally consistent framework5.  Table 2 provides a synthesis of the main assumptions for each scenario and the projected evolution of the key drivers6.  GDP and population growth, technological progress, globalization, global inequality, environmental sustainability, and change in global average temperatures.  Numerical simulations are developed for four pre-deﬁned SSPs, under the assumptions given for each of the Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs).  Each SSP scenario represents a unique and internally consistent scenario for how key socio-economic and climate change variables may evolve over time7.  For example, SSP1 represents the most sustainable scenario with the lowest climate change impacts.  This scenario beneﬁts from high GDP growth, high environmental quality, and strong technological progress paired with low levels of global inequality.  SSP2 is labelled “Middle of the road” because it shows patterns that lie in between those coming from the other scenarios.  SSP3 is a scenario built to take into account a possible fragmentation of the world with increasing global inequality leading some rich countries to obtain high levels of GDP and technological growth, while less developed countries would face high population growth rates with relatively low income.  SSP4 was excluded from this analysis due to its similarity with SSP3.  SSP5 is the business as usual scenario, where the (uneven) economic growth is pushed up by increasing fossil fuel consumption, inducing high levels of GHG emissions with a consequent increase of global temperatures, projected to exceedEconomic data are taken from WIOD8 and contains information on 40 countries around the world including all of the EU countries the USA and other important developing countries such as India, China and Brazil.  They represent, in 2010, more than 75% of global Gross Domestic Product (GDP), more than 50% of total water resources9 (see Table 1 in the Appendix), and they are responsible of almost the 70% of global water footprint for dietary consumption (Tamea et al. , 2014).  This database also includes input-output data on 35 economic sectors and their respective imports and exports to all other sectors and countries included in the database.  Sectoral water use, as reported in WIOD, was derived from the estimations provided by Mekonnen and Hoekstra (2010), FAOSTAT and EXIOPOL.  The International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) and the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) provide data on the reference scenarios for each of the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP).  GDP projections, consistent with these SSP scenarios, are computed by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development(OECD)10.  Data on present day water availability (Wa) are taken from FAO GAEZ11 with future estimates of Wa calculated from the change in P/PET as described above.  FAO (2015) and Hoekstra et al.  (2011) deﬁne several water based indicators used in this paper.  These indicators are used to frame sustainability analysis and to determine when environmental water needs are excessively exploited.  The virtual water (VW) content of a product is the amount of freshwater required for production, measured over the entire production chain of the product.  The water footprint (WF) of a nation is equal to domestic water use from national resources, minus virtual water exported to other countries plus the virtual water imported from other countries.  Green water (GN) indicates the consumptive use of rainwater stored in the topsoil and used for vegetative and agricultural purposes.  Blue water (B) refers to the consumptive use of ground or surface water, while grey water (GY) represents water contamination and is measured as the volume of water required to assimilate pollutants caused by human activity.  As a proxy for water availability (Wa), following Chapagain and Hoekstra (2007), we use the Total Actual Renewable Water Resources12 The issue of analysing green water scarcity has largely been unexplored most probably due to lack of consensus on how to measure green water availability.  For a detailed discussion see Chapagain and Hoekstra (2007), Hoekstra et al.  (2011), and Hoekstra and Chapagain (2011).  which shows the maximum theoretical yearly amount of water available to a country at any given moment.  By including Wa in this analysis we overcome a limitation of Ercin and Hoekstra (2012) who excluded countries’ endowments.  Due to the lack of consistent data from FAO, we are not including non-conventional non-renewable sources of water, namely.  (i) the production of freshwater by desalination of brackish or saltwater (mostly for domestic purposes).  (ii) the reuse of urban or industrial waste water (with or without treatment), which increases the overall eﬃciency of fresh water extracted from primary sources.  (iii) agricultural drainage water, and (iv) groundwater bodies (deep aquifers or fossil water) have a negligible rate of recharge and are therefore considered as non-renewable for the purposes of this analysis.  The issue of water scarcity (henceforth WS), which can be broadly understood as the lack of access to adequate water supply for human and environmental uses, is widely discussed in the literature.  However no consensus on how it should be deﬁned or measured has yet been achieved.  One of the most common measures of water scarcity is the so-called Falkenmark indicator, that deﬁnes water scarcity in terms of the total renewable water resources that are available to the population of a region in any given year.  In our context it is simply given as the ratio WFALK for any country j.  This indicator has been criticised because it does not allow for alternative water uses nor minimising the impacts of water scarcity through Virtual Water Trade (VWT).  A range of alternative indicators for assessing the adequacy of a nation’s water resources have been proposed13.  Due to the complex relation between water resources and social needs, relying on a single indicator may give a misleading impression of water scarcity.  For these reasons we ground our analysis over two interrelated dimensions.  (a) the amount of virtual water necessary to meet social consumption needs (called WSSOC), and (ii) the physical constraints (WSP) resulting from limited renewable freshwater endowments.  In this context, for any country j, we compute the actual national water scarcity per capita as, where WFj is the water footprint of national consumption of country j and POPj stands for its population size.  This index overcomes the main shortcomings of the Falkenmark indicator because it accounts for alternative economic uses of water and for the exploitation of external water resources through international VWT.  The WF indicator returns the total water footprint for a nation, and is the amount of water required for domestic consumption minus the net virtual water due to international exports.  The mathematical computation of WF, in a MRIO context, is provided in the next section.  Based on the Falkenmark classiﬁcation, the social14 water conditions in an area can be categorized as follows.  no stress (WSSOC > 1700 m3 per capita per year), stress (1000 < WSSOC < 1700m3), scarcity (500 < WSSOC < 1000m3), and absolute scarcity (WSSOC < 500m3).  In addition we calculate the direct pressure on national enewable water resources15, namely byWS P.  This indicator is expressed as the ratio between total direct water consumption (necessary for domestic consumption and exports) and the total amount of physical renewable water available within any country.  Hence for any country C (sectoral aggregation by sum) we have.  The numerator of Eq.  (2) returns the sum of total consumption within a country and includes water resources consumed for both industrial production and household needs.  Blue water (B) is mostly used for Agricultural, Food and Forestry (AFF) production (more than 50%) and Energy (40%), green water (GN) is exclusively used in the AFF sector, while grey water (GY) is distributed between the AFF sector (more than 65%) and other polluting sectors (Chemical, Pulp and Paper, Textile, Basic Metals and Fabricated Metal).  Water intensity coeﬃcients for each sector and water use category are kept constant, as given by WIOD, we therefore cannot assume that B, GN and GY water are perfectly substitutable.  Indeed, GN water cannot be used for alternative purposes.  B and GY water can be directed towards alternative uses, the latter once it has been recycled.  The thresholds of physical water stress are provided by Smakhtin et al.  (2005).  over-exploitation (WSP > 1), high exploitation (0. 6 < WSP < 1), moderate exploitation (0. 3 < WSP < 0. 6), and no stress (WSP < 0. 3).  Table 1 provides the initial values, at the beginning of our simulation (2010).  In general, projections of freshwater-related impacts caused by climate change are compared to historical conditions (initial conditions of the dynamic system) which begin in 2010.  Brazil, Russia, China, Canada, and the USA are the biggest countries in terms of Wa, but when economic and demographic factors are taken into account the rank changes drastically.  China and India are facing water scarcity as measured by the Falkenmark indicator, meaning that water endowments are unevenly distributed.  China, India, and Mexico are approaching over-exploitation of renewable freshwater availability.  As it will be clear in the next section, rich wet countries (e. g. , UK) will not suffer from water poverty as their water supply costs are more than matched by their high ability to pay and/or to import goods through virtual water trade.  This information which is neglected by the Falkenmark index, is encoded in the footprint indicator.  Finally, we show that increasing water scarcity does impact signiﬁcantly upon economic growth of both developing and developed countries, showing that limited water resources is a truly global issue.  5.  Development of Mathematical Models.  Each Scenario is built upon a different set of assumptions which determines the evolution of key variables.  IO analysis provides an appropriate and consistent mathematical structure for framing reasonable future scenarios through simple linear algebra computation.  It provides a framework to cope with both feedback effects and industrial requirements, where the latter is fundamental for assessing the sustainability of industrial production and trade.  Within the Supplementary materials (section B) we derive a model looking at the effects of population growth and climate change on water scarcity, excluding all other factors. 16 The key result from this analysis is that the impacts of climate change are exacerbated the most for countries with high population (e. g. , China and India) particularly in the long-run.  Departing from Ercin and Hoekstra (2012) we do not impose any exogenous relationships between trade variations and GDP growth.  rather the dynamics of each of these factors are endogenously determined through the system of equations described below.  We include the impact of GDP growth and technological improvement under the assumption of constant economic and trade structure.  Due to lack of reliable data on sectoral growth, we do not model sectoral transitions.  The structure of the matrix of technical coeﬃcients is therefore ﬁxed17.  Next, we go beyond the assumption of a single homogeneous industrial sector and endogenously estimate the technical coeﬃcients that would be required to meet future fresh water demand.  We therefore take into account the different rates of technical progress for each country-sector pair and for each water category (B, GN, and GY)18 .  In what follows we introduce a system of equations that describes the dynamic evolution of the climate-economic system.  Let GDPCthe level of GDP at time t of country C, hence the rate of growth from year t to t + 1 is given by.  We use the rate of exogenous economic growth (as provided by the OECD projections) to update the matrix of ﬁnal demand F, which includes domestic and international consumption, where ft is the vector of total ﬁnal demand (row sum of F)19, where.  We assume that the vector of sectoral households water use (WH) at (t+1) can be estimated from the beta coeﬃcient, as where the hat stands for diagonal matrix.  The new level of sectoral output (xt+1) is computed through the Leontief inverse L and the new ﬁnal demand as, where the matrix L of Leontief inverse20 has no temporal dimension because of the assumption of constant inter-sectoral coeﬃcients.  Note that F is composed of both domestic and international trade in ﬁnal goods, in particular each row returns the share of exports from each country-sector pair s to any other country-sector pair j.  This information allows us to allocate the variation of ﬁnal demand (Df = ft+1−ft) using the distribution coeﬃcients (v) of ﬁnal demand, for each country-sector pair s, at the ﬁrst year (2010).  In particular, neglecting the temporal dimension, we have, where Fs.  is the vector of ﬁnal demand (domestic + export) for the country-sector pair s, and the denominator is the row sum of Fs. .  In our case vC of country C is a matrix of 35× 41, obtained by summing up the values from each sector belonging to C.  For each country C, the new matrix of ﬁnal demand, including domestic consumption and exports is estimated from population as.  We assume that the vector of water intensity coeﬃcients cs,t, that is the amount of water per unit of production, is updated at a constant yearly rate (bR ≤ 1).  As described in Appendix A. 1, the value of bR is different depending on each scenario and on the macroeconomic area of which the country belongs.  For each country-sector pair s of any country C, with C belonging to the macro-area R, we have • bR.  In the case of no technological change (cs,t = thatcs,t+1 = cs,t cs,t−1) then bR = 1, otherwise a more eﬃcient use of water leads to values of bR < 1. 21 The vector of sectoral water use, in each period, where qC is the rate of population growth of country C and s is a sector within country C ∈ R.  In order to trace the actual water scarcity of each country we should take into account the net balance of virtual water trade which is given by HBAL = HExp − HImp.  The virtual water “embedded” in export and imports are given for country C, neglecting the temporal speciﬁcation, is, where H = ˆc • L and N is the number of countries.  Here fCC is the domestic demand, while fkC represents the vector of export for ﬁnal demand from country K to C, and fK is the row sum of the matrix of • yC is the square ﬁnal demand for each sector in country K.  HCK = LCK sub-matrix which shows the Leontief inverse for country C, when (cid. 2)N it exports to K, multiplied by the sectoral water usage of country C.  K(cid. 5)=C fK returns the water needed in country C when Note that HCC producing goods and services for ﬁnal use which are exported to all the other countries.  Given k (cid. 5)= C, it is possible to recover the water required in country C when producing the intermediate exports that (cid. 2)N are used abroad to produce ﬁnal goods and services consumed by K(cid. 5)=C(fK − fKC).  Hence, the total Water Footprint country K as HCK of national consumption of country C (WFC) is given by the sum of domestic use plus the water balance.  where Zi.  stands for the sum of row i, that is the value of domestic and exported intermediate goods, while Z. i stands for the sum of column i, that is the amount of domestic and imported intermediate goods.  Their subtraction returns the net amount of export of intermediate goods of each sector i in country C.  Note thatf i is the vector of total ﬁnal demand, per each sector i, in country C.  Then, knowing the matrix Z and the level of GDP it is possible to recover the values of the ﬁnal demand.  20 In order to be consistent with the data provided by IPCC, we select the table of the year 2010 which is the starting year of the population forecasts.  The Leontief inverse is the matrix L which solves the system x = L • f, where it can be shown that L = (I−A)−1.  See Miller and Blair (2009) for a detailed description of input-output economics.  21 Note that c is a proxy of technological progress because as a country develops water eﬃciency through technological improvement, water consumption per unit of output will decrease.  The value of b simply represents the speed of growth of c over time, that is the rate of technological progress, as assumed in Ercin and Hoekstrawhere LCC and fCC correspond to the sub-matrix of domestic (within country C) of the Leontief inverse and of ﬁnal demand, respectively.  The ﬁrst member on the right hand side is driven by the GDP growth and water eﬃciency change, while WH is determined by the population growth and speed of technological change b.  The last term provides the effect due to both heterogeneity in growth rate across countries and the structure of international trade.  The aim is to estimate, for each period t, the physical water scarcity index (WSpwhich returns the degree of exploitation of renewable freshwater resources.  6.  Results.  Fig.  2 shows the results, under four different numerical simulations of WSp t (see Eq.  (2)), while Tables 5 and 6 (see Appendix A. 3) report the decomposition analysis of the total variation of (virtual) water use, due to technological progress (c), climate change, and economic growth (GDP).  This study represents the ﬁrst attempt isolating the impacts from each of the different socioeconomic-ecological factors22.  This approach can shed a light on the implications of alternative water management strategies towards investments in R&D, economic growth, adjustments to water use per capita either through reductions in demand or reduced population growth rates.  In each scenario India and China overwhelm their renewable freshwater resources by the year 2025.  This is caused by increasing domestic consumption driven primarily by unsustainable economic growth.  India will need more than 10 times its Wa by 2100 (SSP5) in order to satisfy its production needs.  In each scenario any water saving, though substantial (up to −55% under SSP1, from 2041 to 2070), obtained through a reduction in water intensity coeﬃcients (c), is more than compensated by the projected growth in GDP.  For China there are large variances for each of these different scenarios suggesting particular sensitivity to model input parameters.  Under SSP1 and SSP2 the impact of GDP is signiﬁcant with a peak during the ﬁrst half of this century.  Economic production is estimated to create a +207. 64% increase in the demand for scarce water resources with respect to 2010 levels (under SSP1, from 2041 to 2070).  In SSP3 and SSP5, where technological improvements are assumed smaller, the main difference is given by the rate of GDP growth which is higher under SSP5.  In both India and China the change in Wa due to climate change is small when compared with the increase in demand from economic growth.  The USA and the EU27 attain a very similar path across all scenarios.  The year 2050 is identiﬁed as being a crucial turning point when the USA begins to over-exploit its Wa.  Under SSP5 the USA crosses the 100% threshold, before the 2040s, exceeding the “extreme over-exploitation” threshold, that is 200% of Wa (see Vorosmarty et al. , 2000).  Finally, Russia and Brazil meet their agroindustrial needs without crossing the water stress threshold (60% of Wa = WST) due to their considerable Wa endowments.  The main exception is in SSP5 where, starting from the year 2050, they too will be exploiting their water resources in an unsustainableWhen economic variables are included, most countries face an (extreme) over-exploitation of Wa, conﬁrming that water scarcity is an economic problem that both developed and developing countries must deal with in order to avoid considerable economic loss23.  Over-exploitation is when a country needs more than 100% of its own renewable water, Wa, but can still meet its own production needs through non-renewable water resources.  We do not model the impact of over-exploitation on the quality of freshwater resources nor have we utilised data on the stock of non-renewable resources.  Our simulations suggest that the baseline SSP economic growth scenarios are incompatible with future scenarios of sustainable water consumption.  These results suggest the need for improved global water policies.  Water abundant countries may play an important role in providing additional resources to water scarce regions, and the latter should invest more in R&D and on reducing their water consumptionFig.  3 shows the share of virtual water use for B24, GN and GY between 2010 and 2100 for each of the main countries and sectors (see Table 4 in Appendix A. 3).  We report together SSP1-2 and SSP3-5 because they share common assumptions over the pace of technological progress.  Green water (GN) is the dominant source of water in Indonesia, Australia, and Brazil which show the highest percentages of total water availability (more than 80%).  Sweden and Japan have the smallest proportion of GN water with less than 40% of total water supply.  At the global level, the largest GN water consumers are India, China, the USA, and Brazil (at least 588 km3), both at the beginning and at the end of the century, across all scenarios.  The highest values of blue water (B), for both 2010 and 2100, are in Sweden (63%) and Japan (44%) mostly due to the Electricity, Gas and Water Supply sectors (E) that absorb more than the 87% of B.  Though these percentages are stable in Japan and Sweden, there are some exceptions depending on the projected economic growth.  The Agriculture, Hunting, Forestry, Fishing with Food, Beverages and Tobacco sectors (AFF) are dominant, in terms of B water, in Spain, India, and Turkey (more than 60%), while sector E in Italy covers the 68. 92%.  Brazil, Spain, China, India, and Italy, among others, have diverging trajectories and they reach higher shares under SSP1, due to the AFF sectors.  Hence, it is expected a future structural change, with a shift towards more energy-intensive technologies of production under the scenarios SSP3, SSP4, and SSP5.  At the global level, the biggest B water users are China, India, the USA, and Brazil (from 113 km3 to 314 km3) both at the beginning and at the end of the century, under each scenario.  Finally, the most GY water intensive country, over the whole century, is China with a share of 32% and an absolute consumption of 537 km3, conﬁrming that China’s rapid industrialization has led to a severe deterioration in water quality in the country’s lakes and rivers (Ebenstein, 2012).  The two main followers, at the global level, are the USA and India (more than 174 km3).  while in terms of the percentage of national water consumption we ﬁnd UK, the USA, and Italy (at least 14%) as the largest users.  The sectoral composition is more complex due to the source of production and the level of industrialization, geographical location, and natural resource endowments.  AFF is dominant, though its quota changes substantially between countries.  Spain, Indonesia, UK, and Australia show the highest quotas (more than 97%) for each narrative.  However, there are other sectors that are heavy GY water consumers.  MET (basic and fabricated metal and other nonmetallic mineral) requires 22% and 18% of total GY water in China and Japan, respectively.  CH (Chemicals and Chemical Products) is also an important GY water consumer in Japan, Sweden, and China (more than 13%).  TXT (Textiles and Textile Products) has a signiﬁcant impact in Italy (10%), while PAP (Pulp, Paper, Printing and Publishing) is signiﬁcant in Japan, Canada, and Russia (around 14%).  These percentages are fairly stationary for each scenario over the whole century, but in China and Japan under each SSP there are higher percentages of GY water consumption attributed to MET and CH at the expense of AFF.  Finally, we decompose the total variation of water exploitation to quantify the impact due to climate change, technological progress (c), and economic growth (see Tables 5 and 6 in Appendix A. 3) under different scenarios.  To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt that quantiﬁes the expected impact of the main drivers of water use over the next century.  For the sake of simplicity, the tables report the percentage variation over three periods of 30 year periods.  The results from scenarios SSP1 and SSP2 are similar given the common assumptions on technological growth and similar path of economic and population growth.  The technological progress (c) is a source of water saving, with higher values mostly in the Asian countries, in Brazil, and in Mexico.  In particular, the subperiod 2041–2070 seems to be the most eﬃcient, with savings greater than the 35% (Mexico) and up to 68% (Indonesia), in these countries.  However, the variations of water use due to economic growth are far greater, with the highest variations in China, India, and Indonesia that show an increase of water use in the range +207% / +383% in the subperiod 2040–2071 (SSP1).  Negative variations are expected in Brazil, Australia, Turkey, Mexico, and some European countries (e. g. , Spain, Italy, and France) where the effects should be worse given their relatively low water endowments.  In general, the tendency of economic growth to overwhelm any savings from increasing water eﬃciency, and a relatively small impact of climate change is conﬁrmed in case of SSP3 and SSP5.  The main exception is that under SSP5 the projected economic growth is even faster, with potential detrimental effect on water resources.  The importance of income growth was found (Alcamo et al. , 2007), although our model covers a longer time span and we include all categories of water.  Finally, our results are slightly more pessimistic than those of Ercin and Hoekstra (2012), although we share the idea that a efforts towards water sustainability are necessary.  7.  Sustainability Assessment.  Given the predicted over-exploitation of available water we compute the technological development that will ensure sustainable water consumption (Vorosmarty et al. , 2000).  We elaborate a simple algorithm to update technological progress, in terms of water eﬃciency (c), to estimate how much technological improvement is required to meet future water demand requirements.  Appendix A. 2 explains the algorithm applied to smoothly update c though avoiding unrealistic technological “jumps”.  Gains in eﬃciency and productivity in water use can reduce the economic and environmental risks and enable higher levels of sustainableTable 7 of Appendix A. 3 compares different technological progress (change in c) under different scenario and assumptions.  The table reports the historical values as provided in WIOD (column 2 and 3), the technological change as provided in Ercin and Hoekstra (2012), and the sustainable technological path.  They are compared with the total variations from 1995 to 2009 for the data of WIOD, and from 2010 to 2100 in the other cases.  For a better comparison they are reported the average percentage change on a time span of 5 years.  Note that the historical changes are computed as a weighted average of the change in B, GN, and GY, per unit of production that has occurred in each sector.  Spain, UK, and the USA experienced an increase of water use per unit of production, that led to a reduction in water eﬃciency.  It might be surprising to see that water productivity has worsened in some countries, since improvements in cultivation and irrigation techniques should have improved eﬃciency.  This reasoning is not readily applicable at the aggregate level, though, because we are not considering production factors different from water and the output is measured in monetary terms.  For instance, higher water usage could partly compensate lower productivity of other inputs, including non-market factors associated with changing climate conditions.  Another possible explanation is that water is not priced effectively resulting in many countries not caring about water as a scarce limited resource, or ﬁnally, it might be that the structural change of economic production and trade has shifted some economies towards less water eﬃcient sectors.  However, as expected, the majority of large countries have reduced c, ranging from less than −2% (Italy and Russia) to −5% (Brazil, Canada, UK, and Japan) and even more in case of India (−12%), while China, Australia, Mexico, and Turkey reported variations higher thanFrom column 4 to column 7 we provide the implied technological change coeﬃcients for some country of interest, under the assumptions made in Ercin and Hoekstra (2012).  Technological improvements under SSP1 and SSP2 are larger because it is assumed water eﬃciency gains for each water based indicator, with an average variation of about −36%, from 2010 to 2100.  However, there are mixed results across countries, with minimum values observed in Australia and Spain (less than −30%) and maximum changes for Brazil, China, and Mexico (more than −41%).  These differences are mostly due to increasing international linkages.  Indeed, the impact of trade of intermediate goods and the structure of economic transactions shape, in a variety of ways, the economic impact on water resources.  The values under SSP3 and SSP5 are obtained under the assumption that only c, for Blue water, of the agricultural sector is becoming more eﬃcient.  Hence, the change in water technology is rather smaller than before, ranging from a minimum of less than −2% (Brazil and Canada), to a maximum of more than −9% (Australia, India, Spain, and Mexico).  The third section of Table 7 reports the change in c necessary to follow a sustainable path, that is when industrial water use is smaller than 60% of Wa.  The entries from column 8 to 15 are greater than those provided in the model of the previous section.  Under SSP5, which represents the highest level of GDP, the needed changes in water eﬃciency are particularly high and none of the countries has historical values of technological progress able to ﬁt with the expected growth.  In the other scenarios the outcomes are mixed.  Under SSP3, most of the countries seem to be on the right way, showing historical change in water eﬃciency (comparison of the 5-year length average rate) in line with those need to attain a sustainable path.  Only Spain, UK, the USA, and India need additional investments in c.  SSP1 and SSP2 show similar results and then they are evaluated jointly.  Under these scenarios most of the countries require a fast rate of technological progress, than that experienced in the past.  China, Mexico, and Turkey need only slightly improvements, so that it seems possible to recover the gap, although an analysis of the costs of the investments are out of the scope of the current study.  The most critical countries are the European ones and India that are very distant from the optimal rate of technological progress.  They need improvements so vast and so rapid that their actual realization seems improbable, especially when compared against historical trends.  These results suggest that it is crucial, for a rational and sustainable water management, to make precautionary initiatives as soon as possible (i. e. , investment in water eﬃciency), even in those countries that are currently water abundant, because otherwise they are forced to make larger efforts over a shorter period.  To conclude, we discuss the impact of virtual water trade in the context of sustainable water exploitation.  Fig.  4 shows the projected dynamics, under each SSP, for net exports and imports of virtual water for the largest countries.  Brazil and Canada are expected to become the main exporters of VW, with an increasing trend up to more than 1000 km3 and 500 km3, respectively, for all scenarios and with lower values for SSP3.  China, UK, and India should become a net importer of VW, in this way they can ameliorate the impact of water scarcity through global VWT.  In each scenario UK tend to import a net amount of about 200 km3.  India starts to be a net importer only after 2030s, reaching at most almost 200 km3 (SSP5) in 2100, while China peaks in 2040 in each scenario and thereafter reduces the amount of VW imported.  However, China shows diverging path.  under SSP5 it would become a net exporter at the end of the century, under SSP2 would reach a net balance around zero, and in the other two scenarios it will continue as a net importer.  Russia, although it is a water abundant country with a modest level of water exploitation, appears to be a net importer, in each scenario, at least until the 2060s.  Only after the 2070s it becomes a net exporter, with the exception of SSP3, but with total exports always below 200 km3, representing less than 5% of its own endowment.  Finally, note that the size of the bubbles in Fig.  4 are proportional to net trade balance of VWT and domestic water use, that is they represent the degree of “water dependency” on other countries.  A large bubble means that a country is highly dependent on VWT, while a small one means that a country is relatively self-suﬃcient.  UK shows the biggest circles meaning that the role played by VW is crucial to ensure a suﬃcient amount of virtual water to its population.  Note that further research should analyse the actual risk of moving away from food self-suﬃciency towards more urbanization, industrialization, and import of food Ercin and HoekstraTable 3 reports the implied (virtual) water per capita under sustainable growth, led by a fast technological improvement.  Technological progress and trade that allows to all countries to overwhelm the threshold 1700 m3 per capita per year by 2025, with average values higher than 2000 m3 per capita per year, with increasing trends along the whole century.  India is the main exception, because is not able to escape from social water stress, although a projected remarkable technological progress and increasing imports of VW.  Only under SSP5 where the WSSOC index of India reaches the minimum level of 1700 m3 per capita per year.  <Conclusion> Uncertainties and Limitations.  This study assesses the future virtual water footprints and the sustainability of scenarios of economic development (the SSPs) that have been recently proposed by the IPCC.  Best available data was used but uncertainties remain related to input data (WIOD, IPCC, FAO, and OECD) and limitations due to the assumptions of the Leontief model used for numerical simulations.  This paper deals with aggregate annual averages, therefore it is not possible to trace the variation in water supply within a single year (inter-annual variability) that determines the quality25 of the water at disposal.  We assume that 40% of annual renewable water is suﬃcient for environmental purposes.  As pointed out by Vorosmarty et al.  (2000), blue water shortage is more appropriately expressed at pixel level rather than at country level, the former gives a more realistic relationship between the water resource and the actual accessible water for people.  Due to lack of consistent data, this analysis does not include estimates on the volume of water that is potentially available from non-conventional sources (reuse, desalination, and non-renewable groundwater). 