 Introduction In a typical corporate report, the textual narrative represents the great majority of the disclosure— an average of 80% of an annual report, for instance—versus the remainder that consists of numbers and representations of quantitative data.  The clarity of this large component of mandatory disclosure is crucial to understanding and to interpreting the information contained in the report.  The U. S.  Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has been very forthright about the overly complex corporate reports.  Christopher Cox, Chairman of the SEC, suggested using direct measures of narrative clarity to enforce plain English communication.  SEC seems to believe that “the jargon of lawyers has taken over” and the trend towards hard-to-read disclosures is due to the fact that “the main purpose of the drafting exercise has shifted from informing investors to insuring the issuer and the underwriter against potential claims” (SEC, 2007).  In this paper, we examine whether managers use of complex disclosures goes beyond the presence of “legalese”, but also whether they use complex disclosure to hide information from investors.  The seminal work of Li (2008) explored the relationship between the readability of annual reports and financial performance.  Borrowing the Fog Index from computation linguistics, where a higher reading on the Fog Index indicates disclosures that are more difficult to understand, Li finds a negative relationship between Fog and the level of earnings.  It is unclear, however, whether this result is due to managers providing complex disclosures to obfuscate bad performance or that bad news is simply harder to be communicated (Bloomfield, 2008).  To further explore these alternative explanations, obfuscation or ontology, and to better understand managers’ use of complex disclosures, we look at instances in which firms are more likely to have managed earnings upwards to meet or beat an earnings target (Burgstahler and Dichev, 1997).  In these cases, although firms are releasing good news about meeting a benchmark, they have incentives to hide the tools used to achieve it, as suggested by Warren Buffett.  In other words, when reported performance differs from underlying fundamentals, we expect managers to try to make it harder for investors to identify such earnings management behavior and the underlying performance.  Our results suggest that the readability level of financial disclosures goes beyond the one derived from the ontological explanation of good vs.  bad news being disclosed.  Instead, we find that managers strategically use corporate disclosure to mislead or to influence investors’ understanding of firm's value.  Our study is motivated by the importance and richness of the textual component of financial disclosures.  The SEC highlighted the importance of textual disclosures when it issued a set of rules requiring plain English disclosures.  Christopher Cox, Chairman of the SEC, went further and suggested “just as the Black-Scholes model is commonplace when it comes to compliance with the stock option compensation rules, we may soon be looking to the Gunning-Fog and FleschKincaid models to judge the level of compliance with the plain English rules. ” If readability is going to be used as a measure of compliance, then we should understand the factors that affect how managers choose the level of readability.  Our analysis focuses on the readability of the management discussion and analysis (MD&A) section of the annual report— a section that is required by law but also a medium in which managers have discretion over how to present an explanation of the company's business, financial conditions, and results of operation.  As opposed to conference calls and press releases, the structure and content of MD&As are fixed.  consequently managers are “legally obligated to touch upon”(Warren Buffett) subjects they likely avoid in other disclosures.  The earnings benchmark we use is the prior year's earnings (rather than earnings forecasts or zero earnings) because anecdotal evidence suggests that management's discussions in the annual report are more likely to compare and contrast performance in the current fiscal year with that in the prior year (or years).  Forecasted earnings, whether by sell-side analysts or by management, are seldom referenced in annual reports.  Zero and small positive earnings events are relatively infrequent, so we reserve this benchmark for supplemental analyses. 1 Moreover, small or zero earnings changes mean that performance this year was similar to that in the previous year so little explanation is expected by readers and provided by management.  This idea is the basis for our null hypothesis–firms should provide disclosures that are easy to understand when their performance does not change much from previous year.  The findings are consistent with our hypotheses.  Controlling for the relationship between Fog and the overall earnings level as well as other known factors, we find robust evidence that Fog is higher for firms that meet or just beat prior year's earnings (MBE).  We further identified firms that are more likely to have managed earnings to meet a benchmark.  We use model-free methods, and several accruals and real activities methods to identify firms that are more likely to have managed earnings.  We find that firms more likely to have managed earnings to meet the benchmark by a couple of cents provide more complex disclosures than firms that either miss the benchmark or were less likely to have engaged in earnings management to exceed the benchmark.  this finding holds both when the comparison group is the broad cross-section of firms as well as when the comparison group is a matched group of firms with characteristics similar to the firms with suspected earnings management.  Our conclusions remain the same when we add firm fixed effects that control for firm-specific characteristics, such as the complexity of the firm and the industry, which may impact the complexity of the disclosure.  In another specification check, we include last year's complexity (lagFOG) in our analysis.  Both specifications account for the high persistence of FOG, and our conclusions remain the same.  In two further tests, we use firm-years with earnings that were misstated or required subsequent restatement as clear indicators of earnings management.  In these smaller samples, we find that Fog is higher for firm-years with earnings that were subsequently found to be misstated or had to be restated.  We also investigate whether the higher FOG in the suspect firms is due to more information being provided.  In line with Li (2008), a longer MD&A section could suggest more being explained, or more obfuscation.  We find no significant change in the length of the MD&A for the group of firms that are more likely to have managed earnings to meet the benchmark.  However, we find shorter MD&As for firms that meet the benchmark but with no earnings management.  This is consistent with our null hypothesis that when performance is similar to previous year and no need for obfuscation, firms provide simpler disclosures.  These findings are consistent with and reinforce our Fog analysis.  the suspect firms do not have longer disclosures, but they do have more complex disclosures, so they are not communicating more information, but saying about the same amount in more complex ways.  Although MD&A are required disclosures that the SEC views as essential to investor understanding of firms’ operations and performance, one may also argue that these disclosures are not relevant to investors because of their lack of timeliness, for instance relative to conference calls.  If true, this argument also suggests that managers will care more about beating analysts’ expectations than the past year's earnings number.  To address this issue, we focus on firms with no analyst following because for such firms, management is unconcerned with meeting analysts’ expectations and therefore last year's performance is likely to be a more important target.  We find that the incremental disclosure complexity for suspect firms is three times larger for firms with no analyst following compared with firms that do have analyst following.  Secondly, we split our sample based on the date when the MD&A is made available to investors.  We group firm-years in which MD&As were made available in the same week as earnings were first announced.  We find that the incremental level of complexity found in our previous tests is three times larger when MD&As are released within seven days of the public announcement of earnings.  Our contribution to the literature is two-fold.  First, we add to our understanding of the determinants of readability.  More specifically, we refine the overall relationship between readability and financial performance.  While the overall pattern documented by Li (2008) is one where higher earnings associates with lower Fog, we provide evidence that this relationship is discontinuous (or at least non-monotonic) around the benchmark of the prior year's earnings, particularly for firms that are likely to have managed accruals.  Second, we show that earnings management, that is, using accounting discretion with the aim of concealing underlying performance, manifests itself as more complex disclosures.  Our evidence is consistent with managers strategically choosing higher reporting complexity in conjunction with earnings management in an attempt to conceal the latter, which is a new finding in the literature.  Overall, we add to a more complete understanding of the relationship between financial report readability and reported performance.  Aside from Li (2008), this paper is also closely related to Larcker and Zakolyukina (2012, “LZ”).  However, LZ and this paper differ in a number of important ways.  First, LZ's primary interest is finding linguistic predictors for financial restatements (i. e. , restatements are the dependent variable) whereas this paper's primary interest is in understanding the determinants of readability (i. e. , the Fog score is the dependent variable).  Second, whereas LZ examine voluntary conference calls, we examine MD&A disclosures that are required by law.  Third, LZ analyze verbal communication but we examine textual disclosures, which result in differing levels of preparation, forethought, and spontaneity.  This last difference is important because our hypothesis is based upon management's deliberate attempt to obscure the financial picture to hide earnings management, whereas LZ's hypothesized effect derives in large part from inadvertent signals conveyed (e. g. , use of different pronouns, hesitations, expression of anxiety).  In sum, this paper differs from LZ in research question, whether the disclosure is mandatory, as well as the degree of preparation possible for the different avenues of disclosure.  The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.  The next section describes our hypotheses.  Section 3 contains our analyses and Section 4 concludes.  2.  Hypothesis development.  In computational linguistics, the Gunning Fog Index, or just Fog Index, is a function of the number of words per sentence plus the percentage of words that are complex (i. e. , having three or more syllables).  This sum is scaled by a constant (0. 4) such that the Fog value approximates the number of years of formal education required to understand the text.  The Fog Index was first brought into the accounting literature by Li (2008), who examined how readability of annual reports varies with financial performance.  Li found a negative relationship between profitability and Fog (i. e. , profitable firms have less complex reports compared with firms with losses).  He also found that firms with more persistent positive earnings have lower Fog.  In the discussion of Li (2008), Bloomfield (2008) provides a number of potential explanations for the observed relationships between readability and financial performance.  Two are particularly salient here.  First is obfuscation—that managers try to hide bad news by writing text that is more difficult to decipher.  Second is ontology—that bad news is inherently more difficult to communicate.  Bloomfield provides two other potential explanations that could also be considered variations of ontology.  He suggests that loss firms need to provide more explanation as a result of “management by exception. ” He also suggests that the nature of accounting conservatism—recognizing bad news in a more timely fashion than good news—requires managers to provide more explanation about the future when there are losses.  In sum, the ontological explanations suggest that readability is inherently a function of the circumstances.  In contrast, the obfuscation explanation requires management to intervene and affect the disclosure, manifesting in more complex disclosures.  As will be seen below, our analyses will have bearing on these two explanations.  As suggested by Li (2012), we utilize the fraud triangle framework to further examine managerial use of complex disclosures.  The fraud triangle suggests that fraud is more likely to occur when there is “incentive or pressure” to misreport earnings, when there is “opportunity” to do so, and management has the “attitude or rationalization” for the fraud or misreporting.  2. 1.  Incentive or pressure to misreport.  There is a substantial literature documenting the frequency, motivations, and benefits that accrue to firms that are able to meet or beat benchmarks.  In recent decades, some two-third to three-quarters of firms will meet or beat expectations in the capital market (as proxied by analyst forecasts).  The rewards of doing so are higher stock returns, lower information asymmetry, and lower cost of capital (Bartov et al. , 2002.  Brown et al. , 2009).  These firm-level effects translate into personal benefits via executive compensation directly through higher stock and option value, or indirectly through discretionary bonuses.  Bhojraj et al.  (2009) show that firms that manage earnings via accruals or real activities to meet a benchmark gain short-term benefits over firms that missed the benchmark and chose to not manage earnings.  2. 2.  Opportunity.   Management has the opportunity to misreport by managing accruals and real activities, as well by other means such as balance sheet or cash flow management.  In this study, we focus on the first two because these activities are most directly related to meeting earnings benchmarks.  Cohen and Zarowin (2010) and Zang (2012) show that firms use both accruals and real activity earnings management to achieve benchmarks, and make tradeoff between them.  2. 3.  Attitude or rationalization.  As Li (2012, 398) suggests, management disclosures via MD&A or other means reflects the attitude of management or provides the avenue for management to rationalize its behavior.  Together, our hypotheses and analyses combine the elements of the fraud triangle, by analyzing whether the complexity of MD&A disclosures (attitude/rationalization) relates to whether a firm meets or just beats an earnings benchmark (incentive or pressure) and whether the firm likely used earnings management to meet or beat that benchmark (opportunity).  Depending on the context, some benchmarks will be more salient than others.  In the capital market context, the expectations in the market is the most relevant—meeting or falling short of the market's expectations is what determines changes in stock prices.  In other instances, zero earnings is the relevant benchmark—maintaining a positive level of earnings is important for reasons of contractual provisions and general loss aversion, for examples.  A third benchmark is the prior year's performance, which is equivalent to a benchmark of zero change in earnings.  We focus on the third benchmark for two reasons.  First, our analysis of readability focuses on annual reports, and the MD&A section in particular.  MD&A is a disclosure required by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). 2 As a regulated disclosure, it is reasonable to expect management to discuss facts and figures that are already contained in the audited financial statements and elsewhere in the annual report rather than information from the capital markets, such as analyst forecasts, which can change frequently.  Second, the requirement to comment on trends suggests that management would rather have a zero or positive earnings change rather than having to explain a decline in earnings, which could arguably be interpreted as the beginning of a downward trend.  Third, we focus on the zero earnings change benchmark rather than the zero earnings benchmark to obtain more time-series variation in meeting/beating vs.  missing the benchmark.  That is, some firms are persistently profitable while others are persistently not.  the number of firms at or close to zero profitability is relatively small.  (Nevertheless, we provide some supplementary tests of this alternative benchmark to augment our main analyses. ) While the relationship between Fog and earnings levels documented by Li (2008) is negative overall, we expect that firms at or just above the zero earnings change benchmark will tend to show a different relationship under the obfuscation explanation.  First, if the ontology explanation (our null hypothesis) holds, earnings that met or just beat the prior year should have disclosure that is less complex than for earnings that fell below the prior year's.  In addition, reported results that are close to the prior year's require little explanation and is likely to reduce the complexity of the MD&A, and possibly even relative to earnings that beat the prior's by a larger amount, which would prompt more complex explanations.  Some of the firms that meet or just beat prior year's earnings accomplish this outcome by engaging in upward earnings management, so it can be argued that the underlying performance that they would have otherwise reported would have been lower, which would have a commensurately higher Fog.  That is, all else equal, the readability for the underlying performance is lower than for the reported performance.  However, management discussion is unlikely to dwell on the underlying and unreported performance, particularly if management has engaged in earnings management to meet/beat the benchmark.  Rather, management will discuss the earnings as presented, which is earnings that met or beat the past year's level.  In any case, this ontological effect, if it exists in our research context, would be small because our analysis focuses on a small range of earnings (i. e. , earnings changes close to zero).  Second, we expect firms that are likely to have engaged in earnings management to meet or beat prior year's earnings to actively make disclosures more difficult to understand.  Within the accounting discretion available, management makes biased choices to increase earnings.  Management must try to hide the deception so as not to be discovered.  i. e. , earnings management cannot be transparent for management to believe that it would have the intended effect (Lo, 2008).  Since analysis of financial information, whether numerical or qualitative, is costly, we expect investors to analyze information only up to the point where marginal costs equal marginal benefits of further analysis (Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980.  Bloomfield, 2002). 3 Therefore, more complex disclosures increase the cost of analysis to investors, reducing the depth of analysis, and decrease the likelihood that earnings management will be detected.  We consider this to be the direct effect of obfuscation on readability.  Third, in addition to the direct effect on readability is the indirect effect that arises subconsciously.  Earnings management involves degrees of untruth.  Deceptive communication is linguistically more complex and also cognitively more demanding. 4 This increase in disclosure complexity is a subconscious result of cognitive dissonance between underlying and reported performance (Li, 2012).  Potentially counteracting these effects is that liars will tend to tell simpler stories because it is difficult to be untruthful.  Simpler stories reduce the chance that fabricated details will conflict with each other.  This tendency to tell simpler stories can counteract the tendency of lies to be linguistically more complex.  Whether this effect dominates the direct and indirect effects just discussed is an empirical question.  Based on the above discussion, our central hypothesis is as follows (in alternative form).  H1.  Firms that have managed earnings in a particular year have annual report disclosures in that year that are less readable, ceteris paribus.  Beyond this central hypothesis, we have three subsidiary hypotheses with increasing specificity.  H1A.  Firm-years with zero or slightly positive earnings changes will have annual report disclosures that are less readable, ceteris paribus.  H1B.  Firm-years with (i) zero or slightly positive earnings changes and (ii) income-increasing discretionary accruals or real activities earnings management will have annual report disclosures that are less readable, ceteris paribus.  H1C.  Firm-years with (i) zero or slightly positive earnings changes and (ii) high income increasing discretionary accruals or real activities earnings management will have annual report disclosures that are less readable, ceteris paribus.  These three predictions relate to firm-years that we suspect of containing managed earnings.  However, these classification schemes use purely quantitative data and there is likely a certain amount of misidentification (Dechow et al.  1995).  Therefore, we use the superior accuracy of human investigators to identify instances of earnings management.  Therefore, we also make two additional predictions using restatements and misstatements.  H1D.  Firm-years with financial information that was subsequently restated will have annual report disclosures that are less readable, ceteris paribus.  H1E.  Firm-years with misstatements will have annual report disclosures that are less readable, ceteris paribus.  Restatements are adjustments to financial statements as tracked by Audit Analytics.  we do not examine all restatements, but only those identified by Audit Analytics as relating to fraud or SEC investigations.  Misstatements are those reported in Accounting and Auditing Enforcement Releases (AAER), which may or may not subsequently result in restatements.  Using restatements and misstatements is more accurate in identifying instances of earnings management, but also potentially misses some earnings management activity that has not been the subject of regulatory action.  In this regard, this identification strategy is complementary to the earlier strategy using small positive earnings changes, which likely classifies too many firms as having managed earnings.  <Middle> Research design.  To test our hypotheses, we use a sample of firm-years with available data between 2000 and 2012.  We require financial data from Computat as well as MD&A disclosures on the SEC's Edgar system.  Details of required financial data items are provided below.  We exclude firms in the utilities and financial services industries (SIC 4400–5000 and 6000–6999) because of their different operating and financial structures.  Table 1 shows the results of the sample selection procedure.  The final sample consists of 26,967 firm-years and 4855 unique firms.  Generally, our hypothesis concerns the influence of earnings management on readability.  Therefore, we require measures of readability, earnings management, and control variables that are known to affect readability.  Therefore, the general form of equation we use to test this hypothesis is as follows. 