 1.  Introduction Crude oil is widely considered to be one of the most important commodities affecting global economic growth.  Estimates indicate that the oil and gas drilling sector makes up about three percent of global GDP, and imports of petroleum products account for about forty percent of U. S.  trade deﬁcits. 1 Movements in crude prices have been shown to signiﬁcantly impact the world economy at various levels, from family budgets to corporate earnings and to the national economy (cf.  Eika and Magnussen, 2000.  Kilian, 2009).  According to IMF, a 10% increase in oil prices results in a 0. 2% drop in global GDP.  Therefore, when oil prices reached a record high $145/bbl in 2008, and then began to drop sharply beginning 2014 and reaching a low $29/bbl in early 2016, this resulted in signiﬁcant revenue shortfalls and economic stress on many energy exporting nations such as Russia and Saudi Arabia.  On the other hand, the availability of cheaper oil has been hailed as a potent economic stimulus to many net oil importer countries such as China and India, while keeping inﬂation under check.  Given the central role of oil in the economy there is a great deal of attention in the literature in forecasting crude prices.  According to a recent Wall Street Journal article, “forecasting is always an inexact art, particularly for oil, a global industry with wildly uneven data. . . it is a crucial one, underpinning companies’ decisions about when to drill and how much to hedge” and importantly, “market watchers get this so wrong. ” One of the most watched oil price forecast is from the US Energy Information Administration (EIA), which formally constructs monthly and quarterly forecasts of the price of crude oil at horizons up to two years. 3 Although EIA’s short-term forecasts help inform corporate investment and guide resource deployment decisions, their forecasts are hard to replicate and sometimes not very accurate.  The diﬃculty for replication is due to the lack of available detail information about the forecasting methodology. 