 1.  Introduction  The information contained in earnings announcements plays an important role in the determination of stock prices.   Despite its importance, numerous studies show that stock prices do not immediately and fully incorporate all of the information in earnings announcements and that various accounting-based measures and ﬁnancial statement components have  the ability to predict future stock prices.  Among the reasons offered for these apparent ineﬃciencies are limits on investor  attention, which lead investors to focus on subsets of information, and investors’ inability to fully understand the complexities of the information contained in earnings reports (e. g. , Bartov et al. , 20 0 0 .  Hirshleifer et al. , 2011 .  Doyle et al. , 2006 .   DellaVigna and Pollet, 2009 .  You and Zhang, 2009 ).   Prior research has shown that bond prices, like stock prices, react to earnings news.   This literature, though, does not examine whether corporate bonds incorporate earnings news more eﬃciently than stocks.  The reason why they might is that  the bond market is more heavily dominated by sophisticated investors than is the stock market ( Bessembinder et al. , 2009 .   De Franco et al. , 2009 .  Ronen and Zhou, 2013 ).  These investors have greater resources at their disposal to analyze earnings  reports and are arguably less constrained than are individual investors by either limited attention or diﬃculties in interpreting the information in earnings announcements.  This is supported by Bartov et al.  (20 0 0) and Doyle et al.  (2006) who  show that greater sophisticated investor presence enhances the ability of share prices to quickly incorporate the information  contained in earnings announcements and to mitigate the post-earnings announcement drift.  Consistent with this, Campbell  et al.  (2009) show that institutions trade aggressively to exploit the post-earnings announcement drift.  These results suggest  that if sophisticated investors are more dominant in the bond market than in the stock market, then earnings news would  be incorporated more quickly into bond prices than into stock prices.  Consequently, the bond price reaction to earnings  announcements would, similar to a number of accounting-based measures, have predictive power for future stock returns.   Counterbalancing this is the fact that bonds are typically less liquid and less actively traded than stocks.   Lower levels of liquidity could lead to an increase in the cost of trading and a reduction in the speed with which sophisticated bond  investors trade to their new positions, reducing the relative eﬃciency of the bond market.  For the equity market, the link  between liquidity and the speed of price adjustment has been well documented.  For example, Chordia et al.  (2008) show  that return predictability diminishes in the presence of greater liquidity, while Bhushan (1994) ﬁnds liquidity to be inversely  related to the magnitude of the post-earnings announcement drift.  Evidence for a link between liquidity and bond market  eﬃciency is reported in Ronen and Zhou (2013) .  If lower levels of liquidity in the bond market impede the eﬃciency of  bonds prices, then the ability of bond returns to predict post-announcement stock returns may be restricted to ﬁrms whose  bonds are more liquid.  Testing whether, and under what circumstances, the bond price reaction to earnings announcements  has predictive power for future stock returns is the central focus of this study.   For my tests I use the TRACE database to calculate raw and abnormal bond returns around 19,518 quarterly earnings  announcements of 770 unique ﬁrms between the years 2005 and 2014.  As a ﬁrst step in my analysis I partition ﬁrms each  quarter into deciles according to the bond price reaction to that quarter’s earnings announcement.  For a ﬁrm with multiple  bonds, the ﬁrm’s bond price reaction is the value-weighted average of the ﬁrm’s individual bond returns.  For each decile I  then calculate the average buy-and-hold abnormal stock return over the 60 days subsequent to an earnings announcement.   For the decile with the highest raw (abnormal) bond price reactions, the average buy-and-hold abnormal stock return is 1. 07  (1. 