
Many studies explore the effects of regulatory monitoring and enforcement activities on the subsequent behavior of facilities constrained
by regulatory laws.  These regulatory activities are effective if they
prompt facilities to improve their compliance with laws.  From the standard theory of deterrence (Becker, 1968), regulatory monitoring and
enforcement activities prompt subsequent improvements in compliance by deterring non-compliance through increases in either the certainty of punishment, severity of punishment, or both.  However, many
studies identify alternative, non-monetary motivations for complying
with regulatory laws. 1 As the most prominent alternative motivation,
regulated facilities may be intrinsically motivated to comply with regulatory laws.  Intrinsic motivation involves many dimensions, such as external refs, e. g. , adhering to professional norms, and internal
refs, e. g. , adhering to one's own self-identity as law abiding or
cooperative. 
Our study extends the standard theory of deterrence by incorporating these additional motivations into our conceptual framework.  Using
this framework, we explore regulated facilities' perceptions of the effectiveness of regulatory monitoring and enforcement efforts for inducing
compliance with regulatory laws.  In particular, our study explores the
inﬂuence of these perceptions on facilities' responses to regulatory inspections and enforcement actions conducted at a given facility (“speciﬁc deterrence”) or other similar facilities (“general deterrence”). 
No previous study explores this dimension of regulatory monitoring
and enforcement.  As the closest topic, various studies explore regulated
facilities' perceptions of the fairness of environmental protection laws
(Lazarus, 1997.  Lazarus, 1993.  Tarlock, 1992.  Hsu, 2004.  Schroeder,
1993.  Zinn, 2002.  Wiener, 1999).  For example, environmental regulation can be perceived by regulated entities as “unfair” partially because
it does not provide ﬂexible means of compliance (Zinn, 2002).  Within
this literature, surprisingly few studies explore the issue of enforcement
fairness within the realm of compliance with environmental protection
laws (Rechtschaffen, 1998.  Kagan, 1994.  Costle, 1982.  White, 1996). 
Earnhart Name (2016) explores the link from the perceived fairness of
environmental enforcement on regulated facilities' compliance with efﬂuent limits, ﬁnding that greater fairness undermines the extent of
compliance.  speciﬁcally, facilities who perceive that their regulators
treat them fairly “always” comply less with their efﬂuent limits than
facilities who perceive that their regulators only treat them fairly
“sometimes”. 
Another literature explores regulated facilities' responses to regulatory monitoring and enforcement (e. g. , Earnhart, 2004a.  Earnhart,
2009.  Earnhart and Segerson, 2012).  Gray and Shimshack (2011) survey
the evidence regarding environmental enforcement, concluding that
both monitoring and enforcement improve compliance, proving generally effective deterrents. 
None of these previous studies explores the role played by the perception of enforcement effectiveness.  In fact, because these studies
adopt the standard theory of deterrence, there is no role for factors
other than pecuniary (extrinsic) motivations.  Yet evidence suggests
that non-monetary or intrinsic motivations may be relevant even for
regulated ﬁrms.  For example, several studies demonstrate the importance of enforcement style.  Short and Toffel (2010) ﬁnd that explicit
threats can reduce compliance with environmental regulations, while
both Winter and May (2001) and Earnhart and Glicksman (2015) demonstrate that coercive enforcement styles can be counter-productive. 
These ﬁndings are consistent with aggressive enforcement styles
crowding out the intrinsic motivation to comply or cooperate with regulators.  To explore the different paths through which perceptions of effectiveness might inﬂuence compliance decisions, we develop a general
conceptual framework that includes both standard monetary incentives
and behavioral factors such as intrinsic motivation. 
Beyond these scholarly contributions, our study's results possess
policy implications.  As long as perceptions inﬂuence the effects of government interventions on environmental compliance, policymakers –
the EPA and state environmental protection agencies – should incorporate this insight into their enforcement of environmental protectionFor our empirical analysis, we examine the Clean Water Act, which
restricts discharges from point sources, such as industrial factories, by
imposing discharge limits through issued permits.  Environmental protection agencies induce compliance with these discharge limits by
conducting inspections and taking enforcement actions.  As our sample,
we examine chemical manufacturing facilities permitted under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) during the years
2002 to 2004. 
Using an original survey of these facilities, we collect data on facilities' self-reported perceptions of the effectiveness of regulatory monitoring and enforcement activities.  One survey question asks whether
the respondent believes that inspections effectively induce chemical facilities to comply with discharge limits.  a second question asks whether
the respondent believes that monetary ﬁnes effectively induce chemical
facilities to comply.  For each question, respondents chose from four categories.  deﬁnitely not, probably not, probably yes, and deﬁnitely yes. 
We construct two perception indicators by contrasting “yes” categories
and “not” categories. 
Our empirical analysis interacts these perception indicators with
standard measures of inspection- and enforcement-related deterrence
to assess whether facilities that perceive regulatory monitoring and enforcement activities as effective respond differently to actual monitoring and enforcement activities conducted against the individual
facility or similar facilities.  We investigate both speciﬁc and general deterrence and state and federal inspections. 
We ﬁnd that, on average, federal inspection-related general deterrence is the only effective means of improving the extent of compliance. 
However, when we estimate the effects separately for those who perceive enforcement to be effective and those who do not, our conclusions
differ substantially.  For facilities that perceive enforcement to be effective, increased deterrence of any type generates little gain, with only
federal inspection-related general deterrence (marginally) signiﬁcantly
affecting the extent of compliance.  For managers who already perceive
enforcement to be effective, increased deterrence does not change the
extent of compliance.  The effects on those who perceive enforcement
to be ineffective are very different.  In particular, the actual experience
of being inspected (speciﬁc deterrence) by a state agency proves effective, while greater state inspection-related general deterrence does not. 
Greater general deterrence from federal inspections is also effective.  Our
results reveal that a complex set of motivations inﬂuence the compliance decisions of environmental managers. 
2.  Regulatory Context. 
Our empirical analysis examines the wastewater discharged by U. S. 
chemical manufacturing facilities regulated under the U. S.  Clean
Water Act's NPDES system between 2003 and 2004.  Environmental protection agencies issue facility-speciﬁc permits to facilities regulated as
point sources.  These permits identify the pollutant-speciﬁc discharge
limits with which facilities must comply.  Due to considerations over
local ambient water quality, wastewater discharge limits vary across facilities and time regardless of sector. 
NPDES permits require regulated facilities to monitor and self-report
their discharges on a regular basis. 