
It is widely accepted that the CEOs of large banks have incentives to implement business policies that increase their organizations’ exposure to risks ( Cohen Name, 2014; Ellul and Yerramilli, 2013; Gandhi and Lustig, 2015 ).  These business policies 
are motivated by the highly levered nature of banks that provides CEOs with risk-taking incentives given the convexity of 
their stock and option holdings.  
While shareholders are not against executives taking risks, because equity is an out-of-the-money call option whose 
value is increasing with risk ( Acharya and Ryan, 2016; Jensen and Meckling, 1976 ), they do not have a preference for risks 
that can be detrimental to the survival of the bank ( Stulz, 2015 ).  A bank’s growing exposure to tail risks, measuring the 
possibility of suffering extremely large losses, could be dangerous for the organization ( Cordella and Yeyati, 2003; Ellul and 
Yerramilli, 2013; Hellmann Name, 20 0 0; Keeley, 1990; Park and Peristiani, 20 07 ).  While an exposure to tail risks tends to 
reward shareholders with positive returns in many scenarios, it can also be associated with a small probability of extremely 
large losses that undermine a bank’s longer-term survival ( Cohen Name, 2014; Ellul and Yerramilli, 2013; Thanassoulis, 2013 ).  
The purpose of this paper is to understand whether increases in tail risk are associated with an increased likelihood of 
a forced CEO turnover in large banks.  To this end, we present the ﬁrst cross-country study of CEO turnovers in the banking 
industry based on a sample of 261 large banks selected from 46 countries for the period 2004–2013.  
Whether any link exists between tail risk and the likelihood of a CEO turnover in large banks lacks empirical evidence.  
This is particularly unfortunate given that dismissal is potentially an important mechanism to discipline CEOs by bank boards 
and reduce the chances that they overly expose their banks to extreme risks.  In fact, dismissal might lead not only to the loss 
of current employment but also the loss of unvested equity-based compensation ( Dahiya and Yermack, 2008 ) and reduced 
future career opportunities ( Brickley Name, 1999 ).  
Our analysis is guided by conventional theoretical models proposed for non-ﬁnancial ﬁrms where boards employ performance, volatility and other signals to evaluate CEO choices ( Bushman Name, 2010; Gibbons and Murphy, 1990; Holmstrom, 
1982; Jenter and Kannan, 2015 ).  When these signals indicate bad outcomes for the corporation that are imputable to a lack 
of CEO ability or effort in the decision making, the dismissal of the CEO is a likely consequence.  Along these lines, we argue that tail risk conveys different and additional signals, as compared to stock performance and volatility, of possible bad 
outcomes for the bank that can be related to CEO choices.  
An increasing exposure to tail risks, making a bank more vulnerable to events that can lead to extremely large losses and 
to a ﬁnancial distress ( Ellul and Yerramilli, 2013 ), signals that the bank might ﬁnd it more diﬃcult and costly to conduct its 
business ( Stulz, 2015 ).  For instance, increases in tail risks lead to additional costs for shareholders related to the monitoring 
role of bank creditors and regulators.  Both creditors and regulators do not beneﬁt from the upside gains deriving from bank 
risk-taking while they bear the cost of the downside.  It follows that especially in the presence of a growing tail risk exposure, 
creditors can signiﬁcantly increase the risk-premium charged on bank debts and reduce the amount of available funds for 
the bank ( Flannery, 2001; Schaeck Name, 2011; Stulz, 2015 ).  At the same time, regulators might more closely monitor banks 
and offer negative signals on their ﬁnancial health with the consequence of reducing share prices and further increasing 
borrowing costs ( Berger and Davies, 1998; DeYoung Name, 2001; Slovin Name, 1999 ).  
In our study we follow Ellul and Yerramilli (2013) and Van Bekkum (2016) and use Expected Shortfall ( ES ) as our primary 
measure of bank tail risk.  ES quantiﬁes the downside of bank risk in the form of extremely large negative stock returns.  ES 
is, therefore, a particularly appropriate signal that a bank is overly exposed to extreme risks that are detrimental to bank 
value.  Furthermore, following studies that investigate the role of volatility in CEO dismissal in non-ﬁnancial corporations 
( Bushman Name, 2010 ), we build our analysis on the distinction between idiosyncratic and systematic tail risk, with the 
former being seen as more directly linked to managerial choices.  
By focusing on tail risk, our work is related to the stream of research that emphasizes the importance of going beyond 
the investigations of (average) stock returns and proﬁtability in order to explain forced CEO turnovers in corporations (see, 
for instance, Brickley, 2003 ).  This type of investigation is the focus of earlier studies on CEO turnovers in the banking industry (see Hubbard and Palia, 1995 ).  Furthermore, our paper extends and complements the analysis conducted on small US 
community banks by Schaeck Name (2011) where the authors show that an increase in bank default risk (measured by the 
accounting Z-score) raises the likelihood of a forced CEO turnover due to the disciplinary role played by shareholders.  
Differently from the existing studies, we show the importance of accounting for tail risk in examining the decision to 
remove a CEO by the boards of large banks.  We ﬁnd a positive relationship between idiosyncratic tail risk and forced (but not 
voluntary) CEO turnover, and we document that the ﬁring decision is not, in general, related to an exposure to systematic 
tail risk.  Furthermore, we show that our result is not related to idiosyncratic tail risk capturing a poor performance effect 
or simply an idiosyncratic volatility effect, as in the model proposed by Bushman Name (2010) , and holds under different 
empirical settings, including changes in the way we compute bank tail risk.  
A key consequence of the above results is that the importance of idiosyncratic tail risk for the ﬁring decision should 
depend on the banking market structure as the evaluation of CEO choices is argued to be more diﬃcult in more concentrated 
(less competitive) industries ( DeFond and Park, 1999; Fee Name, 2013; Yonker 2017 ).  This is because CEOs operating in 
more concentrated industries are less likely to be subject to similar uncertainties ( DeFond and Park, 1999 ), have less peers 
( Brickley, 2003; Fee Name, 2013; Yonker, 2017 ), and their outputs are more likely to be inﬂuenced by the actions of other 
CEOs in the same industry ( Holmstrom, 1982 ).  Consistent with the view that the market structure inﬂuences the ability of 
the boards to identify unﬁt CEOs, we ﬁnd that the sensitivity of forced CEO turnovers to idiosyncratic tail risk is lower in 
more concentrated banking markets.  
We next evaluate which stakeholders amplify the importance of tail risk for forced CEO turnovers.  In doing so, we contribute to the literature on how different bank stakeholders react to downside risks in banks ( Gandhi and Lustig, 2015 ).  
We show that the sensitivity of CEO dismissals to idiosyncratic tail risk increases with a larger presence of subordinated 
debtholders (namely debtholders that are liable to incur potentially larger losses in the case of a bank distress) or shareholders with lower diversiﬁcation opportunities.  In other words, there is a stronger relationship between idiosyncratic tail 
risk and CEO dismissal in the presence of stakeholders that have more to lose in the case of distress.  
The ﬁnal part of our analysis looks more closely at a bank’s exposure to systematic tail risk.  In the case of large banks, 
there are speciﬁc factors that go against the argument that any exposure to systematic tail risk is completely unrelated 
to managerial choices.  In particular, recent banking studies suggest that bank CEOs have incentives to manufacture nonﬁrm-speciﬁc tail risks and to engage in systematic risk-taking (modelled as an endogenous choice) to extract value from 
the ﬁnancial safety net ( Acharya Name, 2017 ; Acharya and Yorumazer, 2007 ; Adrian and Brunnermeier, 2016 ; Bushman and 
Williams, 2015 ; Farhi and Tirole, 2012 ; Pennacchi, 2006 ).  
To understand how boards perceive systematic tail risk in large banks, we test for the presence of variation in the sensitivity of forced CEO turnover to systematic tail risk when there are changes in the consequences a bank can suffer from 
being exposed to this risk.  By using several alternative empirical settings, we consistently ﬁnd that there is a stronger 
relationship between an exposure to systematic tail risk and CEO dismissal when such exposure is deemed to be more 
costly for a bank.  For instance, we ﬁnd that the sensitivity of CEO forced turnover to systematic tail risk is signiﬁcantly 
larger after a bank is included in the list of global systemically important ﬁnancial institutions by the Financial Stability 
Board.  For these institutions, regulatory costs are linked to the systemic effects they produce (see Bongini Name, 2015 ) and 
the removal from the list only occurs when they no longer pose a global systemic threat.  All in all, our tests indicate that 
the speciﬁcities of banks play a crucial role in the way bank boards see the exposure to systematic tail risk.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 discusses why tail risks should matter for forced CEO turnovers in 
large banks.  Section 3 describes the sample, econometric methods and variables.  Section 4 examines the impact of a bank’s 
idiosyncratic and systematic tail risk exposure on the likelihood of a CEO turnover, while Section 5 offers conclusions.  
2.  CEO turnovers and the tail risk exposure of large banks 
2. 1.  Tail risk as a signal of bad managerial choice 
The existing literature offers little guidance on whether risk, and tail risk in particular, matters for the board decision 
of large banks to ﬁre a CEO.  Studies on non-ﬁnancial corporations have mostly emphasized the importance of corporate 
performance for CEO turnover ( Brickley, 2003; Chakraborty Name, 2007; Engel Name, 20 03; Farell and Whidbee, 20 03; Fisman Name, 2014; Guo and Masulis, 2015; Hazarika Name, 2012; Jenter and Kannan, 2015 ).  An exception is Bushman Name 
(2010) who argue that, for a given level of corporate performance, a higher level of idiosyncratic volatility is associated with 
an increase in the probability of a forced CEO turnover as it signals uncertainty about CEO talent.  
Similarly, with the exception of Schaeck Name (2011) , who focus on the importance of accounting default risk for forced 
CEO turnovers in US community banks, the limited number of studies on banks has only investigated the inﬂuence of 
performance ( Hubbard and Palia, 1995 ) and the role of regulatory scrutiny on the turnover decision ( Palvia, 2011; Webb, 
2008 ).  
In general, conventional theoretical models of CEO dismissal are built around the idea that boards assess the quality 
of CEO choices on the basis of performance, volatility and other signals ( Bushman Name, 2010; Gibbons and Murphy, 1990; 
Holmstrom, 1982; Jenter and Kannan, 2015 ).  These signals lead to the dismissal of the CEO when they indicate bad outcomes 
for the corporation and when these outcomes are due to a lack of CEO ability or effort in the decision making (bad choices).  
Using this setting as a starting point, we expect that increasing a bank’s tail risk is associated with an increased likelihood of 
a forced CEO turnover.  In other words, we postulate that tail risk offers signals of possible bad outcomes for the corporation 
that are not contained in measures of performance and volatility and that are the result of CEO (bad) choices. 