 1.  Introduction  Competition for CEO talent has increased over the past few decades.  As described in Frydman and Jenter (2010) and  Murphy (2013) , ﬁrms now regularly hire outsiders as CEOs instead of internal candidates, competing with other ﬁrms or  poaching their CEOs, aided by compensation consultants and executive placement ﬁrms that create a market for CEOs and  make compensation packages easier to compare.   What effects does such competition for CEO talent have.  How does it affect the compensation contracts that ﬁrms and  CEOs sign, the incentive power of those contracts, and the value that ﬁrms and CEOs create.  The aim of this paper is  to analyze the effects of introducing competition in a setting with realistic informational frictions, in order to understand  how these frictions and the forces of competition jointly determine the outcome.  We show that the ascent of competition  increases the incentive power of CEO compensation contracts.  This mitigates ineﬃciencies from low-powered incentive contracts that arise when ﬁrms do not compete, but it also introduces new ineﬃciencies caused by excessively high-powered  incentive compensation.  Which setup generates larger ineﬃciencies depends on the informational frictions.   We incorporate the following informational frictions in our model.  Firms are uncertain whether a CEO has high or low  talent.  they cannot observe a CEO’s decisions.  a CEO can misreport her performance.  and the long-term ﬁrm value is a noisy  measure of how much value a CEO added.  We are particularly interested in the role of misreporting in our results.  We show  that if misreporting is not possible, then competition for talent does not cause any ineﬃciencies and thus always increases  the value that is created.  If misreporting is possible, however, the contracts that competing ﬁrms offer to CEO candidates  include excessively high-powered incentive compensation, leading to ineﬃciently high effort and aggressive misreporting,  thereby causing ineﬃciencies that can outweigh the ineﬃciencies that competition mitigates.   Note that many ﬁrms offer signiﬁcant incentive compensation to non-CEO top-level executives.  In industries in which  this is common and in which non-CEO executives are able to signiﬁcantly affect their ﬁrm’s true and reported performance,  our results extend to this set of executives.   The ineﬃciencies that arise under competition are different from those that arise without competition, because their  causes are different.  In the absence of competition, a ﬁrm maximizes its proﬁt by offering a contract with incentive compensation that is ineﬃciently low-powered at low performance levels (a contract with the well-known “no distortion at  the top” feature).  The ﬁrm’s goal is to offer low compensation to a high-talent CEO, without reducing her effort incentives.   By reducing the incentive power at low performance levels, the ﬁrm can make it unattractive for a high-talent CEO to act  as if she had low talent, exert low effort and generate poor performance.  But the ﬁrm’s proﬁt is reduced if the CEO has  low talent, because of the low-powered incentives at low performance levels (a low-talent CEO is expected to generate low  performance).  The ﬁrm trades off reduced compensation against lost proﬁts, a trade-off that depends on the informational  frictions.  In particular, the possibility of misreporting exacerbates the ineﬃciency.  But misreporting is not the driver of the  ineﬃciency.  The ﬁrm’s proﬁt-maximizing contract is ineﬃcient even if misreporting is impossible.   Under competition for talent, the rivalry between ﬁrms forces them to offer contracts under which each CEO’s expected  compensation equals the value she creates — a ﬁrm’s proﬁt must be zero in equilibrium, because if it was not, a rival ﬁrm  1 This rivalry complicates the contract  could design a slightly more generous contract and hire a CEO candidate instead.   design problem.  The contract must offer a high-talent CEO a large expected compensation, since having high talent makes  a CEO more productive.  but such high compensation should not induce a low-talent CEO to act as if she had high talent,  misreport aggressively, earn a large compensation and cause a loss to the ﬁrm.  Firms can prevent such mimicking behavior  by making strong use of performance pay.  A low-talent CEO beneﬁts less from higher performance pay, since she is less  productive, so acting as if she had high talent becomes less attractive.  However, achieving this requires an excessively highpowered incentive contract, leading to excessive effort and misreporting by a high-talent CEO, thereby causing eﬃciency  losses.   Competition for talent thus causes new ineﬃciencies that are very different from those arising in the absence of competition.  Excessive incentive power at high performance levels replaces ineﬃciently low incentive power at low performance  levels.  and ineﬃciencies caused by proﬁt maximization are replaced by ineﬃciencies that arise out of necessity, because  ﬁrms are unable to hire a CEO without them.   By comparing the contracts, decisions and payoffs in the two setups (without and with competition for CEO talent), we  can analyze the effects of introducing competition for talent.  For all talent levels and performance levels, we obtain the  following results.  First, expected CEO compensation increases, because the rivalry between ﬁrms leads to more generous  compensation packages.  Second, the incentive power (pay-performance sensitivity) increases, because competition eliminates a ﬁrm’s ability to offer ineﬃciently low-powered incentives at low performance levels while also requiring excessively  high-powered incentives at high performance levels.  Third, CEO effort increases, in response to the more powerful incentive  compensation.  Fourth, misreporting increases, also in response to the more powerful incentive compensation.  These are important results in light of corresponding changes observed between the years 1980 and 20 0 0.  The size and incentive power  of compensation increased (see Frydman and Jenter, 2010 or Murphy, 2013 ), and there was an increase in misreporting (see  Bergstresser and Philippon, 2006.  Burns and Kedia, 2006 , and Cohen et al. , 2008 ). The ascent of competition for talent during this period may have contributed to all these changes.  Furthermore, these changes are not necessarily evidence of a  worsening in corporate governance ( Bebchuk and Fried, 2003, 2004 ).   While these effects of introducing competition for talent are unambiguous, the consequences for eﬃciency (value or  surplus creation) can be positive or negative.  Both setups (with and without competition) generate ineﬃciencies, but with  different causes and magnitudes.  Which eﬃciency loss is more signiﬁcant under what circumstances is not immediately  obvious.   Competition generates a higher surplus than the single-ﬁrm setup if the informational frictions are not too large.  If ( i )  misreporting is suﬃciently diﬃcult.  ( ii ) a ﬁrm’s long-term performance is a moderately noisy measure of how much value  a CEO’s added.  or ( iii ) the CEO’s risk aversion is low.  Under these conditions, the equilibrium contracts under competition  include only relatively small distortions.  Consequently, the ineﬃciencies are smaller than in the setup without competition,  where proﬁt maximization leads to distortions even if the informational frictions are small.  This implies that economies  or industries with the following characteristics beneﬁt from the ascent of competition for talent.  ( i ) If strict disclosure  regulations and active investors make misreporting diﬃcult.  ( ii ) if CEOs need to make decisions that will be key to their  ﬁrm’s performance over many years, such as responding to import threats, technological change, or new regulations, and  the value-added of those decisions can be misreported in the short run but becomes observable in the long run.  or ( iii ) if  CEOs have high net worth and are thus able to diversify compensation risk (this makes compensation linked to the longterm value of the ﬁrm a more effective contracting tool).   In the extreme case, if misreporting is prohibitively costly, competition for talent leads to equilibrium contracts that are  eﬃcient, while the contracts offered in the single-ﬁrm setup remain distorted and thus generate less surplus.  The ascent  of competition for talent then eliminates ineﬃciencies without causing any new ones and thus unambiguously generates  welfare gains.   But the ascent of competition for talent may also cause a reduction in the value created.  This can happen if there are  signiﬁcant diﬃculties in linking compensation to performance.  If the cost of misreporting is low, the CEO’s risk aversion  is high, and long-term performance is a noisy measure of true performance.  Under these conditions, large eﬃciency losses  arise in both setups, but they are larger under competition for talent. 