 In South Africa, the hake ﬁshing industry is an important contributor to income in coastal communities, generating some 30,000 jobs (Rademeyer et al. , 2008).  It is also the country's most valuable ﬁshery (Butterworth and Rademeyer, 2005.  Petersen et al. , 2010), generating an estimated 5 billion South African Rand (ZAR) per year at present.  The costs, revenues and proﬁts in this industry are much the same as those incurred by ﬁsheries internationally, such as fuel and market price for ﬁsh (e. g.  the target species Merluccius capensis and M.  paradoxus).  It is, however, a highly consolidated and vertically integrated industry with heterogeneous business models and a high level of complexity (Cooper et al. , 2014).  This makes the relative importance and complex interactions and trade-offs among different drivers like fuel price and environmental variability for the industry and its proﬁts hard to estimate at a glance.  It is known that economic, ecological and social dimensions must be appropriately considered to ensure successful management for the sustainability of ﬁsheries (Folke et al. , 2007.  Garcia and Charles, 2008.  Pitcher and Lam, 2010).  Effective policies for the sustainability of human (social and economic) and natural systems are underpinned by untangling the complexities of these systems, such as emergent properties and reciprocal effects (Liu et al. , 2007).  To be able to meaningfully incorporate ecological and human dimensions into management through appropriate objectives with measurable outcomes or indicators for South Africa's hake ﬁshery, it is necessary to ﬁrst have insight into the functioning of the industry and how its proﬁts are affected by changes in some of its major drivers.  Proﬁtability is a signiﬁcant incentive for commercial ﬁshing companies (Sumaila et al. , 2008).  A modelling approach can provide insight into this type of complex system and its structure, function and dynamics (Liu et al. ,2007), particularly in a situation such as South Africa's where publically available economic data on the ﬁsheries is scarce.  Scenario testing provides further understanding of how changes in external drivers affect the industry's structure, function or dynamics.  Achieving insight into the South African offshore demersal hake trawl ﬁshery was the impetus behind the building of HakeSim, an agent-based model (ABM) of the ﬁshery (Cooper, 2015.  Cooper and Jarre, 2017).  HakeSim captures the complex industry structure, complete with heterogeneous company, vessel and market agents, as well as important factors that affect the industry's proﬁtability such as fuel price, total allowable catch, environmental variability (through a proxy), domestic and international market price and demand for hake.  Fuel price is one factor that majorly affects running costs and therefore proﬁtability of the offshore hake trawl industry.  It can account as much as 60% of running costs for ﬁshing companies (Sumaila et al. , 2008).  It is well known as a core issue affecting ﬁsheries economics and dynamics worldwide and, for example, has been identiﬁed as particularly signiﬁcant for the proﬁtability of wetﬁsh trawlers that land fresh ﬁsh in neighbouring Namibia (BCLME, 2006.  Gasalla et al. , 2010.  Sumaila et al. , 2008).  Even where it accounts a lower percentage (10 or 25%), such as in other trawl industries, it can hinder ﬁsheries in the case of a price increase (Sumaila et al. , 2008).  Arnason (2007) point out that increased fuel prices from 2004 meant signiﬁcant increases in cost and reductions in proﬁt, which could push companies already not making a proﬁt into exiting the ﬁshery.  Anecdotally, the South African industry complained of critical interactions between fuel price and catch per unit effort (CPUE) during high fuel price periods and that it was difﬁcult to sustain proﬁts at these times.  Previous modelling scenario analysis with HakeSim demonstrated that prices above ZAR 18. 