
Multinational entities (MNEs) face tax incentives to shift taxable income from high-tax jurisdictions to low-tax
jurisdictions by strategically valuing intercompany transactions.  To mitigate tax-motivated transfer prices for goods,
services, intellectual property, and debt, tax authorities require that transfer prices be “arm’s length,” or comparable to
prices charged between independent enterprises (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 2010a). 
Because arm’s length contractual prices are generally unobservable, MNEs often benchmark transfer prices by identifying a
set of observable, economically comparable, and independent companies that use similar accounting standards to compare
profit margins (PWC, 2006).  Specifically, taxpayers calculate the observable range of book profit rates reported by
comparable firms and demonstrate that affiliate taxable profits are within this benchmark range (McKinley and Owsley,
2013).  Adoption across jurisdictions of a common set of accounting standards, such as International Financial Reporting
Standards (IFRS), expands the set of potential benchmark firms and could allow MNEs more flexibility to support taxadvantaged transfer prices.  However, tax authorities could use a larger set of benchmarks to enforce tighter comparability
standards, resulting in narrower profit ranges. 
In this paper, I examine tax-motivated income shifting across jurisdictions following affiliate adoption of a common set of
accounting standards for unconsolidated financial reporting.  Unconsolidated financial reporting provides separate entity
accounts for each affiliate of a MNE group.  In contrast to the 2005 mandated use of IFRS for consolidated financial reporting
in the European Union (EU), countries varied in mandating or permitting IFRS for unconsolidated financial reporting.  As of
2014, 14 of the 27 EU member states require IFRS for unconsolidated financial reporting for certain types of firms, nine
countries allow IFRS for certain firms, and four countries do not allow IFRS.  This significant variation in unconsolidated IFRS
reporting rules by country, year and entity type across the EU makes the EU a powerful setting to address whether unifying
GAAP at the affiliate level increases MNE flexibility when selecting comparable companies to use in benchmarking transfer
prices.  My study contributes to the literature by exploiting institutional details of intercompany transfer pricing to
investigate a tax consequence of countries permitting or requiring IFRS for unconsolidated financial reporting.  I consider
how an accounting change interacts with tax incentives to affect managerial behavior, thereby addressing an important new
intersection between financial accounting and tax planning. 
All EU member countries follow guidance published by the OECD for substantiating intercompany transfer prices. 1 These
Transfer Pricing Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and Tax Administrations state that,
for the purposes of
benchmarking intercompany prices, an “important aspect of comparability is accounting consistency” (OECD, 2010a, p. 
72).  Thus, holding economic comparability of potential benchmark firms constant, only those firms using similar accounting
standards best meet the OECD definition of comparability for justifying arm’s length transfer prices (OECD, 2006). 2 Per
private discussions with global transfer pricing professionals, tax authorities in the EU historically rejected potential
benchmark firms that use different accounting standards (i. e. , foreign firms using local GAAP).  However, in the years
following EU countries permitting or requiring IFRS for unconsolidated financial reporting, professionals observe that MNEs
increasingly rely on multinational (e. g. , pan-European) sets of benchmark firms to justify intercompany prices (Gonnet Name,Permitted or mandated use of a common set of accounting standards in the EU expands the set of benchmark firms
available to MNEs for substantiating transfer prices, potentially allowing MNEs to choose more favorable benchmarks that
support a tax-advantaged transfer price.  For example, MNEs with an affiliate in a high-tax jurisdiction could “cherry-pick”
among potential benchmark firms and select less profitable firms to substantiate low taxable profits for their high-tax
affiliate.  MNE tax-motivated income shifting could therefore increase following affiliate adoption of IFRS due to increased
opportunity to garner tax benefits. 
However, tax-motivated income shifting may remain unchanged or even decrease following affiliate IFRS adoption due to
limitations to expected benefits and/or increased costs.  First, tax authorities can also use a larger opportunity set of
benchmark firms to challenge taxpayer-favored transfer prices upon audit, cherry-picking benchmarks that increase taxable
income in their jurisdiction or enforcing stricter comparability criteria to reduce transfer pricing flexibility. 3 Second,
increased financial statement transparency upon IFRS adoption could limit tax-motivated income shifting.  Finally, the
significant costs associated with updating transfer pricing strategies and compliance reports could deter taxpayers from
taking action.  Whether the equilibrium level of tax-motivated income shifting increases following affiliate adoption of IFRS
is an empirical question hinging on the cost-benefit tradeoffs of MNEs and taxing authorities. 
An EU Directive requires that MNE affiliates disclose unconsolidated, separate entity financial statements. 4 Between 2003
and 2007, many European MNE affiliates changed accounting methods as several EU member states first permitted or
required IFRS for unconsolidated financial reports.  I use Bureau van Dijk’s Amadeus database, containing European
unconsolidated financial and ownership information.  This unique database provides unconsolidated financial information
required to estimate affiliate-level tax incentives and their effect on estimated affiliate-level taxable profits, neither of which
can be measured using consolidated financial statements or reported segment information. 5 Amadeus also reports which
financial reporting standards each affiliate uses and affiliate ownership linkages.  Thus, I can identify the effect of a common
set of accounting standards on tax-motivated income shifting among affiliated firms within the same controlled group. 
Using a sample of 57,252 profitable affiliate-year observations over the period 2003 to 2012, I test my hypothesis in two
steps.  First, I document that IFRS adopters experience a substantial increase in the number of potential benchmark firms and
the range of possible benchmark book profit margins.  Second, I estimate the effects of tax incentives and affiliate IFRS
adoption on reported affiliate pre-tax profits.  Following Hines and Rice (1994), I estimate affiliate reported book pre-tax
income as a function of statutory tax rates, affiliate tangible fixed assets, affiliate compensation expense, and per capita GDP. 
Results suggest that affiliates engage in more tax-motivated income shifting following adoption of IFRS for unconsolidated
reporting.  Focusing on mandatory adopters because they experienced an exogenous shock to their set of benchmark firms, I
find that the average mandatory IFRS adopter affiliate shifts 11. 5 percent more income relative to pre-adoption and nonadopter affiliate-years.  I caveat that these results are based on a sample limited to profitable affiliates, affiliates in the EU
(group affiliates in other locations are not considered), and the relatively homogenous tax rates of Europe.  Further, although
I conduct tests that separate the effect of changes to the potential benchmark set from accounting changes due to IFRS
adoption, I am unable to rule out that findings are partially attributable to the accounting standards themselves.  I discuss
these caveats in more detail below. 
My study makes several contributions to the literature.  First, this study begins to fill a gap in the literature by providing a
deeper view of transfer pricing institutional detail. 6 I expose a previously unexplored income shifting mechanism by
examining the role that independent benchmark firms play in justifying arm’s length prices for intercompany transactions,
as well as the link between an affiliate’s taxable income and the observable book income of similar, independent firms.  This
study provides a nuanced understanding of transfer pricing rules and practices used by MNEs to shift income and accrue tax
benefits.  I use these institutional details to examine an important spillover effect of financial reporting changes on tax
planning.  To this end, this study answers the call by Shackelford and Shevlin (2001) to move beyond documenting income
shifting to better explaining, understanding, and predicting income shifting.  Future studies can use this more detailed view
of transfer pricing institutional features to continue deepening our understanding of the mechanisms through which MNEs
shift income. 
Second, although much of the research evaluating the economic consequences of IFRS focuses on the intended benefits
for consolidated financial reporting, I evaluate the consequences of IFRS for unconsolidated financial reporting. 7 By
examining the impact of IFRS on the pricing of MNE transactions designed to garner tax benefits, I shed light on a real effect
of accounting choices made by both jurisdictional standards setters and MNE managers, positing that accounting methods,
tax incentives, and managerial incentives interact to affect MNE income shifting behavior.  My study is a contribution to the
literature in that it investigates a previously unexplored effect of countries permitting or requiring IFRS for unconsolidated
affiliate reporting.  This study demonstrates the potential risks of tax and financial accounting policy makers ignoring the
interplay between financial accounting and tax. 
2.  Background
2. 1.  Tax-motivated income shifting
Firms shift taxable income in response to tax incentives via the strategic valuation of intercompany sales of goods,
services, debt and intangibles. 8 To constrain tax-motivated income shifting by MNEs, many countries adopt formal rules to
regulate intercompany pricing.  Although the European Commission (EC) has the authority to enforce tax policies on EU
member states, to date the EC has allowed member states to choose their own tax policies (such as tax rates and transfer
pricing rules) to the extent these policies do not conflict with other EU law. 9 All EU member countries follow the OECD
Guidelines on transfer pricing. 10
The OECD Guidelines define the “arm’s length principle” as the basis for substantiating appropriate transfer prices.  The
arm’s length principle specifies that intercompany prices should be comparable to prices charged by unrelated firms (i. e. 