 1.  Introduction Most liberalized electricity markets suffer from market power, with high concentration indices, and are frequently subject to market investigations (see for example DG COMP, 2007).  Academics and consultants alike struggle to model the exercise of this market power and the implications of possible reforms, such as increasing interconnection (Newbery et al. , 2004), moving to nodal pricing (Joskow and Tirole, 2000), market coupling (Newbery et al. , 2016), breaking up larger companies such as EdF in France (INSEAD, 2004), introducing capacity auctions (Entriken and Wan, 2003.  Genoese et al. , 2012.  Hach et al. , 2015.  Hu and Hobbs, 2008) or by increasing the volumes of renewables (Liski and Vehviläinen, 2015.  Newbery, 2016).  The main problem facing those wishing quantiﬁed results rather than illustrative examples lies in the considerable diﬃculty of modeling strategic behaviour in markets with various capacity and transmission constraints, in which the participants interact daily on auction markets under conditions of great transparency.  Electricity is possibly the best example of the textbook example of a perfectly homogenous product that would seem to favour intense price competition, but, as observed above, liberalized electricity markets are characterized by oligopoly and deviations from competitive behaviour.  Moreover, generators have very complete information about their own and rivals’ short-run cost functions, which are determined by known technologies and observable fuel prices.  Cournot models may be suitable for modeling potential market power and prices for speciﬁc levels of demand (Moselle et al. , 2006) but electricity demand varies substantially hourly, daily and seasonally.  In practice, and more extensively now that the EU has almost completed market coupling at the day-ahead stage, generating companies offer their supply as a function of offer prices (often a step function, see Newbery et al. , 2013) into EUPHEMIA,2 the auction platform that determines day-ahead prices for the whole of the market-coupled EU. 