 1.  Introduction Why do ﬁrms engage in corporate environmental responsibility (CER) activities.  Understanding the incentives for CER engagement has spurred a large academic literature.  In general, there are three distinct perspectives on the determinants of CER.  The ﬁrst perspective focuses on the role of social pressure from nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), suppliers, customers and regulators in CER (Delmas and Toffel, 2008).  The second perspective focuses on the ﬁrm-speciﬁc factors shaping CER, such as age, size, and ownership (Etzion, 2007.  Zeng et al. , 2010), corporate governance (Kassinis and Vafeas, 2002.  de Villiers et al. , 2011.  Walls et al. , 2012), and ﬁrm performance (Ye et al. , 2013.  Sueyoshi and Goto, 2014.  Bostian et al. , 2016).  The third perspective studies the effects of top executives on CER, which includes CEO demographic and psychological characteristics (Lewis et al. , 2014.  Petrenko et al. , 2016), CEO incentives and turnover (Deckop et al. , 2006.  Meng et al. , 2013).  Nevertheless, the literature is silent on whether political connections matter for a ﬁrm's propensity to engage in CER.  This paucity of research is somewhat surprising given the fact that many researchers have highlighted the effects of political connections on ﬁrm behavior and strategic decisions (Fisman, 2001.  Li and Atuahene-Gima, 2001.  Faccio, 2006.  Zhou, 2013), and CER is increasingly viewed as an important business strategy by researchers, investors, and society as a whole (Etzion, 2007.  de Villiers et al. , 2011).  The novel contribution of this research is to explicitly introduce such political connections dimension in an empirical study of corporate environmental practices.  Speciﬁcally we are concerned in this paper with how political connections may affect organizational CER in China.  China offers an ideal setting to investigate this issue.  A distinct feature of China is that the government plays a critical role in the economy.  As a special form of business-government relationship, political connections are an important means of government intervention in ﬁrms (Fan et al. , 2007).  At the same time, political connections are also an important channel for Chinese ﬁrms to access to valuable resources and government protection (Li et al. , 2008), which may in turn affect the costs and beneﬁts of CER activities.  Therefore, as a governmentdominated transitional country with severe environmental problems, China forms a good (quantitative) case study to evaluate the role of political connections in CER.  Our ﬁrst task is to examine whether political connections inﬂuence ﬁrm's propensity to engage in CER.  For this purpose, we propose a mechanism-based theoretical model to explore the possible positive and negative effects of political connections on CER.  And we test the model by constructing a CEO-ﬁrm matched panel data set of 823 Chinese listed ﬁrms in polluting industries from 2008 to 2014.  After controlling for other factors, we ﬁnd that political connections have a signiﬁcant and positive impact on CER.  This ﬁnding is robust to a number of alternative estimation approaches.  We then go a step further and investigate where and how political connections are important to CER.  We argue that the effects of political connections on CER are likely to be different depending on contextual conditions.  This is tested through comparing the roles of political connections in ﬁrms with different ownership and in regions with different environmental regulatory systems.  Our empirical results show that the positive effect of political connections on CER is more pronounced for state-owned ﬁrms and in cities with stringent environmental rules and regulations.  With respect to the mechanisms through which political connections increase CER, we ﬁnd that political connections help ﬁrms to receive government grants, subsidies and tax reduction related to the environment protection, and implement government environmental policies.  These mechanisms work better for state-owned ﬁrms.  To the best of our knowledge, this study is the ﬁrst to establish a link between political connections and CER.  Our work contributes to the literature on CER by showing that political connections do matter in determining a ﬁrm's propensity to engage in CER.  We also add to the growing literature on political connections.  Previous research has examined the impact of political connections on ﬁrm's performance (Fan et al. , 2007.  Li et al. , 2008), corporate bailouts (Faccio et al. , 2006), entrepreneurial investment (Zhou, 2013), workplace fatalities (Fisman and Wang, 2015) and corporate diversiﬁcation (Li et al. , 2012), but has not examined their effects on ﬁrm's environmental responsibility. 