
There is an ongoing debate about the role of oil and gold in hedging
equity portfolios, which has become topical since the ﬁnancial crisis and
the subsequent ﬂuctuations in the prices of these assets.  In the literature, the role of oil and gold as hedges is not universally accepted, and
it seems to depend on geopolitical, economic, as well as other idiosyncratic factors.  This topic is of particular interest for oil-exporting countries, which are usually rich in these assets.  However, most of the
literature has focused on developed countries (Baur and McDermott,
2010; Hood and Malik, 2013; Choi and Hammoudeh, 2010; Creti Name,
2013; Ciner Name, 2013), while developing countries have only recently
started receiving further attention (Basher and Sadorsky, 2016).  Using
data from the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries1 from January
2004 to May 2016, this paper employs a dynamic conditional correlation model (DCC-GARCH) to ﬁrst examine the shock transmissions
between the equity markets and the two commodities, and then
evaluate the hedging opportunities arising from including crude oil
and gold in equity portfolios.  Our paper is the ﬁrst to consider the
dynamic relationships between oil, gold and equities in the GCC countries, therefore further contributing to the debate. 
Examining the interconnectedness between oil, gold and equities is
of great importance for GCC countries, as they are net exporters of oil,
while they hold gold reserves to secure against US dollar ﬂuctuations,
which is the trading currency for both commodities.  At the same time,
GCC countries hold about 1. 3% of the world's gold reserves, hence our
study may also be of interest to local monetary authorities. 2 Finally,
given the absence of a derivatives market for GCC stocks, traditionally
used for hedging, it is important for GCC investors to ﬁnd alternative
risk management options. 
In light of the above, this paper examines the interconnectedness between the GCC exchanges and oil and gold, as well as the usefulness of
the two commodities in hedging GCC-based equity portfolios.  The
period considered, which spans from January 2004 to May 2016, is
rich in events, as it begins with the post-Iraqi war era, and covers the
ﬁnancial crisis, the historic peak of gold prices in 2010 and the
subsequent fall, as well as the recent oil crisis which began in June
2014.  During the ﬁnancial crisis, the price of oil fell signiﬁcantly, but
the rising price of gold balanced the negative effects of the crisis; in
fact, the GCC countries experienced signiﬁcant economic growth during
that period, despite the slowdown in the global economy.  The recent
crises in the gold and oil markets, though, led to a substantial revenue
slowdown for GCC oil exporters, while central bank reserves were also
affected negatively.  This adds to the on-going political turbulence in
the Middle East, which creates more investment uncertainty, and therefore makes the topic in hand an interesting case to examine. 
Our study contributes to the growing literature in energy ﬁnance,
that includes studies such as Arouri and Nguyen (2010), Baur and
McDermott (2010), Choi and Hammoudeh (2010), Filis Name (2011),
Arouri Name (2011), Awartani and Maghyereh (2013), Awartani Name
(2013), Ciner Name (2013), Creti Name (2013), Guesmi and Fattoum
(2014), Hoang Name (2015), Basher and Sadorsky (2016).  Most of
these studies examine the dynamic correlations between oil and equities, while only a few studies consider additional commodities, such as
Mensi Name (2013, 2015). 
We estimate return and volatility spillovers using the dynamic conditional correlation, general autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity
(DCC-GARCH) model of Engle (2002).  For the returns equation, we use
a VAR speciﬁcation that endogenously accounts for structural breaks,
while we follow the multivariate GARCH approach of Ling and McAleer
(2003) to model volatility.  The DCCs between GCC equities and the
two commodities are then used to compute dynamic hedge ratios and
portfolio weights. 
Our results reveal signiﬁcant return and volatility transmissions
from oil to equities, highlighting the link between oil production and
corporate cash ﬂows in GCC economies, whereas the inﬂuence of gold
on equities appears insigniﬁcant and negligible.  In the opposite direction, we do not ﬁnd convincing evidence that the GCC stock markets
can inﬂuence the two commodity markets, which we attribute to the
relatively small capitalisation of the exchanges.  Our analysis of dynamic
correlations and dynamic hedge ratios indicates that, although the two
commodities are cheap hedges, and in contrast to previous studies, they
cannot be considered as good ones due to their weak dynamic correlations with equities.  We therefore conclude that oil and gold can instead
be used for portfolio diversiﬁcation, which is an important result for
GCC equity holders, given that the local exchanges list relatively few
corporations from a narrow selection of sectors. 
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides a
contextual background about the GCC stock markets; Section 3 reviews
the relevant literature; Section 3 analyses the empirical methods
followed; Section 4 presents the data used in this study; Section 5
discusses the empirical ﬁndings, while Section 5 concludes the paper. 
2.  The GCC stock markets. 
The GCC was established on 11 November 1981, and it includes six
countries: Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the UAE. 
GCC countries are important players in the global oil market, as that
they possess 47% of veriﬁed oil reserves and they produce 23. 7% of
crude oil.  Saudi Arabia is the second largest crude oil producer in the
world, producing on average 13% of crude oil.  The contributions for
the rest GCC countries are 3. 6% for Kuwait, 1. 3% for Oman, 1. 9% for
Qatar, and 3. 9% for UAE.  Bahrain is the smallest producer with an average output of 50 thousand barrels a day (0. 06%). 3 As reported in Table 1,
oil revenues contribute signiﬁcantly to the economic and business
p. 162).  Note that the maximum foreign ownership in an Omani can range up to 100% in
the free zones.  Foreign ownership in certain countries, such as Saudi Arabia, is restricted
to GCC nationals. 
activities of the region, as they range from 15% of GDP in Bahrain to
53% of GDP in Kuwait.  Table 1 also shows that one of the main contributions of oil is through the trade balance, since fuel exports account from
42. 5% of total merchandise value in UAE up to 89. 1% in Kuwait. 
These indicators suggest that corporate cash ﬂows and economic
output can be very sensitive to oil price ﬂuctuations.  Moreover, companies which are directly related to oil production, occupy a considerable
proportion of the total capitalisation of the equity indices of the GCC
stock exchanges, with the exception of the Kuwaiti market which is
dominated by ﬁnancial services.  However, oil and gas in the bloc are
produced by national companies and therefore the proportion of the energy sector that is represented in stock exchanges is not necessarily
high.  For instance, Saudi Arabia lists only four traded companies
which comprise b2% of the total traded capital in the market. 4
Corporate cash ﬂows can be also indirectly related to oil price ﬂuctuations, given the heavy dependence of the region on oil.  Khandelwal
Name (2016) explain that this dependence may be channelled through
the supply chain for companies for which oil comprises a signiﬁcant
proportion of their variable costs, or through the close links of ﬁnancial
services with the oil industry in the region.  Moreover, given that oil
revenues are the main source of government funding,5 ﬁscal spending,
which in turn is channelled to a great extent to the private sector,
effectively depends on oil ﬂuctuations. 
Saudi Arabia is the leading exchange in the bloc in terms of size,
years of operation and liquidity, as implied by the turnover ratio
(Table 1).  The smallest and least liquid market is Bahrain, while the
Omani stock market is also relatively illiquid.  Moreover, compared to
other major emerging markets, GCC exchanges are small and less liquid,
while their capitalisation accounts for 0. 8% of global capitalization. 
Despite the recent modernisation efforts, GCC stock markets suffer
from several structural and regulatory deﬁciencies, which, combined
with the political uncertainty in the area, create a challenging corporate
environment.  GCC markets are segmented with signiﬁcant restrictions
on capital mobility and foreign ownership (Table 1), especially when
compared to other developed and emerging economies. 