
Studies have shown that gold extraction and processing can signiﬁcantly degrade natural environments (including soil and sediments,
water, and air quality) and, with that, human health and livelihoods
(Hilson, 2000.  Akpalu and Parks, 2007.  Obiri, 2007.  Leder Name, 2012. 
Saldarriaga-Isaza Name, 2013.  Ako Name, 2014.  Ansa-Asare Name, 2015). 
The pollution mainly occurs during gold extraction and processing,
which includes carbon-in-leach, heap leaching with cyanide, biological
oxidation and roasting (Hilson, 2002.  Leder Name, 2012).  However, the
existing laws in developing countries fail to effectively regulate the
gold mining industries leading to excessive environmental degradation
(Hilson, 2000). 
Thus, in gold-rich countries in Africa, gold miners, both large- and
small-scale, routinely discharge toxic chemicals such as mercury (typically used by small scale miners), cyanide and arsenic and their harmful
compounds into water bodies, exposing workers and residents to a
range of health risks including lower respiratory tract infections, cardiovascular diseases (Franchini and Mannucci, 2007, 2009, and Franchini
and Mannucci, 2012.  Mergler Name, 2007.  Banchirigah, 2008.  Obiri Name, 2010), skin infections, and cancerous infections (Amegbey and
Adimado, 2003.  Adei Name, 2011.  Obiri Name, 2010). 1 A recent review
of arsenic concentration in surface and underground water, for example, found mining as a major cause of high concentration of the hazardous substance in several African countries (Ahoulé Name, 2015).  Some of
the environmental and human damage can be irreversible (see e. g. ,
Naicker Name, 2003.  Stephens and Ahern, 2001). 
In Ghana, for example, several studies have documented heaped
waste materials at mining sites, which have resulted in the release of
toxic chemicals into the environment (see e. g. , Akabzaa Name, 2005. 
Essumang Name, 2007.  Yidana Name, 2007.  and Armah Name, 2010). 
The Council on Ethics of the Norwegian ‘Government Pension Fund
Global’ carried out a detailed survey on mining pollution at the oldest
gold mining town (Obuasi) and found evidence of severe environmental and health damage due to high level of concentration of arsenic, cyanide and heavy metals (e. g.  cadmium, manganese, lead and copper) in
water bodies (Leder Name, 2012).  An earlier study also cited eight cases
of cyanide spillage within a decade and a half (Amegbey and Adimado,
2003), which prompted the Ghana's Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) to remark that the nation is likely to experience water stress in
less than a decade (Banchirigah, 2008). 
In addition to water pollution, the use of heavy machinery in
extracting the ore, coupled with the surface mining techniques
commonly employed by miners in developing countries, generates substantial dust which can cause or exacerbate respiratory disorders
(Ayine, 2001.  ILO, 2005.  Kumah, 2006).  Yet, such damages are rarely internalized by the miners.  It has been argued that the strong desire to
earn foreign exchange from mineral extraction has weakened the resolve of resource-rich African states to pass, or enforce, mining-related
environmental regulations (McMahon, 2011).  In Ghana, although mining companies have generally improved their environmental reporting
in recent times, the ecosystem and health damage persist over the
long-term (Leder Name, 2012).  Moreover, the pollution generated by
small scale miners continues to escalate (Leder Name, 2012). 
Although a number of studies have been undertaken on the health
impact of gold extraction (see, e. g. , Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2013.  and
Currie Name, 2014), there is little research quantifying the welfare impact of mining externalities, especially in Africa.  To help ﬁll that gap,
this study presents a simple hedonic-type model that links private
healthcare costs (both preventive and curative) to exposure to gold
mining-related pollution, and empirically veriﬁes the model using
data from Ghana.  Our results support the hypothesis that, all else
being equal, healthcare expenditure is higher the closer the household
is to a tailing site or the mine. 
Furthermore, using anecdotal evidence about the relationship between
distance to the tailing site and concentration of nitrogen dioxide (NO2),
which is considered a surrogate for other toxic substances released during
mining activities (WHO, 2006), we are able to directly link pollution concentration to residents' willingness to accept (WTA) compensation due to
the mining pollution.  Other statistically signiﬁcant covariates of the
healthcare expenditure model include household income and age of the
household head, both of which positively impact the dependent variable. 
and subjective health status and the variable ‘health insurance paying a
greater portion of healthcare bills’, both of which had a negative impact. 
2.  An Overview of Gold Extraction and Extraction Externalities inGhana has produced and exported gold since the ﬁfteenth century
(Akabzaa and Darimani, 2001).  Before the nation's independence, gold
mining was controlled and restricted to proﬁt the European companies. 
After independence, however, increasing government involvement reduced foreign control of the sector.  Over time, the mining infrastructure
suffered neglect and the mines were operated inefﬁciently leading to
decline in proﬁts in the late 1960s through the dawn of the 1980s
(Akabzaa and Darimani, 2001).  A national decision was made in the
early 1980s to attract substantial injections of international capital (primarily European and more recently North American) into the sector. 
To make the mining sector more attractive to foreign investment,
Ghana's Minerals and Mining Law was passed in 1986, offering generous
capital allowances and concessions such as delayed or reduced income
taxes.  The speciﬁc ﬁscal incentives granted include a signiﬁcant reduction
in corporate tax rate, permission to write off three-fourth of capital investment against taxes in the ﬁrst year and one-half for subsequent years, a
reduction in royalty rate from 6 to 3%, and the scrapping of all other duties
and taxes (Akabzaa and Darimani, 2001.  Aryee, 2014).  The government
also permitted companies to use offshore bank accounts for the servicing
of loans, dividend payments, and expatriate staff remuneration.  Furthermore, the mining companies could retain between 25 and 45% of gross
foreign exchange earnings from minerals sales in company accounts. 
In response to these incentives, and with rising gold prices, between
1985 and 1990 alone eleven new mining companies became active in
the sector, with foreign participation representing an investment total
of US$541 million.  Overall production gradually recovered and by
1992 Ghana's gold production had surpassed 1 million ﬁne ounces
(i. e. , 31,103 kg), signiﬁcantly up from 327,000 in 1987. 
Output continued to rise, reaching 3. 2 million ﬁne ounces in 2013. 
This output expansion, signiﬁcantly, came on the heels of continued investment in the sector, which total approximately US$6. 9 billion between 2000 and 2011. 
There is little denying that the macroeconomic gains made by
Ghana's mining sector since 1986 have beneﬁted the economy in
terms of exports (see e. g. , Akabzaa, 2009.  Gough and Yankson, 2012). 
It is however argued that mining activity made only a marginal contribution to GDP.  generate limited job opportunities, especially for the individuals in mining communities.  took away farmlands and thereby
worsening the livelihoods of individuals within the mining communities (Anyemedu, 1992.  Essumang Name, 2007.  Armah Name, 2012. 
Boateng Name, 2012.  Hilson and Garforth, 2012.  Ferring Name, 2016). 
Throughout Ghana, there is sufﬁcient evidence of serious environmental and health damages due to gold mining activities (Ahmad and
Carboo, 2000.  Hilson and Nyame, 2006.  Leder Name, 2012.  Mensah Name, 2015).  Decades of laissez-faire and even reckless mining, tolerated
by a lax regulatory regime focused more on output than on health,
have resulted in increased concentrations of heavy metals and other
pollutants in numerous water bodies and soils (Bempah Name, 2013. 
Boateng Name, 2012.  Antwi-Agyei Name, 2009.  Armah Name, 2012).  This
has been accompanied by massive deforestation, the forced relocation
of entire communities due to mining activities, and the associated outright destruction of a wide range of cultural resources (Hilson, 2004. 
Britwum Name, 2001). 
Several reports have been made, both ofﬁcially and anecdotally, of
instances of cyanide mismanagement in gold mining areas, resulting
in the widespread contamination of freshwater sources, ﬁsh populations, and the crops on which many individuals within the mining communities depend for their survival.  According to Amegbey and Adimado
(2003), between 1989 and 2003 there were 11 ofﬁcially reported cyanide spillages in Tarkwa and Obuasi, located in the Western and Ashanti
Regions, respectively.  Most of these occurred with catastrophic consequences (Akabzaa, 2000).  Elevated concentrations of heavy metals in
various media such as soils, streams (including sediments), food crops
(e. g. , cassava and plantain), ﬁsh (e. g. , mudﬁsh), plants (e. g. , water
ferns and elephant grass) and humans have been reported. 
<Middle> The Basic Theoretical Model. 
The theoretical model employed in the study is an extension of the
work of Chang and Trivedi (2003).  Their model formalizes self-medication, which is a risky investment, by assuming that a rational utilitymaximizing agent balances the beneﬁts and costs associated with selfmedication.  Like Chang and Trivedi (2003), we assume that a rational
agent maximizes an expected utility function that depends on health
status (h) and consumption of a composite good (x), subject to a budget
constraint.  Let the utility function be deﬁned as this 
with ux N0, uh N0, uxh=uhxN0 and uxx,uhhb0.  Chang and Trivedi (2003)
assume that improvement in health status results from either professional care, which is relatively risk-free, or self-medication, which is
risky. 3 In this study, we assume that health status depends on
investment in health (M), which is a derived demand.  Because of a number of exogenous environmental factors, the returns to such an investment are partly deterministic and partly stochastic.  The stochastic
component is assumed to have a one-sided distribution.  Several factors
could account for the uncertain health outcome, including misdiagnosis
and reinfection resulting from repeated exposure to the emission of
dangerous gases from the mines or leakage of heavy metals to water
that is later used domestically.  As noted earlier, enormous amounts of
inorganic mercury and high concentrations of arsenic are present in
areas close to gold mines (see, e. g. , Smedley, 1996.  andTelmer and
Veiga, 2009).  The health status can therefore be deﬁned as this
where h0 is the initial or “endowed” health status (long-term
health), and r − ε is the return to healthcare investment, r being
the deterministic marginal return to the investment in health, and
ε being the stochastic marginal return.  Suppose the price of the composite good x is normalized to one.  Then the agent's budget constraint is this. 
Following Chang and Trivedi (2003), let the utility function be additive and separable in x and h, so that. 
Let μ=E(r−ε) be the expected returns on healthcare investment
and σ2=E(r−ε−μ)2 be the variance of (r−ε).  The mean-variance formulation of Eq.  (7) is this. 
Maximizing Eq.  (8) with respect to the choice variable (that is, M)
yields the following ﬁrst-order condition. 
Eq.  (9) stipulates that, in equilibrium, the marginal health beneﬁt from
an increased investment in health—that is, (ρ−ho−μM). μ−σ2M—must
balance the marginal utility cost of the investment, which is uM(B−M).  It
can easily be shown that Mdecreases in ho and σ2, but increases in B and μ. 
Thus, dM
N 0.  The implications are
that individuals with better long-term health status will make fewer investments in improving their health.  and secondly, that high variance of
the returns to health is likely to discourage healthcare spending.  On the
other hand, richer individuals will spend more on their healthcare, and
higher returns on healthcare expenditure are likely to stimulate
healthcare spending. 
Finally, let the stochastic component of the health outcome depend
on exposure to mining externalities, such as cyanide spillage, as well
as a vector of individual characteristics (A).  The assumption follows
Johansson's (1994) postulation that the impact of pollution on an
individual's health status cannot be predicted with certainty.  As a result,
μ=μ(z. A) and σ=σ(z. A), where z is a vector of mining externalities
(for example, nearness to the mining site, which is a proxy for exposure
to pollution, or noise pollution from blasting, etc. ).  It is hypothesized
that increased pollution decreases the expected returns to health expenditure, but the variance in pollution increases (i. e. , μz b0 and2 N0) so that dM
b0 .  We can then specify the general form of
healthcare investment equation as. 
Eq.  (10) is a hedonic-type equation, in which the economic cost
of healthcare (both preventive and curative) depends on the level
of environmental hazard to which an individual is exposed (z),
after controlling for other social, economic, and biophysical
characteristics. 
4.  Methodology. 
4. 1.  Primary Data Type and Source. 
The data for the empirical analysis were collected through cluster
sampling of 558 households in the Obuasi Municipality of the Ashanti
Region of Ghana between May and July 2014.  The municipality is approximately 162. 4 km2, and the Obuasi mine is the oldest gold mine
in the country.  It began operation in 1897 but the mining activities
were suspended in late 2014 due to heavy losses recorded.  Due to
high levels of mining pollution in the mining area, compared to all
other mining areas in the country, the mining company (AngloGold
Ashanti) estimated the rehabilitation costs upon closure to be the
highest.  According the most recent population census, the municipality
is predominantly urban (GSS, 2014a).  Gold mining and its related activities constitute the municipality's main industrial activity and employs
some 35% of its working population.  A questionnaire was administered
to each randomly selected household in a face-to-face interview.  Thus,
each relevant question on the questionnaire was read out in English language and/or the local language to the respondent and his/her response
was recorded.  During the interview, each respondent was assured that
his/her responses would remain strictly conﬁdential.  The questionnaire
included questions on demographic characteristics (e. g. , age and level of
education), location of residence, and perceived typical health status of
every household member.  There were also questions on the general
health condition of each household member (e. g. , illnesses and injuries
suffered, duration of illness and its effect on normal activities, and physician consultations during the previous 12 months).  Each household
member also indicated whether he/she had experienced any symptoms
out of a list of symptoms of respiratory tract infections, diabetes, skin
diseases, cardiovascular diseases and neurological disorders during a
period.  Out of these, the data listed in Table 1 were compiled. 
4. 2.  Secondary Data.  Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2) Concentration. 
According to Aragón and Rud (2015), the main gas pollutant in the
mining communities is nitrogen dioxide (NO2).  This is a yellow,
brown or orange coloured, acrid smelling gas.  The authors, following
Foster Name (2009) and Jayachandran (2009), obtained satellite imagery
from the Ozone Monitoring Instrument (OMI) at NASA to investigate
mining related pollution within mining areas.  The data on daily values
of tropospheric air conditions includes NO2, which originates mainly
from combustion of hydrocarbons by large-scale mines. 
Exposure to NO2, which occurs through inhalation, may result in mild
to catastrophic consequences.  Short Term Exposure Limit of the gas is
5 parts per million (ppm) (Queensland Department of Employment,
Economic Development and Innovation, 2011).  While low concentration
and duration of NO2 can result in mild irritation of upper respiratory tract,
prolonged inhalation could reach the air cell spaces of the lungs causing
pain, shortness of breath, pneumonitis, and excess ﬂuid in lung tissues
(Queensland Department of Employment, Economic Development and
Innovation, 2011).  Thus, the duration and concentration will determine
the extent of damage to health. 
We expected to ﬁnd that the distance from the residences to the
mining site correlates positively with households' exposure to pollution. 
Using their limited but highly correlated data points, we regressed NO2
on distance and found an elasticity coefﬁcient of −1. 87, with an
adjusted R-squared of 88% (see Table B1).  Thus, a 1% increase in the distance to the mine decreases the concentration of the gas by approximately 1. 9%.  The results were bootstrapped and found to be consistent
even after 1000 replications. 
4. 3.  Empirical Model. 
The speciﬁc functional form of hedonic models varies considerably
in the literature.  In reality, the speciﬁcation that ﬁts the data best depends on the issues under consideration and the data actually available. 
For example, in applying the model to pricing housing attributes, some
studies have found that linear speciﬁcations best ﬁt the data (see, e. g. ,
Rosen, 1974.  Cropper Name, 1988), while others have found non-linear
relationships (see, e. g.  Halvorsen and Pollakowski, 1981.  Cassel and
Mendelsohn, 1985.  Colwell and Munneke, 1999).  Nonetheless, some
studies advocate the use of nonparametric methods to avoid imposing
a priori restrictions on the distribution of the error terms in such models
(see, e. g. , Stock, 1989.  Meese and Wallace, 1991.  Thorsnes and
McMillen, 1998.  Redfearn, 2009).  Taking a cue from the literature
(and based on the data available), the following equation is proposed. 
It assumes that the relationship between healthcare cost and the quality
of the environment can be linearized here
with α1 b0, α2 N0, andθ b0 (based on Eqs.  (A1)–(A4) at Appendix A). 
where Mi is investment in health proxied by the per capita private
healthcare expenditure of household i, and ωi is a normally distributed
error term (i. e. , ωi~N(0,σω
2 )).  The private healthcare expenditure is calculated as household out-of-pocket expenditure on healthcare plus the
opportunity cost of lost productivity and healthcare-related travel costs. 
The ﬁgure is then divided by the household size to arrive at Mi.  As noted
by Chang and Trivedi (2003), the variable h0i is measured by the longterm health status of the individual.  However, because of a lack of
good data, they used variables reﬂecting current health status, for example, illness and injuries. 
In this study, we proxy the variable by the respondent's subjective
evaluation of the typical health conditions of household members, and
current health conditions.  The variable Bi is per capita household income, and the vector Ai includes the disease incidence of household
members, and the age, gender, years of education, and marital status
of the household head.  For the variable zi, the shortest distance between
the household and a major mine site was used as a proxy.  Instrumental
variable (IV) regression is estimated along with ordinary least squares5.  Results. 
5. 1.  Descriptive Statistics. 
The descriptive statistics of the data used for the empirical analysis
are presented in Table 1.  The average distance between the residences
of the respondents and the mining sites was 1. 4 km, with a standard deviation of 1. 7.  (The relatively high standard deviation implies that some
houses are much farther away from the mining sites than others. )
Nearly one-half (47%) of the households interviewed had at least
one case of lower respiratory tract infection, and on average the recurrence of skin diseases per household is 1. 1.  In other words, a skin infection recurred at least once in a household.  The mean per capita
household out-of-pocket healthcare expenditure, plus the opportunity
cost of lost productivity and healthcare-related travel cost, was approximately GHS 56, with a standard deviation of 49. 5 The per capita out-ofpocket healthcare expenditure in Ghana was GHS 49. 74 while the per
capita total household expenditure was GHS 3117.  The corresponding
ﬁgure for urban areas, which was higher than for rural areas, was GHS
3926 (GSS, 2014b).  From the data we collected in Obuasi Municipality,
which is predominantly urban area, the per capita household expenditure was about GHS 3900. 
The respondents (i. e. , household heads) were asked to evaluate their
health status on a scale of 0 to 100 subjectively. 6 Studies have found
that, when health information is lacking, individuals' subjective health
(SH) assessment can be regarded as a legitimate indicator of overall
health status (see, e. g. , Brook Name, 1979.  Ferraro Name, 1997).  The
mean health status was found to be 80. 5%, which is quite high.  Only
21% of the households interviewed were headed by females, and the average age of the household head was 41 years, with a standard deviation
of 11.  Only one-thirds of the household heads were unmarried, and
their average number of years of education was 11 years, implying
that most have at least a secondary school education.  Finally, only 19%
of households had most of their hospital bills paid by a non-member
of the household. 
5. 2.  Regression Results. 
Two sets of regression equations are estimated.  two-staged least
squares compared with ordinary least squares regressions.  Since it is
possible that higher personal healthcare spending can improve one's
health status while one's good long-term health status simultaneously
reduces one's health expenditure, we suspect a bi-causal relationship
between per capita household health status and per capita household
health expenditure.  We also suspect a bi-causal relationship between
per capita household expenditure and per capita household health expenditure.  As a result, we have estimated an instrumental variable
(IV) regression or two-staged least squares (2SLS) regression.  The following instruments are used.  per capita incidence of lower respiratory
tract infections, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and neurological disorders.  the recurrence of skin infections.  years of formal education. 
per capita household workforce, and a dummy variable for a collection
of activities undertaken to prevent ill-health or maintain good health. 
The results of the determinants of per capita household health expenditure within the mining community selected for the study are
shown in Tables B1 (Appendix B) and 2.  Table B1 shows only the ﬁrst
stage of the instrumental variable (IV) estimation, while Table 2
shows both OLS and IV or 2SLS regression results.  All the instruments
are signiﬁcant, an indication that they are correlated with the excluded
or endogenous variables.  The Shea's adjusted partial R-squared for per
capita household health status and for per capita household expenditure are 0. 175 and 0. 191, respectively.  The F-statistics reveal that the
lines are a good ﬁt at 1% signiﬁcance level (P b 0. 00). 
Moreover, the IV results (Table 2) show improved coefﬁcients compared to the OLS results.  Additionally, the Sargan's score with a P-value
of 0. 42 indicates that the instruments are uncorrelated with the error
term and that the IV equation is not mis-speciﬁed.  This means the excluded variables need not be included in the structural equation.  The
minimum eigenvalue of 14. 73 is greater than the 10% critical value for
the 2SLS relative bias of 10. 22, implying that we cannot reject the null
hypothesis that the instruments are weak.  These conspire to indicate
that the IV estimation is better than the OLS estimates. 
The estimated coefﬁcients of the following variables are statistically
signiﬁcant at 5% level or better.  distance from residence to the major
mining site, per capita household health status, per capita household expenditure, age of household head, and the dummy variable representing
whether or not the household itself pays most of its hospital bills. 
The coefﬁcient of perceived health status is negative and statistically
signiﬁcant at 1% level.  Thus, as predicted by our theoretical construct, individuals with better general health status, all else being equal, spend
less on healthcare.  This is consistent with the ﬁnding that healthcare
in Africa is primarily curative (Murthy and Okunade, 2009).  The corresponding elasticity coefﬁcient is −0. 03 (inelastic), which indicates that
healthcare expenditure is marginally sensitive to perceived health status. 
With regards to policy making, improving the health status of the residents may have positive feedback effect on health care expenditure. 
Also conﬁrmed is our hypothesis that higher income-earning households, all things being equal, spend more on healthcare.  The positive relationship between healthcare spending and real income has also been
found for an African-wide study (Murthy and Okunade, 2009).  The coefﬁcient is signiﬁcant at 5% level, with an elasticity coefﬁcient of 0. 41,
suggesting that healthcare is a normal good.  Since mining communities
in Ghana are bedevilled with high poverty rates, public policy aimed at
improving the incomes of the residents within the mining communities
are likely to promote good health. 
The data also support our critical hypothesis that distance to the
nearest major mining site, a proxy for exposure to pollution, is positively
related to healthcare expenditure.  The coefﬁcient of the variable is statistically signiﬁcant at 1% level and the corresponding elasticity coefﬁcient is −0. 12.  This implies that healthcare expenditure may increase
by 0. 12% as a result of a 1% decrease in the average distance from the
residence to the mining site.  Conversely, the marginal willingness to accept compensation for healthcare expenditure (curative and preventive) because of exposure to pollution from the mining activities, all
else being equal, is higher for households that are closer to the mining
sites.  Existing biochemical studies in Ghana have found signiﬁcant
health impacts of hazardous substances such as arsenic, mercury, cadmium and lead (Essumang, 2009.  Voegborlo Name, 2010.  Armah Name,Furthermore, households with relatively older heads spend less on
healthcare compared to those headed by younger individuals.  Surprisingly, the variable had the highest elasticity coefﬁcient, −0. 74.  This is
quite intriguing and may appear surprising, since older individuals are
expected to have greater health needs.  However, the ﬁndings from the
literature indicate that pure age effect on healthcare spending is an
open empirical question, which cannot be determined a priori.  A cross
country study on Africa found that national healthcare expenditure is
not signiﬁcantly determined by the proportion of the older population
within a country (Murthy and Okunade, 2009).  Also, as argued by
Zhang and Imai (2007), it is the ageing process and the likelihood of
death as one ages that leads to increased healthcare spending not the
age of an individual.  It is therefore unclear whether this ﬁnding is indicative of the income or earnings of the household heads (i. 