1.  Introduction Within the 1997 United Nations Watercourses Convention it is stated that riparian states “may, where necessary, consider” harmonizing their existing agreements with the principles of the convention, thus leaving the decision whether or not to reevaluate past agreements essentially up to riparian states (UN, 2014.  Article 3).  Yet, scholars have emphasized that reevaluation of past agreements is rather a necessity due to pressing economic and development needs, as well as new international agendas (Wegerich and Olsson, 2010.  Brooks et al. , 2013.  Salman, 2014.  Wouters, 2014).  Similarly, calls for reevaluation of water-sharing agreements have been voiced in connection with growing environmental concerns and climate change (Sanchez and Roberts, 2014.  World Economic Forum, 2015).  While there are large-scale studies on how treaties could be designed for coping best with new challenges and what mechanisms are utilized within agreements to address changes (e. g. , Fischhendler, 2004.  Stefano et al. , 2010.  Drieschova et al. , 2011.  De Bruyne and Fischhendler, 2013), there have been only a few studies systematically showing changes in agreements due to paths taken (Pak et al. , 2014.  Soliev et al. , 2015).  Adapting from the conﬂict and cooperation continuum approach on international basins (Yoffe et al. , 2003.  Zeitoun and Mirumachi, 2008.  Sadoff and Grey, 2005), in this article contrasting degrees of change in formal and de facto riparian water allocation are systematically analyzed within multiple transboundary sub-basins in the Ferghana Valley of Central Asia.  The purpose of the analysis is to identify key sources of path dependency determining various degrees of resistance to reallocation and understand how long-term dynamics between (a) drivers of pressure and (b) sources of path dependency can lead to various outcomes in riparian water allocation.  Therefore, the focus is not on one agreement, but on the history of agreements in three case studies selected using the “most similar” comparative method (Lijphart, 1971.  George and Bennett, 2005).  There is no longitudinal comparative study with an in-depth qualitative analysis such as this to be found in the current literature.  as Cox (2016.  230) explains, “obtaining high-quality longitudinal data relevant to the study of human-environment interactions is frequently prohibitively expensive. ” The Ferghana Valley, shared by Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan, presents an opportunity to apply such an approach, as it has a long history of changing water agreements on a large number of small transboundary tributaries with recent research documenting data of great detail and depth (e. g. , Abdullaev et al. , 2009.  Abdullaev and Rakhmatullaev, 2016.  Pak et al. , 2014.  Pak and Wegerich, 2014.  Platonov et al. , 2014.  SIC ICWC, 2011.  Soliev et al. , 2015.  Stucker et al. , 2012.  Wegerich et al. , 2015.  Wegerich et al. , 2016).  The early agreements on these transboundary basins go back to the 1940s.  Although historically these small tributaries were in the same country, the Soviet Union, due to the differences in institutional conditions related to individual tributaries, each of them has its own history of watersharing agreements.  We were particularly interested in cases where sources of path dependency provided strong, moderate, and weak resistance to reallocate over a long period of time to understand how, under conditions with similar pressure, established institutional arrangements can resist reform in various ways.  To understand the differences in these established institutional arrangements and their corresponding effects, dynamics in allocation decisions, protocols of meetings where watersharing agreements were reached, historical correspondence, reports on implementation, wider government documents such as laws, decrees, and basin management schemes, as well as broader literature reﬂecting the nature of riparian relationship in the Ferghana Valley and Central Asia (e. g. 