
Environmental management as a source of competitive advantage
continues to be studied by many researchers from a resource-based perspective.  The seminal studies by Hart (1995), Hart and Ahuja (1996),
Russo and Fouts (1997), Judge and Douglas (1998), Sharma and
Vredenburg (1998) and Hart and Dowell (2011) provide theoretical
support for abundant empirical literature that does not always conﬁrm
the “it pays to be green” hypothesis.  Indeed, studies on whether investment in environmental protection generates a positive economic performance in ﬁrms continue to feed the controversy (Wagner Name,
2002; Cainelli Name, 2013; Fujii Name, 2013; Trumpp and Guenther,Two signiﬁcant justiﬁcations can be presented to attempt to clarify
this controversy.  The ﬁrst is related to the design of environmental
strategy.  Environmental strategy can be designed in different ways,
and the chosen design conditions the possibility of obtaining positive
economic results.  Russo and Fouts (1997) were some of the ﬁrst authors
to underline the economic consequences of a compliance strategy, relative to a go-beyond-compliance strategy.  Since then, studies by Klassen
and Whybark (1999), Christmann (2000), King and Lenox (2002),
Gonzalez-Benito and Gonzalez-Benito (2005), Aragón-Correa Name
(2008), Guenster Name (2011), Sambasivan Name (2013) or Ghisetti
and Rennings (2014) provide empirical evidence that the largely preventive (versus corrective) nature and the proactivity of action taken (deﬁned as the tendency to anticipate and go beyond mere regulatory
compliance and normal industry standards) determines the likelihood
of said action having a positive effect on economic performance. 
The second argument that can justify mixed results in the study of
the win-win hypothesis is related to the conditions and factors accompanying the implementation of environmental strategy.  The idea that
the relationship between environmental and economic performance
depends on situational factors and external or internal conditions has
been highlighted by many authors, such as Christmann (2000),
Wagner and Schaltegger (2003), Cainelli Name (2013), Antonioli Name
(2014), Amores-Salvadó Name (2015) and Mazzanti Name (2016). 
This study empirically analyzes the economic consequences of environmental protection in ﬁrms and considers how the above two factors
can condition the sign of this relationship.  As a ﬁrst precaution, we have
deﬁned our object of study, environmental strategy, by considering
whether it has been designed proactively.  In fact, we have not studied
the economic consequences of environmental protection in the broad
sense but those of environmental proactivity.  With this purpose and
based on the deﬁnitions proposed by authors such as Sharma and
Vredenburg (1998), Aragón-Correa and Sharma (2003), Buysse and
Verbeke (2003) and Murillo Name (2008), we interpret environmental
proactivity as the ﬁrm's tendency to voluntarily apply environmental
protection measures, largely based on prevention, to anticipate environmental protection requirements, and to go beyond regulatory compliance and the measures generally adopted in industry.  Secondly, we
are interested in the conditions that concur and complement or hinder
the implementation of environmental proactivity and that can condition the possibility of obtaining economic results. 
The objective of this study is to analyze if the economic consequences of environmental proactivity in ﬁrms are better when the
ﬁrms are also proactive in technological innovation and if this
additional advantage is sustainable in dynamic environments. 
Therefore, we investigate the possibility of positive complementarities between environmental and technological proactivity, and the
stability and usefulness of these complementarities in dynamic
environments. 
The idea that spending resources on environmental protection generates complementarities with other resources (especially innovation
and organizational change) is rooted in the literature (Wagner, 2007;
Antonioli Name, 2013, 2014; Gilli Name, 2014; Mazzanti Name, 2016 for
a review).  The effect of these complementarities on business results
has been less studied, especially regarding the economic results of
ﬁrms.  In addition, most of the studies of how complementarities affect
economic results (Christmann, 2000; Hall and Wagner, 2012;
Hottenrott Name, 2012; Antonioli Name, 2014; Amores-Salvadó Name,
2015; Rivera-Torres Name, 2015) use subjective measures based on information obtained from surveys and/or place less importance on the
environmental strategy's degree of proactivity. 
In this research, we delve deeper into the study of complementarities arising from the implementation of a proactive environmental
strategy.  We analyze the effect of these complementarities on the
company's ability to obtain medium- and long-term economic results
and analyze whether such an advantage is sustainable in dynamic environments.  The conclusions obtained reinforce the interpretation of environmental proactivity as a dynamic capacity. 
Some of this paper's additional contributions to the previous literature on the topic are, ﬁrstly, a persuasive and objective measurement
of the ﬁrm's efforts regarding both environmental protection and innovation in general, which considers the mean investment efforts made by
industry ﬁrms to calculate the degree of environmental and technological proactivity.  Unlike most previous studies, we particularly emphasize the proactivity concept in both environmental and technological
areas.  Secondly, this study is based on an objective measurement of economic results, which considers the ﬁrm's capability to generate returns
in the medium and long term. 
The application of panel data econometrics to the estimation of coefﬁcients is another distinctive aspect of this study.  This method enables
the estimation to incorporate the speciﬁc effects of each ﬁrm (for instance, effects related to expertise, culture or resources and capabilities)
that have an impact on its performance, but are not measured by the regressors in the model. 
This study is divided into six sections.  The second and third review
the related literature and present the theoretical arguments for characterizing environmental proactivity as a dynamic capability, which enables a sustainable advantage to be taken of complementarities with
other resources related to the innovation.  The fourth describes the samples, the variables used and the methodology.  The ﬁfth presents the
results, and the last section summarizes and discusses the main conclusions arising from this research. 
2.  Environmental Proactivity and Innovation as Complementary Resources: The Dynamic Capabilities Perspective. 
In some seminal papers that deﬁne the Porter hypothesis, Porter
(1991), Porter and Van der Linde (1995a, b), Esty and Porter (1998),
and others establish arguments against the traditional view that there
is a trade-off between environmental and ﬁnancial results and maintain
that environmental regulations generate stimuli for innovation in the
process of searching for less polluting and more efﬁcient production
methods capable of generating competitive advantages.  Hart (1995) refers to these arguments from the natural resource-based view of the
ﬁrm and argues that environmental management capabilities improve
environmental performance while providing competitive advantages
through cost reductions, anticipating competitors and improving stakeholder relations.  These arguments were further supported and extended in multiple studies identifying the resources and capabilities related
to environmental protection that help to create competitive advantages
(Russo and Fouts, 1997; Sharma and Vredenburg, 1998; Bansal, 2005;
Walls Name, 2008). 
Twenty years after the Porter hypothesis, however, the results found
in the empirical literature that has studied this win-win perspective are
contradictory and suggest that the relationship between environmental
and economic performance is not as clear as it would appear. 1 The possibility of complementarities between resources spent on environmental protection and other internal resources is an aspect scarcely
considered in the empirical literature that can explain the lack of consensus about the relationship between environmental and economic
performance (Cainelli Name, 2013; Amores-Salvadó Name, 2015).  In this
regard, Cainelli Name (2013) maintain that an argument that challenges
the conventional pessimistic view of a trade-off between environmental
and economic performance resides in complementarities and economies of scale and scope, which might lead to situations where environmental
investment generates greater positive economic results. 
Possibly inﬂuenced by the Porter hypothesis, most of the literature on
complementarities between environmental resources and other types
of resources focuses on those related to either technological or organizational innovation (such as Christmann, 2000; Hottenrott Name, 2012;
Antonioli Name, 2014; Amores-Salvadó Name, 2015; Rivera-Torres Name,
2015). 2 One of the ﬁrst works in this respect is by Christmann (2000),
who highlights the important role of a company's existing resources
and capabilities for innovation.  In her research, from data collected
from a sample of US chemical ﬁrms, Christmann (2000) ﬁnds evidence
that capabilities for process innovation and implementation are complementary assets that moderate the relationship between process-focused environmental practices and cost advantages.  Christmann
(2000) focuses on pollution prevention technologies, which, unlike pollution control technologies, have to be integrated in the production process and involve signiﬁcant changes in production processes and
practices.  Based on this argument, Christmann (2000) suggests and empirically shows that successful implementation of pollution prevention
technologies requires the ﬁrm to be able to innovate and make changes
to its production process.  Without these capabilities, the expected advantage of cost savings from process-focused prevention pollution practices is not guaranteed. 