 1.  Introduction 1. 1.  No Net Loss.  Environmental policies and legislation that incorporate a ‘no net loss’ (NNL) of biodiversity objective have been widely adopted over recent decades (Maron et al. , 2016).  The theoretical assumption underlying all approaches to NNL is that if the negative biodiversity impacts associated with economic development are quantiﬁed, and commensurate biodiversity gains correspondingly achieved through additional conservation interventions, then losses and gains can be summed to demonstrate a neutral net outcome for nature (Bull et al. , 2013a).  Normally, when seeking NNL, it is required that the impacts predicted to occur as a result of a given development project are mitigated through a sequential ‘mitigation hierarchy’ of preferred measures.  A widespread framing of the mitigation hierarchy is ‘avoid, minimize, remediate, offset’ i. e.  predicted impacts are ﬁrst avoided or minimized wherever possible, then remediated immediately if they are only temporary, and ﬁnally, all residual predicted impacts are compensated for through biodiversity offsets (Gardner et al. , 2013.  Bull et al. , 2016).  The most controversial component of the mitigation hierarchy is biodiversity offsetting (Apostolopoulou and Adams, 2017.  Maron et al. , 2016).  Biodiversity offsets (henceforth, offsets) involve the implementation of conservation actions, such as habitat creation, that provide quantiﬁed biodiversity gains which would not have been achieved otherwise – thereby fully and demonstrably compensating for any unavoidable impacts from the associated development project.  Out of this simple premise, a large body of theoretical literature has emerged, detailing what form and magnitude the biodiversity gains that constitute offsets must take in order to ensure that the overarching NNL objective is met (Calvet et al. , 2015).  Widely held theoretical principles of good practice for biodiversity offsetting include that.  offset gains should be realised in close proximity to development losses (Pilgrim et al. , 2013).  gains must be larger than losses by some factor, to account for restoration uncertainties and other considerations (Moilanen et al. , 2009).  and, NNL should be explicitly calculated against some counterfactual capturing background biodiversity trends (Bull et al. , 2014).  The ﬁrst of these principles, the proximity requirement, can also be interpreted as meaning ‘functional’ proximity e. g.  a wetland offset being implemented in the same watershed as the development for which it compensates.  In the case of either spatial or functional proximity, the assumed preference for proximity means that offsets in different countries to the associated development have not widely been countenanced.  Environmental policies involving trade-offs can be difﬁcult to implement if local stakeholders do not view the trades favourably (Daw et al. , 2015).  Furthermore, in addition to technical requirements, the amount of ecological compensation necessary to achieve NNL is thought to require consideration as to what local stakeholders are willing to accept (Bull et al. , 2017).  For both reasons, the potential perception of biodiversity offsets held by laypeople should be an important consideration in NNL policy development.  Survey methods have previously been employed to understand perspectives on the effectiveness of offsetting as a process from those involved in NNL trades (Coggan et al. , 2013.  Vaissière and Levrel, 2015), and to understand perceived offset needs from other local stakeholders (Burton et al. , 2016.  Kermagoret et al. , 2016).  However, to date, there has been no study that determines whether, or to what extent, basic principles underlying NNL are generally intuitive to those with little prior experience of the concept.  Consequently, in this article, we focus upon stated choices for biodiversity compensation requirements from survey participants who are not NNL experts, and compare this with the logic underlying offsetting.  In particular, we are interested in the application of NNL in a trans-boundary conservation context, how much compensation participants consider necessary, and how this amount is inﬂuenced by different background biodiversity trends. 