
After the equity market collapsed in 2000, many institutions considered commodities a new asset class after the widely publicized
discovery of a negative correlation between commodity returns
and stock returns by Gorton and Rouwenhorst (2006) and Erb and
Harvey (2006).  As a result, billions of investment dollars ﬂowed
into commodity markets from ﬁnancial institutions, insurance
companies, pension funds, foundations, hedge funds, and wealthy
individuals (Wang Name, 2015.  Mi Name, 2017).  A sharp increase in
the popularity of commodity investing in the past decade has triggered
an unprecedented inﬂow of institutional funds into commodity futures
markets, referred to as the ﬁnancialization of commodities (Basak and
Pavlova, 2016).  In recent years, many experts have noticed the
inﬂuence of ﬁnancialization on commodity markets or the correlation
between commodity markets and ﬁnancial markets. 
As stated by Tang and Xiong (2012), the large index investment
ﬂow precipitated a fundamental process of ﬁnancialization among commodity markets, and the vast inﬂows led to a process of integration
of commodity futures markets with other ﬁnancial markets in which
portfolio rebalancing of index investors can cause volatility spillovers
from outside to commodity markets.  Speciﬁcally, they document that
the co-movement between oil and other commodities has risen dramatically following the inﬂow of institutional investors starting fromRecently, Adams and Glück (2015) show that large inﬂows into
commodity investments, i. e. , ﬁnancialization, has changed the behavior
and dependence structure between commodities and the general stock
market, and predict that the spillovers between commodities and the
stock market to remain high in the future, given that institutional investors continue to target funds into commodities.  Basak and Pavlova
(2016) ﬁnd that with ﬁnancialization, i. e. , in the presence of institutional investors, the prices and volatilities of all commodity futures go up,
but more so for the index futures than for non-index ones.  Meanwhile,
the correlations among commodity futures as well as in equitycommodity correlations also increase, with higher increase for index
commodities. 
Some authors focus on the ﬁnancialization related with oil markets. 
Based on the empirical results, Juvenal and Petrella (2015) support the
view that the recent oil price increase is mainly driven by the strength
of global demand but that the ﬁnancialization process of commodity
markets also plays a role.  Yin and Yang (2016) conﬁrm that the
predictive power of technical indicators outperforms the wellknown macroeconomic variables, and their ability to predict the oil
price stems in part from its ability to predict changes in sentiment,
suggesting the ﬁnancialization of oil markets. 
Besides, stronger investor interest in commodities may create
closer integration with conventional asset markets (Babcock, 2012. 
Silvennoinen and Thorp, 2013.  Yao Name, 2017).  as a result, the
ﬁnancialization process also enhances the correlation between commodity markets and ﬁnancial markets.  In order to assess how commodities and ﬁnancial markets are inter-related during 1983–2013, Aboura
and Chevallier (2015) introduce a ‘volatility surprise’ component into
the asymmetric DCC with one exogenous variable (ADCCX) framework,
and ﬁnd that return and volatility spillovers do exist between commodity and ﬁnancial markets and that in turn, their relative impact on each
other is very substantial.  Silvennoinen and Thorp (2013) estimate
sudden and gradual changes in correlation among stocks, bonds and
commodity futures returns, and ﬁnd that most correlations begin the
1990s near zero but closer integration emerges around the early
2000s and reaches peaks during the recent crisis, and higher volatility
index (VIX) also increases commodity returns correlation with equity
returns for about half the pairs, indicating closer integration. 
Due to the wide openness and free movement for investment funds
in the U. S.  stock market, international crude oil and natural gas markets,
a large number of investment funds can swarm into and out of these
markets with limited restrictions and the dynamics of stock market
volatility becomes a crucial impetus for crude oil and natural gas price
ﬂuctuations and investment decisions.  Meanwhile, crude oil and natural
gas play strategic roles in social economic development around the
world, and the extreme volatility of crude oil and natural gas prices
tends to signiﬁcantly affect the economic situation and stock market
returns (Aboura and Chevallier, 2016).  As a result, there can be found
close interaction among these markets.  in particular, the inﬂuence of
stock market instability on crude oil and natural gas markets has
received extensive attention from academics, practitioners and
government (Zhang and Wei, 2011.  Mohanty Name, 2011. 