 
We provide evidence on the effects of bank mergers and acquisitions (M&As) in the U. S.  on borrowers’ voluntary disclosure of ﬁrm-speciﬁc information to public ﬁnancial markets.  The past three decades have witnessed waves of consolidations 
through M&As in the U. S.  banking industry.  This trend has signiﬁcantly reduced the number of banking institutions, and a 
few large banks now hold the bulk of assets.  Researchers argue that the consolidation has fundamentally altered the nature 
of banks as ﬁnancial intermediaries, both directly by affecting how banks monitor and ﬁnance borrowers (e. g. , changing the 
type and nature of products and services banks offer), and indirectly by affecting borrowers’ demand for products and services from alternative (public) ﬁnancial markets.  Evidence on how bank mergers affect borrowers’ disclosure adds to our 
understanding of their consequences, and contributes to the growing literature that seeks to understand how ﬁrms’ incentive to produce and disseminate public information is affected by various institutional mechanisms in a country’s ﬁnancial 
markets (e. g. , Ball Name, 20 0 0; Leuz Name, 2003; Bushman Name, 2004 ).  Furthermore, to the extent that public information 
is a key determinant of the development of stock markets, such evidence can shed light on the interaction between public 
stock markets and bank markets ( Allen and Gale, 20 0 0; Levine, 2005 ).  
We posit that bank mergers affect borrowers’ incentive to disclose information publicly by affecting the monitoring and 
ﬁnancing services provided by banks.  Prior work, however, has not reached consensus on the speciﬁc nature and degree 
of the monitoring and ﬁnancing effects of bank mergers, especially for publicly listed borrowers.  Therefore, whether bank 
mergers can cause economically meaningful public information spillover through increased disclosure by borrowers is ex 
ante unclear and ultimately an empirical question.  
On the monitoring side, mergers can change borrowers’ disclosure incentives by changing the nature and extent of bank 
monitoring.  Traditional banking literature emphasizes the unique role played by banks because of their ability to produce 
soft, private information about their borrowers.  This ability allows banks to serve as delegated monitors for public capital 
providers who ﬁnd it diﬃcult to monitor ﬁrms for which much of the information is soft (e. g. , Diamond, 1984, 1991; Fama, 
1985 ).  Following bank mergers, borrowers’ incentive to disclose may increase or decrease depending on how mergers affect 
bank monitoring.  On one hand, mergers can alter the nature of bank monitoring from being more soft information based to 
being more hard information based, as mergers create more complex and hierarchical organizations that are less effective 
at collecting and processing soft information but may be more eﬃcient at processing hard information (e. g. , Stein, 2002; 
Berger Name, 2005 ).  This can lead to increased public disclosure by borrowers for two reasons.  First, merged banks themselves may rely more on hard information that can be eﬃciently collected through public disclosures ( Gormley Name, 2012 ).  
Second, to the extent that banks’ comparative advantage in monitoring primarily emanates from their ability to process soft 
information, public capital providers may rely less on bank monitoring after mergers and instead demand additional public 
disclosure to facilitate their own monitoring efforts.  On the other hand, to the extent that mergers discipline banks plagued 
by agency problems, monitoring effort may increase at banks that did not suﬃciently monitor their borrowers prior to the 
mergers.  This may increase the willingness of public capital providers to delegate the monitoring role to banks, reducing 
the public capital providers’ demand for public disclosure. 