 1.  Introduction Many studies explore the effects of regulatory monitoring and enforcement activities on the subsequent behavior of facilities constrained by regulatory laws.  These regulatory activities are effective if they prompt facilities to improve their compliance with laws.  From the standard theory of deterrence (Becker, 1968), regulatory monitoring and enforcement activities prompt subsequent improvements in compliance by deterring non-compliance through increases in either the certainty of punishment, severity of punishment, or both.  However, many studies identify alternative, non-monetary motivations for complying with regulatory laws. 1 As the most prominent alternative motivation, regulated facilities may be intrinsically motivated to comply with regulatory laws.  Intrinsic motivation involves many dimensions, such as external refs, e. g. , adhering to professional norms, and internal refs, e. g. , adhering to one's own self-identity as law abiding or cooperative.  Our study extends the standard theory of deterrence by incorporating these additional motivations into our conceptual framework.  Using this framework, we explore regulated facilities' perceptions of the effectiveness of regulatory monitoring and enforcement efforts for inducing compliance with regulatory laws.  In particular, our study explores the inﬂuence of these perceptions on facilities' responses to regulatory inspections and enforcement actions conducted at a given facility (“speciﬁc deterrence”) or other similar facilities (“general deterrence”).  No previous study explores this dimension of regulatory monitoring and enforcement.  As the closest topic, various studies explore regulated facilities' perceptions of the fairness of environmental protection laws (Lazarus, 1997.  Lazarus, 1993.  Tarlock, 1992.  Hsu, 2004.  Schroeder, 1993.  Zinn, 2002.  Wiener, 1999).  For example, environmental regulation can be perceived by regulated entities as “unfair” partially because it does not provide ﬂexible means of compliance (Zinn, 2002).  Within this literature, surprisingly few studies explore the issue of enforcement fairness within the realm of compliance with environmental protection laws (Rechtschaffen, 1998.  Kagan, 1994.  Costle, 1982.  White, 1996).  Earnhart et al.  (2016) explores the link from the perceived fairness of environmental enforcement on regulated facilities' compliance with efﬂuent limits, ﬁnding that greater fairness undermines the extent of compliance.  speciﬁcally, facilities who perceive that their regulators treat them fairly “always” comply less with their efﬂuent limits than facilities who perceive that their regulators only treat them fairly “sometimes”.  Another literature explores regulated facilities' responses to regulatory monitoring and enforcement (e. g. , Earnhart, 2004a.  Earnhart, 2009.  Earnhart and Segerson, 2012).  Gray and Shimshack (2011) survey the evidence regarding environmental enforcement, concluding that both monitoring and enforcement improve compliance, proving generally effective deterrents.  None of these previous studies explores the role played by the perception of enforcement effectiveness.  In fact, because these studies adopt the standard theory of deterrence, there is no role for factors other than pecuniary (extrinsic) motivations.  Yet evidence suggests that non-monetary or intrinsic motivations may be relevant even for regulated ﬁrms.  For example, several studies demonstrate the importance of enforcement style.  Short and Toffel (2010) ﬁnd that explicit threats can reduce compliance with environmental regulations, while both Winter and May (2001) and Earnhart and Glicksman (2015) demonstrate that coercive enforcement styles can be counter-productive.  These ﬁndings are consistent with aggressive enforcement styles crowding out the intrinsic motivation to comply or cooperate with regulators.  To explore the different paths through which perceptions of effectiveness might inﬂuence compliance decisions, we develop a general conceptual framework that includes both standard monetary incentives and behavioral factors such as intrinsic motivation.  Beyond these scholarly contributions, our study's results possess policy implications.  As long as perceptions inﬂuence the effects of government interventions on environmental compliance, policymakers – the EPA and state environmental protection agencies – should incorporate this insight into their enforcement of environmental protectionFor our empirical analysis, we examine the Clean Water Act, which restricts discharges from point sources, such as industrial factories, by imposing discharge limits through issued permits.  Environmental protection agencies induce compliance with these discharge limits by conducting inspections and taking enforcement actions.  As our sample, we examine chemical manufacturing facilities permitted under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) during the years 2002 to 2004.  Using an original survey of these facilities, we collect data on facilities' self-reported perceptions of the effectiveness of regulatory monitoring and enforcement activities.  One survey question asks whether the respondent believes that inspections effectively induce chemical facilities to comply with discharge limits.  a second question asks whether the respondent believes that monetary ﬁnes effectively induce chemical facilities to comply.  For each question, respondents chose from four categories.  deﬁnitely not, probably not, probably yes, and deﬁnitely yes.  We construct two perception indicators by contrasting “yes” categories and “not” categories.  Our empirical analysis interacts these perception indicators with standard measures of inspection- and enforcement-related deterrence to assess whether facilities that perceive regulatory monitoring and enforcement activities as effective respond differently to actual monitoring and enforcement activities conducted against the individual facility or similar facilities.  We investigate both speciﬁc and general deterrence and state and federal inspections.  We ﬁnd that, on average, federal inspection-related general deterrence is the only effective means of improving the extent of compliance.  However, when we estimate the effects separately for those who perceive enforcement to be effective and those who do not, our conclusions differ substantially.  For facilities that perceive enforcement to be effective, increased deterrence of any type generates little gain, with only federal inspection-related general deterrence (marginally) signiﬁcantly affecting the extent of compliance.  For managers who already perceive enforcement to be effective, increased deterrence does not change the extent of compliance.  The effects on those who perceive enforcement to be ineffective are very different.  In particular, the actual experience of being inspected (speciﬁc deterrence) by a state agency proves effective, while greater state inspection-related general deterrence does not.  Greater general deterrence from federal inspections is also effective.  Our results reveal that a complex set of motivations inﬂuence the compliance decisions of environmental managers.  2.  Regulatory Context.  Our empirical analysis examines the wastewater discharged by U. S.  chemical manufacturing facilities regulated under the U. S.  Clean Water Act's NPDES system between 2003 and 2004.  Environmental protection agencies issue facility-speciﬁc permits to facilities regulated as point sources.  These permits identify the pollutant-speciﬁc discharge limits with which facilities must comply.  Due to considerations over local ambient water quality, wastewater discharge limits vary across facilities and time regardless of sector.  NPDES permits require regulated facilities to monitor and self-report their discharges on a regular basis. 2 By comparing these reported discharges to permitted discharges, we calculate the “discharge ratio”, which measures the extent of compliance.  To induce compliance with discharge limits, the EPA and state agencies periodically inspect facilities and take enforcement actions as needed.  Nearly all states possess “primacy” to implement the NPDES system.  These authorized state agencies are primarily responsible for monitoring and enforcement.  However, the EPA retains authority to monitor and sanction facilities.  Inspections are a key component of environmental agencies' efforts to collect evidence for enforcement (Wasserman, 1984), maintain a regulatory presence (EPA, 1990), and offer technical assistance as opportunities arise.  Federal and state agencies use a mixture of informal enforcement actions (e. g. , warning letters) and formal enforcement actions (e. g. , ﬁnes).  Our analysis considers both federal and state inspections and all types of federal enforcement actions.  ﬁnes, other formal enforcement actions, and informal enforcement actions.  Our empirical analysis focuses on chemical manufacturing facilities permitted under the U. S.  Clean Water Act during the years 2002 to 2004.  This focus on a single sector is consistent with other empirical studies of industrial pollution (e. g. , Laplante and Rilstone, 1996.  Barla, 2007.  Earnhart, 2009.  Earnhart and Harrington, 2014). 3 3.  Conceptual Framework.  This section offers a simple conceptual framework for heuristically deriving competing hypotheses, which our empirical analysis tests.  Our framework incorporates three motivations for complying with environmental protection laws.  extrinsic motivation, intrinsic motivation, and social signaling (Ariely et al. , 2009.  Gneezy et al. , 2011.  Bowles and Polania-Reyes, 2012).  Hypothesis H1A.  Increases in either the inspection frequency or ﬁne magnitude are effective at improving compliance.  Compliance involves both beneﬁts and costs.  The manager of a regulated facility chooses the extent of compliance to maximize the net beneﬁts of compliance.  According to the standard model of enforcement (Becker, 1968.  Polinsky and Shavell, 2000), deterrence depends exclusively on explicit monetary disincentives or extrinsic motivation.  Increases in either the likelihood or severity of punishment increase compliance.  i. e.  enforcement is effective at improving compliance.  The manager bears at least partially the costs stemming from compliance efforts as long as her contract connects proﬁts to managerial compensation and compliance efforts lower proﬁts.  Similarly, the manager bears at least partially the costs of non-compliance, which includes the hassle of regulatory monitoring inspections, the monetary sting of ﬁnes, and the external impacts associated with other forms of enforcement (e. g. , loss of consumer and investor support).  Hypothesis H1B.  Increases in either the inspection frequency or ﬁne magnitude are ineffective or counter-productive at improving compliance.  In addition to extrinsic motivation, a manager may be intrinsically motivated to cooperate with regulators or abide by the law, or use compliance to signal adherence with professional and social norms to regulators, a local community, and the market.  Gneezy et al.  (2011) and Bowles and Polania-Reyes (2012) summarize the evidence showing how raising monetary incentives often crowds out these other motivations.  For example, the signaling potential of compliance decisions is strongest when extrinsic motivation is weak (Ariely et al. , 2009). 4 If increased enforcement crowds out the intrinsic or signaling motivations for compliance, then increased enforcement may fail to improve compliance or may even lower compliance (Winter and May, 2001.  Short and Toffel, 2010.  Earnhart and Glicksman, 2015).  Further, while theoretical models assume that inspection probabilities and ﬁne sizes are known, in reality, facility managers must form expectations of these amounts based on their own experiences (speciﬁc deterrence) and the experiences of other similar facilities (general deterrence).  This formation of expectations creates the potential for additional undermining factors to operate.  The manager interprets observations about other facilities' experiences through the lens of her perception of how the enforcement process works.  For example, if the manager perceives that inspection budgets are ﬁxed, then observing more inspections at other facilities may be interpreted as a lower likelihood of future inspections for her own facility, resulting in lower compliance. 5 This effect reﬂects an additional countervailing force in the event of greater general deterrence.  Hypothesis H2A.  Increases in either inspection frequency or ﬁne magnitude generate the same impact on compliance regardless of manager perceptions.  Facility managers are heterogeneous in their perceptions regarding the effectiveness of regulatory enforcement.  However, according to the standard model of enforcement, these perceptions are irrelevant and should not alter managerial responses to regulatory interventions.  Hypothesis H2B.  Increases in either inspection frequency or ﬁne magnitude are more effective at improving compliance for managers who perceive enforcement actions to be effective than for managers who perceive them to be ineffective.  This hypothesis could hold if manager perceptions are related to the importance of non-pecuniary factors in their decision making.  Speciﬁcally, if non-pecuniary motivations play only a minor role for managers who believe that enforcement is effective, yet these motivations play a major role for managers who perceive enforcement to be ineffective, then the crowding out of alternative motivations from increased enforcement is greater for managers who perceive enforcement is ineffective.  Hypothesis H2C.  Increases in either inspection frequency or ﬁne magnitude are less effective at improving compliance for managers who perceive enforcement actions to be effective than managers who perceive them to be ineffective.  Alternatively, manager perceptions might reﬂect their subjective estimates of the likelihood and magnitude of enforcement.  Managers might perceive enforcement as effective if they believe that inspection likelihoods and ﬁne magnitudes are sufﬁciently high and perceive enforcement as ineffective when their estimates of enforcement are low.  The observation of greater enforcement should lead both types of manager to revise upwards their subjective estimates of enforcement.  However, this upward revision might be greater for managers who consider enforcement ineffective.  <Middle> Econometric Framework.  To test these hypotheses, we construct an econometric framework that reﬂects the theoretical framework, while adding control factors.  In each period, the manager operating a regulated facility decides on its extent of compliance, measured by the ratio of actual to permitted discharges (“discharge ratio”), which represents the dependent variable (Earnhart, 2004a, 2004b, 2004c.  Earnhart, 2009.  Earnhart and Segerson, 2012).  We also formulate a set of primary explanatory variables measuring regulatory enforcement and monitoring.  Each facility must form expectations about monitoring and enforcement before selecting its extent of compliance.  Our empirical analysis assumes that each facility bases its expectations of future monitoring and enforcement on the experiences of other similar facilities along with its own recent experiences (Shimshack and Ward, 2005.  Earnhart, 2004a, 2004b, 2004c.  Earnhart, 2009).  General deterrence reﬂects the ex ante general “threat” of future punishment based on the recent experiences of other facilities with regulatory interventions (Sah, 1991.  Cohen, 2000).  Speciﬁc deterrence adjusts this general threat based on the speciﬁc enforcement and monitoring experiences of particular facilities in the recent past (Cohen, 2000.  Earnhart and Friesen, 2013).  Since facilities most likely need weeks or perhaps months to respond to their own and others' experiences with monitoring and enforcement, our analysis lags the measures of inspections and enforcement actions (Earnhart, 2004a, 2004b.  Earnhart, 2009.  Shimshack and Ward, 2005).  Based on standard deterrence theory, deterrence divides into punishment certainty and punishment severity, with inspections and ﬁnes playing different deterrent roles.  We interpret inspections as a measure of punishment certainty and ﬁnes as a measure of punishment severity.  To improve separation between the certainty and severity of punishment, we use the ﬁne conditional average amount, i. e. , dollars per imposed ﬁne, as our severity measure.  Based on these measures, we construct particular deterrence factors, starting with inspection-based measures of punishment certainty.  For the general deterrence measure, we calculate the aggregate count of inspections against all other similar facilities – major chemical manufacturing facilities operating in the same state – over the preceding 12-month period.  Then we divide the aggregate count of inspections by the number of months other major chemical facilities were operating in each state over the 12-month period.  For the speciﬁc deterrence measure, we assess inspections conducted at the individual facility in the preceding 12-month period, treating these lagged inspections as an exogenous regressor. 6 As with general deterrence, we divide the number of inspections by the number of months a particular facility was active in the preceding 12-month period.  Thus, both regressors measure inspections per month of activity.  We next construct ﬁne-based measures of punishment severity.  For the general deterrence measure, we examine the aggregate count and monetary value of ﬁnes (in dollars) imposed against other similar facilities over the preceding 12-month period.  To calculate the conditional average ﬁne, we divide each aggregate monetary value of ﬁnes by the aggregate count of ﬁnes.  For the speciﬁc deterrence measure, we sum ﬁnes imposed on an individual facility in the preceding 12-month period. 7 For comparability with the general deterrence measure, we divide each summed monetary value of ﬁnes by the summed count of ﬁnes. 