 1.  Introduction The environment has attracted unprecedented attention from ecologists, researchers and policymakers in recent years.  While the objective of the diverse stakeholders is to maintain a high standard of living and reduce global poverty, which can be considered justiﬁable ends in their own right, an unrestricted exploitation of natural resources could also cause an irrevocable loss to the biosphere and hurt the world's long-term economic and social development objectives.  The catch lies in the fact that the environment cannot be sustained without sacriﬁcing at least some of the long-term growth and development objectives.  Consequently, to satisfy basic human needs, some damage to the environment is inevitable.  Attitudes towards the environment vary substantially, particularly among policymakers.  Even if the biosphere can be exploited in a variety of ways which lead to a range of consequences, many ecologists believe that the ecosystem could be managed in a way that it can adapt itself to continuously changing conditions (El Kholy et al. , 2012).  The environmental Kuznets curve (EKC), a theory of the relationship between economic development and environmental quality, hypothesizes that over time there will be a reduction in the level of emissions for most countries.  This reduction can take place possibly because well developed economies should develop and raise sufﬁcient revenues in the long-run to afford newer and cleaner technologies that can help abate pollution.  Environmental degradation sustains a heavy price in terms of health and life sacriﬁces.  According to recent estimates, outdoor pollution kills more than three million people in the world every year, while many more people suffer from a range of diseases (OECD, 2014).  The prospects of long-term development are also hurt by the degradation of the quality of natural resources.  Fisheries for example are damaged because of water pollution, and deforestation leads to erosion siltation, disrupts the hydrological cycle of major watersheds and reduces the productivity and returns of natural resources such as forests, agricultural lands and ﬁsheries translate (Dixon et al. , 2013).  The catch lies in the fact that the objectives of sustainable development are often inconsistent with the goals of maintaining the afﬂuent lifestyle of the developed world and reducing the poverty of the burgeoning masses in the developing world (See Daly, 1991.  Arrow et al. , 1995).  Economic growth is a precondition for effective poverty reduction initiatives (Bourguignon, 2004.  Suryahadi et al. , 2012.  Thorbecke, 2013), but the increased revenues resulting from higher growth are used to pursue overly redistributive policies (Bhagwati and Panagariya, 2014).  However, the existing development paradigm is unsustainable because it favors a level of prosperity, which invariably results in more consumption and greater pressure on natural resources (Aşıcı, 2013).  Sustainable economic growth depends on the availability of renewable energy sources, and the integrated development of such sources is essential for an environmentally friendly development of countries or regions.  One of the widely used sources of renewable energy in the United States is biomass which is any organic (decomposable) matter derived from plants or animals, and hence is available on a renewable basis.  Biomass includes wood and agricultural crops, herbaceous and woody energy crops and municipal organic wastes as well as manure.  This renewable energy source contains a complex mix of carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen and oxygen.  Unlike the conventional fossil fuels such as petroleum and coal, biomass is a source of renewable energy based on the carbon cycle.  Thus, in virtue of its abundant sources, biomass is likely to be a prevalent option for generating electricity in the future.  The study examines the short- and long-run relationship between carbon emissions and their determinants in the presence of structural breaks and determines whether biomass energy consumption improves environmental quality by reducing carbon pollutants.  It particularly seeks to discern whether the EKC hypothesis for economic growth and carbon exists in the presence of biomass consumption and trade openness.  Finally, it strives to examine the causality between biomass energy consumption, trade openness and carbon emissions.  To our knowledge, these multifaceted relationships of biomass energy consumption have not been addressed adequately in the existing literature.  This paper makes the following ﬁve-fold contributions to the existing literature.  (i) It uses biomass energy consumption as an indicator of renewable energy in an augmented carbon emissions function.  (ii) It investigates the quadratic and cubic association between economic growth and carbon emissions in the presence of biomass energy and trade variables.  (iii) It applies the single and double unknown structural break unit root test to estimate the unit root properties of the variables.  (iv) It uses the bounds testing approach to cointegration that accommodates structural breaks in the series to test whether cointegration exists or not.  (v) It checks the causality between the variables by applying the VECM Granger causality test in the presence of structural breaks in the series.  The results ﬁnd cointegration between carbon emissions and their determinants and highlight that biomass energy consumption improves environmental quality by lowering carbon emissions.  Moreover, the relationship between economic growth and carbon emissions is inverted U-shaped (i. e. , EKC exists) and N-shaped in the presence of biomass energy consumption and structural breaks.  Additionally, trade openness (exports, imports) is inversely linked with carbon emissions in the presence of biomass energy consumption.  The causality analysis demonstrates a feedback effect between biomass energy consumption and carbon emissions, while economic growth causes CO2 emissions.  The causal association between trade openness (exports, imports) and carbon emissions is bidirectional.  The remainder of study is organized as follows.  Section 2 surveys the literature on EKC, biomass energy consumption and trade openness.  Section 3 develops the empirical model and Section 4 presents the methodological framework.  Section 5 discusses the empirical results.  Section 6 provides the conclusion and policy implications.  2.  Biomass energy consumption and regulations in the U. S.  In comparison with the other sources of energy, biomass provides a distinctive advantage with respect to maintaining the environment since it is “carbon neutral”.  Although the combustion of biomass generates as much carbon dioxide as fossil fuels do, CO2 emissions released is removed when a new plant grows (Agbor et al. , 2014.  Al-Mulali et al. , 2016).  In other words, some CO2 emissions from one year's combustion of biomass are captured by future biomass crops through the process of photosynthesis.  In relation to its energy uses by industry, biomass energy can be used for heat or power generation or for combined heat and power generation as a direct substitute for fossil fuels.  In short, the biomass use is growing in signiﬁcance as an input to a number of major functions of industries, ranging from research into an application of material inputs to industrial processes through to an implementation of mass produced intermediate and ﬁnal products (Burritt and Schaltegger, 2012).  The potential beneﬁts of biomass include an increase in the values of agricultural products and a support for farmers and the agricultural sector in both developed and developing countries, a potential reduction in greenhouse gases emissions relative to the petroleum-based fuels and an improved energy security for countries that grow their own feed stocks.  Projected increases in biofuel trade are also considered as a potential driver of economic growth in the tropics and subtropics regions, which are likely to hold a comparative advantage in feedstock production due to high biomass productivity (Marshall, 2007).  Biomass energy is one of the earliest and most primary sources of energy to provide processing and heat for industrial facilities in the United States.  Historically, in this country it has come from three primary sources.  wood, waste, and alcohol fuels.  More recently, it has come from corn as well.  Each of these forms of biomass energy (wood energy, waste energy and biofuel) is used in the United States.  Collectively, they represent almost half of the total renewable energy production.  Most electricity generation from wood biomass occurs at lumber and paper mills and these facilities use wood waste to provide much of their own steam and electricity needs.  The adoption of biomass has been increasing over the years in the United States.  Biofuel production increased from 1382 ktoe in 1990 to 3000 ktoe in 2000, and further to 28,440 in 2013 (BP Statistical Review of World Energy, 2014).  Over the years, the U. S.  government has introduced several policies to improve the share of renewable energy in the total energy mix, including an increase in the use of biomass.  For instance, the Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) policy, which is a state regulation, calls on electric utilities to ensure that a speciﬁc percentage of all produced electricity should come from renewable resources.  The ﬁrst RPS was ratiﬁed in Iowa in 1983, under a slightly different name, but with the same basic construction.  The 1990s really sparked the adoption of RPS, as seven more U. S.  states enacted RPSs of similar varieties.  Currently there are 30 states, along with the District of Columbia, that have adopted some form of an RPS policy.  RPS allows for ample state ﬂexibility including a variation of different target goals and deadlines, market trading mechanisms and renewable energy types used to comply with the RPS policy.  This ﬂexibility makes this particular policy tool especially popular, as evident by the recent exponential increase in RPS adoption.  Even though the adoption of RPS is becoming rather common, this policy tool is still relatively new, with few scholarly attempts at ascertaining the results of its implementation (Eastin et al. , 2014).  The second policy is the renewable fuel standard (RFS) program, which is a national policy that requires a certain volume of renewable fuels to replace or reduce the quantity of petroleum-based transportation fuel, heating oil or jet fuel.  The Congress created this program as part of the Energy Policy Act in 2005 in an effort to reduce greenhouse gases emissions and expand the nation's renewable fuels sector, while reducing reliance on imported oil (Barros et al. , 2011).  The RFS program was expanded under the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007.  The RFS was conceived by policy makers as a tool to reduce the demand for transportation fuels derived from foreign oil by stimulating the production of domestic biofuels that could be mixed with or replace gasoline at a time when foreign imports and prices were at or near alltime highs.  The RFS, administered by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), mandates the annual minimum volumes of biofuels across four nested categories that must be incorporated into the nation's transportation fuel supply.  The biofuel categories include total renewable fuels, advanced renewable fuels, cellulosic biofuel, and biomassbased biodiesel.  It also requires electricity providers to acquire speciﬁc amounts of renewable energy generation over time which are prevalent within the United States (Barros et al. , 2011).  The government has also introduced several additional policies including the Production Tax Credit or PTC, which is a per-kilowatthour tax credit for electricity generated (through renewable energy sources including biomass) by qualiﬁed energy resources and is paid for by the U. S.  taxpayers.  These policies also include the Investment Tax Credit or ITC, which allows the tax credit to be taken based on the amount invested rather than electricity produced.  They also include the Modiﬁed Accelerated Cost Recovery System Depreciation Schedule or MACRS, which gives bonus depreciations and reduces taxes on large biomass projects (Zhou et al. , 2016).  3.  Literature review.  The issues of climate change and carbon dioxide emissions are at the forefront of policy debates in both developed and developing countries.  Correspondingly, there is now a vast literature on the determinants of emissions (including income and energy prices among others), with the majority of the studies utilizing the EKC hypothesis in the analyses, which has often yielded mixed and conﬂicting results. 