 1.  Introduction The important role of oil in the world economy has motivated the research on the economic and ﬁnancial consequences caused by oil price changes.  In his seminal study on oil price changes and the macroeconomy, Hamilton (1983) ﬁnds that an oil price shock is a contributing factor to US recession.  Since then, scholars have performed much research on this issue (Jones et al. , 2004.  Hamilton, 2008.  Herrera et al. , 2011.  Filis and Chatziantoniou, 2014.  Salisu et al. , 2017, among others).  Stock markets act as the barometer for anticipating economic changes in economic activity (Fama, 1990).  Oil price is also likely to play an important role in predicting stock prices by at least two channels as follows.  On the one hand, since oil is an important input in the production of many goods, oil price changes may affect future cash ﬂows of enterprises.  As a result, higher oil prices may increase the production cost of enterprises, dampening corporate proﬁts and thus further depressing stock prices (Sadorsky, 1999.  Apergis and Miller, 2009).  On the other hand, oil price changes may impact the discount rate.  Rising oil prices are often seen as indicative of inﬂationary pressures.  Central banks typically address it by raising the interest rate (Huang et al. , 1996.  Miller and Ratti, 2009).  Since the link between oil price changes and stock markets has important implications for portfolio management strategies, this issue has attracted considerable attention in recent studies (e. g. , Park and Ratti, 2008.  Naifar, 2016.  Kayalar et al. , 2017).  Despite the increased interest in the oil-stock relationships, there are relatively few papers that investigate the time-varying relationships between them (e. g. , Chang et al. , 2013.  Broadstock and Filis, 2014.  Joo and Park, 2017).  This series of study reﬂects the importance of allowing the relationships to be variable.  However, they do not systematically isolate bearish and bullish markets.  Quantile regression is able to describe the entire conditional distribution of the dependent variable and can solve this problem effectively.  Applying this approach, Lee and Zeng (2011) argue that the impacts of oil price shocks on real stock returns vary with the stock performances (e. g. , bearish and bullish markets).  Sim and Zhou (2015) also indicate that oil shocks affect US stock returns depending on market circumstances by using the quantile-on-quantile approach.  Moreover, the majority of the existing studies investigate the oil-stock relationships in a linear framework.  However, Mork (1989) and Mork et al.  (1994) conclude that oil price increases have a negative effect on GDP, whereas oil price decreases have not been found to have a positive impact on output or an impact of the same degree.  Some related works explore the non-linear effects of oil price changes on stock returns (Cong et al. , 2008.  Park and Ratti, 2008.  Ramos and Veiga, 2013.  Tsai, 2015.  Reboredo and Ugolini, 2016).  In a recent study, Kang and Ratti (2013) argue that the relationships of oil-stock are not formed in isolation from economic policy uncertainty.  This is because oil price shocks and economic policy uncertainty are interrelated and jointly inﬂuence stock returns.  Relatively little attention, however, has been paid to the relationships between economic policy uncertainty and the stock market.  Economic policy uncertainty might have an impact on asset prices by many channels.  First, policy uncertainty might delay or change important decisions taken by ﬁrms and other economic agents, such as employment, investment, consumption and saving decisions (Gulen and Ion, 2016).  Second, policy uncertainty might increase spending on ﬁnancing and production by inﬂuencing supply and demand, as well as increasing disinvestment and economic contraction.  Third, economic policy might also inﬂuence interest rate, inﬂation and expected risk premiums (Pástor and Veronesi, 2013).  A growing number of studies provide evidence that uncertainty affects ﬁnancial markets, such as equity portfolios and stocks (Anderson et al. , 2009.  Bekaert et al. , 2009.  Pástor and Veronesi, 2012.  Brogaard and Detzel, 2015.  Bekiros et al. , 2016), volatility and investment opportunities (Bloom et al. , 2007.  Bloom, 2009), and energy and metals markets (Reboredo and Uddin, 2016).  In particular, given the relationships between oil prices and economic policy uncertainty, if one or both constructs are misrepresented in the model, there is a substantial likelihood that the coefﬁcient of one variable is contaminated by another variable (Arouri et al. , 2014).  At present, only a few, albeit important paper, have investigated the effects of oil price changes on stock markets accounting for economic policy uncertainty (Kang and Ratti, 2013, 2015.  Arouri et al. , 2014.  Kang et al. , 2017).  The papers, however, neglect the distributional heterogeneity of stock returns and do not take account into the nonlinear effects of oil price changes.  Reboredo and Ugolini (2016) argue that stock prices reactions to oil price changes may be complex and the reactions may be depending on whether a market is bullish or bearish.  Moreover, Chang et al.  (2015) argue that the effects of economic policy uncertainty may be different depending on whether the stock markets are bullish or bearish phases.  Besides, the possible effects of market turmoil or ﬁnancial crisis must be considered because the relationships may change at the onset of the crisis.  The global ﬁnancial crisis is believed to have signiﬁcant inﬂuence on oil prices as well as other markets such as stock and exchange rate markets. 1 Chen and Lv (2015) examine whether the relationships between the crude oil market and the Chinese stock market are changed by a crisis and conclude that the Chinese stock market exhibits stronger external dependence with the oil market during the subprime crisis.  Luo and Qin (2017) also explore the role of the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis in the oil-stock nexus in China.  Ignoring crisis may render inappropriate or inaccurate estimation.  Additionally, we focus on China due to the rapid rise of emerging markets and increasing importance of developing countries.  Developing countries have not received sufﬁcient research attention compared with developed ones.  Furthermore, oil consumption in China has dramatically increased since its economic reforms are initiated in 1978.  According to the Energy Information Administration (EIA, 2014), China took the place of the US as the largest net importer of crude oil and other liquids in September 2013.  Lu et al.  (2015) discuss China's energy consumption structure in detail and present the trend of the proﬁts of new energy companies in the Chinese stock market over the period 2002 to 2010.  Additionally, the uncertainty in the oil market or economic policy may cause greater effects on developing countries due to the immature ﬁnancial policies and investors.  The relationships between oil price changes and the stock market for China have attracted scholars' attention (Cong et al. , 2008.  Zhang and Chen, 2011.  Broadstock et al. , 2012.  Wang et al. , 2013.  Fang and You, 2014.  Li et al. , 2017.  Bouri et al. , 2017).  As regards to the relationships between economic policy uncertainty and stock returns in China, the related studies include Arouri et al.  (2014), Kang and Ratti (2015), Li et al.  (2016) and so on.  To the best of our knowledge, no study has established the relationships between oil price changes, economic policy uncertainty, and stock returns in China accounting for distributional heterogeneity in a panel quantile regression framework.  Thus, our contribution is complementary to this research.  More speciﬁc, we add to the extant literature from the following aspects.  (a) we examine the joint effects of oil price changes and economic policy uncertainty on stock returns in China, both before and after the global ﬁnancial crisis.  The theoretical literature is aware of a possible joint effect of oil price changes and economic policy uncertainty on stock returns, but few empirical studies have analysed this issue satisfactorily.  (b) to study the non-linear effects of oil price changes, we separate positive shocks from negative ones by deﬁning two auxiliary variables.  Dramatic oil increases could depress national economic growth, but little evidence proves that an oil price decrease could accelerate economic development.  For this reason, there might be non-linear effects of oil price shocks on the stock markets.  (c) by employing a panel quantile regression model, we extend the earlier analysis by exploring the impacts of factors not only on the mean but also on the shape of the conditional distribution of stock returns.  In particular, we examine whether oil price changes and economic policy uncertainty affect stock returns under different market circumstances, including bearish (lower quantile) and bullish (upper quantile) ones, which has implications for investors in terms of risk management and the predictability of stock prices.  The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 reviews the literature.  Section 3 outlines the methodology.  Section 4 describes the data used in this paper.  The empirical results of panel quantile regression model are presented in Section 5.  Section 6 concludes the2.  Literature review.  Oil is one of utmost important natural resources in the modern economy.  Following the major oil price shocks of 1970s, the bulk of article has studied the relationships between oil price shocks and economic activity.  In a pioneering work, Hamilton (1983) ﬁnds that oil price shocks are responsible for US recession.  Oil prices might affect economy by the real balance channel, income transfer channel and allocate channel (Fang and You, 2014).  Although the documentation that oil price shocks have signiﬁcant effects on economic activity, relatively less work has appeared on the oil-stock relationships, and the results are inconclusive.  Jones and Kaul (1996) conclude that oil price increases have a signiﬁcantly negative effect on aggregate stock returns in the post-war period.  By using 1947–1996 monthly data, Sadorsky (1999) indicates the negative effects of oil price shocks on stock prices.  Similar conclusions have been documented by Papapetrou (2001), Park and Ratti (2008), Cunado and de Gracia (2014), Filis and Chatziantoniou (2014), and Mensi et al.  (2017).  In contrast, Sadorsky (2001), El-Sharif et al.  (2005), Gogineni (2007), Yurtsever and Zahor (2007), Chen and Lv (2015), and Zhu et al.  (2016) indicate that there exists a positive connection between oil price shocks and stock returns.  In addition, Huang et al.  (1996), Apergis and Miller (2009), and Sukcharoen et al.  (2014) do not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant relationship between oil futures prices and stock returns.  In light of these contradicting results, more detailed investigation of the impacts of oil price shocks on the stock market deserves particular attention.  There is a growing literature focusing on the time-varying relationships between oil price shocks and stock returns (e. g. , Sadorsky, 2012.  Antonakakis and Filis, 2013.  Antonakakis et al. , 2014.  Sadorsky, 2014.  Filis, 2014.  Inchauspe et al. , 2015.  Antonakakis et al. , 2017).  They suggest that the effects of oil price changes on stock markets change over time.  Indicatively, Antonakakis et al.  (2014) exploit dynamic relationships between crude oil and stocks for a sample of both net oil-exporting and net oil-importing countries, which permit the effects to differ in varying development conditions.  The authors conclude that the effects of oil price changes on stock market are not constant over time.  Chang and Yu (2013) conclude that the effects of oil price shocks on stock returns are regime dependent.  Inchauspe et al.  (2015) suggest that oil prices became more inﬂuential in inﬂuencing stock returns after 2007.  However, these studies do not systematically isolate bearish and bullish markets.  Quantile regression can solve this problem effectively by providing a more complete picture of the factors affecting the stock markets.  For instance, using this method, Nusair and Al-Khasawneh (2017) explore the effects of oil price shocks on the stock returns of the Gulf Cooperation Council countries and conclude that the coefﬁcient estimates have not been constant throughout the distribution of stock returns.  Another strand of the literature studies the interaction of policy uncertainty and stock markets, such as Ozoguz (2009), Dzielinski (2012), Boutchkova et al.  (2012), Pástor and Veronesi (2012, 2013), Antonakakis et al.  (2013), Arouri et al.  (2014), Lam and Zhang (2014), Lean and Nguyen (2014), Chang et al.  (2015), Liu and Zhang (2015), Arouri and Roubaud (2016), Dakhlaoui and Aloui (2016), Kang and Ratti (2013, 2015), and Kang et al.  (2017).  Indicatively, Arouri et al.  (2014) conclude that economic policy uncertainty has a negative effect on stock returns in the US, Europe, China and the Gulf Cooperation Council and that the effect is inﬂuenced by oil price changes.  Lean and Nguyen (2014) conclude that US policy uncertainty affects Dow Jones Sustainability Indices for the Asia Paciﬁc and North America regions during a crisis period.  By using panel causality method, however, Chang et al.  (2015) conclude that there exist inconsistent patterns in the linkages between policy uncertainty and stock prices across seven OECD countries.  The neutrality hypothesis is supported for Canada, France and Germany.  Arouri and Roubaud (2016) ﬁnd that economic policy uncertainty signiﬁcantly negatively affects stock returns, whereas positively affects market volatility in the US and India.  Speciﬁcally, Dakhlaoui and Aloui (2016) conclude that there is a time-varying correlation between US economic policy uncertainty and BRIC stock market volatility.  Using a quantile regression approach, Mensi et al.  (2014) conclude that US economic policy uncertainty has no impact on BRICS stock markets.  Existing research on stock markets has mainly focused on developed economies,2 whereas relatively few studies have investigated emerging countries, especially in China.  Due to the rise of China as a major economic power, there are increasingly more studies that focus on China.  On the one hand, a number of studies in the literature explore the oil-stock relationships. 3 Caporale et al.  (2015) examine the timevarying relationships between oil price uncertainty and sectoral stock returns in China.  After controlling for structural break, Broadstock et al.  (2016) explore the relationships between oil prices, gasoline prices and stock returns in the different sub-samples using ﬁrm level data.  On the sectoral level, Bouri et al.  (2017) explore whether the relationships between oil and sectoral indexes change according to the reform of the reﬁned oil pricing mechanism (March 27, 2013).  Similarly, Luo and Qin (2017) also explore the role of the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis in the oil-stocks nexus in China.  On the other hand, as for the relationships between economic policy uncertainty and stock returns in China, Arouri et al.  (2014) conclude that economic policy uncertainty has negative effects on stock returns and that the extent is inﬂuenced by oil price changes.  Using a structural VAR model, Kang and Ratti (2015) show that a positive shock to China's economic policy uncertainty has a delayed negative impact on real stock market returns in China.  Li et al.  (2016) argue that there are bidirectional causal relationships between economic policy uncertainty and stock returns in China in several sub-periods.  This paper aspires to bring together the two key strands of the literature, namely, the impacts of oil price shocks on stock markets and the impacts of economic policy uncertainty on stock markets.  Particularly, we explore the time-varying effects between oil price shocks, economic policy uncertainty and stock returns in China using a panel quantile regression approach.  Although much of the literature has explored the relationships in a time-varying framework, they do not systematically isolate bearish and bullish markets.  Quantile regression can describe the entire conditional distribution of stock returns and solve this problem effectively.  Additionally, we explore whether the results are sensitive to the sample period.  A comparative analysis is conducted on the nexus of both oil-stock and economic policy uncertainty-stock in the pre- and post-crisis periods.  <Middle> Model speciﬁcation and methodology.  We examine the impacts of oil price changes and economic policy uncertainty on industry stock returns in China.  The following baseline empirical model is applied to panel data incorporating the potential inﬂuences of other control variables where ri,t denotes the real return on the i-th industry in time t, eput is economic policy uncertainty index, oilt, irt and ert represent the ﬁrst natural logarithm difference of real oil price, real interest and exchange rate, respectively.  εi, t refers to the random error term.  αi denotes industry effects.  Similar to Arouri et al.  (2016) and Reboredo and Ugolini (2016), the lagged return, denoted as ri,t−1, is also included. 4 Our results verify the necessity of including the lagged dependent variable, which appears to be almost strongly signiﬁcant.  There appear to be important economic and econometric ramiﬁcations to this.  βi is the sensitivity of stock returns to the corresponding inﬂuential factors.  The advantage of this model is that intercept (αi) can vary with industry for unobserved heterogeneity, taking account any possible industryspeciﬁc factors that may have an inﬂuence on stock market returns beyond the explanatory variables included (Wooldridge, 2012).  Also, panel data model enhances both the quality and quantity of data and allows for more accurate model inference to control the impacts of omitted variables (Ramos and Veiga, 2013). 5 In addition, many of the problems confronted by different industries have a trans-boundary character and thus need a collective response.  Speciﬁcally, as international oil prices are consistent across sectors, cross-sectional dependence is also allowed in our panel data analysis, which makes the panel data inference more reliable.  Eq.  (1) assumes the rising and falling oil prices have symmetrical effects on stock returns.  To capture the non-linear effects of oil price changes on stock returns, following Mork (1989) and MoyaMartínez et al.  (2014), we separate positive changes from negative ones by deﬁning two auxiliary variables oilpt=max(0,oilt) and oilnt= min(0,oilt).  This model helps answer the question “whether oil price increases and decreases have symmetrical effects on stock returns”.  However, it cannot answer another important question.  “do positive and negative oil price shocks inﬂuence stock returns differently for markets with low returns and for markets with high returns. ” From a policy perspective, it is more interesting to understand what occurs in extremes (in our case, bearish and bullish).  To answer these important questions, quantile regression, developed by Koenker and Bassett (1978), is used.  Speciﬁcally, the motivation to use quantile regression is as follows.  Quantile regression is an extension of the standard regression, providing a more complete picture of a conditional distribution.  In our case, it helps us obtain the complex impacts of the independent variables throughout the conditional distribution of stock returns.  Moreover, the quantile regression estimators are robust to outlying observations, heteroskedasticity, and skewness on the dependent variable (Koenker and Hallock, 2001).  This is of particular advantage in the stock returns equations setting since the common features of ﬁnancial data are characterized by these features, as seen, for instance, in Baur (2013).  Generally, the function can be formulated in the following manner where 0bτb1, Qyt(τ|xt) denotes the τ-th conditional quantile of yt, xt is a vector of independent variables, and βτ and ατ represent the estimated coefﬁcients and unobserved effects at quantile τ, respectively.  In the mean regression, coefficients measure the effects of the independent variables on the conditional mean of the dependent variable.  whereas in the quantile regression case the coefﬁcient βτ represents the effects of the independent variables on the conditional τth quantile of the conditional distribution of that variable.  Only under the assumption of the marginal effects of the independent variable being a simple “location shift” will the impact at the mean be the same as the impact for the entire distribution (Heckman et al. , 1997).  Eq.  (3), however, does not take into account unobserved individual heterogeneity (in our case industry heterogeneity).  There has been little but growing work focused on the econometric theory of applying quantile regression to panel data contexts that can solve this issue, including Koenker (2004), Lamarche (2010), Galvao (2011) and Canay (2011).  The use of panel rather than time series data not only increases the total number of observations and their variation but also reduces the noise coming from the individual time series regressions (Westerlund et al. , 2015). 6 Therefore, Eq.  (3) is improved to the panel quantile regression model where Qyit(τ|αi, xit) denotes the τ-th conditional quantile of yi, t for individual i in time t.  The main problem with this model is the incidental parameters since it includes a large number of ﬁxed effects (Neyman and Scott, 1948.  Lancaster, 2000).  The estimator will be inconsistent when the number of cross-sectional units goes to inﬁnity while the number of observations for each cross-sectional unit is ﬁxed (Kato and Galvao, 2010).  The standard demeaning (or differencing) approaches to eliminate unobserved ﬁxed effects is unfeasible in the quantile regression model.  These methods rely on the fact that expectations are linear operators, which is not the case for conditional quantiles (Canay, 2011).  Koenker (2004) proposes a shrinkage method to address such problem.  The author treats unobservable ﬁxed effects as parameters to be jointly estimated with the covariate effects for different quantiles.  Speciﬁcally, parameters are estimated as follows,  where wk is the relative weight given to the τk-th quantile, which controls for the contribution of the k-th quantile on the estimation of the ﬁxed effects.  ρτk(u)=u(τk−I(u b0)) is the “check function”.  and I(. ) is an indicator function.  The solution to this problem is obtained using the linear programming algorithm suggested by Koenker and D'Orey (1987).  The pair bootstrap procedure introduced by Buchinsky (1995) can be used to obtain the standard errors for the estimated coefﬁcients.  λ is the tuning parameter that shrinks the individual effects towards zero to improve the performance of the estimate of β.  As the term λ approaches zero, the penalty term disappears, and we obtain the usual ﬁxed effect estimator.  as the term λ approaches inﬁnity, we obtain the estimate of the model without the individual effects.  In this paper, we set λ=1 (Damette and Delacote, 2012.  Lee et al. , 2012) and wk= 1/K (Lamarche, 2011.  Alexander et al. , 2011).  To check the robustness of our results, we also conduct sensitivity analysis with different values of λ.  To study the effects of oil price shocks and economic policy uncertainty on stock returns by accounting for heterogeneity throughout the returns distribution, Eq.  (2) is transformed into the corresponding panel quantile regression model as follows.  Our variables of interest and the control variables are as indicated above.  In our study, we choose seven quantiles τ=(0. 05, 0. 10, 0. 25, 0. 50, 0. 75, 0. 90, 0. 95) and divide these quantiles into three parts, namely, the lower quantiles (0. 05, 0. 10, and 0. 25), intermediate quantile (0. 50) and upper quantiles (0. 75, 0. 90, and 0. 95).  Following the related ﬁnancial literature, e. g. , Naifar (2016), the three parts allow the examination of the relationships in speciﬁc market circumstances, including bearish (lower quantiles), bullish (upper quantiles), and normal (intermediate quantile) ones.  4.  Data description and preliminary analysis.  4. 1.  Data description.  Our sample data comprises China's industry data during the period from January 1995 to March 2016.  Fourteen industries are considered, including Agriculture.  Mining.  Manufacturing.  Production and Supply of Power, Heat, Gas and Water (PS).  Construction.  Wholesale and retail trade (WR).  Transportation.  Accommodation and Catering (AC).  IT.  Financial.  Realty.  Leasing and business services (LBS).  Water, environment and public facilities management (WEP) and Culture, Sports and Entertainment (CSE). 7 Our objective is to explore the asymmetric effects of oil shocks, economic policy uncertainty on stock returns in China.  Another objective is to explore whether the observed nexus is sensitive to the sample period, in particular that of the global ﬁnancial crisis period.  To achieve this, we divide our study period into two sub-periods referred as pre-crisis (January 1995 to August 2008) and post-crisis (September 2008 to March 2016), respectively.  We use September 2008, when Lehman Brothers collapsed, as the starting point of the crisis.  This selection is consistent with a recent study by Berger and Uddin (2016).  Stock prices come from the Resset Financial Database (www. resset.  cn).  We deﬂate nominal stock prices by the Chinese CPI, which are obtained from the Monthly Monetary and Financial Statistics of the OECD database for China, and compute stock returns using the log difference of real stock prices. 8 Industry stock returns are weighted by the market capitalization of the larger companies in the industry.  As to oil, national prices (e. g.  Daqing crude oil prices for China) are always susceptible to price-control, high and varying taxes on petroleum products, and exchange rate ﬂuctuations.  Thus, some literatures use the world crude oil prices as a common indicator of the world market disturbances that affects other countries.  As the proxy for the world oil prices, there are three main series that have been widely used.  the West Texas Intermediate (WTI), Brent crude oil prices and the US reﬁners' acquisition cost for imported crude oil (RAC).  WTI, which is used in this paper, is more appreciated by market participants and risk managers since the active trade of oil futures contract in NYMEX (Wang et al. , 2015).  We also report the results to alternative measures of oil prices.  The data of three oil prices are obtained from EIA.  The real crude oil prices for China are adjusted by the Chinese CPI following some scholars, for instance Kang and Ratti (2015).  We also use Brent and RAC oil price, and apply the same method to transform these series.  The measure of China's economic policy uncertainty is based on Baker et al.  (2014), constructed by the month-by-month searches of the South China Morning Post, and Hong Kong's leading English-language newspaper, for articles including the term ‘uncertainty’ and items are related to the economy and to economic policies.  This index has a wide range of applications.  For example, Wang et al.  (2014) employ this index to examine the impacts of economic policy uncertainty on corporate investment in China.  Additionally, Zhang et al.  (2015) examine the relationships between economic policy uncertainty and capital structural choice in China.  Finally, we also include interest rate and exchange rate to control for macroeconomics.  The interest rate index is obtained from the OECD, and the exchange rate is obtained from Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System.  We deﬂate these two indexes by the Chinese CPI.  A detailed description of all the variables and data sources is presented in Table 1.  4. 2.  Preliminary analysis.  Panel A, B and C of Table 2 report the descriptive statistics of our data for the full, pre-, and post-crisis period, respectively.  First, to justify the use of quantile regression, we report the skewness and kurtosis of the variables.  The kurtosis coefﬁcient is N3 for stock returns in different periods, indicating that the unconditional distribution of stock returns is asymmetric.  The Jarque-Bera (JB) test statistic for normality clearly conﬁrms rejection of the null hypothesis for all series at a 1% level of signiﬁcance.  The results indicate that stock returns are signiﬁcantly different from a normal distribution, which provide further motivation to use quantile regression on the stock returns equation.  In heterogeneous distributions, the OLS regression estimates that the mean effects of the independent variables on the dependent variable might seriously under or over-estimate effects or even fail to identify effects at all (Cade and Noon, 2003).  A solution to such problem is to employ the quantile regression method instead of OLS regression (Koenker and Bassett, 1978).  The quantile regression method makes it possible to analyse effects of the independent variables on different quantiles of the returns distribution instead of focusing on the mean of the distribution.  In addition, the method is robust to the outlier and gives the researcher a more complete picture of the effects of the independent variables on the dependent variable (Binder and Coad, 2011).  Second, before estimating the panel quantile regression model, we test whether the variables used are stationary using the IPS approach.  The intercept and trend model is used.  An inspection in Table 2 indicates that we cannot reject the null of a unit root for all variables at their levels except stock returns and economic policy uncertainty.  However, we can reject the null of I(1) for these indexes at their ﬁrst differences, indicating stock returns and economic policy uncertainty follow an I(0) process and others variables follow an I(1) process.  Therefore, stock returns and economic policy uncertainty in level and other variables in the ﬁrst difference are used in the model.  Figs.  1 and 2 plot the monthly time series of the uncertainty indexes of China and stock returns as well as uncertainty indexes of China and WTI price, respectively.  5.  Empirical ﬁndings.  5. 1.  Asymmetric effects for the full sample.  In this section, we apply panel quantile regression to investigate the effects of oil price changes and economic policy uncertainty on stock returns in China.  To facilitate a comparison, we ﬁrst report the results for the full sample from the mean regression in column (1) of Table 3.  The results show that both positive and negative oil price shocks have positive significant impacts on stock returns.  Regarding the economic policy uncertainty, there are signiﬁcant negative effects on stock returns.  As regards to the lagged return, the coefﬁcient is signiﬁcantly positive.  For other control variables, we ﬁnd signiﬁcant negative effects on stock returns.  However, as mentioned earlier, the mean regression summarizes the average relationships between the independent variables and the dependent variable based on the conditional mean of the dependent variable, which does not allow the relationships to differ across various market conditions.  While average effect certainly is an important feature to examine, it is also interesting to understand what happens at the extremes of a distribution.  Compared to the mean regression model, the quantile regression provides a more comprehensive picture as it models the relationships at speciﬁc quantiles of the dependent variable.  thus, providing information on the effects of oil price shocks and economic policy uncertainty on stock returns in speciﬁc market conditions, such as bullish, bearish, or normal.  We report the results from the quantile regression for the full sample (January 1995–March 2016) in Table 3.  Fig.  3 provides summary charts for the quantile regression results.  The standard errors for the quantile estimates are obtained by the bootstrapping approach. 9 We estimate seven quantiles, from the lower (τ=0. 05) to the higher one (τ=0. 95), all of which divide the market into three types, i. e. , bearish, bullish and normal market.  The non-linear effects of oil shocks are investigated by considering the positive and negative parts, which has attracted several researchers (Cong et al. , 2008.  Phan et al. , 2015).  We can draw some interesting ﬁndings about the non-linear effects on Chinese stock markets of oil shocks from Table 3.  First, the effects of positive oil price shocks on stock returns are positively signiﬁcant at the intermediate and upper quantiles (normal and bullish market), but negative signiﬁcant at lower quantiles (bearish market).  This suggests that increasing oil prices lead to rising stock returns when the stock markets are bullish and normal, while these seem to lower stock returns when the market is bearish.  A possible reason is that the economy grows fast in the bullish markets and offsets the negative effects of the increase in oil prices.  The result appears to be the ﬁndings in Jansen and Tsai (2010), whereby the effects of monetary policies on stock markets are related to different market circumstances (bullish and bearish markets).  Second, a negative oil price shock is signiﬁcantly positively related to stock returns at all percentiles.  The results indicate that a negative oil price shock appears to represent an incentive for bad stock market performance and restrains stock market returns.  From here, we ﬁnd that there are differences between the estimated coefﬁcients of positive and negative oil shocks, particularly for the lower quantiles.  For instance, the negative variations are obviously greater than the positive variations in the lower quantiles.  That is, oil price drops affect stock returns more than oil price hikes in bearish markets.  This implies that the stock returns react asymmetrically to oil price changes.  thus, we can preliminarily conclude that the non-linear effects should exist.  The non-linear responses of oil shocks are tested by using the Wald test.  The results are presented in the bottom of Table 3.  Rejection of the null hypothesis of H01. β1τ=β2τ indicates statistical support for nonlinearity at the τ-th quantile.  However, non-rejection could be due to both coefﬁcients being equal to zero (in our case, there is no sensitivity to the oil factor).  Thus, we also analyse a more speciﬁc version of this test that both coefﬁcients are jointly equal to zero (H02. β1τ=β2τ=0).  The results show that the null hypothesis of joint test, H02, is rejected at all quantiles.  It indicates the signiﬁcant effects of the oil price ﬂuctuations.  Crude oil prices may indicate world economic conditions and affect Chinese stock market trends.  Taking oil prices into account helps investors to hedge risk and maximize proﬁt when structuring their portfolios and diversiﬁcation strategies.  Furthermore, the null of equality, H01, is rejected only at lower quantiles, whereas not rejected at intermediate and upper quantiles.  These results conﬁrm the effects of oil shocks are non-linear at lower quantiles.  In terms of policy implications, negative oil shocks move stock returns more than positive oil prices do in a bearish market.  In this case, the negative shocks emanating from the oil market are relatively more important for predicting stock returns.  However, we discover that there is no signiﬁcant difference for positive and negative oil price shocks' effects in a normal or bullish market.  Market participants would not discriminate against different oil shocks because of the unremarkable asymmetry in a normal or bullish market.  From Table 3, we see that economic policy uncertainty negatively affects stock returns.  The impacts of economic policy uncertainty are signiﬁcant for all quantiles except for the 0. 9 quantile.  This implies that a higher uncertainty level appears to reduce stock returns, which is consistent with Kang and Ratti (2013, 2015).  To better estimate market trends, it is essential to consider the inﬂuence of economic policy uncertainty under different market circumstances.  Furthermore, it is worth noting that the inﬂuence is not constant since the estimated coefﬁcients for this index are highly heterogeneous.  People may overestimate the market's potential while underrating or neglecting the suppression effects from economic policy uncertainty.  Therefore, to gain the maximum beneﬁt, decision makers must consider not only the effects of the uncertainty level on stocks but also the asymmetric effects across different market circumstances.  Results for other control variables included in the model are also informative.  We can conclude that the effects of interest rate are negative across quantiles, which implying that a higher interest rate leads to lower stock returns.  Thus, the result suggests little evidence of heterogeneity in the effects of interest rate on stock returns, although the marginal impacts are different across conditional distributional of stock returns.  The coefﬁcient of the exchange rate is negative and significant at the 0. 95 quantile only but insigniﬁcant for the other percentiles.  The result indicates that higher exchange rate leads to lower stock returns in extreme bullish market circumstances but not bearish market circumstances.  As regards to the lagged return, the coefﬁcient is signiﬁcantly negative in lower quantiles but signiﬁcantly positive in intermediate and upper quantiles.  Negative coefﬁcients of the lagged return at lower quantiles indicate a reversion towards an equilibrium value.  Negative serial correlation in stock returns can be seen as a consequence of bid-ask bounce (Roll, 1984).  Furthermore, the results imply relatively slow speeds of adjustment based on the magnitude of the lagged dependent coefﬁcients.  Finally, a parameter heterogeneity test can be examined using interquantile tests, which is developed to examine whether the differences along the estimated coefﬁcients are statistically signiﬁcant across quantiles.  More speciﬁcally, Wald tests are performed to check for slope equality across quantiles.  The variance-covariance matrixes of the corresponding coefﬁcients are obtained from the bootstrap procedure.  To save space, we present the results whether the model at the lower quantile, represented here by the 0. 05 quantile, is the same as the median quantile (0. 50) and the upper quantiles (0. 75, 0. 90, and 0. 95).  The results are reported in Table 4.  The test of equality of the coefﬁcients (except the intercept) between the lower quantile and the upper quantiles reject the hypothesis of parameter homogeneity for the most part except exchange rate.  In summary, we can conclude that it is necessary to take into account the distribution heterogeneity to study the relationships.  5. 2.  Asymmetric relationships during the pre-crisis and post-crisis periods.  The global ﬁnancial crisis is believed to have signiﬁcant inﬂuence on oil prices as well as other markets such as stock and exchange rate markets (Zhu et al. , 2014.  Tsai, 2015).  Reboredo and Ugolini (2016) argue that the dependence of oil price and stock returns might have been different before and after the crisis.  To explore whether the nexus of oil-stock is changed by crisis, we split our data into two subperiods, which is consistent with Berger and Uddin (2016).  the precrisis period, January 1995 to August 2008, followed by the post-crisis period from September 2008 to March 2016.  Panel A and B of Table 5 report the estimated results of the quantile regression model for the pre- and post-crisis period, respectively.  Figs.  4 and 5 provide the corresponding summary charts.  To facilitate a comparison, we also report the results from mean regression in column (1) of Table 5.  In this part our discussion will concentrate on the impacts of positive and negative oil price shocks as well as economic policy uncertainty, of the variables of interest, on stock returns.  First, our focus is on the effects of crude oil shocks.  The results show that.  (1) in the pre-crisis period, the effects of positive oil price changes on stock returns are heterogeneous across quantiles.  Specially, the results show that positive oil shocks have a signiﬁcant negative effect on stock returns for all quantiles except for the 0. 75 quantile.  the coefﬁcients of negative oil price shocks are signiﬁcantly positive for all quantiles except for the 0. 10 quantile.  (2) in the post-crisis period, the results show that positive oil shocks have signiﬁcantly positive effects on the stock returns across conditional distribution of returns.  the coefﬁcients of negative oil price shocks are positive and signiﬁcant for all quantiles except for the 0. 90 and 0. 95 quantiles.  (3) To validate the asymmetry of positive and negative oil shocks, we further test whether the coefﬁcients are equal in different sub-periods.  We report the test results in bottom of panel A and B in Table 5.  The null hypothesis of joint test, H02. β1τ=β2τ=0, is rejected at almost all quantiles except for the 0. 10 quantile before crisis, and various conditional distribution after crisis.  Generally, it indicates that oil price ﬂuctuations signiﬁcantly affect the stock markets in different periods.  Furthermore, the null of equality, H01. β1τ=β2τ, is rejected at all quantiles except for the 0. 10 quantile before the crisis, whereas rejected at four quantiles (i. e. , 0. 25, 0. 50, 0. 75 and 0. 90) after the crisis.  These results conﬁrm that the oil shocks have certain non-linear effects on stock returns both in preand post-crisis periods.  Moreover, we show that the impacts on stock markets of oil shocks are different across periods.  A plausible explanation is the effects of oil changes depend on the underlying cause of the changes (Kilian, 2009.  Cunado and de Gracia, 2014).  Oil price changes are mainly caused by supply-side shocks in the pre-crisis period, such as the oil production cut by OPEC countries over the period March 1998–December 1998 and Venezuelan general strike of 2002–2003, whereas oil shocks in the post-crisis period might be mainly caused by demand-side shocks, such as the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis, the downgrade of the US debt status in August 2011, and the euro zone debt crisis of 2012.  Following Cunado and de Gracia (2014), we hold that oil price changes before the crisis (caused by a supply shock) are expected to have more negative effects on stock returns than the one after the crisis (due to a demand shock).  Notably, oil shocks can have an impact on stock performances by affecting investor expectations.  Falling oil prices can be interpreted by investors as bad news, as they expect falling economic activity, and rising oil prices can be seen as a good signal of a prospering economy.  That is, the oil price changes positively inﬂuence stock returns through investor expectations.  Therefore, the total impacts of oil shocks on stock depend on the aggregate of positive and negative effects.  For instance, this led to the negative or less positive effects before the crisis since the oil shocks are mainly due to supply.  Another phenomenon is worth pondering.  in regard to either positive or negative oil price shocks, oil price shocks and stock returns are mostly positively related, except that the effects of positive oil shocks on stock returns are negative (insigniﬁcant or signiﬁcant) in the pre-crisis period.  This may indicate that investors become frightened and much more susceptible by their sentiment after the crisis.  Thus, the relationships between oil price shocks and stock should be related to the optimistic or pessimistic sentiments of investors.  Signiﬁcantly, Chinese investors are not mature and rational when facing the ﬂuctuation from oil markets, which is similar to the case in some of the previous literature (Lee and Zeng, 2011.  Wen et al. , 2012).  Investors may not be sufﬁciently mature to cope with larger oil price shocks.  This requires that the policy makers should avoid uncertain information from the oil market because it may cause large shocks in stock markets.  Second, we ﬁnd that the coefﬁcients of economic policy uncertainty are almost unanimously negative before and after the crisis.  The result implies that economic policy uncertainty depresses stock market returns in most market circumstances.  Moreover, the relationships are signiﬁcant across almost all quantiles before the crisis (except for the 0. 90 and 0. 95 quantiles) and after the onset of the crisis (except for the 0. 05 quantile).  Additionally, the extent of the impacts on stocks in the pre-crisis period is relatively greater than that in the post-crisis period at most quantiles.  A plausible explanation why the impacts are mitigated after the crisis can be the basic fact of government bailout after the crisis.  For example, China's package plan, including the 4 trillion RMB ﬁscal stimulus investments, is implemented to shield the Chinese economy from the slumping world trade in 2008 and help maintain Chinese economic growth.  Rational investors hold their present investments until the uncertainty were removed, resulting in a negative effect on the level of growth and investment by uncertainty.  The negative effects on stocks of economic policy uncertainty are offset by the positive effects caused by the government bailout.  Additionally, an inter-quantile test is used to examine whether the differences along the estimated coefﬁcients are statistically signiﬁcant across quantiles.  The results are reported in Table 6.  As regards to positive and negative oil price shocks, the test of equality of the coefﬁcients between the lower and the upper quantiles rejects the hypothesis of parameter homogeneity at the 0. 75 and 0. 90 quantiles respectively in the pre-crisis period.  In the post-crisis period, the test of equality of the coefﬁcients is not rejected for the positive oil price shocks between the lower quantiles and the intermediate as well as upper quantiles.  However, the test of equality of the coefﬁcients is rejected for the negative oil price shocks between the lower quantiles and the intermediate quantiles as well as upper quantiles (i. e. , 0. 75 and 0. 90).  Overall, we can conclude that it is necessary to take into account the distribution heterogeneity to study the relationships between oil price shocks and returns.  Finally, we further estimate the model with the other two measures of oil prices, i. e.  Brent and RAC.  The results are reported in Tables 7–9.  The results are largely consistent with the variables of interest and the differences are summarized as follows.  In the full sample, only the inﬂuence of positive oil shocks changes.  The effects of Brent market changes at the 0. 50, 0. 90 and 0. 95 quantiles (e. g.  it becomes insigniﬁcant at the intermediate quantile).  And they become insigniﬁcant at the 0. 25 quantile for RAC shocks.  Furthermore, the signiﬁcance of oil shocks changes only at one quantile in the pre-crisis period.  They become insigniﬁcant at the 0. 05 quantile for Brent oil market.  For RAC shocks, the effects of positive and negative oil shocks change at the 0. 75 and 0. 05 quantiles, respectively.  Besides, during the post-crisis period, the changes of signiﬁcance happen at the 0. 05 and 0. 10 quantiles for positive shocks and at the 0. 90 quantile for negative shocks in Brent markets, as well as at the 0. 75 quantile for negative RAC oil shocks.  Our results are partly similar with Huang et al.  (2016), who argue that the Brent and WTI oil prices have different impacts on stocks.  One possible explanation for the differences observed can be explained by different dynamics and stylized facts of these oil proxies.  That is, crude oil prices reﬂect the conditions of the underlying market and vary in terms of characteristics, quality, and market penetration.  Ajmi et al.  (2014) argue that these factors ultimately lead to causing different reactions from stock markets.  Moreover, the efﬁciency of the different oil markets varies over time (Tabak and Cajueiro, 2007).  Although the relationships between oil-stock nexus are not completely consistent in different oil price markets, the conclusions are informative.  Our results reveal some properties which are directly related to oil-related risk management.  For instance, contrast with WTI proxy, the result indicates that Brent oil increases have no signiﬁcant effects on returns when stock markets are bearish.  This result indicates that Chinese stock markets are less sensitive to Brent markets and investors should not overly concern about their effects when stock markets are bearish.  Therefore, considering both crude oil markets will permit a thorough analysis of the oil-stock market relationships in China, it can provide valuable insights for commodity portfolio investors, hedgers and policymakers.  5. 3. 1.  Alternative estimate method.  In this section we investigate whether our ﬁndings are affected by different estimation techniques.  Comparing with the estimation method proposed by Koenker (2004), we report the results of Canay's (2011) two-step method in Table 10.  Panel A, B and C present the results for the full sample, pre-, and post-crisis period, respectively.  There are small differences.  For the variables of interest, the results show that the effects on stock returns are consistent for full sample, whereas the signiﬁcance of positive (negative) oil price shocks changes at the 0. 10 (0. 90) quantile for the pre-crisis (post-crisis) period.  Overall, the results are robust with alternative estimate technique.  5. 3. 2.  Different lambda values.  We examine whether our ﬁndings are robust to different λ.  We experiment with different values of λ ranging from 0. 1 to 1. 5.  To save space, we only report the results with λ=0. 1 in Table 11.  In this case, there are only two differences, i. e.  the 0. 10 quantile for positive oil shocks before the crisis and the 0. 90 quantile for negative oil shocks after the crisis.  The magnitudes of the coefﬁcients, however, are slightly different.  The results are almost unchanged, which are also true for other values of λ.  5. 3.  Robust analysis.  To test the validity of our results, we conduct a series of robustness checks, including (i) an alternative estimation technique.  (ii) different values for λ.  (iii) different random seeds.  In this section we focus on WTI crude oil prices.  5. 3. 1.  Alternative estimate method. In this section we investigate whether our findings are affected by different estimation techniques.  Comparing with the estimation method proposed by Koenker (2004), we report the results of Canay's (2011) two-stepmethod in Table 10.  Panel A, B and C present the results for the full sample, pre-, and post-crisis period, respectively.  There are small differences.  For the variables of interest, the results show that the effects on stock returns are consistent for full sample, whereas the significance of positive (negative) oil price shocks changes at the 0. 10 (0. 90) quantile for the pre-crisis (post-crisis) period.  Overall, the results are robust with alternative estimate technique.  5. 3. 2.  Different lambda values We examine whether our findings are robust to different λ.  We experiment with different values of λ ranging from 0. 1 to 1. 5.  To save space, we only report the results with λ=0. 1 in Table 11.  In this case, there are only two differences, i. e.  the 0. 10 quantile for positive oil shocks before the crisis and the 0. 90 quantile for negative oil shocks after the crisis.  Themagnitudes of the coefficients, however, are slightly different.  The results are almost unchanged, which are also true for other values of λ.  5. 3. 3.  Different random seeds.  As the standard errors for quantile estimates are obtained by the bootstrapping approach, the signiﬁcant level might be impacted by random seeds.  Thus, we check the robustness of our results with different seeds.  The number of bootstrap replications is 10,000.  All the results are unchanged.  We can say that our study is robust to the chosen seed and ensures the validity of the conclusions.  The results are not reported here to conserve space but are available upon request.  <Conclusion> Conclusions.  This paper aims at complementing the research on the relationships between oil price shocks, China's economic policy uncertainty and stock returns by paying special attention to the distribution of stock returns.  The main contribution of this study is to examine their nexus across the conditional distribution of stock returns.  For this purpose, quantile regression technique has been employed.  From an economic perspective, the aim is to provide a richer characterization of the relationships between oil price shocks, economic policy uncertainty and stock returns.  Moreover, considering that the dependence relationships might be changed by a crisis, we further explore the relationships both before and after the recent ﬁnancial crisis, and the differences between these time periods. 