 National oil companies (NOCs), that have the government as their major ownership, control most of the international oil reserves.  In the early 1970s, NOCs controlled slightly more than 10% of the world’s oil and gas reserves (Leis et al. , 2012).  By the end of 2000s, NOCs controlled 73% of oil reserves and 65% of gas reserves (Victor et al. , 2011).  The nature of the NOC’s ownership alters its objectives, and directly inﬂuence the public policies and incentives faced by company’s managers (Vickers and Yarrow, 1988).  Despite the importance of the effects of ownership, research on oil and gas companies is limited.  In fact, the literature has compared the technical eﬃciency between NOCs and IOCs.  Al-Obaidan and Scully (1992) state that NOCs generate between 61% and 65% of the IOCs’ revenues with the same inputs.  Victor (2007) ﬁnds that revenues from their main commercial objective are generated with more eﬃciency by IOCs than NOCs.  This author attributes these ineﬃciencies to several factors, in particular, employment policy and subsidies for delivered products, among others.  Wolf and Pollitt (2008) estimate a 3. 6% increase in return on sales, a 35% drop in employment and an average of 15% increase in total production when an NOC becomes an IOC.  Wolf (2009) ﬁnds that IOCs encourage superior performance compared to NOCs in terms of output eﬃciency and proﬁtability.  Eller et al.  (2011) ﬁnd that NOCs are less eﬃcient than IOCs, which can be mainly explained by the differences in the ﬁrms’ objectives.  Likewise, Shleifer and Vishny (1994), Hartley and Medlock (2008), Eller et al.  (2011) and Hartley et al.  (2012) ﬁnd empirical evidence that non-commercial objectives, such as domestic fuel subsidies and employment – which represent high levels of employment, unproﬁtable projects, or non-necessary expenditures – are major sources of reduced economic eﬃciency for many NOCs.  NOCs’commercialobjectiveisverymuchlikethoseofinternational oil companies (IOCs), seeking to generate wealth for their owners – the citizens.  Nevertheless, governments include non-commercial objectives in NOCs missions.  While IOCs seek to maximize shareholder value, NOCs often have a wider range of objectives, such as providing domestic fuel price subsidies, fostering domestic employment, wealth re-distribution, economic development, and energy security (Shleifer and Vishny, 1994.  Hartley and Medlock, 2008.  Eller et al. , 2011.  Hartley et al. , 2012).  The different objectives between NOCs and IOCs are even deeper at the managerial level, due to their different ownership and/or shareholding.  In IOCs, so far as they are publicly traded, ownership means – in principle – a direct claim on the proﬁts generated by the ﬁrms commercial activities.  Any fundamental changes in IOC’s governance ultimately require the shareholders’ majority approval, according with their by-laws.  This structure poses well known problems related to managerial incentives, mainly studied through the principal-agent paradigm (Jensen and Meckling, 1976.  Harris and Raviv, 1978).  In practice, this agency problem is countered by the existence of a market for ownership rights, the threat of takeover, the threat of bankruptcy, and a managerial labor market (Jensen and Meckling, 1976.  Harris and Raviv, 1978).  A widespread incentive practice has been to align management’s interests with those of stockholders, through partial compensation with stocks and stock options (Holmström, 1999).  There is also a principal–agent relationship between the government and IOC, in which the government (principal) could design an incentive contract that induces the IOC (agent) to undertake actions that will maximize the government’s welfare through taxes and royalties (Pongsiri, 2004). 