 Introduction Buy-side analysts play an important role in equity markets because their research directly impacts the investing decisions of portfolio managers (Cheng et al. , 2006.  Frey and Herbst, 2014.  Rebello and Wei, 2014).  These analysts usually work for an investment ﬁrm (e. g. , mutual fund, hedge fund, pension fund), and they perform their research activities exclusively for the ﬁrm that employs them.  In contrast to sell-side analysts whose stock recommendations are distributed widely to their clients and who often receive coverage in the business press, buy-side analysts' stock recommendations are not available to anyone outside their own ﬁrm.  Thus, although buy-side analysts are much closer than sell-side analysts to the ultimate investing decision, they are rarely the subject of academic research.  The purpose of this study is to expand our understanding of the activities of buy-side analysts and their role in the capital markets.  We survey 344 buy-side equity analysts employed by 181 institutional investment ﬁrms and conduct 16 detailed followup interviews on a wide range of topics.  We examine the factors that determine their compensation, their motivation to issue proﬁtable stock recommendations, the inputs to their stock recommendations, the frequency and value of their interactions with company management, and their assessments of ﬁnancial reporting quality.  Further, because buy-side analysts are an important consumer of sell-side research, we examine the nature and frequency of their interactions with sell-side analysts and the attributes of sell-side analysts they ﬁnd most important.  One important takeaway of our paper relates to the role of sell-side analysts in buy-side research.  Speciﬁcally, although we ﬁnd that buy-side analysts have strong ﬁnancial incentives to produce proﬁtable stock recommendations, fewer than 3% of them indicate sell-side stock recommendations are a very useful input for their own stock recommendations.  Nevertheless, we ﬁnd that sell-side analysts add value to buy-side analysts in other ways.  For example, buy-side analysts typically follow more companies spread across more industries than do sell-side analysts, so they often rely on the sell side to quickly get up to speed on a particular industry.  Further, buy-side analysts indicate that industry knowledge is the most useful input to their stock recommendations, which are the primary determinants of their compensation.  Our ﬁndings help explain why institutional investors consistently rate industry knowledge so highly in Institutional Investor's (II) annual rankings of sell-side services.  Relatedly, buy-side analysts indicate that private communication with senior management is an important input into their stock recommendations, and that sell-side analysts play a pivotal role in facilitating access to management.  Collectively, our ﬁndings suggest buy-side analysts rely on sell-side analysts for raw information (e. g. , industry knowledge) and access to company management, which help inform their own stock recommendations.  however, buy-side analysts do not look to sell-side analysts when translating this information into their own stock recommendations.  Despite prior research suggesting that sell-side analysts employed by large brokerages have more resources (Clement, 1999.  Clement and Tse, 2003.  Hong and Kubik, 2003), and that II All-Stars are superior sell-side analysts (Asquith et al. , 2005.  Leone and Wu, 2007.  Stickel, 1992), fewer than 3% of the buy-side analysts say brokerage size and All-Star status are important attributes of sell-side analysts when deciding whether to use information they provide.  In contrast, sell-side analysts' experience following a company and the frequency of their communication with senior management are the two most important determinants of buy-side analysts' decisions to use information sell-side analysts provide.  Concerns that ﬁnancial reports lack timeliness and suffer from information overload have grown in recent years (White, 2013).  Despite these concerns, nearly half (48%) of the buy-side analysts indicate that the recent 10-K or 10-Q report is very useful for determining their stock recommendations.  These ﬁnancial reports are more useful to them than quarterly conference calls, management earnings guidance, and recent earnings performance.  Buy-side analysts also believe the most important attribute of high-quality earnings is that earnings are backed by operating cash ﬂows.  When we asked about “red ﬂags” of management effort to intentionally misrepresent ﬁnancial results, many “red ﬂags” identiﬁed by prior research received strong support, including internal control weaknesses and weak corporate governance, suggesting buy-side analysts are concerned about the integrity of ﬁnancial reports.  We make several contributions to the literature.  Prior research documents that buy-side analysts play an important role in institutional investment decisions (Cheng et al. , 2006.  Crawford et al. , 2014.  Frey and Herbst, 2014.  Rebello and Wei, 2014).  However, the determinants of buy-side analysts' stock recommendations remain unclear, so our ﬁndings represent an important step forward for the literature.  Further, institutional ownership has grown from around 5% of U. S.  equities in 1945 to over 67% in 2010 (Blume and Keim, 2012).  thus, buy-side analysts play an increasingly important role in equity markets.  We also add to the literature's limited understanding of the working relationship between buy-side and sell-side analysts.  Lastly, because buy-side analysts have strong incentives to identify attributes of high-quality earnings and “red ﬂags” of misreporting, their views about the value of ﬁnancial statements and the determinants of ﬁnancial reporting quality bring important insights to the literature (Nelson and Skinner, 2013).  <Middle> Subject pool, survey design and delivery, interviews, and cross-sectional analyses.  2. 1.  Subject pool.  We used Thomson One to identify our subject pool of buy-side equity analysts. 1 For each ﬁrm in the S&P 100 index as of September 10, 2012, we identiﬁed the 100 institutional investment ﬁrms with the largest percentage ownership as of March 31, 2013.  This included a total of 450 institutional investment ﬁrms, and we collected contact information for all buy-side equity analysts afﬁliated with these ﬁrms in Thomson One. 2 We restricted our sample to analysts located in the United States or Canada to mitigate any language-related difﬁculties for our survey participants.  In total, our subject pool includes 4,865 buy-side analysts employed by 450 institutional investment ﬁrms that are the 100 largest shareholders of at least one of the S&P 100.  For each investment ﬁrm identiﬁed by our selection process, we captured all buy-side analysts listed in Thomson One, not just those covering companies in the S&P 100.  The investment ﬁrms in our subject pool exhibit considerable variation in size. 3 Further, these investment ﬁrms do not invest only in large-cap stocks like the S&P 100. 4 2. 2.  Survey design and delivery.  We designed a survey to answer fundamental questions about the activities of buy-side analysts and the determinants of their stock recommendations.  In doing so, we wanted to shed light on the interactions of buy-side analysts with other capital market participants who are more commonly the subject of academic research, namely sell-side analysts and company management.  After compiling an initial list of questions, several buy-side analysts reviewed our survey and suggested additional questions they deemed relevant for a buy-side audience.  After several iterations, we piloted our survey with buy-side analysts who helped us gain information about the reasonableness and presentation of our questions, the functionality of the online survey platform, and the time required to complete the survey.  The collective feedback we received helped us reduce the possibility that we asked unimportant questions, failed to ask fundamental questions, or designed a survey requiring too much time to complete.  Our survey contained 15 questions, many with multiple parts, followed by demographic questions.  To reduce the burden on analysts, we grouped the 15 questions into three broad categories that we presented sequentially. 5 The ﬁrst category consists of four questions about buy-side analysts' interactions with and their assessment of sell-side analysts.  The second category has seven questions about buy-side analysts' interactions with company management and their portfolio managers, the inputs to their stock recommendations, and the determinants of their compensation.  The ﬁnal category is comprised of four questions about buy-side analysts' views of ﬁnancial reporting, including signs that ﬁnancial results have been misrepresented and evidence of high-quality earnings.  Within each category, we randomized the order in which we presented the questions.  Except when the options had a natural sequence (e. g. , Never, Once a year, Twice a year), we randomized the order in which we presented each question's options. 6 After asking the 15 survey questions, we asked the analysts to provide demographic information.  We used qualtrics. com to deliver the survey via email on September 17, 2013.  We sent reminder emails to analysts who had not completed the survey on September 26 and October 9, and we closed the survey on October 15, four weeks after our original invitation. 7 To encourage participation, we told our subjects we would donate $10,000 multiplied by the response rate to our survey, and that we would allocate the total donation among four charities from which we allowed the analysts to choose.  We informed analysts that their responses would be held in strict conﬁdence, that no individual response would be reported, and that the survey should take less than 15 minutes to complete. 8 We received a total of 344 responses for a response rate of 7. 1%, with a completed survey from at least one analyst at 181 different investment ﬁrms (40% of the investment ﬁrms in our subject pool).  Our response rate is similar to that of other ﬁnance and accounting surveys administered via email. 9 2. 3.  Interviews.  We asked analysts to provide their phone number if they were willing to be contacted for follow-up interviews.  Fiftyseven analysts volunteered for an interview, and we conducted one-on-one phone interviews with 16 analysts in order to obtain additional insights beyond those contained within the responses to the survey. 10 Prior to conducting the interviews, we created a list of questions we knew we wanted to ask.  others were follow-up questions based on the aggregated survey results.  Due to time constraints, we did not ask each question on our list to every analyst.  however, over the course of the interviews, multiple analysts addressed each question.  We used a semi-structured interview protocol, wherein we asked open-ended questions and allowed the analysts to elaborate as they saw ﬁt.  We sought to interview a diverse set of analysts that reﬂected the demographic characteristics of our full sample. 