
Limited regulatory oversight and weak public ﬁnancial disclosure in the municipal bond market provide a novel context
for studying the conﬂicting roles of market and political forces in driving disclosure decisions.  From a market perspective,
low borrowing costs minimize resources consumed by interest payments and maximize resources that can be devoted to
political priorities.  Therefore, municipal ofﬁcials are incented to use disclosure to reduce the cost of capital, to the extent the
beneﬁt exceeds the cost of publishing and disseminating the information.  From a political perspective, municipal ofﬁcials
operate under a democratic system in which voters rely on the limited information available to them to make electoral
decisions.  Therefore, reputational damage from disclosing negative information to voters may inhibit disclosure. 
To better understand the trade-off between minimizing the cost of capital through transparency, minimizing expected
reputational costs by suppressing negative information, and minimizing administrative costs, I identify several events that
alter the cost-beneﬁt tradeoff.  Because these events affect only a subset of municipal bond issues, unaffected issues create a
natural control group. 
First, I identify a ubiquitous, externally imposed escalation of credit risk: the abatement of municipal bond insurance. 
Municipal bond insurance was historically prevalent in the municipal bond market because it reduces the cost of capital for
issuers.  During the ﬁnancial crisis, municipal bond insurers suffered large losses related to subprime mortgage exposure,
leading to credit downgrades for all of the bond insurers.  By 2010, most insurers ceased writing new policies, several were
forced to cease paying claims, and a few, including Ambac, sought bankruptcy protection.  Despite the fact that exposure to
municipal bonds did not precipitate the ﬁnancial distress of the municipal bond insurers, the cost of capital for issuers of
insured debt increased. 
After controlling for unobservable issue-level heterogeneity, group-speciﬁc time trends, time ﬁxed effects, new issuance,
changes in credit quality, and changes in county-level demographics, I document that issuers of insured bonds respond to
the diminution of bond insurance with increased disclosure, on average.  Speciﬁcally, issuers of insured debt are 7 percent
more likely to ﬁle ﬁnancial statements and 60 percent more likely to ﬁle a budget after Ambac's bankruptcy than issuers of
uninsured debt.  This disclosure increase is particularly pronounced for issues insured by Ambac and issuers of insured debt
that issue new bonds over the ensuing two-year period, suggesting these disclosures are motivated by a desire to reduce the
cost of capital.  By contrast, the countervailing reputational incentive to suppress negative information is particularly acute
for issuers that were inordinately exposed to the nationwide drop in house prices that precipitated the distress of the bond
insurers.  I ﬁnd that issuers of insured bonds located in counties that experience extreme house price depreciation are less
likely than other issuers to increase disclosure following Ambac's bankruptcy, demonstrating the relative strength of
reputational incentives. 
Next, I examine the relationship between disclosure and heightened credit risk that stems endogenously from disclosing
negative information.  Because voters cannot directly observe the performance of county ofﬁcials, they evaluate ofﬁcials
across a variety of indirect economic, ﬁscal, and social outcomes.  I focus on two such outcomes that overlap with the
dimensions on which the rating agencies evaluate credit risk.  From an economic perspective, voters penalize incumbents for
personal welfare loss, such as income abatement (Lewis-Beck and Stegmaier, 2000).  From a ﬁscal perspective, voters
penalize incumbents for wealth transfers in the form of increased governmental spending (Peltzman, 1990).  These negative
outcomes jointly heighten the cost of capital and decrease the probability of political success for incumbent ofﬁcials. 
I ﬁnd that issuers that either suffer a decline in local per capita income or increase spending reduce the quantity and
quality of public disclosure.  Issuers in counties that experience a negative change in per capita income ﬁle 7 percent fewer
ﬁnancial statements and are 33 percent less likely to separately ﬁle a budget in the following year than issuers that do not
experience a negative change in per capita income.  Issuers that increase spending are 4 percent less likely to ﬁle ﬁnancial
statements, ﬁle 11 percent fewer ﬁnancial statements and are 22 percent less likely to ﬁle a budget in the following year
than issuers that do not increase spending.  These reductions suggest that, on balance, the desire to capture personal political
success tends to outweigh the capital market-based motive to provide transparency.  Moreover, issuers with relatively strong
ex-ante electoral incentives are particularly likely to suppress negative information.  By contrast, issuers that are subject to
relatively strong voter oversight are less likely to suppress negative information. 
Finally, I examine the relationship between dissemination costs and disclosure.  I capitalize on the introduction of a free,
electronic, centralized repository for municipal disclosures (similar to the SEC's EDGAR system for corporate disclosures). 
The online system allows issuers to communicate information immediately and inexpensively to all stakeholders at once.  I
provide evidence that the ability to reach a broad audience at lower cost online is associated with enhanced disclosure. 
Issuers with few alternate dissemination channels are 9 percent more likely to disclose and ﬁle 28 percent more ﬁnancial
statements after the inception of the repository than large, general purpose issuers that are more likely to have web sites.  By
contrast, issuers of pre-refunded bonds ﬁle 20 percent fewer ﬁnancial statements in the repository than issuers of bonds
that are required to provide continuing disclosures. 
Overall, this paper seeks to develop a richer understanding of municipal disclosure incentives, but it also contributes
broadly to the disclosure choice literature.  My ﬁndings demonstrate that the relationship between risk and disclosure
depends on the nature of the risk.  I provide novel evidence that to the extent reputational capital is not threatened,
increased risk is associated with increased disclosure.  This suggests that even in the municipal bond market, in which capital
is relatively cheap, issuers believe there are beneﬁts to transparency.  However, municipal ofﬁcials have powerful personal
incentives to preserve reputational capital.  When present, these short-term political incentives tend to outweigh the perceived capital market beneﬁts of transparency. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 develops hypotheses.  Section 3 describes the data, empirical
proxies, and research design used to estimate the relation between disclosure incentives and disclosure outcomes.  I present
results demonstrating relationships between disclosure, cost of capital, reputational capital, and the cost of dissemination in
Section 4.  I offer concluding remarks in Section 5. 
2.  Disclosure incentives. 
As of 2015, state and local governments owe investors over $3. 7 trillion, spanning 50 thousand different issuers and
1. 5 million individual municipal bonds.  These bonds ﬁnance general governmental operations and myriad projects, ranging
from sewage to hospitals.  Repayment sources are also diverse, ranging from property taxes to usage fees.  Despite the
economic importance of the municipal bond market, municipal disclosure is weak relative to corporate disclosure.  For
example, the rate of failure to ﬁle ﬁnancial disclosures in 2009 was nearly 40 percent (Schmitt, 2011). 
Weak municipal disclosure persists because of a weak ex-ante commitment to disclosure.  Issuers of municipal securities
are exempt from the majority of federal securities laws, including the registration and reporting requirements of the
Securities Act of 1933 and the Exchange Act of 1934.  At the time of issuance, issuers must agree to provide annual ﬁnancial
disclosures to designated information repositories within a speciﬁed period (usually six to nine months).  However, breach of
a continuing disclosure covenant does not constitute a technical default and issuers are not subject to direct regulatory
enforcement of their disclosure obligations.  The lack of regulatory consequences for failure to ﬁle annual ﬁnancial statements makes disclosure effectively voluntary for many issuers, inducing a great amount of heterogeneity in both the
quantity and quality of available information. 
Most of the extant municipal disclosure research explores variation in the quality of disclosure.  These studies document a
relationship between reporting quality and a speciﬁc aspect of the capital market, political, or regulatory environment.  From
a capital market standpoint, disclosure quality is positively related to debt levels (Austin and Robbins, 1986) and governance
(Baber Name, 2013) and negatively related to bond insurance (Gore Name, 2004).  From a political standpoint, reporting quality
is positively related to the council-manager form of government (Evans and Patton, 1983) and negatively related to electoral
incentives (Kido Name, 2012).  Finally, from a regulatory standpoint, reporting quality is positively related to state GAAP
disclosure regulation (Gore, 2004). 
I extend this literature in three important ways.  First, I investigate the decision to provide ﬁnancial statements to the
public.  In the aforementioned studies, measurement of reporting quality is conditional upon the existence of ﬁnancial
statements.  However, not all issuers provide ﬁnancial statements to the public.  For example, Baber Name (2013) lose 30
percent of their sample due to lack of ﬁnancial statement availability.  Second, I extend prior cross-sectional analyses that
document an association between the level of risk and the level of disclosure (Gore Name, 2004; Botosan and Plumlee, 2002)
by examining the relationship between changes in different types of risk and changes in disclosure.  Third, rather than focus
on disclosure incentives provided by one stakeholder in particular, I study the tension between capital market incentives
and political disincentives.  To measure the relative strength of conﬂicting incentives, I examine the disclosure response to
several changes in the municipal environment. 
2. 1.  Municipal bond insurance. 
Bond insurers accept an up-front fee, and in return agree to make principal and interest payments in the event of issuer
default.  The value of bond insurance to municipal bond issuers is the strong credit rating of the insurer, which reduces the
cost of borrowing for the issuer.  Prior to 2008, all of the “big four” municipal bond insurers (Ambac, MBIA, FGIC, and FSA)
carried AAA ratings and over ﬁfty percent of new issues were insured.  Investors in insured debt had little incentive to
perform robust ﬁnancial analysis on the underlying credit because they experienced loss only in the event of joint issuer and
insurer default.  However, the likelihood of insurer default increased during the ﬁnancial crisis of 2007–2009 because the
insurers wrote insurance on structured ﬁnance securities tied to the housing market, for which they were unable to pay
claims.  All of the big four insurers' credit ratings were downgraded below AAA in 2008 and continued to decline, many to
speculative-grade, in 2009 and 2010.  By the time Ambac sought Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in 2010, less than nine
percent of new issues were insured.  I refer to the diminution of bond insurance as the “Ambac bankruptcy” in this paper
because Ambac's November 2010 bankruptcy ﬁling was a high-proﬁle event that punctuated the severity of the industry's
distress. 
The diminution of bond insurance had two related but distinct implications for municipal bond issuers.  First, the risk of
insurer default increased the cost of capital on existing insured debt.  Yields on insured bonds, particularly those insured by
troubled insurers, rose above yields on equivalent uninsured debt after the ﬁnancial crisis (Bergstresser Name, 2013), in part
due to uncertainty about the credit quality of underlying issuers.  Therefore, issuers of bonds insured by Ambac in particular
may choose to use disclosure as an alternate mechanism to reduce their cost of capital.  The second implication of the
diminution of bond insurance is increased cost of capital for future issuances.  Because insurance capacity and its perceived
beneﬁt to issuers were dramatically lower following the ﬁnancial crisis, issuers of insured debt that subsequently issue new
debt are particularly likely to substitute additional transparency for the future loss of insurance. 
I measure issuers of insured bonds' disclosure response to the diminution of bond insurance relative to the response of
issuers of uninsured bonds.  Therefore, the ability to cleanly draw inferences relies on the assumption that issuers of insured
bonds were not asymmetrically affected by the economic conditions that led to the insolvency of the municipal bond
insurers.  While this is likely a fair assumption, depressed home values across the country led to defaults on sub-prime
mortgages.  Some issuers (irrespective of insurance) were more exposed to house price depreciation than others.  Therefore,
some issuers of insured bonds were simultaneously exposed to economic risk from depressed home values and credit risk
from the depressed value of bond insurance.  For these issuers, disclosure can reveal negative local economic outcomes and
therefore poses a threat to the reputational capital of county ofﬁcials.  Issuers of insured bonds that experience extreme local
house price depreciation are less likely to increase disclosure than issuers of insured bonds whose local economy did not2. 2.  Negative outcomes. 
Counties are governed by a board of elected ofﬁcials (hereafter, a “commission”) that is presided over by a senior ofﬁcial
who is generally responsible for preparing the budget. 1 I refer to county commissioners and senior ofﬁcials, collectively, as
county “ofﬁcials. ” County ofﬁcials have a ﬁduciary relationship with investors and a political relationship with the electorate.  Both stakeholders (creditors and voters) have a vested interest in the economic and ﬁscal strength of the county. 
Despite the fact that county ofﬁcials cannot directly control the local economy, economic changes are important to
creditors and voters.  Moody's and Standard & Poor's heavily weight the local economy in their municipal rating criteria and
explicitly consider per capita income in their rating methodologies.  Standard & Poor's attributes the use of per capita income
to “the data availability of these statistics at the local level and their correlation with overall economic activity and local
government revenues” (Standard & Poor's, 2012).  Moreover, the political economy literature suggests that voters incorporate
indirect outcomes, such as personal welfare changes, into their assessment of politicians.  Votes for incumbent presidents,
senators, governors, and congressmen increase in per capita income and job growth (Peltzman, 1990; Lewis-Beck and
Stegmaier, 2000). 2 Therefore, a decline in per capita income at the county level simultaneously raises the cost of capital and
lowers the reputational capital of county ofﬁcials. 
Governmental spending is also important to creditors and voters.  The two major credit rating agencies evaluate local
governmental control over expenditures because expenditure controls lessen the likelihood of ﬁscal distress.  Furthermore,
voters penalize spending increases around election years at the federal and state level (Peltzman, 1992).  Irrespective of how
the spending is ﬁnanced, voters respond negatively to shifting resources from the private sector to the public sector of the
economy.  Therefore, creditors and voters are apt to respond negatively to spending increases, raising the cost of capital and
lowering the reputational capital of county ofﬁcials. 
I examine whether and how disclosure changes in response to these negative economic and ﬁscal outcomes.  On one
hand, disclosure may increase because the cost of capital increases.  Disclosure decisions motivated by cost of capital considerations are likely to be made by issuers with greater ﬁnancing needs.  Therefore, issuers that subsequently issue new
debt are more likely to respond to cost of capital incentives than those that issue debt infrequently. 
On the other hand, disclosure may decline because self-interested politicians seek to maximize their own utility.  One way
to maximize utility (increase the probability of re-election) is to temporarily suppress information that may be reputationally damaging.  The rationale is similar to corporate managers who delay discretionary bad news disclosures in the hope
that they may never have to release the bad news if the situation improves before the required information release (Kothari
Name, 2009).  Because disclosure is effectively voluntary and required information releases only occur at the time of bond
issuance, municipal investors are not able to easily distinguish issuers with negative information from issuers with no
information (Dye, 1985).  Moreover, timely data from external sources at the county level is relatively sparse.  For example,
county level economic data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) is released with a 16-month delay.  Therefore,
municipal ofﬁcials can temporarily withhold damaging information and hope that stakeholders will focus on favorable
information in the interim (Verrecchia, 1983). 
While the direction of the disclosure response to negative outcomes is ultimately an empirical question, several anecdotes suggest public municipal disclosure decreases in the face of ﬁscal and economic distress.  The City of Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania, ﬁled for bankruptcy protection in October of 2011, having failed to formally ﬁle annual ﬁnancial statements in
any of the three preceding years.  In addition, estimated disclosure-compliance rates fell from 67 percent before the ﬁnancial
crisis to 60 percent during the ﬁnancial crisis (Schmitt, 2011). 
The incentive to suppress negative information is heterogeneous across issuers.  General purpose issuers ﬁle comprehensive annual ﬁnancial reports (CAFRs), which often disclose information about county demographics, property values,
principal employers, and principal taxpayers.  These statements are particularly likely to inform residents, voters, and
creditors about the economic condition of the county.  Non-general purpose issuers ﬁle fund-speciﬁc statements that also
often include economic information.  For example, school districts ﬁle statements that may include information about
student test scores, funding for needy families, spending on school lunches for underprivileged children, and spending on
capital improvement projects that address overcrowding. 