 It is widely known that the stock market reacts positively to earnings surprises at the ﬁrm level.  Recent research (e. g. , Kothari et al. , 2006.  Cready and Gurun, 2010) documents a negative association between stock returns and contemporaneous earnings surprises at the aggregate level, suggesting that aggregate earnings convey discount rate news.  The exact channel through which aggregate earnings convey discount news, however, remains largely a puzzle.  In this study, we help shed light on this question by examining.  (1) whether aggregate earnings contain information about monetary policy news as measured by unexpected changes in the Federal funds rate.  (2) whether the monetary policy news in aggregate earnings can explain the negative aggregate earnings-returns association.  and (3) whether the market fully anticipates the policy news in aggregate earnings.  The Federal funds rate—the interest rate banks charge each other for overnight loans of reserve balances—is the U. S.  Federal Reserve's primary tool for monetary policy.  The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is responsible for setting the Federal funds target rate (hereafter, the target rate).  The FOMC adjusts the target rate through open market operations, which affect the provision of reserves to depository institutions.  At each meeting, the FOMC adjusts the target rate in line with economic developments.  When economic data are stronger (weaker) than expected, the FOMC is likely to increase (decrease) the target rate.  A large literature ﬁnds that the stock market reacts negatively (positively) to unexpected increases (decreases) in the target rate (e. g. , Jensen et al. , 1996.  Thorbecke, 1997.  Jensen and Mercer, 2002.  Rigobon and Sack, 2004.  Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005). 1 If aggregate earnings are positively associated with future GDP growth and inﬂation (e. g. , Konchitchki and Patatoukas, 2014a, 2014b.  Shivakumar and Urcan, 2014), then positive (negative) aggregate earnings news may be predictive of increases (decreases) in the target rate, resulting in a negative (positive) market reaction.  We therefore predict that the negative aggregate earnings-returns association is driven at least in part by the monetary policy news in aggregate earnings.  To test this prediction, we begin by replicating Kothari et al.  (2006).  Speciﬁcally, we perform a quarterly analysis of the association between stock returns and contemporaneous earnings surprises.  Because we measure monetary policy news using changes in the target rate, we end our sample in 2007, the last year the target rate was the main policy instrument used by the Fed.  Consistent with Kothari et al.  (2006), we ﬁnd a signiﬁcantly negative aggregate earnings-returns association over the 1972–2007 period.  When we control for changes in the target rate, however, this negative association becomes insigniﬁcant.  We next conduct vector autoregression analysis and ﬁnd that aggregate earnings are predictive of target rate changes up to one quarter ahead, even after controlling for GDP growth, inﬂation, and unemployment.  In particular, a one-standard-deviation positive shock to aggregate earnings growth is associated with a target rate hike that is 17. 5 bps higher one quarter after the shock.  This indicates that aggregate earnings convey monetary policy news that can contribute to the negative aggregate earnings-returns association.  We next move from the quarterly analysis to conduct two sets of short-window analyses.  monthly analysis using monthly returns and FOMC announcement analysis using one-day FOMC announcement returns.  The short-window analyses provide additional insights on the monetary policy channel.  First, monetary policy decisions are made at least eight times a year.  As a result, there can be multiple FOMC announcements and target rate changes within a quarter (potentially in opposite directions).  The frequency of FOMC announcements can thus make it difﬁcult to cleanly isolate the effect of target rate changes on a quarterly basis.  Second, the short-window analyses allow us to employ Federal funds futures to construct a market-based measure of policy news that better distinguishes the unexpected component from the expected component of target rate changes.  This measure is important because unexpected changes in the target rate, not expected changes, are what trigger a market reaction.  The market-based measure of policy news also allows us to examine the extent to which the aggregate earnings-returns association is affected by the strength of the market's reaction to policy news.  Third, by utilizing one-day policy surprises and one-day announcement returns, we can isolate the rate surprises as well as the market's reaction for each FOMC announcement, providing direct evidence on whether the market fully anticipates the policy news in aggregate earnings.  For the monthly analysis, we construct monthly aggregate earnings changes using the earnings announced in the corresponding month.  To construct monthly policy surprises, we follow Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) and use Federal funds futures data.  We ﬁrst examine whether aggregate earnings changes convey information about policy news and whether the market reacts to policy surprises.  We ﬁnd that aggregate earnings are positively associated with both contemporaneous and one-month-ahead policy surprises, suggesting that positive earnings news is predictive of positive policy surprises (i. e. , larger-than-expected rate hikes or lower-than-expected rate cuts by the Fed).  We also ﬁnd a signiﬁcantly negative market reaction to policy surprises, with the reaction being stronger for negative policy surprises.  Turning to the monthly aggregate earnings-returns association, we ﬁnd that aggregate earnings are negatively associated with both contemporaneous and one-month-ahead monthly returns.  When we examine these associations separately over months with negative and positive policy surprises, we ﬁnd that the negative association is only signiﬁcant in periods with negative policy surprises.  In addition, the negative association is muted when we control for the corresponding policy surprises.  In contrast, during months with positive policy surprises, the aggregate earnings-returns association is negative but insigniﬁcant, with the magnitude of the association largely unchanged when we control for the corresponding policy surprises.  Taken together, these ﬁndings are consistent with the monetary policy news channel.  Aggregate earnings convey policy news and the market reacts negatively to policy surprises, which drive the negative aggregate earnings-returns association.  When policy news does not trigger a signiﬁcant market reaction (e. g. , in periods with positive policy surprises), we do not observe a signiﬁcant negative aggregate earnings-returns association.  The signiﬁcant negative association between aggregate earnings and one-month-ahead returns that becomes insignificant when one-month-ahead policy surprises are included in the regression suggests that the market does not fully anticipate the upcoming policy news in aggregate earnings.  To shed further light on this result, we examine whether the FOMC announcement-day returns are also predictable.  We ﬁnd a signiﬁcant negative association between aggregate earnings and one-month-ahead FOMC announcement-day returns when policy surprise is negative.  This association is muted when we control for the one-day policy surprises.  This ﬁnding conﬁrms that the market does not fully anticipate the policy news in aggregate earnings prior to an FOMC announcement.  More importantly, it provides direct evidence that the negative aggregate earnings-returns association is driven at least in part by the market's reaction to the upcoming policy news.  Our study contributes to several literatures.  First, recent research documents a negative aggregate earnings-returns association.  Our results extend this work by showing that aggregate earnings contain monetary policy news, a channel through which aggregate earnings convey discount rate news that can help explain the negative association.  Second, while a large literature in accounting examines the information content of ﬁrm-speciﬁc accounting information and its usefulness for different economic decisions, few studies examine its aggregate counterpart.  Our study adds to the growing research on the information content of aggregate earnings.  We show that aggregate accounting news contains information about the Fed's monetary policy stance, which has practical implications for investors and analysts interested in predicting the Fed's next move.  Finally, a large literature in macroeconomics and monetary economics attempts to understand the determinants of and responses to monetary policy.  Our study complements this research by providing evidence on the information role of aggregate earnings.  The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 provides some background on the Fed's monetary policy.  Section 3 reviews the related literature and presents our main empirical prediction.  Section 4 outlines the data and sample selection.  Section 5 presents our empirical research design and results, and Section 6 concludes.  2.  Background.  The Fed's monetary policy The U. S.  Federal Reserve System deﬁnes monetary policy as “the actions undertaken by a central bank, such as the Federal Reserve, to inﬂuence the availability and cost of money and credit to help promote national economic goals. ”2 The Fed's explicit monetary policy goals are to promote maximum sustainable output and employment and to promote stable prices.  These goals are prescribed in a 1977 amendment to the Federal Reserve Act. 3 The Fed implements its policy objectives through three tools.  open market operations, discount loans, and reserve requirements.  The most commonly used policy tool, however, is open market operations, which traditionally consist of buying or selling U. S.  government securities (primarily Treasury bills) to target a speciﬁed Federal funds rate.  Decisions about the target Federal funds rate are made by the FOMC, which holds eight regularly scheduled meetings per year and additional meetings and/or conference calls as needed.  Prior to each meeting, the FOMC is provided with the Fed's Greenbook, which contains their economic projections and outlook discussions, and the Beige Book, which provides anecdotal information on current economic conditions in each of the 12 Federal Reserve districts as well as by sector.  Although the FOMC determines the target rate, actual open market operations (the buying and selling of government securities) are conducted by the trading desk of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  If the FOMC decides to loosen monetary policy, it will lower the target rate, in which case the trading desk will buy government securities from U. S.  banks.  As a result, banks will have more cash reserves.  To the extent that banks can make these additional reserves available for overnight lending to other banks, the effective Federal funds rate declines.  Monetary policy tightening, in contrast, involves selling government securities to banks, thereby reducing reserves and increasing the effective Federal funds rate. 4 3.  Related literature and predictions Kothari et al.  (2006) document a negative association between stock returns and contemporaneous earnings surprises at the aggregate level.  The intuition for the negative aggregate earnings-returns association is often illustrated using the decomposition framework of Campbell (1991).  In this framework, returns (R) are decomposed into an expected component and an unexpected component (UR), with unexpected returns arising from either cash ﬂow news, or discount rateBased on this framework, the contemporaneous association between returns and aggregate earnings changes (can be expressed as follows).  One can see from above that a negative aggregate earnings-returns association can arise when the association between Þ) is sufﬁciently positive and dominates the association aggregate earnings news and discount rate news (i. e. , cov NR.  dE ). 5 Put differently, a negative aggregate earningsbetween aggregate earnings news and cash ﬂow news (i. e. , cov Ncf .  dE returns association suggests that aggregate earnings convey discount rate news.  Empirical evidence is consistent with this conjecture (Cready and Gurun, 2010.  Patatoukas, 2014). 6 The exact channel through which aggregate earnings convey discount rate news, however, remains largely a puzzle.  In this study, we propose a monetary policy channel.  In particular, we posit that aggregate earnings contain monetary policy news, which can help explain the negative earnings-returns association at the aggregate level.  3. 1.  Aggregate earnings and monetary policy news As noted in Section 2, the Fed's monetary policy has two primary objectives.  stable prices and maximum sustainable employment and output.  When economic data come in stronger (weaker) than expected, the FOMC is likely to increase (decrease) the target rate.  Exactly what economic data are used to arrive at a policy decision is less clear, however, due to the discretionary nature of monetary policy.  However, given the Fed's stated objectives, inﬂation, unemployment, and real GDP growth are important inputs in this decision.  Hence, when inﬂation, employment, and GDP ﬁgures are higher than expected, the market, in anticipation of the Fed's reaction, is likely to revise its expectation about the future target rate upward.  Evidence from recent research suggests that accounting earnings at the aggregate level contain macroeconomic information that can be informative about inﬂation, unemployment, and GDP (e. g. , Shivakumar, 2007.  Konchitchki and Patatoukas, 2014a, 2014b.  Shivakumar and Urcan, 2014).  For example, Shivakumar (2007), in his discussion of Anilowski et al.  (2007), offers preliminary evidence that aggregate earnings are positively associated with future inﬂation.  Shivakumar and Urcan (2014) ﬁnd that aggregate earnings surprises are predictive of Producer Price Index inﬂation forecast errors.  Similarly, Patatoukas (2014) ﬁnds a positive association between changes in expected inﬂation and contemporaneous growth in aggregate earnings.  Konchitchki and Patatoukas (2014a, 2014b) provide evidence consistent with aggregate earnings growth being a leading indicator for nominal and real GDP growth.  Taken together, these studies suggest that aggregate earnings convey information about macroeconomic indicators that can be indicative of the Fed's intention to lower or raise interest rates.  3. 2.  The monetary policy channel A large literature in ﬁnance and monetary economics ﬁnds that the market reacts negatively (positively) to unexpected increases (decreases) in the Federal funds rate (e. g. , Jensen et al. , 1996.  Thorbecke, 1997.  Jensen and Mercer, 2002.  Rigobon and Sack, 2004.  Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005).  Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), in particular, ﬁnd that the effect on returns is due in large part to changes in the risk premium, with unexpected increases (decreases) in the target rate associated with an increase (decrease) in the risk premium.  Thus, if positive (negative) earnings growth is predictive of target rate increases (decreases), and monetary tightening (easing) is associated with an increase (decrease) in the risk premium and hence lower (higher) stock returns, then we should observe a negative aggregate earnings-returns association.  We therefore predict that the negative (or weak) aggregate earnings-returns association is driven at least in part by the monetary policy news in aggregate earnings.  Speciﬁcally, if aggregate earnings contain news about monetary policy, and the market reacts negatively to policy surprises, then the negative aggregate earnings-returns association should be muted when we control for policy surprises.  <Middle> Sample and data.  4. 1.  Sample.  Both our quarterly and monthly samples come from the intersection of the Compustat and CRSP databases.  We exclude observations with missing earnings, earnings announcement date, beginning-of-quarter stock price, or book value, as well as observations for which the stock price is below $1.  Because we focus on the monetary policy channel and measure policy news using the Federal funds target rate, it is important that we employ a sample period over which the target rate is the Fed's primary policy tool.  In 2008, the target rate reached 0% and the Fed began using large-scale purchases of Treasury and agency securities (i. e. , “quantitative easing”) as its primary policy tool. 7 We therefore end both our quarterly and monthly samples in 2007.  For the quarterly sample, we follow Kothari et al.  (2006) and include only those ﬁrms with ﬁscal quarters ending in March, June, September, or December to calculate aggregate earnings.  Our quarterly sample is from 1972 to 2007.  For the monthly sample, we include all ﬁrms regardless of ﬁscal year-end (i. e. , we include ﬁrms with ﬁscal quarters ending in any month) to calculate aggregate earnings.  We follow Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) and begin the sample period in June 1989 due to the availability of Federal funds futures data, which we use to measure policy surprises in our monthly analysis.  Our ﬁnal quarterly (monthly) sample contains 371,571 ﬁrm-quarter (279,574 ﬁrm-month) observations over the 1972–2007 (1989–2007) period.  Macroeconomic and monetary policy variables used in our main analyses come from the St.  Louis Federal Reserve Economic Database (FRED) and the Philadelphia Federal Reserve's real-time data set, while quarterly and monthly macroeconomic forecasts come from the Philadelphia Federal Reserve's Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) and Money Market Services International (MMS), respectively. 8 We obtain FOMC meeting dates from the Federal Reserve's website and Federal funds futures data from the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE).  Variable deﬁnitions are summarized in Appendix A.  4. 2.  Variable measurement.  4. 2. 1.  Measuring policy surprise We follow Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) in measuring monthly and announcement-date policy surprises.  Speciﬁcally, we utilize Federal funds futures to determine market expectations of rate changes.  See Appendix B for details on the construction of these variables.  4. 2. 2.  Controlling for macroeconomic news In the quarterly analysis, we control for macroeconomic news using revisions in forecasts of inﬂation, unemployment, and real GDP growth.  We measure the corresponding forecast revision for quarter q as the difference between the median current-quarter forecast made in quarter q and the median one-quarter-ahead forecast made in quarter q 1 (Macro FRq where Macro¼Inﬂation, Unemp, RGDP). 9 The quarterly forecast data come from the SPF and the forecasts are released midquarter.  Macroeconomic forecast errors can also be used to capture macroeconomic news.  However, because the realized values of macroeconomic indicators are released after the end of each quarter, quarterly forecast errors are relatively stale compared to quarterly forecast revisions.  In particular, forecast errors measured in quarter q provide news about the prior quarter whereas forecast revisions measured in quarter q provide news for the contemporaneous quarter. 10 Therefore, in the quarterly analysis, we use forecast revisions to capture macroeconomic news. 11 In the monthly aggregate earnings-returns analysis, we control for macroeconomic news using forecast errors instead of forecast revisions due to the lack of availability of one-month-ahead forecasts.  Speciﬁcally, we use the median monthly forecasts of inﬂation, unemployment, and industrial production growth from MMS to measure the corresponding forecast error, which is the difference between the median forecast and the corresponding realized value for month t 1 released in month t (Macro FEt where Macro¼Inﬂation, Unemp, IndPro).  Notice that in the monthly analysis we control for news about industrial production instead of real GDP growth because, unlike inﬂation and unemployment, real GDP is measured quarterly.  Also, while the MMS forecasts for inﬂation, unemployment, and industrial production start in 1980, forecasts for real GDP growth start in 1990.  thus, using real GDP forecasts would further reduce our time series. 12 Additionally, we use PPI forecast errors to measure inﬂation news because Shivakumar and Urcan (2014) ﬁnd that aggregate earnings have predictive ability for future changes in PPI rather than CPI.  5.  Empirical research design and results.  5. 1.  Quarterly analysis.  For the quarterly analysis, we begin with descriptive statistics of quarterly aggregate earnings changes, target rate changes, and macroeconomic forecast revisions.  Speciﬁcally, we calculate the average and median values of aggregate earnings growth, the change in the target rate, and the three macroeconomic forecast revision variables for three subsample periods.  “Decrease” (when the target rate decreases), “Increase” (when the target rate increases), and “No Change” (when the target rate remains the same).  Eq is aggregate earnings for quarter q 1 announced in quarter q, where earnings is deﬁned as earnings before extraordinary items.  Aggregate earnings growth, dEq, is seasonally differenced quarterly earnings (i. e. , Eq–Eq 4) scaled by the aggregate lagged market value of equity.  The change in the target rate, ΔTargetq, is the difference between Targetq and Targetq 1, the target rate as of the end of quarters q and q 1, respectively.  Macroeconomic forecast revisions (Macro FRq, where Macro¼Inﬂation, Unemp, RGDP) are as deﬁned in Section 4. 2. 