
It is widely known that the stock market reacts positively to earnings surprises at the ﬁrm level.  Recent research (e. g. ,
Kothari Name, 2006; Cready and Gurun, 2010) documents a negative association between stock returns and contemporaneous earnings surprises at the aggregate level, suggesting that aggregate earnings convey discount rate news.  The
exact channel through which aggregate earnings convey discount news, however, remains largely a puzzle.  In this study, we
help shed light on this question by examining: (1) whether aggregate earnings contain information about monetary policy
news as measured by unexpected changes in the Federal funds rate; (2) whether the monetary policy news in aggregate
earnings can explain the negative aggregate earnings-returns association; and (3) whether the market fully anticipates the
policy news in aggregate earnings. 
The Federal funds rate—the interest rate banks charge each other for overnight loans of reserve balances—is the U. S. 
Federal Reserve's primary tool for monetary policy.  The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is responsible for setting
the Federal funds target rate (hereafter, the target rate).  The FOMC adjusts the target rate through open market operations,
which affect the provision of reserves to depository institutions.  At each meeting, the FOMC adjusts the target rate in line
with economic developments.  When economic data are stronger (weaker) than expected, the FOMC is likely to increase
(decrease) the target rate.  A large literature ﬁnds that the stock market reacts negatively (positively) to unexpected increases
(decreases) in the target rate (e. g. , Jensen Name, 1996; Thorbecke, 1997; Jensen and Mercer, 2002; Rigobon and Sack, 2004;
Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005). 1 If aggregate earnings are positively associated with future GDP growth and inﬂation (e. g. ,
Konchitchki and Patatoukas, 2014a, 2014b; Shivakumar and Urcan, 2014), then positive (negative) aggregate earnings news
may be predictive of increases (decreases) in the target rate, resulting in a negative (positive) market reaction.  We therefore
predict that the negative aggregate earnings-returns association is driven at least in part by the monetary policy news in
aggregate earnings. 
To test this prediction, we begin by replicating Kothari Name (2006).  Speciﬁcally, we perform a quarterly analysis of the
association between stock returns and contemporaneous earnings surprises.  Because we measure monetary policy news
using changes in the target rate, we end our sample in 2007, the last year the target rate was the main policy instrument
used by the Fed.  Consistent with Kothari Name (2006), we ﬁnd a signiﬁcantly negative aggregate earnings-returns association over the 1972–2007 period.  When we control for changes in the target rate, however, this negative association
becomes insigniﬁcant.  We next conduct vector autoregression analysis and ﬁnd that aggregate earnings are predictive of
target rate changes up to one quarter ahead, even after controlling for GDP growth, inﬂation, and unemployment.  In particular, a one-standard-deviation positive shock to aggregate earnings growth is associated with a target rate hike that is
17. 5 bps higher one quarter after the shock.  This indicates that aggregate earnings convey monetary policy news that can
contribute to the negative aggregate earnings-returns association. 
We next move from the quarterly analysis to conduct two sets of short-window analyses: monthly analysis using
monthly returns and FOMC announcement analysis using one-day FOMC announcement returns.  The short-window analyses provide additional insights on the monetary policy channel.  First, monetary policy decisions are made at least eight
times a year.  As a result, there can be multiple FOMC announcements and target rate changes within a quarter (potentially in
opposite directions).  The frequency of FOMC announcements can thus make it difﬁcult to cleanly isolate the effect of target
rate changes on a quarterly basis.  Second, the short-window analyses allow us to employ Federal funds futures to construct
a market-based measure of policy news that better distinguishes the unexpected component from the expected component
of target rate changes.  This measure is important because unexpected changes in the target rate, not expected changes, are
what trigger a market reaction.  The market-based measure of policy news also allows us to examine the extent to which the
aggregate earnings-returns association is affected by the strength of the market's reaction to policy news.  Third, by utilizing
one-day policy surprises and one-day announcement returns, we can isolate the rate surprises as well as the market's
reaction for each FOMC announcement, providing direct evidence on whether the market fully anticipates the policy news
in aggregate earnings. 
For the monthly analysis, we construct monthly aggregate earnings changes using the earnings announced in the
corresponding month.  To construct monthly policy surprises, we follow Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) and use Federal
funds futures data.  We ﬁrst examine whether aggregate earnings changes convey information about policy news and
whether the market reacts to policy surprises.  We ﬁnd that aggregate earnings are positively associated with both
contemporaneous and one-month-ahead policy surprises, suggesting that positive earnings news is predictive of
positive policy surprises (i. e. , larger-than-expected rate hikes or lower-than-expected rate cuts by the Fed).  We also ﬁnd
a signiﬁcantly negative market reaction to policy surprises, with the reaction being stronger for negative policy
surprises. 
Turning to the monthly aggregate earnings-returns association, we ﬁnd that aggregate earnings are negatively associated
with both contemporaneous and one-month-ahead monthly returns.  When we examine these associations separately over
months with negative and positive policy surprises, we ﬁnd that the negative association is only signiﬁcant in periods with
negative policy surprises.  In addition, the negative association is muted when we control for the corresponding policy
surprises.  In contrast, during months with positive policy surprises, the aggregate earnings-returns association is negative
but insigniﬁcant, with the magnitude of the association largely unchanged when we control for the corresponding policy
surprises.  Taken together, these ﬁndings are consistent with the monetary policy news channel.  Aggregate earnings convey
policy news and the market reacts negatively to policy surprises, which drive the negative aggregate earnings-returns
association.  When policy news does not trigger a signiﬁcant market reaction (e. g. , in periods with positive policy surprises),
we do not observe a signiﬁcant negative aggregate earnings-returns association. 
The signiﬁcant negative association between aggregate earnings and one-month-ahead returns that becomes insignificant when one-month-ahead policy surprises are included in the regression suggests that the market does not fully
anticipate the upcoming policy news in aggregate earnings.  To shed further light on this result, we examine whether the
FOMC announcement-day returns are also predictable.  We ﬁnd a signiﬁcant negative association between aggregate
earnings and one-month-ahead FOMC announcement-day returns when policy surprise is negative.  This association is
muted when we control for the one-day policy surprises.  This ﬁnding conﬁrms that the market does not fully anticipate the
policy news in aggregate earnings prior to an FOMC announcement.  More importantly, it provides direct evidence that the
negative aggregate earnings-returns association is driven at least in part by the market's reaction to the upcoming
policy news. 
Our study contributes to several literatures.  First, recent research documents a negative aggregate earnings-returns
association.  Our results extend this work by showing that aggregate earnings contain monetary policy news, a channel
through which aggregate earnings convey discount rate news that can help explain the negative association.  Second, while a
large literature in accounting examines the information content of ﬁrm-speciﬁc accounting information and its usefulness
for different economic decisions, few studies examine its aggregate counterpart.  Our study adds to the growing research on
the information content of aggregate earnings.  We show that aggregate accounting news contains information about the
Fed's monetary policy stance, which has practical implications for investors and analysts interested in predicting the Fed's
next move.  Finally, a large literature in macroeconomics and monetary economics attempts to understand the determinants
of and responses to monetary policy.  Our study complements this research by providing evidence on the information role of
aggregate earnings. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 provides some background on the Fed's monetary policy.  Section 3
reviews the related literature and presents our main empirical prediction.  Section 4 outlines the data and sample selection. 
Section 5 presents our empirical research design and results, and Section 6 concludes. 
2.  Background: The Fed's monetary policy
The U. S.  Federal Reserve System deﬁnes monetary policy as “the actions undertaken by a central bank, such as the
Federal Reserve, to inﬂuence the availability and cost of money and credit to help promote national economic goals. ”2 The
Fed's explicit monetary policy goals are to promote maximum sustainable output and employment and to promote stable
prices.  These goals are prescribed in a 1977 amendment to the Federal Reserve Act. 3 The Fed implements its policy
objectives through three tools: open market operations, discount loans, and reserve requirements.  The most commonly used
policy tool, however, is open market operations, which traditionally consist of buying or selling U. S.  government securities
(primarily Treasury bills) to target a speciﬁed Federal funds rate. 
Decisions about the target Federal funds rate are made by the FOMC, which holds eight regularly scheduled meetings per
year and additional meetings and/or conference calls as needed.  Prior to each meeting, the FOMC is provided with the Fed's
Greenbook, which contains their economic projections and outlook discussions, and the Beige Book, which provides
anecdotal information on current economic conditions in each of the 12 Federal Reserve districts as well as by sector. 
Although the FOMC determines the target rate, actual open market operations (the buying and selling of government
securities) are conducted by the trading desk of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
If the FOMC decides to loosen monetary policy, it will lower the target rate, in which case the trading desk will buy
government securities from U. S.  banks.  As a result, banks will have more cash reserves.  To the extent that banks can make
these additional reserves available for overnight lending to other banks, the effective Federal funds rate declines.  Monetary
policy tightening, in contrast, involves selling government securities to banks, thereby reducing reserves and increasing the
effective Federal funds rate. 4
3.  Related literature and predictions
Kothari Name (2006) document a negative association between stock returns and contemporaneous earnings surprises at
the aggregate level.  The intuition for the negative aggregate earnings-returns association is often illustrated using the
decomposition framework of Campbell (1991).  In this framework, returns (R) are decomposed into an expected component
and an unexpected component (UR), with unexpected returns arising from either cash ﬂow news, or discount rateBased on this framework, the contemporaneous association between returns and aggregate earnings changes (can be expressed as follows). 
One can see from above that a negative aggregate earnings-returns association can arise when the association between
Þ) is sufﬁciently positive and dominates the association
aggregate earnings news and discount rate news (i. e. , cov NR; dE
). 5 Put differently, a negative aggregate earningsbetween aggregate earnings news and cash ﬂow news (i. e. , cov Ncf ; dE
returns association suggests that aggregate earnings convey discount rate news.  Empirical evidence is consistent with this
conjecture (Cready and Gurun, 2010; Patatoukas, 2014). 6 The exact channel through which aggregate earnings convey
discount rate news, however, remains largely a puzzle.  In this study, we propose a monetary policy channel.  In particular, we
posit that aggregate earnings contain monetary policy news, which can help explain the negative earnings-returns association at the aggregate level. 
3. 1.  Aggregate earnings and monetary policy news
As noted in Section 2, the Fed's monetary policy has two primary objectives: stable prices and maximum sustainable
employment and output.  When economic data come in stronger (weaker) than expected, the FOMC is likely to increase
(decrease) the target rate.  Exactly what economic data are used to arrive at a policy decision is less clear, however, due to
the discretionary nature of monetary policy.  However, given the Fed's stated objectives, inﬂation, unemployment, and
real GDP growth are important inputs in this decision.  Hence, when inﬂation, employment, and GDP ﬁgures are higher
than expected, the market, in anticipation of the Fed's reaction, is likely to revise its expectation about the future target
rate upward. 
Evidence from recent research suggests that accounting earnings at the aggregate level contain macroeconomic information that can be informative about inﬂation, unemployment, and GDP (e. g. , Shivakumar, 2007; Konchitchki and
Patatoukas, 2014a, 2014b; Shivakumar and Urcan, 2014).  For example, Shivakumar (2007), in his discussion of Anilowski
Name (2007), offers preliminary evidence that aggregate earnings are positively associated with future inﬂation.  Shivakumar
and Urcan (2014) ﬁnd that aggregate earnings surprises are predictive of Producer Price Index inﬂation forecast errors. 
Similarly, Patatoukas (2014) ﬁnds a positive association between changes in expected inﬂation and contemporaneous
growth in aggregate earnings.  Konchitchki and Patatoukas (2014a, 2014b) provide evidence consistent with aggregate
earnings growth being a leading indicator for nominal and real GDP growth.  Taken together, these studies suggest that
aggregate earnings convey information about macroeconomic indicators that can be indicative of the Fed's intention to
lower or raise interest rates. 
3. 2.  The monetary policy channel
A large literature in ﬁnance and monetary economics ﬁnds that the market reacts negatively (positively) to unexpected
increases (decreases) in the Federal funds rate (e. g. , Jensen Name, 1996; Thorbecke, 1997; Jensen and Mercer, 2002; Rigobon
and Sack, 2004; Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005).  Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), in particular, ﬁnd that the effect on returns is
due in large part to changes in the risk premium, with unexpected increases (decreases) in the target rate associated with an
increase (decrease) in the risk premium.  Thus, if positive (negative) earnings growth is predictive of target rate increases
(decreases), and monetary tightening (easing) is associated with an increase (decrease) in the risk premium and hence
lower (higher) stock returns, then we should observe a negative aggregate earnings-returns association.  We therefore
predict that the negative (or weak) aggregate earnings-returns association is driven at least in part by the monetary policy
news in aggregate earnings.  Speciﬁcally, if aggregate earnings contain news about monetary policy, and the market reacts
negatively to policy surprises, then the negative aggregate earnings-returns association should be muted when we control
for policy surprises. 
<Middle> Sample and data. 
4. 1.  Sample. 
Both our quarterly and monthly samples come from the intersection of the Compustat and CRSP databases.  We exclude
observations with missing earnings, earnings announcement date, beginning-of-quarter stock price, or book value, as well
as observations for which the stock price is below $1.  Because we focus on the monetary policy channel and measure policy
news using the Federal funds target rate, it is important that we employ a sample period over which the target rate is the
Fed's primary policy tool.  In 2008, the target rate reached 0% and the Fed began using large-scale purchases of Treasury and
agency securities (i. e. , “quantitative easing”) as its primary policy tool. 7 We therefore end both our quarterly and monthly
samples in 2007. 
For the quarterly sample, we follow Kothari Name (2006) and include only those ﬁrms with ﬁscal quarters ending in
March, June, September, or December to calculate aggregate earnings.  Our quarterly sample is from 1972 to 2007.  For the
monthly sample, we include all ﬁrms regardless of ﬁscal year-end (i. e. , we include ﬁrms with ﬁscal quarters ending in any
month) to calculate aggregate earnings.  We follow Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) and begin the sample period in June 1989
due to the availability of Federal funds futures data, which we use to measure policy surprises in our monthly analysis.  Our
ﬁnal quarterly (monthly) sample contains 371,571 ﬁrm-quarter (279,574 ﬁrm-month) observations over the 1972–2007
(1989–2007) period. 
Macroeconomic and monetary policy variables used in our main analyses come from the St.  Louis Federal Reserve
Economic Database (FRED) and the Philadelphia Federal Reserve's real-time data set, while quarterly and monthly macroeconomic forecasts come from the Philadelphia Federal Reserve's Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) and Money
Market Services International (MMS), respectively. 8 We obtain FOMC meeting dates from the Federal Reserve's website and
Federal funds futures data from the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE).  Variable deﬁnitions are summarized in
Appendix A. 
4. 2.  Variable measurement. 
4. 2. 1.  Measuring policy surprise
We follow Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) in measuring monthly and announcement-date policy surprises.  Speciﬁcally, we
utilize Federal funds futures to determine market expectations of rate changes.  See Appendix B for details on the construction of these variables. 
4. 2. 2.  Controlling for macroeconomic news
In the quarterly analysis, we control for macroeconomic news using revisions in forecasts of inﬂation, unemployment,
and real GDP growth.  We measure the corresponding forecast revision for quarter q as the difference between the median
current-quarter forecast made in quarter q and the median one-quarter-ahead forecast made in quarter q 1 (Macro FRq
where Macro¼Inﬂation, Unemp, RGDP). 9 The quarterly forecast data come from the SPF and the forecasts are released midquarter.  Macroeconomic forecast errors can also be used to capture macroeconomic news.  However, because the realized
values of macroeconomic indicators are released after the end of each quarter, quarterly forecast errors are relatively stale
compared to quarterly forecast revisions.  In particular, forecast errors measured in quarter q provide news about the prior
quarter whereas forecast revisions measured in quarter q provide news for the contemporaneous quarter. 10 Therefore, in the
quarterly analysis, we use forecast revisions to capture macroeconomic news. 11
In the monthly aggregate earnings-returns analysis, we control for macroeconomic news using forecast errors instead of
forecast revisions due to the lack of availability of one-month-ahead forecasts.  Speciﬁcally, we use the median monthly
forecasts of inﬂation, unemployment, and industrial production growth from MMS to measure the corresponding forecast
error, which is the difference between the median forecast and the corresponding realized value for month t 1 released in
month t (Macro FEt where Macro¼Inﬂation, Unemp, IndPro).  Notice that in the monthly analysis we control for news about
industrial production instead of real GDP growth because, unlike inﬂation and unemployment, real GDP is measured
quarterly.  Also, while the MMS forecasts for inﬂation, unemployment, and industrial production start in 1980, forecasts for
real GDP growth start in 1990; thus, using real GDP forecasts would further reduce our time series. 12 Additionally, we use
PPI forecast errors to measure inﬂation news because Shivakumar and Urcan (2014) ﬁnd that aggregate earnings have
predictive ability for future changes in PPI rather than CPI. 
5.  Empirical research design and results. 
5. 1.  Quarterly analysis. 
For the quarterly analysis, we begin with descriptive statistics of quarterly aggregate earnings changes, target rate
changes, and macroeconomic forecast revisions.  Speciﬁcally, we calculate the average and median values of aggregate
earnings growth, the change in the target rate, and the three macroeconomic forecast revision variables for three subsample
periods: “Decrease” (when the target rate decreases), “Increase” (when the target rate increases), and “No Change” (when
the target rate remains the same).  Eq is aggregate earnings for quarter q 1 announced in quarter q, where earnings is
deﬁned as earnings before extraordinary items.  Aggregate earnings growth, dEq, is seasonally differenced quarterly earnings
(i. e. , Eq–Eq 4) scaled by the aggregate lagged market value of equity.  The change in the target rate, ΔTargetq, is the difference
between Targetq and Targetq 1, the target rate as of the end of quarters q and q 1, respectively.  Macroeconomic forecast
revisions (Macro FRq, where Macro¼Inﬂation, Unemp, RGDP) are as deﬁned in Section 4. 2. 
The results are reported in Table 1.  We ﬁnd that 31. 9% (37. 5%) of the sample quarters correspond to a decrease (increase)
in the Federal funds target rate.  Further, as expected, median aggregate earnings growth is positive (negative) during
periods of increasing (decreasing) rates.  We also ﬁnd that inﬂation (unemployment) forecast revisions are negative (positive) during periods of decreasing rates and positive (negative) during periods of increasing rates, consistent with the Fed's
stated goals of low inﬂation and unemployment. 
5. 1. 1.  The aggregate earnings-returns association
Next, we replicate Kothari Name (2006) by estimating the contemporaneous aggregate earnings-returns relation. 13 We do so for
both the Kothari Name (2006) sample period (1972–2000) and our extended sample period (1972–2007).  Speciﬁcally, we estimate, where Rq is the market return over the three months in quarter q (i. e. , the quarter in which earnings for quarter q 1 are
announced), which is measured using the value-weighted CRSP indices, and dEq is as previously deﬁned.  In Eq.  (1B), we add
lagged dEq to the speciﬁcation in Eq.  (1A) to better capture aggregate earnings news. 14
The results on the contemporaneous earnings-returns association are reported in Table 2. 15 Focusing ﬁrst on Eq.  (1A), we
ﬁnd that consistent with Kothari Name (2006), the coefﬁcient on dEq is negative and signiﬁcant at the 5% (10%) level, with a
coefﬁcient of  7. 58 ( 5. 05) for the 1972–2000 (1972–2007) period.  When we add the control for lagged dEq in Eq.  (1B), we
continue to ﬁnd a negative and signiﬁcant coefﬁcient on dEq; with a coefﬁcient of  11. 61 ( 11. 32) for the 1972–2000
(1972–2007) period. 
To examine whether monetary policy news in aggregate earnings drives the negative aggregate earnings-returns
association, we estimate the following regressions,
where Rq, dEq, and ΔTargetq are as previously deﬁned.  We control for the lagged target rate change in order to better isolate
the surprise component of policy news because the stock market reacts negatively (positively) to surprise increases
(decreases) in the target Federal funds rate.  In addition to controlling for lagged values of dEq and ΔTargetq, in Eq.  (1D) we
control for macroeconomic news using forecast revisions of inﬂation, unemployment, and real GDP growth (Macro FRq,
where Macro¼Inﬂation, Unemp, RGDP) for quarter q, as deﬁned in Section 4. 2. 
The results on the effect of target rate changes on the earnings-returns association are also reported in Table 2.  Because
the results for the 1972–2000 and 1972–2007 periods are qualitatively similar, we focus our discussion on the latter period. 
We ﬁnd that the coefﬁcient on dEq becomes insigniﬁcant after controlling for target rate changes.  In particular, while the
coefﬁcient on dEq is  11. 32 and signiﬁcant at the 1% level in Eq.  (1B), it is  7. 82 and insigniﬁcant after controlling for
contemporaneous and lagged changes in the target rate in Eq.  (1C), while the coefﬁcient on ΔTargetq is  0. 90 and signiﬁcant at the 10% level. 16 Adding controls for macroeconomic news in Eq.  (1D) reduces the coefﬁcient on dEq to  5. 32 and
increases the R2 from 5. 5% to 7. 1%.  This reduction suggests that macroeconomic news has some incremental explanatory
power for aggregate returns. 17 Taken together, these results are consistent with the monetary policy news component of
aggregate earnings conveying discount rate news, which can help explain the previously documented negative aggregate
earnings-returns association. 
5. 1. 2.  Aggregate earnings and target rate changes: VAR analysis
Next we employ vector autoregression (VAR) analysis to examine whether aggregate earnings are predictive of changes
in the target rate.  Monetary policy studies often include a large menu of economic variables with multiple time series (e. g. ,
Bernanke, 1986; Blanchard and Watson, 1986).  A common approach to mitigating the endogeneity inherent in the time
series is to use VAR analysis (Sims, 1980a, 1980b, 1982, 1986; Stock and Watson, 2001), which models each variable as a
function of its own lags, as well as the lags of each of the other variables in the system.  This approach allows us to analyze
the effects of shocks to one or more of the variables in the system.  In basic VAR analysis, the equations are solved using
ordinary least squares (OLS).  If the variables are correlated with each other, which is often the case in a macroeconomic time
series, then the error terms are correlated and the shocks cannot be isolated.  Structural VARs require identifying
assumptions that prescribe speciﬁc causal links such that the shocks are uncorrelated.  Here, we estimate a structural VAR
model that includes ﬁve stationary variables: dEq, Inﬂationq, Unempq, RGDPq, and ΔTargetq. 18 Speciﬁcally, we consider the
following structural VAR, where Zq is a vector of the ﬁve stationary variables (dEq, Inﬂationq, Unempq, RGDPq, and ΔTargetq), A is a 5  5 full-rank matrix.  We focus on the dynamic responses to the structural shocks, εq.  To do so, we estimate the reduced-form
Our estimated VAR includes four lags, which is chosen to minimize the Akaike
where B denotes A
Information Criterion (AIC).  To identify the system, we impose a set of restrictions using a Cholesky decomposition of the
estimate of the variance-covariance matrix.  We order aggregate earnings ﬁrst, followed by the three macroeconomic
indicators (real GDP growth, inﬂation, and unemployment) and the target rate change. 19 This order reﬂects the intuition that
aggregate earnings contain news about future macroeconomic expectations, and both aggregate earnings and macroeconomic indicators contain news about future monetary policy. 20
Results from the structural VAR are best presented in the form of impulse response functions (IRFs), which describe how
a “response” variable reacts to a one-standard-deviation positive shock to an “impulse” variable over time.  For the IRFs, we
compute 90% bootstrapped conﬁdence intervals based on 1,000 replications.  Table C1 summarizing the IRF output is presented in Appendix C.  Fig.  1 plots the IRF of the target rate changes to a shock in aggregate earnings growth.  The x-axis
represents the number of quarters following the shock.  We ﬁnd that a one-standard-deviation increase in aggregate
earnings growth results in a 17. 5 bps increase in the target rate change one quarter after the shock.  This result is consistent
with aggregate earnings conveying information about the Fed's monetary policy actions.  These results, along with those in
Table 2, offer preliminary evidence that aggregate earnings convey monetary policy news that can contribute to the negative
aggregate earnings-returns association. 
5. 2.  Short-window analysis
Analyzing the role of monetary policy news at the quarterly frequency presents several concerns than can be mitigated
by short-window tests.  In this section, we discuss our short-window tests, in which we employ both monthly and FOMC
announcement-day measures of returns and surprises. 
5. 2. 1.  Monthly analysis
We begin with monthly analyses for the 1989–2007 period.  Table 3 reports descriptive statistics for monthly aggregate
earnings changes, the expected and surprise components of changes in the target rate, and macroeconomic forecast errors. 
We again partition our sample into periods of “Decrease,” “Increase,” or “No Change. ” The monthly descriptive statistics are
consistent with our quarterly numbers.  In particular, we ﬁnd that the target rate decreases (increases) in 18. 4% (13. 9%) of the
sample months and, as expected, average and median aggregate earnings growth is positive (negative) during periods of
increasing (decreasing) rates.  Further, the inﬂation forecast errors are more negative during periods of decreasing rates than
during periods of increasing rates. 21 Unemployment (industrial production growth) forecast errors are positive (negative)
when the target rate decreases but negative (positive) when the target rate increases. 
5. 2. 1. 1.  Aggregate earnings and policy surprises.  The monetary policy channel explanation for the negative aggregate
earnings-returns association relies on (1) aggregate earnings containing news about the unexpected component of target
rate changes and (2) the market reacting negatively to unexpected changes in the target rate.  Thus, before we provide
evidence on the monthly aggregate earnings-returns association, we ﬁrst examine whether aggregate earnings are associated with contemporaneous and future policy surprises.  Speciﬁcally, we estimate the following regressions,
where k¼{0,1}, Surprisetþ k is the monthly policy surprise as deﬁned in Appendix B, dEt is the sum of all ﬁrms’ seasonally
differenced quarterly earnings announced in month t scaled by aggregate lagged market value of equity, and Macro Controls
include the monthly forecast errors Inﬂation FEt, Unemp FEt, and IndPro FEt.  We include lagged values of dEt to better capture
aggregate earnings news.  Speciﬁcally, we follow Cready and Gurun (2009) and include dEt 3 to control for earnings for the
previous quarter announced in month. 
Table 4 presents results for Eqs.  (2A) and (2B), with results for contemporaneous surprises (Surpriset) in the left panel and
results for one-month-ahead surprises (Surprisetþ 1) in the right panel.  Although the coefﬁcient on dEt is positive for both
contemporaneous and one-month-ahead policy surprises, the association is only signiﬁcant for one-month-ahead surprises. 
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd that aggregate earnings growth is signiﬁcantly positively associated with the one-month-ahead policy
surprises, suggesting that aggregate earnings news is predictive of policy surprises.  For instance, the coefﬁcient of 0. 11 for dE
in Eq.  (2A) implies that a one-standard-deviation increase in aggregate earnings news is associated with a 2. 3 bps increase
in next month's funds rate surprises.  When we add the macroeconomic news controls in Eq.  (2B), the coefﬁcient on dEt
remains positive and signiﬁcant.  Moreover, adding the macroeconomic controls only marginally increases the adjusted R2,
from 4. 5% to 4. 7%, suggesting that the forecast errors convey relatively little incremental information about policy surprises
above and beyond aggregate earnings growth. 
5. 2. 1. 2.  Market reaction to policy surprise.  The results above conﬁrm that aggregate earnings contain news about future
Federal funds surprises.  However, for this news to drive the negative aggregate earnings-returns association, the market
must react negatively to Federal funds rate surprises.  Thus, in our next set of tests, we follow Bernanke and Kuttner (2005)
and examine the association between aggregate returns and the contemporaneous surprise and expected components of
target rate changes using the following equation, where Rt is the monthly CRSP value-weighted return and Surpriset and Expectedt are monthly measures of the surprise and
expected components of the Federal funds rate change, as deﬁned in Appendix B. 
We present results for the full sample in Table 5.  We ﬁnd that, consistent with Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), the market
reacts signiﬁcantly negatively to policy surprises.  Speciﬁcally, a 1% surprise increase in the target rate is associated with a
market response of  9. 54%, which is slightly lower than the  11. 43% documented by Bernanke and Kuttner (2005).  The
reaction to the expected component is insigniﬁcant. 
If the negative aggregate earnings-returns association is driven by the market's reaction to policy news in aggregate
earnings, then this association should be most negative when the market reaction is strongest.  To investigate this link, we
follow prior monetary policy literature (e. g. , Ehrmann and Fratzscher, 2004; Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005; Chuliá Name, 2010;
Lucca and Moench, 2015; Ozdagli and Weber, 2015), which considers the direction of the Federal funds surprise as a
potential source of variation in the market's response to a policy surprise.  Speciﬁcally, we divide our sample into positive
(surprise 40) and negative (surprise r0) policy surprises and re-estimate Eq.  (3).  The results for the subsample analysis
are also presented in Table 5.  We ﬁnd that the coefﬁcient on Surpriset is  10. 01 and signiﬁcant at the 1% level for negative
surprises, while for positive surprises, it is 3. 67 and insigniﬁcant at conventional levels.  These results suggest that the
negative relation between returns and policy surprises for the full sample is driven by the negative surprise subsample, i. e. ,
the market reaction to policy news is strongest in periods with negative policy surprises. 
5. 2. 1. 3.  The aggregate earnings-returns association.  We next examine the aggregate earnings-returns association at the
monthly frequency for the full sample, as well as the positive and negative surprise subsamples using contemporaneous and
one-month-ahead returns.  Speciﬁcally, we estimate the following regressions,
where k¼{0,1}, Rtþ k is the monthly CRSP value-weighted return, Surprisetþ k and Expectedtþ k are monthly surprise and
expected changes in the target rate as deﬁned in Appendix B, and dEt, and Macro Controls are as previously deﬁned in
Section 4. 2. 
Panel A (B) in Table 6 reports results for the contemporaneous (one-month-ahead) monthly returns regression, with
the full sample results in the left panel and the negative (positive) surprise subsample results in the middle (right) panel. 
For the full sample, we ﬁnd that the negative association between aggregate earnings and both contemporaneous and
one-month-ahead returns is muted when we control for the corresponding Federal funds rate surprises, although the
association is signiﬁcantly negative only for the one-month-ahead returns.  This is perhaps not surprising given that
aggregate earnings are informative about one-month-ahead surprises but not contemporaneous surprises (see Table 4). 
The stronger negative association in the one-month-ahead monthly returns regression suggests that at least part of the
negative association documented in the quarterly analysis arises from aggregate earnings containing one-month-ahead
policy news. 
In particular, in the one-month-ahead returns regression in Panel B, the magnitude of the coefﬁcient on dEt decreases
from 4,02 (signiﬁcant at the 5% level) in Eq.  (4A) to 65 (insigniﬁcant) after controls for policy news are added in Eq. 
(4B).  The negative and signiﬁcant coefﬁcient on Surprise is consistent with Bernanke and Kuttner's (2005) ﬁnding (as well as
our Table 5 results) that the market reacts negatively to policy surprises.  When we add the controls for macroeconomic
news (i. e. , forecast errors of inﬂation, unemployment, and industrial production growth) in Eq.  (4C), the coefﬁcient on dEt
and the adjusted R2 remain largely unchanged, which suggests that the forecast errors have little additional explanatory
value above and beyond aggregate earnings and policy news. 23 Interestingly, the coefﬁcient on 3 is positive and signiﬁcant in all speciﬁcations.  This result is consistent with the ﬁndings of Cready and Gurun (2009) and suggests that some
drift occurs at the aggregate level. 24
Table 6 further shows that for both contemporaneous and one-month-ahead returns, the coefﬁcient on dEt in Eq.  (4A)
is negative and signiﬁcant only for the negative surprise subsample.  Speciﬁcally, the coefﬁcient on dEt is  3. 11 ( 3. 98)
in Panel A (B).  Additionally, the coefﬁcient on dEt becomes less negative and insigniﬁcant after controlling for policy
surprises in Eq.  (4B), with the coefﬁcient on Surpriset (Surpriset þ 1) in Panel A (B) being signiﬁcant only for the negative
surprise subsample.  Overall, the signiﬁcant negative aggregate earnings-returns association is most evident in periods
with negative policy surprises, which corresponds to when we observe a strong market reaction to policy news.  When
there is little policy news (i. e. , when target rate surprises do not trigger a signiﬁcant market reaction as in the case of
positive policy surprises), we do not observe a signiﬁcantly negative aggregate earnings-returns association.  These
results are consistent with the policy news in aggregate earnings driving the negative aggregate earnings-returns
association. 
The signiﬁcant negative association between aggregate earnings and one-month-ahead returns suggests that the market
does not fully anticipate the upcoming policy news in aggregate earnings.  We next examine whether aggregate earnings are
predictive of next month's announcement-day policy surprise and announcement-day return. 
5. 2. 2.  FOMC announcement-day analysis
5. 2. 2. 1.  Aggregate earnings and policy surprises.  We ﬁrst investigate whether aggregate earnings are predictive of future
target rate surprises on the announcement day (i. e. , a one-day surprise) by examining the association between aggregate
earnings news and one-month-ahead announcement-day surprises.  Unlike the monthly analysis, we do not examine the
relation between aggregate earnings and contemporaneous announcement-day policy surprises to ensure that we capture earnings news released prior to the FOMC announcement.  In particular, dEt measures earnings news announced
throughout month t; thus, some of this news is released after the FOMC announcement.  We estimate the following
regressions, where dEt is aggregate earnings news announced in month t, and FOMC Surpriset is the Federal funds rate surprise
measured on the announcement day (or on the day of Open Market Desk implementation in the pre-1994 period) as
deﬁned in Appendix B.  Macro Controls include the monthly forecast errors Inﬂation FEt, Unemp FEt, and IndPro FEt. 
Panel A in Table 7 reports the results. 