 1.  Introduction Strategies that provide information about the environmental impact of activities are increasingly seen as an effective way to encourage conservation behavior (Evans et al. , 2009).  The environmental impact of everyday activities is often invisible to consumers who cannot gauge the impact of their actions.  Information strategies that aim to correct this information asymmetry are increasingly common (Foulon et al. , 2002.  Kennedy et al. , 1994).  These include mercury and air pollution advisories (Cutter and Neidell, 2009.  Shimshack and Ward, 2010.  Shimshack et al. , 2007.  Zivin and Neidell, 2009).  mandatory and voluntary corporate disclosure (Bennear and Olmstead, 2008.  Delmas et al. , 2010.  Evans et al. , 2009.  Khanna, 2001.  Konar and Cohen, 1997.  Lyon and Maxwell, 2007.  Powers et al. , 2011) and ecolabels (Hallstein and Villas-Boas, 2013.  Teisl et al. , 2002).  Such strategies are based on the principle that more and better information about the environmental impact of activities will encourage consumers to conserve.  Electricity conservation has been an especially active context for the deployment of information strategies.  Electricity and heat generation accounts for over 40% of greenhouse gases across the world (International Energy Agency, 2014) and effective conservation programs could contribute to signiﬁcant environmental improvements.  A large number of energy conservation experiments have been conducted using various information strategies to reduce energy use (Allcott, 2011.  Allcott and Rogers, 2014.  Asensio and Delmas, 2015.  Delmas and Lessem, 2014.  Jessoe and Rapson, 2014).  These include providing users with energy saving tips, historical individual usage, real time energy usage, peer usage, etc.  Meta-analyses of these ﬁeld experiments ﬁnd these strategies to be effective for conservation (Delmas et al. , 2013), although effectiveness varies with the type of message provided.  However, until very recently (McRae, 2015.  Pellerano et al.  2015), there have been no ﬁeld experiments in developing countries that focus on information strategies for energy conservation behavior.  Indeed, a recent meta-analysis based on 156 ﬁeld trials published in peer-reviewed journals from 1975 to 2012 found that 100% of the studies were conducted in developed countries, mostly Europe and the United States (Delmas et al. , 2013).  Developing countries differ in many characteristics from developed countries, including income and education levels, and information technology infrastructure, and it is unclear how energy information strategies would perform in such contexts.  For example, conducting ﬁeld experiments in developing countries could allow researchers to provide meaningful monetary gains and losses with the same amount that would be considered trivial in developed countries (Harrison and List, 2004.  Kachelmeier and Shehata, 1992.  Slonim and Roth, 1998). 1 At the same time, the demographic stratiﬁcation of developing countries is changing rapidly, with an increase share of middle classes with higher income levels.  For example, the middle class population of India is estimated at 267 million individuals and to double to 547 million individuals by 2026. 2 We still know little about the attitudes of these middle class households towards energy conservation and how to best engage them in conservation behavior (Mawdsley, 2004).  Some have described middle classes as particularly responsive to environmental issues because they have inherited a culture of conservation due to scarcity of resources (Vyas, 2012).  Others have suggested that middle class exhibit a lack of concern about the public good because they are swept into the global frenzy of consumption (Gidwani and Reddy, 2011).  So it is unclear how middle class households in developing countries will engage with information about energy conservation and act on it.  Since the majority of the growth in energy demand over the next few decades will come from the developing world (Wolfram et al. , 2012), and because of the rapid growth of middle class households, identifying cost-effective strategies for promoting energy conservation behavior for the middle class in these countries could have a profound impact on greenhouse gas emissions.  In this study, we contribute to the energy conservation behavior literature by conducting a ﬁeld experiment on electricity conservation behavior in urban India.  In recent years, India has emerged as one of the fastest growing economies of the world, entailing an equally rapid increase in energy consumption (Balachandra et al. , 2010).  The estimated electricity consumption in India was of 882,592 GWh in 2013, showing an annual growth rate of 9% since 2006 (Government of India, 2015).  India's consumption of energy is now the fourth largest in the world, behind China, the U. S and Russia (IEA, 2012).  Although the Indian economy is gradually becoming more energy efﬁcient, India is still among the least energy efﬁcient countries in the world (Balachandra et al. , 2010).  Most importantly, electricity generation is a major source of air pollution in India (Guttikunda et al. , 2013), since 66% of the electricity generation is derived from coal power plants (Guttikunda and Jawahar, 2014). 3 The pollution from these plants resulted in an estimated 80,000–115,000 premature deaths and N20 million asthma cases from exposure to total particulate matter (PM) 2. 5 pollution (Guttikunda and Jawahar, 2014).  Because of the signiﬁcant health impact of electricity generation in India, we decided to conduct a randomized ﬁeld experiment to test how motivations on the health impact of energy use motivate consumers to conserve electricity as compared to more conventional monetary motivations to conserve.  Buildings in India account for N30% (264,778 GWh) of overall energy consumption and residential building are responsible for 93% (246,243 GWh) of building energy consumption (Batra et al. , 2013.  CEA, 2012).  Indian residential energy use is expected to increase by around 65–75% in 2050 compared to 2005 (Van Ruijven et al. , 2011).  The urban population constitutes about a third of the total population and a major share of the residential energy consumption (Chaturvedi et al. , 2014).  Studying middle class urban households is particularly important because research shows that the impact of urbanization on emissions is more pronounced in the middle-income group than in the other income groups (Poumanyvong and Kaneko, 2010).  We therefore focus our research on identifying the most effective information strategies for energy conservation behavior in the residential sector for urban middle class households.  We replicated the methodology used in a randomized ﬁeld experiment conducted in the U. S.  by Asensio and Delmas (2015, 2016).  We provided real-time, smart metering energy feedback to 19 Indian households over an academic year, to test the effectiveness of two different messaging strategies based either on the environmental and health impacts of electricity consumption, or on the monetary savings of reducing electricity consumption.  While our sample size was relatively small, our advanced energy metering system enabled us to collect high frequency data with the statistical power necessary to detect changes in energy consumption behaviors.  This aspect of our energy metering system is remarkable as low technology electricity infrastructure as often been the main barrier to conduct energy information experiments in developing countries.  Indeed, in India, electriﬁcation rates are low, and the electricity grid frequently fails to provide a reliable supply of power when people need it (Urpelainen, 2014).  Furthermore, our system allowed us to identify participants' level of engagement with the treatment messages.  Namely how many times participants actually read the messages we sent them and how many times they visited their personalized electricity usage dashboard.  This feature allows us to assess the effect of the actual treatment, speciﬁcally when people access their energy feedback information, rather than just measuring the effect of the intent to treat, that is to say sending the email or making the information available on the dashboard.  This contrasts with previous energy conservation messaging strategies that relied mostly on “intent to treat” study designs (Schultz et al. , 2007.  Allcott, 2011).  This method also allows us to measure the link between engagement with the information and conservation behavior.  Our results show that non-monetary messages that framed electricity consumption in terms of environmental and health impacts were more effective than monetary messages that framed electricity consumption in terms of ﬁnancial savings.  Households in the environmental/health treatment group were more engaged with their electricity feedback, and reduced their electricity usage by 18. 4% relative to the control group, while households in the monetary group did not make signiﬁcant changes in their usage throughout the 12 weeks of the experiment relative to the control group.  These revealed preferences provide stark contrast to the stated preferences disclosed in a survey of 1820 residents of urban India, in which survey participants identiﬁed monetary savings, not health protection, as their main motivation for energy conservation.  Our ﬁndings illustrate the advantage of ﬁeld experimental techniques to reveal conservation behavior and the potential for nonmonetary information strategies for encouraging energy conservation behavior in developing countries.  The failure to engage in energy efﬁciency has been characterized as a market failure associated with imperfect information.  individuals lack the relevant information or knowledge to engage in energy saving behaviors (Golove and Eto, 1996.  Brown, 2001. 