1.  Introduction Environmental management as a source of competitive advantage continues to be studied by many researchers from a resource-based perspective.  The seminal studies by Hart (1995), Hart and Ahuja (1996), Russo and Fouts (1997), Judge and Douglas (1998), Sharma and Vredenburg (1998) and Hart and Dowell (2011) provide theoretical support for abundant empirical literature that does not always conﬁrm the “it pays to be green” hypothesis.  Indeed, studies on whether investment in environmental protection generates a positive economic performance in ﬁrms continue to feed the controversy (Wagner et al. , 2002.  Cainelli et al. , 2013.  Fujii et al. , 2013.  Trumpp and Guenther,Two signiﬁcant justiﬁcations can be presented to attempt to clarify this controversy.  The ﬁrst is related to the design of environmental strategy.  Environmental strategy can be designed in different ways, and the chosen design conditions the possibility of obtaining positive economic results.  Russo and Fouts (1997) were some of the ﬁrst authors to underline the economic consequences of a compliance strategy, relative to a go-beyond-compliance strategy.  Since then, studies by Klassen and Whybark (1999), Christmann (2000), King and Lenox (2002), Gonzalez-Benito and Gonzalez-Benito (2005), Aragón-Correa et al.  (2008), Guenster et al.  (2011), Sambasivan et al.  (2013) or Ghisetti and Rennings (2014) provide empirical evidence that the largely preventive (versus corrective) nature and the proactivity of action taken (deﬁned as the tendency to anticipate and go beyond mere regulatory compliance and normal industry standards) determines the likelihood of said action having a positive effect on economic performance.  The second argument that can justify mixed results in the study of the win-win hypothesis is related to the conditions and factors accompanying the implementation of environmental strategy.  The idea that the relationship between environmental and economic performance depends on situational factors and external or internal conditions has been highlighted by many authors, such as Christmann (2000), Wagner and Schaltegger (2003), Cainelli et al.  (2013), Antonioli et al.  (2014), Amores-Salvadó et al.  (2015) and Mazzanti et al.  (2016).  This study empirically analyzes the economic consequences of environmental protection in ﬁrms and considers how the above two factors can condition the sign of this relationship.  As a ﬁrst precaution, we have deﬁned our object of study, environmental strategy, by considering whether it has been designed proactively.  In fact, we have not studied the economic consequences of environmental protection in the broad sense but those of environmental proactivity.  With this purpose and based on the deﬁnitions proposed by authors such as Sharma and Vredenburg (1998), Aragón-Correa and Sharma (2003), Buysse and Verbeke (2003) and Murillo et al.  (2008), we interpret environmental proactivity as the ﬁrm's tendency to voluntarily apply environmental protection measures, largely based on prevention, to anticipate environmental protection requirements, and to go beyond regulatory compliance and the measures generally adopted in industry.  Secondly, we are interested in the conditions that concur and complement or hinder the implementation of environmental proactivity and that can condition the possibility of obtaining economic results.  The objective of this study is to analyze if the economic consequences of environmental proactivity in ﬁrms are better when the ﬁrms are also proactive in technological innovation and if this additional advantage is sustainable in dynamic environments.  Therefore, we investigate the possibility of positive complementarities between environmental and technological proactivity, and the stability and usefulness of these complementarities in dynamic environments.  The idea that spending resources on environmental protection generates complementarities with other resources (especially innovation and organizational change) is rooted in the literature (Wagner, 2007.  Antonioli et al. , 2013, 2014.  Gilli et al. , 2014.  Mazzanti et al. , 2016 for a review).  The effect of these complementarities on business results has been less studied, especially regarding the economic results of ﬁrms.  In addition, most of the studies of how complementarities affect economic results (Christmann, 2000.  Hall and Wagner, 2012.  Hottenrott et al. , 2012.  Antonioli et al. , 2014.  Amores-Salvadó et al. , 2015.  Rivera-Torres et al. , 2015) use subjective measures based on information obtained from surveys and/or place less importance on the environmental strategy's degree of proactivity.  In this research, we delve deeper into the study of complementarities arising from the implementation of a proactive environmental strategy.  We analyze the effect of these complementarities on the company's ability to obtain medium- and long-term economic results and analyze whether such an advantage is sustainable in dynamic environments.  The conclusions obtained reinforce the interpretation of environmental proactivity as a dynamic capacity.  Some of this paper's additional contributions to the previous literature on the topic are, ﬁrstly, a persuasive and objective measurement of the ﬁrm's efforts regarding both environmental protection and innovation in general, which considers the mean investment efforts made by industry ﬁrms to calculate the degree of environmental and technological proactivity.  Unlike most previous studies, we particularly emphasize the proactivity concept in both environmental and technological areas.  Secondly, this study is based on an objective measurement of economic results, which considers the ﬁrm's capability to generate returns in the medium and long term.  The application of panel data econometrics to the estimation of coefﬁcients is another distinctive aspect of this study.  This method enables the estimation to incorporate the speciﬁc effects of each ﬁrm (for instance, effects related to expertise, culture or resources and capabilities) that have an impact on its performance, but are not measured by the regressors in the model. 