 1.  Introduction The notion of ecosystem services has been accompanied by valuation methods to identify human preferences and priorities concerning nature.  Valuation studies are believed to draw decision makers' attention to the goods and services provided by natural processes (Laurans and Mermet, 2014).  Following the popularity of valuation the scientiﬁc practice of evaluating the goodness of nature - the questions of value and valuing - the process through which people assign value to objects - have gained increasing attention in literature.  Also critical perspectives have emerged.  The critics of utilitarian welfare economics have argued that the richness of what is acknowledged as good or valuable is missed in the existing monetary accounts of nature values (Polishchuk and Rauschmayer, 2012).  Monetary values, as revealed and stated preferences of self-regarding, narrowly rational individuals, are not considered to sufﬁciently reﬂect social importance (Laurans et al. , 2013.  Parks and Gowdy, 2013).  Assigning only economic value to ecosystem services is argued to make the multiplicity and nuances of human-nature relationships invisible by reducing the dimensions of importance, worth and meaning (Kosoy and Corbera, 2010.  Bowker, 2005).  In reality, the critics argue, things, beings and places matter to people for different and often incommensurable reasons (Maris, 2014).  As a response, non-monetary valuation methods have been developed to enlarge the value categories taken into account from purely economic to social and cultural values (e. g.  Tengberg et al. , 2012.  Kelemen et al. , 2014).  Often based on qualitative approaches, these methods broaden the type of information regarded as evidence of nature's significance to humans.  In addition, deliberative valuation methods move beyond individual values and address values as collective outcomes (e. g.  Maynard et al. , 2015.  Parks and Gowdy, 2013).  Despite the broadening scope, the debate has largely remained ignorant of the nature of valuing as a dynamical and situated process.  Human preferences are never set in stone but constantly transforming (Parks and Gowdy, 2013.  Gomez-Baggethun et al. , 2010).  Mapping environmental values at a particular moment, valuation studies pay little attention to how human preferences emerge from place and time speciﬁc, historical and political relations and events (Ernstson and Sörlin, 2013.  Bieling, 2014).  From this perspective, non-monetary valuation methods are problematic, too.  They address a broadened set of value categories but maintain the tendency to map values as static reﬂections of human preferences.  Polishchuk and Rauschmayer (2012) take a step forward by emphasizing the need to analyze factors inﬂuencing people's ability to gain beneﬁts from ecosystems.  Maynard et al.  (2015), in turn, point out the importance of identifying which actors value ecosystem services and beneﬁt from nature.  These approaches do not merely argue for the complexity of social processes through which nature values emerge.  Knowledge about social dynamics, power relations and accessibility inﬂuencing human preferences is essential for understanding the relevance of valuation studies and their results.  This article adds up to the debate by discussing the open-endedness of valuing from a pragmatist perspective.  We argue that the turn to the pragmatist approach in social sciences, pointing out the importance of practices and activities rather than opinions and perceptions in organizing social life, offers a fruitful starting point for understanding the emergence and transformation of environmental values.  The pragmatist perspective suggests that value judgments - be it taste, norms, appreciations, preferences, goods or respect - always come into being through everyday activities and particular situations (Heuts and Mol, 2013.  Muniesa, 2012.  Moor and Lury, 2011).  It assumes that values are practiced and performed rather than inherent characteristics of natural elements and functions.  Following this, the analytical focus is directed at how values emerge from practical ways of relating to species, ecosystems and their functions.  We introduce the pragmatist approach and its methodological orientation in the following section.  We then present empirical ﬁndings from three case studies demonstrating how values emerge from reallife valuing processes.  1) restoration of natural springs in Finland, 2) protection of the bearded vulture (Gypaetus barbatus) in the Vanoise National Park in the French Alps, and 3) management of urban biodiversity in the parks of the city of Grenoble in France.  The cases render visible three commonplace ways of relating to nature.  domestication, inheriting, and community building.  While the importance of this kind of relations has to a certain extent been underlined in literature, they have so far been largely neglected in valuation studies.  Paying attention to mundane activities enables to address social and temporal dimensions as well as speciﬁc modes of valuing leading to the outcomes that can be grasped by valuation studies.  Our ﬁndings lead us to discuss the importance and implications of the pragmatist perspective for nature conservation and point out its relevance for understanding the mechanisms that make governance of ecosystem services effective - or2.  Valuing in Practice.  In much of the current literature values have been presented as a cognitive phenomenon rather than as emerging from practical ways of living in and engaging with the world (Milton, 2002.  Polishchuk and Rauschmayer, 2012).  Although economic valuation methods operationalize also non-verbal ways of appreciating, for example, measure preferences in terms of costs, they still focus on the outcomes of valuing processes.  Pragmatist theories, in turn, can explain how values are enacted through everyday practices (Muniesa, 2012.  Moor and Lury, 2011.  Heuts and Mol, 2013).  Rather than characteristics that something has, or meanings depending on social positions and interests, values are “understood in the sense of a process, a form of mediation, of something that happens in practice, something that is done to something else, and so forth.  value is deﬁnitely not something that something just has” (Muniesa, 2012, pp.  32).  Hence, “the good is not something to pass a judgment on, in general terms and from the outside, but something to do” (Mol et al. , 2010, pp. 13).  Pragmatist ideas originate in Dewey's philosophy and discussion on the subjectivity of values.  To overcome the subject–object dualism, Dewey suggested that values emerge from practical situations (Dewey, 1915.  cited by Muniesa, 2012).  Following this, pragmatism calls analytical attention for the activities through which particular aspects of nature become signiﬁcant and relevant for people.  In this regard, from social constructionism which assumes that social groups have different views about nature based on their ways of framing it and emphasizing different qualities of its worth.  Pragmatism underlines that it is different ways of engaging with natural elements that make people care about them - or not.  the pragmatist perspective also stands out Drawing on the pragmatist approach, Jeannette Pols (2005) has demonstrated how patients' appreciations are formed in social interaction between other patients and professionals in mental health care.  She analyses the patients' preferences as emerging from particular relations and situations rather than as reﬂecting individual opinions.  The situations include the material environment that organizes the patients' lives and affects their preferences by enabling or constraining certain subject positions.  For instance, social activities may be preferred in a hospital ward with rather than without safe and comfortable corners.  Human preferences are thus a provisional outcome of particular ways of relating to other people and the materialities of everyday life.  Along these lines, Heuts and Mol (2013) suggest paying attention to the different modes of valuing, relevant to different practices of engaging with natural elements.  In particular, they discuss the difference between evaluation, classifying things as valuable, and valorizing, the activity of making something valuable, for instance by taking care of it.  Valuation studies often focus on the former, rating beneﬁts that people gain from nature although improving may be a crucial aspect of ecosystem services.  Thirdly, Heuts and Mol highlight respect as a mode of valuing. 