
Information asymmetry between "sophisticated" and "unsophisticated" investors (hereafter referred to simply as
"information asymmetry") is a pervasive friction in capital markets (e. g.  Amihud and Mendelson, 1986; Easley and O'hara,
2004; Kim and Verrecchia, 1994; Leuz and Verrecchia, 2000). 1 In this study, we revisit a fundamental question in
information economics, which has implications for both accounting and ﬁnance—what effect does the public release of ﬁrmspeciﬁc information into the market environment (hereafter referred to as a “information release”) have on information
asymmetry in a short window around the announcement event. 
Whereas public information releases of all types generally decrease information asymmetry in the post-announcement
period relative to the pre-announcement period, disclosure literature theorizes that the net effect of a given information
release on information asymmetry at announcement depends on the relative strengths of two countervailing forces that
exist simultaneously in any given information release (e. g. , Kim and Verrecchia, 1994).  First, an information release provides
some information that is new to both sophisticated and unsophisticated investors, which will increase information asymmetry at announcement, ceteris paribus (hereafter referred to as the "asymmetry-increasing force").  This immediate
increase occurs because of the superior processing abilities possessed by sophisticated investors relative to unsophisticated
investors, which allows sophisticated investors to impound the information contained in the announcement more quickly
than unsophisticated investors.  Second, at the same time, an information release reveals to unsophisticated investors some
information that is new to them but which was already known (privately) by sophisticated investors, which will decrease
information asymmetry at announcement by reducing the information gap between the two types of investors, ceteris
paribus (hereafter referred to as the "asymmetry-decreasing force").  Hence, in theory, the announcement effect of a public
information release on information asymmetry depends on which type of information dominates in that particular release. 
Relying on these theoretical arguments as motivation, prior literature ﬁnds that earnings announcements and management forecasts increase information asymmetry at announcement (e. g. , Coller and Yohn, 1997; Lee Name, 1993).  These
ﬁndings are consistent with our intuition that, as ﬁrm-supplied information releases, earnings announcements and management forecasts are likely to contain more information that is new to all external market participants (relative to
information that is new only to unsophisticated investors), resulting in dominance of the asymmetry-increasing force. 
Extant empirical literature has to our knowledge provided no evidence of an information release that decreases information
asymmetry at announcement.  Thus, there is no empirical evidence that the asymmetry-decreasing force plays a signiﬁcant
role in announcement-period information dynamics. 
In this study, we utilize the setting of analyst forecasts to re-examine these dynamics.  Compared to earnings
announcements and management forecasts, extant literature suggests that analyst forecasts contain a relatively high
concentration of information that is new only to unsophisticated investors (i. e, already known by sophisticated investors)
versus information that is new to all (e. g. , Irvine Name, 2007; Kadan Name, 2016).  Conceptually, an analyst forecast is an
information release by a sophisticated information intermediary who collects public and private information and analyzes
it, which parallels the activities of sophisticated investors.  Indeed, ﬁnancial analysts are often thought of as a proxy for
sophisticated investors in capital markets.  As an example, one may think about a sophisticated investor as an institution
(e. g. , hedge fund) that employs buy-side analysts.  The hedge fund's buy-side analysts have similar skill sets and industry
connections, and perform similar analysis, information collection and research as do sell-side analysts, and at certain times
collect information directly from sell-side analysts. 2 Therefore, it is likely that the information set possessed by sophisticated
investors will have relatively high overlap with the information contained in analyst forecasts.  Based on this logic, we
predict and document that analyst earnings forecasts decrease information asymmetry at announcement. 
Of course, analyst forecasts may indeed contain some information that is new to both sophisticated and unsophisticated
investors, which would produce the asymmetry-increasing force.  However, our study is based on an argument of relativity. 
That is, whereas the asymmetry-increasing force is dominant in earnings announcements and management forecasts, we
expect the asymmetry-decreasing force to be stronger in analyst forecasts, relatively speaking.  This logic is further supported by extant evidence that suggests that the information set of analysts overlaps with the information set of sophisticated investors, and by evidence of investor trading patterns around analyst forecast announcements. 
Although analysts produce several types of information releases (e. g. , earnings forecasts, stock recommendations, target
prices), we focus our attention on analyst earnings forecasts, as these releases are the most frequent type of output, and are
more directly comparable with earnings announcements and management earnings forecasts.  The three types of events are
comparable in that they are frequently recurring releases of information events that are well-studied (i. e. , we understand
most of their properties), where the type of information is similar in nature (i. e. , corporate earnings/performance). 
Nevertheless, we acknowledge that there are characteristic differences between analyst forecasts and both earnings
announcements and management forecasts, apart from the theoretical difference that we rely on to generate our prediction
(i. e. , that analyst forecasts contain a higher relative concentration of information that is new only to unsophisticated
investors).  For example, analyst forecasts may less likely be anticipated events, relative to earnings announcements and
management forecasts.  As another example, extant literature suggests that analyst forecasts may contain differential biases,
relative to earnings announcements and management forecasts (e. g. , McNichols and O’Brien, 1997).  In our empirical tests,
we address these factors to increase the conﬁdence that our directionally opposite results across information release types
are driven by the differential information dynamics that we theorize. 
We follow prior literature and focus on equity market bid-ask spread as a measure of information asymmetry, while
controlling for its non-information-asymmetry-related components.  We document that, on average, bid-ask spread
decreases by approximately one-and-a-half percent during an analyst forecast announcement period relative to the period
immediately preceding the forecast.  Because there are, on average, between two and three analyst forecasts per ﬁrmquarter, the overall quarterly magnitude of the real economic effect of analyst forecasts on a given ﬁrm's bid-ask spread
during the announcement period is therefore approximately four percent.  We ﬁnd consistent results using quoted depth
and price impact as alternative measures of information asymmetry. 
Although our paper focuses on announcement-period effects, we further document that all three types of information
releases (i. e. , analyst forecasts, management forecasts and earnings announcements) decrease information asymmetry over
the ten days subsequent to the announcement.  Accordingly, consistent with our expectations, the directionally opposite
information asymmetry effects across analyst forecasts and the other two information releases are temporary, and exist only
during the short-window announcement period. 
We conduct several additional analyses to provide comfort that our ﬁndings are not attributable to alternative explanations.  First, we provide evidence that our results hold in a subset of forecasts that are isolated in time relative to other
analyst forecasts, which suggests that our ﬁndings are not attributable to the alternative explanation that analysts simply
issue their forecasts in the wake of other signiﬁcant information events while information asymmetry is already decreasing. 
Second, we show that the magnitude of the information asymmetry decrease is a function of forecast information content,
which is difﬁcult to reconcile with alternative explanations.  Third, we document that our results hold for both “anticipated”
and “unanticipated” analyst forecasts, which suggests that announcement anticipation is not the driver of our ﬁndings. 
Finally, our results hold for both good news and bad news forecasts.  This mitigates the concern that our results may be
attributable to analysts’ incentives to disclose good news, or to a mechanical relation between the nature of news and bidask spread. 
Our evidence contributes to the literature by documenting that different types of information releases lead to predictably
opposite effects on information asymmetry at announcement.  Speciﬁcally, our evidence that analyst forecasts cause
reductions in announcement-period information asymmetry in equity markets complements the evidence provided in
Coller and Yohn (1997) and Lee Name (1993) which show that earnings announcements and management forecasts increase
announcement-period information asymmetry.  Although these directionally opposite effects are temporary, the understanding of how information is incorporated into prices and short-term trading frictions is central to our understanding of
capital markets phenomena, and requires the study of short-window capital market dynamics (e. g. , So and Wang, 2014). 
Relatedly, these results also provide the ﬁrst empirical validation (of which we are aware) of the discussion in Kim and
Verrecchia (1994) that an information release can indeed decrease information asymmetry at announcement. 
In addition, our study speaks to the contribution of analysts to a ﬁrm's information environment.  Speciﬁcally, our results
suggest that on average, analyst forecasts lead to an immediate narrowing of the information gap between sophisticated and
unsophisticated investors.  Further, our short-window announcement-period event study design reduces concerns relating to
reverse causality that have plagued prior literature (e. g. , Healy Name, 1999; Lang and Lundholm, 1996), and therefore contributes to the recent debate about the causal effects of sell-side equity research (Kelly and Ljungqvist, 2012; Li and You, 2015). 
2.  Motivation and predictions. 
Extant literature characterizes information asymmetry between sophisticated and unsophisticated investors (e. g. ,
Glosten and Milgrom, 1985; Kalay, 2015).  Typically, such information asymmetry is thought to come from two potential
sources.  First, sophisticated investors have access to (or the ability to develop) private information about the ﬁrm that is not
available to unsophisticated investors.  Second, sophisticated investors have superior processing abilities with respect to new
information when it is released to all market participants, which allows sophisticated investors to gain a temporary
information advantage with respect to new public information. 
Consistent with these dual sources of information asymmetry, Kim and Verrecchia (1994) observe that the
announcement-period effect of a public information release on information asymmetry can be characterized by two
simultaneous forces that have directionally opposite empirical implications. 3 First, an information release that provides new
information to both sophisticated and unsophisticated investors increases information asymmetry at announcement,
because sophisticated investors can process and incorporate information more quickly than unsophisticated investors. 
Second, at the same time, an information release decreases information asymmetry at announcement if it reveals to
unsophisticated investors information that they did not previously possess but which the sophisticated investors previously
held privately.  The net directional effect on announcement-period information asymmetry therefore depends on how the
information contained in the release relates to the information previously held by sophisticated investors. 
Extant literature provides evidence consistent with dominance of the asymmetry-increasing force.  Lee Name (1993) ﬁnd
that bid-ask spreads increase at the time of earnings announcements.  Similarly, Krinsky and Lee (1996) provide evidence
that the adverse selection component of the bid-ask spread increases signiﬁcantly around earnings announcements, supporting the notion that earnings announcements indeed increase announcement-period information asymmetry.  Similar to
the evidence from earnings announcements, Coller and Yohn (1997) ﬁnd that bid-ask spread increases in the short window
around the issuance of a management forecast.  Following the theory in Kim and Verrecchia (1994), these results suggest
that, consistent with our intuition, earnings announcements and management forecasts contain a relatively high proportion
of information that is new to both sophisticated and unsophisticated investors (although, of course, we expect that they also
contain some information that is already known to sophisticated investors but new to unsophisticated investors).  These
ﬁndings are further consistent with the notion that order ﬂow immediately after earnings announcements and management
forecasts is likely to come from sophisticated investors because of their superior ability to process new information. 
Intuitively, extant studies also ﬁnd that this announcement-period increase in information asymmetry is temporary, in that
bid-ask spreads one week after the management forecast announcement are smaller than spreads one week prior to the
announcement. 
Analyst forecasts have distinguishing characteristics that may make the asymmetry-decreasing force more pronounced,
relative to earnings announcements and management forecasts.  Speciﬁcally, an analyst forecast is an information release by
a sophisticated information intermediary who collects public and private information and analyzes it, which parallels the
activities of sophisticated investors.  Indeed, ﬁnancial analysts are often considered to be a proxy for sophisticated investors
in capital markets (e. g. , Allee Name, 2007; Ramnath Name, 2008).  It is likely, then, that compared to earnings announcements
and management forecasts, a relatively large proportion of the information contained in an analyst forecast is new only to
unsophisticated investors, thus decreasing information asymmetry with sophisticated investors.  This intuition yields our
prediction that, whereas both earnings announcements and management forecasts increase information asymmetry at
announcement, analyst forecasts decrease information asymmetry at announcement.  Intuitively, when a specialist observes
order ﬂow immediately after an analyst forecast, she is less concerned than she was immediately before the analyst forecast
release that the order ﬂow is coming from a sophisticated investor holding an information advantage, and bid-ask spread
should decrease accordingly. 
Prior research supports this assertion that analyst forecasts have a high degree of overlap with information held by
sophisticated investors.  For example, extant evidence suggests that sophisticated investors place relatively little value on the
earnings forecasting role of analysts.  Brown Name (2015) survey buy-side analysts, and document that only 11% view analyst
forecasts as useful.  Groysberg Name (2015) ﬁnd that broker votes for analysts, which determine their compensation, have
very little relation to analyst forecast activity, and very strong relation with analysts’ white papers (comprehensive research
reports).  Moreover, the literature on analyst tipping suggests that analysts directly reveal their information to sophisticated
investors prior to public release (e. g. , Irvine Name, 2007; Juergens and Lindsey, 2009; Markov Name, 2011), consistent with
literature which shows that sophisticated investors can predict the content of analyst information releases prior to public
announcement (e. g. , Christophe Name, 2010; Klein Name, 2014).  Further, a recent paper by Kadan Name (2016) shows that
institutions trade before analysts' information releases, while individuals trade mainly during and after the information
releases.  Consistent with our arguments above, these trading dynamics around analyst information releases are opposite to
those documented in Lee (1992) for earnings announcements. 
We also note that, whereas prior literature examines how the presence of information intermediaries affects the increase
in information asymmetry surrounding earnings announcements, there is no prior evidence on the direct effect of analyst
forecast releases on information asymmetry.  Although Yohn (1998) ﬁnds evidence that general information asymmetry is
lower for ﬁrms with greater analyst following during the period leading up to and including earnings announcements, she
ﬁnds no evidence that the presence of analysts mitigates the earnings announcement increase in information asymmetry. 
Bushee Name (2010) provide evidence that greater press coverage is associated with a lower abnormal bid-ask spread around
earnings announcements.  Whereas these studies examine interactive effects between the presence of information intermediaries and the effect of earnings announcements on information asymmetry, our study differs in that we examine the
direct effect of information releases by analysts on information asymmetry, where by design we eliminate associated
earnings announcement effects. 
<Middle> Research design and sample selection. 
3. 1.  General empirical setup. 
To test our predictions concerning the effect of an information release on announcement-period information asymmetry,
we directly measure how the information asymmetry component of bid-ask spread changes across several days spanning the
announcement date. 4 One way to conceptualize this design choice is that as a specialist observes order ﬂow, she increases bidask spread to protect herself when it is more likely that order ﬂow is coming from sophisticated investors that have superior
processing abilities. 5 However, it is well established that observed bid-ask spreads reﬂect not only information asymmetry, but
also specialists' order processing costs and inventory carrying costs.  To control for these other components of bid-ask spread,
we estimate a model based upon ﬁnance theory (e. g. , Glosten and Milgrom, 1985; Stoll, 1978), variations of which have been
empirically implemented in extant literature (e. g. , Amiram Name, 2011; Coller and Yohn, 1997).  Speciﬁcally, we estimate the
following model, which uses daily bid-ask spread as the dependent variable and several independent variables to absorb its
non-information asymmetry components, where we use four daily observations spanning each announcement date (i. e. , the
two days before the announcement date, the announcement date itself, and one day after the announcement), where variable subscripts i, d, t, and r reference ﬁrm, day, quarter, and a particular information release, respectively.  BASpread
is bid-ask spread percentage on trading day d, measured from TAQ. 6 Our primary variable of interest is Info0IR, which is an
indicator variable that equals one if day d is the announcement day for an information release concerning ﬁrm i, and equals
zero otherwise.  We also include Info1IR, an indicator variable that equals one if day d is the trading day immediately after the
announcement day, as announcement-period effects may extend into a second day.  PreInfo1IR is an indicator variable that
equals one if day d is the trading day immediately prior to the announcement day.  In this empirical design, bid-ask spread two
days prior to the announcement day is reﬂected in the intercept (implicitly PreInfo2IR), thus the included indicator variables
PreInfo1IR, Info0IR, and Info1IR capture the change in bid-ask spread on those days relative to two days prior to the information
release.  The information release can be one of three types: an analyst forecast (IR¼AF), earnings announcement (IR¼EA), or
management forecast (IR¼MF).  If analyst forecasts indeed decrease announcement-window information asymmetry as we
predict, we expect β2o0 and β3o0 (where IR¼AF). 
We include daily stock price (Price) to control for market makers' processing costs (Stoll, 1978), prior-quarter (t 1)
average daily turnover (Turnover) to control for liquidity of the ﬁrm's shares which affects inventory holding costs (Demsetz,
1968), and prior-quarter average return volatility (Volatility) and ﬁrm size (LnSize) to control for inventory risk. 7 We include
daily quoted depth (Depth) to control for the market maker's potential adjustment to depth as an alternative protection
mechanism against inventory risk or information asymmetry.  Further, we include daily trading volume (Volume) and the
absolute value of the announcement window abnormal return (AbsCAR) to further control for inventory risk and differential
news content.  We also consider speciﬁcations that use quoted depth (Depth) and price impact of trades (PriceImpact) as
alternative dependent variables, as prior literature nominates these constructs as alternative measures of information
asymmetry.  We deﬁne all variables further in the Appendix A. 
Because the two ﬁrm-days immediately prior to the announcement day serve as a baseline for measuring
announcement-window effects, endogeneity concerns that plague prior studies which examine the relation between
analysts and a ﬁrm's information environment are mitigated. 8 We introduce several modiﬁcations to this basic
empirical structure in subsequent analyses.  We discuss these modiﬁcations along with the associated results
in Section 4. 
3. 2.  Sample selection and data
We obtain analyst forecast data from the I/B/E/S detail EPS US ﬁle, and restrict our sample to one-quarter-ahead forecasts
(i. e. , fpi¼6) between the years 1993 and 2012, inclusive.  We require observations to have non-missing data for the forecast
announcement date (anndats), forecast value (value), actual quarterly earnings (actual), earnings announcement dates
(anndats_act) company identiﬁer (ticker), forecast period ending date (fpedats) and the forecasting analyst (analys). 9 This
yields a sample of 2,274,742 observations. 