 1.  Introduction Stock market anomalies reﬂect inefﬁciencies in the way information is disseminated in the market place and reﬂected in asset prices via investors' trades.  Anomalies also provide the basis for active investment strategies that aim to generate abnormal proﬁts.  One of the widely examined anomalies that has been shown to persist in stock markets is the momentum anomaly which relates to the relationship between a stock's historical and subsequent performance (e. g.  Asness, 1994.  Carhart, 1997.  Moskowitz and Grinblatt, 1999.  Jegadeesh and Titman, 1993, 2001).  An important implication of this anomaly is an investment strategy called momentum investing that is based on buying past winner stocks and selling past loser stocks.  Thus, apart from being a matter of concern from an academic perspective, the presence of this anomaly has signiﬁcant investment implications as well.  In another popular strand of the literature, numerous studies have explored the effect of oil market dynamics on stock return and volatility.  Oil can affect stock market dynamics via a number of different channels.  At the ﬁrm level, oil price can affect costs and growth expectations, which then affect stock values.  At the consumer level, oil price can affect consumer spending via its effect on their disposable income, thus affect the demand for the products that drive ﬁrm-level revenues and growth rates.  These arguments have in fact been supported in many studies that show a signiﬁcant oil effect on stock returns and volatility. 1 None of these studies, however, have explored whether oil price dynamics also contribute to stock market anomalies that reﬂect informational inefﬁciencies.  From a behavioral perspective, one can argue that oil price ﬂuctuations can affect investor sentiment, which may be particularly signiﬁcant in high oil-sensitive economies.  Such an effect on investor sentiment, in turn, may contribute to mispricing in the stock market in the form of stock market anomalies.  In fact, in a recent study, Ding et al.  (2017) show that oil price ﬂuctuations signiﬁcantly affect investor sentiment in the Chinese stock market without relating their ﬁndings to stock market anomalies.  Therefore, the main contribution of this study is to provide a novel perspective to the oil-stock market nexus by examining the predictive ability of oil price dynamics over a well-studied and yet unresolved stock market anomaly, i. e.  the momentum anomaly, that has been shown to persist in ﬁnancial markets (e. g.  Avramov and Chordia, 2006.  Liu and Zhang, 2008.  Liu et al. , 2011.  Wang and Xu, 2015).  Clearly, this is not only a concern from a market efﬁciency point of view, but can also present considerable abnormal proﬁt opportunities for active managers.  For our empirical study, we focus on China, the second largest oil importer globally (after the U. S. ) with an economy that is heavily reliant on oil imports to sustain its economic growth projections. 2 In addition to China's signiﬁcant role in the world energy markets as a major consumer, several features of the Chinese stock market provide fertile ground to study the oil-stock market nexus from a market anomaly perspective.  First, the literature offers robust evidence of an oil price effect on ﬁnancial markets in China (e. g.  Cong et al. , 2008.  Nguyen and Bhatti, 2012.  Wen et al. , 2012.  Zhu et al. , 2016.  Broadstock et al. , 2016, among others).  Second, Demirer et al.  (2015b) recently show that the momentum anomaly is present in this emerging stock market and document a signiﬁcant herding effect on the short-run performance of momentum strategies.  Finally, recent evidence by Ding et al.  (2017) show that international crude oil price ﬂuctuations signiﬁcantly Granger cause Chinese stock market investor sentiment such that a 1% ﬂuctuation in the price of crude oil leads to a 3. 94% negative effect on stock market sentiment.  Therefore, given the evidence in the literature, the Chinese stock market offers an interesting setup to examine whether oil market dynamics contribute to the momentum anomaly and allows us to extend the literature in a novel direction.  Our ﬁndings show that oil return volatility has robust predictive power over industry momentum payoffs in the Chinese stock market.  The predictive power of oil volatility over momentum is irrespective of whether the market is in a positive or negative state and is robust even after controlling for stock market volatility as well as key macroeconomic variables including the short-term rate, default spread and term spread.  In fact, our robustness checks suggest that oil return volatility absorbs the predictive ability of stock market volatility, implying that uncertainty surrounding oil price movements contributes to this anomaly more so than the stock market's own volatility does.  Examining possible asymmetries in predictability patterns, we ﬁnd that predictability comes primarily from winner industries.  Consistent with the recent ﬁndings by Ding et al.  (2017), we argue that oil price ﬂuctuations contribute to time varying investor sentiment, while this effect is channeled on stock prices via investors' over-purchase of high quality stocks in winner industries, thus creating overpricing in those industries, which in turn predicts negative returns in the subsequent periods.  Whatever the underlying investor rationale might be, our analysis shows that the predictive power of oil on subsequent momentum payoffs can in fact be used within an active investment strategy.  We show that an oil-based momentum strategy wherein the investor conditions the trade on the state of oil volatility in month (t) yields signiﬁcant returns in the following month (t + 1), which amounts to a spread of 2. 107% per month over the conventional momentum strategy.  Overall, our ﬁndings suggest that the predictive power of oil volatility is not only a statistical result with implications on the informational efﬁciency of the Chinese stock market, but also bears quite signiﬁcant investment implications within an actively managed portfolio strategy.  An outline of the remainder of the paper is as follows.  Section 2 provides a brief review of the literature on the effect of oil price on stock market dynamics in China.  Section 3 explains the data and methodology.  Section 4 presents the empirical results and Section 5 concludes the paper.  2.  The literature on oil and the Chinese stock market.  As a top player in the world's energy market, China has attracted a fair amount of interest in the academia with numerous studies examining the oil-stock market nexus in this giant emerging economy.  In one of the earlier studies, Cong et al.  (2008) employ a multivariate VAR model 2 BP Statistical Review of World Energy (June 2016).  and show that oil price shocks only affect the manufacturing index and some oil companies, while the oil price shocks possess stronger explanatory power over interest rates.  Focusing on economic growth measures, Du et al.  (2010) document a positive correlation between oil prices and China's GDP, while Tang et al.  (2010) show that oil price increases have a negative effect on investment and output with positive effects on inﬂation and interest rates.  However, this ﬁnding is later questioned by Kim et al.  (2017) who show that the response of Chinese interest rates to oil price shocks is not only time-varying, but also shows different signs over different sub-periods.  Supporting the earlier ﬁndings, Zhang (2011) and Ou et al.  (2012) show that positive oil price shocks lead to negative effects on real output, industrial production and stock prices.  Focusing on industry speciﬁc effects, Li et al.  (2012) utilize panel cointegration and Granger causality tests to examine the relationship between oil prices and the industry sector returns in China.  Their empirical results yield a positive effect of real oil price on sector returns in the long-run, while Zhang and Cao (2013) ﬁnd that only the mining industry has a strong and consistent relationship with international oil price shocks when systematic risk factors are controlled for.  Later, focusing on time-varying conditional correlations, Broadstock et al.  (2012) and Broadstock and Filis (2014) show that the oil price effect is stronger on energy related stocks and that the impact of oil price got stronger during the global ﬁnancial crisis period.  Likewise, Zhu et al.  (2016) show that the oil price effect is present only in recessions or bearish markets with low expected returns.  In more recent studies relating oil prices to the Chinese stock market, Wei and Guo (2017) argue that the effects of oil shocks on monetary and stock market variables depend on the underlying drivers of oil price changes and that monetary policy plays a limited role in the oilstock market relationship.  Luo and Qin (2017) show that shocks in the CBOE crude oil volatility index have negative effects on the Chinese stock market.  Similarly, Wang et al.  (2017) ﬁnd that oil price uncertainty exerts a negative effect on corporate investment, while Wei and Guo (2016) argue that oil prices can be utilized in forecasting models for Chinese exports.  In a study that is more related to the context of this particular paper, Ding et al.  (2017) employ Granger causality tests and document a signiﬁcant effect of oil price ﬂuctuations on investor sentiment in the Chinese stock market.  None of these studies, however, have examined the possible relationship between oil price dynamics and stock market anomalies that reﬂect inefﬁciencies in the way information is reﬂected in investors' trades and thus in stock prices.  To that end, this study provides the initial evidence in that regard.  <Middle> Data and methodology.  3. 1.  Data.  We use daily and monthly return data for all A-shares listed on the Shanghai (SH) and Shenzhen (SZ) stock exchanges obtained from the GTA-CSMAR (China Securities Market & Accounting Research) database.  Each month between January 1996 and December 2015, we assign each stock to one of 78 industries using the ﬁrst two digits of its disclosed industry code based on the China Securities Regulatory Commission's (CSRC) 2012 issue.  We exclude industries with fewer than 5 stocks traded on any trading day during the sample period, leaving us with 52 industries and 2226 stocks in all (1033 stocks traded on Shanghai and 1193 traded on Shenzhen exchanges).  Table 1 provides the list of industries used in the analysis.  Real Estate and Computer & Electronic Device Manufacturing industries dominate the list with the greatest number of listed ﬁrms (105 and 102, respectively), while Financial Services is the largest industry in terms of market capitalization, accounting for 11. 27% of total market value.  On the performance aspect, technology related industries including Internet & Related Services and Software & IT Services stand out as the best performing industries with average monthly returns of 4. 93% and 3. 73%, respectively.  In addition to stock return data, our predictive regressions utilize several important business cycle related variables, in monthly frequency, sourced from Bloomberg and Wind Financial Terminal.  Following Wang and Xu (2015) and Demirer et al.  (2017), the additional predictors include (i) the dividend yield for the Chinese stock market (DIV)3.  (ii) the default spread (DEF), i. e.  the spread between BBBrated bonds and AAA-rated bonds.  (iii) the term spread (TERM), i. e.  the spread between ten-year and three-month government bonds.  and (iv) the 3-month deposit rate (YLD).  As the focus of the paper is the predictive ability of oil return and volatility on stock market momentum, we use monthly price data on Brent crude oil as this type of oil is considered the global benchmark (Demirer et al. , 2015a).  In order to identify months of high/low oil (stock market) return volatility, we also use daily returns for Brent crude oil (stock market index) and compute the lagged volatility estimates for the stock market and oil returns.  However, since there is no single stock market index available for China that includes all A shares traded in both SH and SZ exchanges, we use data on all A shares in our sample covering both exchanges and construct a value-weighted index as a proxy for the aggregate stock market.  Daily oil and stock market index return data are then used to identify months of high/low volatility based on the lagged volatility estimates for these two variables.  All other estimations are done using monthly data.  3. 2.  Methodology.  The ﬁrst step in the analysis is to identify winner and loser industries each month.  For this purpose, at the beginning of each month (t), we rank each industry based on its return during the formation period from month (t – 12) to month (t – 2).  We skip the most recent month (t-1) in order to mitigate issues related to microstructure (e. g.  Asness, 1994.  Grinblatt and Moskowitz, 2004).  An industry is deﬁned as winner (loser) if its formation period return is above (below) the median return across all industries.  Table 1 reports, for each industry, the percentage of months when the industry is placed in the winner portfolio.  Having identiﬁed winner and loser industries at the beginning of each month (t), the industry momentum payoff is computed as the holding month (t) return difference between equal-weighted winner and loser industry portfolios as the conventional industry momentum strategy involves buying past winner industries and selling past loser industries.  Repeating this process with monthly rebalancing, we obtain the time series of monthly industry momentum returns (IndMOMt).  In order to examine the predictive power of oil return and volatility over industry momentum, we follow Wang and Xu (2015) and utilize predictive regressions in the form, where IndMOMt is the industry momentum payoff for month t and xt−1 is a vector of predictors measured at the end month t-1.  The predictive regressions are applied to momentum return series as well as winner and loser industry portfolio returns separately in order to examine whether the predictability of winner and loser industries vary in significant ways across different predictors.  Doing so also allows us to examine whether the predictive power of oil emanates from its predictive ability over winner or loser industries.  4.  Empirical ﬁndings.  4. 1.  Portfolio sorts based on market state and volatility.  Before examining the predictive power of oil return and volatility over momentum in the Chinese stock market, we ﬁrst establish the baseline evidence for a possible stock market effect on momentum payoffs.  Establishing this baseline evidence allows us to compare it with the effect of oil related variables and see whether oil return and volatility is able to absorb the predictive power of stock market return and volatility.  For this purpose, we deﬁne the stock market state in terms of its lagged return such that a month is in positive (negative) market state if the lagged three-year market return is positive (negative).  Similarly, we classify a month as in positive (negative) oil state if the lagged three-year Brent oil return is positive (negative).  Independently, a month is classiﬁed as high (low) market volatility if the lagged 12-month stock market volatility is larger (smaller) than the lagged three-year market volatility.  Finally, a month is of high (low) oil volatility if the lagged 12-month Brent oil return volatility is larger (smaller) than the lagged three-year oil return volatility.  Having sorted all months in the sample period into four subsets based on the state of the market and level of volatility, we then calculate the average monthly momentum payoff for each of the four categories.  Table 2 reports the average monthly momentum payoff (in percentage) for each of the four categories of positive (negative) market state and high (low) volatility.  Panel A (B) presents the momentum payoffs when market state and volatility is deﬁned in terms stock market index (oil) returns, respectively.  In both panels, we observe that the market state is a signiﬁcant driver of momentum payoffs such that industry momentum payoffs are signiﬁcantly higher (and positive) in positive market states while negative momentum payoffs are observed in negative market states regardless of the level of market volatility.  However, comparing the momentum payoffs across the two panels, we observe larger momentum payoffs during positive oil market states compared to positive stock market states.  For example, the average momentum payoffs during positive oil states are 3. 776% and 4. 442% per month for high and low volatility months, respectively, whereas they are 2. 204% and 3. 344% per month during positive stock market states, a difference of 1. 572% (3. 776%–2. 204%) and 1. 098% (4. 442%– 3. 344%) per month, which is economically quite signiﬁcant.  This suggests that the state of the oil market has a greater impact on stock market momentum compared to the state of the stock market in China.  Furthermore, although not reported in the table, we ﬁnd that the average monthly momentum payoff is 2. 041% for the full sample period.  Therefore, an important investment implication of our ﬁndings would be that a momentum strategy conditional on the state of the oil market could generate an abnormal return in the range of 2. 401% (4. 442%–2. 041%) to 1. 735% (3. 776%–2. 041%) depending on the level of oil return volatility.  On the other hand, comparing the momentum payoffs across the high and low volatility states, we see that the level of stock market volatility matters as well, implied by higher momentum proﬁts in low volatility months.  For example, in Panel A, low volatility months outperform high volatility months by 1. 14% (3. 344%–2. 204%) within the positive market state, while the spread is 0. 826% (−3. 456%-(−4. 282%)) within the negative market state.  A similar observation holds in Panel B when volatility is measured by oil returns so that low volatility months outperform high volatility months within both positive and negative market states.  These intuitive comparisons are also supported graphically in Fig.  1 where we observe large momentum payoffs following periods of low oil volatility, particularly during 2006–2008 and 2010–2014. 4 Overall, the preliminary analysis suggests that market state and volatility may have predictive ability over momentum payoffs, while this effect is larger when we deﬁne market state in terms of oil returns rather than stock market returns.  4. 2.  The predictive power of market state and volatility over momentum.  Having established the baseline evidence for the effect of market state and volatility on the proﬁtability of momentum, we next perform several predictive regressions in order to formally test the predictive power of these variables over momentum payoffs.  In our benchmark model, we regress monthly momentum returns against the lagged three-year market return on annual basis (MKT) and the lagged twelve-month market volatility (VOL).  Separately, we deﬁne VOL+ (VOL−) as equal to VOL if the lagged three-year market return is positive (negative), otherwise equal to 0.  This allows us to dissect the possible volatility effect during positive and negative market states.  In Table 3, Panels A and C report the results when volatility is measured by stock market volatility and Brent oil return volatility, respectively.  The ﬁndings in Panel A conﬁrm the ﬁndings from the intuitive comparisons presented in Table 2 such that the state of the market has a positive effect on subsequent momentum returns, while stock market volatility negatively affects momentum returns.  We also observe that the stock market volatility effect is in fact conditioned on the market state implied by a signiﬁcant and negative estimate for VOL− in Panel A, implying that stock market volatility predicts momentum during negative market states only.  Robustness checks presented in Table B when volatility is calculated over the past six-months further conﬁrm the predictive power of stock market state and volatility on momentum.  Interestingly, however, when oil volatility is used as the predictor, the ﬁndings reported in Panel C show that oil volatility has an unconditional effect on stock market momentum regardless of the state of the market. 