 
Investors, preparers, regulators, and standard setters have expressed concern that corporate disclosure has become longer, 
more redundant, less readable, less speciﬁc, and more boilerplate over time ( Li, 2008; KPMG, 2011; SEC, 2013 ).  In 2013, the 
SEC began a comprehensive review of regulation with the intent of identifying excessive, unduly complex, and redundant 
disclosure ( SEC, 2013 ).  Similarly, the FASB has an ongoing agenda project, the Disclosure Framework, evaluating the effectiveness of textual disclosure ( FASB, 2012 ).  A variety of explanations have been offered for why disclosure might be changing 
over time including increases in litigation concerns, business complexity, globalization, regulation, and new mandatory disclosures ( KPMG, 2011; SEC, 2013; Monga and Chasan, 2015 ).  In this paper we quantify a variety of 10-K disclosure attributes 
and provide initial descriptive evidence on trends in these attributes over time.  
While there is a substantial academic literature on trends in the characteristics of quantitative accounting data (particuthe magnitude, economic determinants, speciﬁc content, and attributes of trends 
larly earnings and book value) over time, 
in textual disclosure have received less attention.  At least in part, this likely reﬂects the challenge in assessing the content 
of 10-K textual disclosure and in categorizing and quantifying disclosure for a large number of lengthy, complex documents, 
especially given that disclosure of a given topic often appears in multiple sections of the 10-K and any given passage often 
combines multiple topics.  
In many ways, the issues in assessing 10-K content are similar to those faced in other literatures.  For example, researchers 
in journalism have been interested in trends in coverage of the New York Times ( Blei, 2012 ), those in literature in understanding topical trends in poetry ( Rhody, 2012 ), in politics understanding trends in Senate discourse ( Grimmer, 2010 ), in 
history understanding historical trends using the content of State Department cables ( Chaney Name, 2015 ), and in science 
understanding topical trends in journals such as Science ( Blei and Lafferty, 2007 ).  In all of these domains, the challenge is 
in analyzing trends in corpuses far too large for humans to manually review and to summarize them in a way that is easily 
interpretable.  
Following that literature, we use a natural language processing technique, Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), to understand the changing content of 10-Ks.  3 LDA is a Bayesian computational linguistic technique that identifies the latent topics in a corpus of documents.  4 It is well suited to understanding the text of the 10-K because it permits analysis of the topical content of a large group of lengthy documents over time in an objective and replicable matter and relies on a very limited set of assumptions that are likely to be met in 10-K disclosure.  Further, it is specifically designed to infer proportions of content for documents which contain multiple topics, even if the topics are entangled, which is important given that 10-Ks comprise a large number of interspersed topics.  5 It permits the proportion of the 10-K related to each topic to vary across documents so it is well-suited to examining topical trends in textual disclosure.  As a result, we can deconstruct the 10-K by topic irrespective of whether topics appear in, for example, the footnotes, risk factors, or Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A).  We can then assess trends in the discussion of topics over time and relate them to changes in specific disclosure requirements (e. g. , new FASB standards, SEC requirements, and regulatory events such as SOX) and other events (e. g. , changes in litigation risk, mergers and acquisitions, etc. ). 
Additionally, once the topic model is trained, it permits us to identify paragraphs by topic, so that we can track where 
speciﬁc topics occur within the 10-K.  This allows us to identify the extent to which, for example, FASB requirements (e. g. , 
footnotes) create redundancy with SEC requirements (e. g. , risk factors and MD&A) by highlighting which topics tend to 
be redundant within the 10-K as well as across time and across ﬁrms.  Similarly, by accumulating text within a topic, we 
can identify the topical sources of textual attributes that prior literature suggests may be important such as boilerplate, 
redundancy, stickiness, and lack of speciﬁcity.  
In our empirical analysis, we examine the text of 10-Ks for 10,452 ﬁrms and 75,991 ﬁrm-years over the period 1996 
to 2013.  We begin by documenting trends in textual characteristics that have been identiﬁed by prior research as potentially affecting the informativeness of disclosure, including length ( Loughran and McDonald, 2014 ), readability ( Miller, 2010 ), 
boilerplate ( Lang and Stice-Lawrence, 2015 ), redundancy ( Cazier and Pfeiffer, 2015b ), speciﬁcity ( Hope Name, 2016 ), stickiness  ( Brown  and  Tucker,  2011 ),  and  the  relative  prevalence  of  informative  numbers  in  the  text  or  “hard” information 
( Blankespoor, 2016 ).  
We document clear and consistent trends across all measures.  Median text length doubled from 23,0 0 0 words in 1996 to 
nearly 50,0 0 0 in 2013, while redundancy, boilerplate, and stickiness increased nearly monotonically and readability, speciﬁcity, and the relative mix of hard information showed clear decreases.  Given these trends, we next investigate their topical 
sources.  
Prior literature (e. g. , Cazier and Pfeiffer, 2015b ) suggests that variables such as size, industry-composition, complexity, 
one-time events, litigation, and SEC oversight affect textual attributes such as length and readability in the cross section.  
Consistent with assertions by commentators such as Monga and Chasan (2015) , it could be the case that those factors also 
change in the time series in ways that explain trends in textual attributes.  We examine textual attributes after controlling 
for a wide variety of company-level variables suggested by the prior literature and for a constant sample of ﬁrms, but similar 
patterns persist.  While those variables are signiﬁcant cross-sectional determinants of textual attributes, including them in a 
regression framework does not explain the trend in disclosure characteristics over time.  
Given that readily observable ﬁrm-level attributes do not explain the trends we observe, we use LDA to examine the 
topical content and characteristics of the additional disclosure.  Our analysis suggests that the corpus of 10-Ks comprises 150 
topics, which we aggregate into 13 broader categories for ease of discussion.  The four categories which account for the bulk 
of 10-K length are Performance; Compliance with speciﬁc accounting and disclosure standards; Industry-Speciﬁc disclosure; 
and Employee-Related disclosure.  However, only disclosure related to Compliance with speciﬁc accounting and disclosure 
standards increased substantially over time.  Within this category, three topics explain the vast majority of the increase: fair 
value and impairment disclosure, discussion of internal controls, and risk factor disclosure.  
To ensure that we have accurately identiﬁed the content of these three topics, we demonstrate that they are associated 
as expected with underlying economic attributes (special items, internal control weaknesses, and return variability).  Then, 
we examine patterns in disclosure around the events that should have increased disclosure of these topics (implementation 
of SFAS 157, Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX), and Item 1A).  We document sharp increases in the length of these three topics in the 
years in which their associated standards were implemented, consistent with the LDA topics effectively capturing disclosure 
in response to standards.  Disclosure associated with these topics is not limited to a single section of the annual report but 
Similarly, the pattern in disclosure length for these three topics largely explains 
extends across all of the major sections.  
the increase in disclosure length for the 10-K as a whole.  
In our third set of analyses, we link topical disclosure at the paragraph level, in particular that relating to the three major 
increasing topics, to other textual attributes of the 10-K.  We demonstrate that fair value/impairment, risk factor, and internal 
control disclosure tend to have relatively high levels of redundancy, stickiness, and boilerplate, and low levels of readability, 
speciﬁcity, and hard information.  Further analyses indicate that the increasing prevalence of these three topics contributed 
signiﬁcantly to the overall increases in redundancy, stickiness, and boilerplate, and the decreases in readability, speciﬁcity, 
and the mix of hard information.  
Finally, we examine cross-sectional variation in fair value, internal control, and risk factor disclosures.  We document 
consistent patterns of increased length associated with these topics for disparate subsamples of ﬁrms suggesting that ﬁrms 
signiﬁcantly increased disclosure length even when the additional disclosure may not have been as relevant.  Further, we 
ﬁnd that ﬁrms for which the requirements were potentially less relevant often responded by providing disclosure that was 
particularly high in boilerplate, redundancy, complexity, and stickiness, and lacking in hard information, although less so for 
fair values where ﬁrms appear to have exercised more ﬂexibility to tailor disclosure based on materiality.  
Overall, our evidence identiﬁes clear trends in textual attributes and suggests that a substantial portion can be explained 
by disclosure in response to recent regulatory changes.  While the fact that disclosure associated with new requirements 
increased over time is not in and of itself surprising, our results provide several potential contributions.  First, we believe it is 
important to quantify the extent to which attributes of 10-K textual disclosure have, in fact, changed over time and attempt 
to distinguish among various explanations.  While the three primary disclosure topics that we identify are logical candidates 
to explain the increase in 10-K disclosure length over time, it is noteworthy that they explain such a large proportion of the 
overall increase in length, as well as in other attributes such as complexity, redundancy, boilerplate, stickiness and lack of 
speciﬁcity.  In contrast, economic factors from the prior literature (e. 