 Introduction Prior research (e. g.  Biddle et al. , 2009) hypothesizes and finds that accounting quality improves investment efficiency.  They identify a conditional negative (positive) association between accounting quality and investment for firms operating in settings prone to overinvestment (underinvestment).  We extend this line of research, similarly hypothesizing and finding a conditional negative (positive) association between conservatism and investment for firms operating in settings prone to overinvestment (underinvestment).  We also find that more conservative firms in settings prone to underinvestment issue more debt and invest in more prudent projects, and that the investment and financing effects of conservatism are more pronounced in the presence of greater information asymmetries.  Accounting conservatism imposes more stringent verifiability requirements for the recognition of economic gains relative to losses (Basu, 1997.  Watts, 2003).  This results in earnings that capture difficult-to-verify economic losses more quickly than gains and generates a downward bias in the value of net assets.  The literature shows that conservatism improves investment efficiency by reducing managerial overinvestment (Francis and Martin, 2010.  Bushman et al. , 2011).  We explore the related issue of when conservatism can increase investment in situations where firms are more prone to underinvestment.  Prior research provides evidence that conservatism (1) discourages managerial selection of projects with negative net present value (NPV) and triggers the early abandonment of poorly performing projects (Ball, 2001.  Ball and Shivakumar, 2005) and (2) creates incentives to discard positive-NPV but high-risk projects (Leuz, 2001.  Roychowdhury, 2010.  Bushman et al. , 2011).  We predict that conservatism also mitigates underinvestment among firms facing financing difficulties.  These firms likely suffer from related problems such as the risk of insolvency and low profitability.  For them, the costs associated with negative-NPV investments—or overly risky positive-NPV investments—are high.  Both debt- and equityholders are reluctant to grant new capital to such firms (Jensen and Meckling, 1976.  Myers, 1977).  Conservatism can help to alleviate agency problems and thus mitigate financing constraints for these firms.  Investors likely fear that financially constrained firms may tumble into insolvency if their projects fail.  In these situations, we expect conservative accounting to facilitate access to additional debt for new investments, as it encourages prudent investments that can increase firm value without exacerbating financial risk.  In contrast, conservatism is less likely to alleviate shareholders' reluctance to provide additional financing.  Dispersed shareholders are less capable of ensuring that firms maintain conservative accounting policies and undertake prudent investments.  Furthermore, shareholders, when they provide financing, may prefer risky projects that can transfer wealth to them from debtholders.  Conservative reporting discourages managers from engaging in this kind of conduct because of the timely recognition of losses.  Overall, these arguments lead to the prediction that conservatism facilitates additional debt for financially constrained firms seeking to invest but does not necessarily facilitate their access to additional equity.  We also expect conservatism to help to limit overinvestment problems.  Overinvestment is likely to pervade firms that have a high investment capacity.  In these firms, managers are more able to pursue projects that have a negative NPV but generate private benefits for them.  Conservatism, by imposing timely reporting of losses, makes such self-interested decisions apparent sooner, enabling stakeholders to discipline managers, if necessary, and deterring such conduct in the future.  We predict these roles of conservatism hold not only for acquisitions, as illustrated by Francis and Martin (2010), but also for more opaque investments such as capital expenditures and research and development (R&D). 1 Finally, we predict that conservatism affects differently future profitability and its volatility depending on whether the firm is in a setting prone to over- or underinvestment.  In settings prone to overinvestment (i. e. , in firms with a high investment capacity), conservatism leads to better project selection and earlier abandonment of loss-making projects, increasing the future return on assets (ROA).  However, this may not always be true in firms prone to underinvestment (i. e. , those with a low investment capacity).  For these firms, conservatism instead facilitates the access to additional funding, particularly for low-risk and less volatile projects that do not necessarily generate a higher rate of return than existing ones.  Using a large US sample for the period 1990–2007, we follow the method of Biddle et al.  (2009) and test these predictions on the association between accounting conservatism and firm investment, financing, and performance.  In our main tests, we use the firm-level measure of conservative reporting—timely loss recognition—proposed by Khan and Watts (2009).  Our results are robust to the use of alternative proxies based on Callen et al.  (2010) and Givoly and Hayn (2000).  We incorporate in our tests measures of financial reporting quality to ensure that we isolate the incremental economic consequences of conservatism.  The analysis yields several key findings.  First, more conservative firms invest more and issue more debt than less conservative ones in settings where underinvestment is more likely.  We also show that conservatism is associated with lower overinvestment not only for acquisitions but also for more opaque investments, such as capital expenditures and R&D.  Finally, we show that the association between conservatism and accounting profitability, as measured by the future ROA, is conditional on whether the firm is prone to over- or underinvestment.  For firms prone to overinvestment, conservatism is associated with a higher ROA.  However, for firms prone to underinvestment, conservatism is associated with less volatile investments that do not necessarily lead to a higher ROA.  Our results contribute to the literature in several ways.  First, we extend the growing literature on the links between accounting quality and investment efficiency. 2 We show that, among firms prone to underinvest, those with more conservative accounting invest more (in less profitable but more prudent projects) and issue more debt.  This suggests that conservatism encourages low-risk, positive-NPV investments and that these new investments are financed with new debt.  This is consistent with conservatism limiting debt-equity conflicts.  Our finding that conservatism mitigates underinvestment in financially constrained firms is novel, as prior research focuses only on the role of conservatism in reducing overinvestment (Francis and Martin, 2010.  Bushman et al. , 2011).  We also contribute to the stream of literature on the links between accounting quality and financing (e. g. , Balakrishnan et al. , 2014).  Prior work shows that conservatism can lead to a lower cost of debt (Ahmed et al. , 2002.  Zhang 2008.  Wittenberg-Moerman, 2008).  We provide evidence of an association between conservatism and new debt issuances for financially constrained firms.  This finding complements the related analytical evidence provided by Göx and Wagenhofer (2009), who show that conditional conservatism is the optimal accounting policy for financially constrained firms seeking to issue debt.  Our evidence also complements the work of Beatty et al.  (2010).  Their work on the role accounting quality in facilitating investment focuses on access to private versus public debt.  We examine debt versus equity.  We also expand the evidence on the role of conservatism in mitigating the overinvestment problems documented in Francis and Martin (2010).  We show that conservatism, in overinvestment scenarios, is also associated with reduced investment in more opaque investments, such as R&D and capital expenditures, where outsider monitoring is less likely to affect investment outcomes.  We also add to their findings by showing that the investment-related effects of conservatism affect performance differently depending on whether the firm is over- or underinvesting.  While prior research finds that the investment effects of improved accounting quality lead to greater profitability (Hope and Thomas, 2008.  Francis and Martin, 2010), we find that this is true only in settings prone to overinvestment.  In settings prone to underinvestment, conservatism is associated with investment in prudent projects and therefore does not lead to a higher ROA.  The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 discusses the expected association between conservatism and investment and financing.  Section 3 contains the research design.  Section 4 describes the sample and discusses the main empirical results.  Sections 5 and 6 contain additional analyses and robustness checks, and Section 7 concludes.  2.  Conservatism, investment and ﬁnancing.  development of hypotheses.  We make two major predictions.  (1) conservatism is associated with increased investment in firms prone to underinvest, and (2) conservatism reduces overinvestment problems in firms prone to overinvest.  These predictions lead to two further hypotheses about the role of debt- and equityholders in alleviating investment constraints.  Our study builds on the literature linking financing and investment decisions.  In their seminal work, Modigliani and Miller (1958) argue that financing and investment decisions are separate in perfect capital markets.  However, a large stream of literature subsequently shows that information frictions drive linkages between financing and investment decisions (Myers, 1977, 1984.  Childs et al. , 2005).  In line with this literature and similar to the work of Balakrishnan et al.  (2014), we assume that information frictions can affect financing and investment and that financial reporting can help to decrease these frictions.  Biddle et al.  (2009) argue that firms constrained in their ability to make new investments are probably characterized by having low cash balances and high leverage.  These firms might even suffer from such related problems as low profitability and the risk of insolvency.  Both debt- and equityholders are unlikely to finance these firms, as the costs associated with negative-NPV projects or with positive-NPV but high-risk investments are high, particularly when information asymmetry is also high.  We predict that conservative reporting can mitigate these constraints.  By imposing timely loss recognition and delayed gain recognition, conservatism makes poor investment decisions apparent in earnings sooner.  This lowers managerial incentives to invest in negative-NPV projects and prompts the early abandonment of poorly performing projects (Ball, 2001.  Ball and Shivakumar, 2005).  Thus conservatism enables a firm's stakeholders to discipline managers, if necessary and encourages managers to avoid high-risk projects and select more prudent ones (Roychowdhury, 2010.  Bushman et al. , 2011).  For financially constrained firms, conservative reporting signals that managers will likely engage in low-risk, positiveNPV projects (which we designate as “prudent investments”).  We predict that this, in turn, will facilitate a firm's access to capital.  Even for these prudent investments, without conservative reporting, we expect firms operating in settings prone to underinvestment to be unlikely to gain access to capital.  In contrast, for firms prone to overinvest, conservatism lowers investment.  In these firms, managers are more likely to pursue negative-NPV investments, such as pet projects or trophy acquisitions, that generate private benefits for those managers.  We predict that conservatism will stem these kinds of investments because it triggers the early recognition of losses and thus intervention by disciplining bodies such as boards of directors (Ahmed and Duellman,While not directly examining the issues under analysis, prior research offers evidence consistent with these predictions.  Bushman et al.  (2011) find that, in countries with more conservative accounting, firm investment decisions are more sensitive to declining investment opportunities.  Pinnuck and Lillis (2007) likewise show that loss reporting serves to resolve agency problems and triggers the exercise of the abandonment option.  More closely related to our research, Francis and Martin (2010) demonstrate that conservative firms make more profitable acquisitions and divest sooner from poorly performing acquisitions.  The above discussion leads to the following predictions.  H1a.  Among firms prone to underinvestment, more conservative firms invest more.  H1b.  Among firms prone to overinvestment, more conservative firms invest less.  Information asymmetry can exacerbate over- and underinvestment problems.  When information asymmetry is high, financially constrained firms face difficulties securing credit or equity.  Conversely, for firms that are not financially constrained, information asymmetry can lead to greater overinvestment, as managers can more easily evade monitoring.  Conservatism helps to alleviate these problems.  Prior evidence shows that conservatism arises in response to information asymmetries (LaFond and Watts, 2008.  Khan and Watts, 2009) and that it can lower the negative consequences of information asymmetry for debt and equity markets (Wittenberg-Moerman, 2008.  Kim et al. , 2013).  This leads to our second hypothesis.  H2.  The effects of conservatism on investment are more pronounced among firms characterized by greater information asymmetry.  Next, we delve into specific agency issues that arise when firms are prone to underinvest versus when they are prone to overinvest.  For those prone to underinvest, especially those at risk of insolvency, two main conflicts arise.  First, equityholders have no incentives to raise new capital that would make debt safer, even if the firm is considering prudent projects.  This is the debt-overhang problem described in Myers (1977).  Second, equityholders have an incentive to increase risk, as they primarily benefit from this risk.  This is the risk-shifting problem described by Jensen and Meckling (1976).  Myers (2003) describes an additional problem for debtholders.  managers can procrastinate, concealing problems from creditors and lengthening the effective maturity of debt.  In this situation, when firms are prone to underinvest, we expect debtholders to be the better monitors and to find conservatism particularly useful.  This occurs because conservatism triggers the timely violation of debt covenants (Zhang, 2008.  Nikolaev, 2010) and promotes the early transfer of control rights to debtholders, thus addressing the concealment problem identified by Myers (2003).  This possibility that debtholders may seize control of the firm disciplines managers, motivating them to make prudent investments.  These investments may improve the firm's financial condition and help to ensure its survival.  A lengthy literature confirms the view that conservatism contributes to debtholder monitoring.  Lenders use lower bounds of the current value of the borrower's assets in the loan-granting decision and require an assurance that this asset value will be enough to recover their loans (Watts 2003).  Conservatism provides this lower bound.  Consistent with this argument, Göx and Wagenhofer (2009, p.  13) show that conservatism “maximizes the ex ante probability of obtaining financing” and that it can reduce debt costs.  In particular, Ahmed et al.  (2002) and Zhang (2008) show, respectively, that conservatism improves a firm's debt rating and decreases the initial interest rate that lenders offer.  Similarly, Wittenberg-Moerman (2008) shows that conservatism reduces information asymmetries between informed and uninformed traders in the secondary loan market.  Finally, conservatism deters the artificial inflation of earnings (Chen et al. , 2007.  Gao, 2013).  This reduces agency costs for debtholders, as it limits the earnings available for distribution to shareholders at the expense of lenders (Ahmed et al. , 2002) and discourages managerial self dealing (Khan and Watts, 2009).  To the best of our knowledge, there is no prior literature on the links between conservatism and equity financing in firms prone to underinvest.  We expect debtholders to play a more important disciplinary role when the firm suffers financial problems.  Therefore we expect shareholders to restrict equity financing in such firms.  Also, given the call-option nature of shareholders' claims, among firms likely to underinvest, shareholders have incentives to pursue high-risk projects.  However, these are precisely the type of projects that conservatism would make unattractive to managers, because of early loss recognition.  Equityholders thus will be less willing to provide additional capital to more conservative firms prone to underinvestment.  The above discussion leads to our final hypotheses.  H3a.  Among firms prone to underinvestment, accounting conservatism is associated with future debt issuances.  H3b.  Among firms prone to underinvestment, accounting conservatism is not associated with future equity issuances.  An extension of our arguments is that we expect conservatism to play a more limited role in debt contracting for firms likely to overinvest.  In these firms, conservative accounting may not contribute to monitoring.  Aggregation across many investment projects may reduce the likelihood of poor decision-making triggering debt-covenant violations in healthy profitable firms, and thus there would be no transfer of control rights to debtholders.  In addition, in such cases, even if equityholders try to restrict access to equity capital, the firms will have sufficient internal funds to forge ahead.  Therefore, for firms prone to overinvest, other monitoring mechanisms such as boards of directors are likely to matter more.  However, conservatism may also facilitate access to debt financing in the case of nonfinancially constrained firms, as it may reduce overinvestment.  This reduction will also benefit debtholders, who might in turn be more willing to lend additional funds.  Given these opposing effects, the relation between conservatism and debt financing in firms without financing constraints is an empirical open question.  To summarize, our initial setting is that of a firm likely to underinvest.  This firm would experience the debt-equity conflicts that arise when firms are highly levered and might be at risk of insolvency, i. e. , debt overhang and risk-shifting problems (Myers, 1977.  Jensen and Meckling, 1976.  Becker and Strömberg, 2012).  Both equity- and (particularly) debtholders might then withhold financing, leading to underinvestment.  We predict that conservatism alleviates these agency conflicts, by benefiting debt-holders.  Therefore, under more conservative accounting, we expect to observe less underinvestment, greater debt financing and less risk taking (greater investment in prudent projects, leading to a lower future volatility of income) in this firm.  <Middle> Research design.  3. 1.  Main proxy for reporting conservatism.  In our main tests, we employ the firm-year proxy for conditional conservatism developed by Khan and Watts (2009).  Drawing from the Basu (1997) model, they estimate, at the firm level, the timeliness of earnings to good news (G-Score) and the incremental timeliness of earnings to bad news (C-Score).  By adding both, they obtain the total timeliness of bad news recognition.  We define our conservatism proxy as the annual decile ranks of the three-year average (years t, t 1, and t 2) of the total timeliness of loss recognition (G-ScoreþC-Score) and designate this measure as CONS.  We use deciles to mitigate measurement error in the estimates and reduce concerns about nonlinearities.  Appendix A contains the definitions of all variables.  In Appendix B, we provide a detailed description of how we construct CONS, as well as evidence on its correlations and association with the economic determinants of conservatism.  CONS captures long-term conditional conservatism, which has contracting value and thus is relevant to our research (Ball and Shivakumar, 2005, pp.  90–91).  We view conservatism as being exogenous and predetermined for the current generation of managers.  an ex ante managerial choice that prevents opportunism, thereby permitting firms to accrue debt-financing benefits.  As is common in accounting research, we cannot entirely rule out endogeneity concerns.  However, prior research demonstrates that, in line with our view, conservative accounting is sticky and changes slowly.  Khan and Watts (2009) and Callen et al.  (2010) confirm that conservatism proxies are stable over time.  In addition, we take the three-year average to alleviate some of these concerns.  Finally, the use of the proxy of Khan and Watts (2009) further mitigates the concerns, given that they base their measure on a linear combination of size, leverage and market-to-book ratio.  Because of its construction, the Khan and Watts proxy (2009) changes when the determinants of conservatism change.  Ettredge et al.  (2012) and Jayaraman (2012) show that the Khan and Watts measure captures variation in conservatism at the firm's level, despite criticisms of the validity of conservatism measures based on the Basu (1997) model. 3 In Section 6. 2, we perform robustness tests using three additional conservatism proxies.  the conservatism ratio of Callen et al.  (2010), a measure based on the skewness of earnings and cash flows and a measure based on the accumulation of nonoperating accruals (Givoly and Hayn, 2000).  3. 2.  Association between conservatism and investment efficiency.  Our tests are based on the method of Biddle et al.  (2009), which permits an analysis of the effects of accounting choices in reducing both over- and underinvestment.  We adapt their model to capture the effects of conservatism on investment as follows.  In Eq.  (1), Investment is a measure of total future investment in both capital and noncapital goods.  CONS is a firm-yearspecific measure of conservatism.  UnderInvest is a ranked variable constructed at the industry-year level capturing settings where under- or overinvestment is more likely.  FRQ is a measure of financial reporting quality.  GOV is a set of governance variables, and Controls is a vector of control variables that affect investment and financing.  We estimate Eq.  (1) in a paneldata fashion with a fixed-effects model that includes year-indicator variables to control for year-specific shocks to investment.  We report robust standard errors based on a firm and year clustering (Petersen, 2009).  The dependent variable, Investment, measures total investment defined as capital expenditures, research and development, and acquisition expenditures.  less cash receipts from sales of property, plant, and equipment.  multiplied by 100.  and scaled by lagged sales. 4 In our robustness tests, we use an alternative definition of Investment.  UnderInvest is a proxy used to detect settings in which there is greater likelihood of under- or overinvestment problems.  Following Biddle et al.  (2009), we identify industry-year combinations where there is aggregate under- or overinvestment at the industry level.  To do so, we estimate the following regression, where Investment is the average investment of all the firms in each industry-year group (I, t), and SalesGrowth, a proxy for investment opportunities, is the average sales growth of all the firms in each industry-year group, where sales growth for each firm is calculated.  To compute the averages, we impose a minimum of 20 firms per industry-year.  Industry groups are the industry classifications in Fama and French (1997).  We rank the industry-year specific residuals of model 2 multiplied by 1 into deciles and rescale the decile rankings from 0 to 1.  We refer to these rankings as UnderInvest.  We then assign these decile rankings to each firm by year and industry membership.  High (low) values of UnderInvest identify settings in which under-investment (over-investment) at the industry-year level is most likely.  In unreported sensitivity tests, we also use an alternative definition of UnderInvest.  a ranked variable based on the average of a decile-ranked measure of cash and a decile-ranked measure of leverage.  Using this alternative definition, also based on the work of Biddle et al.  (2009), we obtain identical inferences.  We use Eq.  (1) to test hypotheses H1a and H1b, that is, whether conservatism reduces under- and overinvestment.  In Eq.  (1), the coefficients of interest are δ1 and δ2.  We expect conservatism to reduce both under- and overinvestment.  Therefore, when underinvestment is likely (i. e. , UnderInvest¼1), we expect the sum of the coefficients δ1 and δ2 to be positive, indicating that conservatism increases investment in settings where underinvestment is most likely.  On the contrary, when overinvestment is likely (i. e. , UnderInvest¼0), we expect coefficient δ1 to be negative and significant, indicating that conservatism decreases investment in such settings.  To test H2, we extend the previous analysis to investigate whether conservatism contributes to the reduction of investment inefficiencies in settings where information asymmetries between managers and the providers of finance are more pronounced.  Given that conservatism appears in response to information asymmetries, we expect the effects of conservatism on investment to be particularly pronounced when information asymmetry is high.  To test this idea, we estimate the following regression, where all variables have been defined previously, except for InfoAsym.  We use three proxies for information asymmetry (InfoAsym).  Given our prior theoretical arguments, we are particularly interested in measuring information asymmetry for debt investors.  To measure information asymmetry for debt investors, LaFond and Watts (2008) use a market-based proxy, and finance researchers commonly use proxies such as the bid–ask spread (e. g. , Krishnaswami et al. , 1999), given that information asymmetries between all users of accounting information are likely correlated.  Thus our first proxy (IA) is market-based.  It is the average of the standardized values of bid–ask spread, stock return volatility, and idiosyncratic risk.  Regarding information asymmetries between the firm and debtholders, we introduce two proxies following Sufi (2007, 2009) and Faulkender and Petersen (2006).  (1) a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if the firm has no credit rating (NCR) and (2) the negative of the firm's age (Young), as younger firms are less known by investors.  Firms with no credit rating and younger firms are more likely to have higher information asymmetries.  The details of the calculations of these proxies can be found in Appendix A.  Finally, to test hypothesis H3a, we use the following model.  The dependent variable, ΔDebt issuancetþ 1, is defined as the future change in new debt issuance scaled by current sales.  Debt issuance equals long-term debt issuance, minus the reduction in long-term debt, plus changes in current debt.  If more conservative firms in settings prone to underinvestment issue more debt than less conservative firms, we expect the sum of δ1 and δ2 to be positive and significant.  We also predict a negative association between conservatism and equity issuance in settings prone to underinvestment.  We test H3b using the change in future equity issuance (ΔEquity issuancetþ 1) as the dependent variable in Eq.  (4), keeping the rest of the model unaltered.  In this case, we expect conservatism to relate negatively to equity issuance.  This occurs for two reasons.  First, equityholders, in settings prone to underinvestment, would prefer prudent new projects to be funded by debtholders, who are likely better at monitoring in such cases.  Also, equityholders are expected to be less willing to provide additional capital to more conservative financially constrained firms.  In these firms, conservatism prevents investments in risky projects that benefit equityholders at the expense of debtholders.  We therefore expect the sum of δ1 and δ2 to be negative when we model future equity issuance.  The details of the measurement of this new dependent variable are in Appendix A.  Throughout Eqs.  (1), (3), and (4) we control for financial reporting quality (FRQ) to ensure that conservatism is not a proxy for accruals quality.  We follow Biddle et al.  (2009) and use a measure of accruals quality based on the work of Dechow and Dichev (2002).  Appendix A contains the estimation details.  Corporate governance quality can also affect a firm's investments and financing, so to ensure that we isolate the effects of conservatism, we follow Biddle et al.  (2009) and incorporate the following into our three main models.  (a) the percentage of the firm's shares held by institutional investors (Institutions), (b) the number of analysts following the firm (Analysts), and (c) the measure of antitakeover protection developed by Gompers et al.  (2003), multiplied by  1 (InvGIM-Score).  Because InvGIM-Score is not available for the full sample, we also incorporate (d) GIM-Score-dum, a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 when the GIM-Score is missing and 0 otherwise.  Finally, we include additional controls for effects that can confound our results.  In particular, we follow previous research and identify variables that affect either investment5 or financing. 6 Specifically, we control for size, leverage, market-to-book ratio (MTB), depreciation method (AcceDep), the volatility of cash flow from operations (StdCFO), volatility of sales (StdSales), volatility of investment (StdInvestment), bankruptcy risk (Z-Score), proportion of tangible assets (Tangibility), industry capital structure (Ind-Cap-Struc), operating cash flow to sales (CFOsale), dividend payout ratio (Dividend), length of the operating cycle (OperCycle), length of the investment cycle (InvCycle), frequency of losses (Loss), and financial slack (Slack).  We also control for information asymmetries between the firm and capital providers. 