1.  Introduction Reducing global poverty and mitigating climate change are two major challenges facing mankind in the twenty-ﬁrst century.  Economic growth leads to absolute poverty reduction, particularly if it is not associated with rising income inequality (e. g.  Dollar and Kraay, 2002.  Bourguignon, 2003).  There is a substantial literature that investigates the relationship between income and carbon dioxide emissions (the main driver behind the increase in global surface temperature).  This literature suggests that economic growth, at least up to a certain level of economic development, increases greenhouse gases (IPCC, 2014.  Jakob et al. , 2014).  Consequently, from the perspective of a developing country, economic growth may alleviate poverty, but intensify climate problems.  A related issue is whether there is also a tradeoff between income inequality and carbon emissions, as stated by Ravallion et al.  (2000).  As we discuss below, the theoretical and empirical literature generates mixed results on this question, pointing to different mechanisms and effects (for a survey see Berthe and Elie, 2015).  Much of this literature is, however, based on econometric methods that are biased in the presence of time-varying unobserved heterogeneity, and on older data on both inequality as well as emissions.  We improve upon the existing literature in both of these respects.  A particular innovation with respect to the existing literature is that we use a group ﬁxed effects estimator (Bonhomme and Manresa, 2015) as opposed to a standard ﬁxed effects estimator.  This grouped ﬁxed effects estimator takes into account that different regions of the world adopt clean technologies at different rates or face different structural challenges and dynamics.  Furthermore, the estimator arguably deals better with endogeneity due to unobserved heterogeneity.  Finally, the within transformation associated with the standard country-based ﬁxed effects estimator would eliminate most of the variation in the Gini data, leaving only the relatively small intertemporal variation (see the literature on the debates on inequality and growth literature, e. g.  Forbes, 2000, Banerjee and Duﬂo, 2003, Scholl and Klasen, 2016).  To the best of our knowledge, only ﬁve papers are closely related to our empirical investigation of the link between per capita carbon dioxide emissions, per capita output, and inequality.  There are also related studies investigating the link between inter-country inequality and emissions (e. g.  Guo, 2013.  Coondoo and Dinda, 2008).  First, Ravallion et al.  (2000) use a pooled OLS model that interacts inequality with a third-order polynomial of income, a time trend, and population size.  The panel data set consists of 42 countries over the period from 1975 to 1992.  The authors use one (average) inequality measure per country.  They ﬁnd that there is a static tradeoff between reducing carbon emissions and reducing income inequality.  Second, Borghesi (2006) applies OLS and ﬁxed effects panel data estimators to a panel data set of 37 countries for the period 1988 to 1995.  He prefers the ﬁxed effects estimator and ﬁnds that inequality does not have an effect on emissions.  For the pooled OLS estimator, he ﬁnds a statistically signiﬁcant negative effect between income inequality and carbon dioxide emissions.  Third, Heerink et al.  (2001) use a cross-section design with 65 country observations from about 1985.  The speciﬁcation includes income, its square, and the Gini coefﬁcient.  Similar to Ravallion et al.  (2000), they ﬁnd that income inequality is negatively associated with carbon emissions per capita.  All three studies rely on the inequality measure from the data set described in Deininger and Squire (1996).  Two further studies use the University of Texas Inequality data which proxies household inequality with the between sector wage inequality in non-agricultural sectors.  Drabo (2011) ﬁnds, in a 2SLS ﬁxed effects framework using 86 countries ﬁnds that inequality increases emissions.  Gassebner et al.  (2008) use extreme bound analysis for a sample of up to 120 countries in 1960–2001 and ﬁnd that inequality is robustly associated with smaller CO2 emissions.  The use of the UTIP data, which relates to a particular aspect of industrial wage inequality, as a proxy for overall inequality is, however, controversial and can lead to biases (Scholl, 2016).  Our analysis uses expanded and improved data from Solt (2009), which is derived from the much broader, more consistent, and more reliable WIDER2 World Income Inequality Database.  This allows us to use a larger set of countries (158) than the existing literature, and observations from 1980 to 2008, which is larger and more recent than most existing studies.  Furthermore, we argue that cross-section estimates based on pooled OLS or related methods are arguably not the most appropriate tools for this analysis, and argue that the group ﬁxed effects estimator (Bonhomme and Manresa, 2015) is more suitable for the analysis.  We also compare our analysis to a standard ﬁxed effects estimator. 3 We ﬁnd that the relationship between income inequality and emissions depends on income levels.  At lower levels of incomes higher income inequality reduces emissions while at higher levels of income, the effect is reversed.  The group ﬁxed effects also generate interesting differentiated time trends linked closely to trends in energy intensity in the different groups.  The rest of the paper is structured as follows.  Section 2 reviews theoretical arguments in the existing literature, emphasizing that the relationship between income inequality and emissions is ambiguous.  Section 3 describes the panel data set.  Section 4 outlines the ﬁxed effects model for our setting, and reveals its shortcoming in the current context.  We then argue that a group ﬁxed effects estimator is more appropriate, and describe that model.  The main results and a sensitivity analysis are presented in Section 5.  Section 6 concludes.  2.  Theory.  Starting in the mid-1990′s, economists have developed several theoretical arguments to explain the relationship between economic inequality and environmental degradation.  For a full review, please see Cushing et al.  (2015) and Berthe and Elie (2015).  Here we only provide a condensed summary of this very large literature.  While some of the arguments entail a positive association, namely the “equality hypothesis” proposed by Boyce (1994), Torras and Boyce (1998) and Borghesi (2006), others argue that greater inequality could also be negatively associated to emissions (Heerink et al. , 2001.  Ravallion et al. , 2000.  Scruggs, 1998).  If the second argument prevails, there will be a tradeoff between redistribution policies and environmental quality.  Boyce (1994) proposes that greater inequality could increase environmental degradation via the impact on the rate of time preference and via a modiﬁed cost-beneﬁt analysis that considers power-weighted costs and beneﬁts.  Boyce (1994) and Torras and Boyce (1998) assume that environmental quality is a public good and effective demand requires public policy solutions to this market failure.  The factors which allow economies to redress market failure more efﬁciently are “vigilance and advocacy”, as pointed out by Grossman and Krueger (1995) in earlier work.  These two factors increase with per capita income because individuals gain greater power to make their demand effective through the political process.  In particular, some individuals beneﬁt from economic activities that generate pollution, whereas other citizens, adversely affected by pollution, bear net cost.  The latter exercise vigilance and are in charge to demand for environmental controls, whereas the former attempt to prevent that those environmental controls are established or strengthened.  Assuming that in more unequal societies those who beneﬁt from pollution are more powerful than those who bear the cost, the beneﬁt-cost rule will lead to predict an inefﬁcient high level of pollution.  This implies a positive correlation between income inequality and pollution.  A controversial assumption they made to reach this outcome is that net beneﬁt from polluting activities is positively correlated with individual income.  However, Scruggs (1998) claims that wealthy and powerful individuals do not necessarily prefer more degradation than the rest and he also questions Boyce's underlying assumption that more democratic societies produce better environmental results than other political regimes.  Also, it is unclear whether this argument, which has been formulated for environmental degradation more generally, also holds for carbon emissions.  In the case of carbon emissions, costs are not only felt locally but globally and emission control is a global public good, where it is unclear that national income inequality will necessarily play a critical role in this mechanism.  In the same line of reasoning as Boyce (1994), Borghesi (2006) suggests that an increase in inequality hinders the way for public policy solutions to environmental problems and therefore greater inequality can contribute to increasing emissions.  Also Marsiliani and Renstrom (2003) argue that higher inequality leads to less environmental protection and consequently higher emissions in an overlapping generations model with a majority elected representative.  The author points to the anecdotal evidence that Scandinavian countries are the most protective of their environment among the developed countries, being as well the most egalitarian.  A different argument is put forward by McAusland (2003) and Gassebner et al.  (2008).  Both suggest that inequality may inﬂuence emissions through the channel of factor ownership and voting.  According to McAusland (2003), the relationship between income inequality and demand for pollution policy depends on the level of ownership concentration and openness to trade in countries.  Hence, empirical tests of the relationship between income inequality and environmental quality are expected to yield ambiguous results.  The author suggests controlling for the source of income inequality in each country as well as for the endogenous price effects of its pollution policy.  Gassebner et al.  (2008) argue that, at least in richer countries, rising income inequality is associated with accelerated industrial decline (through increasing outsourcing of industrial production as well as skill-biased technical change), which in turn reduces the political power of industrial producers and workers, thereby reducing their ability to bloc measures to reduce pollution or emissions.  Extending this line of argument, one could imagine that in poorer countries, the political clout of the rising industrial sector is rising as well, leading to less environmental regulation, particularly when richer population groups are associated with the rising industrial sector.  Thus this line of argument could predict a different correlation between income inequality and emissions in poor and rich countries.  While these studies generally suggest that increasing income inequality will increase emissions, a second group of studies predicts exactly the opposite.  Ravallion et al.  (2000) point out that in a simple model where the marginal propensity to emit (MPE) varies with income, inequality measures enter the income-emission relationship, a point also made by Heerink et al.  (2001).  In fact, they point out that there will be a biased estimate in the income-emission relationship if income inequality is not included in the estimation.  There is considerable evidence from micro studies in several countries that the MPE does indeed vary with the level of income, with most studies ﬁnding that the MPE falls with income (see Holtz-Eakin and Selden, 1995.  Heil and Selden, 1999.  Grunewald et al. , 2012.  Jakob et al. , 2014.  Serino and Klasen, 2015).  This suggests that higher inequality reduces emissions.  This would be ampliﬁed if, in poorer countries, higher inequality implies that a large share of the population lives outside the carbon economy, i. e.  they lack access to electricity and other forms of modern energy.  For that subpopulation, the MPE might be close to zero, thus increasing their share in the population would lower aggregate emissions. 4 Finally, the emulation theory, originally due to Veblen (1899), hypothesizes that in more unequal societies individuals in a given social class tend to compare themselves with the members of the immediately superior social class and emulate their consumption patterns.  In this way, more unequal societies might have a higher propensity to consume more polluting intensive goods and services (such as big cars, long-distance vacations, etc. ) that are associated to a higher MPE and therefore to higher emissions in comparison to egalitarian societies.  The marginal propensity to emit will be higher at all income levels.  In summary, the theoretical literature is ambiguous about the sign of the relationship between inequality and emissions that is conditioned to a number of underlying assumptions, see also Cushing et al.  (2015) and Berthe and Elie (2015).  In this respect, we aim to contribute with a novel empirical approach to shed light on some of the above mentioned theories.  The contrasting theoretical arguments also suggest that the relationship is probably heterogeneous across countries, leading to different levels of emissions across countries, as well as to differences in income and inequality elasticities.  In fact, some theories suggest that high inequality is associated with more emissions in richer countries, while the relationship might be reversed in poorer countries.  For example, Gassebner et al.  (2008) relate rising inequality in rich countries to industrial decline and reduction of political power of the industrial producers.  This implies limited inﬂuence to stop stringent environmental regulations demanded by consumers in rich countries.  Our speciﬁcation below will enable us to examine a non-monotonic relationship, such as the one implied by their mechanism.  <Middle> Data.  We use an unbalanced panel data set with annual measurements from 1980 to 2008, covering 158 countries.  The total number of observations is 3966.  This data set is much more extensive than those used in the existing literature on the relationship between income inequality, GDP, and carbon emissions.  The corner stone of our data set are the Gini coefﬁcients from the Standardized World Income Inequality Database (SWIID) by Solt (2009).  For the SWIID, a missing data algorithm was used to ﬁll in the Gini measurements and to make the data from different sources comparable.  Solt (2009) differentiates between before and after tax income inequality.  Many high income countries apply strong redistributive policies, which lead to overall lower after-tax income inequality than before tax income inequality.  We use after-tax income inequality measure because we are interested in the effect of redistributive policies, and want to account for those already in place.  The data on carbon dioxide emissions are from the Oak Ridge National Laboratory data set, which covers emissions from fossil fuel, natural gas consumption, and cement manufacturing (Boden et al. , 2012).  This data set is widely used in the literature but faces two major shortcomings, see e. g.  Borghesi (2006).  First, it is estimated data which is based on the consumption of fossil fuels multiplied with the average carbon content of the respective fuel type.  Second, it does not account for emissions from agriculture, livestock, deforestation or land use change.  Therefore, it will underestimate the carbon dioxide emissions for countries with a strong agricultural sector or where deforestation is a serious issue.  But as shown in the recent IPCC report (IPCC, 2014), our data cover about 75% of total greenhouse gas emissions (when expressed in CO2 equivalents) and this share is fairly stable over time.  GDP per capita and further control variables are taken from the World Development Indicators, see World Bank (2012).  The measure of GDP that we use is based on purchasing power parity, and measured in constant 2005 International Dollars.  The WDI also supplies the shares of value added of agriculture, manufacturing and the service sector in percentages of total GDP, and the proportion of the population that lives in cities (“Urban population”).  Finally, we use the Polity measure, see Marshall and Cole (2011), which is a measure of state fragility that ranges from +10 (strongly democratic) to −10 (strongly autocratic).  An overview of the variables, with summary statistics, are given in Table 1.  4.  Econometric Model.  This section describes the ﬁxed effects model and the group ﬁxed effects model, which we use to investigate empirically the relationship between emissions, GDP, and income inequality.  We will argue that, for our empirical application, the group ﬁxed effects estimator, proposed by Bonhomme and Manresa (2015), is an attractive alternative to the commonly used ﬁxed effects estimator.  The results for both models are described in Section 5.  For country i at time t, let eit be log CO2 emissions per capita, and let yit denote log GDP per capita.  Furthermore, let git denote the log of the Gini coefﬁcient, which is our preferred measure of income inequality.  Additional explanatory variables are collected in a vector Xit.  A useful starting point for our analysis is the following ﬁxed effects model, with the standard assumptions on the error term uit, and allowing for an unrestricted relationship between the country- and time-speciﬁc effects (αi, λt) and the covariates (“ﬁxed effects”).  The quadratic speciﬁcation in (yit, git) serves as an approximation to a general, nonlinear relationship between emissions, GDP, and income inequality.  The squared income inequality term is omitted, as it is highly correlated with git, and our results are not sensitive to its omission.  Note that the quadratic income term allows the relationship between emissions and income to be non-monotonic.  For example, it allows for the inverted U shape that is documented in the literature on the environmental Kuznets curve.  The interaction term between income and inequality allows the relationship between income inequality and emissions to depend on income.  The inclusion of the interaction term is therefore crucial, as our discussion in Section 2 led to the conclusion (see the last paragraph in that section) that the elasticity of emissions with respect to inequality depends on income.  In our model, this elasticity is given by.  This elasticity depends on the current level of GDP per capita. 5 For example, if β3 b 0 and β4 N 0, the elasticity is positive only if a country is rich enough, i. e.  yit N y⁎ = −β3⁄β4.  Models such as (1) are widely used in economics, and in the existing empirical papers on the relationship between income inequality and emissions.  In particular, Ravallion et al.  (2000) ignore heterogeneity, but allow for a cubic income term.  Their omission of country-speciﬁc ﬁxed effects is rejected by our empirical results.  Borghesi (2006) and Drabo (2011) use a ﬁxed effects model, but leaves out the interaction term between income and inequality.  The ﬁxed effects model (1) provides a ﬂexible way to control for unobserved heterogeneity at the country level.  A drawback is that the time effect λt is restricted to be the same for all countries. 