 1.  Introduction The study of the economic growth and energy consumption nexus allows for testing of four hypotheses with strong implications for growth and energy policy.  (1) the feedback hypothesis (which indicates a bidirectional causation between the two variables).  (2) the growth hypothesis (or a unidirectional causation ﬂowing from energy to economic growth).  (3) the conservative hypothesis (or a unidirectional causation ﬂowing from economic growth to energy).  or (4) the neutrality hypothesis (no causation).  Hypothesis (2) advances the view that energy consumption promotes economic growth.  It is also widely believed that demand for energy is propelled by economic growth, giving rise to hypothesis (3).  The complementarity between energy and economic growth, as portrayed in (2) and (3), has given rise to hypothesis (1).  Hypotheses (1) and (2) posit a connection between energy policy and economic growth.  Acceptance of these hypotheses discourages restrictive energy policies, but calls for policies that promote energy efﬁciency.  The prevalence of hypotheses (3) or (4) emphasises a disconnection between energy policies and economic growth and gives a green light to energy conservation policies (Narayan, 2016). 1 While a plethora of studies examine this nexus for total energy consumption, there is an emerging strand that examines the four hypotheses explicitly for total renewables and/or non-renewables for one or more individual countries, or a panel of countries, by their level of economic development or region (see, Tiba et al. , 2016.  Bhattacharya et al. , 2016.  Chang et al. , 2015.  Salim et al. , 2014.  Pao et al. , 2014.  Marques and Fuinhas, 2012.  Apergis and Payne, 2011a, 2011b, 2010a.  Apergis et al. , 2010.  and Sardosky, 2009).  Some also examine the traditional energy consumption and economic growth nexus for different energy mixes of renewables and non-renewables (see Bloch et al. , 2015.  Long et al. , 2015.  Pao and Fu, 2013.  Marques and Fuinhas, 2012.  and Yildirim et al. , 2012).  We summarise these studies in Table 1.  By mainly using cointegration/VECM/VAR/Granger causality tests for developing and developed nations, this group of studies clariﬁes policy directions along the lines of long-term growth and energy by renewable and non-renewable energy.  While this literature shows evidence that is mixed, for both renewables and non-renewables, majority tend to ﬁnd support for the feedback hypothesis (see Table 1).  Of the 28 previous studies surveyed, for renewables, the majority (57%) show evidence in support of the feedback effect in the long run (Apergis and Payne 2010a,b, 2011a,b, 2012.  Apergis et al. , 2010.  Apergis and Danuletiu, 2014.  Chang et al. , 2015.  Salim et al.  2014.  Tiba et al. , 2016.  Tugcu et al. , 2012.  Pao and Fu, 2013.  Lin and Moubarak, 2014.  Sebri and Ben-Salha, 2014.  Bloch et al. , 2015.  Omri et al. , 2015).  Only nine out of 28 studies consider short-term causality and all nine show evidence in favour of the feedback effect in the short-run (Sardosky, 2009.  Apergis and Payne 2010a,b, 2011a,b, 2012.  Pao et al. , 2014.  Sebri and Ben-Salha, 2014.  and Shahbaz et al. , 2015).  Evidence that renewable energy leads economic growth is found in 18% of the studies in the longrun (Pao et al. , 2014.  Bhattacharya et al. , 2016.  Yildirim et al. , 2012.  Chang et al. , 2015.  Shahbaz et al. , 2015.  Omri et al. , 2015).  Evidence that economic growth causes higher demand for renewable energy is found in 18% of the studies (Sardosky, 2009.  Menyah and Wolde-Rufael, 2010.  Long et al. , 2015.  Omri et al. , 2015.  and Mbarek et al. , 2017).  Neutrality between renewable energy consumption and economic growth is supported in 11% of the studies (Marques and Fuinhas, 2012.  Pao and Fu, 2015.  Chang et al. , 2015).  Of the 12 studies that examine the link between non-renewable energy consumption and economic growth, majority (67%) show the same feedback effect in the long run (Apergis and Payne, 2011a.  Pao et al. , 2014.  Salim et al.  2014.  Pao and Fu, 2013, 2015.  Shahbaz et al. , 2015.  Bloch et al. , 2015.  Long et al. , 2015).  The evidence of the growth hypothesis is prevalent in 25% of the studies (Tugcu et al. , 2012.  Bhattacharya et al. , 2016) in the long run and one study, Pao et al. , 2014, in the short run.  Evidence of the conservative hypothesis is not found, but the neutrality hypothesis is found in Tugcu et al.  (2012).  In this study, we re-examine the four hypotheses outlined above for renewable and non-renewable energy consumption per capita. 2 The point of difference between this study and the extant literature is that we distinguish between residential and industrial users of renewable and non-renewable energy.  This distinction recognises the varying energy source mix which we explain below.  We ﬁnd that the disparity in the energy type mix between the two user groups becomes more apparent when we classify the users of energy by their level of development.  It can therefore be argued that the link between energy and economic growth will depend on the level of development, the users, and the energy mix.  The four hypotheses are tested for countries categorised into four income groups.  high income (HI), upper middle income (UMI), and low and lower middle income (LLMI).  Several of the abovementioned panel-based studies examine the four hypotheses on the basis of the level of development of the country, although most of these studies only examine a developed country panel (Apergis and Payne 2010a.  Salim, et al. , 2014.  and Chang et al. , 2015) or developed and developing panels (see Apergis and Payne 2011a.  Apergis et al.  2010.  Omri et al. , 2015).  Tiba et al.  (2016) is the only study that examines the energygrowth nexus for two out of four income groups (see Table 3 below) normally used to classify countries, i. e.  high income and middle income countries.  Such a division is important as across these income groups the nature of changes occurring with respect to the use of renewables and non-renewables, is signiﬁcantly different.  The International Energy Agency (IEA, 2006.  2015) notes that in the United States and the European Union, expansion of renewable energy occurs largely at the expense of aging fossil-fuelled capacity.  In China, India, and many other developing countries, expansion of renewable capacity goes hand-in-hand with efforts to expand energy supply from other sources, to keep up with rapidly increasing demand.  So far, only one study has shed some light on the association between economic growth and renewable and non-renewable industrial energy consumption (see Doytch and Narayan, 2016). 3 Doytch and Narayan (2016) examine the one-way link going from economic growth to total industrial energy consumption for high, middle and low and lower middle income groups – in effect only testing the conservative hypothesis.  Their GMM estimations, which also factor in for sectoral FDI, suggest that real GDP per capita growth positively and signiﬁcantly inﬂuences industrial energy consumption (renewable and non-renewable).  Our study follows the same testing procedure, but focuses on the bilateral relationship for this category of energy consumption (industrial) as well as residential renewables and non-renewables.  In doing so, our study is one of the few to explore the short-term association between renewable (and non-renewable) energy consumption and economic growth.  The link between industrial energy consumption and economic growth is one that can be contemplated without much difﬁculty using the growth theory.  For instance, industrial energy use by both labour and capital produces goods and services.  However, the theoretical underpinning for the relationship between residential energy consumption and economic growth is unknown.  Empirical evidence on hypotheses (1) to (4) for total residential (and industrial) energy consumption is also rather thin. 4 Nonetheless residential energy users are seen by policymakers as key target groups for energy conservation policies.  “Residential energy conservation is a key component of contemporary energy and climate change policy in the US and elsewhere” (Suter and Shammin, 2013.  551).  Pablo-Romero et al.  (2017.  342) in their article “Global changes in residential energy consumption” reinforce this view, “(t)he residential energy sector is crucial to achieving CO2 emission reductions as it has an important energy-saving potential and its environmental controls are difﬁcult to displace to other countries”.  On the basis of an analysis of the residential energy consumption trends for the period 1993–2013, Pablo-Romero et al.  (2017) recommend different energy policies across regions.  They suggest that East Asian, Southern Asian, EU15, and other developed countries should reduce residential energy use.  However, since energy is generally seen as a vital component of growth, it is important to identify whether or not conserving residential energy use hurts economic growth.  Further, should this policy of conserving residential energy use be enforced on all countries.  Knowledge about the link between residential energy and economic growth, or whether residential energy is a viable target for conservation, is lacking.  Our study attempts to provide more evidence for understanding these important questions.  We focus on the effects of residential energy on short-term economic growth for income group panels of countries.  In this study, using data from 89 countries, we uncover additional compelling differences in the consumption patterns of residential and industrial – renewable and non-renewable – energy consumption, by income group, over the period 1971 to 2011.  We explain these in detail in Section 2 (also see Tables 2A and 2B).  Here we brieﬂy explain some of the patterns and trends relating to the energy mix of the income groups from our preliminary analysis to illustrate the importance of the energy mix, users and income groups in the examination of the linkage between energy consumption and economic growth.  First, total industrial energy consumption takes a larger share of ﬁnal energy consumption than total residential energy usage in high income and upper middle income countries (Table 2A, I7 and Table 2B, R7).  Nonetheless, between these two groups, over the period 1971 to 2011, the average growth of industrial share (of ﬁnal consumption) has been falling in the high income countries, but increasing strongly in the case of the upper middle income countries (Table 2A, I10).  Of the low and lower middle income countries, industrial share of ﬁnal consumption has been on average increasing (at a slower rate than the upper middle income) and for this income group (unlike other groups), on average residential energy users are bigger than industrial energy users (Table 2A, I10).  From these preliminary observations, given the difference in the key energy users by income group, we expect that.  (a) residential energy consumption is a signiﬁcant contributor to economic growth in the low and lower middle income countries and it seems that for this set of countries conservation of energy will hurt economic growth.  and (b) industrial energy consumption is a signiﬁcant contributor to economic growth in upper middle income countries, and possibly the high income group as well.  Second, in terms of the distribution of renewable and non-renewable, we notice that, across all income panels, residential users are more important than industrial users for renewable energy.  and for non-renewable energy, industries are more substantial users than residential users.  The residential renewable energy consumption share of total ﬁnal renewable consumption is, on average, greater than the industrial renewable energy consumption share of total ﬁnal renewable energy consumption for the period 1971 to 2011 (Table 2A, I9 andTable 2B , R9).  However, the opposite is true for non-renewable consumption share of total ﬁnal nonrenewable consumption for all panels (Table 2A, I8 and Table 2B, R8).  From this observation we can state that.  (c) residential renewable energy, not industrial renewable energy, is a driver of economic growth and/ or vice versa.  However, with biomass being the most dominant source of energy for residences in low income countries, the negative effects of biomass energy on health, environment, and productivity is also widely known and documented (see our discussion in Section 3. 3).  As a result, it is likely that.  (d) for low and middle income countries the positive effects of residential renewable energy use on economic growth will be nulliﬁed, or will become negative.  Third, growth of residential renewable energy consumption share of total ﬁnal renewable consumption averaged over 1971 to 2011 has been strongest in high income countries, but growth of industrial renewable energy consumption share of total ﬁnal renewable consumption is the strongest for the upper middle income countries (Table 2A, I12, Table 2B, R12).  Since several studies (mentioned above) suggest economic growth encourages demand for renewable energy consumption, it becomes important to investigate whether.  (e) economic growth is a trigger for residential renewable energy consumption in high income countries.  and (f) economic growth is a trigger of industrial renewable energy consumption in the upper middle income countries.  Fourth, over the same period the average growth of renewable energy consumption is stronger for the residential sector than for the industrial sector in high income and low and lower middle income countries, suggesting higher adoption of renewables in the residential sector (see Table 2A, I6 and Table 2B R6).  In the upper middle income countries, we observe the opposite effect, with industries adopting renewable energy more than the residential sector.  This preliminary ﬁnding matches with our statement in (a) that residential energy consumption may be seen as a contributor of economic growth in low and lower middle income countries.  Overall, given the difference between the levels, proportions, and growth of the share of residential and industrial renewables and nonrenewables across the income groups, we believe that the short-run effects of economic growth on energy (and/or vice versa) – and therefore the policy implications – cannot be homogenous for different energy users and energy sources.  Hence, when testing the four hypotheses related to the economic growth-energy consumption nexus, we apply the different energy categories and income panels mentioned previously.  For completeness, we also examine energy consumption as total residential.  total industrial.  total renewables.  and total non-renewables.  We apply the GMM approach as our main estimation method, but also provide results derived using the ﬁxed effect method.  To foreshadow our key GMM results, our study shows signiﬁcant differences in results amongst residential and industrial users by income panel.  In fact we ﬁnd that the effect of economic growth is multifacetted.  In other words the effects of economic growth are felt by more than one energy user group, although not all user groups contribute to economic growth.  Our ﬁndings suggest the presence of a feedback effect, with total nonrenewable for both the low and lower middle income, and upper middle income panels.  Interestingly, for the upper middle income panel, economic growth is also found to positively impact on non-renewable industrial energy.  However, this panel's non-renewable industrial energy consumption is not a signiﬁcant driver of growth in the short-term.  The high income panel also shows feedback for total non-renewable after allowing for investment.  Further we ﬁnd evidence of feedback for non-renewable industrial energy of the high income, as well as the low and lower middle income group, implying that non-renewable industrial energy consumption is the signiﬁcant source of the feedback effect for total non-renewable energy use.  Further, total residential energy consumption encourages economic growth in low and lower middle income (LLMI) countries.  Additionally, economic growth in the low and lower middle income panel boosts total industrial, non-renewable residential and total renewable energy consumption, a sign of the multi-facet effect of economic growth in the case of LLMI countries.  The models with economic growth-energy consumption variables ﬁnd neutrality for renewable industrial and residential (for all panels).  The neutrality hypothesis is also present with renewables (except LLMI).  total residential (UMI, HI) and industrial (HI).  We augmented the per capita based models with investment, following Apergis and Payne (2010a, 2010b, 2011a, 2011b).  From this exercise, we ﬁnd that most of our results are robust.  After accounting for capital investment, we were able to ﬁnd the presence of feedback for high income total non-renewables.  We are also able to show feedback in non-renewable industrial use for the LLMI group.  However, nonrenewable residential use for low and lower middle income countries, which originally supported the conservative hypothesis, moves to neutrality after capital investment is captured.  The balance of the paper is organised as follows.  Section 2 continues the discussion of the average trend of renewable and non-renewable – residential and industrial – energy consumption, in terms of levels, share, and growth.  These are explained by paying attention to all 89 nations and each of the three income groups studied here.  Section 3 presents different case studies on groups (EU, developing countries) or speciﬁc countries (the US, India) to explain some of the trends that were presented in the previous section.  This section explains the composition of residential and industrial energy consumption as well as some of the social and economic issues relating to renewable and non-renewable energy consumption by residential and industrial users.  Section 4 lays out the methodology applied in the paper to test the hypotheses.  Section 5 presents the results.  We also provide a summary of the results.  Section 6 provides the concluding remarks.  2.  Residential and industrial energy consumption (renewable and non-renewable) by income group.  The average industrial and residential energy consumption, in terms of total, non-renewable, and renewable, for the period 1971 to 2011 is presented in Table 2A and Table 2B in levels, shares, and growth terms according to three income groups.  low and lower middle income, upper middle income, and high income countries.  Table 2A and Table 2B display some of the facts which are readily known about energy consumption across income groups.  For instance, high income countries are the largest consumers of industrial and residential energy.  It is also known that high density industrial sectors in upper middle income groups are the second biggest users.  And with relatively lower industrial density, the low and lower middle income groups have the least amount of industrial energy consumption. 5 What is probably less known is that this pattern is also prevalent in the case of non-renewable energy consumption – for industrial and residential – but is not the case for renewables.  There are many interesting facts that can be observed from Table 2A and Table 2B.  First, total industrial energy consumption per capita is greater than those of residential consumption for the upper middle income and high income groups (see Table 2A, row I1 and Table 2B, row R1).  However, in the case of the low and lower middle income group, residential energy consumption is far greater than industrial consumption.  In terms of growth, residential energy consumption is higher than industrial for high income countries.  This is consistent with industrial and residential energy consumption as a share of total ﬁnal consumption for these nations (Table 2A, row I7 and Table 2B, row R7).  Second, in terms of growth of total industrial consumption, the upper middle income takes the lead followed by low and lower middle income countries and high income countries (see Table 2A, row I7).  The pattern is different for growth of non-renewable industrial energy – the low and lower middle income group shows the strongest average growth rates, followed by the upper middle income countries (Table 2A, row I8).  The high income countries show a negative growth rate for non-renewable energy.  While this is being compensated for by renewable energy, row I9 of Table 2A also reveals that growth rates for renewable energy consumption by industries in high income countries has in fact, on average, been lower than those of upper middle income countries (but higher than the lower income countries).  Table 2A (row I11) reveals that the share of non-renewable energy consumption by industry to total non-renewable energy consumption is indeed declining for high income countries.  This trend is also present in the upper middle income countries.  At the same time, the share of industrial renewable energy to total renewable energy consumption is increasing for both these panels, although growth is much higher for upper middle income countries.  Further, in the total renewable energy use by industries, the high income panel takes the lead, followed by the other two income groups (see Table 2B, R3).  Together these indicate that efﬁcient use of energy and adoption of renewable energy is mainly driving the negative growth for non-renewable energy use in our panels of high income countries and upper middle income countries.  Third, for residential energy consumption, the narrative is different (from industrial energy consumption) across income groups and energy mix.  While total energy consumption by the residential sector is indeed highest in the high income countries and lowest in the low and lower middle income countries, the share of residential energy consumption to ﬁnal consumption is greatest for the low and lower middle incomeTotal renewable energy consumption by residents is, on average, greatest for low and lower middle income countries, with the upper middle income and high income countries lagging behind (see Table 2B, row R3).  Similarly, the average share of renewable residential energy consumption to total renewables is strongest for our low and lower middle income group and weakest for the high income group.  However, the mean growth of this share is highest among the high income nations and lowest among poor nations.  As well, the average share of non-renewable residential energy consumption to total nonrenewables is highest for the high income group and lowest for the low and lower middle income group.  But the mean growth of this share is highest among the low and lower middle income countries and lowest among rich nations.  Fourth, in terms of growth, residential energy is strongest in the high income group, followed by upper middle income and low and lower middle income groups (see row Table 2B, row R9).  Nonrenewable energy consumption, on the other hand, grew fastest in the low and lower middle income countries – the energy deﬁcit countries (see Table 2B, row R8).  This was followed by upper middle income and high income countries.  Fifth, if we compare renewable and non-renewable energy consumption between industrial and residential users, we ﬁnd that for all three income panels the share of growth in non-renewable energy consumption is higher in residential than industrial (Table 2A, row I8 and Table 2B R8).  However, growth in renewable energy consumption by residence is much stronger in high income and low and lower middle income countries (Table 2A, I9 and Table 2B R9).  In the upper middle income countries, we observe the opposite effect – industries are adopting more renewable energy than residences.  Sixth, weﬁ nd that over the study period, mean renewable energy consumption total as a percentage of total ﬁnal consumption is highest for the low income countries.  This is followed by middle income countries, and ﬁnally high income countries (Fig.  1).  This is same for renewable industrial (or residential) energy consumption as a percentage of total industrial (or residential) energy consumption (Figs.  2 and 3).  We observe a recent resurgence of renewable energy use in LLMI countries mainly due to residential energy consumption. 6 3.  Residential and industrial energy consumption (renewable and non-renewable).  In this section, we look behind the trends described in the previous section.  3. 1.  Renewable energy - residential and industrial.  Our preliminary analysis revealed an increase in the share of renewable energy for high income and upper middle income countries.  There is strong evidence that the share of renewable energy has been increasing for the European Union (EU), which comprises high and upper middle income nations, reaching 16% in gross ﬁnal energy consumption, and is on track to meet its target, a 20% share of renewable energy in its gross ﬁnal energy consumption by 2020 (European Environment Agency, EEA, 2015).  Between 2005 and 2013, renewable energy use grew by an average 0. 8% every year.  In the EU countries, residences use renewable energy in power generation in the heating and cooling sector.  The renewable energy share in electricity consumed in the EU grew at an average of 1. 3% per year between 2005 and 2013.  In 2013, in the EU 25. 4% of electricity consumed was generated from renewables, with around 38. 0% contributed by variable renewable electricity (wind and solar) (EEA, 2015).  Bioenergy (for electricity and heating) make the largest source of renewable energy in the EU, followed by hydropower, and then wind power.  In the EU, renewable energy support comes in the form of surcharges on the energy bill of the end users (this prevails in the case of electricity) and governmental support.  Countries with a higher effective tax rate on carbon dioxide generally have a higher rate of patent applications in renewable technologies.  The 2014 EEA report identiﬁes that in 2012, 32 countries have a total of 236 support measures associated with renewables, which represents 40. 5% of the identiﬁed support measures.  The rest of the energy support measures (59. 5%) were in support of fossil fuels and nuclear energy.  Innovations in, and deployment of, renewable energy may be viewed as an important driver in shaping the future of our economic systems (EEA, 2014).  In Europe, the renewable energy industry provides N2. 2 million full-time equivalent jobs (EEA, 2014).  There is evidence to suggest that investment in renewables is also growing in non-European countries.  The International Energy Agency (IEA, 2016) reports that global investment in renewable-based power generation was $270 billion in 2014, and positive policy moves in many countries are encouraging growth of the renewable sector.  In many countries, renewable technologies are becoming increasingly cost-competitive, although public support schemes are still required for their deployment in many others.  In 2014, renewable-based power generation capacity amounted to 45% of world power generation capacity additions and the International Energy Agency (IEA, 2006.  2015) also reports that China (a lower middle income country) remains the largest wind power market, with increasing capacity (20 GW) more than the wind power market of Germany (5 GW) and US (less than 5 GW).  Solar power has also expanded strongly in Asia, particularly in China and Japan.  Nonetheless, the power sector continues to be the world's dominant fossil-fuel consumer, accounting for 40% of the energy sector total in 2013 (EIA, 2015).  3. 2.  Residential energy consumption in a high income country.  It was reported above that residential energy consumption per capita is the strongest in high income countries.  In the US, in 2012, the residential sector accounted for 21% of total primary energy consumption and about 20% of carbon dioxide emissions in the (Energy Information Administration (EIA), 2015).  While household energy usage increased in the 1980–2009 period by 8. 9%- an average annual growth of 0. 3%, aggregate energy intensity per household and per square foot declined by 24. 2% and 43. 1%, respectively (see EIA, 2015).  In the US, single-family units form the major type of household.  In 2009 single-family households in the US accounted for about 69. 1% of the housing, 85. 9% of ﬂoor space and 80. 0% of site energy consumption (EIA, 2015).  The rest was apartments (24. 8% of total housing) and mobile homes (6. 1%).  There is, however, a movement from detached single-family housing to attached ones in larger buildings, using less energy.  The size of housing, on the other hand, has increased, on average, in the US.  While this varies by the type of housing, single-family detached houses have grown faster in size than other types of housing.  Nonetheless, they have used less energy on heating due to improved energy efﬁciency of heating equipment, along with better window design and insulation to more effectively seal homes (EIA, 2013b).  The US Energy Information Administration (EIA, 2015) reports that part of the decline in residential energy consumption, particularly space heating, is due to the household shifting from the Northeast and the Midwest to the warmer regions of the South and West, where demand is lower for space heating than for space cooling, and where energy consumption (per household and per square foot) is also lower.  Appliances (dishwashers, clothes washers, clothes dryers, two or more TVs, computers, digital video recorders, and video game systems) and refrigeration account for the largest share of household electricity consumption.  Other key end uses are space heating, water heating, and air conditioning.  In fact an EIA report released in 2011 suggested that in US homes the share of residential electricity used by appliances and electronics has doubled in three decades.  The energy consumption share of space heating has fallen from 53. 1% in 1993 to 41. 5% in 2009.  while the share of appliances, electronics and lighting has climbed from 24. 0% to 34. 9% between 1993 and 2009, offsetting some of the efﬁciency gains (EIA, 2013a).  While natural gas remains as the main source of energy in the US over the 29 year period from 1980 to 2009, its share has fallen from 53. 3% in 1980 to 46. 1% in 2009, while the share of electricity increased from 26. 6% to 43. 1%.  The fall in natural gas intensity was mainly a result of improvements in the efﬁciency of household space heating units and building codes as well as increases in natural gas prices (EIA, 2015. 12).  More expensive natural gas has led to its replacement with heating equipment using other fuels, as well as the purchase of gas heating equipment more efﬁcient than the 78% Annual Fuel Utilization Efﬁciency (AFUE) standard – currently units are as high as 97% AFUE (EIA,According to the EIA (2015), the post-1990s period reﬂects the impact of many forms of energy efﬁciency programs, including the initial US Federal mandatory energy efﬁciency standards, enacted between 1988 and 1994, for all major appliances, demand-side management, and ENERGY STAR rating systems.  3. 3.  Residential energy mix in India and other low and lower middle income nations.  Historically, in India the industrial sector was the highest electricity user, but the residential sector has become equal to, or slightly greater than, industrial demand.  The EIA reports (EIA, 2014) that while electricity consumption is growing exponentially in India, the country's electricity system is maturing, with difﬁculties (outages, shortages, issues with reliability and quality) that are characteristic of a developing country.  Like many aspects of a developing country, there are clear distinctions between urban and rural centres in energy consumption.  In terms of energy mix, electricity is the least used energy source (EIA, 2014).  Indian urban centres use LPG most, followed by electricity, biomass (wood), and kerosene, while rural centres use wood, followed by kerosene, electricity, and LPG (EIA, 2014).  Lighting is provided by both electricity and kerosene (EIA, 2014).  Furthermore, in rural centres of developing countries in tropical/ temperate zones (Asia and Africa), energy is mostly used for cooking.  While a precise breakdown is difﬁcult, the main use of energy in households in developing countries is for cooking, followed by heating and lighting (IMF, 2006).  In its World Economic Outlook the IMF (2006) reported that 2. 5 billion people, or 52% of the populations in developing countries (mostly in rural centres) use biomass (wood, agricultural waste and animal dung) to meet their energy needs for cooking, accounting for over 90% of household energy consumption in many countries.  Over half of these people live in India, China, and Indonesia.  The proportion of the population relying on biomass is highest in subSaharan Africa.  The IMF (2006) report argues that unsustainable harvesting practices and inefﬁcient energy conversion technologies have serious adverse consequences for health, the environment and economic development.  Every year about 1. 3 million people – mostly women and children – die prematurely because of exposure to indoor air pollution from biomass fuels.  Valuable time and effort is devoted to fuel collection instead of education or income generation (IMF, 2006. 416).  In contrast, in the urban centres, the trends are different.  For instance, Zhao et al.  (2012) examines China's urban renewable energy consumption during the period 1998 to 2007 and ﬁnds evidence of an intensive structural change towards high quality and cleaner energy, such as electricity, oil, and natural gas.  The authors point out that this trend, “…reﬂects a changing lifestyle and consumption mode in pursuit of a higher level of comfort, convenience and environmental protection”.  <Middle> Model, methodology and data.  4. 1.  Methodology.  To examine the four hypotheses associated with energy consumption and economic growth, our empirical models are.  with μin~i.  i.  d(0,σμin), εitn~i.  i.  d.  (0,σε), E[μinεitn]=0, n =1,2.  Here k is a measure of energy consumption divided by the population.  EnConsit yt is the per capita GDP in constant 2005 prices, PPP.  and ηt is a time (annual) dummy and μi is an idiosyncratic country-speciﬁc effect. 8 Model (1) tests the conservative hypothesis while model (2) tests the growth hypothesis.  If β2 in models (1) and (2) is found to be different from zero, then we accept the feedback hypothesis.  However, insigniﬁcance of β2 in both models (1) and (2) suggests the prevalence of the neutrality hypothesis.  We examine the two models for several measures of energy consumption.  The subscript “k” [k = (1)…(8)] captures measures of different types of energy consumption.  (1) total residential.  (2) total industrial.  (3) total non-renewables.  (4) total renewables.  (5) residential non-renewables.  (6) industrial non-renewables.  (7) residential renewables.  and (8) industrial renewables.  System GMM is a method superior to ﬁxed effects, when there is an endogeneity problem in the data.  The correlation between lagged dependent variables and the unobserved residual is precisely the reason why panel data is to be preferred to cross-sectional when analysing change in the dependent variable.  Cross-section estimates produce a i. t−1 and μi1 in model bias, caused by the correlation between EnConsk (1) and yi,t−1 and μi2 in model (2), which disappears in samples with a large time-dimension, but does not disappear with time-averaging.  Thus, if such a correlation exists, the true underlying structure has a dynamic nature and time-averaging cross-section techniques introduce a bias that cannot be removed by controlling for ﬁxed-effects.  Therefore, to avoid these pitfalls, we adopt the GMM methodology.  A potential problem of the Arellano-Bond difference GMM estimator is that, under certain conditions, the variance of the estimates may increase asymptotically and create considerable bias if.  (i) the dependent variable follows a random walk, which makes the ﬁrst lag a poor instrument for its difference, (ii) the explanatory variables are persistent over time, which makes the lagged levels weak instruments for their differences, (iii) the time dimension of the sample is small (Alonso-Borrego and Arellano, 1999 and Blundell and Bond, 1998).  These sets of conditions, therefore, apply.  (i) no second order auto(εi1t−εi1,t−1)]=0.  correlation in the error term.  E[Growth_EnConsi,t−s E[Growth_yi,t−s(εi2t−εi2,t−1)]=0.  for s ≥ 2 andt = 3, …T, where the growth rate of GDP and energy consumption, respectively, are instrumented with GMM-style instruments in each of the models and (ii) No correlation of the unobserved country-speciﬁc effect with their )(μi+εi1t)]=0.  difference E[(Growth_EnConsi,t−1 E[(Growth_yi,t−1−Growth_yi,t−2)(μi+εi2t)]=0.  k −Growth_EnConsi,t−2 In addition to the GMM results, we also report robustness tests (see, Section 5. 6 “Robustness tests”) with respective ﬁxed effects models.   The model  combines equations.  unobserved country-speciﬁc effects and εitn are the errors, n = 1, 2.  4. 2.  Data.  The data are annual, multi-country (up to 89 countries) and span a forty-year period, from 1971 to 2011. 10 Table 3 displays the list of countries in the sample under four categories.  1 - low income.  2 - lower middle income.  3 - upper middle income.  and 4 - high income.  This grouping is based on the World Bank classiﬁcation.  In this study, we combine categories 1 and 2 as “low and lower middle income” countries.  We use time-varying stratiﬁcation of income level categories to capture shifts in development levels of countries. 11 The time-variation is also based on the methodology of the World Bank.  According to the International Energy Agency, (IEA, 2013), the Residential and Industrial Energy breakdown is.  Non-renewable Energy, including.  coal, peat, crude oil and oil, natural gas.  and Renewable Energy, including.  nuclear, hydro, geothermal, solar, wind, and biofuel.  Energy is measured in thousands of tonnes.  The data source is the International Energy Agency (IEA), World Energy Balances, Ed.  2013, extracted data set. 12 Real GDP per capita is measured in constant 2005 international dollars.  We use the growth rate of real GDP per capita.  The source for this variable is the International Energy Agency (IEA).  5.  Empirical results.  In this section we highlight the empirical results in terms of the four different sets of measures on energy consumption.  5. 1.  Industrial and residential total energy consumption and economicResults relating to the nexus between industrial and residential total energy consumption and economic growth are presented in Tables 4 and 5, respectively.  Panels 1 and 2 report estimated coefﬁcients corresponding to Eqs.  1 and 2.  Economic growth has a positive and signiﬁcant impact on industrial total energy consumption for all countries.  the low and lower middle income.  and upper middle income panels (Table 4, panel 1).  Industries in low and middle income nations are increasingly becoming manufacturing based while high income countries' key industries are service driven.  Manufacturing demands more energy than service industries.  Furthermore, high income countries are at the forefront when it comes to funding, developing, and using energy efﬁcient technologies and appliances, which reduces energy intensities (see, for example, discussion in case studies in Section 3).  Hence, economic growth driving industrial energy consumption of the low and lower middle income and upper middle income panels, and not high income, at this level of aggregation seems reasonable.  However, economic growth does not have a signiﬁcant effect on residential total energy consumption (Table 5, panel 1).  This result resonates best with upper middle to high income residential energy users.  Where energy is mostly used for space heating and cooling, these households are equipped with standard heating, cooling and electrical appliances.  For these groups, if income is a contributor to increased energy use, this would be insigniﬁcant.  In comparison, for the low to lower middle income groups, because users are energy poor, economic growth should increase energy demand due to an improved ability to buy electrical appliances that will increase demand for electricity.  However, we don't ﬁnd any evidence of this.  It seems that not enough is earned by the low and lower middle income group, on a per capita basis, to have any signiﬁcant impact on demand for residential energy.  Further improvements in energy efﬁciency reduce demand for energy and slow down the growth of energy use.  We see from Table 2B that growth of residential energy consumption is the weakest for high income countries and strongest for the low and lower middle income group.  In the EU for instance, energy efﬁciency has increased strongly in the residential sector.  The Odyssee energy efﬁciency index for the EU27 increased by 24. 0% over the 1990 to 2009 period with an annual average rate of 1. 4%, driven by the diffusion of more efﬁcient buildings, space heating technologies and electrical appliances (EEA, 2015). 13 This is true for other industrialised nations.  It is likely that this has weakened the link between economic growth and energy consumption.  In the EU nations, residential renewable energy is used in power generation in the heating and cooling sector.  The renewable energy share of electricity consumed in the EU grew at an average of 1. 3% per year between 2005 and 2013.  In 2013, in the EU 25. 4% of electricity consumed was generated from renewables, with around 38. 0% contributed by variable renewable electricity sources (wind and solar) (EEA, 2015).  Bioenergy (for electricity and heating) make the largest source of renewable energy in the EU, followed by hydropower and then wind power.  However, in middle to lower income countries, relatively fewer households have access to electrical appliances.  hence a tendency for residential energy consumption to be sensitive to economic growth is highly likely.  Here, energy consumption increases are linked to rising personal income which permits higher standards of living, with increases in comfort levels and ownership of domestic appliances.  Section 3. 3 suggests that for these users, there are critical problems associated with the supply of energy.  Hence, at the aggregated level, we are not seeing any signiﬁcant effect (see Tables 4 and 5).  Both residential and industrial total energy consumption are, however, found to contribute to economic growth.  For residential total, their effects are signiﬁcant at the 5% level or better, only in the case of low and lower middle income countries.  For industrial total, their effects on economic growth are also positive, but this effect is found to be at best signiﬁcant at the 10% level in the case of all countries panel and upper middle income panel.  Being heavily dependent on heavy industrial type manufacturing, an increase in energy use is linked to increased industrial productivity in the upper middle countries.  From Table 1, weﬁ nd that this result is consistent with several studies.  5. 2.  Non-renewable and renewable total energy consumption and economic growth.  As noted in Section 1, various studies have examined the link between economic growth and total energy (renewable and nonrenewable) consumption.  Our results relating to the nexus between non-renewable and renewable total energy consumption and economic growth are presented in Tables 6 and 7, respectively.  Panels 1 and 2 in each of these tables report estimated coefﬁcients corresponding to Eqs.  1 and 2.  Economic growth leads to a higher consumption of non-renewables total for all panels.  all countries.  low and lower middle income.  upper middle income.  and high income.  The marginal effect is more than proportional for the all countries and low and lower middle income panels, but less than proportional for upper middle and high income countries (Table 6, panel 1).  Economic growth has a positive and signiﬁcant effect on the consumption of renewables total only for the low and lower middle income panel (Table 7, panel 1).  Non-renewable total energy consumption also boosts economic growth – this is true for all, except the high income countries (Table 6, panel 2).  The effect is strongest for the upper middle income countries.  Renewable total, on the other hand, does not have any signiﬁcant effect on income growth for any of the four panels.  Overall, for non-renewables total energy consumption, our results conﬁrm the feedback hypothesis for three out of four panels.  all countries.  low and lower middle income.  and upper middle income countries.  These ﬁndings imply a strong connection between energy policy on non-renewables and economic growth, with conservative energy policies directed at non-renewables hurting economic growth in the short-term.  In this respect, our ﬁndings are consistent with a few studies which consider groupings similar to ours, or cover nations that fall into one of our income groups (see Apergis and Payne 2011a, 2012.  Pao and Fu, 2013, 2015.  Salim, et al. , 2014).  Still, in regard to total non-renewables, the result for the high income panel conﬁrms the growth hypothesis, which suggests that conservative energy policies relating to non-renewables will reduce economic growth.  This is consistent with two studies that also examine total non-renewables as we have (see Bhattacharya et al. , 2016.  Marques and Fuinhas, 2012).  With total energy consumption of renewables, we only ﬁnd evidence to support of the conservation hypothesis for the low and lower middle income panel, and not for the other groups.  This difference in results by income groups is consistent with the fact that total renewable energy consumption, in per capita terms in high and upper middle income countries, is still far less when compared to low and lower middle income countries (see Table 2A, I3 and Table 3B, R3).  Our ﬁnding implies that low and lower middle income countries can activate conservation policies with respect to renewable energy consumption without affecting economic growth.  This ﬁnding is consistent with previous studies that examine individual countries in the low and lower middle income group (see, Long et al. , 2015 on China.  and Omri et al. , 2015 on Argentina).  The acceptance of the neutrality hypothesis for the high and upper middle income countries suggests that renewables and economic growth are unrelated.  Nonetheless, our ﬁnding is at odds with Tiba et al.  (2016) who suggest bidirectional relations between renewable energy and economic growth for these countries.  5. 3.  Non-renewable industrial and residential energy consumption and economic growth.  Economic growth positively and signiﬁcantly impacts consumption of non-renewable industrial energy for all, except the low and lower middle income countries (Table 8, panel 1).  The labour-intensive production processes in low and lower middle income countries, versus capital intensive processes in the upper middle income and high income countries, is likely to be the key driving force behind this ﬁnding.  It is also worth noting that high income countries' economic growth was not found to affect total industrial energy use, but the effect of economic growth became signiﬁcant against non-renewable industrial energy.  This suggests that there is strong potential for energy intensive industry to switch from non-renewables to renewables.  That economic growth affects residential total energy consumption was rejected previously (see Table 5, panel 1).  Our results here show that non-renewable residential energy consumption has been positively impacted by economic growth, and, as expected, this is only visible for low and lower middle income countries (Table 9, panel 1).  This ﬁnding suggests economic growth has improved access of non-renewables energy (whose average growth per capita (3. 7%) has been stronger than that of total residential energy use per capita (0. 02%)) for residential users in energy-poor nations (see Table 2B, R5 and R4, i. e.  the low and lower middle income countries).  Non-renewable industrial energy consumption has a positive and signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the income of high income countries only (Table 8, panel 2).  Results in Panel 1 and 2 in Table suggest that a switch to renewable would be a better policy direction than the conservative approach for non-renewable energy usage in industries in high income countries.  In contrast, residential non-renewable energy consumption has no signiﬁcant effect on any of the income groups (Table 9, panel 2).  5. 4.  Renewable industrial and residential energy consumption and economic growth.  Results relating to the nexus between non-renewable industrial and residential energy consumption and economic growth are presented in Tables 8 and 9, respectively.  Panels 1 and 2 of each table report estimated coefﬁcients corresponding to Eqs.  1 and 2.  Results relating to the nexus between renewable and nonrenewable total energy consumption and economic growth are presented in Tables 10 and 11, respectively.  In both tables, panels 1 and 2 report estimated coefﬁcients corresponding to Eqs.  1 and 2.  Results suggest that economic growth has a positive, but insigniﬁcant, inﬂuence on renewable industrial (Table 10) and renewable residential (Table 11) energy consumption.  Similarly, renewable energy consumption – residential or industrial – has no signiﬁcant impact on income.  One conclusion that can be made from this is that while the upper middle income and higher income nations are putting increasingly more effort into making the switch to renewable energy (as shown in Table 2A and Table 2B), the major industries which are seen as the growth engines in these nations are lagging behind in switching from non-renewables to renewables.  The low and lower middle income countries, whose per capita renewable energy consumption is greater than other income groups, are still using more of the renewable energy sources for household use.  In poor countries the renewable energy mix largely comprises biomass fuels that have proven negative health and economic effects, hence this result of neutrality meets the expectation expressed in point (d) (Section 1).  5. 5.  Summary of results by hypothesis and income groups and some additional discussion.  In Table 12, we present a summary of the above results according to four relevant hypotheses.  the feedback hypothesis.  the growth hypothesis.  the conservative hypothesis.  and the neutrality hypothesis.  The feedback hypothesis supports a bidirectional relationship between energy and economic growth, suggesting complementarity between the two such that an increase in economic growth boosts energy consumption and a rise in energy consumption will stimulate economic growth.  We found support for this hypothesis in industries' usage of total energy and/or non-renewable energy.  Upper middle income countries show bidirectional links with industrial total and non-renewable total use.  Low and lower middle income countries show the feedback effect when dealing with non-renewable consumption totals, while high income countries support the feedback effect in the case of nonrenewable industrial energy use.  In all, for these groups policies directed towards either economic growth or energy consumption (of industrial total, non-renewable industrial, or/and total non-renewable) seem to be sufﬁcient for increasing both economic growth and energy consumption.  Given that there is signiﬁcant government support around the world for providing more efﬁcient usage of non-renewables, this suggests that energy policies that lead to efﬁcient use of energy (of industrial total, non-renewable industrial, or/and total non-renewable) are stimulating economic activity as well.  An important question here is why our results do not show any support for the feedback effect in case of renewables.  This may be a symptom of government policies, as well as the private sector still being biased towards non-renewable energy sources.  The growth hypothesis, which suggests that energy consumption leads to economic growth or that inadequate provision of energy limits economic growth, is found to be true for energy-deﬁcient countries – the low and lower middle income countries.  This unidirectional argument supports residential total energy consumption of poor nations and suggests that energy is not only an input in the production of goods and services but also complements labour inputs.  The conservation hypothesis takes the view that economic growth inﬂuences energy consumption.  This view also suggests that the economy is less energy dependent and has the capacity for energy conservation which, if implemented, will have little to no effect on economic growth.  For the low and lower middle income countries this is true when dealing with total industrial energy consumption and total renewables.  For the upper middle income and high income panels, this is true when using non-renewables as energy sources.  The case of neutrality, or no causality between these variables, appears to be another scenario that favours energy conservation policies.  such policies will not harm economic growth.  Evidence in support of the neutrality hypothesis is very strong and found in the use of renewable industrial and residential, total renewables, non-renewable residential, total residential, and total industrial energy consumption.  The link between economic growth and energy consumption is neutral for high income countries in the case of all, except non-renewables total and non-renewables industrial.  For the upper middle income panel, this hypothesis could not be rejected, except for total industrial, total non-renewables and non-renewables industrial.  In contrast, for the low and lower middle income countries, the neutrality hypothesis is only accepted in the case of non-renewables industrial and renewables industrial and residential.  5. 6.  Robustness test.  To ascertain the robustness of our results, we ﬁrst follow Apergis and Payne (2010a, 2010b, 2011a, 2011b), and introduce investment as a share of GDP in the models estimated above.  Capital investment is a crucial determinant of economic growth hence it has strong theoretical implications for Eq.  (2) and inclusion of the variable capital investment in Eq.  (1) highlights the investment in energy-related technology.  These models are estimated using the GMM approach.  We summarise the results in Table 12. 14 We ﬁnd that all, or most, of the results with and without gross investment are consistent.  The differences are as follows.  In the case of total non-renewables we ﬁnd that models with investment favour the feedback hypothesis for the high income panel when models without investment showed the presence of the conservative hypothesis.  For non-renewable industrial energy consumption, we ﬁnd that models with investment favour the feedback hypothesis for all countries and the low and lower middle income panel.  However, models without investment favoured the conservative hypothesis only.  Nonrenewable residential consumption supports the conservative hypothesis without investment but the neutrality hypothesis with investment.  There is a suggested weakness of instruments in some of our models, as the Sargan statistic shows. 15 In models with relatively small samples, or a relatively large set of excluded instruments, the test of the orthogonality of the instruments becomes less powerful (Roodman, 2009).  However, as Roodman (2009, p.  142) points out further, “there is no precise guidance on what is a relatively safe number of instruments”.  As a result, we complement the GMM results with the ﬁxed effect (FE) results. 16 The FE models point to an overall robustness of the GMM regression coefﬁcients.  They do not require special moment conditions, but they also do not incorporate dynamics or solve the endogeneity problem.  For these reasons, we recommend that they are read as complementary to the GMM results and not in their substitution.  The two respective ﬁxed effects models are.  where μin~i.  i.  d(0,σμin), εitn~i.  i.  d.  (0,σε),E[μinεitn]=0, n=3,4.  ηt represents a vector of annual dummy variables.  All other variables in models (3) and (4) are as in models (1) and (2), respectively.  These results are presented next to the GMM results in Tables 4–11 in columns 5–8.  We also summarise the FE results in Table 12.  The FE coefﬁcients conﬁrm three out of four of our results regarding the feedback hypothesis (the bidirectional relationship) and 50% of our neutrality hypotheses.  The FE coefﬁcients are less helpful for conﬁrming our results relating to the conservative hypothesis (unidirectional from growth to energy consumption) and the growth hypothesis (unidirectional from energy consumption to growth) results (see Table 12).  To re-emphasize, the FE results are to be treated with caution as they do not control for endogeneity and do not capture the dynamics of the processes.  <Conclusion> Concluding remarks.  Our study takes an extensive look at the four hypotheses relating to the energy consumption and economic growth nexus.  While there is a large body of literature that differentiates between renewable and non-renewable energy, this paper suggests further dividing such studies by residential and industrial users of energy.  There are distinct and compelling features among the consumption patterns of these user groups, particularly across panels of countries by income.  We test the four hypotheses across different energy categories by income panel and show differences.  We use the GMM approach to estimate the growth model to highlight the current situation.  One of our key results relates to low and lower middle income countries where the residential energy consumption total shows growth effects for low and lower middle income countries (see point (a) in Section 1).  This is the ﬁrst large scale study that shows the importance of residential energy for the economic development of low income countries.  There is an urgent need for both the public and private sectors to work harder to promote better access to electricity for households in these nations.  Further efforts to conserve residential energy in these nations would hurt their economic growth.  We show that the feedback effect is associated with the matured energy sources non-renewables – total and industrial – in all income groups (point (b), Section 1).  Neutrality is still associated with renewables, except in the case of upper middle income countries that support the presence of the conservative hypothesis.  Together, both ﬁndings suggest the global depth of dependence on non-renewables.  We failed to ﬁnd any evidence.  that residential renewable energy is a driver of economic growth and/or vice versa (point c).  that economic growth is a trigger of residential renewable energy consumption in high income countries (point e).  and that economic growth is a trigger of industrial renewable energy consumption in the upper middle income countries (point f).  Overall, we believe this study provides an important dynamic panel data perspective on the bidirectional relationships between economic growth and energy consumption, with useful insight on renewables versus non-renewables and industrial versus residential energy consumption.  References <Ending>. 