
Land-use conversions from forested and natural lands to agricultural
landscapes are a leading cause of biodiversity decline worldwide
(Gibson Name, 2011.  Laurance Name, 2014).  Agricultural conversions
also release large amounts of carbon and contribute signiﬁcantly to climate change (Mendelsohn and Dinar, 2009).  Economic models of agricultural land-use change have proved helpful in understanding the
ecological consequences of land conversion across multiple scales and
for many commodities (Lubowski Name, 2008).  These models can also
be used to predict the environmental impact of changes in agricultural
policy or prices (Lawler Name, 2014.  Polasky Name, 2008). 
Cannabis represents an emerging agricultural crop of economic and
ecological signiﬁcance (Carah Name, 2015.  Decorte Name, 2011).  Cannabis is now legal, either as a medicine or for recreational use, in over
half the United States and the federal government has signaled potential
shifts in its classiﬁcation of cannabis as well (National Conference of
State Legislatures, 2016).  The market for legal cannabis is already estimated to reach $22. 8 billion nationwide by 2020, approximately double
the value of wheat production (Arcview Market Research, 2014).  The
growth of this industry may lead to clearing of new land for agriculture
or the intensiﬁcation of already established sites. 
While many facets of cannabis production are not well documented,
there is ample evidence that cannabis production can have negative
ecological impacts (Carah Name, 2015).  For instance, illegal cannabis cultivation sites have been linked to rodenticide poisoning throughout
Northern California (Gabriel Name, 2012.  Thompson Name, 2014), and
to dewatering of streams due to irrigation practices (Bauer Name,
2015).  Many grows are located in areas of potential ecological impact,
such as on steep slopes, far from developed road networks, and near
habitat for threatened and endangered ﬁsh species (Butsic and
Brenner, 2016). 
Given its high economic value and potential impact on the environment, surprisingly little is known about the most basic spatial dimensions of this emerging agricultural activity.  Even less is known about
how cannabis farmers choose the location and size of their operations. 
Unlike most agricultural crops in the United States, which are mapped
and recorded by various government departments, the presence of cannabis agriculture has gone widely undocumented, with the exception of
police reports during the era of strong prohibition.  Recent advances in
the availability of high resolution satellite imagery have made it possible
to map cannabis farms at some times of the year across fairly broad spatial scales (Bauer Name, 2015).  One recent study (Butsic and Brenner,
2016) produced baseline data that could be used to model land-use
decisions on cultivation location and size.  With these insights,
policymakers, planners, and others charged with governing this emerging land-use activity might better prepare to mitigate anticipated environmental impacts. 
We use a dataset consisting of 1341 documented cannabis cultivation sites on private land in Humboldt County, California to
model the spatial location and production decisions of cannabis
farmers.  We evaluate the impact of biophysical variables (slope, distance from ocean, distance to water, vegetation cover, and aspect),
network variables (number of plants on nearby parcels), local regulations (zoning), and historical variables (whether or not a timber
harvest has taken place in the last 15 years) on producer decisions. 
In addition, we test to see if the impact of these variables differs for
alternative production methods (outdoor cultivation vs.  greenhouse
cultivation). 
<Middle> Methods. 
2. 1.  Study Area. 
Our study area consists of 54 randomly selected watersheds in Humboldt County, CA which are representative of the county as a whole
(Butsic and Brenner, 2016).  Humboldt County is located in northern
California (Fig.  1) along the Paciﬁc coast and is considered the leading
cannabis producing county in the United States, if the not world.  The
county is a mix of coniferous and hardwood forest with pockets of
open rangeland.  The study area is home to numerous threatened and
endangered species, including.  Chinook and Coho salmon, steelhead
trout, and the northern spotted owl (California Department of Fish
and Wildlife, 2015). 
Due to the steep terrain and poor soils, agriculture is limited to a
relatively small area of the county.  Livestock, dairy, and nursery
production are the largest agricultural sectors ($76, $61, $41
million dollars in sales in 2014) and make up over 95% of all
agricultural production by value.  Timber production contributes
another $72 million in direct sales (Humboldt County, 2015).  In
comparison, the wholesale value of cannabis production is likely
over $300 million, although no ofﬁcial ﬁgures exist (Butsic and
Brenner, 2016). 
2. 2.  Cannabis Production in Humboldt County. 
Cannabis can be legally cultivated in California for medicinal purposes, although the federal government still considers cannabis an illegal Schedule I drug (McGreevy, 2015).  Medical producers (recreational
marijuana will not be legal in California until 2018) must be documented care givers and can supply their crop either to individuals who have
physician approval to use cannabis or to dispensaries, which can sell
cannabis to patients.  During the time period of our study, there was virtually no chain of custody in the cannabis industry, and the supply chain
from growers to consumers was undocumented.  Under the Obama administration, federal law enforcement agencies did not strongly enforce
federal cannabis laws nationally, although there is precedent for federal
actions on dispensaries and growers (Zilversimt, 2016).  Federal law typically enforces a 5-year prison sentence for cultivation sites larger than
99 plants, hence anecdotal evidence suggests that many farmers stay
under that number in case of federal intervention (California Normal,
2016).  Currently there is no organized program in California to track
cannabis cultivation siting, production, or sales, even in the legal market.  New laws passed in 2015 aim to establish such a system by 2018
(McGreevy, 2015).  The details of such laws are still under formation in
California, with the California Department of Food and Agriculture
(CDFA) releasing their ﬁrst proposed regulations on medical cannabis
cultivation on April 28, 2017.  From a land use perspective individual
counties will be able to create land use ordinances that limit production
beyond state standards. 
There is little documentation of actual practices of cannabis production in the scientiﬁc literature (Carah Name, 2015).  The lack of research
stems in part from federal restrictions on interacting with cannabis,
which have prevented researchers from observing and studying production systems (Sides, 2015).  Nevertheless, researchers have anecdotally observed several tendencies of cannabis production that are
relevant to our modeling exercise.  First, production takes place both
outdoors and in greenhouses.  Outdoor production is reliant on natural
sunlight and plants are typically grown in groups or individually in
raised beds.  Greenhouse production allows for light to be diminished
with shades or enhanced with artiﬁcial light.  The manipulation of light
allows growers to precisely control ﬂowering, which gives greater control over production in terms of both the schedule and the amount
produced. 
Cannabis requires water throughout its growing season, which takes
place during Humboldt County's dry season and can last up to
150 days. 2 Given Humboldt County's dry summers and falls, irrigation
of cannabis plants is needed on a nearly daily basis, with some estimates
suggesting up to 22 l per day per plant (Humboldt Growers Association,
2010).  Although not documented, it is likely that cannabis produced in
greenhouse settings may need less irrigation. 
Finally, for most agricultural crops, soil quality is a driver of crop
choice.  In Humboldt County, poor-quality agricultural soil covers
nearly 90% of the county.  Therefore, many growers import soil for
both outdoor and greenhouse grows.  While there is no documentation of how much soil is imported, various local businesses exist to
supply soil in large quantities (e. g.  www. humboldtnutrients. com,
www. royalgoldcoco. com). 
2. 3.  Data. 
We use a number of spatial datasets to parametrize our model. 
The main cannabis dataset is a reduced version of the dataset used
in Butsic and Brenner (2016).  The dataset used in this study includes
only cultivation sites in Humboldt County to control for any policy or
enforcement differences across county boundaries.  Our dataset documents cannabis cultivation sites on 1341 parcels (out of 14,462 parcels larger than one acre), with the majority of cultivation sites
recorded in 2012 and the remainder in 2013.  Of these 1341 parcels,
726 have greenhouse operations, 478 have outdoor grow operations,
and 137 have both.  The average production of each parcel is 180
plants, while the parcel with the most cannabis plants has 2794
plants (Table 1). 
We joined the cannabis dataset with several other spatial datasets. 
Parcel boundaries and zoning designations were provided by Humboldt
County.  We used the CalVeg (http. //www. fs. fed. us/r5/rsl/projects/
mapping/accuracy. shtml) vegetation layer to quantify the percent of
each parcel in different vegetation types.  The percent of each parcel
with over 30% slope was estimated using a digital elevation model
(DEM) provided by Humboldt County. 
A number of variables which describe the spatial location of a
parcel were created.  For each parcel we calculated the distance to
the Paciﬁc Ocean and the meters north.  Humboldt County receives
dense fog near the Paciﬁc Ocean, so growers might hypothetically
locate farther from the ocean to obtain more sunlight.  Also provided
by Humboldt County was a map of maintained roads.  We used
the dataset to calculate the distance from a parcel edge to a developed road.  We calculated the distance of each parcel to the
nearest water source, based on data provided by the California
Department of Fish and Wildlife (https. //www. wildlife. ca. gov/
Data/GIS/Clearinghouse).  For each parcel we also calculated the
number of plants within 100 m and 500 m of its boundary in
order to identify parcels that were located in clusters of cultivationFinally, we were interested in the historical land use of each parcel,
especially whether or not a parcel had been logged in the last
15 years.  A common narrative is that areas where timber was produced
in the past are often converted into cannabis cultivation sites.  In California, Timber Harvest Plans (THP) are required for the harvest of merchantable timber on private lands.  Landowners, either individuals or
ﬁrms, apply for plan approval and once approval is granted, timber harvest can commence.  Once timber is cut, it is usually replanted.  However,
it may be the case that some landowners are not replanting but
converting to cannabis.  This may be economically efﬁcient as the land
cleared by timber harvest may be less expensive to convert to cannabis
since trees are already removed from this area.  We used the Timber
Harvest Plan database provided by the State of California to document
for each parcel the percent of land that was permitted to be harvested
since 1997 (Table 2). 
2. 4.  Intuition Behind Spatial Location and Size of Cultivation Sites. 
Our goal was to estimate what factors inﬂuenced two decisions on
the part of cannabis growers.  First we wanted to know where cannabis
cultivation sites were most likely to be located.  Typical economic
models of land use focus on the expected net returns to different
crops to model the decision of where cropland will expand.  Much of
the intuition from these models may hold true in our case as well. 