 Introduction Corporate directors have access to material non-public information, which makes them a potential information source for professional traders.  Directors are, of course, required to keep sensitive material private.  Delaware law recognizes a director's duty of conﬁdentiality, and corporations have comprehensive policies in place to prevent leaks.  Investors, too, face regulatory scrutiny and reputational costs if they use inside information in traceable manners, and these safeguards seem to be effective in some institutional settings (Grifﬁn et al. , 2012).  However, sensitive information can travel through education networks from senior corporate ofﬁcers to mutual fund managers and sell-side analysts (Cohen et al. , 2008, 2010).  This raises an important question.  to what extent do director networks transmit information that sophisticated traders are able to exploit.  We investigate whether the breadth of directors' professional connections systematically affects the likelihood of information leakage to sophisticated traders.  Well-connected directors interact with scores of people, and unguarded conversations can easily reveal sensitive facts.  In addition, Larcker et al.  (2013) show that ﬁrms beneﬁt from more connected boards because board connections are a conduit of information exchange.  Yet an important competitive advantage of connected directors stems from their ability to provide insights that would otherwise be inaccessible to less connected colleagues.  Fulﬁlling this role might require some deliberate sharing of sensitive material.  Sophisticated traders, who gather, analyze and interpret data from multiple sources, have a comparative advantage when piecing together information about ﬁrms with highly connected directors.  We therefore study possible information transmission from corporate directors to sophisticated traders by examining the relation between board connectedness and the informativeness of trades made by short sellers, option traders, and institutional investors.  Our results indicate that these investor groups are indeed more informed when trading stocks of companies with more connected boards.  We measure informed trading as the monthly level of short interest, the ratio of monthly option volume to stock volume, and weekly order imbalances of institutional traders.  From BoardEx, we obtain the number of ﬁrst-degree connections for each director, which includes links through educational institutions attended, current and previous employers, military service and civic institutions.  To ensure that our measure of board connectedness is not driven by factors that have been documented to affect the ﬁrm's information environment, we ﬁrst aggregate the connections of all board members and then orthogonalize them with respect to ﬁrm size, board size, ﬁrm age, the number of analysts and institutional ownership.  We examine portfolios sorted by board connectedness and each of the three measures of informed trading and ﬁnd that the annualized return difference between the highest and lowest quintile of informed trading in highly connected boards is signiﬁcantly more pronounced compared to the same return difference in ﬁrms with less connected boards.  The economic magnitude ranges from 4% for option volume and 5. 4% for short interest, to 7. 2% for institutional order imbalance.  Next, we examine whether the trades of sophisticated investors predict changes in ﬁrm fundamentals.  Our results indicate that a higher fraction of negative earnings news is embedded in prices of highly connected ﬁrms ahead of the announcement, and that sophisticated traders better anticipate earning surprises in ﬁrms with highly connected boards.  Indeed, their trades predict ﬁrm-speciﬁc news content more broadly, as our analysis of Thompson Reuters' public news data shows.  Changes in board connectedness are also positively associated with changes in measures of adverse selection costs, such as the probability of informed trading (PIN), bid–ask spreads and the price impact measure of Amihud (2002).  In a series of robustness checks we establish that neither family ownership, corporate governance quality, nor asset tangibility, drive our ﬁndings.  Our study contributes to several strands of the literature.  First, we add novel insights to recent studies examining the role of director networks in ﬁnancial markets.  Among directors these networks contribute to higher ﬁrm performance (Larcker et al. , 2013), the dissemination of CEO compensation practices (Wong et al. , 2015), stock option backdating (Bizjak et al. , 2009), and earnings management (Chiu et al. , 2012).  Board members and their social networks inﬂuence which companies become targets in change-of-control transactions (Stuart and Yim, 2010).  Directors of Finnish ﬁrms earn sizable abnormal returns by trading stocks where they have information advantages through their board connections (Berkman et al. , 2014).  We build on these insights by documenting that board connections in general affect the external corporate information environment, increase the potential for informed trading, and facilitate the dissemination of information into stock prices.  While prior research suggests that analysts, media outlets and managers have incentives to convey positive news (McNichols and O'Brien, 1997.  Kothari et al. , 2009), we show that negative news, in particular, ﬂows through director networks.  Second, we contribute to research into the information sources of sophisticated traders.  Short sellers predict the outcome of earnings surprises (Christophe et al. , 2004), detect ﬁnancial misconduct (Karpoff and Lou, 2010), and uncover hidden bad news in high levels of accruals (Hirshleifer et al. , 2011).  Short sellers excel in processing publicly available news (Engelberg et al. , 2012) and receive tips ahead of analyst downgrades (Christophe et al. , 2010).  Option trades (Pan and Poteshman, 2006.  Johnson and So, 2012) and institutional trades (Grifﬁn et al. , 2003.  Campbell et al. , 2009.  Puckett and Yan, 2011) also predict future stock prices.  Our ﬁndings suggest that more connected directors contribute, directly or inadvertently, to the information set of short sellers, option traders, and institutional investors.  More generally, we advance an emergent literature that examines how a ﬁrm's organizational structure affects its information environment.  Anderson et al.  (2012) report that family ownership increases informed trading.  We complement their ﬁndings by directly linking the governance structure of the ﬁrm to sophisticated trading in the ﬁrm's stock.  <Middle> Identiﬁcation strategy and hypotheses development.  How does material non-public information ﬂow from corporate insiders to sophisticated investors.  What organizational characteristics restrain or exacerbate the magnitude of information transmission.  How does this affect trading and security prices.  These questions, while essential to understand, are difﬁcult to answer.  Insiders can be found on every level of the corporate hierarchy, the sophistication of traders is not readily apparent, both groups have incentives to keep their conversations about privileged information secret, and traders frequently disguise trades that could trigger regulatory attention.  In light of these challenges, we develop a novel identiﬁcation strategy that focuses on the possible information transmission between two important groups of people.  we investigate whether patterns in trading behavior and securities prices suggest that privileged information ﬂows from corporate directors to sophisticated traders.  By focusing on the board of directors, we study a group of clearly identiﬁable corporate insiders with privileged information about their ﬁrms.  Unfettered access to material, non-public information is necessary to monitor and advise management, the social networks of directors are observable, and recent studies suggest that these networks are important conduits of information exchange.  We argue that sophisticated traders can obtain privileged information from directors and trade proﬁtably on that information before it becomes available to the broader market.  If information is channeled towards sophisticated traders, their proﬁtability will be high.  In contrast, if connected directors disseminate sensitive information broadly, prices will quickly incorporate it, leaving smaller proﬁt opportunities for sophisticated traders.  As possible transmission channels we consider inadvertent information leakage, deliberate sharing of sensitive information, and “mosaic” information gathering.  We discuss each channel in turn.  The risk of inadvertent information leakage increases with the size of the network of people who are privy to material non-public information. 1 Steele (1989) formalizes this idea, and models the likelihood of disclosing a secret as proportional to the square of the number of people who know the secret.  More connections increase the difﬁculty of guarding against the unintended disclosure of private information.  We therefore expect that inadvertent information leakage will be more pronounced for companies with more connected boards.  Directors also face incentives to share sensitive information deliberately.  After all, an important competitive advantage of broadly connected directors stems from their ability to obtain and share insights that would otherwise be inaccessible to less connected colleagues.  Molm (2003) suggests that reciprocal information sharing increases the status and inﬂuence of an individual within a network.  Fisman et al.  (2012) remark that “board membership more broadly creates a context for a kind of reciprocal attraction and friendship among a fraternity of individuals. ” While SEC enforcement actions allege that directors have deliberately provided information to traders,2 our study does not assess the legality of directors' actions.  Reciprocal sharing of sensitive material by connected directors does not necessarily harm shareholders.  the beneﬁts of connectedness may outweigh the costs.  Incentives related to reciprocal sharing simply suggest that highly connected directors are more likely to divulge some sensitive information.  More connected directors may increase the amount of publicly available information in ways that favor “mosaic” information gathering by sophisticated investors.  Jarrell (2011) argues.  “Securities analysts and investment managers legally gather, analyze and interpret large quantities of information from multiple sources.  From this information, investment recommendations and decisions are routinely made.  Not until the ‘bits and pieces’ of stray information are compiled together into a ‘complete picture of the company’ does it sometimes reveal material, non-public information.  It is my understanding that under the ‘mosaic theory,’ analysts and investment managers are free to act on this compilation of information without risking liability under the insider trading laws. ”3 Due to their extensive networks, more connected directors provide better access to these “bits and pieces”.  they are members of clubs, societies, and other ﬁrms, they are often invited to give speeches, and frequently interpret publicly available information about their ﬁrm.  While most investors lack the resources to piece together this kind of public information, sophisticated traders physically track directors,4 comb through public records of their large consumer and asset purchases and attend their invited speaking events.  Some directors are even spied on. 5 The more connected the members of corporate boards are, the greater the amount of difﬁcult-to-process information that sophisticated trades might be able to access.  While inadvertent information leakage, deliberate tipping, and “mosaic” information gathering are three possible channels of information transmission, it is not clear that companies with more connected directors are indeed associated with more informed trading.  Federal regulations prohibit selective disclosure, Delaware law recognizes the duty of conﬁdentiality as part of a director's duty of loyalty, and corporate lawyers have developed comprehensive conﬁdentiality policies to prevent leaks.  In addition, Grifﬁn et al.  (2012) argue that institutional investors are reluctant to use inside information in traceable manners.  Our null hypothesis is that there is no systematic link between board connectedness and informed trading.  Banerjee and Eckard (2001) , however, doubt that insider trading regulations effectively limit informed trading.  Many studies document informed trading among short sellers, option traders and institutional investors, and more connected boards might increase the information ﬂow to these sophisticated traders.  The information channels that we identify are not the only possible ones, they are not necessarily illegal or mutually exclusive, and we are not assessing their relative importance.  Our alternative hypothesis simply states that sophisticated investors' trades are more informed when they trade shares in ﬁrms with more connected boards.  3.  Sample selection, variables and descriptive statistics.  3. 1.  Sample selection.  The BoardEx database tracks connections of corporate directors and executives from 2002 onward.  Since we rely on BoardEx to quantify board connections, our sample period begins in January 2002 and ends in December 2011.  Stock prices, trading volume and shares outstanding are from CRSP, book-to-market ratios, leverage, ROA, R&D, industry segments, and other accounting variables are from COMPUSTAT, options data come from Ivy OptionMetrics, institutional ownership and insider trading data are provided by Thomson Financial, and analysts' forecasts by I/B/E/S.  We limit our analysis to common stocks (share code 10 or 11) of non-ﬁnancial ﬁrms traded on AMEX, NYSE, or NASDAQ and require stocks to have at least 12 months of past return data, at least 10 days per month with available trades and return data, a month-end stock price above one dollar, and sufﬁcient data from COMPUSTAT to compute accounting ratios as of December of the previous year.  3. 2.  Measures of informed trading In our analysis we use three measures of informed trading.  Our ﬁrst measure is the monthly level of Short Interest, deﬁned as current shares sold short divided by total shares outstanding.  Monthly short interest data are available for the entire sample period for which we have board characteristics and options data.  Several studies, including Asquith et al.  (2005), Desai et al.  (2006) and Karpoff and Lou (2010) use monthly short interest as a measure of short selling activity, and document that short interest contains negative information about stock prices and future ﬁrm fundamentals.  Boehmer et al.  (2010) argue that absence of short interest can be viewed as a signal of good news.  Thus, short interest can signal bad news by its presence, or good news by its absence.  Our second measure of informed trading is the ratio of total monthly put and call trading volume to stock trading volume, or Option/Stock volume.  Pan and Poteshman (2006) provide evidence of informed trading by using proprietary Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) option market data.  More recently, Johnson and So (2012) report that Option/Stock volume contains negative information about future stock prices.  Our third measure of informed trading is institutional trading order imbalances.  Grifﬁn et al.  (2003), Campbell et al.  (2009), and Puckett and Yan (2011) document that institutions are informed traders whose trades predict stock returns.  To measure institutional trading, we use the weekly trading order imbalance of institutional traders in each stock.  The trading order imbalance, Institutional OIB, measures whether the observed weekly trading volume is dominated by institutional buying or selling.  We obtain transaction level data on institutional trading from Ancerno Ltd.  for the period from 2002 to 2011.  For each stock, we calculate order imbalance as buyer minus seller initiated institutional trading over a week, normalized by total institutional trading activity measured as the total number of shares traded.  A positive institutional trading order imbalance indicates that institutions are net buyers, and a positive relation between weekly order imbalance and future returns suggests that institutions are informed traders.  We expect this relation between Institutional OIB and subsequent returns to be more pronounced for ﬁrms with more connected boards.  Following Johnson and So (2012), we transform all informed trading measures into decile ranks and use the decile ranks of these variables in multivariate regressions that feature the particular informed trading measure.  3. 3.  Measuring board connectedness We obtain connections for each director from the BoardEx database and aggregate them at the board level.  This straightforward measure of board connections merely enumerates the number of ﬁrst-degree links for all directors on the board.  This includes connections through educational institutions attended, current and previous employers, military service as well as civic institutions like non-proﬁt boards. 6 Yet this simple aggregation suffers from two obvious drawbacks.  First, by construction, this aggregation increases mechanically with the number of directors, leading to a Spearman rank correlation of more than 0. 6 between board size and aggregate connections.  Second, several factors have been identiﬁed in the literature to affect the ﬁrm's information environment and the potential returns from informed trading, which are also correlated with aggregate director connections.  For example, ﬁrm size affects the quality and quantity of information that can be exploited by informed traders (Hong et al. , 2000), but directors of larger ﬁrms tend to be more connected within the BoardEx universe.  Similarly, Zhang (2006) argues that ﬁrm age captures differences of opinion related to future events, but directors of older ﬁrms have more aggregate connections.  Firms with more analyst following are also likely to have more connected directors, but the amount of analyst coverage directly affects the information available about the ﬁrm (Hong et al. , 2000).  Finally, D'Avolio (2002) provides evidence that institutional ownership measures shorting costs because it affects the supply of lendable shares, and Cohen et al.  (2007) document that the ability to exploit information depends on the ability to access loaned shares.  At the same time, directors of ﬁrms with more institutional investors also tend to have more connections.  To ensure that our measure of board connectedness is not driven by any of these factors, we regress the natural logarithm of aggregate board connections on the natural logarithms of ﬁrm size, board size, ﬁrm age, number of analysts, and on institutional ownership, and use the residual values from these year-end cross-sectional regressions, which we term Connectedness, to categorize ﬁrms in our sample.  3. 4.  Additional control variables Beyond orthogonalizing our Connectedness measure with respect to factors that have been shown to jointly affect opportunities for informed traders and aggregate director connections, we account in our multivariate regressions for characteristics of the ﬁrm's information and contracting environment that might affect board characteristics or the measures of informed trading.  For example, growth opportunities (book-to-market) are an important proxy of the corporate information environment that has been shown to affect a ﬁrm's governance choices.  However, ﬁrms that are growing more slowly are less opaque, have less information uncertainty, and hence, lower opportunities for informed trading (Hong et al. , 2000.  Zhang, 2006).  In contrast, higher research and development (R&D) expenses lead to greater information asymmetry (Aboody and Lev, 2000, among others), and complex ﬁrms, which operate in different industries or distinct business segments, have slower information diffusion (Cohen and Lou, 2012).  Because these attributes could attract informed traders and also affect board characteristics, we include in our analysis R&D expenditure and the number of business segments in which the ﬁrm operates.  We also control for return on assets (ROA) since it attracts informed traders' attention.  We include liquidity, turnover and return volatility (IVOL) in our analysis to ensure that our results are not driven by differences in the cost of exploiting information (Pontiff, 2006) and include past return to control for short-term reversal or medium-horizon stock price continuation (Jegadeesh and Titman, 1993).  Table 1 provides deﬁnitions for all control variables.  3. 5.  Descriptive statistics Table 2 presents time-series averages of cross-sectional statistics for all companies in our sample.  Since the number of available observations differs for our three measures of informed trading, we report monthly statistics for the Short Interest sample in Panel A, for the Option/Stock volume ratio sample in Panel B, and weekly statistics for the Institutional OIB sample in Panel C.  The average board in our BoardEx sample has around 4000 aggregate connections.  The distribution of aggregate connections is skewed, with a median and standard deviation of around 3000, and a range from 225 to over 24,000 connections.  After orthogonalization, which we describe in Section 3. 4, Connectedness (which is in natural logs) ranges from  1. 7348 to 1. 0987 in the Short Interest sample, from  1. 5636 to 1. 0158 in the Option/Stock volume sample, and from  1. 7468 to 1. 0900 in the Institutional OIB sample.  For the Short Interest and Institutional OIB samples, the average ﬁrm is around 25 years old and has a market capitalization that exceeds one billion dollars.  The Option/Stock volume sample requires companies with traded options, which limits us to companies that are slightly older and larger.  the average ﬁrm is around 26 years old with a market capitalization that exceeds seven billion dollars.  Other ﬁrm characteristics do not notably differ across the three samples.  Average Short Interest is 4. 9%, average Option/Stock volume is 3. 8%, and the average Institutional OIB is 5. 0%.  Table 3 presents times series averages of cross-sectional Spearman rank correlations.  Here again, we report statistics for the Short Interest sample in Panel A, the Option/Stock volume sample in Panel B, and the Institutional OIB sample in Panel C.  The correlations illustrate why we orthogonalize aggregate connections to create the Connectedness measure.  Aggregate connections is highly correlated with several ﬁrm characteristics.  Panel A reveals that the correlation coefﬁcient is 0. 61 for ﬁrm size, 0. 62 for board size, 0. 20 for ﬁrm age, 0. 14 for the number of analysts, and 0. 46 for institutional ownership.  By orthogonalizing we create a Connectedness measure that is highly correlated with aggregate connections, yet largely uncorrelated with ﬁrm characteristics that have been documented to affect the prevalence of informed trading.  While the correlation coefﬁcient between Connectedness and aggregate connection is 0. 7, the correlations with ﬁrm size, board size, ﬁrm age, number of analysts, and institutional ownership do not exceed 0. 03.  Connectedness effectively measures the crosssectional variation in board connections, yet is far less likely to reﬂect differences in the ﬁrm's information environment.  4.  Connectedness, informed trading, and stock returns In this section we investigate the link between stock returns and informed trading across ﬁrms with different Connectedness.  We expect a stronger relation between our measures of informed trading and future returns for companies with more connected boards.  4. 1.  Portfolio analysis We begin our analysis by sorting stocks into equal groups of low, medium, and high board Connectedness, and then into quintiles based on the level of informed trading.  In the Short Interest and Option/Stock volume samples, portfolios are formed at the beginning of every month, held for a month after portfolio formation, and portfolio returns are calculated as equally weighted averages of monthly stock returns.  In the Institutional OIB sample, portfolios are formed every week, held for a week after portfolio formation, and portfolio returns are calculated as equally weighted averages of weekly stock returns.  We report time series averages alphas (αs) from the Fama-French three factor model (Fama and French, 1993), augmented with a momentum factor (Carhart, 1997).  All tests of statistical signiﬁcance are based on Newey–West standard errors.  Panel A of Table 4 displays portfolio results for the Short Interest sample.  The ﬁrst column, labeled All, aggregates the Connectedness groups and conﬁrms that, consistent with previous studies, Short Interest is negatively associated with subsequent stock returns.  For the three lowest short selling quintiles we ﬁnd that subsequent returns are higher for more connected boards, which is consistent with Larcker et al.  (2013).  Whereas Larcker et al.  (2013) look at average returns across connectedness portfolios, we examine informed trading within connectedness portfolios.  We ﬁnd that the difference in riskadjusted returns (αs) between the highest and lowest Short Interest quintile (S5 S1) for the high Connectedness group is  1. 161%, per month.  In contrast, the same difference is only  0. 681% in the medium Connectedness group and  0. 697% in the low Connectedness group.  Put differently, the novel ﬁnding of our study is that the risk-adjusted return between the high and low Short Interest groups (S5 S1) is 0. 464% per month more negative for ﬁrms with highly connected boards than for ﬁrms with less connected boards, and this difference is statistically signiﬁcant at the one percent level (t-statistic¼  3. 89).  This means that the annualized return difference between the highest and lowest quintile of Short Interest in ﬁrms with highly connected boards is about 5. 4% more negative than the same return difference for ﬁrms with less connected boards.  High Short Interest predicts negative returns more strongly in ﬁrms with well-connected directors.  Panel B reports results for the Option/Stock volume sample.  Again, the column labeled All aggregates the Connectedness groups and indicates that Option/Stock volume is negatively associated with future stock returns as documented by Johnson and So (2012).  Consistent with the results for Short Interest in Panel A, the difference in risk-adjusted returns between the highest and lowest Option/Stock volume quintile (O/S5 O/S1) is 0. 340% per month more negative for ﬁrms with highly connected boards than for ﬁrms with less connected boards, and this difference is again statistically signiﬁcant at the one percent level (t¼  2. 64).  High Option/Stock volume also predicts negative returns more strongly in ﬁrms with wellconnected directors.  Panel C presents results for the Institutional OIB sample.  For each stock in the Ancerno database the institutional trading imbalance (Institutional OIB) is constructed as institutional buys minus institutional sells over a week.  Unlike short interest or options trading, where informed trading is associated with negative returns, higher Institutional OIB is associated with positive returns, and lower Institutional OIB with negative returns.  Consistent with the short interest and option trading results, the risk-adjusted return between the high and low institutional order imbalance groups (OIBS5 – OIBS1) is 0. 134% per week more positive for ﬁrms with highly connected boards than for ﬁrms with less connected boards, and this difference is statistically signiﬁcant at the ﬁve percent level (t¼2. 14).  This means that the annualized return difference between the highest and lowest quintile of institutional order imbalance in ﬁrms with highly connected boards is about 7. 2% higher than the same return difference for ﬁrms with less connected boards.  We also examine time-varying patterns in return predictability within low and high connected boards to ensure that our results are not driven by a speciﬁc time period.  For example, our ﬁndings could be affected by the passages of Regulation Fair Disclosure or the Sarbanes–Oxley Act, which restrict corporate information sharing and governance structure.  Yet when we plot the annual quintile hedge return for each connectedness tercile in Fig.  1, we see no clear time-series pattern.  All three informed trading measures predict stock returns more strongly in ﬁrms with well-connected directors, and these results are not driven by a particular subperiod.  The results could be impacted by other stock characteristics, so we investigate that possibility next.  4. 2.  Multivariate regressions In this section, we extend the portfolio analysis from Section 4. 1 by performing cross-sectional multivariate regressions.  These regressions allow us to control for various other stock characteristics that could potentially affect the relation between our informed trading measures and returns across different levels of Connectedness.  In particular, we estimate Fama and MacBeth (1973) regressions of subsequent returns on the informed trading measures, Connectedness, and the interaction between the two, while controlling for several ﬁrm characteristics, where Mi. t is one of our three informed trading measures.  Short Interest, Option/Stock volume, or Institutional OIB.  The dependent variable is monthly return for the Short Interest and Option/Stock volume samples, and weekly return for the Institutional OIB sample.  If sophisticated traders are more informed when trading stocks in ﬁrms with more connected boards, then we expect a negative coefﬁcient on the interaction term ðβ3 o0Þ for the Short Interest and Option/Stock volume samples, and a positive coefﬁcient ðβ3 40Þ for the Institutional OIB sample.  The multivariate regression results in Table 5 support these predictions and corroborate the portfolio results.  The estimated coefﬁcient on the interaction between the informed trading variable, Mi. t, and Connectedness are  0. 395 (t¼  2. 81) for Short Interest,  0. 513 (t¼  2. 59) for Option/Stock volume, and 0. 094 (t¼2. 10) for Institutional OIB.  The positive and statistically signiﬁcant coefﬁcient on the direct effect of Connectedness in the ﬁrst two columns conﬁrms previous results by Larcker et al.  (2013).  Yet even after controlling for additional stock characteristics, we ﬁnd that short interest, options trading and institutional trade order imbalances contain more information about future stock returns if the ﬁrms' boards are more connected.  5. 