
Within the 1997 United Nations Watercourses Convention it is stated
that riparian states “may, where necessary, consider” harmonizing their
existing agreements with the principles of the convention, thus leaving
the decision whether or not to reevaluate past agreements essentially
up to riparian states (UN, 2014.  Article 3).  Yet, scholars have emphasized
that reevaluation of past agreements is rather a necessity due to pressing
economic and development needs, as well as new international agendas
(Wegerich and Olsson, 2010.  Brooks Name, 2013.  Salman, 2014.  Wouters,
2014).  Similarly, calls for reevaluation of water-sharing agreements have
been voiced in connection with growing environmental concerns and
climate change (Sanchez and Roberts, 2014.  World Economic Forum,
2015).  While there are large-scale studies on how treaties could be designed for coping best with new challenges and what mechanisms are
utilized within agreements to address changes (e. g. , Fischhendler,
2004.  Stefano Name, 2010.  Drieschova Name, 2011.  De Bruyne and
Fischhendler, 2013), there have been only a few studies systematically
showing changes in agreements due to paths taken (Pak Name, 2014. 
Soliev Name, 2015).  Adapting from the conﬂict and cooperation
continuum approach on international basins (Yoffe Name, 2003.  Zeitoun
and Mirumachi, 2008.  Sadoff and Grey, 2005), in this article contrasting
degrees of change in formal and de facto riparian water allocation are
systematically analyzed within multiple transboundary sub-basins in
the Ferghana Valley of Central Asia.  The purpose of the analysis is to identify key sources of path dependency determining various degrees of resistance to reallocation and understand how long-term dynamics
between (a) drivers of pressure and (b) sources of path dependency
can lead to various outcomes in riparian water allocation. 
Therefore, the focus is not on one agreement, but on the history of
agreements in three case studies selected using the “most similar” comparative method (Lijphart, 1971.  George and Bennett, 2005).  There is no
longitudinal comparative study with an in-depth qualitative analysis
such as this to be found in the current literature.  as Cox (2016.  230) explains, “obtaining high-quality longitudinal data relevant to the study of
human-environment interactions is frequently prohibitively expensive. ” The Ferghana Valley, shared by Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan, presents an opportunity to apply such an approach, as it has a long
history of changing water agreements on a large number of small
transboundary tributaries with recent research documenting data of
great detail and depth (e. g. , Abdullaev Name, 2009.  Abdullaev and
Rakhmatullaev, 2016.  Pak Name, 2014.  Pak and Wegerich, 2014. 
Platonov Name, 2014.  SIC ICWC, 2011.  Soliev Name, 2015.  Stucker Name,
2012.  Wegerich Name, 2015.  Wegerich Name, 2016).  The early
agreements on these transboundary basins go back to the 1940s.  Although historically these small tributaries were in the same country,
the Soviet Union, due to the differences in institutional conditions related to individual tributaries, each of them has its own history of watersharing agreements.  We were particularly interested in cases where
sources of path dependency provided strong, moderate, and weak resistance to reallocate over a long period of time to understand how, under
conditions with similar pressure, established institutional arrangements
can resist reform in various ways.  To understand the differences in these
established institutional arrangements and their corresponding effects,
dynamics in allocation decisions, protocols of meetings where watersharing agreements were reached, historical correspondence, reports
on implementation, wider government documents such as laws,
decrees, and basin management schemes, as well as broader literature
reﬂecting the nature of riparian relationship in the Ferghana Valley
and Central Asia (e. g. , Bichsel, 2011.  Bucknall Name, 2003.  Djanibekov
Name, 2016.  Dukhovny and de Shutter, 2011.  FAO, 2013.  Libert Name,
2008.  O'Hara, 2000.  Sehring, 2009) were iteratively studied using an
in-depth qualitative content analysis veriﬁed with information from
key informants in the province water management departments. 
The article continues with the theoretical framework explaining the
concept and different degrees of path dependency in riparian water allocation.  Then materials and methods are presented, followed by results of
analysis and then discussion of how sources of path dependency can lead
to various outcomes.  Finally, discussion is extended to a broader signiﬁcance of the study results for the scholarship on transboundary water
management from an institutional perspective, before drawing main
conclusions in the ﬁnal section. 
2.  Path Dependency in Riparian Water Allocation. 
Path dependency has been emerging as an important concept
explaining the possibility of and the ways that a change can take place
in allocation institutions (Heinmiller, 2009.  Theesfeld and MacKinnon,
2014).  North (1990, 1994) has argued that while continuously changing
circumstances will put pressure on existing institutions and require
adoption of new solutions, historically formed path dependency in
these institutions will resist or limit the scope of changes.  More generally,
in economic literature, path dependency is explained by increasing
returns from staying on the taken path (Arthur, 1994) where sources
such as (i) high setup (and sunk) costs, (ii) learning effects, (iii) coordination effects, and (iv) adaptive expectations provide the existing institutions with so-called “positive feedback” (see for example Weber de
Morais Name, 2015 for a summary).  In addition, there are sources of
non-increasing returns that in certain combinations with signiﬁcant
ﬁxed (sunk) costs might be sufﬁcient to create path dependency or
lock-in (Arrow, 2000.  Marshall, 2005).  Among these, Kay (2005)
highlighted (i) vested interests of existing actors, (ii) network effects
from administrative capacities, and (iii) existence of formal and informal
contracts with individuals. 
Later, North (2003) reiterated that to be able to understand how a
change takes place in a complex environment and therefore to be able
to bring about successful development reforms, economists need to go
well beyond application of neoclassical concepts such as prices and markets and recognize that our choices are at all times path dependent at
least to some degree.  Within this study, path dependency is explored
as a concept that is seen as especially helpful to understand the often–
complex cross-disciplinary problems of transboundary water management.  The concept can powerfully address both the adaptability aspect
of transboundary water management, which is crucial for sustainable
management of natural resources in large-scale socio-ecological systems,
as well as the stability aspect, which is particularly important from the
perspective of sustaining constructive international relations.  Sjöstedt
(2015.  2) states that “[p]ath dependence is often used to conceptualize
stability rather than change and gives an underlying logic to why particular paths can be extraordinarily difﬁcult to reverse. ” However, he goes
on to emphasize that “the concept is in fact dynamic rather than static
in character” (Sjöstedt, 2015.  2).  Further, as Cox (2016.  215) summarizes, in contrast to classical economic perspectives “[t]he perspective
of path dependence is likely to value adaptability more than efﬁciency
as a primary policy goal, or at least to value them in equal measure. ”
Yet, this highly cross-disciplinary concept is far from its theoretical saturation and, as Cox (2016.  230) concedes, further research is needed to
understand “what institutional conditions encourage lock-in or adaptability. ” In particular, he (ibid. ) stresses the need for “more data, speciﬁcally longitudinal and panel data to document patterns over time. ” The
three-fold theoretical question of the present study is therefore.  (1)
How to strike an appropriate balance between stability and adaptability
or “between permanence and change,” as Pahl-Wostl (2009.  358) puts
it.  (2) What are the institutional conditions affecting such a balance. 
(3) What can we learn from a longitudinal study in transboundary
water management. 
Until recently, the broader literature on the continuous need for
water reallocation in river basins has largely lacked a longitudinal perspective.  For example, Ohlsson and Turton (1999), and similarly Molle
(2003), argued that growing pressure on water resources would lead
to corresponding adaptation—pushing toward ﬁrst, “more water”, then
“more use per drop” and ﬁnally, “more value per drop”—resulting in similar patterns or trajectories of development in river basins.  While their
studies focused on forecasting continuously increasing water stress on
the one hand and explaining how societies should adapt in order to
cope with the scarcity on the other hand, possible resistance resulting
from existing institutional arrangements in response to new reforms
has remained unexplored.  Likewise, in a more recent work, Molle Name
(2010.  575) explain “how to best share scarce water supplies” from
state, user, or market perspectives.  They stress the increasing economic
importance of reallocations.  However, the question of what a reallocation could mean for existing actors and allocation institutions is not covered.  Molle and Berkhoff (2009.  6) show in the reallocation of water
resources from agriculture to cities that “cities select options that go
along the ‘path of least resistance’, whereby economic, social and political
costs are considered in conjunction. ”
In addition to water stress, the nature of the established relationship
between riparian states is one of the most commonly identiﬁed factors
when it comes to transboundary water allocation (e. g. , Fischhendler,
2004.  Zeitoun and Warner, 2006.  Mirumachi and Alan, 2007).  Trust,
power asymmetry, and riparian position, as well as issue linkages are
among the determinants shaping the relationship between riparian
parties in a transboundary setting.  Nevertheless, to this day, there is
hardly any study speciﬁcally focusing on the impact of path dependency
on the dynamics in transboundary water allocations in a systematic way,
with scholars who applied the concept to water reforms being focused
mostly on federal level transboundary cases or path dependencies within
one national jurisdiction (e. g. , Heinmiller, 2009.  Libecap, 2011.  Marshall,
2005, 2013.  McCann, 2013.  Theesfeld and MacKinnon, 2014.  Garrick,
2015.  Cox, 2016.  Marshall and Alexandra, 2016).  Findings of these studies generally support the argument that reforms are increasingly difﬁcult
with the presence of established allocation institutions.  In this respect, a
brief overview by Hensengerth Name (2012.  27) challenges the often–
replicated contrasting assumption of Wolf (2004) that “… in river basins
with a history of cooperation and institutions to build on, cooperation in
new areas can be achieved more easily than in basins where no institutions exist, since existing mechanisms can be used to exchange information and build mutual conﬁdence, which reduces transaction costs. ”
Instead, Hensengerth Name (2012) point to a number of cases where conﬂicts emerged despite established cooperation. 
The question is then whether it is possible to distinguish among different degrees of path dependency to explain this varying effect of
established institutions more holistically.  Theesfeld and MacKinnon
(2014) suggest that there is a continuum from no or little change to fundamental or rapid change.  Studying transformations in water allocation
in the US West, they argue that path dependence can result in
incremental changes, where small changes occur without threatening
the survival of the entire system.  Within incremental changes,
Theesfeld and MacKinnon (2014.  110) stressed the importance of
distinguishing between “successful,” which accommodate new needs,
and inadequate (“too little too late”) changes, which ultimately allow accumulated “pressure of unmet needs to push the system over threshold
and collapse. ” It is in line with what North (1990) described as adaptive
efﬁciency.  incremental change might or might not be efﬁcient in terms of
responding to new challenges (see also Marshall, 2005).  To sharpen the
focus further, it is proposed here to distinguish among three continua. 
(1) continuum in drivers of pressure, from weak to strong.  (2) continuum of path dependency, from weak to strong resistance.  and (3) continuum consisting of varying degrees of change as a result of collision
between the drivers of pressure and sources of path dependency.  For
the purposes of this research, which is interested in sources of path dependency, the possibility of investigating two, ideally three cases (to
allow triangulation), where drivers of pressure could be realistically assumed as constant across these cases, would present an opportunity to
understand intricacies within complex characteristics of path dependencies and their impact on possible outcomes.  Given that, we also keep in
mind that both strong resistance to change over a long period with corresponding no or little change in outcome, as well as moderate resistance
leading to multiple incremental changes, might equally result in a fundamental transformation of the system in the long run (Theesfeld and
MacKinnon, 2014).  At the same time, weak resistance can be seen as a
third comparative possibility, which, in the presence of sufﬁciently
strong drivers of pressure, can result in a more immediate fundamental
change.  Hence, the logical model of the present research can be illustrated as presented in Fig.  1.  Finally, it should be acknowledged that any outcome of a reform can contribute to creation of a new or reinforcement
of an existing path dependency (Cox, 2016.  see also Thelen, 1999. 
Mahoney, 2000.  Pierson, 2000). 
Obviously, there is often a discrepancy between formal and informal/
de facto water-sharing arrangements.  In a complex resource and institutional environment, it is reasonable to expect some discrepancy between
an agreement and its implementation.  Among others, Luhmann (1995),
and speciﬁcally from an institutional perspective, North (2003), have
stressed that social systems operate with imperfect information at all
times due to limited cognitive abilities, differences in perceptions and
complexity of the environment.  Pak Name (2014) show how lack of
data to determine annual or decadal ﬂows, inaccurate data due to negligence of maintenance, or lack of control on water abstraction can result
in deviations of implementation from formal sharing agreements of
varying intensities (see also SIC ICWC, 2011).  The article intends to extend this framework by analyzing the long-term changes in water
allocation.  In categorization of the presented cases, although the history
of the formal agreements is studied in depth, particular attention is paid
to the de facto outcomes of the implementation of these plans. 
<Middle> Materials and Methods. 
3. 1.  Study Area. 
The Ferghana Valley is situated in the upstream Syr Darya Basin (Fig. 
2).  While the central part of the valley covers the territories of Andijan,
Ferghana, and Namangan provinces of Uzbekistan, the surrounding
mountainous slopes are mostly part of Batken, Jalalabad, and Osh provinces of Kyrgyzstan and Sogd province of Tajikistan.  The Naryn, with an
average annual discharge of 13. 8 km3, and the Karadarya (3. 9 km3) originate in the mountains of Kyrgyzstan and converge in Uzbekistan, forming
the main stem of the Syr Darya (37 km3).  The two main tributaries are
regulated by the Toktogul (14 km3 of storage capacity) and Andijan
(1. 75 km3) reservoirs.  at the exit from the valley the Syr Darya is regulated by the Kayrakkum (2. 6 km3) reservoir.  There are also more than 20
smaller transboundary tributaries (STTs) with combined average annual
ﬂow of 7. 8 km3.  These STTs feed the Naryn, Karadarya, and Syr Darya, as
well as the canals constructed across the valley (Soliev Name, 2015). 
3. 2.  Data. 
The data represent interactions among the riparian states on national,
provincial, and district levels signed or prepared to manage the shared
land and water resources and other related matters reﬂected in 24 documents covering the period between 1946 and 2012 (detailed in
Appendix A).  Such documents include minutes of the meetings where allocation decisions were made (Protocols), agreements, and correspondence between government organizations, as well as reports and
internal notes on implementation of agreed decisions.  In addition, data
with main characteristics of transboundary infrastructure (Soliev Name,
2015) and information on wider relevant developments were derived
from earlier studies (World Bank, 2004.  UNEP, 2004.  SIC ICWC, 2011). 
3. 3.  Methods. 
A most similar comparative approach has been used to select the
cases (Lijphart, 1971.  George and Bennett, 2005).  Here, the three cases
with a common political and socio-economic background, which over a
long period of time have shared very similar drivers of pressure to reallocate and had very similar technological development trajectories, are
comparatively analyzed to understand why, despite these similarities,
each case experienced a different degree of resistance to reallocation,
categorized here as strong, moderate, and weak resistance to reallocation
in the long run. 
The case studies are based on an in-depth qualitative analysis of the
documents described in Section 3. 2.  First, the documents are analyzed
to establish the chronology of formal changes in allocations and drivers
of pressure leading to these decisions.  Second, informal/de facto changes
are identiﬁed through analysis of documents related to implementation
of water sharing agreements.  Third, each case study (see Appendix A) is
examined against the set of explanatory variables reviewed in Section 2. 
the reasons for the systematic appearance of resistance to change, as well
as discrepancies between formal and de facto changes in allocations, are
analyzed.  As a result of the three-step analysis, key sources of path dependency applicable to riparian water allocation are suggested and
discussed. 
It should be noted that the wealth of local knowledge that the team
of authors possesses and their access to further local experts were crucial in verifying ﬁndings of the research derived from the documents,
especially in relation to older documents that were created under the
Soviets, in times when documents might have been intended to obscure
either the process or the result involved in these water allocation agreements.  Thus, as the reliance on the documents alone would present a
challenge, in parallel to clarifying the nuances with the experienced
key informants, the authors were exceptionally cautious in their reﬂexive iterations, “visiting and revisiting the data and connecting them with
emerging insights, progressively leading to reﬁned focus and understandings” (Srivastava and Hopwood, 2009.  77).  In one of the cases, as
will be shown, a comparative analysis of satellite images proved to be
useful to verify long-term developments. 
<Conclusion> Results and Discussion. 
The comparative summary of the three case studies (consisting of
ﬁve different river basins) highlighting established principal similarities,
differences, and corresponding outcomes is presented in Table 1. 
All rivers in the Ferghana Valley largely share a broader history and
have similar techno-ecological basin development trajectories.  Historically, water allocation rules in the valley developed through complex
multilevel decision processes (Soliev Name, 2015.  Pak and Wegerich,
2014.  Pak Name, 2014).  The pre-independence ideology, when the
three riparian states were part of the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) as Kyrgyz SSR, Tajik SSR, and Uzbek SSR respectively, was to
develop lands to their maximum level and create a system of interconnected water infrastructure.  ﬁrst, to regulate the available ﬂow.  second,
to be able to transfer water among different sources and reach different
parts of the valley.  Despite being part of one country, already starting in
the 1950s the republics gained increased autonomy, directly negotiating
projects with one another.  In the 1970s, the central government in Moscow actively encouraged competition and direct dispute resolution between the republics.  in the 1980s it became acceptable if the republics
ofﬁcially challenged the decision of the central government.  and in
1992 the new independent states agreed to adhere to the arrangements
existing at the time, thus transferring the legitimacy of allocation agreements, as well as unresolved issues related to them, directly to the new
period (Soliev Name, 2015).  Therefore, although often seen as a single complex system, a more detailed look at individual rivers shows their different
pathways of continuous allocation adjustments at different points in time. 
The ﬁrst case study, the Maylisai River, shows strong resistance to reallocate in de facto arrangements, despite fundamental changes in formal
allocation agreements.  The second case study bundles the Sokh,
Isfayramsai, and Shakhimardansai rivers, and displays relatively moderate
resistance, leading to incremental changes in both formal and de facto arrangements.  The third case study, the Isfara River, shows weak resistance
to continuous reallocations, as well as a fundamental change in de facto
riparian allocation that followed formal incremental changes.  The three
sources of path dependency and their varying degrees of strength
explaining the differences across the three case studies were identiﬁed
as (i) vested interests, (ii) infrastructure control, and (iii) network effects. 
The article continues with discussion of the ﬁndings from the three
case studies in more detail (see the detailed description of changes in
allocations in Appendix A).  Table 2 provides a more in-depth synthesis
of how formal and de facto changes in riparian water allocation were
triggered and implemented.  Please note, to refer to a speciﬁc detail
from Table 2 in our discussion, we use the following acronyms in parenthesis (T2.  CS2-C5), where, in this example, T2 stands for Table 2, CS2
for Case Study 2, and C5 for Column 5.  First, we reﬂect on the longitudinal aspect of the study.  This is followed by subsections with individual
discussion on drivers of pressure (Section 4. 1) and sources of path dependency (Section 4. 2), as well as on interplay among these drivers of
pressure and sources of path dependency (Section 4. 3).  The ﬁnal subsection discusses broader implications of the ﬁndings (Section 4. 4). 
For the precision of analysis, it is important to distinguish short- and
long-term outcomes (T2.  C9 and C10).  the ﬁrst is seen in comparison of
the changes within a case study and the other is among the case studies
from a broader longitudinal perspective. 
On the one hand, each case has had its own little-to-fundamental
changes.  The gradual ﬁlling of the Tortgul reservoir and corresponding
increases in the Kyrgyz share on the Isfara River (T2.  CS3-C9.  Appendix
A.  CS3) might be seen as incremental changes in the short-term, but
the mutual exclusion of riparian states altogether (Uzbekistan from the
Isfara and Tajikistan from the BFC) can be seen as a fundamental change
in the long run.  In contrast, while the change to 50/50 sharing in the
Sokh, Isfayramsai, and Shakhimardansai through an oral agreement in
2001 (T2.  CS2-C9.  Appendix A.  CS3) might be seen as a fundamental
change in the short-term, in the long run it can be viewed as part of incremental changes, as the de facto sharing did not change as fundamentally over time (Appendix A.  Fig.  A2).  As expected, in relation to the time
horizon taken in the analysis, it can be seen that a series of incremental
changes over a long period of time can cumulate in very signiﬁcant
changes in institutions (Theesfeld and MacKinnon, 2014).  Thus, the degree of change at one place might look different if one were to consider
the effectiveness of implementation and a longer time perspective. 
On the other hand, comparing the cumulative outcomes from the
three case studies allows deliberating on sources of path dependency
leading to the different long-term outcomes. 
The institutional analysis shows that the longer the history of relations
on a river or bundle of rivers was, the larger the “baggage” (sources of
path dependency) became, in terms of both number of issues and pentup pressure from certain individual issues.  The scope and nature of each
subsequent change was clearly affected by the accumulated issues.  This
highlights the importance of longitudinal studies to better understand
the changes.  The ﬁndings support the argument that a long-term relationship between riparian states, even if cooperative, does not necessarily
mean that reallocation in such basins will be easier.  a change in such
settings, in fact, might prove more complicated.  For example, for downstream Uzbekistan, improving the infrastructure, such as in the case of
the reconstruction of the BFC in the Isfara case (Appendix A.  CS3) or increased ﬂow regulation through a number of reservoirs in the Isfayramsai
and Shakhimardansai case (Appendix A.  CS2) resulted in fact in continuous pressure from upstream Kyrgyzstan beyond previously agreed allocations.  Such continuous pressure obviously creates strong disincentives to
improve internal use or report any gains, as it would entail new demands
to reconsider allocations.  However, we have also observed that on-demand informal communication channels (telephone calls or so called
telegrams—instant message services) through which lower level province
and district level ofﬁcials contacted their neighbors were sometimes useful to prevent situations from getting “worse”, especially in cases of emergencies such as ﬂoods or droughts.  Nevertheless, provinces reported that
these communication channels became increasingly ineffective with the
basin closure, that is, after all water resources were allocated for use
(the late 1970s). 