 In South Africa, the hake ﬁshing industry is an important contributor to income in coastal communities, generating some 30,000 jobs (Rademeyer et al. , 2008).  It is also the country's most valuable ﬁshery (Butterworth and Rademeyer, 2005.  Petersen et al. , 2010), generating an estimated 5 billion South African Rand (ZAR) per year at present.  The costs, revenues and proﬁts in this industry are much the same as those incurred by ﬁsheries internationally, such as fuel and market price for ﬁsh (e. g.  the target species Merluccius capensis and M.  paradoxus).  It is, however, a highly consolidated and vertically integrated industry with heterogeneous business models and a high level of complexity (Cooper et al. , 2014).  This makes the relative importance and complex interactions and trade-offs among different drivers like fuel price and environmental variability for the industry and its proﬁts hard to estimate at a glance.  It is known that economic, ecological and social dimensions must be appropriately considered to ensure successful management for the sustainability of ﬁsheries (Folke et al. , 2007.  Garcia and Charles, 2008.  Pitcher and Lam, 2010).  Effective policies for the sustainability of human (social and economic) and natural systems are underpinned by untangling the complexities of these systems, such as emergent properties and reciprocal effects (Liu et al. , 2007).  To be able to meaningfully incorporate ecological and human dimensions into management through appropriate objectives with measurable outcomes or indicators for South Africa's hake ﬁshery, it is necessary to ﬁrst have insight into the functioning of the industry and how its proﬁts are affected by changes in some of its major drivers.  Proﬁtability is a signiﬁcant incentive for commercial ﬁshing companies (Sumaila et al. , 2008).  A modelling approach can provide insight into this type of complex system and its structure, function and dynamics (Liu et al. ,2007), particularly in a situation such as South Africa's where publically available economic data on the ﬁsheries is scarce.  Scenario testing provides further understanding of how changes in external drivers affect the industry's structure, function or dynamics.  Achieving insight into the South African offshore demersal hake trawl ﬁshery was the impetus behind the building of HakeSim, an agent-based model (ABM) of the ﬁshery (Cooper, 2015.  Cooper and Jarre, 2017).  HakeSim captures the complex industry structure, complete with heterogeneous company, vessel and market agents, as well as important factors that affect the industry's proﬁtability such as fuel price, total allowable catch, environmental variability (through a proxy), domestic and international market price and demand for hake.  Fuel price is one factor that majorly affects running costs and therefore proﬁtability of the offshore hake trawl industry.  It can account as much as 60% of running costs for ﬁshing companies (Sumaila et al. , 2008).  It is well known as a core issue affecting ﬁsheries economics and dynamics worldwide and, for example, has been identiﬁed as particularly signiﬁcant for the proﬁtability of wetﬁsh trawlers that land fresh ﬁsh in neighbouring Namibia (BCLME, 2006.  Gasalla et al. , 2010.  Sumaila et al. , 2008).  Even where it accounts a lower percentage (10 or 25%), such as in other trawl industries, it can hinder ﬁsheries in the case of a price increase (Sumaila et al. , 2008).  Arnason (2007) point out that increased fuel prices from 2004 meant signiﬁcant increases in cost and reductions in proﬁt, which could push companies already not making a proﬁt into exiting the ﬁshery.  Anecdotally, the South African industry complained of critical interactions between fuel price and catch per unit effort (CPUE) during high fuel price periods and that it was difﬁcult to sustain proﬁts at these times.  Previous modelling scenario analysis with HakeSim demonstrated that prices above ZAR 18. 783 per litre, prices that could occur with a large fuel price increase or removal of fuel subsidies, caused all modelled companies to make a loss and lower fuel prices than this could cause companies to make an unacceptably low return on investment to continue operations (Cooper and Jarre, 2017).  Should such an increase occur in future, in light of a deteriorating currency (ZAR), a global fuel price rise or a decrease in fuel subsidy, it is possible that industry could offset losses by increasing revenue streams.  It is unknown to what extent this is possible or how different companies might cope with these kinds of challenges.  To be able to assess this it is useful to consider different types of costs and revenues for companies and the variation between these variables at an individual company or vessel level.  Additionally, there may be other variable costs to the industry such as labour or storage costs, and ﬁxed costs such as repairs and maintenance or insurance (Whitmarsh et al. , 2000).  On the other hand, since it is an export-dominated ﬁshery (Crosoer et al. , 2006), market demand and international price (in Euros or US dollars) for hake, as well as the foreign exchange rate for the ZAR are important determinants of income to local companies.  Indeed, exchange rate is known to be an important factor for ﬁsheries and countries that export ﬁsh worldwide (Asche, 2014).  The changes to and interactions among these and other variables that affect costs and revenue determine short-term gross proﬁts.  They also determine economic proﬁts over the long term together with depreciation and opportunity costs (Whitmarsh et al. , 2000).  Understanding how proﬁts of different types of companies might be affected is signiﬁcant since changes to proﬁt not only affect companies and their employees, but are also of social and environmental signiﬁcance, for example on government decisions for public support or subsidies (Arnason, 2007).  It is not just the overall proﬁt that is important to companies, but also variance in proﬁt, which is a form of risk.  Since companies in the South African offshore hake trawl industry differ in their rightsholdings, the composition and numbers of vessels that they own, the products that they sell and their core business structure (Cooper et al. , 2014), they might make different trade-offs between proﬁt and risk.  They can also be quite differently affected by increased risk due to (environmental) variability in catches.  This type of individual level variability and the collective, emergent properties at a ﬁsheries system level that result from the interactions of these individual companies, vessels and markets are not captured in traditional economic models, but can be captured with an ABM.  Furthermore, the overall ﬂeet size and composition of the entire hake trawl industry has changed signiﬁcantly through time (Cooper et al. , 2014), and this presumably reﬂects trade-offs between proﬁt (i. e.  vessel costs balanced against revenue under different catch and market conditions) and deviation in proﬁts.  Understanding how proﬁt risk trade-offs affect ﬂeet structure help to inform management and policies regarding what vessels companies can operate and how they operate them.  For example, in Namibia government apportionment restrictions enforce a certain composition of wetﬁsh to freezer trawlers (Kirchner and Leiman, 2014), whereas the South African government has allowed companies to allocate their catch between vessels as they see ﬁt.  The objectives of the present paper are to use HakeSim to 1) examine trade-offs and interactions among industry drivers, such as fuel price and environmental variability, for example to understand whether losses due to high fuel price or low catches could somehow be offset and 2) examine the trade-offs in risk (variation in proﬁt) and proﬁt that companies experience for different company sizes and structures, and different ﬂeet compositions and sizes in the South African context.  it will provide insight into their different business strategies and how these might fare under different levels of uncertainty.  As an ABM HakeSim incorporates individual variability and interactions and how these result in observable patterns (emergent properties) at the ﬁsheries system level, as well as qualitative data, it will provide a novel way of examining these interactions and trade-offs in the absence of extensive quantitative economic data.  It will also provide insights into why consolidation in the industry continues to happen despite governments attempts to divide up quota, as discussed in (Cooper et al. , 2014), an important point in light of upcoming long term rights allocations.  <Middle> Methods.  To test a variety of scenarios for the offshore demersal hake trawl industry of South Africa, the model HakeSim was used, as described in Cooper and Jarre (2017).  The core features of its design are summarised here for convenience.  It is an ABM of the industry that captures the individual variability of and interactions among companies, ﬁshing vessels and the domestic and international markets (‘clients’), which are modelled as agents.  There are three types of ﬁshing vessel agents, four types of company agents that represent the four types of consolidated business entities described in Cooper et al.  (2014), and eleven client agents (see submodels in Fig.  1).  Client agents represent the South African domestic market for hake as well as the major export markets for hake that import on average 500 t or more of hake per annum from South Africa (Spain, Italy, Portugal, United Kingdom, Australia, France, Germany, the United States of America and the Netherlands) plus one agent that represents the collective South African hake imports of all countries that import on average less than 500 t per annum.  As shown in Fig.  1, ﬁshing vessels are activated as appropriate by the companies that own them to catch and land hake as fresh or frozen ﬁsh.  The company's objective is to catch all of its monthly quota using the minimum number of vessels and also to apportion catch between fresh and frozen vessels depending on international demand.  As such, each company ﬁrst determines whether there is an international market demand for fresh or frozen ﬁsh and then appropriately activates fresh, freezer or both types of vessels.  Each company activates sufﬁcient vessels from its own ﬂeet to capture the monthly proportion of the company's quota (which is equal to the right multiplied by the total allowable catch averaged across months).  Type and quantity of landings are therefore emergent.  Type of landings (fresh versus frozen) are therefore determined by international market demand.  The quantity of landings is determined by TAC, CPUE, an environmental variability proxy (which operates to a prescribed extent on variability of the CPUE) and the capacity of vessels available to each company.  The model therefore assumes that TAC is reﬂective of hake population levels, which is not an unreasonable assumption in the South African context where TAC is calculated annually on the basis of an extensive stock assessment modelling and review process (Field et al. , 2013).  Unlike in many international contexts, the South African hake TAC is typically the amount recommended on the basis of the stock assessment models.  Moreover, as TAC is the operational variable that limits catches by vessels, in the context of questions asked of industry proﬁtability, drivers and proﬁt-risk trade-offs, it was more relevant to use than population models, at least for this prototype version of the model.  Landed ﬁsh is then processed by companies to end-product that is ﬁnally sold on to clients in this model.  The assumption is that all ﬁsh is processed according to the individual company's fresh and frozen ﬁsh processing efﬁciency coefﬁcients, giving a ﬁnal per-company volume of processed product.  Clients have as their objective to satisfy their demand for fresh and frozen processed ﬁsh, and will buy from as many companies as necessary to achieve this.  Final sales volumes and revenue per company are emergent, as are ﬁnal product volumes bought and money spent by clients.  Joint product is not included in the model.  In all procedures, hake is separated into fresh and frozen ﬁsh, including landings, processing in companies, values and sales to clients.  Modelled companies generate revenue from the sales of hake made to different clients, as an emergent property.  Modelled clients purchase in foreign currency (Euros) and the ZAR revenue equivalent is based on the foreign exchange rate.  Modelled companies also accrue variable and non-variable costs.  these include maintenance costs, stafﬁng and the running of active vessels.  Costs are also an emergent property, as are ﬁnal proﬁts.  Model companies calculate short-term, gross proﬁts (ZAR) as the balance between total revenue and total costs.  The full details of these procedures, their associated equations and how their values for a standard run were calculated may be found in (Cooper and Jarre, 2017).  HakeSim was implemented in Netlogo 5. 0. 1 and successfully subjected to thorough testing, including assumption analyses, thorough sensitivity analyses and independent implementation and testing of submodels (Cooper and Jarre, 2017).  During model testing, and also for the scenarios that follow, 100 replicate runs were made in HakeSim using the BehaviorSpace tool built into Netlogo 5. 0. 1.  output values were recorded at every time-step.  3.  Scenario Analysis.  3. 1.  Interactions Among Industry Drivers.  Fuel prices beyond ZAR18. 783 per litre of diesel can rapidly drive companies to make a loss and ultimately to exit the South African offshore hake ﬁshery (Cooper and Jarre, 2017), resulting in job losses in vulnerable coastal communities.  A fuel price above this level is a possibility given that global fuel prices are likely to increase in future as fossil fuel resources dwindle.  In general, fuel price is known to be a core issue in ﬁshery economics and dynamics and to interact with other variables including those that affect fuel consumption (e. g.  nature of target species or weather) and the value of landings, to affect costs and proﬁts (Cheilari et al. , 2013.  Gasalla et al. , 2010.  Sumaila et al. , 2008).  It will be useful to understand how fuel price interacts with other key drivers to determine proﬁtability in the industry and how losses resulting from fuel price increases could be offset.  Scenarios that examine interactions of high (ZAR18. 783 per litre) and low (ZAR1. 574 per litre, the minimum price per litre from the 2000–2012 diesel time series.  Cooper and Jarre, 2017) fuel prices with CPUE, environmental stochasticity, exchange rate and market price were examined (Tables 1–4).  As was expected, there were clear interactions between CPUE and fuel price in determining company costs and hence proﬁtability (Table 1.  Fig.  2a).  Irrespective of fuel price, all companies made a proﬁt when CPUE was high and a loss when it was low.  The higher the fuel price, the greater the loss.  CPUE had a greater overall effect on whether companies remained proﬁtable or not, due to the fact that CPUE has a twofold effect in the model.  Firstly, it inﬂuences the catch cost per tonne the lower the CPUE the greater the effort and the more fuel used.  Secondly, it inﬂuences the maximum catching ability of modelled vessels – if CPUE is low, with all vessels active it may still be difﬁcult for companies to catch their entire quota, meaning reduced volumes of ﬁsh for sale and hence proﬁts.  This suggests, given a raised fuel price, companies may seek to increase CPUE to offset losses.  This is commonly observed elsewhere.  fuel price increases have often resulted in changes to ﬁshing behaviour in an attempt to reduce effort, improve gear and increase energy efﬁciency, all of which serve to increase CPUE (Abernethy et al. , 2010.  Cheilari et al. , 2013.  Parente et al. , 2008).  Such changes to behaviour can have consequences, such as concentrating ﬁshing effort in certain areas, generally closer to port (Cheilari et al. , 2013), and could ultimately compromise long term resource sustainability.  If it is difﬁcult to easily increase CPUE further under a higher fuel price, ﬁshers might also reduce effort, as a strategy for cost savings, which in turn would mean lower overall catches and economic hardship for ﬁshers (Abernethy et al. , 2010).  Because South African companies wish to demonstrate their ability to catch their allocated quota to ensure reallocation of rights and to continue to meet client demands, they may often continue to ﬁsh irrespective of raised fuel prices and lowered CPUE and take a short-term loss, so long as they maintained proﬁts over a longer term.  It is likely companies would not be able to survive long term losses due to sustained low CPUE, particularly if it were coupled with a high fuel price.  On top of the interaction between fuel price and CPUE there is another component to the certainty of catching ﬁsh which is captured in the model through the variable ‘stochasticity of catching ﬁsh’ (SF). 1 This variable allows some uncertainty in the catching of ﬁsh (i. e.  the ‘environment’) to be added, since it dictates how stochastic the CPUE is for each ﬁshing trip.  It essentially creates a speciﬁed level of random variance in catches in an attempt to incorporate a proxy for environmental uncertainty into the model.  Scenarios of average and high SF in situations where fuel price is low and high were explored (Table 2).  Low SF scenarios were not considered, since they were considered uninformative as in reality there is always some variability in catches.  Fuel price determined proﬁtability irrespective of SF (Fig.  2b), indicating modelled fuel price was a more important determinant of cost and hence proﬁt levels.  Nevertheless, increasing SF increased costs, reducing proﬁts.  As such, uncertainty reduces proﬁts in favourable conditions, and could under certain unfavourable conditions be the nail in the cofﬁn that pushes companies to make unbearable losses.  Local fuel price and exchange rate are usually linked.  when the ZAR devalues, fuel price increases, since oil is priced in US dollars.  At the same time, since hake is an export market, a higher ZAR value equivalent is obtained for the same Euro price of exported ﬁsh.  Thus changes in exchange rate have multiple and complex effects on company proﬁts.  To be able to explore the outcome of the complex interactions of companies with multiple markets, scenarios of different ZAR/Euro exchange rates and fuel prices were explored in the model.  As fuel price (in ZAR) and exchange rate are usually linked in South Africa, linked scenarios were explored to determine how exchange rate changes might actually affect ZAR proﬁts through revenue and cost changes.  But worst case, strengthened ZAR and high fuel price – presumably low ZAR revenue and high US $ fuel cost, and best case (weakened ZAR and low US $ fuel price) scenarios were also explored to see how the industry might fare when relative changes in the oil price and exchange rate were decoupled (Table 3).  The value of ﬁsh sold increased substantially when exchange rate increased (i. e.  when the ZAR devalued), and the costs to companies increased when fuel price increased, but to a lesser extent (Fig.  2c).  The resulting interaction between costs and revenue determined proﬁts for companies.  i. e.  at some break-even point fuel price and exchange rates would intersect and proﬁts would be zero.  Analysis of scenarios conﬁrmed that in the worst case scenario companies made a loss, while in the best case scenario large proﬁts were made by companies.  In the linked scenarios, which are more commonly observed in the real world, companies maintained positive proﬁts whether exchange rate and fuel price were both high or low.  Proﬁts were greater when both fuel price and exchange rate were high than when both were low.  Thus the increased value of ﬁsh with a devalued ZAR outweighed the increased fuel cost, leading to a positive proﬁt.  This means that companies would likely be able to maintain proﬁtability in the face of higher fuel prices (up to a point) if the ZAR was devalued.  Importantly these results also suggest that exchange rate, where CPUE and other variables are average, can outweigh the effect of fuel price on proﬁt, which is signiﬁcant given the importance of fuel price interacting with CPUE described for this study and elsewhere (Abernethy et al. , 2010.  Cheilari et al. , 2013).  Given the scenario of a ﬁxed exchange rate and an increase in world fuel prices, resulting in a higher ZAR cost of fuel, it is interesting to examine to what extent the Euro equivalent market value of ﬁsh would need to increase to compensate the loss incurred by increased fuel costs.  Scenarios of different price paid by countries for hake (i. e.  market value of hake) with high fuel price were run to explore this (Table 4).  As the price paid (pp) by countries increased the value of ﬁsh sold and consequently company proﬁt increased (Fig.  2d).  For a ﬁxed average exchange rate and the average market value of ﬁsh, a high fuel price resulted in losses being made.  at (current) average conditions ﬁrms had a tight proﬁt margin.  This suggests that at the given exchange rate should US $ fuel price increase and the international market price of hake not increase, companies would make a loss.  However, even an increase of market value by 25% across the board for countries was enough to cause model companies to make a proﬁt under high fuel price and ﬁxed exchange rates.  Any increases in international market value of hake above this further increased proﬁts through direct increases in the value of ﬁsh sold by companies.  Therefore, companies could offset increased costs, e. g.  fuel, by increasing the price paid for products.  They of course have little ability to inﬂuence market value for hake, as they are price takers in the current international market where they compete with many other hake and whiteﬁsh suppliers such as Spain, Portugal, Chile and Argentina (BCLME, 2004).  Additionally, many ﬁshermen worldwide have little control over market value, because of the price-making power of ﬁsh buyers (Abernethy et al. , 2010).  South African hake companies do, however, have the ability to valueadd their product and shift towards a product that yields a higher Euro value per tonne, as this would have a similar effect to increasing market value for hake.  Indeed, this type of product displacement towards a higher value (and lower catch cost value) product was seen in an analysis of South African hake export data, where companies switched from whole fresh ﬁsh towards value added frozen product, which had a lower catch cost per tonne and a higher international market value per tonne (Cooper, 2015).  3. 2.  Interactions of TAC and CPUE With Company Fleets.  If mismatches between TAC and CPUE occur because of time lags in CPUE being incorporated into hake population predictions and therefore TAC recommendation, it could lead to mismatched ﬁshing capacity (i. e.  number of boats) and CPUE and consequently desynchronized investment in vessels.  During consultation the offshore hake trawl industry anecdotally reported that mismatches between TAC and CPUE can make it difﬁcult for companies to downsize their ﬂeets or for companies with downsized ﬂeets to catch their entire quota.  Companies may maintain larger ﬂeet sizes than are efﬁcient to be able to catch all quota in years were TAC was high and CPUE was low, since demonstrating the capacity to catch ones quota is a key factor in future reallocation of rights.  (There are also market incentives to fulﬁl contracts with clients. ) This raised an interesting question in whether such ‘capacity to capture quota’ policies could help to create perverse incentives for companies to ﬁsh when lower CPUEs could be indicating poor performance of stocks.  Albeit that CPUE is not a perfect indicator for stock abundance, at least in the South African context it has been standardized to try to account for technological changes.  To provide insight into whether ﬁshing under mismatch conditions was very detrimental to companies and whether in fact larger ﬂeet sizes need to be maintained, the industry structure inputs in the model were modiﬁed (Table 5).  Four equally sized companies were modelled with equal shares of the quota, and vessel numbers equal to the entire industry ﬂeet in 2013, double this number, half this number or no vessels.  The model was then run with different scenarios of TAC and CPUE to explore whether mismatches could affect the levels of uncaught ﬁsh and proﬁtability for different ﬂeet sizes (Table 6).  In the standard model run (Fig.  3), where TAC and CPUE are held at an average level, all ﬂeet sizes except zero were proﬁtable and each ‘company’ ﬂeet caught its proportion of TAC.  (The control of ‘no vessels’ ﬂeet veriﬁed that the ﬂeet size variables were behaving as expected, generating outputs of zero in all cases. ) Of all the TAC and CPUE scenarios the average input scenario yielded the maximum proﬁt for all companies in the model (i. e.  all ﬂeet sizes).  The scenario of TAC being at an extreme high and CPUE at an extreme low represented a situation where the industry made a loss regardless of ﬂeet size.  The larger the ﬂeet, the higher the vessel running costs and costs to companies and the greater the loss.  The quantity of uncaught ﬁsh in this scenario was also very high for all ﬂeet sizes, and even increased with ﬂeet size.  In the case where TAC was at a realistic maximum and CPUE was at a realistic minimum the normal (i. e.  2013) ﬂeet size yielded the greatest profit, followed by the half normal ﬂeet size.  A ﬂeet of double the present size incurred the largest costs and made the least proﬁt in this scenario.  In this case, companies with the normal ﬂeet and double ﬂeet size also managed to catch their entire allotted quota, while a ﬂeet half normal size did not.  In scenarios where TAC was low and CPUE was high all ﬂeet sizes yielded a proﬁt.  Half the normal ﬂeet size made the greatest proﬁt and proﬁt decreased with increasing ﬂeet size, due to increasing maintenance costs to companies with increasing vessel numbers.  When TAC was low and CPUE was high the entire allotted quota was caught regardless of ﬂeet size.  Given these ﬁndings it seems that in all circumstances other than where TAC was high and CPUE was low, it was favourable to have a smaller ﬂeet than the present size (2013 values) in terms of proﬁt, since all quota could still be caught and the cost to company was lower.  If no mismatches where TAC was high and CPUE was low occurred it would seem efﬁcient then for companies to have smaller ﬂeets, if proﬁtability was to be considered.  The only beneﬁt of having a normal ﬂeet size seems to be to maximise proﬁtability and reduce the risk of not catching the entire allotted quota when TAC is high and CPUE is low.  Double the current ﬂeet size would help to buffer even more for an extreme situation, but since a larger ﬂeet size carries a larger cost, the logical trade-off for industry appears to be to settle for a normal ﬂeet size, which is what they have done in the real world.  It is also important to note that mismatches in TAC and CPUE have economic consequences for companies if they are to send out vessels ﬁshing and ensure that they catch their quota, ability to catch quota being an important criterion in renewal of their ﬁshing rights in future (Roy Bross, South African Deep-Sea Trawling Industry Association, personal communication,3. 3.  Trade-offs of Proﬁt and Risk.  3. 3. 1.  Company Strategy and Risk.  Scenarios were developed to try to understand how different types of companies might cope with uncertainty, which could take the form of uncertainty in catches, and how companies trade-off proﬁt against risk in the (data limited) South African context.  These scenarios included trade-offs in risk (variance in proﬁt) and proﬁt and proportional return on investment (revenue/cost) that companies experience for different company sizes and structures and different ﬂeet compositions and sizes.  Thus mean-variance analyses of proﬁt versus risk in proﬁt and proportional return on investment versus risk in proﬁt were conducted on the different companies in the model under different levels of SF (as a crude proxy for environmental uncertainty), to determine their different strategies for trading off proﬁt and revenue per unit invested (revenue/cost) against risk with different levels of uncertainty.  Three levels, low (0), medium (0. 5) and high (1), were used as SF inputs for the model and all other inputs were held constant for replicate runs.  The output of proﬁt and proportional return on investment (revenue/cost) at each time step was collected for individual companies and this was aggregated between replicate runs to determine average proﬁt and variance in proﬁt per company, plotted in Fig.  4.  In the context of this analysis risk is deﬁned as a calculated parameter, while uncertainty is something that cannot be quantiﬁed.  Companies had distinct strategies for trading off proﬁt against risk which appear to be linked to the size of their quota (Fig.  4a).  Large, followed by medium companies, made the greatest levels of proﬁt and had the lowest risks, indicating that they were relatively more riskaverse, using the classiﬁcation of ﬁshers as mainly risk-neutral to riskaverse in attitude (Eggert and Martinsson, 2004), and the ﬁnding that South African ﬁshers fall on a continuum of different levels of riskaverseness (Brick et al. , 2012).  Super-cluster followed by small companies made the lowest proﬁts, but also bore much higher risks, i. e.  they were relatively less risk-averse.  When considering proportional return on investment versus risk (variance in proﬁt), the picture is slightly different (Fig.  4b).  Small companies have the highest return per unit cost for a similar risk level as borne by super-cluster companies, both super cluster and small companies could be considered less risk-averse.  Whereas larger and medium companies opt for a similar level of proﬁts to super-cluster companies but for reduced risk, i. e.  they are relatively more risk-averse.  For all companies ﬁnancial risk, represented by variance in proﬁts, increased with stochasticity, especially for smaller companies.  The small company in the model appeared to be the most vulnerable to SF (a coarse proxy for environmental uncertainty) in terms of its increased ﬁnancial risk at high stochasticity levels.  Medium companies were the least prone to ﬂuctuations in risk that was associated with increased SC.  This may help to explain why over time, despite government's efforts to redistribute quota and promote new entrants to the ﬁshery, consolidation of rights has continued.  Small companies may yield a proportional return on investment (revenue/cost), but they are more susceptible to variation in proﬁt and proportional return on investment and more affected by stochasticity than the other company sizes.  Over time small companies have either formed super-clusters where they operate together, which the model demonstrates reduces vulnerability to uncertainty and increases overall proﬁt for similar levels of risk, or they have been bought over or merged with larger companies, with very few small companies remaining.  This consolidation of rights, discussed in Cooper et al.  (2014) has continued in the past few years, resulting in an industry predominated by large and medium companies.  The model clearly demonstrates that these companies, despite a slightly lower proportional return on investment relative to small companies (but similar proportional return on investment relative to medium, and super-cluster companies), have greater overall proﬁts and lower risk margins and are less affected by uncertainty in the form of stochastic variation in catches, which often results from environmental variation.  Because of their larger quota share, large and medium companies have more access to economies of scope and scale than smaller companies, allowing them to buffer uncertainties through the large volumes of ﬁsh that they process and sell and to simultaneously take advantage of the high gross proﬁts this strategy yields (BCLME, 2006.  Cooper et al. , 2014).  Future rights allocations by government should take into account that small quotas are riskier and more vulnerable to uncertainties in catches.  With climate change and its interaction with multiple stressors on ﬁsheries, such uncertainties and variability in catches are likely to be an increasing issue in future.  Fleet size and conﬁguration is another very important factor that can determine how companies are affected by stochasticity in ﬁsh catches, especially given the sensitivity of HakeSim to changes in ﬂeet size (Cooper and Jarre, 2017).  3. 3. 2.  The Effect of Fleet Size on Proﬁt and Risk.  A mean-variance analysis of proﬁt and proportional return on investment (revenue/cost) versus variance in proﬁt (i. e.  ﬁnancial risk) was conducted for different ﬂeet sizes and conﬁgurations.  This analysis was designed with the intention to elucidate the trend of decreasing vessel numbers in the industry through time (Cooper et al. , 2014), and to understand how and why ﬁshing industries structure their ﬂeets.  In this scenario analysis the model inputs were modiﬁed so that there was only a single functional company agent that represented the entire offshore demersal trawling industry.  To do this all vessels and all quota were assigned to a single company agent, and all other companies were allocated zero quota and vessels.  Different ﬂeet sizes and compositions were compared using historical data of actual ﬂeet compositions from the past (circa 1983, c. 1995, c. 