 1.  Introduction Crude oil is widely considered to be one of the most important commodities affecting global economic growth.  Estimates indicate that the oil and gas drilling sector makes up about three percent of global GDP, and imports of petroleum products account for about forty percent of U. S.  trade deﬁcits. 1 Movements in crude prices have been shown to signiﬁcantly impact the world economy at various levels, from family budgets to corporate earnings and to the national economy (cf.  Eika and Magnussen, 2000.  Kilian, 2009).  According to IMF, a 10% increase in oil prices results in a 0. 2% drop in global GDP.  Therefore, when oil prices reached a record high $145/bbl in 2008, and then began to drop sharply beginning 2014 and reaching a low $29/bbl in early 2016, this resulted in signiﬁcant revenue shortfalls and economic stress on many energy exporting nations such as Russia and Saudi Arabia.  On the other hand, the availability of cheaper oil has been hailed as a potent economic stimulus to many net oil importer countries such as China and India, while keeping inﬂation under check.  Given the central role of oil in the economy there is a great deal of attention in the literature in forecasting crude prices.  According to a recent Wall Street Journal article, “forecasting is always an inexact art, particularly for oil, a global industry with wildly uneven data. . . it is a crucial one, underpinning companies’ decisions about when to drill and how much to hedge” and importantly, “market watchers get this so wrong. ” One of the most watched oil price forecast is from the US Energy Information Administration (EIA), which formally constructs monthly and quarterly forecasts of the price of crude oil at horizons up to two years. 3 Although EIA’s short-term forecasts help inform corporate investment and guide resource deployment decisions, their forecasts are hard to replicate and sometimes not very accurate.  The diﬃculty for replication is due to the lack of available detail information about the forecasting methodology.  There are many examples of forecasting inaccuracy.  For instance, EIA reported a price projection of about $28/bbl in 2010, yet the actual average price for oil traded on the New York Mercantile Exchange in 2010 was $79. 61/bbl.  Ironically, right before the sharp fall of oil prices in the middle of 2014, EIA raised its 2014 forecast on WTI crude-oil prices to nearly $96/bbl. 4 In a letter defending the veracity of EIA reports, Howard Gruenspecht, deputy administrator of the EIA, commented that, “EIA does not characterize any of its long run projection scenarios as a forecast. ”5 Futures-based forecasts provide a market-based expectation of oil prices.  Although in principle the futures market should be a good predictor of future spot prices, this is not supported by empirical evidence.  Alquist and Kilian (2010) document that oil futures prices tend to be less accurate in the mean-squared prediction error sense than a simple no-change forecast (which posit that oil prices will be the same tomorrow as they are today).  Various econometric approaches have been proposed to forecast oil prices.  For example, in an attempt to improve forecasting performance, Pindyck (1999) adds a mean reversion term to a deterministic linear trend model.  Radchenko (2005) applies a shifting trend model with an autoregressive process in error terms instead of the white noise process.  Still others apply ARIMA models to forecast the monthly WTI crude oil prices.  However, such forecasting methods have not been particularly successful when compared with the naive no-change forecast (see Hamilton, 2009.  Alquist and Kilian, 2010.  Alquist et al. , 2013).  Overall, conclusions from prior studies suggest that changes in oil prices are inherently unpredictable and diﬃcult to model, and as a result the current price of oil may be the best available forecast of future prices.  Given the challenges faced by past forecasting approaches it would be important to understand why oil prices are so hard to predict.  The literature provides interesting insights (cf.  Hamilton, 2009).  Crude oil prices are driven by a large set of dynamic and multi-dimensional factors including physical markets factors, ﬁnancial markets factors and trading factors that are themselves often hard to predict, and may also have counteracting effects.  Perfect foresight is also hindered due to unexpected demand shifts in the global economy, supply disruptions, changes in oil production and inventory demand, geopolitical events, among other factors.  These types of events create uncertainty about future supply or demand, which can lead to higher volatility in prices. 