 1.  Introduction Energy serves as the material basis of human activity and a prerequisite to and guarantee of economic development.  With its rapid economic development, China's energy consumption has signiﬁcantly increased in recent decades.  from 1. 04 billion tons of standard coal in 1991 to 4. 26 billion tons in 2014.  At the beginning of China's reform and opening up, the level of economic development was relatively low, and the scale of energy consumption was relatively small.  China's energy consumption surged with the expansion of reform and opening up and the rapid development of its economy.  During the last several decades, China has achieved remarkable economic growth, and the living standard of Chinese citizens has been signiﬁcantly improved.  In the meanwhile, alongside robust economic growth and rapid industrialization and urbanization, China's energy consumption was soaring In 1992, China's total energy consumption exceeded its total energy production for the ﬁrst time, and since then, the gap between energy consumption and production has grown.  To meet the increasing energy demand, energy imports have continued to grow, and this has become a potential hurdle to China's sustainable development.  In addition, because coal dominates China's energy mix, the rapid increase in energy consumption has also had a negative inﬂuence on environmental quality, which is visually reﬂected by the serious haze and smog pollution that have affected most areas of eastern and northern China in recent years.  Since 2006, China has replaced the U. S.  as the largest carbon dioxide emitter in the world.  There is evidence that the current development pattern is not consistent with China's pursuit of sustainable and harmonious development.  The rapid increase in China's energy consumption has an inherent economic logic, and understanding this economic logic is important for controlling the rapid increase in energy consumption and improving the environmental quality.  One important characteristic is the convergence in China's per capita energy consumption.  Convergence is an important economic theory that was originally applied to investigate the convergence of per capita income across different regions and countries.  According to neoclassical growth theory, if a country's interior regions are open to each other, under a functioning market mechanism and bound by the law of diminishing returns, the free mobility of factors will produce a self-correcting effect on any imbalance in regional economic development, with the result that the per capita income and/or output levels in different regions will tend toward equilibrium.  Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995) use a technology diffusion model to study this effect and ﬁnd that the relatively low imitation cost for the technology follower and the relatively high degree of openness are two key reasons for the existence of economic convergence (i. e. , the phenomenon that per capita incomes of poorer economies would tend to grow at faster rates than those of richer economies).  Several types of convergence have been identiﬁed so far, including β-convergence, σ-convergence, stochastic convergence, deterministic convergence and club convergence.  β-convergence refers to the fact that regions with a lower per capita output level at the beginning of a period tend to have faster economic growth.  In other words, with β-convergence, there is a negative correlation between the per capita output growth rate and output level in different regions.  Because the deﬁnition of convergence was originally raised in the ﬁeld of economics, so far there have been a large amount of studies on economic convergence (e. g. , Baumol, 1986.  Barro et al. , 1991.  Islam, 2003.  Maasoumi et al. , 2007).  Since mid-1990s, partly because of China's dramatic economic growth, a growing number of literature has focus on the economic convergence across provinces and regions within China.  For instance, Chen and Fleisher (1996) ﬁnd evidence of the conditional convergence of per capita production across China's provinces from 1978 to 1993 by employing the framework of an augmented Solow growth model.  In contrast, using provincial panel data, Weeks and Yao (2003) ﬁnd empirical evidence for system-wide income divergence between regions in China during the post-reform period 1978–1997.  Aroca et al.  (2008) conﬁrm that there was an increase in the spatial dependence of per capita GDP during the last two decades of the 20th century and that the spatial effect plays an important role in China's regional convergence.  In recent years, as the problems of energy shortage and environmental degradation have become acute for many countries, a growing number of studies have investigated the convergence in energy consumption and environmental quality.  For instance, Herrerias (2012) uses a weighted distribution dynamics approach to reexamine and verify the convergence in world energy intensity, although the characteristics of convergence differ in developing and developed countries.  Markandya et al.  (2006) verify the existence of convergence in energy intensity among 12 transition countries in Eastern Europe and 15 countries in the European Union (EU), and the energy consumption intensity in transition countries signiﬁcantly converges to the average of EU countries.  Similarly, using a dataset of IEA countries, Liddle (2009) ﬁnds evidence for the convergence in commercial and industrial electricity intensities. 