 1.  Introduction Oil consumption has risen over the last 50 years, as nations have become reliant on oil for daily activities such as home heating, industrial processes and transportation (IEA, 2015).  There have historically been few substitutes for oil, so oil prices and shocks to oil prices have had a major impact on global economic activity (Brown and Yucel, 2002.  He et al. , 2010).  High oil prices in the 1970s had adverse economic impacts in the industrialized world, and contributed to low growth, high unemployment and high inﬂation (Blanchard and Gali, 2007).  This caused oil importing nations to re-examine energy security, and resulted in movements towards energy efﬁciency and the development of alternative energy sources (Natural Resources Canada, 2012.  Department of Energy and Climate Change, 2012).  On the other hand, when oil prices drop, oil producing and exporting countries face a reduction in revenue streams (U. S.  Energy Information Administration, 2016a, 2016b), which can potentially lead to economic downturns.  While oil prices were high for much of the early 2000s, prices declined sharply in the summer of 2014 to levels that were less than half of their 2012 values (US EIA, 2016b).  The West Texas Intermediate (WTI) spot price for crude oil was $105 per barrel as of July 2014 and by January 2015 it had dropped to 44 $/barrel.  Canada is a major player in the global market for oil and gas.  proven reserves in Canada are third in the world after Venezuela and Saudia Arabia, while production and exports are ﬁfth and fourth, respectively.  Further, the oil and gas sector accounted for 7. 5% of Canadian GDP in 2013 (Natural Resources Canada, 2015).  Given this dependence on the oil and gas sector, it is clear that shocks to oil prices may have hard-hitting and potentially long-lasting effects on the national economy.  With a lower value of Canadian production and exports, Canada suffers a loss of international purchasing power (Royal Bank of Canada, 2014).  In Canada, the oil and gas sector is especially predominant within the provinces of Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Newfoundland and Labrador (NL).  In NL, the Oil Extraction and Supporting Activities sector, comprised primarily of the offshore oil ﬁelds Hibernia, Terra Nova, and White Rose, is by far the largest individual contributor to GDP, responsible for approximately 30% of provincial GDP.  Provinces such as NL, which saw great beneﬁts from the rise of oil prices prior to the shock in the 2000s, have been the hardest hit when prices drastically fell.  The shock to oil prices has resulted in increased unemployment, reduced production and GDP.  “Production in oil and gas related industries declined by 8% between the fourth quarters of 2014 and second quarter of 2015, while business investment linked to these industries fell sharply” (Bank of Canada, 2015).  In NL, preliminary estimates show that there has been a 2% drop in real GDP since 2014, an expected decline in production by about 16% as of 2015 and an increase in unemployment by about 0. 6% in 2015 (Government of Newfoundland and Labrador, 2015a, 2015b).  Further, the oil price drop has reduced government revenue (royalties).  the NL government receives a signiﬁcant portion of its provincial revenue (33%) from the various royalty regimes associated with the offshore oil extraction projects (Royal Bank of Canada, 2015).  Understanding the impact of a major change in oil prices on factors such as those described above can prove crucial for developing the optimal policy responses in reaction to shifting prices.  Our goal is to estimate the short run (5 year) and long run (30 year) economic costs and impacts to NL from a drop in oil prices in the magnitude observed in 2014.  To analyse this shock, we develop a dynamic Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) Model that has been calibrated to the NL economy.  The model tracks important economic variables like production, GDP, labour, investment, consumption and trade across 21 sectors up until the year 2040.  CGE models can capture both direct impacts to the oil and gas sector, as well as indirect and induced impacts in other sectors.  Given the impact of oil price ﬂuctuations, many studies have examined the economic impact of oil price shocks since the 1970s (Pindyck and Rotemberg, 1983.  Kilian, 2008.  Hooker, 1996.  Jiménez-Rodríguez and Sánchez, 2005.  Blanchard and Gali, 2007.  Bernanke et al. , 1997.  Hamilton, 2009.  Doroodian and Boyd, 2003).  As summarized in Aydin and Acar (2011), the general consensus is that oil price shocks will have an inverse relationship with economic activity, and higher prices will lower GDP in oil importing regions.  However, as noted above, lower prices may adversely impact oil exporting nations.  CGE models have gained momentum in the past few decades in analysing energy phenomenon (Beckman et al. , 2011).  Researchers can focus on variables of interest and follow how the rest of the economy (multiple economic sectors) adjusts in response to speciﬁc shocks.  A popular adjustment in energy related models targets speciﬁc commodity prices.  For instance, Solaymani et al.  (2015) adapt the CGE model from Solaymani and Kari (2013) to analyse the economic and environmental consequences of energy subsidy adjustments on the Malaysian transport sector.  They investigate impacts from 3 scenarios.  high oil prices, energy subsidy reforms, and a combination of both.  Their ﬁndings show that higher oil prices raise real GDP and household income, stimulate investment, and increase Malaysian terms of trade in the long run.  Aydin and Acar (2011) examined the general equilibrium impacts of a change in oil prices, focusing on GDP, the CPI, tax revenues, trade ﬂows, and carbon emissions in Turkey.  The model they used was called TurGEM-D, which is a multi-sectorial dynamic model suited for the Turkish economy, a small open net oil importing country.  Their oil price scenarios include low, reference, and high oil prices.  Their results show that high oil prices led to reductions in output and consumption, however they also found that the higher prices reduced carbon emissions.  Canada, a net exporter of oil, would likely gain from higher oil prices, as the value of production rises with prices.  Maisonnave et al.  (2012) used the GEM-E3 model to determine whether climate policy would lessen the impact of higher energy prices in the EU.  They found that a rise in oil prices would cost the EU 2. 2% of GDP in the absence of climate change policy, and 1. 5% in the presence of climate change policy.  In the current application, we use a multi-sector dynamic CGE model for the province of NL.  We examine the impact of a decrease in oil prices, similar to many studies in the past that examined the impact of higher prices.  In the current application, we model oil price reductions as a reduction in royalties (the land royalty payments in the oil and gas sector).  We follow this route since land inputs are exogenous in the model, and shocking royalties will allow us to capture the reduction in the productive capacity (and the value of production) of the oil and gas sector due to lower prices.  Further, since royalties are exogenous, we can capture growth in prices over time via growth in royalties.  we include a variety of scenarios for price growth, allowing us to capture intertemporal impacts.  <Middle> Methods.  2. 1.  CGE model speciﬁcation.  We use a provincial, recursive dynamic CGE model for the economy of Newfoundland and Labrador (NL).  The model is based on neoclassical economic theory.  The speciﬁcation for our model follows that of Ochuodho and Lantz (2014) and Corbett et al.  (2015).  However, our calibration differs as we use 2009 baseline economic data for NL and focus on shocks to the oil and gas sector.  For more details on the model, including equations, refer to Ochuodho and Lantz (2014).  NL is assumed to be a small open economy that operates under perfect competition.  Producers are assumed to maximize proﬁts (deﬁned as the difference between revenue earned and the cost of factors and intermediate inputs) subject to constant returns to scale on production technology.  There are three primary factors of production in the model.  labour, capital, and land in the oil and gas sector (i. e.  royalties).  The production function for ﬁrms is speciﬁed in a two-level nest.  At the top level, a composite of value-added and a composite of intermediate inputs are smoothly substitutable in a constant elasticity of substitution function (CES).  At the bottom level, the three primary factors of production are assumed to substitute smoothly through a CES composite value-added function under single primary factor nest (Rutherford and Paltsev, 2000.  Winchester et al. , 2006).  Intermediate inputs, on the other hand, are determined by ﬁxed-shares through a Leontief function.  There is a representative household who aims to maximize utility through consumption.  The household receives income by supplying factors of production and from import tariff revenues transferred to them by their domestic governments (Prasada et al. , 2010).  Supplies of factors of production are typically assumed to be ﬁxed within a given time period.  Labour and capital are mobile across sectors, whereas royalties are speciﬁc to the oil and gas sector.  Under the capital mobility assumption, ﬁrms could move their capital from one industry to another in response to different rental rates in the economy (Alavalapati et al. , 1998).  Household savings rate is determined by a ﬁxed marginal propensity to save.  a ﬁxed proportion of total income is saved.  Disposable income is total household income less savings, which is spent on consumption.  The optimal allocation between consumption of commodities by households is through maximization of a Stone-Geary utility function or a Linear Expenditure System (LES).  LES is structured so that expenditure has a linear relationship with income and price, and is thus maximized subject to the household's disposable income constraint.  Total savings is the sum of household and foreign savings.  Investment demand is determined by total savings factored by Cobb-Douglas investment preference for each commodity.  Unemployment is endogenous to the model, speciﬁed with a Phillips curve.  This explains the relationship between wage and unemployment using a Laspeyres consumer price index (CPI) and factor prices and supplies.  Input factor supplies are exogenously determined in the model, based on existing data.  Equilibrium in the factor markets requires that the demand for factors equal the supply.  To achieve equilibrium, factor prices in these markets must adjust to ensure that demand equals supply.  However, unemployment (voluntary and involuntary) exists due to imperfect labour markets.  Therefore, market clearing for labour is relaxed to allow for unemployment in labour supply.  NL, as a small open economy, differentiates traded products according to their region of origin.  That is, all goods in the model are either produced domestically or imported.  Domestic consumers discriminate between domestically produced and imported goods through a CES Armington speciﬁcation (Armington, 1969).  The ﬁnal ratio of imports to domestic goods is determined by the relative prices of each type of good as domestic demanders seek to minimize their costs.  Thus, an increase in the domestic-import price ratio causes an increase in the import-domestic demand ratio.  In other words, demand shifts away from the more expensive source.  On the supply (export) side, the domestic outputs delivered to domestic market are differentiated from products produced for export by the same sector.  So, substitution possibilities also exist between production for domestic and foreign markets.  Producers make this decision through a constant elasticity of transformation (CET) function, which distinguishes between exported and domestic goods.  As proﬁt maximizers, producers sell in those markets where they can achieve the highest returns.  This condition ensures that an increase in the export-domestic price ratio causes an increase in the export-domestic demand ratio.  Thus, demand shifts to the higher return source.  2. 2.  Model calibration.  The model was calibrated to the NL economy using 2009 symmetric IO tables produced by Statistics Canada (Statistics Canada, 2011a, 2012).  The provincial economy was aggregated in to 21 sectors at small (S-level) aggregation following the Northern American Industry Classiﬁcation System (NAICS 2007 version).  Three primary factors of production were speciﬁed, including labour, capital, and land (royalties in the oil and gas sector).  Labour was measured using Statistics Canada IO tables, (Statistics Canada, 2012) as wages, salaries, and supplementary labour income, in addition to ‘mixed income’ (i. e.  income of unincorporated businesses).  Capital was also measured using Statistics Canada IO tables (Statistics Canada, 2012) as the sum of other operating surplus, indirect taxes on products, subsidies on products, other subsidies on production, and other indirect taxes on production less land services expenditures (in the oil and gas sector only).  Royalties are the payments that ﬁrms make to government for the use and development rights of land used in oil extraction and production.  Thus, royalties are speciﬁc to the oil and gas extraction sector of the NL economy.  Royalties are reﬂective of the value of productive land inputs in the oil and gas industry.  larger royalties indicate larger payments on land inputs, implying enhanced productive capacity.  Royalty values were taken from NL Provincial accounts, using an average between 2004 and 2014 (Government of NL, 2016).  Note that while the model estimates shocks of the magnitude observed in 2014, the model is actually calibrated in the base case using 2009 data (most recent available at time of model development), and the analysis is conducted over the 2009–2040 period.  However, royalties in NL in 2009 were very similar to the average annual royalty over the 2004–2014 period, as well as royalties in 2014.  Thus, we believe that the model will capture royalties (and shocks) in a reasonable way for our purposes.  Royalties were added in the oil and gas sector, and the amount was taken out of capital in that sector.  Parameters were estimated to accurately reﬂect the economy of NL in the base year.  Elasticity parameters, including income elasticity, elasticity of substitution, and elasticity of transformation, were derived from other studies (Dimaranan, 2006).  The model is ﬁrst solved statically given the input-output data.  The initial equilibrium represents the benchmark state of the NL economy in 2009.  Following this static general equilibrium, the model is solved recursively over a 31-year (2009–2040) time period.  For every period, capital stock was updated via a capital accumulation equation based on an endogenous growth rate as determined by endogenous return on capital rate and endogenous total saving (Ochuodho and Lantz, 2014).  Labour was assumed to grow at an exogenous rate in the model.  Labour supply growth projections were estimated using projected employment data from Statistics Canada (Statistics Canada, 2011b).  Unless stated otherwise, all the values are in real terms, with 2009 as the base year, and the discount factor used for all present value calculations is 4%.  Growth of royalties is assumed to be exogenous and to follow the same growth path as oil prices, based on United States Energy Information Administration (US EIA) projections.  We calculate the growth rate based on the reference oil price scenario in US EIA (2013).  this growth rate represents a change in prices between the shock period and 2040.  For the baseline scenario, we calculate the growth rate in prices based on the pre-shock oil price ($93 per barrel) and the price of $265 per barrel in 2040 (US EIA, 2013).  We assume that royalty growth follows the same growth as oil prices.  We use the 2013 publication from EIA, as this oil price forecast was produced prior to the shock.  Our baseline model assumes no price shocks, so price forecasts should not include information after the shock.  Note that assuming royalties follow the same growth path as oil prices is a simpliﬁcation, as the value of the royalty payments are dependent on a structure of production targets, and different net tier payments based on net proﬁt structures and return allowance (Government of Newfoundland and Labrador, 2015b).  2. 3.  Model solution and oil price shock scenarios.  The model equations were solved using the General Algebraic Modeling System (GAMS) software with a nonlinear programming algorithm along with CONOPT3 solver (GAMS, 2012).  The model is ﬁrst solved for the initial period to replicate the 2009 benchmark IO tables.  Then, a dynamic baseline growth path for the economy was simulated in the model by allowing labour, capital, and royalties to grow as described above.  Economic variables in the baseline scenario can then be compared to those under other scenarios (or growth paths) related to adverse shocks to royalties.  This allows for assessment of the economic costs and impacts of reduced oil prices.  To model the impact of oil price shocks on the provincial economy, we used six scenarios that capture the decrease in oil prices by reducing the value of royalties.  Again, we model a shock as reduced royalties and not prices directly, as royalties are exogenous in the model, and we are able to simulate growth in royalties over time.  In this way, we directly impact the value of production in the oil and gas sector by reducing the land input, which will impact the economy directly, as well as indirectly through related sectors.  Following all royalty shocks other than the sixth scenario, we adjust the royalty growth rate, so that royalties (i. e.  oil prices) will return to their predicted 2040 value as given in the 2015 (US EIA) Annual Energy Outlook (US EIA 2015).  Unlike the baseline, which relied on a 2013 (pre-shock) EIA price forecast, we use the most recent oil price forecasts to model the growth of royalties following the shock.  Following the shock, royalties will grow at a faster rate in order to achieve the 2040 levels.  However, long run impacts may still result, due to the initial shock.  An example of how we calculate oil price growth, and thus royalty growth rates is provided in Table 1.  We consider a variety of scenarios, to understand the impact of the oil price drop, given a variety of shocks and recovery options.  Scenario 1 assumes a 50% reduction in royalties in the ﬁrst period.  Scenario 1 serves as our ‘best guess’ shock scenario, and is based on the observed reduction in (average annual) oil prices from 2014 to 2015.  average WTI prices per barrel were $93. 26 in 2014 and $48. 69 in 2015.  The value of royalties falls proportionally with prices, assuming that production remains constant during the one-period shock.  Following the one period shock, royalties begin to grow at a rate of 6. 22% (see Table 1).  We also provide sensitivity analysis for Scenario 1, to determine the impact of varying the discount rate.  Scenarios 2–6 are included for sensitivity and robustness.  Scenario 2 assumes a one-time, 75% decrease in royalties in the ﬁrst period.  This implies a larger impact to the value of production from the same magnitude oil price shock as Scenario 1, due to potential reductions in the quantity of oil produced.  While the choice of 75% is arbitrary, it provides sensitivity to our Scenario 1.  A worst case scenario is represented by Scenario 3.  We decrease royalties by 90% in the ﬁrst period, describing a scenario in which the oil and gas sector experiences a near total productive shutdown.  Scenarios 1 through 3 involve single period declines in royalties.  Scenarios 4 and 5 differ as they incorporate two-period royalty shocks.  This is necessary, as at the time of this writing, we were into the second year (2016) without any recovery in oil prices.  In the ﬁrst period, there is 50% decrease in royalties and in the subsequent second period, we impose a further 20% reduction.  In Scenario 4, we assume that price levels recover gradually following the shocks.  That is, they grow at a constant rate back to the 2040 levels, as in the other scenarios.  Scenario 5 allows for prices to recover immediately after the second period shock.  That is, for Scenario 5, the NL economy recovers to price levels equal to those directly before the shock, and then grows to the 2040 levels (at a slower pace).  The royalty growth rates in each of the baseline and shock scenarios are provided in Table 2.  Finally, Scenario 6 considers a much more pessimistic case, where oil prices remain low for a prolonged time.  We assume that oil prices remain at 50% of 2014 levels for ten years.  The growth rate of royalties following this shock is the same as Scenario 1.  This results in lower prices by 2040 than the prices assumed by EIA.  Although the authors do not believe that this is the case that will prevail, it is provided for a sensitivity test, to understand the potential long run impacts of a prolonged oil price shock.  Note that we capture the general equilibrium impact of lower oil prices by capturing the reduction in the value of production in the oil and gas sector.  Results are measured primarily in terms of reduced GDP, welfare (compensating variation), production, income, consumption, etc.  However, we do not capture the impact of higher unemployment (since there has not been a large rise in unemployment in NL from 2014 to 2016), or reduced Government Revenue (royalties).  That is, in this application, royalties are the value of inputs into production in the oil and gas sector, and not revenue for government.  We leave these other elements for future study.  3.  Results.  3. 1.  Impacts of oil price shock in the long run.  In Table 3, we summarize these long run impacts by presenting cumulative present value estimates for Scenario 1 and the Baseline.  Economic costs (i. e.  reductions in compensating variation) and impacts (i. e.  changes in GDP, income, consumption, investment, export, import, and input expenditures) due to oil price shocks were estimated by calculating the difference between the respective variables under the baseline vs.  shock scenarios.  All values were presented in 2009 Canadian dollars, over the 2009–2040 period, using a 4% discount rate.  As a result of Scenario 1, NL GDP was estimated to fall by $7. 12 billion in present value terms over the 30-year period, or roughly 1. 74%.  This impact occurred because of the initial shock, and due to the fact that prices do not recover completely (to levels forecasted prior to the shock) in 2040 following the shock.  Economic impacts were driven in the model in all scenarios by a reduction in production (and thus income) in the oil and gas sector when royalties fall, which ultimately impacts consumption, trade and investment in the oil and gas sector, and all related sectors indirectly.  Thus, GDP is reduced due to lower consumption, investment and trade in all sectors, which is based initially on lower income and production in the oil and gas sector.  Scenario 1 caused a decline in the 30-year cumulative values of production (0. 74%), household income (1. 77%), consumption (1. 30%), investments (1. 59%), and labour expenditures (1. 90%).  Welfare impacts (as measured by compensating variation) were a reduction from 1. 1% of GDP to 0. 15% of GDP.  In Table 4, we provide sensitivity analysis to Scenario 1, to account for the impact of varying the discount rate.  We present cumulative present value estimates for the difference between Scenario 1 and the Baseline, assuming both a 2% and 6% discount rate.  The discount rate clearly has an impact on the value of all variables in present value terms.  However, this sensitivity analysis reveals that varying the discount rate produces marginally different impacts for Scenario 1, in terms of both levels and percentage values.  We ﬁrst examine the impact of the drop in royalties on economic variables in the long run, focusing on the Baseline model vs.  Scenario 1.  The Baseline scenario and Scenario 1 growth paths for GDP are presented in Fig.  1.  Over the 2009–2040 period, GDP was lower due to the negative shock to royalties.  In the Baseline scenario, the economy accumulated approximately $409. 89 billion (present value) of GDP over the time horizon.  The effect of the 50% royalty decrease in the ﬁrst period was stronger in the short-run, as the economy converged back to the baseline in later years due to the fact that prices are thought to largely recover by 2040.  This is captured in the model by the fact that our royalty growth rates are higher following a shock.  3. 