
Explaining the main determinants and improving the forecast accuracy of crude oil market volatility are crucial to market investors and
government decision makers.  However, forecasting oil volatility is an
intractable task, as the crude oil market is quite complex and has various
uncertain determinants, such as global oil supply and demand, OPEC
spare capacity levels, ﬁnancial crises, and national elections.  Some studies have claimed that oil price change relies heavily on oil demand and
supply, especially global demand (i. e. , Dées Name, 2007.  Kilian, 2009.  Mu
and Ye, 2011).  However, other studies have argued that a speculative
component plays a key role (Zhang, 2013.  Hamilton and Wu, 2014. 
Kilian and Murphy, 2014.  Juvenal and Petrella, 2015.  Gogolin and
Kearney, 2016). 
Liu Name (2016) disentangle the contributions of oil demand, supply,
and speculation in real oil prices, whereas Yin and Zhou (2016) identify
the role of speculation and economic fundamentals in driving oil price
volatility.  However, as in the seminal work of Baker Name (2013) on
measuring economic policy uncertainty (EPU), it is worth mentioning
that many studies have examined the effect of EPU on the stock market
and have considered EPU indices in forecasting stock market returns
(Pastor and Veronesi, 2012.  Antonakakis Name, 2013.  Kang and Ratti,
2013.  Tsai, 2017).  The literature about EPU's impact on the oil market
is growing in recent years (e. g. , Aloui Name, 2016.  Balcilar Name, 2016. 
Yin, 2016).  For example, Aloui Name (2016) hold that the movements
in uncertainty index can identify the supply-side, aggregate-demand,
and oil-speciﬁc demand shocks, that directly drive the oil price.  Thus,
an increase (decrease) in the uncertainty index probably negatively
(positively) affects the economy, which in turn reduces (increases)
the demand and supply of crude oil and then cause oil price volatility. 
Balcilar Name (2016) also emphasize that EPU can drive the oil price ﬂuctuations.  We conjecture that a high EPU can cause serious divergence in
the expectations of oil consumers, producers, and speculators simultaneously and thus affect the demand, supply, or speculation stock for
crude oil.  Therefore, EPU may comprehensively involves various information such as oil shocks, ﬁnancial crisis, and political events that greatly impact the oil market and cause oil price volatility.  However, it is not
clear whether EPU is the most informative factor in forecasting oil volatility, and which determinant is the most powerful remains to be
addressed. 
This study is speciﬁcally related to the literature on the determinants
of oil market return or volatility (e. g. , Dées Name, 2007.  Kilian, 2009.  Mu
and Ye, 2011.  Conrad Name, 2014.  Hamilton and Wu, 2014.  Kilian and
Murphy, 2014.  Gogolin and Kearney, 2016) and the predictability of
EPU indices in asset return or volatility (e. g. , Pastor and Veronesi,
2012.  Antonakakis Name, 2013.  Kang and Ratti, 2013.  Tsai, 2017).  We
address two questions.  First, is EPU helpful for forecasting crude oil
market volatility.  Second, which determinant is most informative and
helpful in forecasting spot oil volatility—oil demand, supply, speculation, or the novel EPU index.  To answer these questions, we consider
two newly released global EPU (GEPU) indices and six countryspeciﬁc EPU indices from major oil consumers and producers worldwide.  This allows us to investigate whether these new indices help in
forecasting oil volatility and to compare their predictabilities with
those of traditional determinants. 
Regarding the models for forecasting asset volatility, GARCH
and its extensions have been popularly used in empirical analyses
(e. 