 1.  Introduction Crude oil is widely considered to be one of the most important commodities affecting global economic growth.  Estimates indicate that the oil and gas drilling sector makes up about three percent of global GDP, and imports of petroleum products account for about forty percent of U. S.  trade deﬁcits. 1 Movements in crude prices have been shown to signiﬁcantly impact the world economy at various levels, from family budgets to corporate earnings and to the national economy (cf.  Eika and Magnussen, 2000.  Kilian, 2009).  According to IMF, a 10% increase in oil prices results in a 0. 2% drop in global GDP.  Therefore, when oil prices reached a record high $145/bbl in 2008, and then began to drop sharply beginning 2014 and reaching a low $29/bbl in early 2016, this resulted in signiﬁcant revenue shortfalls and economic stress on many energy exporting nations such as Russia and Saudi Arabia.  On the other hand, the availability of cheaper oil has been hailed as a potent economic stimulus to many net oil importer countries such as China and India, while keeping inﬂation under check.  Given the central role of oil in the economy there is a great deal of attention in the literature in forecasting crude prices.  According to a recent Wall Street Journal article, “forecasting is always an inexact art, particularly for oil, a global industry with wildly uneven data. . . it is a crucial one, underpinning companies’ decisions about when to drill and how much to hedge” and importantly, “market watchers get this so wrong. ” One of the most watched oil price forecast is from the US Energy Information Administration (EIA), which formally constructs monthly and quarterly forecasts of the price of crude oil at horizons up to two years. 3 Although EIA’s short-term forecasts help inform corporate investment and guide resource deployment decisions, their forecasts are hard to replicate and sometimes not very accurate.  The diﬃculty for replication is due to the lack of available detail information about the forecasting methodology.  There are many examples of forecasting inaccuracy.  For instance, EIA reported a price projection of about $28/bbl in 2010, yet the actual average price for oil traded on the New York Mercantile Exchange in 2010 was $79. 61/bbl.  Ironically, right before the sharp fall of oil prices in the middle of 2014, EIA raised its 2014 forecast on WTI crude-oil prices to nearly $96/bbl. 4 In a letter defending the veracity of EIA reports, Howard Gruenspecht, deputy administrator of the EIA, commented that, “EIA does not characterize any of its long run projection scenarios as a forecast. ”5 Futures-based forecasts provide a market-based expectation of oil prices.  Although in principle the futures market should be a good predictor of future spot prices, this is not supported by empirical evidence.  Alquist and Kilian (2010) document that oil futures prices tend to be less accurate in the mean-squared prediction error sense than a simple no-change forecast (which posit that oil prices will be the same tomorrow as they are today).  Various econometric approaches have been proposed to forecast oil prices.  For example, in an attempt to improve forecasting performance, Pindyck (1999) adds a mean reversion term to a deterministic linear trend model.  Radchenko (2005) applies a shifting trend model with an autoregressive process in error terms instead of the white noise process.  Still others apply ARIMA models to forecast the monthly WTI crude oil prices.  However, such forecasting methods have not been particularly successful when compared with the naive no-change forecast (see Hamilton, 2009.  Alquist and Kilian, 2010.  Alquist et al. , 2013).  Overall, conclusions from prior studies suggest that changes in oil prices are inherently unpredictable and diﬃcult to model, and as a result the current price of oil may be the best available forecast of future prices.  Given the challenges faced by past forecasting approaches it would be important to understand why oil prices are so hard to predict.  The literature provides interesting insights (cf.  Hamilton, 2009).  Crude oil prices are driven by a large set of dynamic and multi-dimensional factors including physical markets factors, ﬁnancial markets factors and trading factors that are themselves often hard to predict, and may also have counteracting effects.  Perfect foresight is also hindered due to unexpected demand shifts in the global economy, supply disruptions, changes in oil production and inventory demand, geopolitical events, among other factors.  These types of events create uncertainty about future supply or demand, which can lead to higher volatility in prices.  Of course, accidental events such as reﬁnery outages or pipeline problems adds to the unpredictability.  Therefore, in accounting for the history of past oil supply and demand shocks emanating from various events, market participants are always assessing the possibility of future events and their potential impact on prices.  In addition to the size and duration of a potential disruption, agents also consider the current stock levels and the ability of producers to offset a potential supply/demand shock.  Furthermore, the forward-looking behavior of speculators and the quantiﬁcation of speculative oil demand shocks can, at times, invalidate standard econometric models if speculators respond to information not available to the econometrician attempting to disentangle demand and supply shocks based on historical data (Kilian and Lee, 2014).  Confounding this challenge, it is also diﬃcult to relate changes in real oil prices to macroeconomic outcomes due to the presence of reverse causality from macro aggregates to oil prices (see Barsky and Kilian, 2002.  Kilian, 2009.  Chatrath et al. , 2016).  These challenges not withstanding, forecasting efforts have not entirely been in vain.  Researchers report success by expanding the range of explanatory factors and integrating them into their models.  Dees et al.  (2007) model oil prices as a function of oil inventories and demand, OPEC production, producer quotas and production capacity.  Ewing and Thompson (2007) focus on the relationship between macroeconomic variables and crude oil prices, and ﬁnd oil prices to be procyclical - i. e. , leading consumer prices but lagging industrial production activities.  Kaufmann et al.  (2008) study the potential effect of reﬁnery utilization rate on crude oil prices and show that lower reﬁnery rates correspond with higher crude oil prices.  In adding to this mix, the role of speculation and forward looking behavior in crude oil prices has been carefully examined by various authors.  Sari et al.  (2011) use the VIX index as a proxy for global risk and ﬁnd that oil prices are inﬂuenced by related commodities.  Coleman (2012) ﬁnds positive relationships between crude oil prices and proxies for speculative and terrorist activities while controlling for fundamental and market parameters.  More recently, Miao et al.  (forthcoming) report how crude oil inventory announcements impact oil futures and options prices.  There is also some evidence that forecasting models based on economic fundamentals work better at shorter horizons (up to 3 months).  whereas, models based on the crack spread work better at longer horizons (between 12 and 24 months).  Baumeister and Kilian (2015) present a combination approach with six different models that marginally improves the forecasting performance in comparison to the no-change forecast.  This paper contributes to the literature by using a relatively new methodology that optimally selects among various factors that underlie crude oil price movements.  In aiding our investigation, we consider a wide range of potential explanatory factors that are popularly associated with oil prices.  Our analysis employs weekly data, and for expository purposes classiﬁes variables along six broad factor dimensions.  supply, demand, ﬁnancial market, commodities market, speculative, and political factors.  Speciﬁcally, we employ the Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) method to generate out-of-sample forecasts.  Our results indicate that the LASSO method yields superior forecasts, as observed by reductions in the mean squared prediction error relative to various benchmark models such as the the no-change forecast, EIA projections and futures market predictions.  The results also provide insights into the temporal relationship between various inﬂuential factors and crude oil prices. 6 The remainder of the study is organized as follows.  Section 2 provides an overview of the data used in the study and establishes the economic importance of variables that determine oil prices.  The various forecasting models and approaches are described in Section 3, followed by discussion of empirical results in Section 4.  Section 5 concludes the paper.  <Middle> Components of the crude oil price forecasting models.  We use the West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude oil spot prices as the dependent variable, and 26 potential determinants or predictors that are classified into six broad groups.  The description, sample frequency and data source for each variable are shown in Table 1. 7 Our data spans the period from January 04, 2002 to September 25, 2015.  The model is estimated over various ﬁxed length rolling windows (5, 6 and 7 years), which minimizes the odds of generating spurious regression estimates.  Table 1 provides a list of various factors, corresponding descriptions and data source.  2. 1.  Supply factors.  It is commonly believed that oil is an exhaustible resource.  We consider the following supply factors.  1) Global crude oil production.  The global crude oil production includes both OPEC and non-OPEC production.  The production of crude oil is often subject to geopolitical developments, as well as factors such as weather-related events, exploration and production (E&P) costs, investments and innovations.  According to 2014 estimates, OPEC member countries control 81% of the world’s crude oil reserves, with the bulk of OPEC oil reserves being in the Middle East, amounting to around 66% of the OPEC total. 8 The non-OPEC members also play an increasingly important role.  According to EIA, non-OPEC members represent about 60% of world oil production in 2015. 9 2) Global crude oil export.  Global crude oil export can be viewed as an additional measure of global crude oil production.  Whereas, the former set of variables provide a direct picture of supply, this measures the potential capacity for (excess) supply.  Hallock et al.  (2004) show a strong relationship between the conventional oil production and the available export for the world.  3) OPEC surplus crude oil production capacity.  According to EIA, the surplus crude oil production capacity by OPEC nations is a useful indicator of general market supply conditions.  Excess production capacity tends to stabilize global markets, and helps mitigate supply disruptions that can occur from time to time.  4) Crude oil inventory.  Several studies examine the role of crude oil inventory on prices (see, for example Hamilton, 2009.  Kilian and Murphy, 2014).  The accumulation of crude oil stock permits greater ﬂexibility in responding to short-term supply shortages. 10 We include both the global crude oil closing stock and the U. S.  crude oil inventory in our forecast.  5) U. S.  reﬁnery utilization rate.  Kaufmann et al.  (2008) ﬁnd that the reﬁning rate plays an important role in determining crude oil prices, because lower reﬁnery utilization rate will lead to a preference for higher quality crude oil, putting upward pressure on prices.  Note, U. S.  reﬁning capacity represents about one-ﬁfth of world capacity.  6) Baltic exchange dirty tanker index.  We follow Breitenfellner et al.  (2009) and Fan and Xu (2011) by using the Baltic exchange dirty tanker index to track the shipping rates for transportation of unreﬁned oil on representative routes.  Lower index values generally correspond with declining oil prices.  2. 2.  Demand factors Demand factors have been shown to have a signiﬁcant and positive inﬂuence on crude oil prices (see Hamilton, 2009.  Hicks and Kilian, 2009.  Kilian, 2009).  We consider several demand factors.  1) GDP.  Global economic growth is closely related with oil demand.  We consider the GDPs of the U. S. , China and the Euro area (19 countries), which together account for more than 60% of the global GDP.  2) Kilian index.  Kilian (2009) develops an index that measures shifts in the demand for industrial commodities that are driven by the global business cycle.  Speciﬁcally, the index is based on dry cargo single voyage ocean freight rates.  3) Steel production.  World steel production has also been shown to be a reliable indicator of global economic activity (Ravazzolo and Vespignani, 2015).  We use the world steel production, as well as regional steel production in the U. S. , China and the Euro area, as an important proxy for economic activity.  4) ISM manufacturing index.  The ISM manufacturing index is widely viewed as an indicator of the business cycle (Scotti, 2013).  The index is based on surveys of more than 300 manufacturing ﬁrms conducted by the Institute of Supply Management.  5) Global crude oil imports.  Global crude oil imports is another key factor that reﬂects the state of the economy.  Ghosh (2009) ﬁnd a long-run relationship between quantity of crude oil imports and the price of the imported crude, and document unidirectional causality between economic growth and crude oil imports.  2. 3.  Financial market factors.  The relationship between ﬁnancial market factors and oil prices can be complex.  We consider the following three factors.  1) U. S.  interest rates.  Frankel (2006) ﬁnd that crude oil prices are negatively related with interest rates.  In particular, U. S.  monetary policy can impact oil prices through its effect on both currency values and interest rates.  We consider the three-month Treasury bill rate and the Federal fund rate in our study.  2) Exchange rates.  The importance of the U. S.  dollar exchange rate in inﬂuencing oil prices has been documented by Sadorsky (2000), andWang and Wu (2012), among others.  Studies indicate that a weaker dollar usually leads to higher oil prices as oil producers aim to regain the purchasing power of the export revenues that are denominated in U. S.  dollars.  In addition, the country whose currency appreciates against the U. S.  dollar is likely to experience higher demand for crude oil due to reduced costs.  We use the U. S.  dollar index, computed as the weighted geometric mean of the dollar’s value relative to select currencies that include the Euro, Japanese yen, British pound, Canadian dollar, Swedish Krona and Swiss Franc.  3) Stock market.  Jones and Kaul (1996) and Sadorsky (1999) ﬁnd that the stock market and oil prices tend to move together in the same direction, seemingly in response to global aggregate demand factors.  Shifts in aggregate demand inﬂuence both corporate proﬁts and the demand for oil.  Following Hammoudeh and Li (2005) we use the S&P 500 and MSCI World indexes, respectively as proxies for the U. S.  and world equity markets.  2. 4.  Commodity market factors.  It’s been noted that there is a relationship between crude prices and the prices of other industrial commodities.  Following Coleman (2012) and Baumeister and Kilian (2015), we select two indices in our forecasting models.  1) S&P GSCI Non-Energy Index serve as a benchmark for investments in commodity markets.  It consists of all commodities included in the S&P GSCI index, with the exception of crude oil and natural gas.  2) CRB Raw Industrial Materials index (CRB Rind index) measures price movements in 22 basic commodities whose markets are believed to be sensitive to changes in economic conditions.  The selection of the two indices, which exclude crude oil and natural gas, mitigates potential endogeneity problems in the forecasting models.  2. 5.  Speculative factors.  The existence of an active derivatives market that allows for risk sharing, price discovery and cost control is an important feature of crude oil markets.  Over the past decade, and in particular after 2004, there has been an ineluctable trend toward greater ﬁnancialization of commodity markets with inﬂows of large amounts of investments into commodity futures.  Derivatives markets which spawn speculative activities are believed to exert an important inﬂuence on oil prices.  Behind such appeals is the implicit belief that crude oil prices are impacted in a signiﬁcant manner by factors other than the prevailing market demand and supply conditions (see Kaufmann, 2011.  Kilian and Murphy, 2014).  Following Coleman (2012), therefore, we use the ratio of trading volume of oil futures contracts to global oil production as a measure of speculative activities.  2. 6.  GeoPolitical factor.  Crude oil is commonly recognized as a commodity that is sensitive to geopolitical events.  Although many different variables exist that may capture the geopolitical environment, we follow Coleman (2012) by using the total amount of terrorist attack in the Middle East and North Africa, which largely overlaps with OPEC countries, as a proxy for geopolitical (in)stability. 11 This data is obtained from the Global Terrorism Database at the University of Maryland, with details of individual international terrorist incidents since 1970.  3.  Forecasting models.  3. 1.  Benchmark 1.  no-change forecast.  Following the literature (see Alquist and Kilian, 2010.  Kilian and Lee, 2014.  Baumeister and Kilian, 2015), we focus on the real price of oil rather than log prices.  This helps avoid log approximation errors when ﬁtting the real price of oil.  A commonly used benchmark for judging the performance of forecasting models is provided by the random walk model without drift.  This model implies that changes in the spot price are unpredictable.  so the best available forecast of future spot prices of crude oil is simply the current spot price.  We consider described below.  three alternative forecasting benchmarks.  3. 2.  Benchmark 2.  EIA forecast.  The U. S.  Energy Information Administration (EIA) of the Department of Energy (DOE) provides comprehensive oil price forecasts regularly that are closely followed by market participants.  EIA constructs monthly and quarterly price forecasts, the Short-Term Energy Outlook (STEO), with horizons ranging from one month to two years. 12 The STEO are released on the ﬁrst Tuesday following the ﬁrst Thursday of each month.  EIA analysts construct forecasts based on information such as current and near-term futures prices of crude oil, OPEC and non-OPEC production, global economic growth, crude oil stock, among other factors.  It is worth noting that EIA uses largescale multi-equation econometric models to estimate supply and demand conditions for crude oil in various energy markets, as well as employs a consensus mechanism to arrive at the ﬁnal forecast. 13 3. 3.  Benchmark 3.  futures-based forecast Market participants use oil futures prices to divine future spot prices.  The futures-based forecast is generated as follows, where Ft is the price of crude oil WTI futures contract that matures in h periods and available at time t.  3. 4.  Benchmark 4.  factor-based model Factor-based models provide an alternative approach to forecast oil prices (see Baumeister and Kilian, 2015).  A full factor-based model includes all valid predictor variables relevant to the determination of crude prices.  By definition, the full factor model is not parsimonious and is subject to significant collinearity problems due to the presence of strong correlations across variables.  We consider this “kitchen sink” model as a benchmark for comparison purposes, and later refine this to include significant variables found from LASSO and stepwise regression methodologies.  where the crude oil prices at time t (Pt) is a function of its lagged terms and s independent variables, namely Xt,j, j = 1, .  .  .  , s.  et refers to error term at time t, representing any potential temporary deviations from long-term relationship that couldn’t be explained by the model.  Note that this factor-based regression is in the form of a reduced-form one-dimensional vector autoregression (VAR) model with exogenous variables.  The regular VAR model would be more appropriate when there are bidirectional interactions between the dependent and independent variables.  In our study, given the relatively large number of factors that are employed, plus the unidirectional nature of influence for the majority of independent variables, we use the reduced-form VAR model.  3. 5.  The LASSO method.  The LASSO method is an innovative variable selection method in which the choice of predictive variables is carried out using an algorithmic procedure.  It was first introduced by Tibshirani (1996) and has gradually found application in the energy area such as electricity consumption (Wang et al. , 2007), electricity prices (Suard et al. , 2010), and natural gas prices (Alfano et al. , 2015).  The LASSO method adds a penalty term to the cost function which keeps the estimated value of the regression coefficients small, thus reducing the inflation in standard errors often found in the presence of multicollinearity.  When selecting variables, LASSO minimizes the residual sum of squares subject to the sum of the absolute value of the coefficients being less than a constant.  More specifically.  This problem is equivalent to, and each k corresponds to a unique LASSO parameter c.  When the LASSO parameter is small enough, some of the regression coefficients shrink to zero.  Hence, the LASSO method selects only a subset of the regression coefficients for each LASSO parameter.  The LASSO parameter c > 0 controls the degree of shrinkage that is applied for the estimates.  Tibshirani (1996) uses quadratic programming techniques to solve each LASSO parameter of interest.  Osborne et al.  (2000) develop a “homotopy” method to estimate the parameters for all values of c.  In this paper we employ a computationally efficient method developed by Efron et al.  (2004), a variant of the “least angle regression” method to obtain a pre-determined sequence of LASSO solutions.  All other LASSO solutions are obtained by linear interpolation from the sequence of LASSO solutions.  When the LASSO parameter is small enough, some of the regression coeﬃcients shrink to zero.  Hence, the LASSO method selects only a subset of the regression coeﬃcients for each LASSO parameter.  The LASSO parameter c > 0 controls the degree of shrinkage that is applied for the estimates.  Tibshirani (1996) uses quadratic programming techniques to solve each LASSO parameter of interest.  Osborne et al.  (2000) develop a “homotopy” method to estimate the parameters for all values of c.  In this paper we employ a computationally eﬃcient method developed by Efron et al.  (2004), a variant of the “least angle regression” method to obtain a pre-determined sequence of LASSO solutions.  All other LASSO solutions are obtained by linear interpolation from the sequence of LASSO solutions.  3. 6.  Stepwise regression method.  For comparison purposes, we also estimate a stepwise regression using the same set of predictive factors.  The stepwise regression method has been used for evaluating movements in crude prices (Alexandridis et al. , 2008), electricity prices (Nan et al. 