 1.  Introduction Since the many projects launched over the past decade to achieve increased market integration across day-ahead electricity markets in Europe, the day-ahead electricity price convergence between market areas has increased signiﬁcantly, adding to the complexity of modeling the joint behavior of day-ahead electricity prices.  The ﬁrst signiﬁcant step towards market integration in Europe was taken with the introduction of the Nord Pool market, which is the main platform for trading power in most Nordic and Baltic countries.  At Nord Pool, the bidding areas are price coupled, meaning that the transmission capacity is auctioned as an implicit part of the day-ahead auction of electrical energy.  This achieves - as opposed to the explicit auctioning, where the transmission capacity auction and the day-ahead auction of electrical energy are separate actions - the eﬃcient utilization of interconnectors and results in smaller price differences between the bidding areas.  Since Nord Pool’s creation in the mid 90’s, many countries have joined and Nord Pool today comprises Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.  For the sake of completion, we also mention that Nord Pool has taken sole ownership of the UK market as of 2014.  Although Nord Pool has a long-standing history of price coupling, such initiatives are more recent for other European countries.  In 2006, the so-called Tri-Lateral Market Coupling (TLC) project comprising France, Belgium and the Netherlands was initiated.  Later in 2010, the price coupling of Central West Europe (CWE) was achieved, integrating Germany, France, Austria, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg.  In 2014, a crucial milestone was reached with the price coupling of the North Western European (NWE) region, covering the CWE region, the UK, the Nordic and Baltic countries - and as of 2016, the price coupling region has grown to include 19 European countries.  Also, a new algorithm regarding how cross-border capacities are included in the day-ahead price calculation was introduced on 20 May 2015 in the CWE region, with the transition from the Available Transmission Capacity (ATC) methodology to the more eﬃcient Flow-Based (FB) methodology.  For the joint modeling of day-ahead electricity prices in two interconnected areas, price coupling has induced a fundamental change that cannot be ignored.  In the case of the CWE region for example, the transition from explicit to implicit auctioning of transmission capacity has meant that equal prices in two adjacent markets are very often observed now.  As already accentuated in the existing literature (see e. g.  Füss et al.  (2017)), this has generally resulted in the non-feasibility of previously proposed models.  For one, the pricing of spread options such as the ﬁnancial transmission rights cannot be achieved using spread option formulas á la Margrabe.  Also in risk management applications, the classical reduced-form models are no longer suitable for modeling the joint behavior of prices.  To exemplify some events and their inﬂuence on the day-ahead electricity prices, we plot in Fig.  1 the evolution of the German– French price spread at hour 8, for the period 1 January 2009 to 25 September 2016.  According to Fig.  1, the most visible change in the spread dynamics was caused by the price coupling of Germany and France in 2010, leading to a large amount of exact price convergence in the following period.  In this paper, we propose a regime-switching AR–GARCH copula model for the joint behavior of pairs of day-ahead prices in coupled electricity markets, inspired by ideas from Haldrup and Nielsen (2006) and Haldrup et al.  (2010).  The regime-switching part is essential for distinguishing the case of identical prices from the case of non-identical prices.  The AR–GARCH functions as a ﬁlter to remove the serial dependence in the conditional means and conditional variances.  The use of copula models facilitates the analysis in the sense that marginal models for day-ahead prices are treated separately from the dependence structure.  Furthermore, copulas allow for the easy transition to more realistic distributional assumptions for the residuals, and also allow for the inclusion of a more detailed description of the dependence structure when the prices do not coincide.  Our empirical study concentrates on four coupled markets.  Germany–France, Germany–Netherlands, Netherlands–Belgium and Germany–Western Denmark.  The proposed model has a wide range of applications in the context of derivatives pricing, hedging and risk management.  Here, we consider two applications.  The pricing of ﬁnancial transmission rights, and the out-of-sample forecasting of tail quantiles.  In both applications, we study how the results are impacted by the choice of marginal distributions and the choice of copula.  Furthermore in the forecasting exercise, we demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed modeling framework by comparing the forecast performance of copula-based models against a simple alternative that is not copula-based.  The existing literature on bivariate or multivariate models for day-ahead prices in coupled electricity markets is scarce.  Due to the aforementioned increasing complexity in the joint price dynamics, some authors employ fundamental models, with examples being Kiesel and Kustermann (2016) and Füss et al.  (2017).  Kiesel and Kustermann (2016) propose a fundamental model in the spirit of Carmona et al.  (2013), and derive closed-form pricing formulas for futures and plain vanilla options under market coupling.  Moreover, they provide an empirical application using data from the German and French markets.  In Füss et al.  (2017), the authors also employ a fundamental model, and consider the pricing of futures and transmission rights under different allocation schemes.  Aside from providing closed-form pricing formulas, sensitivity analyses are also carried out.  However appealing fundamental models are when it comes to their adaptability to changes in the market structure - which indeed happen quite often - they can be extremely data-heavy and thus both theoretically and empirically challenging, as also acknowledged by Kiesel and Kustermann (2016). 