
Empirical research on conditional conservatism documents a piecewise linear relation between earnings and stock
returns and often attributes this pattern to a more timely recognition of bad news than good news (e. g. , Basu, 1997). 
However, we argue that a similar asymmetric relation can arise from a fundamentally different source—cost stickiness.  Cost
stickiness refers to the asymmetric response of costs to sales increases versus decreases, which is a widely documented
finding in the research on cost behavior (e. g. , Anderson Name, 2003).  We show that cost stickiness can be mistaken for
conditional conservatism in standard models, distorting inferences about both the average level of conservatism and the
extent of cross-sectional variation in conservatism.  To reduce the likelihood of spurious inference, we develop new
empirical tests that separate conservatism from the confounding effect of sticky costs. 
Conditional conservatism implies that bad news (the usual proxy for which is negative stock returns) is recognized in
earnings more quickly and more fully than good news (measured by positive returns).  Therefore, the contemporaneous
association between earnings and stock returns should be stronger for negative returns than for positive returns (Basu,
1997).  Numerous studies find results consistent with this prediction and infer the presence of conditional conservatism (e. g. ,
Pope and Walker, 1999; Ball Name, 2000; Watts, 2003b; Ball Name, 2013a). 
The research on sticky costs documents an asymmetric behavior of costs and attributes it to operational decisions by
managers who face adjustment costs, such as severance payments to dismissed workers and disposal costs for property, plant,
and equipment (e. g. , Anderson Name, 2003).  To avoid adjustment costs, managers retain some unused resources when sales
fall.  By contrast, when sales rise, managers have to add sufficient resources to meet the demand.  Because of this operational
asymmetry, costs are “sticky” on average—they rise more in response to sales increases than they fall for sales decreases. 
The cost asymmetry implies that, on average, earnings respond more to sales decreases than to sales increases.  Because
sales changes and concurrent stock returns are positively correlated, cost stickiness leads to an asymmetric relation between
earnings and stock returns, which is stronger for negative returns than for positive returns.  Therefore, the standard
estimates of asymmetric timeliness are likely biased upwards on average when sticky costs are prevalent.  Further, because
cost stickiness varies systematically (e. g. , Weiss, 2010), it leads to variation in the bias, which is likely to distort inferences
about the extent of cross-sectional variation in conservatism.  To control for this confounding effect, we incorporate cost
stickiness in standard conservatism models. 
We use data for publicly traded US firms from 1987 to 2007 to examine the confounding effect of cost stickiness in the
Basu (1997), Ball Name (2013b), and Collins Name (2014) models. 1 Controlling for the asymmetric effect of sales changes
reveals an average bias in conservatism estimates of more than 25%.  Further tests confirm that the confounding asymmetry
for sales changes is consistent with manifestations of cost stickiness and is distinct from conservatism.  Thus, the upward
bias in the standard conservatism measures arises because the measures mistake cost stickiness for conditional
conservatism.  We also find that controlling for the variation in cost stickiness has a large impact on estimates of the
variation in conservatism.  For example, the correlation between industry-level conservatism estimates (at the three-digit
SIC level) with and without controls for cost stickiness is just 51. 3%, and the difference between the two estimates is
statistically significant in 49% of the industries.  Thus, the use of standard models leads to mistaken inferences not only about
the average degree of conservatism but also about how much conservatism varies cross-sectionally. 
Cost stickiness also confounds inferences about the correlates of conservatism.  For example, we find that the standard
estimates of the association between managerial stock ownership and conditional conservatism contain a large bias.  These
estimates become statistically insignificant when we mitigate the bias.  Controlling for cost stickiness also significantly changes
the estimated effects of the standard proxies of the demand for conservatism, such as size, leverage, and the book-to-market
ratio.  Thus, recognizing the confounding effect of cost stickiness is essential to ensure accurate inferences in future research. 
In Section 2, we develop our argument for the correlated omitted variable bias and formulate the hypotheses.  In Section 3,
we describe the data and the estimation models.  Section 4 presents our main empirical results and the additional validation
tests.  Section 5 further illustrates the confounding effect of cost stickiness.  Section 6 concludes. 
2.  Hypothesis development. 
We build on both the research on conservatism in financial accounting (e. g. , Basu, 1997; Pope and Walker, 1999; Ball
Name, 2000) and the research on sticky costs in cost accounting (e. g. , Anderson Name, 2003; Weiss, 2010; Chen Name, 2012). 
Conservatism and sticky costs are fundamentally different phenomena: conservatism is asymmetry in the information
system that translates economic activity into accounting data, whereas cost stickiness is asymmetry in the economic activity
itself.  Because the asymmetry in reported earnings can arise from either conservatism or cost stickiness, empirical models
should account for both phenomena to ensure accurate inferences. 
Financial accounting interprets conditional conservatism as the higher degree of verification of good news as gains than
bad news as losses (Basu, 1997; Watts, 2003a).  Conservatism implies that earnings incorporate bad news about future cash
flows more quickly than good news.  Basu (1997) bases his primary measure of asymmetric timeliness on a regression of net
income on stock returns with separate slopes for positive and negative returns (proxies for good and bad news,
respectively).  He finds that the slope coefficient and the R2 are higher for negative returns than for positive returns, which
is consistent with his predictions.  His model has been widely used to document the prevalence of conservatism, measured
by average asymmetric timeliness, and to examine theories about the causes and correlates of conservatism, tested by
analyzing systematic variation in asymmetric timeliness (see Watts (2003b) and Qiang (2007), for reviews). 
The cost accounting literature (e. g. , Anderson Name, 2003; Weiss, 2010; Banker Name, 2013; Banker and Byzalov, 2014) has
identified another source of asymmetry in cost and earnings behavior.  These studies document that most of the major cost
components are “sticky” in the sense that they rise more for sales increases than they fall for equivalent decreases.  Anderson
Name (2003) explain that cost stickiness arises because of deliberate decisions by managers to adjust resources.  For many
resources, managers face substantial adjustment costs, such as installation and disposal costs for equipment or hiring and firing
costs for labor.  These adjustment costs lead to an asymmetry in managerial decisions.  When sales decrease, managers retain
some slack resources to avoid incurring adjustment costs associated with cutting resources and future adjustment costs to
restore resources when sales rebound.  Consequently, the fall in costs is less than proportional to the sales decrease.  In contrast,
when sales increase sufficiently, managers have less discretion because they must add resources to accommodate the increased
demand.  Therefore, on average, costs are more sensitive to sales increases than to sales decreases because of asymmetric
resource adjustment.  Because costs enter earnings with a negative sign, the direction of asymmetry is reversed for earnings, i. e. ,
earnings are more sensitive to sales decreases than to sales increases when costs are sticky (Banker and Chen, 2006). 
Changes in sales and concurrent stock returns are positively correlated (e. g. , Benston, 1967).  For example, the
contemporaneous correlation between sales changes and stock returns in our sample is 0. 193 and is significant at the 1%
level.  Thus, sales changes may constitute a correlated omitted variable in the standard conservatism models.  When costs are
sticky, this omitted variable has an asymmetric effect on earnings, which is stronger for sales decreases than for sales
increases.  Because sales changes correlate positively with stock returns, the association between earnings and stock returns
should be stronger for negative returns than for positive returns even if conservatism is absent.  Therefore, the estimates of
the piecewise linear relation between stock returns and earnings in standard models reflect not only asymmetric loss
recognition but also the confounding asymmetric effect of cost stickiness.  Because both types of asymmetry act in the same
direction, sticky costs could lead to an upward bias on average in the standard estimates of asymmetric timeliness. 2
Collins Name (2014) and Hsu Name (2012) document significant asymmetric timeliness for operating cash flow and
recommend that researchers estimate conservatism using operating accruals rather than earnings.  However, this
modification of the Basu model is unlikely to remove the confounding effect of sticky costs because cost stickiness affects
operating accruals.  For example, because managers retain unused fixed assets when sales decrease and acquire additional
fixed assets when sales increase beyond the available capacity, depreciation expense falls less for sales decreases than it
rises for sales increases.  Because the retention of slack resources entails additional cash outflows, managers also need to
increase their borrowing or slow down the repayment of loans.  These financing activities lead to an asymmetry in interest
expense, including its non-cash component.  Additionally, when sales decrease sufficiently, managers remove some unused
resources and incur the associated adjustment costs.  Some of these costs, such as severance payments to workers or
environmental remediation costs following the closure of production facilities, can include cash payments in the following
fiscal year that are reported as operating accruals.  Because cost stickiness has an asymmetric effect on accruals, it biases
both earnings-based and accruals-based conservatism measures in standard models, distorting inferences about the average
level of conservatism. 
Hypothesis 1a.  Asymmetric timeliness estimates in standard conservatism models have an upward bias on average because
these models do not control for cost stickiness. 
Cost stickiness varies systematically (e. g. , Weiss, 2010).  The cost accounting literature has documented four primary drivers of
this variation: the size of the resource adjustment costs (Anderson Name, 2003; Banker Name, 2013), managerial optimism and
pessimism about future sales (Anderson Name, 2003; Banker Name, 2014b), agency problems (Chen Name, 2012), and behavioral
issues (Chen Name, 2013).  Further, variation in conservatism can influence cost stickiness.  Francis and Martin (2010), Ahmed and
Duellman (2011), and Bushman Name (2011) show that conservatism improves investment efficiency either by curbing the
inefficient overinvestment associated with managers' empire-building behavior or by mitigating the inefficient underinvestment
caused by frictions in capital markets.  These investment patterns can affect cost stickiness.  Because the standard conservatism
models do not control for the variation in cost stickiness, they are likely to mistake it for variation in conservatism.  In other words,
the bias from Hypothesis 1a likely varies systematically across observations because of predictable differences in cost stickiness.  This
confounding effect distorts inferences about the extent of variation in conservatism. 
Hypothesis 1b.  Estimates of the variation in conservatism in standard models are distorted because these models do not
control for the variation in cost stickiness. 
The confounding variation from Hypothesis 1b can bias inferences in tests of theories about the causes or correlates of
conservatism.  For example, cost stickiness likely varies with some of the standard proxies of the demand for conservatism. 
The book-to-market ratio is higher for capital-intensive firms (e. g. , Novy-Marx, 2011).  Capital-intensive firms have larger
resource-adjustment costs that increase cost stickiness (Anderson Name, 2003).  This effect can lead to a positive association
between the book-to-market ratio and cost stickiness.  Managers can adjust many resources, such as plant capacity, only in
discrete increments.  This constraint impedes resource adjustment in small firms but is less important for large firms. 
Therefore, large firms likely have lower resource-adjustment costs, which can lead to a negative relation between the firm's
size and cost stickiness.  Interest expense increases with debt; therefore, cost stickiness for interest expense is likely to be
positively associated with leverage.  If a given explanatory variable is positively (negatively) associated with the variation in
cost stickiness, such as the book-to-market ratio (size), then the standard estimate of its association with conservatism likely
has a positive (negative) bias.  Therefore, the inferences about these standard correlates of demand for conservatism can
have a context-specific bias that reflects the sign of each variable's association with cost stickiness. 
<Middle> Data and estimation models. 
3. 1.  Sample selection and descriptive statistics. 
Our sample selection procedure is summarized in Panel A of Table 1.  We start with the Compustat/CRSP annual sample
from 1987 to 2007. 3 We exclude financial firms (SIC codes 6000–6999) because cost stickiness can manifest itself differently
given the distinct structure of the financial statements for such firms.  Our findings are robust to their inclusion.  Following
Khan and Watts (2009), we discard firm-year observations with missing or invalid data for the regression variables and
observations with a lagged stock price below $1.  We also exclude observations for which the annual change in sales exceeds
50% to eliminate large acquisitions that distort performance measures like earnings and operating accruals (Collins and
Hribar, 2002), and use a symmetric negative threshold of 50% to exclude large divestitures. 4 All of the continuous regression
variables are winsorized at the top and bottom 1%.  Our results are robust to not winsorizing returns. 
The univariate sample statistics and the correlation matrix are presented in Panels B and C of Table 1.  Financial variables
are scaled by the lagged market value of equity.  On average, earnings before extraordinary items and discontinued
operations are equal to  0. 6% of the lagged market value (the median is 4. 7%).  Scaled earnings are negatively skewed (the
mean is less than the median), which is consistent with the presence of conditional conservatism (Basu, 1995; Ball Name,
2000).  Following Ball Name (2013b), we market-adjust the stock returns using the CRSP value-weighted index including all
distributions (the results are robust to using unadjusted returns).  The annual market-adjusted stock returns are 0. 7% on
average (median  7. 0%).  The correlation between the stock returns (RET) and the concurrent scaled sales changes (ΔS/P) is
0. 193 and is significant at the 1% level.  This correlation suggests that sales changes might be an important correlated omitted
variable in the earnings-returns relation.  The correlation between the negative portion of the stock returns (DR  RET) and
the negative portion of the sales changes (DS  ΔS/P) is 0. 147 and is significant at the 1% level.  This correlation also suggests
that the magnitude of sales decreases might be an important correlated omitted variable that affects the incremental slope
for negative stock returns (i. e. , the asymmetric timeliness coefficient).  The correlations between these pairs of variables are
much less than one, which indicates that there is sufficient independent variation to reliably separate the effect of sales
changes from that of stock returns. 
3. 2.  Empirical models. 
We start with the Basu (1997) asymmetric timeliness model,
where Et/Pt 1 represents the earnings in year t scaled by the market value of equity at the beginning of the fiscal year, RETt is
the market-adjusted stock return for the 12-month period of fiscal year t, DRt is a dummy variable equal to one if RETt is
negative and zero otherwise, and εt is an error term.  We omit the firm index for brevity. 
The market-adjusted stock return, RET, is a proxy for news about future cash flows, and a negative return (DR¼1)
indicates bad news.  The asymmetric timeliness coefficient on DR  RET captures the difference between the slopes for
positive and negative returns.  Conservatism implies that this coefficient is positive because bad news (negative return) is
reflected in earnings to a greater extent than good news (positive return). 
In our full model, we add sticky costs,
where DSt is a dummy variable that is equal to one if sales decreased from year t 1 to year t and zero otherwise, ΔSt/Pt 1 is
the sales change from year t 1 to year t that is scaled by the market value of equity at the beginning of the fiscal year, and
the remaining variables are as previously defined.  The variables DS, ΔS/P, and DS  ΔS/P capture sticky costs.  When costs are
sticky, earnings fall to a greater extent for sales decreases than they rise for the equivalent sales increases, which implies
that the coefficient on DS  ΔS/P is positive. 
Hypothesis 1a predicts that controlling for the confounding effect of cost stickiness alleviates the upward bias in the
conservatism estimates.  Therefore, the asymmetric timeliness coefficient on DR  RET in the full model (2) will be less than
the coefficient in the Basu model (1). 
We also estimate a model that includes cost stickiness but not conditional conservatism,
where all of the variables are as defined previously.  This model is representative of the recent earnings behavior models in
cost accounting (e. g. , Banker and Chen, 2006), which incorporate asymmetric cost behavior but do not account for
conservatism.  We use this model as a benchmark to assess the relative explanatory power of conservatism versus
sticky costs. 
Ball Name (2013b) argue that the cross-sectional correlation between the expected components of earnings and stock
returns can distort standard conservatism estimates.  They propose corrections for this potential bias, which we use in
robustness checks.  Because our theoretical arguments in Hypotheses 1a and 1b are driven by a time-series correlation
between the changes in sales and the concurrent stock returns, our predictions are robust to the inclusion of Ball Name's
controls for cross-sectional correlation. 
In additional robustness checks, we also examine earnings components as
recommended by Collins Name (2014) and Hsu Name (2012). 
We test Hypothesis 1b in two ways.  First, we use a cross-industry analysis that captures the combined effect of all of the
observable and unobservable industry-level drivers of both conservatism and cost stickiness.  We estimate the Basu model (1) and
the full model (2) for each industry to obtain estimates of cross-industry variation in asymmetric timeliness.  Hypothesis 1b predicts
that after controlling for the variation in cost stickiness, the estimates of the variation in asymmetric timeliness should change. 
Therefore, our full model should yield a different rank ordering and relative magnitudes of industry-level conservatism measures
than the Basu model.  Second, we use the firm-year conservatism score of Khan and Watts (2009) that captures the predicted
asymmetric timeliness conditional on the book-to-market ratio, leverage, and size.  These variables also likely lead to variation in
cost stickiness (Section 2).  Therefore, we examine whether controlling for the association of these variables with cost stickiness
changes the relative magnitudes and ranking of the firm-year conservatism scores. 
4.  Estimation results. 
Table 2 presents the pooled estimates for the Basu model, the sticky cost model, and our full model.  The sticky cost model
has greater explanatory power than the Basu model (the adjusted R2s are 19. 0% and 12. 7%, respectively).  Column 1 shows a
significant positive coefficient on DR  RET, which indicates conservatism, and column 2 shows a significant positive
coefficient on DS  ΔS/P, which indicates cost stickiness. 
For the full model in column 3, the adjusted R2 improves to 26. 8%.  Both the Basu model and the sticky cost model are
rejected in favor of the full model (F¼180. 88 and F¼61. 47, respectively, df¼3).  All of the coefficients in the full model have
the expected signs and indicate that significant conservatism (DR  RET) and significant cost stickiness (DS  ΔS/P) coexist. 
The main parameter of interest is the asymmetric timeliness coefficient on DR  RET.  This coefficient in the Basu model is
0. 408.  When we control for cost stickiness, the asymmetric timeliness coefficient decreases to 0. 321, and the difference is
significant at the 1% level (t¼7. 65).  Thus, consistent with Hypothesis 1a, the standard conservatism estimates suffer from a
substantial upward bias of 27. 2% (¼[0. 408/0. 321] 1) on average, which arises because the Basu model does not control for
the confounding effect of sticky costs. 5
Robustness checks are presented in Table 3.  In Panel A, we add firm fixed effects to control for the cross-sectional
correlation between the expected components of earnings and returns following Ball Name (2013b).  Consistent with
Hypothesis 1a, when we control for cost stickiness, the fixed-effect conservatism estimate decreases from 0. 183 in the Basu
model to 0. 146 in the full model.  Thus, after including firm fixed effects as suggested by Ball Name, the standard conservatism
estimates continue to suffer from a large upward bias of 25. 4% (¼[0. 183/0. 146] 1), which is significant at the 1% level. 
These results are also similar (untabulated) when we use an asymmetric time-series model to control for expected earnings,
another correction proposed by Ball Name (2013b). 
In Panel B, we estimate the models for operating accruals as suggested by Collins Name (2014) and Hsu Name (2012). 
Consistent with Hypothesis 1a, the accruals-based conservatism estimates without controls for sticky costs are biased
upwards considerably relative to the estimates in the full model, and the average bias is significant at the 1% level.  The
results are robust to the addition of firm fixed effects (Ball Name, 2013b) and/or control variables from the Jones (1991) and
Dechow and Dichev (2002) accrual models (untabulated). 
In all models in Tables 2 and 3, the variance inflation factor (VIF) for the asymmetric timeliness coefficient is less than 2. 5,
which indicates that multicollinearity is not a major concern.  However, because our sticky cost modification doubles the number
of explanatory variables, multicollinearity could become a problem in some samples.  Multicollinearity constitutes an insufficient
data problem (as opposed to a model specification problem), which means that the sample does not contain sufficient
information to reliably separate the effects of different variables (e. g. , Wooldridge, 2013, p.  97).  In other words, if a researcher
finds that the full model with sticky costs suffers from multicollinearity in a given sample, then the inferences in the parallel
standard model are unreliable because they cannot be convincingly attributed to conservatism as opposed to cost stickiness. 
4. 1.  Do sales changes capture sticky costs or conservatism. 
While we attribute the asymmetric effect of sales changes in Tables 2 and 3 to cost stickiness, it could potentially
represent conditional conservatism.  If sales changes contain incremental information (relative to stock returns) about future
cash flows from booked assets, then sales decreases could trigger asset write-downs (e. g. , Banker Name, 2014a).  These writedowns could generate a piecewise linear relation between sales changes and earnings even if cost stickiness is absent. 
Therefore, we conduct additional tests to determine whether the asymmetry for sales changes (DS  ΔS/P) primarily reflects
cost stickiness or conditional conservatism.  If this asymmetry is a proxy for conservatism, as we will explain, then it will
have a much different coefficient sign and significance in these tests than if it is a proxy for sticky costs. 
First, we estimate model (2) for a few earnings components for which cost stickiness and conservatism have different
predictions for the coefficient on DS  ΔS/P: depreciation expense, interest expense, and change in accounts receivable.  To
maintain consistent coefficient signs, items that reduce earnings (e. g. , depreciation) are coded as negative numbers.  For
depreciation expense and interest expense, cost stickiness predicts a significant positive coefficient on DS  ΔS/P because
asymmetric resource adjustment will influence these expenses (Section 2).  In contrast, conservatism predicts an
insignificant coefficient on DS  ΔS/P for these items.  Even if sales decreases can trigger fixed asset write-downs, these
write-downs will flow through special items and not through depreciation.  Similarly, while sales decreases can indicate bad
news about future interest payments, these unrealized future losses will not be recognized in current period interest
expense.  Therefore, if sales changes are a proxy for conservatism, then they will not have an asymmetric effect on
depreciation and interest expense. 
For changes in accounts receivable, cost stickiness predicts an insignificant coefficient on DS ΔS/P because sticky costs
constitute an asymmetry in costs rather than revenues.  In contrast, if DS ΔS/P represents conservatism, then the coefficient on
DS ΔS/P for accounts receivable will be positive and significant because sales decreases can lead to write-downs of receivables. 
The results are presented in Panel A of Table 4.  We indicate the distinctive sign predictions under sticky costs and
conservatism in the second and third columns.  We observe a significant asymmetric effect of sales changes (DS  ΔS/P) on
both depreciation expense and interest expense, which is consistent with cost stickiness and not with conservatism.  For
changes in accounts receivable, the coefficient on DS  ΔS/P is insignificant, which conforms with the predictions for sticky
costs and suggests that sales changes do not play a role in conservatism for accounts receivable. 
In our second validation test, we examine the relation between the prior period's sales decreases (DSt 1) and the degree
of asymmetry with respect to current sales changes (DS  ΔS/P).  We augment model (2) by adding interactions with lagged
sales decreases and lagged negative returns.  The main parameter of interest is the coefficient on the interaction term
DSt 1  DS  ΔS/P.  Cost stickiness predicts that this coefficient is negative, i. e. , the degree of cost stickiness (DS  ΔS/P) is
smaller in the case of a prior sales decrease (DSt 1¼1).  After managers observe a prior sales decrease, they become
pessimistic about future sales (e. g. , Anderson Name, 2003; Banker and Byzalov, 2014).  This pessimism reduces cost stickiness
(Hypothesis 3a in Anderson Name, 2003) because managers are reluctant to add resources when sales increase and are more
willing to cut resources when sales decrease.  In contrast, conservatism for sales changes predicts that the coefficient on the
interaction term DSt 1  DS  ΔS/P is positive, i. e. , the degree of asymmetry for current sales changes is larger in the case of
a prior sales decrease (a proxy for bad news).  Prior bad news reduces the fair value of the assets at the beginning of the
current period.  This reduction in the fair value is likely to increase conservatism because asset write-downs are triggered
when the news in the current period is sufficiently bad to use up the available “accounting slack” (Beaver and Ryan, 2005). 
Thus, if the piecewise linear effect of sales changes represents cost stickiness (conservatism), then the coefficient on
DSt 1  DS ΔS/P is expected to be negative (positive).  To test these contrasting predictions, we estimate the following
model, where all of the variables are as defined previously. 
The predicted signs under cost stickiness and conservatism and the empirical estimates are presented in Panel B of
Table 4.  The coefficient on the interaction term DSt 1  DS  ΔS/P is negative and significant, which indicates that the
asymmetry for current sales changes (DS  ΔS/P) is smaller in the case of a prior sales decrease (DSt 1¼1) than in the case
of a prior sales increase (DSt 1¼0).  This is consistent with cost stickiness but not with conservatism for sales changes. 
In our next test, we extend model (2) by adding interactions with two standard proxies for adjustment costs from the
literature on sticky costs: asset intensity (AINT) and employee intensity (EINT).  The main parameters of interest are the
interaction coefficients on AINT  DS  ΔS/P and EINT  DS  ΔS/P.  Cost stickiness predicts that both of these coefficients are
positive and significant, because more asset- and employee-intensive firms have greater resource-adjustment costs that
increase cost stickiness (Anderson Name, 2003, Hypothesis 4).  In contrast, conservatism for sales changes predicts that only
the coefficient on AINT  DS  ΔS/P is positive and significant while the coefficient on EINT  DS  ΔS/P is insignificant.  Asset
intensity should increase conservatism because more asset-intensive firms have a greater potential for large write-downs in
the event of bad news, whereas employee intensity is unlikely to affect conservatism because intangibles such as
investments in human capital are not recognized as assets on the balance sheet.  We use the following model,
where AINTt 1 is the lagged asset intensity (total assets / sales), EINTt 1 is the lagged employee intensity (total employees/
sales), and the remaining variables are as defined previously. 
We present the sign predictions and the estimates in Panel C of Table 4.  The coefficients on both AINT  DS  ΔS/P and
EINT  DS  ΔS/P are positive and significant, which indicates that the asymmetry for sales changes increases with both
asset intensity and employee intensity, in agreement with the theory of sticky costs but not with conservatism. 
The tests support our argument that sales changes primarily capture cost stickiness.  However, this does not imply that
conservatism is irrelevant for sales changes.  For example, while the tests for depreciation and interest expense confirm that
sales changes have a large impact on earnings via cost stickiness, sales changes also have a significant (but smaller)
asymmetric effect on special items (untabulated), which could partly reflect conservatism.  Similarly, while variation in the
asymmetry for sales changes in our tests is consistent with cost stickiness and not with conservatism, these tests likely
capture the combined effect of both phenomena; the empirical evidence indicates that cost stickiness is the dominant (but
not necessarily the only) source of this variation. 
4. 2.  Impact of the variation in cost stickiness on inferences about the extent of variation in conservatism. 
In Table 5, we examine whether cost stickiness confounds inferences about the extent of variation in conservatism.  First,
we analyze industry-specific conservatism estimates following Wittenberg-Moerman (2008).  We estimate the Basu model
(1) and our full model (2) for each industry at the two- and three-digit SIC levels.  The average of the industry-specific
conservatism coefficients in the Basu model is biased upwards by 32. 5% for two-digit industries and 36. 2% for three-digit
industries (untabulated), which is consistent with our pooled results.  In both cases, the bias is significant at the 1% level, and
its variation is significantly positively associated with the industry-specific cost stickiness estimates in the full model. 6
Panel A presents the correlations of the industry-level conservatism estimates across the two models.  For large industry
subsamples at the two-digit SIC level, the Pearson correlation between the asymmetric timeliness estimates in the Basu
model and in the full model is 0. 838; for the more detailed three-digit industries, the correlation decreases to just 0. 513. 
Both correlations are significantly less than one at the 1% level in simulation-based tests. 7 Thus, controlling for variation in
cost stickiness significantly alters inferences about the relative magnitudes of conservatism across industries. 
The Spearman correlation between the asymmetric timeliness estimates in the two models is 0. 861 at the two-digit SIC
level and 0. 765 at the three-digit level.  Both measures are significantly less than one at the 1% level.  Thus, recognizing the
cross-sectional variation in cost stickiness has a large impact on the relative rank-ordering of conservatism across industries. 
To further illustrate the scope of this effect, in Panel A of Fig.  1 we plot the relative ranking (on a scale from 0 to 100%) of
each industry's asymmetric timeliness estimate in the Basu model against its ranking in the full model.  The 451 line in the
graph represents the industries that are ranked identically in both models.  Many industries deviate considerably from the
451 line; further, these deviations affect industries at all conservatism levels, indicating that the confounding effect of cost
stickiness impacts inferences for a broad population of industries. 
We also compute the rejection rates that are defined as the proportion of industry subsamples in which the Basu
conservatism estimate differs significantly at the 5% level from the corresponding estimate in the full model.  For the twodigit industries, the rejection rate is 85% (untabulated).  In other words, controlling for cost stickiness has a statistically
significant effect on the conservatism estimates for 85% of the industries in the full sample.  Even at the three-digit SIC level
(for which an average industry subsample comprises just 226 firm-year observations, limiting the power of statistical tests
within individual subsamples), the rejection rate is 48. 7%. 
In Panel B, we examine the confounding effect of the variation in cost stickiness on the firm-year conservatism score (C_Score)
of Khan and Watts (2009).  We estimate the Khan and Watts model and a modified model that incorporates sticky costs. 
where BMt 1, LEVt 1, and SIZEt 1 stand for the book-to-market ratio, leverage, and size (natural logarithm of the market value of
equity), respectively, at the beginning of the fiscal year; and the remaining variables are as defined previously.  In both models,
the firm-year conservatism score (C_Score) is equal to α3þα6BMþα9LEVþα12SIZE (i. e. , the asymmetric timeliness coefficient on
DR RET, including all relevant interaction terms).  The original C_Score of Khan and Watts (2009) is derived from model (6).  Our
modified C_Score is based on model (7), which controls for the variation in cost stickiness and excludes this variation when
computing the firm-year conservatism score. 
The Pearson correlation between the standard C_Score and the modified C_Score is 0. 519, and the Spearman correlation is
0. 714 (Panel B of Table 5).  Thus, the confounding variation in cost stickiness has a large impact on both the relative
magnitudes and the relative ranking of the firm-year conservatism measures.  As Panel B of Fig.  1 illustrates, this
confounding variation affects inferences for a broad population of firms.  In untabulated tests, we also find that the bias
in the standard C_Score is significantly positively associated with the firm-year estimates of cost stickiness, and that the bias
varies significantly with the book-to-market ratio, leverage, and size. 8
As the preceding results show, the bias in the standard conservatism estimates varies substantially across both industries
and firm-years.  Further, the bias is systematically associated with both industry and firm characteristics.  This association
distorts inferences about the observable sources of variation in conservatism. 
5.  Empirical illustration: the confounding effect of cost stickiness on the association between managerial ownership and
conditional conservatism. 
To further illustrate the importance of controlling for cost stickiness, we examine the negative association between
managerial stock ownership and conservatism that is documented by LaFond and Roychowdhury (2008). 9
Chen Name (2012) find that cost stickiness is positively associated with proxies for the agency problem between managers
and shareholders.  Because managerial ownership aligns the managers' incentives with the shareholders’ interests, it might
be associated with lower cost stickiness.  In standard models, this effect can be mistaken for a decrease in conditional
conservatism.  Therefore, the standard models likely overestimate the strength of the negative association between the
managerial ownership and conservatism. 
We combine our Compustat/CRSP sample with Execucomp data, which is available from 1992 on.  Following LaFond and
Roychowdhury (2008), we use two ownership measures.  The first proxy, CEOOWN, captures the ownership by the CEO and
is defined as the number of shares owned by the CEO divided by the total number of shares outstanding.  The second proxy,
TOP5OWN, measures the total stock ownership by the five most highly compensated managers within the firm and is
defined similarly.  We estimate the LaFond and Roychowdhury (2008) model and an extended model with controls for sticky costs,
where OWNt1 is the scaled decile rank of either CEOOWN or TOP5OWN at the beginning of the fiscal year; BMt 1, LEVt 1,
and SIZEt1 are the scaled decile ranks of the book-to-market ratio, leverage, and the market value of equity, respectively, at
the beginning of the fiscal year; LITt 1 is an indicator variable for firms in litigious industries that is equal to one for SIC
codes 2833–2836, 3570–3577, 3600–3674, 5200–5961, and 7370; and the remaining variables are as defined previously.  The
variable definitions and the decile rank transformation follow LaFond and Roychowdhury (2008). 
The estimates are presented in Table 6.  In the model without sticky costs, the association between managerial ownership
and conservatism (the coefficient on OWN  DR  RET) for both CEOOWN and TOP5OWN is negative and significant (columns
1 and 3, respectively), which is consistent with LaFond and Roychowdhury (2008).  However, when we add sticky costs, the
results are markedly different (columns 2 and 4).  As expected, we observe a significant negative interaction between
managerial ownership and cost stickiness (OWN  DS  ΔS/P). 10 More important, the association between managerial
ownership and asymmetric timeliness (OWN  DR  RET) is weakened by 68. 3% (¼[0. 060/0. 189] 1) for CEOOWN and by
58. 7% (¼[0. 069/0. 167] 1) for TOP5OWN, respectively, and is no longer statistically significant.  All of these inferences are
robust to adding firm fixed effects following Ball Name (2013b). 
The coefficients on the control variables have the expected signs.  Conservatism increases with the beginning of the year
book-to-market ratio and leverage and decreases with the firm's size (BM  DR  RET, LEV  DR  RET, and SIZE  DR  RET,
respectively).  When we control for the association between these variables and cost stickiness (columns 2 and 4), the
estimates of the variables’ impact on conservatism change considerably (F¼10. 16 and F¼11. 18, respectively, and significant
at the 1% level).  These results indicate that the variation in cost stickiness has a confounding effect on the estimates of these
standard correlates of conservatism. 
<Conclusion> Conclusion. 
We examine the confounding effect of cost stickiness on conditional conservatism estimates.  Because of sticky costs,
earnings behave asymmetrically for operational reasons.  This operational asymmetry can distort standard asymmetric
timeliness estimates.  We combine the theory of conservatism from financial accounting with cost stickiness from cost
accounting to develop empirical hypotheses.  We propose extensions of the standard conservatism models to control for the
confounding effect of sticky costs. 
Using Compustat/CRSP data from 1987 to 2007, we provide evidence that the conditional conservatism estimates in the
Basu model (and in the modified models of Ball Name, 2013b and Collins Name, 2014) are overstated by more than 25%.  The
bias arises because these models do not control for cost stickiness.  Validation tests confirm that our empirical proxy for
sticky costs, a piecewise-linear effect of changes in sales, is distinct from conditional conservatism and primarily captures
cost stickiness.  The estimates of the extent of variation in conservatism across industries and firms change considerably
when we control for the variation in cost stickiness.  We also provide evidence that cost stickiness distorts inferences about
standard demand drivers of conservatism such as the book-to-market ratio, leverage, and size, and about other correlates of
conservatism such as managerial ownership. 
We identify a specific source of bias in the standard conservatism models and propose a constructive way to correct this
bias.  After controlling for sticky costs, asymmetric timeliness estimates are in agreement with conservatism theory.  Thus,
while standard conservatism estimates are distorted by cost stickiness, our results do not refute the general approach of
using (appropriately corrected) asymmetric timeliness as a measure of conditional conservatism. 
How our sticky cost modification should be used depends on the research context.  If a researcher's objective is to characterize
financial reporting choices related to conditional conservatism, then it is essential to separate asymmetric financial reporting
from asymmetries in the underlying economic activity.  Therefore, the researcher should control for cost stickiness and should
exclude it from the conservatism estimate.  To further sharpen the focus on conservative financial reporting, the researcher can
also remove earnings components that are unlikely to manifest conditional conservatism (and are likely confounded by cost
stickiness), such as operating cash flow (Collins Name, 2014) and depreciation and interest accruals. 
If the objective is to explore conservatism in contracting contexts, such as debt covenants, then the analysis should be tailored
to the specific institutional details and theoretical argument.  For example, Schrand (2014) argues that because debt contracts are
typically written based on earnings, creditors likely factor the total earnings asymmetry into the determination of the debt
covenants.  Therefore, she suggests that the empirical “conservatism” measure in this context might need to reflect the total
earnings asymmetry (and not just accruals asymmetry), whether or not it is truly related to conservatism.  However,
conservatism and cost stickiness affect creditors differently, which likely influences the design of the debt contracts.  Conditional
conservatism accelerates the recognition of the economic losses, which allows creditors to respond sooner to financial distress
(Zhang, 2008; Wittenberg-Moerman, 2008; Nikolaev, 2010). 