 Introduction Information asymmetry between "sophisticated" and "unsophisticated" investors (hereafter referred to simply as "information asymmetry") is a pervasive friction in capital markets (e. g.  Amihud and Mendelson, 1986.  Easley and O'hara, 2004.  Kim and Verrecchia, 1994.  Leuz and Verrecchia, 2000). 1 In this study, we revisit a fundamental question in information economics, which has implications for both accounting and ﬁnance—what effect does the public release of ﬁrmspeciﬁc information into the market environment (hereafter referred to as a “information release”) have on information asymmetry in a short window around the announcement event.  Whereas public information releases of all types generally decrease information asymmetry in the post-announcement period relative to the pre-announcement period, disclosure literature theorizes that the net effect of a given information release on information asymmetry at announcement depends on the relative strengths of two countervailing forces that exist simultaneously in any given information release (e. g. , Kim and Verrecchia, 1994).  First, an information release provides some information that is new to both sophisticated and unsophisticated investors, which will increase information asymmetry at announcement, ceteris paribus (hereafter referred to as the "asymmetry-increasing force").  This immediate increase occurs because of the superior processing abilities possessed by sophisticated investors relative to unsophisticated investors, which allows sophisticated investors to impound the information contained in the announcement more quickly than unsophisticated investors.  Second, at the same time, an information release reveals to unsophisticated investors some information that is new to them but which was already known (privately) by sophisticated investors, which will decrease information asymmetry at announcement by reducing the information gap between the two types of investors, ceteris paribus (hereafter referred to as the "asymmetry-decreasing force").  Hence, in theory, the announcement effect of a public information release on information asymmetry depends on which type of information dominates in that particular release.  Relying on these theoretical arguments as motivation, prior literature ﬁnds that earnings announcements and management forecasts increase information asymmetry at announcement (e. g. , Coller and Yohn, 1997.  Lee et al. , 1993).  These ﬁndings are consistent with our intuition that, as ﬁrm-supplied information releases, earnings announcements and management forecasts are likely to contain more information that is new to all external market participants (relative to information that is new only to unsophisticated investors), resulting in dominance of the asymmetry-increasing force.  Extant empirical literature has to our knowledge provided no evidence of an information release that decreases information asymmetry at announcement.  Thus, there is no empirical evidence that the asymmetry-decreasing force plays a signiﬁcant role in announcement-period information dynamics.  In this study, we utilize the setting of analyst forecasts to re-examine these dynamics.  Compared to earnings announcements and management forecasts, extant literature suggests that analyst forecasts contain a relatively high concentration of information that is new only to unsophisticated investors (i. e, already known by sophisticated investors) versus information that is new to all (e. g. , Irvine et al. , 2007.  Kadan et al. , 2016).  Conceptually, an analyst forecast is an information release by a sophisticated information intermediary who collects public and private information and analyzes it, which parallels the activities of sophisticated investors.  Indeed, ﬁnancial analysts are often thought of as a proxy for sophisticated investors in capital markets.  As an example, one may think about a sophisticated investor as an institution (e. g. , hedge fund) that employs buy-side analysts.  The hedge fund's buy-side analysts have similar skill sets and industry connections, and perform similar analysis, information collection and research as do sell-side analysts, and at certain times collect information directly from sell-side analysts. 2 Therefore, it is likely that the information set possessed by sophisticated investors will have relatively high overlap with the information contained in analyst forecasts.  Based on this logic, we predict and document that analyst earnings forecasts decrease information asymmetry at announcement.  Of course, analyst forecasts may indeed contain some information that is new to both sophisticated and unsophisticated investors, which would produce the asymmetry-increasing force.  However, our study is based on an argument of relativity.  That is, whereas the asymmetry-increasing force is dominant in earnings announcements and management forecasts, we expect the asymmetry-decreasing force to be stronger in analyst forecasts, relatively speaking.  This logic is further supported by extant evidence that suggests that the information set of analysts overlaps with the information set of sophisticated investors, and by evidence of investor trading patterns around analyst forecast announcements.  Although analysts produce several types of information releases (e. g. , earnings forecasts, stock recommendations, target prices), we focus our attention on analyst earnings forecasts, as these releases are the most frequent type of output, and are more directly comparable with earnings announcements and management earnings forecasts.  The three types of events are comparable in that they are frequently recurring releases of information events that are well-studied (i. e. , we understand most of their properties), where the type of information is similar in nature (i. e. , corporate earnings/performance).  Nevertheless, we acknowledge that there are characteristic differences between analyst forecasts and both earnings announcements and management forecasts, apart from the theoretical difference that we rely on to generate our prediction (i. e. , that analyst forecasts contain a higher relative concentration of information that is new only to unsophisticated investors).  For example, analyst forecasts may less likely be anticipated events, relative to earnings announcements and management forecasts.  As another example, extant literature suggests that analyst forecasts may contain differential biases, relative to earnings announcements and management forecasts (e. g. , McNichols and O’Brien, 1997).  In our empirical tests, we address these factors to increase the conﬁdence that our directionally opposite results across information release types are driven by the differential information dynamics that we theorize.  We follow prior literature and focus on equity market bid-ask spread as a measure of information asymmetry, while controlling for its non-information-asymmetry-related components.  We document that, on average, bid-ask spread decreases by approximately one-and-a-half percent during an analyst forecast announcement period relative to the period immediately preceding the forecast.  Because there are, on average, between two and three analyst forecasts per ﬁrmquarter, the overall quarterly magnitude of the real economic effect of analyst forecasts on a given ﬁrm's bid-ask spread during the announcement period is therefore approximately four percent.  We ﬁnd consistent results using quoted depth and price impact as alternative measures of information asymmetry.  Although our paper focuses on announcement-period effects, we further document that all three types of information releases (i. e. , analyst forecasts, management forecasts and earnings announcements) decrease information asymmetry over the ten days subsequent to the announcement.  Accordingly, consistent with our expectations, the directionally opposite information asymmetry effects across analyst forecasts and the other two information releases are temporary, and exist only during the short-window announcement period.  We conduct several additional analyses to provide comfort that our ﬁndings are not attributable to alternative explanations.  First, we provide evidence that our results hold in a subset of forecasts that are isolated in time relative to other analyst forecasts, which suggests that our ﬁndings are not attributable to the alternative explanation that analysts simply issue their forecasts in the wake of other signiﬁcant information events while information asymmetry is already decreasing.  Second, we show that the magnitude of the information asymmetry decrease is a function of forecast information content, which is difﬁcult to reconcile with alternative explanations.  Third, we document that our results hold for both “anticipated” and “unanticipated” analyst forecasts, which suggests that announcement anticipation is not the driver of our ﬁndings.  Finally, our results hold for both good news and bad news forecasts.  This mitigates the concern that our results may be attributable to analysts’ incentives to disclose good news, or to a mechanical relation between the nature of news and bidask spread.  Our evidence contributes to the literature by documenting that different types of information releases lead to predictably opposite effects on information asymmetry at announcement.  Speciﬁcally, our evidence that analyst forecasts cause reductions in announcement-period information asymmetry in equity markets complements the evidence provided in Coller and Yohn (1997) and Lee et al.  (1993) which show that earnings announcements and management forecasts increase announcement-period information asymmetry.  Although these directionally opposite effects are temporary, the understanding of how information is incorporated into prices and short-term trading frictions is central to our understanding of capital markets phenomena, and requires the study of short-window capital market dynamics (e. g. , So and Wang, 2014).  Relatedly, these results also provide the ﬁrst empirical validation (of which we are aware) of the discussion in Kim and Verrecchia (1994) that an information release can indeed decrease information asymmetry at announcement.  In addition, our study speaks to the contribution of analysts to a ﬁrm's information environment.  Speciﬁcally, our results suggest that on average, analyst forecasts lead to an immediate narrowing of the information gap between sophisticated and unsophisticated investors.  Further, our short-window announcement-period event study design reduces concerns relating to reverse causality that have plagued prior literature (e. g. , Healy et al. , 1999.  Lang and Lundholm, 1996), and therefore contributes to the recent debate about the causal effects of sell-side equity research (Kelly and Ljungqvist, 2012.  Li and You, 2015).  2.  Motivation and predictions.  Extant literature characterizes information asymmetry between sophisticated and unsophisticated investors (e. g. , Glosten and Milgrom, 1985.  Kalay, 2015).  Typically, such information asymmetry is thought to come from two potential sources.  First, sophisticated investors have access to (or the ability to develop) private information about the ﬁrm that is not available to unsophisticated investors.  Second, sophisticated investors have superior processing abilities with respect to new information when it is released to all market participants, which allows sophisticated investors to gain a temporary information advantage with respect to new public information.  Consistent with these dual sources of information asymmetry, Kim and Verrecchia (1994) observe that the announcement-period effect of a public information release on information asymmetry can be characterized by two simultaneous forces that have directionally opposite empirical implications. 3 First, an information release that provides new information to both sophisticated and unsophisticated investors increases information asymmetry at announcement, because sophisticated investors can process and incorporate information more quickly than unsophisticated investors.  Second, at the same time, an information release decreases information asymmetry at announcement if it reveals to unsophisticated investors information that they did not previously possess but which the sophisticated investors previously held privately.  The net directional effect on announcement-period information asymmetry therefore depends on how the information contained in the release relates to the information previously held by sophisticated investors.  Extant literature provides evidence consistent with dominance of the asymmetry-increasing force.  Lee et al.  (1993) ﬁnd that bid-ask spreads increase at the time of earnings announcements.  Similarly, Krinsky and Lee (1996) provide evidence that the adverse selection component of the bid-ask spread increases signiﬁcantly around earnings announcements, supporting the notion that earnings announcements indeed increase announcement-period information asymmetry.  Similar to the evidence from earnings announcements, Coller and Yohn (1997) ﬁnd that bid-ask spread increases in the short window around the issuance of a management forecast.  Following the theory in Kim and Verrecchia (1994), these results suggest that, consistent with our intuition, earnings announcements and management forecasts contain a relatively high proportion of information that is new to both sophisticated and unsophisticated investors (although, of course, we expect that they also contain some information that is already known to sophisticated investors but new to unsophisticated investors).  These ﬁndings are further consistent with the notion that order ﬂow immediately after earnings announcements and management forecasts is likely to come from sophisticated investors because of their superior ability to process new information.  Intuitively, extant studies also ﬁnd that this announcement-period increase in information asymmetry is temporary, in that bid-ask spreads one week after the management forecast announcement are smaller than spreads one week prior to the announcement.  Analyst forecasts have distinguishing characteristics that may make the asymmetry-decreasing force more pronounced, relative to earnings announcements and management forecasts.  Speciﬁcally, an analyst forecast is an information release by a sophisticated information intermediary who collects public and private information and analyzes it, which parallels the activities of sophisticated investors.  Indeed, ﬁnancial analysts are often considered to be a proxy for sophisticated investors in capital markets (e. g. , Allee et al. , 2007.  Ramnath et al. , 2008).  It is likely, then, that compared to earnings announcements and management forecasts, a relatively large proportion of the information contained in an analyst forecast is new only to unsophisticated investors, thus decreasing information asymmetry with sophisticated investors.  This intuition yields our prediction that, whereas both earnings announcements and management forecasts increase information asymmetry at announcement, analyst forecasts decrease information asymmetry at announcement.  Intuitively, when a specialist observes order ﬂow immediately after an analyst forecast, she is less concerned than she was immediately before the analyst forecast release that the order ﬂow is coming from a sophisticated investor holding an information advantage, and bid-ask spread should decrease accordingly.  Prior research supports this assertion that analyst forecasts have a high degree of overlap with information held by sophisticated investors.  For example, extant evidence suggests that sophisticated investors place relatively little value on the earnings forecasting role of analysts.  Brown et al.  (2015) survey buy-side analysts, and document that only 11% view analyst forecasts as useful.  Groysberg et al. 