
The literature on oil and commodity markets during the last
decade has shown the importance to identify and understand the
causes and consequences of commodity price shocks.  Some of the
key insights (Kilian, 2008a) are that (i) most commodity prices
are endogenous with respect to the global business cycle, and (ii)
demand shocks cause delayed and sustained price movements while
supply shocks have small and transitory effects.  Whereas disentangling the supply and demand components in a structural model is
now common in the empirical literature to understand commodity price dynamics (especially for crude oil price), some important
concerns are missing regarding the effect of second-order moments
(especially the one related to uncertainty). 
So far, the previous literature is indeed silent on the effects of
macroeconomic uncertainty on the volatility of commodity prices. 
This issue is nevertheless worthy of investigation since the impact
of uncertainty on the global economy has been widely documented. 
For instance, theories of investment under uncertainty explain
why under irreversibility condition or ﬁxed costs, uncertainty over
future returns reduces current investment, hiring, and consumption
through an “option value to wait”. 1 The starting point is that at a
micro level, uncertainty may diminish the willingness of ﬁrms to
commit resources to irreversible investment and the readiness of
consumers to spend or allocate their earning and wages.  It follows
that micro-level uncertainty may be transmitted to the macro level
because uncertainty about the return to investment at a micro level
may create cyclical ﬂuctuations in aggregate investment at a macro
level (see Bernanke, 1983). 2 The crucial point here is that there is
no reason why such mechanism at both micro and macro levels
should not be extended to commodity markets.  Indeed, at a micro
level, commodity ﬁrms in several sectors (especially in oil industry)
are confronted to high costs and should be impacted by uncertainty
about returns to investment.  Similarly, at a macro level, as prices are
related to global supply and demand conditions, uncertainty about
macroeconomic aggregates should also affect commodity prices. 
In the wake of the literature about the origins of commodity price
movements, the aim of this paper is to investigate the impact of
uncertainty on commodity price returns and volatility.  Regarding the
previous literature, the bulk of the studies have looked at the reverse
relationship and highlighted the signiﬁcance of uncertainty in oil
prices in explaining economic ﬂuctuations and in exacerbating asymmetry in the oil price-economic activity nexus. 3 All of them suggest
that oil price uncertainty impacts output, investment, and consumption in the U. S.  and G-7 countries in an asymmetric way.  While
providing interesting results, these studies suffer from an important
drawback since it is well known that the effect of uncertainty in
the oil price—and commodity prices in general—on the macroeconomy should be small, by construction of the underlying economic
models.  As argued by Kilian (2014), energy is indeed not necessarily a key component of the cash ﬂow of investment projects, making
the effect of oil price uncertainty on output not plausible.  It follows
that looking at the reverse transmission from macroeconomic uncertainty to the volatility of commodity prices is more relevant with
regard to the modern view of the endogenous component of prices. 
As stressed above, this question has not been widely addressed in
the literature.  Some limited exceptions can, however, be mentioned. 
First, regarding theoretical papers, (i) Pindyck (1980) discusses the
implications of uncertainty associated with oil demand and reserves
on the oil price behavior.  (ii) Litzenberger and Rabinowitz (1995)
analyze backwardation behavior in oil futures contracts.  and (iii)
Alquist and Kilian (2010) allow for endogenous convenience yield
and endogenous inventories, and stress that it is uncertainty about
the shortfall of supply relative to demand that matters.  Second,
among empirical papers, one may refer to (i) Kilian (2009) and Kilian
and Murphy (2014) who design as a precautionary demand shock
a shock that reﬂects shifts in uncertainty and treat macroeconomic
uncertainty as unobserved.  and (ii) Van Robays (2013) who investigates whether observed macroeconomic uncertainty changes the
responsiveness of the oil price to shocks in oil demand and supply. 
Our paper extends this literature on the relationship between
macroeconomic uncertainty and commodity prices in several ways. 
Speciﬁcally, we address this question by examining the inﬂuence of
macroeconomic uncertainty on a large panel of commodity markets. 
More precisely, we consider four groups of 19 raw materials (energy,
precious metals, agriculture, and industry) to investigate whether
the impact of macroeconomic uncertainty on commodity prices differs depending on the type of market.  In addition, with uncertainty
evolving through time, we account for this feature by assessing its
impact at various horizons—namely short-, medium-, and long-run
horizons—to test whether its effect varies according to its maturity. 
From a theoretical viewpoint, ﬂuctuations in uncertainty may indeed
have different impacts through time on the economy (Bloom, 2014),
with usually two negative channels in the short run (the real option
and risk aversion/risk premium effects4) and two positive channels
in the long run (the growth option and Oi-Hartman-Abel effects5). 6
Turning to methodological issues, our contribution is threefold.  First,
we retain a nonlinear structural threshold vector autoregressive
(TVAR) speciﬁcation that allows us to identify different uncertainty
states, and we investigate whether the impact of uncertainty varies
according to its level and variability.  Second, because macroeconomic uncertainty is unobservable, assessing its effect on commodity
markets obviously requires us to ﬁnd an adequate proxy.  To this
end, we rely on Jurado Name (2015) and consider a robust approach
to measuring macroeconomic uncertainty.  The retained proxy uses
a wide range of monthly macroeconomic and ﬁnancial indicators
and is based on the underlying idea of a link between uncertainty
and predictability.  In this sense, we go further than the previous
literature—particularly compared with Van Robays’s (2013) paper,
which is the closest to ours—which generally relies on dispersion
measures such as conditional volatility (e. g.  conditional variance of
world industrial production growth or of U. S.  GDP growth estimated
from a GARCH(1,1) process) or the VXO index of Bloom (2009).  As
we will see, an important drawback in using GARCH-type models
to proxy uncertainty is that they are inherently backward-looking,
whereas investors’ expectations tend to be forward-looking.  More
generally, and thanks to a detailed robustness analysis, we show that
the choice of the uncertainty measure is crucial to avoid erroneously
attributing to uncertainty ﬂuctuations that are actually predictable. 
Third, for the sake of completeness, we also investigate how macroeconomic uncertainty can generate uncertainty in commodity prices,
looking at second-order moments transfer.  To this end, we construct
a robust proxy of commodity market uncertainty based on macroeconomic uncertainty, and provide a historical decomposition that
allows us to determine the contribution of macroeconomic uncertainty to commodity price uncertainty.  For the speciﬁc case of oil,
we further disentangle supply and demand components of oil price
uncertainty to assess their respective contribution during periods of
uncertainty in the market. 
The central message of the paper is that most of commodity
price returns are affected by macroeconomic uncertainty, the effect
being more important for commodities that are strongly related
to the global business cycle (such as oil, agricultural, and industrial markets).  Then, in addition to traditional supply and demand
shocks, macroeconomic uncertainty constitutes another key channel
through which economic fundamentals may impact commodity
prices.  Maturity seems to matter depending on the commodity type. 
long-run uncertainty having more effect on agricultural and industrial cumulative price dynamics, while other markets being more
sensitive to short-run impacts.  Furthermore, our new commodity
price uncertainty indicator shows for most considered series a transfer from macroeconomic uncertainty to price uncertainty during
the 2007–09 great recession period.  It further reveals that volatility
and uncertainty in prices are disconnected.  It is especially the case
for oil as we ﬁnd that most important shocks that occurred in the
1990s and the beginning of the 2000s that lead to price volatility
do not generate systematic price uncertainty, meaning that most of
these movements were predictable at this period and emphasizing
the relevance of our uncertainty measure in linking uncertainty to
predictability rather than to volatility. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 presents
the uncertainty measure and discusses the corresponding theoretical
framework.  Section 3 addresses methodological issues by presenting
the TVAR speciﬁcation as well as our data.  Section 4 displays the
results regarding the impact of macroeconomic uncertainty on commodity markets.  Section 5 is devoted to the link between macroeconomic uncertainty and the uncertainty of each commodity market,
and disentangles the respective contribution of supply and demand
shocks to oil price uncertainty.  Section 6 provides some robustness
checks regarding the choice of both the macroeconomic uncertainty
measure and our measure of price uncertainty.  Finally, Section 7
concludes the paper. 
2.  Uncertainty measure. 
2. 1.  Measuring macroeconomic uncertainty. 
Measuring uncertainty and examining its impact on market
dynamics is a challenging question for economists because no
objective measure exists.  Although in a general sense uncertainty is deﬁned as the conditional volatility of an unforecastable
disturbance,7 the empirical literature to date has usually relied on
proxies.  The most common measures used are the implied or realized
volatility of stock market returns, the cross-sectional dispersion of
ﬁrm proﬁts, stock returns, or productivity, and the cross-sectional
dispersion of survey-based forecasts. 