
We investigate whether firms' recurring measurements of the fair values of recognized financial instruments (hereafter
“fair value measurements”) exhibit conditional conservatism when the instruments do not trade in liquid markets, thereby
enabling them to exercise discretion over the measurements. 1 Absent such discretion, fair value measurements should be
unbiased, i. e. , symmetrically incorporate unrealized gains and unrealized losses.  Policymakers and academics often make
statements or research design choices that suggest fair value measurements generally are unbiased, ignoring biases introduced by discretion.  For example, SEC (2008) states that the “objective of SFAS No.  157 and of existing fair value standards
is to provide transparent unbiased information about fair value. ” Shaffer (2011) describes fair value measurement as “an
anchor for”…“an asset/liability approach… [in which] valuations must be objective and neutral.  This requirement overrides
the constraint of conservatism, which historically assumed a downward bias for asset valuations. ” (Emphasis added in both
quotes. ) Empirical research examining fair value measurements' predictive power and their value-, returns-, and risk-relevance often sums fair values or fair value gains and losses, which is appropriate only if the summed items are measured
comparably (e. g. , are unbiased or have the same proportional bias). 2
Ostensibly in contrast to the view that fair values are unbiased, some influential observers claim that fair value measurements for instruments that do not trade in liquid markets represent optimistic or noisy “mark-to-myth” (Buffett, 2003)
or “mark-to-make-believe” (Weil, 2007) valuations that are discounted by investors.  Empirical research provides evidence
supporting these claims (Kolev, 2009; Song Name, 2010; Goh Name, 2009).  To mitigate such discounting, we expect firms to
take steps to increase the perceived reliability of these measurements.  The step we examine is suggested by the extensive
literature that documents the contracting and other benefits of conditional conservatism (e. g. , Basu, 1997; Watts, 2003). 
Roychowdhury (2010) emphasizes the critical role of explicit and implicit governance mechanisms, which increase the
strength and persistence of firms' incentives to report conditionally conservatively, to obtain these benefits.  Although firms
make reporting decisions each period, when these incentives are sufficiently strong and persistent, they effectively constitute a “credible commitment” to conditional conservatism (e. g. , Zhang, 2008). 
We identify the extent of firms' discretion over fair value measurements using disclosures provided under Statement of
Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) 157, Fair Value Measurements (FASB, 2006).  This standard requires firms to disclose,
for each major category of asset and liability, the fair value measurement amounts that are based on active market prices for
the items being measured (Level 1 inputs), other observable information (Level 2 inputs), or unobservable information
(Level 3 inputs). 3 These three input levels differ in their observability and individual completeness as measures of fair value,
and thus in the extent of discipline they provide over firms' fair value measurements.  Level 1 inputs are both observable and
individually complete measures of fair value, and thus provide a very high level of discipline over fair value measurements. 
Level 2 inputs are observable but individually incomplete measures of fair value, requiring either adjustments to observed
market prices for the illiquidity or dissimilarity of the items being fair valued or model-based calculations involving other
inputs to determine fair values.  Level 3 inputs are both unobservable and individually incomplete measures of fair value.  We
refer to Level 2 or 3 inputs or fair value measurements based on these inputs as “lower-level”. 
We predict that firms mitigate investors' discounting of lower-level fair value measurements by reporting the measurements conditionally conservatively, i. e. , by recognizing unrealized losses in a timelier fashion than unrealized gains.  We
further predict that firms report more conditionally conservative fair value measurements when the measurements are
evaluated by more knowledgeable investors, verified by more independent third parties, and disclosed more fully in financial reports, governance mechanisms that increase the strength and persistence of firms' incentives to report conditionally conservatively.  Lastly, we predict that firms that narrowly meet or beat earnings targets, an earnings management
incentive that typically conflicts with conditional conservatism, report less conditionally conservative fair value measurements. 
To test these predictions, we measure conditional conservatism using two expanded versions of Basu's (1997) approach. 4
The dependent variables in these expanded models are the portions of comprehensive income (CI) attributable to fair value
measurements of financial instruments (FVCI) and the remainder of CI (CI–FVCI).  We interact the proportions of fair value
measurements at the various levels with the explanatory variables in recent implementations of Basu's (1997) approach. 
Consistent with the discussion above, we expect firms with higher proportions of Level 2 and 3 fair value measurements,
but not those with higher proportions of Level 1 measurements, to exhibit more conditionally conservative FVCI. 
In contrast, we do not expect any association between the fair value measurement level proportions and the conditional
conservatism of CI–FVCI.  Although CI–FVCI includes any conditionally conservative fair-value-based impairment writedowns of tangible and intangible assets (Ramanna and Watts, 2012; Roychowdhury and Martin, 2013), there is no apparent
reason why the frequency or size of these non-recurring write-downs should vary with the proportions of recognized financial instruments measured at the various fair value levels on a recurring basis.  In this regard, the analysis of CI–FVCI
constitutes a placebo test. 
To test our predictions about variation in incentives to report conditional conservative Level 2 and 3 fair value measurements across firms and time, we compare the conditional conservatism of FVCI across four partitions of the full sample. 
First, to capture the ability of firms' investors to evaluate lower-level fair value measurements, we partition based on the
proportion of the firm's equity that is owned by non-transient institutional investors.  Second, to capture the verification of
firms’ lower-level fair value measurements by independent third parties, we partition based on an indicator for audit
quality.  Third, to capture firms' earnings management incentives that conflict with reporting conditionally conservative
lower-level fair value measurements, we partition based on an indicator for the firm narrowly meeting or beating earnings
targets versus clearly missing these targets.  Fourth, to capture investors' improved ability to evaluate firms' Level 2 and
3 measurements under SFAS 157's expanded disclosure requirements, we examine the sample in the first year before the
required adoption of SFAS 157, 2007, versus the first year after that adoption, 2008. 5 In addition, we expect SFAS 157's
expanded disclosures to strengthen the effects of the three firm-level partitioning variables.  To capture these interactive
effects, we compare the conditional conservatism of FVCI for the sets of subsamples formed based on each of these proxies
in 2007 versus 2008. 
Our empirical findings are largely consistent with these predictions.  As expected, in the full sample we find that firms
with higher Level 2 and 3 proportions exhibit more conditionally conservative FVCI but not CI–FVCI.  In the subsamples
formed partitioning on a single variable, we find that these results are more pronounced for firms with higher non-transient
institutional ownership, with higher audit quality, and that do not narrowly meet or beat earnings thresholds, as well as in
2008.  The results are mostly but less uniformly consistent with expectations in the sets of subsamples formed partitioning
on both a firm-level proxy and 2007 versus 2008, possibly due to the smaller sample sizes in these two-way partitions. 
To demonstrate the generalizability of our results to balance sheet items other than financial instruments, we conduct
similar analysis on pro forma earnings measures calculated using Canadian and U. S.  oil and gas firms' disclosed measures of
reserves, which are akin to Level 2 or 3 fair value measurements.  We find that the conditional conservatism of these
earnings measures increases with the inclusion of these reserve measures. 
To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first paper to examine firms' exercise of discretion to report conditionally
conservative recurring Level 2 and 3 fair value measurements for recognized financial instruments.  Our paper contributes to
ongoing debates about the relative merits of unbiased versus conditionally conservative accounting measurement and,
relatedly, of fair value versus (impaired) amortized cost measurement.  Accounting standard setters, securities regulators,
and some investors and academics argue that expanded requirements for firms to measure financial instruments and similar items at (unbiased) fair value would increase the usefulness of financial reports (e. g. , FASB, 2011; SEC, 2008; Barth,
2006, 2014; Barth and Taylor, 2010; Ryan, 2008).  Consistent with these arguments, the FASB recently issued Statement of
Financial Accounting Concepts No.  8, which eliminated conservatism from the conceptual framework. 6 The Board's rationale
is that conservative biases prevent accounting numbers from being representationally faithful, an essential qualitative
characteristic of useful financial information.  Taking an opposing view, other investors and academics argue that eliminating
conditional conservatism without understanding the reasons for its longstanding existence and pervasive use likely would
generate unintended adverse economic consequences (e. g. , Watts, 2003; Nissim and Penman, 2008; Kothari Name, 2010). 
These authors also point out that, despite the FASB's disavowal of conservatism, over its life the Board has repeatedly and
even increasingly issued standards that require conditional conservatism (Watts, 2003).  Our findings indicate that in
practice firms report conditionally conservative Level 2 and 3 fair value measurements, potentially mitigating concerns
about unintended adverse consequences of fair value accounting requirements. 
Our paper complements prior research that finds firms exercise discretion over the timing and amount of (fair-valuebased) impairment write-downs, typically for non-financial assets (Ramanna and Watts, 2012; Roychowdhury and Martin,
2013).  The settings examined in this prior research differ from our setting in the following crucial respect.  Asset impairment
standards require conditional conservatism (i. e. , asset write-ups are prohibited).  In contrast, the FASB's intent in SFAS 157 is
to yield unbiased reporting, consistent with CON 8's revisions to the conceptual framework.  We provide evidence that,
despite this intent, in practice reporting firms exercise discretion to meet the market's demand for conditionally conservative fair value measurements.  We believe this evidence is likely to generalize to other settings involving lower-level fair
value measurements, because it is difficult to legislate against market demand. 
Our paper exhibits three more specific but still notable differences from this prior research.  First, asset impairments are
non-recurring, being recorded only when specified, and sometimes hard to meet, conditions are satisfied.  For example, firms
may have to determine that assets are other-than-temporarily impaired or have less than fully recoverable amortized cost
bases to record impairments.  This feature implies that firms' exercise of discretion over asset impairments is substantially
about whether to record impairments in given periods.  In contrast, we examine firms' exercise of discretion over fair value
measurements every period.  Second, impairments often involve tangible or intangible assets for which fair value measurements rarely are based on Level 1 inputs.  This feature constrains variation in the extent of firms' discretion over impairments, which is generally fairly high.  In contrast, in our setting firms' discretion varies between high for Level 2 and
3 measurements and low for Level 1 measurements.  Third, firms record asset impairments only when news is sufficiently
bad.  Hence, studies documenting an association between impairment and conditional conservatism using Basu's (1997)
approach essentially show differential response to bad news captured in (fair-value-based) impairments versus good news
captured in non-fair-value-based measurements.  In contrast, we document differential response to bad news conveyed by
different levels of fair value measurements. 
Lastly, our results suggest that empirical research examining fair value measurements' predictive power and their value-,
returns-, and risk-relevance would exhibit improved model specification and statistical power by distinguishing these
measurements based on their extent of conditional conservatism. 
2.  SFAS 157 and related prior research
SFAS 157, which became effective in 2008 with early adoption allowed in 2007, defines fair value and provides comprehensive guidance regarding fair value measurement.  As a central part of that guidance, the standard specifies a threelevel hierarchy of fair value measurement inputs.  Level 1 (highest-level) inputs are quoted prices in active markets for
identical items.  SFAS 157 requires reporting firms to measure fair values using Level 1 inputs, generally unadjusted, if they
exist.  Level 2 inputs are most other directly or indirectly observable inputs.  Level 2 inputs include quoted prices for similar
assets in active markets or identical items in less than active markets.  Quoted priced-based Level 2 inputs generally require
adjustment for the dissimilarity or illiquidity of the item being fair valued.  Level 2 inputs also include published interest
rates, yield curves, volatilities, prepayment speeds, default rates, loss severities, credit ratings, et cetera.  These rawer Level
2 inputs generally must be plugged into models to generate fair value estimates, and the accuracy of these estimates
depends critically on the validity of the models used.  Level 3 (lowest-level) inputs are based on the reporting entity's
internal data or are otherwise unobservable, but they should reflect the inputs that market participants would use in pricing
the item.  Generally, these inputs must also be plugged into models.  SFAS 157 “prioritizes” Level 2 over Level 3 inputs but
allows reporting firms to use Level 3 inputs rather than available Level 2 inputs if the former inputs reflect “the assumptions
that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability. ” The level of a fair value measurement is determined by
the lowest significant input into the measurement. 
SFAS 157 requires firms to disclose the amounts of each level of recurring recognized fair value measurements for each
major category of asset or liability (including major types of investment securities).  The standard and its amendments
require expanded disclosures for Level 3 (and to a lesser extent Level 2) measurements due to their greater subjectivity. 
Two sets of prior papers examine SFAS 157-required fair value measurement-level disclosures for financial assets and
liabilities recognized at fair value.  First, Kolev (2009), Song Name (2010), and Goh Name (2009) examine the value-relevance
of these disclosures.  These studies provide evidence that financial instrument fair values based on higher level inputs are
more value-relevant.  Specifically, all three studies find that Level 1 and 2 fair values are more value-relevant than Level 3 fair
values.  Goh Name (2009) find that Level 1 fair values are more value-relevant than Level 2 fair values.  Song Name (2010) find
that Level 3 fair values are more value-relevant for banks with better corporate governance. 
Second, Lev and Zhou (2009) and Riedl and Serafeim (2011) examine the liquidity- and information-risk relevance of
SFAS 157 fair value measurement-level disclosures.  These studies provide evidence that firms with more financial assets
with fair values measured using lower-level inputs exhibit higher risk.  Specifically, Lev and Zhou (2009) argue that the three
fair value measurement levels indicate liquidity risk.  Consistent with this argument, they find that, for events during the
recent financial crisis that impaired market liquidity, the share price reaction is most negative for financial institutions
holding Level 3 financial assets, followed by Level 2 assets and then by Level 1 assets.  The reverse holds for events that
improved market liquidity. 