 1.  Introduction In recent decades, the phenomenon of global warming caused by greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions has become extremely serious, resulting in more frequent and intense extreme weather and natural disasters.  As well known, the carbon emissions from fossil fuel consumption are the nuclear source of the GHG emissions.  Therefore, mitigating carbon emissions has become a global assignment to realize low carbon sustainable development.  In response to climate change, many countries have reached basic agreements on mitigating carbon emissions.  The Paris Climate Agreement and the Kyoto Protocol show the world's determination to cope with climate change issue.  As the largest developing country and the largest carbon emitter, China enacted the energy intensity target policy and a series of binding policies during the 11th “Five-Year Plan” (FYP) (2006–2010) and achieved a success in energy saving and energy intensity reduction (Cao and Karplus, 2014.  Fujii et al. , 2016).  In 2009, China has ofﬁcially raised the carbon intensity constraint target that carbon emissions per GDP (i. e. , carbon intensity) would be reduced by 40%–45% in 2020 than the 2005 level.  Such a target has been considered in the mid-long term plans of the national economic and social development.  In 2011, China's 12th FYP explicitly proposed a sub-target of the CICP that carbon emissions per GDP would drop by 17% in than that in 2010.  This is the ﬁrst time for China to propose carbon intensity constraint target in the FYP.  Subsequently, the Chinese central government allocated the carbon intensity reduction task to each provincial region, and stipulated that such a task must be incorporated into the local economic and social development plans.  Thus, the carbon intensity reduction target must be reﬂected in the performance assessment of the local government.  To fulﬁl such a target, the Chinese central government and local governments have formulated a series of relevant supporting policies and measures, and have carried out a “lasting battle” strategy for energy saving and carbon reduction.  They have released a serious of documents to declare that the government should endeavor to expedite industrial structure adjustment, support energy conservation and the development of low carbon energy, increase carbon sinks, control non-energyrelated GHG emissions, and facilitate the substitution of high carbon productions.  China's industrial sector is not only a crucial engine of economic growth, but also responsible for the largest share of the country's energy consumption and carbon emissions.  The decline of carbon intensity in the industrial sector plays a decisive role in achieving the overall carbon intensity reduction target.  As a vital part of carbon reduction polices, a number of speciﬁc measures focused on carbon reduction in the industrial sector, mainly including 6 aspects as follows.  (1) In 2009, the Chinese government ofﬁcially introduced the Standard for Sector-integrate Eco-industrial Parks, standardizing the construction, management, and assessment of sector-integrate eco-industrial parks.  In the same year, for the enterprises in the eco-industrial parks, the speciﬁc requirements for promoting the development of low carbon economy were put forward.  (2) In 2010, the Chinese government published a list of enterprises in 18 industrial sub-sectors (especially energy-intensive industries), targeted at eliminating the backward production capacity.  (3) China conducted a national resource tax reform for oil and gas in 2011, shifting from a volume-based tax to an ad valorem tax with a tax rate of 5%–10% (Shi et al. , 2015).  The resource tax reform on coal, rare earths, tungsten, and molybdenum followed the reform of the oil and gas tax.  Compared with the volume-based resource tax system, the tax rate in proportion to the market price will increase the costs of resource use in the overheated market (Liu et al. , 2017), which is beneﬁcial for energy conservation and carbon reduction.  (4) The 12th FiveYear Plan for Energy Saving and Emission Reduction stipulated the direction of restructuring the key industries, and promoted mergers and acquisitions in eight major industries, such as automobiles, steel, and cement.  (5) The 12th Five-Year Plan for Energy Saving and Emission Reduction speciﬁed the targets and assignment of energy conservation for the energy-intensive industrial sectors.  (6) In 2011, the Chinese government issued a catalogue of industrial restructuring guidance to limit the expansion of some industries, such as coal, petrochemical and chemical industries.  The speciﬁc measures in the industrial sector contribute to industrial carbon reduction.  However, under the ongoing tightening pressure of carbon reduction, some provinces begin to implement some administrative mandatory measures like power rationing,1 attempting to achieve the energy-saving and emission-reduction targets in a shortterm by the way of limiting enterprises' production.  The central government also continues to give pressure to the key industries and enterprises, in order to realize the emission-reduction targets.  Obviously, whether or not the CICP can achieve the “double dividend” of carbon reduction and industrial growth is signiﬁcant for achieving China's low carbon sustainable development, because industrial sector is the biggest emitter, as well as the important engine of economic growth.  Moreover, in 2015, China submitted its intended nationally determined contribution (INDC) and released its pledge in GHG reduction.  This brings a new challenge for China to integrate climate change mitigation into other national priorities.  The investigation on the effects of the CICP can provide necessary decision-making reference for coordinating carbon reduction with economic development.  However, the implementation effect of China's CICP on such a “double dividend” goal is paid little attention to in previous studies.  The appropriate measure of sustainable growth is necessary for assessing whether or not the CICP is effective to coordinate industrial growth and carbon reduction.  The green production performancethe environmentally sensitive productivity growth encompassing undesirable output(s), is usually employed by the existing studies to reﬂect green accounting or sustainable development (Kumar, 2006.  Oh, 2010.  Chen and Golley, 2014).  Since improving the GPP means a better coordination state of industrial growth and carbon reduction, the investigation of the effects of the CICP on the industrial GPP can provide the competent evidence in whether such a policy is actually beneﬁcial to the sustainable development of a certain country.  Actually, although the gross industrial carbon emissions in China have been increasing, the industrial carbon intensity has been decreasing year by year during 2001–2013 (see Fig.  1).  In terms of a single indicator of industrial carbon intensity, China's CICP in recent years seemed to be successful, and the environmental policy aiming at the industrial sector is not as inefﬁcient as some studies mentioned (e. g.  Zheng et al. , 2015).  However, the decrease of carbon intensity is only a direct result of the implementation of the CICP, and the impact of such a policy on the industrial GPP is still covered.  Theoretically, from the perspective of microeconomics, the CICP affects the industrial GPP in two aspects.  On the one hand, as an environmental regulation policy, a reasonable CICP can promote energy saving and low carbon production by improving the allocation of input factors (Li et al. , 2013).  On the other hand, the carbon constraint target force the enterprises to increase innovation investment, ameliorate technological progress, and improve energy efﬁciency (Xuan and Zhou, 2011), in order to facilitate carbon reduction and productivity growth.  In this case, the industrial GPP can be enhanced even when industrial output scale remains unchanged.  Despite some theoretical arguments, the impact of China's CICP on the industrial GPP has not yet been empirically explored.  In an attempt to ﬁll such a gap, this paper employs the quasi difference-in-differences (quasi-DID) method to investigate the effect of the CICP on China's industrial GPP for the ﬁrst time.  The industrial GPP is estimated based on the framework of nonparametric data envelope analysis (DEA), which is widely used in the existing literature to assess the environmentally sensitive productivity growth.  The directional distance function (DDF) is an alternative approach to measuring the productivity growth considering the undesirable output.  The original DDF is regarded as an oriented and radial measure with some limitations (Fukuyama and Weber, 2009.  Zhang and Choi, 2014), and the infeasible problem of linear programming could distort the productivity growth level.  For the purpose of avoiding the biases caused by the radial and oriented DDF and the infeasible problem, this paper combines the global benchmark technology (Oh, 2010) and the non-radial and nonoriented DDF (NNDDF) (Zhou et al. , 2012) to measure the industrial GPP of China.  The remainder of this paper is organized as follows (see Fig.  2).  Section 2 provides an overview of the related literature.  Section 3 introduces the used data and methodology, including the estimation models of industrial GPP and the quasi-DID model for investigating the effect of the CICP on industrial GPP.  In Section 4, we report and discuss the estimation results of the industrial GPP and quasi-DID model.  Section 5 draws main conclusions and provides some policy implications.  2.  Literature review.  2. 1.  Measurement of the GPP.  Among the methodologies of measuring the GPP, i. e. , the environmentally sensitive productivity growth, the Malmquist-Luenberger productivity index (ML index), which is proposed by Chung et al.  (1997) and integrates the concepts of the Malmquist productivity index and DDF, has been widely applied in the previous studies (Färe et al. , 2001.  Yoruk and Zaim, 2005.  Kumar, 2006.  Zhou et al. , 2010.  Arabi et al. , 2014).  However, the ML index method encounters three shortcomings.  Firstly, since the ML index employs the contemporaneous benchmark technology, and thus faces a potential infeasible problem when calculating intertemporal DDF (Oh, 2010).  Secondly, the conventional DDF, the basis of the ML index, is a radial and oriented measure method that may overestimate the efﬁciency when there is some slacks (Fukuyama and Weber, 2009).  Meanwhile, if researcher focuses on the total factor productivity index, non-oriented DDF rather than outputoriented model is more appropriate (Zhang and Choi, 2014).  Thirdly, the ML index is not circular as it employs geometric mean to avoid choosing an arbitrary benchmark (Oh, 2010).  In view of such defects, some studies develop several novel methods.  Based on the global benchmark technology, the GML (global Malmquist-Luenberger) index is proposed by Oh (2010) in order to completely overcome the potential infeasible problem.  Since the intertemporal DDF is formulated based on a single technology frontier, i. e. , the global benchmark technology, there is no need to employ geometric mean to avoid choosing an arbitrary benchmark when calculating the total factor productivity growth.  This makes the GML index circular.  Because of such an advantage, the GML index method is applied by a lot of studies (e. g. , Azad and Ancev, 2014.  Fan et al. , 2015.  Zhang and Wang, 2015).  However, the GML index has the shortcomings of radial and oriented measure methods.  For remedying the bias of the radial and oriented measure methods, Fukuyama and Weber (2009) and Färe and Grosskopf (2010a, 2010b) developed the NNDDF, which was later extended by Chang and Hu (2010), Barros et al.  (2012), Zhou et al.  (2012), Zhang et al.  (2013), and Arabi et al.  (2014) to establish the efﬁciency measure model incorporating undesirable outputs.  Among such studies, Zhou et al.  (2012) made an important contribution by providing a formal deﬁnition and the mathematical properties of the NNDDF considering undesirable outputs.  To avoid the bias caused by the infeasible problem and taking into account the disadvantages and advantages of various efﬁciency measure methods based on the DEA framework, we incorporate the global benchmark technology (Oh, 2010) and the NNDDF (Zhou et al. , 2012) into a uniform measure model and adopt the Luenberger indicator which is more consistent with the characteristics of the NNDDF to evaluate the GPP of China's industrial sub-sectors.  2. 2.  DID method in the environmental policy assessment.  With regard to the method of assessing the impact of a certain policy, the difference-in-differences (DID) method is widely used in the existing literature (Gruber and Poterba, 1994.  Feldstein, 1995.  Eissa, 1995.  Cai et al. , 2016).  The DID usually divides the samples into the treatment group and the control group, and evaluates the effect of policy implementation by comparing the differences between the treatment group and the control group before and after the policy intervention.  Because most policy interventions regarded as natural experiments are exogenously given, the DID method can avoid an endogenous problem.  Some studies have applied the DID to explore the effects of various environmental policies.  Bao et al.  (2013) examined the actual effect of local environmental legislation by using the DID method and found that the environmental protection legislation per se in China could not signiﬁcantly inhibit the local pollutant emissions, and only in the provinces with strict law enforcement and serious pollution, the environmental protection legislation could play a signiﬁcant environmental improvement effect.  Li and Chen (2013) explored the effect of the revision of the Air Pollution Prevention Law in China and argued that such a policy intervention signiﬁcantly improved the total factor productivity of the sectors with intensive air pollution.  They asserted that the implementation of appropriate environmental regulation policy in China may achieve a “win-win” outcome of improving environmental quality and economic productivity.  Recently, Cai et al.  (2016) investigated regional unanticipated responses to the pollution reduction mandates imposed by China's central government in 2001 and concluded that the enforcement of pollution discharge fee collection is more lenient in most downstream counties within a province, and that private enterprises make more contributes to such a downstream effect than state-owned and foreign ones.  As mentioned above, although the CICP proposed in 2009 is a signiﬁcant measure of controlling carbon emissions in China, the existing related studies pay little attention to the effect of such a carbon regulation policy on the GPP.  Since the DID method is able to recognize the net impact of a policy intervention, it is conducted in this paper to examine the actual effect of the carbon intensity constraint policy.  However, the DID method needs to strictly set treatment group and the control group, and it is very difﬁcult for our research object to distinguish such groups because all the industrial subsectors are affected by such a carbon regulation policy.  Hence, we adopt a quasi-DID method to conduct our research.  To our knowledge, the quasi-DID method is applied by Nunn and Qian (2011) for the ﬁrst time, who estimated the contributions of potato production to population and urbanization.  The advantage of such a method is that the method does not need to strictly divide the treatment group and the control group and thus can investigate the impact of an exogenous policy.  The detailed description of such a method will be presented in Section 3. 2 of this paper.  <Middle> Methodology and data.  3. 1.  DEA model for estimating industrial GPP.  Suppose that there are K industrial sub-sectors and that each subsector generates M desirable outputs, y=(y1,…yM)∈ℜM +, and I undesirable outputs, b=(b1,…,bI)∈ℜI +, by using N inputs, x=(x1,…,xN)∈ℜNThe contemporaneous environmental production possibility set (PPS) or the contemporaneous environmental technology set of sub-sector k (k = 1, …, K) in period t (t = 1, …, T) can be expressed as this where zk t are intensity variables, which are weights assigned to subsectors in constructing the PPS.  The non-negativity constraints on zk allow the model to satisfy constant returns to scale (CRS).  The above PPS satisﬁes the basic axioms of the PPS containing undesirable outputs. 2 In the case of the variant returns to scale (VRS) environmental PPS, Kuosmanen (2005) introduced an abatement factor uk to hold the weak disposability property of the environmental PPS. 3 Following Kuosmanen (2005), the linear version of the contemporaneous environmental PPS exhibiting the VRS can be characterized as.  b)T denotes a normalized weight vector related to where w=(wn vector. β=(βnx,βmy,βib)T≥0 is a vector of scaling factors indicating indithe numbers of inputs and outputs.  g=(−gx,gy,−gb) is an directional vidual inefﬁciency measures for inputs and outputs.  the symbol diag means diagonal matrices.  The NNDDF seeks to measure maximum possible expansion in desirable outputs and reductions in inputs and unde!tðxt.  yt.  bt.  gtÞ based on the contemporary sirable outputs.  The NNDDF D PPS exhibiting the CRS can be gained through the following DEA-typeSimilarly, the NNDDF D vðxt.  yt.  bt.  gtÞ can be evaluated relative to t (xt).  To overcome the infeasible problem when calculating theintertemporal NNDDF, we incorporate the global benchmark technology (Oh, 2010) and the NNDDF (Zhou et al. , 2012) into the DEA model.  We deﬁne the NNDDF based on the global benchmark technology as.  where PG(x)=convex(P1∪P2∪…∪PT) is the global PPS, a convex envelope of all the contemporaneous PPSs.  Consisting of all the DMUs' inputs and outputs, the global PPS is unique under a certain assumption of returns to scale.  Therefore, the reference technology used to measure the efﬁciency of each sub-sector is uniform.  The NNDDF based on thec ðxt.  yt.  bt.  gtÞ, global PPS under the CRS assumption in period t, i. e. , D can be obtained by solving the following model.  Similarly, the NNDDF based on the global PPS under the VRS assumption can be solved through the following model.  Since this study focuses on the effect of the CICP on the GPP, we choose gross industrial output (Y) and carbon emissions (C) as desirable output and undesirable output, respectively, and the inputs include capital (K), labor force (L), and energy consumption (E).  Referring to Zhou et al.  (2012) and Zhang et al.  (2013), we set the directional vector as g = (−K, −L, −E, Y, −C) and the corresponding weight vector as (1/3, 1/3, 1/9, 1/9, 1/9, 1/9).  Thus, following the form of the Luenberger indicator, we can formulate the GPP between periods t and The variable GPP N 0 (GPP b 0) represents a melioration (regression) in the green total factor productivity, i. e. , the environmentally sensitive productivity.  Referring to Simar and Wilson (1998), Gilbert and Wilson (1998), and Grosskopf (2003), the GPP can be decomposed into pure efﬁciency change (PEC), scale efﬁciency change (SEC), pure technical change (PTC), and scale technical change (STC) as.  The variable PEC measures the catching-up effect of a sub-sector toward the contemporaneous technology frontier, and PEC N 0 (PEC b 0) indicates that the sub-sector is approaching (lagging behind) the contemporaneous frontier over two periods.  The variable SEC is the change of the distance between the boundaries of Pv(x) and Pc(x) relative to a sub-sector's position at t and t + 1, revealing the change in the scale efﬁciency of the sub-sector.  The variable SEC N 0 (SEC b 0) indicates that an increase (decrease) in the scale efﬁciency.  The variable PTC is a measure of changes in the technology gap between the contemporaneous technology frontier and the global technology frontier between periods t and t + 1, and TC N 0 (TC b 0) corresponds to the technical progress (technical regression).  The variable STC describes the changes in the shape of the technology between periods t and t + 1 in the hyperplane, reﬂecting the changes in returns to scale of the technology, and STC N 0 (STC b 0) indicates that the technology is moving toward (deviating from) the CRS.  Beneﬁting from the additive form of the Luenberger indicator and the NNDDF, it is possible to recognize the key drivers of improving the GPP from the perspectives of input and output factors.  Following the decomposition method proposed by Fujii et al.  (2014, 2015), we can decompose the GPP as follows.  where GPPx, GPPy, and GPPb measure the contribution effects of inputs, industrial output, and carbon emissions on the GPP, respectively.  GPPx N 0, GPPy N 0, and GPPb N 0 mean that the change of inputs, industrial output, and carbon emissions are beneﬁcial for optimizing the GPP, i. e. , the green total factor productivity growth, representing the inputsaving effect, output-growth effect, and carbon-reduction effect, respectively.  The increase in GPPs (s = x, y, b) may result from.  (i) input use (or output production) ameliorates the GPP.  (ii) the inefﬁciency of s becomes smaller relative to the others (Fujii et al. , 2014, 2015).  Since the inputs in this paper contain capital stock, labor force, and energy consumption, the inﬂuence of inputs can be further decomposed as follows.  E denote the inﬂuences of capital stock, where GPPx labor force, and energy consumption on the GPPx, respectively.  SimilarE N0 indicate that the changes of capital ly, GPPx stock, labor force, and energy consumption have the capital-saving effect, labor-saving effect, and energy-saving effect on the GPPx, respectively.  The three kinds of inputs affect the GPP by affecting the GPPx.  3. 2.  Quasi-DID model for investigating the impact of the CICP.  Following Nunn and Qian (2011), we use the quasi-DID method to investigate the impact of the CICP on the GPP.  The difference between this method and standard DID model is that we use a continuous treatment (i. e. , carbon intensity) to capture the relative impact of the CICP. 6 We establish the corresponding econometric model as follows.  where i and t denote the industrial sub-sector and the time in years, respectively.  the dependent variable GPP is the estimated GPP above.  CI is carbon intensity.  and It is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 in the period after 2008 (i. e. , 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013) to reﬂect the implementation of the CICP.  trend represents exogenous technological change (Chen and Golley, 2014) and is measured by natural logarithm of 1–13 (from 2001 to 2013).  CV denotes other control variables closely affecting the GPP.  α0–α3 are parameters to be estimated, and α1 captures the relative impact of the CICP on the industrial GPP of the treatment group compared with the control group.  εit is the error term.  Eq.  (11) also includes sector and year ﬁxed effects, labeled as fi and ft, respectively.  Based on the existing literature and China's actual situation, we choose the following factors as control variables (CV).  (1) R&D investment (rd).  The previous studies found that R&D investment could improve energy efﬁciency (Conrad, 2000), which may affect the GPP by energy saving and carbon emission reduction.  Referring to Fan et al.  (2015), rd is measured by the share of the internal expenditure of science and technology development projects in gross industrial output value.  (2) Learning by exporting (exp).  The existing literature argued that industrial enterprises could obtain advanced production technology and management experience through export trade to improve their production efﬁciency (Clerides et al. , 1998).  Therefore, the export activities should be an important factor affecting the GPP.  We use the share of industry export delivery value in sales value to measure it.  (3) Energy consumption structure (ecs).  Energy consumption structure can affect carbon emissions since different fossil fuels have different carbon emission coefﬁcients.  Hence, the adjustment of energy consumption structure plays a signiﬁcant role in the change of environmentally sensitive productivity (Shao et al. , 2011.  Fan et al. , 2015).  Considering China's coaldominated energy consumption structure and the highemitting and high-polluting characteristics of coal, we use the share of coal-type consumption in the total energy consumption to measure ecs.  (4) Technology spillover of foreign investment (fdi).  When foreign enterprises enter into the host country, they could generate the technology spillover effect to promote the production efﬁciency of domestic enterprises (Javorcik, 2004.  Jiang et al. 