
Stock liquidity is central to the efficient functioning of trade in the financial markets and is determined in part by
information asymmetry among traders.  Since voluntary disclosure can affect information asymmetry among traders, theoretical research has shown that voluntary disclosure can affect stock liquidity (e. g. , Bushman and Indjejikian, 1995). 
However, empirical tests of this mechanism must recognize that a manager's provision of disclosure is a product of many
forces, all of which must be identified. 1 It has proved difficult to construct an empirical model of disclosure that incorporates
all these forces (e. g. , Joos, 2000; Leuz and Verrecchia, 2000).  Index funds, by contrast, trade primarily for nonstrategic
reasons, and theory suggests that such nonstrategic traders unambiguously prefer higher disclosure relative to privately
informed managers and strategic investors.  This implies that I can use index funds' disclosure preferences to construct an
empirical model of voluntary disclosure that abstracts away from managers' strategic disclosure motives.  Accordingly, I use
an index-fund setting to construct a recursive model of voluntary disclosure, index fund ownership, and stock liquidity, and
demonstrate that voluntary disclosure increases stock liquidity. 
The effect of index fund ownership on liquidity can arise from two mechanisms: (1) index funds' unambiguous preference for additional disclosure, and (2) index fund ownership itself (e. g. , increased nonstrategic trading related to portfolio
rebalancing).  Separating these two mechanisms is crucial for understanding the determinants of liquidity, but it cannot be
done with simple OLS or regression discontinuity (RD) techniques.  For example, even if index funds elicit more disclosure
from managers, instrumenting disclosure with index fund ownership does not solve the identification problem: Any effect
on liquidity related to common variation in disclosure and index fund ownership could be due to either increased disclosure
or index fund ownership itself (the same is true for RD designs).  An appropriate empirical solution for separating these
effects is to construct structural equations for disclosure and index fund ownership, and then to use recursive estimation to
obtain each mechanism's liquidity effect (Greene, 2002, p.  397). 2
Constructing the recursive model requires that index fund ownership be properly identified.  To achieve this goal, I use an
index-fund-inclusion setting.  An important feature of this setting is that changes in the index's constituent firms are made
by the index's governing body (such as S&P), and are therefore exogenous to index funds themselves.  When a firm is added,
index funds must take an ownership position in that firm, and this exogenous ownership position confers control rights. 
When index funds acquire control rights through ownership, any link between an increase in voluntary disclosure due to
this control and stock liquidity can be construed as causal.  By contrast, it is harder to make such claims for strategic investors
(including managers) without explicitly modeling their endogenous preferences for disclosure, ownership, and liquidity.  The
same goes for atomistic or retail traders, who can trade at will according to their disclosure preferences and are too small to
influence managers' disclosure choices. 
I use inclusion in the S&P 500 index as the key economic phenomenon to test whether disclosure affects stock liquidity.  At
the time of a firm's index inclusion, the ownership level assumed by index funds is determined by their assets under management (AUM).  Since index fund AUM varies across time and index inclusions occur throughout time, the index-fund setting
generates substantial variation in index fund ownership.  This setting has other benefits as well.  Since firm managers can
neither influence index fund AUM nor control the timing of index inclusions, the index fund ownership stake is exogenous to
the firm (see Section 3. 1).  From the index fund perspective, prior research suggests that variation in index fund ownership is
not due to strategic stock selection (see Section 2).  In addition, S&P makes public their index-inclusion criteria, which I use to
match each inclusion firm to a control firm (using propensity scores).  Exploiting each inclusion firm's behavior pre and post
inclusion relative to the matched control firm results in a difference-in-differences (D-in-D) regression setting that eliminates
any time-varying effects common to both firms and differences away any firm-fixed effects.  Importantly, the D-in-D design also
controls for any “index-inclusion” effect common to all inclusion firms (for disclosure and liquidity). 
I use a sample of 368 firms added to the S&P 500 index over the period of 1996–2010 (and 368 control firms).  In my
sample, 78% of index inclusions occur due to a merger or an acquisition involving an existing index firm, which frees up a
spot in the index.  Upon index inclusion, the ensuing index fund ownership level in my sample firms is economically
meaningful, ranging from 3. 9% to 10. 2% of a firm's common shares outstanding. 
In the first analysis, I regress several disclosure proxies on the change in index fund ownership resulting from index
inclusion.  I find that for a one standard deviation increase in index fund ownership, management guidance disclosures
increase by approximately 19. 35%, 8-K filings increase by 18. 99%, supplementary financial statement filings increase by
9. 49%, and press releases increase by 7. 51% (relative to control firms).  I also find that less entrenched managers provide more
disclosure for the same amount of increase in index fund shareholdings.  These results suggest that index funds are more
effective at eliciting disclosure when they have a larger stake in a firm.  Inclusion firms also experience an improvement in
their information environment, as measured by a reduction in analyst forecast errors. 3
In the second analysis, I demonstrate that stock liquidity, as proxied for by bid-ask spreads and the Amihud (2002)
illiquidity measure, increases for inclusion firms relative to control firms in a D-in-D manner when the inclusion firm gets a
larger ownership stake from index funds.  However, recall that this increase in liquidity may be unrelated to the improved
disclosure environment—it could occur simply because of index fund ownership by itself.  I use a recursive structural
equation model to separate the disclosure effect and the index fund ownership effect on liquidity, and find that the disclosure effect is significant (see Section 4. 5).  This result implies that disclosure increases liquidity. 
This study makes several contributions to the literature.  First, other studies relating disclosure to stock liquidity acknowledge identification challenges in modeling managers' strategic disclosure choices.  For example, Leuz and Verrecchia
(2000) rely on the voluntary adoption of IFRS by German firms to represent a commitment to increased disclosure and find
that voluntary adopters experience greater liquidity.  Shroff Name (2013) find that after the passage of the 2005 Securities
Offering Reform, firms increased disclosure before seasoned equity offerings, which led to higher liquidity for these firms. 
Balakrishnan Name (2014) find that increases in disclosure associated with reductions to analyst coverage lead to increased
liquidity, but they do not explicitly model the increase in disclosure.  My study corroborates the prediction that disclosure
increases liquidity, yet it abstracts away from any particular model of managers' strategic disclosure motives, which considerably simplifies the analysis.  I also highlight an important mechanism that gives rise to disclosure. 
Second, through the use of index funds, I bypass an endogeneity concern that is specific to institutional holdings.  Prior
studies such as Lang and Lundholm (1996) and Bushee and Noe (2000) show that disclosure is associated with institutional
investor shareholdings.  These studies use these associations to argue that institutional investors are attracted to firms with
certain disclosure practices, and that managers adopt disclosure practices to attract such investors.  However, these studies
acknowledge that institutional investors may strategically invest and divest based on their unobservable investing strategy,
which may ultimately affect their demand for disclosure.  Index funds, by contrast, have no such leeway in choosing their
portfolio firms.  Instead, the funds appear to influence disclosure through ownership, an important consideration for future
work on institutions and disclosure. 
Third, my study differs in two important ways from that of Boone and White (2015), who argue (along lines similar to
mine) that index funds prefer high disclosure because it decreases trading costs.  Boone and White (2015, Tables 3 and 5)
show that firms moving from the Russell 1000 to the Russell 2000 index exhibit increased disclosure, increased liquidity,
and higher institutional ownership.  They acknowledge that the liquidity effect could occur “via direct and indirect channels,” with the former related to index fund ownership and the latter related to disclosure.  But, unlike this study, theirs does
not explicitly test for the two mechanisms and thus cannot address the economic question of whether disclosure and index
fund ownership separately affect liquidity.  Another difference is that Boone and White (2015) measure institutional ownership at the “quasi-indexer” level.  Bushee and Noe (2000) find that this classification comprises not just index funds but
also non-index funds that have strategic disclosure preferences.  By measuring index fund ownership directly from regulatory filings, I eliminate the possibility that institutions' strategic disclosure preferences drive my results. 4
Lastly, my focus on index funds complements the work of Brav Name (2008), who show that other large owners, such as
hedge funds, exercise their ownership power by intervening in managers' business decisions.  Such intervention, which
requires the investor to acquire new management skills, is not feasible on a large scale for index funds, which aim to hold a
large basket of stocks in many industries at low cost.  Nonetheless, as this study shows, index funds do exploit their ownership power for other purposes. 
In Section 2, I motivate the hypotheses.  Sections 3 and 4 describe the data and empirical results, and Section 5 concludes. 
2.  Hypothesis development. 
The index-fund industry is dominated by a few large funds with economies of scale in a highly competitive market (as of
2016, S&P's website notes that index fund holdings account for $2. 2 trillion of the $17. 7 trillion S&P 500 market capitalization, or 12. 4%).  Index funds maintain their competitive position by offering a significant cost advantage to owning a large
index of stocks, and by keeping expense ratios and liquidity-related trading costs low (relative to managed funds).  According
to my conversations with BlackRock independent trustees, the overwhelming majority of S&P 500 index-fund trade occurs
in the open secondary markets, and a significant volume of such trade arises on a daily basis (the same is true for Fidelity
and Vanguard).  Thus, the liquidity of the index fund and all of its associated vehicles depends on the liquidity of the
underlying stocks.  To reduce their liquidity-related costs, index funds can improve liquidity in the underlying stocks by
eliciting more disclosure from these firms.  High liquidity in these stocks lowers trading costs for clients, reduces absolute
tracking error, preserves AUM, and increases the liquidity of derivative securities such as ETFs (see Appendix A).  More
liquidity also ensures that ETF prices do not deviate from the underlying index or become highly exposed to the risk of
adverse price movements in the underlying stocks (Madhavan, 2015). 5
Given prior evidence that neither retail nor mutual fund flows are strategic (e. g. , Carhart, 1997; Fama and French, 2010;
Frazzini and Lamont, 2008), I assume that index fund clients purchase and redeem index fund shares for nonstrategic (e. g. ,
personal consumption) reasons.  That is, if a client has private information about a given firm, he may wish to trade in that
firm directly, not through the index.  Consequently, index funds have an unambiguous preference for high disclosure, and I
can use this characteristic to directly model their disclosure preferences. 6
In theory, when index funds join a firm due to its S&P 500 index inclusion, disclosure moves to a new second-best level
equilibrium that incorporates index funds' disclosure preferences.  In practice, reaching this new equilibrium requires that
managers learn index funds' disclosure preferences.  Accordingly, large index funds such as BlackRock, Fidelity, and Vanguard retain teams of analysts and investor relations personnel who can check disclosure levels across an industry by
examining media and financial reports, management disclosures and guidance activities, and earnings conference calls. 
These funds can then communicate their preference for more disclosure directly to companies through investor conferences,
private meetings, and phone conversations.  Index funds also clearly state their preference for more disclosure on their
websites and governance materials (see Appendix B), and managers can observe and learn from the reporting practices of
their new index peers (e. g. , Dye and Sridhar, 1995). 
Of course, managers may resist index funds' preference for greater disclosure.  To overcome this obstacle, index funds
must rely on both hard and soft power.  Hard power arises from index funds' ownership stakes, which confer control rights
such as proxy votes.  These funds appear willing to use such leverage: Matvos and Ostrovsky (2010, Table 1) show that
Vanguard's S&P 500 index fund withheld votes for management-proposed directors and proposals 17. 2% of the time from
July 2003 to June 2004 (similar magnitudes were found for other index funds).  Given that many votes are decided by less
than 5%, managers have a significant incentive to preserve the support of index funds (Appel Name, 2016; Gillian and Starks,
2000).  Disclosing according to the preferences of these funds is one way to maintain their support. 7
Soft power over management, by contrast, comes from a variety of sources, not least of which are informal negotiation
settings.  In 2013, Glenn Booraem, the Controller of Vanguard's S&P 500 index fund, noted that “while our approach of quiet
diplomacy has led some to conclude that our voice is silent on many debates, we believe that our effectiveness is maximized
by taking our message directly to those companies where we believe changes are needed. ” Booraem noted further that
Vanguard has “found through hundreds of direct discussions every year that we are frequently able to accomplish as much
or more through dialogue as we are through voting.  Importantly, through engagement, we are able to put issues on the table
for discussion that aren't on the proxy ballot” (Booraem, 2013).  Likewise, in 2015, Larry Fink, the CEO of BlackRock, called for
“consistent and sustained” engagement by his firm (Fink, 2015).  These forms of private communication appear important
not only to Vanguard and BlackRock: Matvos and Ostrovsky (2010) find that in 2003, after the SEC passed a new rule
requiring disclosure of proxy votes, many index fund sponsors wrote comment letters to the SEC in which they expressed
concern about being denied private communication with companies whose management the funds had voted against. 
Soft power also comes from managers' and directors' concerns about their reputation and credibility.  Index fund
sponsors such as BlackRock and Vanguard, by virtue of their size, have considerable soft influence in the director market due
to personal relationships and other connections (e. g. , Cohen Name, 2008).  Information sharing between large shareholders
may also drive managers to comply with index funds’ preferences.  For instance, if managers refuse to disclose more after
meeting with an index fund sponsor, that sponsor could inform other large owners that management is uncooperative.  This,
in turn, might cause these non-index fund owners to sell their stock or vote against management in the future.  Evidence of
this type of information sharing—documented in Hong Name (2005) and the survey paper McCahery Name (2016)—suggests
that such an outcome is indeed possible.  Proxy advisor firms such as ISS and Glass Lewis, who avow that their guidance
arises solely from public information, and formal groups such as the Shareholder-Director Exchange further strengthen the
collective influence of index funds.  Soft power thus appears to be quite salient in these settings. 
Lastly, companies' disclosure motivations also depend on the general market for their shares; index funds are important
players in such markets.  For example, Nagel (2005) and Boehmer and Kelley (2009) argue that index fund ownership
increases the supply of a company's stock available for short sales, which can induce traders to act more aggressively on
unfavorable information (Boehmer and Wu, 2013).  Managers may want to counteract the price effect of such trade, and can
do so through disclosure. 