 Accounting covenants are widely used in private lending agreements to mitigate conﬂicts of interest between shareholders and lenders.  These covenants increase contracting eﬃciency by providing the basis for the optimal allocation of control  rights when contracts are incomplete ( Watts and Zimmerman, 1986.  Roberts and Suﬁ, 2009a.  Christensen and Nikolaev,  1 Auditors are required to check borrowers’ compliance with covenants in private lending  2012.  Christensen et al. , 2016 ).   agreements under GAAP.  In particular, accounting and auditing standards require auditors to conﬁrm the going concern assumption and to ensure the appropriate classiﬁcation of debt as current or non-current, which entails checking covenant  compliance.  In addition to these standard obligations to verify compliance, however, auditors may offer a letter providing  speciﬁc negative assurance directly to lenders by certifying that they have no knowledge of any default.  What is unclear  is whether this additional covenant compliance assurance occurs at random, or whether it can be explained by eﬃcient  contracting.  To date, the literature has been largely silent on the conditions under which lenders seek such assurance from  auditors.  We seek to address this question in this paper.   The fact that auditors report on borrowers’ covenant compliance directly to lenders may be economically important  because of its effects on auditor liability.  Under the GAAP regime, auditors are not liable to lenders because lenders are  regarded as non-contractual third parties to standard audit arrangements.  Nevertheless, auditors may become liable to third  parties depending on whether auditors are aware that ﬁnancial statements are to be used for particular purposes by known  parties, and whether there is any conduct by the auditors linking them to third parties ( Feinman, 2015 ).  Because they require  auditors to write to lenders to state they have no knowledge of any defaults on the covenants, auditor covenant compliance  assurance clauses are likely to extend auditors’ liability to lenders, even though there is no contract between them.  This is  because it will be more diﬃcult for auditors to convince a court that they were not aware who they were reporting to and  what their reports were to be used for.   We present novel descriptive evidence of auditors providing assurance to private lenders of borrowers’ compliance with  accounting covenants.  If the standard GAAP regime is suﬃcient for lenders’ needs, we do not expect to observe systematic associations between lenders’ audit demands and borrower or loan characteristics.  According to agency theory and the  theory of incomplete contracting, information asymmetries and contracting eﬃciency should drive observed variation in  lenders’ demand for additional assurance.  Agency theory predicts that covenants appear in debt contracts to reduce conﬂicts of interest between providers of equity and providers of debt ( Jensen and Meckling, 1976.  Smith and Warner, 1979 ).   More recent insights based on the theory of incomplete contracting view accounting information as part of an eﬃcient contracting regime, where ﬁnancial covenants represent the contingency for the allocation of control rights ( Christensen et al. ,  2016 ).  We draw on these arguments and predict that lenders will demand auditor assurance of covenant compliance in an  attempt to reduce agency problems and to enhance contracting eﬃciency.  Such assurance involves reporting speciﬁcally to  lenders on borrowers’ compliance with the chosen set of contractual accounting deﬁnitions ( Li, 2010 ).  To test our predictions, we conduct a cross-sectional analysis of auditor covenant compliance clauses, using a large sample of private lending  agreements retrieved from the SEC EDGAR archives for the period 1996 to 2012.   Around 35% of the 6,513 loan agreements in our sample are identiﬁed as containing an auditor covenant compliance  assurance (CCA) clause.  After adjusting for the total number of ﬁnancial covenants in loan agreements, the use of CCA  clauses is comparatively stable over our sample period.  We do not ﬁnd that the use of CCA clauses is concentrated among  a few banks or industries–their use is widespread.  When we explore the sources of the variation in the incidence of CCA  clauses, our results are inconsistent with the idea that they are randomly distributed across private lending arrangements.   In particular, in various empirical speciﬁcations, we ﬁnd that private lenders’ demand for independent assurance by auditors  is stronger when accounting measurement rules depart more from GAAP, when agreements rely more on accounting data  (either in the form of more accounting covenants or accounting-based performance pricing provisions), when borrowers  have high levels of harder-to-verify intangible assets, and when there are more lenders in the loan syndicate.   The paper makes several contributions to the literature.  First and foremost, it provides novel empirical evidence that in  addition to their standard obligations under GAAP, auditors play a role in ameliorating information asymmetries and enhancing contracting eﬃciency between borrowers and lenders.  In addition to the information they receive via standard general  purpose ﬁnancial statements, lenders also often demand direct assurance from auditors that borrowers have conformed to  the negotiated measurement rules speciﬁed in the contract.  These results are consistent with Li’s (2010) conjecture that  more extensive departures from GAAP rules involve higher monitoring costs for lenders and may help explain why debt  contracts often contain comparatively few accounting ratios ( Christensen et al. , 2016 ).   Our results contribute to the contracting literature by indicating that covenant compliance assurance by auditors is associated with borrower and loan characteristics.  Furthermore, our ﬁndings suggest that when it is deemed optimal by contracting parties, auditor covenant compliance assurance may facilitate contracting on the basis of intangible assets that are  harder to verify ( Frankel et al. , 2008 ).  Our results also contribute to the agency literature by showing that the number of  lenders in loan syndicates is positively associated with explicit requirements for auditor assurance of covenant compliance.   This may be due to reduced monitoring effectiveness induced by large loan syndicates or because of higher renegotiation  costs in the event of a misclassiﬁed covenant violation.  Finally, and more broadly, our research contributes to the growing  evidence on the importance and inﬂuence of private lenders as active participants in ﬁnancial reporting and corporate governance mechanisms.  Although several studies have examined the role of auditors in stock markets and public debt markets  (e. g.  Teoh and Wong, 1993.  Mansi et al. , 2004.  Lou and Vasvari, 2013 ), evidence on their role in private debt markets remains  scarce ( Menon and Williams, 2016 ).  This is in spite of reports that corporations raise more capital from banks than from  public debt and equity markets combined ( Ferreira and Matos, 2012.  Nini et al. , 20 09.  Suﬁ, 20 07 ).  Our ﬁndings thus contribute to the nascent literature demonstrating that banks exert inﬂuence over borrowers’ corporate governance processes,  even outside default states ( Triantis and Daniels, 1995.  Nini et al. , 2012.  Christensen et al. , 2016 ).   Overall, our research indicates that auditors fulﬁll important functions in private debt markets in addition to their main  responsibilities under GAAP.  We emphasize at the outset, however, that although our analyses are guided by theory, our  study is exploratory and as such, only allows us to document statistical associations, not causal relationships.  As is common in this ﬁeld, our results are vulnerable to concerns that different contractual features are determined simultaneously  ( Armstrong et al. , 2010 ).   In Section 2 , we outline the regulatory and legal background to the auditor-lender relationship and review relevant prior  literature.  In Section 3 , we develop our hypotheses.  Section 4 outlines our sample and data collection methods and describes  our primary measure of private lenders’ demand for audit.  Section 5 presents our empirical results and we summarize and  conclude in Section 6 .   2.  Background and prior literature.  2. 1.  Auditors’ responsibilities under GAAP and legal liability.  In the absence of any audit arrangements between contracting parties, auditors are required to test whether borrowers  are in compliance with debt covenants as part of the annual audit under GAAP.  In particular, ASC 470 Debt requires auditors  to classify debt as current when clients violate any covenants set out in the loan agreement.   Hence, unless the debt is already classiﬁed as current, auditors check borrowers’ compliance with covenants as a matter of routine.   An important feature of the GAAP regime is that auditors’ responsibility is to shareholders.  This seems unsatisfactory  from the point of view of lenders, who might seek legal redress from auditors with ‘deep pockets’ in the event of borrower  default.  Accordingly, clauses in private lending agreements often require auditors to report directly to creditors regarding  borrowers’ compliance with contractual terms.  Auditing standards (for public issuers and non-issuers) recognize such obligations and offer guidance to auditors in specifying the limited nature and scope of this type of assurance.  For public issuers,  AS 3305 Special Reports , states.   … loan agreements usually also require the borrower to furnish annual ﬁnancial statements that have been audited by  an independent auditor.  In some instances, the lenders … may request assurance from the independent auditor that  the borrower has complied with certain covenants of the agreement relating to accounting matters.  The independent  auditor may satisfy this request by giving negative assurance relative to the applicable covenants based on the audit  of the ﬁnancial statements.   This standard goes on to provide an example of a report that auditors may issue to lenders under such arrangements.   There are two important features of this example.  (i) it is addressed solely to the management of the borrower and a  speciﬁc bank or lender.  and (ii) it only offers negative assurance, i. e. , it states that nothing came to auditors’ attention that  the borrower failed to comply with the covenants in the debt contract.   It is generally accepted that in equity markets, auditors play an insurance role in addition to their information role  ( DeFond and Zhang, 2014 ).  This is not necessarily the case in private debt markets, however, because lenders are regarded  as third parties to the audit regime.  As such, auditors are not liable to lenders unless certain conditions are met.  The extent  of auditors’ liability to lenders depends on which of the four legal standard courts apply.  (i) privity, (ii) near privity, (iii)  restatement (or known users), or (iv) reasonable foreseeability.   We expect covenant compliance assurance clauses to increase auditors’ liability to lenders under the two most commonly  applied standards – near privity and restatement.  First, under a restatement approach, where inaccurate information supplied by auditors is reasonably relied on by creditors and banks (or other non clients), auditors are held liable, as long as  the third parties relying on the reports are known to the them ( Scherl, 1994 , p.  273).  Because CCA clauses involve auditors  writing to lenders, it will be diﬃcult for them to argue that they were unaware that lenders were relying on the information they provide.  Second, under near privity, while the CCA clauses may not automatically be suﬃcient to establish a  direct relationship between the auditor and the lenders, courts sometimes interpret the necessary linking conduct as ‘some  communication or contacts demonstrating the accountant’s awareness of the third party’s reliance’ ( Feinman, 2015 , p.  146).   We expect CCA clauses to lead to direct communication between the auditor and the lenders, increasing the likelihood that  courts will ﬁnd auditors liable.   The recent case of GSP Finance versus KPMG illustrates that lenders place signiﬁcant emphasis on the assurance provided  by auditors – not just via a clean audit report ( Menon and Williams, 2016 ), but also through their demand for conﬁrmation  of borrowers’ compliance with ﬁnancial covenants.   This case also suggests that CCA clauses may increase auditors’ litigation  risk from lenders, even under a strict near-privity standard.   The case involved a credit facility of over $525 million taken out by the borrower (Hicks Sports), $67 million of which was  supplied by GSP.  The lending agreement contained clauses requiring the borrower’s auditors, KPMG, to deliver to lenders ( 1 )  a clean audit report and (2) a letter of compliance with ﬁnancial covenants, one of which limited borrower’s consolidated  total debt to $600 million.   The borrower subsequently defaulted on the payment of the loan.  KPMG were sued by GSP for providing a clean audit  opinion and a letter stating that the borrower was in compliance, with the plaintiffs arguing that Hicks had exceeded the  $600 million debt threshold.  The lenders argued that had the borrower’s capital lease obligations been included within the  deﬁnition of consolidated indebtedness (as they had been in previous years), Hicks would have surpassed its credit limit,  allowing the lenders to exercise control rights that would have reduced their losses.   The letter of covenant compliance represents an important component of the litigation against the auditors in this case. 