. 
All auditors (US and foreign) who audit US-listed companies are required to register with the Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board (PCAOB) and be subject to PCAOB inspections.  In this study, we focus on foreign auditors and consider 
whether audit quality for non -US-listed foreign public clients (non-US-listed clients) is higher following the initial PCAOB inspection. 
Our study addresses the issue of positive externality, i. e. , whether the PCAOB international inspection program 
improves audit quality for foreign auditors’ non-US-listed foreign clients even though investors in these particular foreign 
companies are not the intended beneﬁciaries of the foreign auditor inspection program
The impact of the PCAOB international inspection program on audit quality abroad is ambiguous.  Given the PCAOB’s 
reputation for actively looking for auditor misconduct and taking follow-up disciplinary actions against deﬁcient auditors 
( DeFond, 2010; Farrell and Shabad, 2005 ), the very act of registering with the PCAOB may exacerbate foreign auditors’ exposure to reputation loss and provide them with an ex ante incentive to strengthen their ﬁrm -level quality controls and 
increase audit quality.  To the extent that audit deﬁciencies are discovered during the initial inspection, the auditor may 
have an additional incentive to take appropriate remedial action and strengthen ﬁrm-level quality controls to avoid further 
embarrassment on subsequent inspections.  The improvements in the foreign auditor’s ﬁrm -level quality controls could increase audit quality for all of the ﬁrm’s foreign clients US-listed or otherwise.  Moreover, because the starting point for audit 
quality is potentially lower abroad than in the US ( Choi Name, 2008; Francis and Wang, 2008 ), the PCAOB inspection program 
could have a greater impact abroad than in the US.  
However, reasons exist to doubt the eﬃcacy of PCAOB inspections in improving audit quality.  Prior research ( DeFond, 
2010; Lennox and Pittman, 2010 ) indicates that PCAOB inspection reports are not useful for assessing audit quality because 
they merely list audit deﬁciencies and do not provide a summary opinion about the auditor’s quality.  Moreover, the effectiveness of the PCAOB’s international inspections may be limited by geographic distance from the US, potential language 
differences, or cultural barriers.  Finally, foreign auditors may follow an asymmetric approach to their US-listed and nonUS-listed clients.  Given that the PCAOB is primarily interested in protecting investors in US-listed companies (selecting only 
US-listed client engagements for inspection) and the fact that auditor litigation exposure is lower for non-US-listed clients 
than for US-listed clients, foreign auditors may be less incentivized to improve audit quality for their non-US-listed clients.  
Foreign auditors may override their ﬁrm-level quality controls and utilize less effective audit programs or assemble less 
qualiﬁed audit teams for their non-US-listed clients (which may be less costly).  To the extent that foreign auditors follow 
an asymmetric approach in servicing their US-listed and non-US-listed clients, any PCAOB inspection-related improvements 
in ﬁrm-level quality controls may not necessarily beneﬁt their non-US-listed audit clients.  For all these reasons, the overall 
effectiveness of the PCAOB international inspection program in improving audit quality for foreign auditors’ non-US-listed 
clients is far from obvious and remains an open empirical question.  
Because the quality of ﬁnancial reporting is a joint outcome of manager and auditor decision making, audit quality is 
best viewed as a continuum with higher audit quality providing greater assurance of ﬁnancial reporting quality ( DeFond and 
Zhang, 2014 ).  Still, beyond the notion that better audit quality leads to better ﬁnancial reporting quality, little or no consensus emerges in the extant literature as to how best to measure audit quality.  Hence, given that all audit quality proxies have 
their limitations, we use multiple ﬁnancial reporting quality measures (such as discretionary accruals, the propensity to just 
meet or beat earnings expectations, and accruals quality) that capture different dimensions of the audit quality construct.  
In addition, we employ a measure of auditor independence: the likelihood of the auditor issuing a modiﬁed opinion for 
non-US-listed clients as a proxy for audit quality.  For non-US-listed clients, this metric is similar to the propensity to issue 
a going-concern opinion for US-listed clients, and it is generally viewed as a measure of the auditor’s ability to withstand 
client pressure to issue a clean audit opinion ( DeFond Name, 2002; Chen Name, 2010; Fung Name, 2016 ).  
Our study covers a 13-year period (2002–2014) and includes a total of 61,612 non-US-listed client-year observations with 
PCAOB-registered foreign auditors from 55 non-US countries.  Our sample includes observations from countries that allow 
as well as those that prohibit PCAOB inspections.  In our difference-in-differences (DID) research design, we control for the 
threat of PCAOB inspections based not only on whether the observation is from a country that allows (or prohibits) PCAOB 
inspections (consistent with Lamoreaux (2016) ) but also on a model that captures the likelihood of the client-year observa3 Our ﬁndings suggest that initial inspections have an incremental 
tion being audited by a PCAOB-inspected foreign auditor.  
effect on the audit quality of the foreign auditor over and above the effect of the threat of such inspections.  These ﬁndings 
are of particular interest because some countries (such as China) continue to disallow PCAOB inspections.  Our ﬁndings are 
consistent with those of Aobdia and Shroff (2017) who suggest that PCAOB oversight of non-U. S.  auditors with US-listed 
clients increases the perceived assurance value of their audits and is reﬂected in an increase in their market share in their 
home countries.  
All of our results continue to hold when we re-estimate our tests using a matched sample based on the propensity score 
of a non-US-listed foreign client having a PCAOB-inspected foreign auditor.  Further, we examine whether the strength of 
the positive relation between PCAOB inspections and audit quality metrics for foreign auditors’ non-US-listed clients (the 
externality effect) varies cross-sectionally over a number of factors.  The ﬁndings from our cross-sectional analyses suggest 
that, controlling for the threat of inspections, the impact of the initial inspection is stronger when the likelihood of a foreign 
auditor being inspected by the PCAOB is lower, in countries without a substantive increase in ﬁnancial reporting enforcement, in countries with lower liability standards for accountants, for earlier (versus later) initial inspections, and for foreign 
auditors aﬃliated with one of the six global audit ﬁrm networks (GNs).  Consistent with the notion that PCAOB inspectors 
share their ﬁndings and suggestions for improvement with the auditor at the time of the inspection itself without having 
the auditor wait for the formal inspection report ( Aobdia, 2016 ), in additional analyses we ﬁnd that the improvement in 
audit quality for foreign auditors’ non-US-listed clients is observable in the year the initial inspection report is issued and 
that the improvement has persistence beyond the ﬁrst year.  
Our paper contributes to the literature in several ways.  First, our study, to our knowledge, is the ﬁrst to examine whether 
the PCAOB’s international inspection program (which is intended to improve audit quality for foreign auditors’ US-listed 
clients) has a positive externality effect, i. e. , also improves audit quality for foreign auditors’ non-US-listed clients.  
Our study complements studies by Lamoreaux (2016) and Krishnan Name (2017) who examine the direct audit quality effect of 
PCAOB inspections, i. e. , focus on foreign auditors’ US-listed clients.  We contribute by documenting a positive externality in 
that non-US listed audit clients beneﬁt from their audit ﬁrms’ PCAOB inspections.  
Second, we contribute to the literature on auditor incentives and reputation concerns outside the US.  With respect to 
incentives, prior research (e. g. , Lennox, 1999 ; Khurana and Raman, 2004 ) suggests that litigation exposure, not reputation 
protection, is a driver of audit quality outside the US.  Along the same lines, Francis and Wang (2008) propose that audit 
quality abroad is a function of investor protection.  The stronger the country-level legal institutions, the higher the auditor 
incentive to provide a quality audit.  However, Weber Name (2008) and Skinner and Srinivasan (2012) argue that reputation 
loss imposes actual costs on an auditor (in the form of lost market share) in Germany and Japan, respectively, and thereby 
incentivizes audit quality even in countries with little or no legal exposure.  Pertinent to reputation concerns, the PCAOB’s 
international inspections have the potential for embarrassing the foreign auditor through adverse publicity by disclosing 
engagement-level audit deﬁciencies and for not remediating ﬁrm-level quality control deﬁciencies on a timely basis.  Our 
ﬁndings are consistent with the notion that auditor reputation matters outside the US in that the initial PCAOB inspection has an incremental salutary effect on the foreign auditor’s audit quality over and above the effect of the threat of an 
inspection itself.  
Finally,  our  study  contributes  to  the  inquiry  of  the  eﬃcacy  of  the  PCAOB  international  inspection  program  in  improving  audit  quality.   As  noted  by  Carcello  et  al.   (2010) ,  US-listed  companies  audited  by  foreign  auditors  account  for 
more  than  $650  billion  in  US  market  capitalization.   Further,  foreign  auditors  play  a  substantial  role  in  the  audit  of  US 
domestic  companies  by  auditing  foreign  subsidiaries  that  are  material  to  the  consolidated  ﬁnancial  statements  of  US 
multinationals.   For  these  reasons,  the  PCAOB  views  inspections  of  foreign  auditors  as  a  priority  and  devotes  substantial  resources  to  its  international  inspections  program.   Still,  the  board  faces  a  diﬃcult  challenge  in  this  area  because 
a  number  of  countries  (such  as  China)  have  barred  PCAOB  inspections  within  their  borders  (on  national  sovereignty 
grounds),  thereby  increasing  the  risk  of  substandard  audit  quality  for  investors  in  US-listed  companies.   We  document 
that  the  PCAOB  international  inspection  program  generates  a  positive  externality,  as  it  not  only  improves  audit  quality  for  foreign  auditors’  US-listed  clients  (as  shown  in  concurrent  studies  by  Lamoreaux  (2016 )  and  Krishnan  et  al.  
(2017 )),  but  also  for  their  non-US-listed  clients,  thereby  improving  investor  protection  from  substandard  audits  for  US 
investors and foreign investors in non-US-listed foreign public companies.  These ﬁndings potentially allow foreign countries  and  regulators  to  better  assess  the  desirability  (in  terms  of  the  favorable  audit  quality  impact  for  their  own 
domestic  investors  in  non-US-listed  public  companies)  of  allowing  the  PCAOB  to  conduct  inspections  in  their  home 
countries.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 provides background information and develops our hypotheses.  Section 3 presents the research methodology and data description.  A discussion of empirical results follows in 
Section 4 .  Section 5 provides concluding remarks.  
2.  Background and hypothesis development. 
2. 1.  Background. 
The PCAOB was established by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX; PL 107-204) with the objective of improving audit 
quality for companies listed in US public securities markets.  To achieve this objective, the board is vested with broad powers 
to oversee and discipline auditors (US and foreign) of US-listed companies and to conduct mandatory inspections of these 
auditors as a new channel for improving audit quality.  Inspections for US auditors began in 2004.  Inspections for foreign 
auditors commenced the following year, on a staggered basis, as the PCAOB sought to build its international inspection staff
and obtain the necessary permission from foreign governments to conduct inspections of foreign auditors in their home 
countries.  Also, while large auditors (those with more than 100 US-listed public company clients) are subject to annual 
inspections, small auditors are inspected triennially.  Overwhelmingly, foreign auditors, including those aﬃliated with the six 
global audit ﬁrm networks, are small auditors.  
Prior research on the eﬃcacy of PCAOB domestic inspections in improving audit quality for US auditors indicates that 
the  threat  of  inspections  drove  nearly  half  of  the  small  US  audit  ﬁrms  out  of  the  market  for  public  company  audits 
and  thereby  increased  average  audit  quality  for  small  auditors  ( DeFond  and  Lennox  2011 ).   Other  studies  ( Abbott  et  al. , 
2013; Gunny and Zhang, 2013; Gramling Name, 2011 ) show that audit quality (as measured by clients’ lower discretionary 
accruals  and  auditors’  increased  propensity  to  issue  going-concern  opinions)  improved  for  small  US  auditors  following 
inspections.  
With respect to large US auditors, some limited evidence exists that PCAOB inspections improve audit quality.  Carcello 
Name (2011b) report that, for a sample of US-listed clients audited by Big 4 ﬁrms, the initial PCAOB inspections were associated with an improvement in audit quality as measured by a decline in abnormal accruals.  By contrast, Boone Name 
(2015) indicate that each of the Big 4 auditors in the US have received inspection reports identifying audit deﬁciencies 
every year since the beginning of inspections in 2004, but that these large ﬁrms have been largely blasé about adverse 
inspection reports because the PCAOB ﬁndings are based on “second-guessing” by “government bureaucrats” ( Norris, 2011a, 
6 Further, although the PCAOB’s censure of Deloitte in December 2007 (the ﬁrst-ever PCAOB censure of a Big 4 
2011b, 2011c ).  
ﬁrm for not remediating ﬁrm-level quality control deﬁciencies on a timely basis) inﬂicted losses on the auditor in the form 
of increased risk of client loss and lower audit fees, Boone Name (2015) report that Deloitte’s audit quality was not different 
from that of other Big 4 ﬁrms during a three-year window either before or after the PCAOB censure.  More recently, Gipper 
Name (2016) examine increases in short-window earnings response coeﬃcients (ERCs) around earnings announcements for 
US-listed domestic clients following PCAOB inspections of their US auditors and report signiﬁcant ﬁndings for both Big 4 
and non–Big 4 auditors.  Finally, regarding the eﬃcacy of PCAOB domestic inspections, we are not aware of any studies on 
US auditors with non-US-listed foreign public clients or of any studies pertaining to PCAOB inspections of US auditors with 
non-US-listed clients.  
With respect to the eﬃcacy of PCAOB international inspections in improving audit quality for foreign auditors’ US-listed 
clients (the direct effect of the inspections), two studies address this issue.  Lamoreaux (2016) suggests that the threat of 
PCAOB inspections (as proxied by whether or not the foreign auditor is located in a country that allows PCAOB inspections) 
is associated with improved audit outcomes, such as an increased propensity on the part of the foreign auditor to issue 
going-concern opinions for US-listed clients.  By contrast, Krishnan Name (2017) investigate the effect of the initial inspection 
of foreign auditors and report a decrease in abnormal accruals as well as an increase in the value relevance of accounting 
numbers for their US-listed clients.  In examining the audit quality impact of the initial inspection, they do not control for the 
threat of a PCAOB inspection preceding the inspection.  Separately (and possibly as a means of putting pressure on countries, 
such as China, that disallow PCAOB inspections), the Board in 2010 disclosed the names of US-listed companies with foreign 
auditors located in countries that do not allow PCAOB inspections.  Carcello Name (2011a) ﬁnd that the stock market reacted 
adversely to these disclosures, that is, investors reacted negatively to the news that the PCAOB is not allowed to inspect the 
foreign auditors of US-listed clients in their home countries.  Our study controls for the threat of a PCAOB inspection and 
examines the incremental audit quality impact of the initial PCAOB inspection for foreign auditors’ non-US-listed clients, i. e. , 
we examine the externality effect associated with the PCAOB international inspection program.  
2. 2.  Hypothesis development. 
The PCAOB  utilizes a risk-based (instead of a random or representative) sample approach to identify US-listed audit 
engagements to review and is known to be actively looking for auditor misconduct.  Also, during inspections, the PCAOB 
evaluates the  design and  effectiveness of  the  auditor’s  ﬁrm- level quality  control  systems  ( Center  for  Audit  Quality  CAQ, 
2012 ; Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, 2012 ).  The underlying motivation for assessing the effectiveness of the 
auditor’s ﬁrm-level quality controls is to increase audit quality for all of the auditor’s US-listed audit clients, not just the 
sample of  US-listed  clients  (engagements) selected  for  review.   In  the  case  of  the  PCAOB’s  international inspections,  the 
improvements in the foreign auditor’s ﬁrm - level quality controls could beneﬁt not only its US-listed clients but also its non US-listed clients.  Further, the PCAOB can issue inspection reports that publicly disclose engagement-level deﬁciencies, albeit 
without identifying the client involved, and censure the auditor (i. e. , impose ﬁnes or bar the auditor from continuing to audit 
US-listed clients) for ﬁrm-level quality control weaknesses that are not remediated on a timely basis (typically within 12 
months) to the satisfaction of the board ( Center for Audit Quality CAQ, 2012 ; Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, 
2012 ).  
The public disclosure of audit deﬁciencies and possible censure by the PCAOB could embarrass the audit ﬁrm and damage 
its reputation.  Prior research ( Boone Name, 2015; Klein and Leﬄer, 1981; Schmalensee, 1978; Shapiro, 1982; Smallwood and 
Conlisk, 1979; Von Weizsacker, 1980 ) suggests that such reputational harm can inﬂict economic losses on the auditor by 
triggering  a  decline  in  the  demand  for  the  ﬁrm’s  services  or  by  lowering  its  selling  price  and  that  the  threat  of  these 
economic losses incentivizes the ﬁrm to maintain its service quality.  Consistent with this argument, recent studies ( Weber 
Name, 2008; Skinner and Srinivasan, 2012 ) ﬁnd that auditor reputation matters outside the US, too.  Reputational harm can 
result in loss of audit clients and market share.  Further, other research ( Choi Name, 2008; Francis and Wang, 2008 ) shows 
that audit quality is lower outside the US due to extant lower levels of auditor litigation exposure and investor protection 
abroad.  Because PCAOB standards require the auditor to have strong ﬁrm-level quality control systems and the inspections 
essentially represent a new channel for identifying auditor misconduct, it is reasonable (consistent with DeFond (2010) ) to 
expect the threat of PCAOB inspections to provide PCAOB-registered foreign auditors (at least in countries that allow PCAOB 
inspections) with an ex ante incentive to improve audit quality.  To the extent that the initial inspection identiﬁes deﬁciencies 
in the auditor’s ﬁrm-level quality control systems, the inspection may be expected to be associated with higher audit quality.  
For these reasons, our expectation is for both the threat and the initial PCAOB inspection to be associated with an increase 
in audit quality.  
However, several considerations could mitigate or negate the effect of PCAOB inspections (threatened or actual) on audit quality for foreign auditors.  First, as noted by Palmrose (2006) , PCAOB inspections appear to trade off independence 
for expertise.  Although PCAOB inspectors are independent of the profession, they may lack cutting-edge audit knowledge 
because they cannot be practicing certiﬁed public accountants.  Others (e. g. , Glover Name, 2009 ; Lennox and Pittman, 2010 ) 
have expressed concerns about the quality and expertise of the inspection staff, the effectiveness of the feedback system, 
the timeliness of the inspection reports, and the usefulness of the information in the inspection reports.  Second, the audit 
deﬁciencies revealed in PCAOB inspection reports may reﬂect no more than differences in professional judgment between 
the inspector and the auditor about what constitutes appropriate evidence and documentation, i. e. , mere second-guessing 
of auditor judgment ( Church and Shefchik, 2012; Peecher and Solomon, 2014 ).  In other words, to the extent that PCAOB 
inspectors are narrowly focused on documentation and substantiation (compliance with PCAOB rules and standards) instead 
of providing a holistic assessment of audit quality, the inspections may not be associated with an observable increase in the 
ﬁrm’s audit outcomes (quality).  Also, the effectiveness of the PCAOB’s international inspections (threatened or actual) may 
be limited by geographic distance from the US as well as potential language and cultural differences.  Prior research (e. g. , 
Ayers Name, 2011 ; Malloy, 2005 ) shows that geographic distance can diminish the availability of soft (but important) information obtained through informal local information channels potentially imposing a signiﬁcant information disadvantage on 
the visiting PCAOB inspecting team.  
PCAOB-registered foreign auditors also have non-US-listed public companies from their home countries as their audit 
clients.  The improvements in the ﬁrm-level quality controls of these foreign auditors (following the threat of or an actual 
PCAOB inspection) could also be reﬂected in higher audit quality for these non-US-listed clients.  However, this positive 
externality is contingent on the incentives of the foreign auditor.  A foreign auditor could improve ﬁrm-level quality controls 
and follow a symmetric approach to both its US-listed and its non-US-listed clients.  It could utilize the same audit programs, 
follow standardized audit processes and assemble audit teams of the same caliber from a common pool of staff auditors and 
partners for both sets of clients.  Alternatively, a foreign auditor could follow an asymmetric approach.  Given that the PCAOB 
is primarily focused on US-listed clients (selects only US-listed client engagements for inspection) and the fact that auditor 
litigation exposure is lower for non-US-listed clients, the foreign auditor could override quality controls and utilize less 
effective audit programs and assemble less qualiﬁed audit teams for its non-US-listed clients.  Hence, the improved audit 
quality beneﬁt for the foreign auditor’s non-US-listed clients remains an important, albeit unanswered, empirical question.  
We state Hypothesis H1 , in the null form: 
H1.  Controlling for the threat of PCAOB inspections, there is no change in audit quality for foreign auditors’ non-US-listed foreign 
clients following the initial PCAOB inspection of the foreign auditor.  
<Middle> Methodology and data. 
3. 1.  Research design. 
To test our hypothesis, we employ a number of audit quality proxies used in prior literature.  
Because auditor effort s contribute to clients’ ﬁnancial reporting quality ( Gul Name, 2009 ), we use three audit quality proxies that relate to clients’ 
ﬁnancial reporting quality: abnormal accruals AB_ACC ( Kothari Name, 2005; Gul Name, 2009 ), accrual quality AQ ( Francis Name, 
2005; Srinidhi and Gul, 2007 ), and probability of just meeting or beating earnings benchmarks Prob.  (MEET) ( Burgstahler 
and Dichev, 1997; Frankel Name, 2002 ).  Given that the initial PCAOB international inspections were staggered over time, any 
improvement in clients’ ﬁnancial reporting quality following the initial inspection may reasonably be linked to the inspection 
itself and not to a confounding event.  Our fourth audit quality proxy is the auditor’s propensity to issue a modiﬁed audit 
opinion Prob.  (OPINION) , which is viewed as a more direct measure of audit quality because it represents an outcome over 
which the auditor has greater control ( DeFond and Zhang, 2014 ).  Further, because managers may be expected to pressure 
the auditor to release a clean opinion, the issuance of a modified audit opinion captures the auditor’s independence.  The auditor’s ability to withstand client pressure is an important element of audit quality ( Fung Name, 2016 ).  8,9 Lower values of AB_ACC , AQ , and Prob.  (MEET) and higher values of Prob.  (OPINION) are indicative of higher audit quality.  All the variables used in our study are defined in Appendix A .  
Following Bertrand and Mullainathan (1999a, 1999b, 20 03) , Low (20 09) , and Chan Name (2012, 2013) , we use a differencein-differences approach to examine whether a change in audit quality is evident for a treatment group of PCAOB-inspected 
foreign auditors’ non-US-listed foreign clients relative to a control group of other (non-inspected) foreign auditors’ non-USlisted foreign clients.  We adopt the following research design, where the dependent variable ( DepVar ) represents the audit quality proxies.  The test variable POSTINSPECT equals one for 
client-year observations in which the foreign auditor has undergone initial inspection by the PCAOB and zero otherwise.  
We define the first post-inspection year as the year of the inspection report, consistent with prior studies (e. g. , Aobdia, 2016 ; Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB), 20 05, 20 08 ) which indicate that inspectors share their findings and suggestions for improvement with the audit firm during the inspection process itself (to encourage the firm to correct the deficiencies and perform the missed audit procedures on a timely basis) without the auditor having to wait for the formal inspection report to be issued.  11 The coefficient on POSTINSPECT , β1 , measures the change in the dependent variable from the pre- to the post-inspection period for initially inspected foreign auditors’ clients relative to the change over the same time period for non-inspected foreign auditors’ clients.  The empirical model does not include the main effects INSPECT and POST or an intercept to allow for the inclusion of a full vector of client and country-year fixed effects, which capture time-invariant client characteristics or country-specific time trends.  In all tests, the t -statistics are computed based on robust standard errors clustered at the auditor level. 
In estimating Eq.  (1) , we include several auditor-level and client-level control variables as well as a variable to control for 
the likelihood of a PCAOB inspection.  Speciﬁcally, we control for type of auditor ( BIG4 ), length of auditor-client relationship 
( TENURE ), client size ( SIZE ), client leverage ( LEV ), market-to-book ratio ( MB ), sales growth ( S_GROWTH ), property, plant, and 
equipment growth ( P_GROWTH ), and a lagged loss indicator ( LAG_LOSS ).  Following prior studies, we also include control 
variables speciﬁc to each of our four audit quality measures: AB_ACC, AQ, Prob.  (MEET) , and Prob.  (OPINION) .  We control for 
future equity or debt issuance ( FISSUE ) in the AB_ACC regressions ( DeFond and Zhang, 2014 ); client innate factors including 
σ (SALES) ], operating cycle [ LOG(OPCYCLE) ], and incidence 
standard deviation of CFO [ σ (CFO) ], standard deviation of SALES [ 
of negative earnings ( NEGEARN ) in the AQ regressions ( Francis Name, 2005 ); client age ( AGE ) in the Prob.  (MEET) regressions 
( Davis  et  al. ,  2009 );  and  client  age  ( AGE ),  change  in  leverage  ( CLEV ),  stock  return  ( RET ),  future  equity  or  debt  issuance 
( FISSUE ), investments ( INVEST ), lagged audit opinion [ LAG(OPINION) ], and probability of bankruptcy z -scores ( ZSCORE ) in the 
Prob.  (OPINION) regressions ( DeFond Name, 2002; DeFond and Zhang, 2014 ).  
Lamoreaux (2016) suggests that the threat of a PCAOB inspection has a salutary effect on a foreign auditor’s audit quality 
for its US-listed clients as measured by an increase in the propensity to issue a going-concern opinion or an adverse internal 
control opinion.  He assesses the threat of a PCAOB inspection by whether the foreign auditor’s home country allows the 
PCAOB access to conduct inspections in its home territory.  To capture the incremental effect, if any, of the initial PCAOB 
inspection over the threat of such an inspection on the audit quality of the foreign auditor’s non-US-listed clients, we include 
in Eq.  (1) a control variable that attempts to capture the likelihood of a PCAOB inspection.  To obtain the likelihood of a 
PCAOB-registered foreign auditor being selected by the PCAOB for inspection, we estimate Eq.   (2) below.  The predicted 
values from this estimation are used as a proxy for the likelihood of the initial PCAOB inspection ( LIKELIHOOD ) in Eq.  (1) .  
We hypothesize that the PCAOB choice of foreign auditor to inspect is based on country, auditor and client characteristics, 
year, and industry.  As reported in Appendix B , the results from estimating Eq.  (2) indicate that the coeﬃcient on ACCESS is 
signiﬁcantly positive, consistent with the notion that the board can inspect auditors only in countries that allow PCAOB 
inspections.  Similarly, on grounds of practicality, the PCAOB is more likely to inspect auditors from countries that are closer 
to the US in terms of geographic distance as well as culture and language ( PROXIMITY is positive).  Further, the PCAOB 
is more likely to inspect auditors in countries that are more important to the US equity market ( CTRY_IMP and AU_IMP are 
positive).  Also, the PCAOB is more likely to inspect a non–Big 4 foreign auditor than a Big 4 foreign auditor ( BIG4 is negative).  
Finally, the ﬁndings reported in Appendix B show that the PCAOB is more likely to select foreign auditors to inspect based 
on client characteristics such as size ( SIZE ), leverage ( LEV ), lagged loss dummy ( LAG_LOSS ), and cash ﬂow from operations 
( CFO ).  
Because the treatment group (inspected foreign auditors’ non-US-listed clients) and the control group (non-inspected foreign auditors’ non-US-listed clients) are not randomly assigned, the two groups could be different in terms of their underlying client characteristics.  Our use of a difference-in-differences research design could mitigate this concern by comparing the 
difference in the audit quality metrics between the two groups during periods both before and after the initial inspection.  
Still, to obtain stronger inferences, we attempt to control for the possible underlying differences between the treatment and 
control groups using the propensity score matching (PSM) approach ( LaLonde, 1986 ).  We use the propensity scores derived 
from Eq.  (2) to closely match observations from the treatment group and the control group.  
3. 2.  Sample and data. 
Panel  A  of  Table  1  reports  on  the  sample  selection  process.   We  examine  PCAOB  initial  inspection  reports  of  foreign  auditors  dated  2006  (the  ﬁrst  year  that  a  PCAOB  international  inspection  report  was  issued)  through  2011  ( https: 
//pcaobus. org/Inspections/Reports/Pages/default. aspx ).  To capture the impact of the initial PCAOB inspections on audit quality during 2006–2011 using a difference-in-differences research design, we include observations from a three-year pre-period 
(20 02–20 05) and a three-year post-period (2012–2014).  Hence, we extract all non-US-listed foreign client-year observations 
available in Compustat Global Vantage for 2002–2014 for all non-US countries with at least one PCAOB-registered auditor.  
In total, we obtain 243,049 client-year observations from 61 countries, with 30,608 unique non-US-listed foreign public 
companies in the initial sample.  
An important part of our study is to correctly identify the auditor of a client-year observation so that we can check 
whether a client-year observation is audited by a PCAOB-registered foreign auditor and whether (and when) the foreign 
auditor is initially inspected by the PCAOB during our sample period.  Of the 243,049 client-year observations, Global Vantage 
provides auditor identity for only about half (49%).  Further, prior studies (e. g. , Francis and Wang, 2008 ) note that auditor 
identity data in the Global Vantage database may be miscoded for some countries (such as India, Japan, Pakistan, and South 
Korea).  Hence, we manually collect the identity of the auditor from the Standard & Poor’s (S&P) Capital IQ database and 
verify the accuracy of the auditor identity data reported by Global Vantage.  For observations that are not covered by the S&P 
Capital IQ database, we collect the auditor identity information from client websites and online search engines, if available.  
Following this procedure, we delete 58,037 observations in which the auditor could not be identiﬁed (about 24% of the 
initial sample).  In addition, we delete observations that have missing data, are from the financial sector, are audited by foreign auditors not registered with the PCAOB, and are audited by foreign auditors who undergo their initial inspection during 2012–2014.  16 Further, for clients whose foreign auditors were inspected by the PCAOB more than once during 2002–2011, we delete observation(s) relating to a subsequent inspection (if any).  Thus, our sample includes only observations
pertaining to the initial PCAOB inspection during 2002–2011.  These screening procedures result in a test sample of 61,612 client-year observations (10,516 unique clients and 384 unique PCAOB-registered foreign auditors) from 55 countries.  Our treatment group in the test sample ( INSPECT = 1) contains 11,722 client-year observations audited by 85 unique foreign auditors, which underwent the initial PCAOB inspection during the sample period (2002–2011).  A total of 4877 observations pertain to post–inspection years ( POSTINSPECT = 1).  17 Panel B of Table 1 reports information on client-year observations and foreign auditors for the countries in our sample.  A total of 384 ( = 85 + 299) foreign auditors registered with PCAOB, of which 85 (22. 1%) are PCAOB-inspected during our sample period.  Further, as of the end of 2011, the PCAOB has access to inspect foreign auditors in 30 of the 55 countries in our sample.  Panel C presents the number of initial inspections by year.  Our study examines a total of 85 initial inspections of foreign auditors, and the number of initial inspections increases over the study period.  Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for the treatment group (non-US-listed clients with PCAOB-inspected foreign au- ditors during our sample period, or INSPECT = 1) and the control group (clients with foreign auditors who are PCAOBregistered but not inspected by PCAOB during our sample period, or INSPECT = 0).  The last column of Table 2 reports the results of tests of the difference in means between the treatment and control groups.  The means of AB_ACC , AQ , and Prob.  (MEET) are lower and the mean of Prob.  (OPINION) is higher for the treatment group than for the control group, all consis- tent with the notion that audit quality for non-US-listed clients of PCAOB-inspected foreign audit firms is higher relative to that for clients of PCAOB-registered but not inspected foreign audit firms. 
4.  Empirical results. 
4. 1.  Tests of Hypothesis 1. 
To test Hypothesis H1 , we start with our test sample (see Table 1 , Panel A) of non-US-listed clients with PCAOB-registered foreign auditors.  This sample consists of 61,612 client-year observations for the AB_ACC and Prob.  (MEET) tests, 48,706 for the AQ test, and 12,794 client-year observations for the Prob.  (OPINION) test.  The sample size for the Prob.  (OPINION) test is much smaller because, following DeFond Name (2002) , we include only distressed clients (clients with negative return on assets).  Ordinary least squares (OLS) estimation is used for the tests of abnormal accruals and accruals quality (models (1) and (2) of Table 3 ).  The coefficients on POSTINSPECT are negatively associated with both AB_ACC and AQ , indicating that the ini- tial PCAOB inspection of foreign auditors lowers abnormal accruals and improves the mapping between accruals and cash flows for these auditors’ non-US-listed clients.  When the dependent variable is abnormal accruals ( ABACC ), the coefficient on POSTINSPECT has a value of −0. 007 and is significant at p < 0. 01.  Using the mean absolute value of average total accru- als (| −0. 052|) in our sample as a benchmark, the coefficient represents a 13. 46 percentage decrease in abnormal accruals ( −0. 007/| −0. 052|).  This suggests that the incremental effects associated with initial PCAOB inspections are economically meaningful.  Similarly, based on a sample mean of 0. 061 for AQ , the coefficient of POSTINSPECT ( −0. 005) translates into an 8. 2% decrease in the AQ metric (i. e. , an increase in accruals quality) for non-US-listed clients subsequent to the initial PCAOB inspection of their foreign auditor. 
Models (3) and (4) of Table 3 report results with the clients’ probability of just meeting earnings benchmarks [ Prob.  
(MEET) ] and the auditor’s propensity to issue modiﬁed audit opinions [ Prob.  (OPINION) ] as dependent variables, both estimated using linear probability (LP) models.  18 The results consistently show that the coefficient on POSTINSPECT is negatively (positively) associated with the probability of just meeting earnings benchmarks (issuing modified audit opinions), which is consistent with an improvement in audit quality for non-US-listed clients subsequent to the initial inspection of their for- eign auditor by the PCAOB.  Model (3) shows that the probability of the client just meeting earnings benchmarks decreases by 3. 7%, subsequent to the initial PCAOB inspection, which is not only statistically but also economically significant given that on average only 17. 3% of clients in our sample just meet benchmarks.  Similarly, model (4) shows that after the initial PCAOB inspection the probability of issuing modified opinions increases by 2. 4%, which is economically significant when compared with the sample mean of 3. 5% for OPINION .  Also, in models (1)–(3) (model (4)), the coefficient on LIKELIHOOD is negative (positive) and significant, consistent with the findings of Lamoreaux (2016) that the threat of a PCAOB inspection is associated with improved audit quality.  More important, the results for our test variable POSTINSPECT hold after controlling for LIKELIHOOD , indicating that the initial PCAOB inspection has an impact on audit quality that is over and above the 
impact associated with the threat of an inspection.  
Overall, the results presented in Table 3 show that, controlling for the threat of a PCAOB inspection, the initial PCAOB 
20 This ﬁnding 
inspection of a foreign auditor has a salutary effect on the audit quality of the auditor’s non-US-listed clients.  
is consistent with the presence of an externality effect associated with PCAOB inspections of foreign auditors.  The audit 
ﬁrm-level quality control improvements associated with these inspections has a beneﬁcial effect on the audit quality of the 
ﬁrms’ non-US-listed foreign clients, even though these particular clients are not the intended beneﬁciaries of the PCAOB 
international inspection program.  In other words, although the PCAOB’s mission is to protect investors in US-listed companies from substandard audits provided by US or foreign auditors, the PCAOB international inspection program appears to be 
beneﬁting the inspected foreign auditors’ non-US-listed clients.  
Next, we employ a propensity score matching (PSM) procedure to obtain a propensity score matched sample to bet- ter control for potential differences between PCAOB-inspected foreign auditors’ non-US-listed foreign clients (the treatment group) and other foreign auditors’ non-US-listed foreign clients (the control group).  In particular, based on the estimated likelihood of a foreign auditor being inspected by the PCAOB [from Eq.  (2) ], we match in the year prior to the initial inspec- tion each non-US-listed client audited by a PCAOB-inspected foreign auditor (treatment client) with another non-US-listed client from the same country for the same year with a non-PCAOB-inspected (but PCAOB-registered) foreign auditor with the closest propensity score.  21 Re-estimating results reported in Table 3 using this PSM sample provides evidence on the ex- tent to which our earlier inferences are driven by underlying differences in the characteristics of the treatment and control groups of non-US-listed clients instead of by the treatment (the PCAOB inspection) itself.  Our matching process necessarily requires that we exclude from our test sample observations from countries that prohibit PCAOB inspections (i. e.  observations from countries with ACCESS = 0).  22 In untabulated analysis, we repeat the univariate comparison (as in Table 2 ) for the treatment and the matched control groups, and the results show that most of the differences in client company characteristics between the treatment and con- trol groups are no longer statistically significant (except that client age, market-to-book ratio, and investments are slightly higher for the treatment group than for the control group).  These findings suggest that our matching quality is high, as the covariates are balanced ( Caliendo and Kopeinig, 2008 ).  Using the PSM sample (and the models specified in Table 3 ), we reexamine the effect of an initial PCAOB inspection of foreign auditors on the four audit quality metrics for their non-US-listed clients.  The results of this estimation are presented in Table 4 .  Models (1) and (2) show that POSTINSPECT is significantly associated with lower abnormal accruals and higher accrual quality (i. e. , lower AB_ACC as well as lower AQ ).  Models (3) and (4) show that POSTINSPECT is negatively associated with the probability of just meeting earnings benchmarks and positively associated with the probability of issuing modified audit opinions (both consistent with higher audit quality).  Once again, these results are obtained after controlling for the threat of a PCAOB inspection ( LIKELIHOOD ).  Thus, the results for the PSM sample are consistent with those of the full sample and show that the initial PCAOB inspection of foreign auditors improves audit quality (over and above the threat of an inspection) for their non-US-listed clients.  Further, these findings indicate that the inferences reported in Table 3 cannot be explained purely in terms of the differences in underlying client characteristics between the treatment and control groups.  The reported inferences are, in fact, the likely result of the initial PCAOB inspection of the foreign auditor. 
4. 2.  Cross-sectional analyses of the externality effect. 
Next, we examine whether the externality effect varies cross-sectionally by comparing the magnitude of the coeﬃcient 
of interest ( POSTINSPECT ) across sample partitions.  These cross-sectional tests offer insights into the various factors that 
affect the magnitude of the externality effect.  In Table 5 , for brevity, we report only the coeﬃcients for POSTINSPECT and 
the results of the test for differences in the size of the coeﬃcients for POSTINSPECT .  
4. 2. 1.  Likelihood of PCAOB inspection. 
The externality effect could vary with the likelihood of the foreign auditor being inspected by the PCAOB.  Consistent with 
DeFond (2010) , the greater the likelihood of a PCAOB inspection, the greater the auditor’s ex ante incentive to improve audit 
quality prior to the initial inspection in an attempt to avoid reputational harm from possible adverse ﬁndings disclosed in 
the inspection report.  Other things being equal, the greater the ex ante incentive to improve audit quality prior to the initial 
inspection, the weaker the externality effect associated with the initial inspection, i. e. , the smaller the improvement in audit 
quality following the initial inspection.  
For this analysis, we partition our sample into client-years with above and below median values of LIKELIHOOD and 
estimate Eq.  (1) separately for each partition.  The results, shown in Panel A of Table 5 , show that the improvement in audit 
quality (following the initial inspection) for the foreign auditor’s non-US-listed clients is largely observable only for client 
years with below-median value of LIKELIHOOD , consistent with the notion that foreign auditors with a lower likelihood 
of a PCAOB inspection are less likely to engage in pre-inspection improvements in audit quality and that, as a result, the 
improvement in post-inspection audit quality is greater.  
4. 2. 2.  Substantive increases in ﬁnancial reporting enforcement in the foreign auditor’s home country. 
The size of the externality effect could vary with institutional factors in the foreign auditor’s home country.  One such 
institutional factor identiﬁed in recent research is substantive improvements in local ﬁnancial reporting enforcement, i. e. , 
whether a country that adopts International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) undertakes enforcement-related actions 
such as creating a new enforcement agency, moving to a more proactive ﬁnancial statement review process (to ensure 
compliance with IFRS), tightening penalties for violating accounting standards, and increasing the resources available to supervisory authorities.  Christensen Name (2013) suggest that the beneﬁts of mandatory IFRS adoption are signiﬁcantly reduced 
in the absence of such substantive improvements in the IFRS-adopting country.  
In the context of our study, the improvements in ﬁnancial reporting enforcement in the foreign auditor’s home country 
could impact the magnitude of the externality effect.  When the foreign auditor’s home country has undergone a substantive 
improvement in local ﬁnancial reporting enforcement, the foreign auditor’s non-US-listed clients could show an improvement in ﬁnancial reporting quality independent of any initial PCAOB inspection of the foreign auditor.  Further, three of our 
four audit quality metrics, AB_ACC, AQ, and Prob.  (MEET) , are ﬁnancial reporting measures.  Also, an improvement in ﬁnancial reporting enforcement is likely to pressure the foreign auditor to strengthen auditor independence and improve audit 
quality as measured by our fourth metric, Prob.  (OPINION) .  In other words, and all else equal, a substantive improvement 
in local ﬁnancial reporting enforcement is likely to positively impact all four of our audit quality metrics.  Consequently, for 
foreign auditors from countries that have undergone a substantive improvement in local ﬁnancial reporting enforcement, 
the externality effect associated with the initial PCAOB inspection of the foreign auditor could be weaker.  
We utilize the proxy for substantive improvements in ﬁnancial reporting enforcement developed by Christensen Name 
(2013) for 20 02–20 09.  The proxy is a dummy variable, where 1 represents a substantive improvement in 
ﬁnancial reporting enforcement in the foreign auditor’s home country and equals zero otherwise.  Because the Christensen 
Name (2013) proxy is available for only 46 of the 55 countries in our sample and only up to 2009, our sample for this 
particular analysis is reduced to 51,157 observations.  
In Panel B of Table 5 , we split our sample into countries with and without substantive improvements in ﬁnancial reporting enforcement ( 0, respectively).  After controlling for other factors (including the 
threat of inspections, LIKELIHOOD ), we ﬁnd that, across all four of our audit quality metrics, the coeﬃcient for POSTINSPECT 
is statistically signiﬁcant only in the subsample of countries without substantive improvements in reporting enforcement.  
Put differently, our ﬁndings suggest that PCAOB international inspections could compensate for the lack of substantive improvements in local ﬁnancial reporting enforcement.  Collectively, our ﬁndings suggest that the positive externality effect 
associated with the initial PCAOB inspection of a foreign auditor is present only in countries without a substantive improvement in local ﬁnancial reporting enforcement.  
4. 2. 3.  Liability standards for accountants and auditors in the home country. 
The liability standard for accountants and auditors is a country-level proxy for the ease with which investors in a country 
can recover damages from the auditor following misleading ﬁnancial disclosures ( Francis and Wang, 2008 ).  Consistent with 
the notion that litigation risk is a driver of audit quality, Francis and Wang (2008) ﬁnd that the higher the local liability 
standard, the higher the audit quality.  
For our analysis, we include only countries for which data on accountants’ liability standards are available ( N 
We partition our sample of foreign auditors’ non-US-listed foreign clients into countries with high auditor liability ( HiLIAB 1) and low auditor liability ( HiLIAB  0), based on the median value of the liability metric ( La Porta Name, 2006 ).  This 
procedure yields 45,323 (11,4 4 4) observations and 26 (15) countries in the HiLIAB 
 0 ) subsample.  We estimate Eq (1) for each subsample separately, and the results are reported in Panel C of Table 5 .  For all our audit quality proxies, 
the coeﬃcient on POSTINSPECT is signiﬁcantly larger for the subsample of countries with low auditor liability.  Our ﬁndings 
suggest that PCAOB international inspections could compensate for weak auditor liability standards in the foreign auditor’s 
home country.  Our results show that the positive externality effect associated with the initial PCAOB inspection of a foreign 
auditor is present only in countries with weak auditor liability standards.  
4. 2. 4.  Earlier versus later initial PCAOB inspection. 
To the extent that the initial PCAOB inspection can be anticipated and the foreign auditor is able to make pre-inspection 
improvements to audit quality, the impact of the initial PCAOB inspection is likely to vary with the amount of time available 
to the foreign auditor to improve audit quality prior to the inspection.  For this analysis, we partition our sample into two 
subsamples consisting of earlier and later initial inspections.  Given that the earliest PCAOB inspection report for a foreign 
auditor is dated 2006, we view the time available for pre-inspection improvement in audit quality to be shorter for the 
24 As shown in Panel D of Table 5 , the coeﬃearlier inspections (20 06–20 08) than for the later inspections (2009–2011).  
cients of POSTINSPECT are signiﬁcantly lower for the tests of AB_ACC , AQ , and Prob. 