
It is widely known that the stock market reacts positively to earnings surprises at the ﬁrm level.  Recent research (e. g. ,
Kothari Name, 2006; Cready and Gurun, 2010) documents a negative association between stock returns and contemporaneous earnings surprises at the aggregate level, suggesting that aggregate earnings convey discount rate news.  The
exact channel through which aggregate earnings convey discount news, however, remains largely a puzzle.  In this study, we
help shed light on this question by examining: (1) whether aggregate earnings contain information about monetary policy
news as measured by unexpected changes in the Federal funds rate; (2) whether the monetary policy news in aggregate
earnings can explain the negative aggregate earnings-returns association; and (3) whether the market fully anticipates the
policy news in aggregate earnings. 
The Federal funds rate—the interest rate banks charge each other for overnight loans of reserve balances—is the U. S. 
Federal Reserve's primary tool for monetary policy.  The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is responsible for setting
the Federal funds target rate (hereafter, the target rate).  The FOMC adjusts the target rate through open market operations,
which affect the provision of reserves to depository institutions.  At each meeting, the FOMC adjusts the target rate in line
with economic developments.  When economic data are stronger (weaker) than expected, the FOMC is likely to increase
(decrease) the target rate.  A large literature ﬁnds that the stock market reacts negatively (positively) to unexpected increases
(decreases) in the target rate (e. g. , Jensen Name, 1996; Thorbecke, 1997; Jensen and Mercer, 2002; Rigobon and Sack, 2004;
Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005). 1 If aggregate earnings are positively associated with future GDP growth and inﬂation (e. g. ,
Konchitchki and Patatoukas, 2014a, 2014b; Shivakumar and Urcan, 2014), then positive (negative) aggregate earnings news
may be predictive of increases (decreases) in the target rate, resulting in a negative (positive) market reaction.  We therefore
predict that the negative aggregate earnings-returns association is driven at least in part by the monetary policy news in
aggregate earnings. 
To test this prediction, we begin by replicating Kothari Name (2006).  Speciﬁcally, we perform a quarterly analysis of the
association between stock returns and contemporaneous earnings surprises.  Because we measure monetary policy news
using changes in the target rate, we end our sample in 2007, the last year the target rate was the main policy instrument
used by the Fed.  Consistent with Kothari Name (2006), we ﬁnd a signiﬁcantly negative aggregate earnings-returns association over the 1972–2007 period.  When we control for changes in the target rate, however, this negative association
becomes insigniﬁcant.  We next conduct vector autoregression analysis and ﬁnd that aggregate earnings are predictive of
target rate changes up to one quarter ahead, even after controlling for GDP growth, inﬂation, and unemployment.  In particular, a one-standard-deviation positive shock to aggregate earnings growth is associated with a target rate hike that is
17. 5 bps higher one quarter after the shock.  This indicates that aggregate earnings convey monetary policy news that can
contribute to the negative aggregate earnings-returns association. 
We next move from the quarterly analysis to conduct two sets of short-window analyses: monthly analysis using
monthly returns and FOMC announcement analysis using one-day FOMC announcement returns.  The short-window analyses provide additional insights on the monetary policy channel.  First, monetary policy decisions are made at least eight
times a year.  As a result, there can be multiple FOMC announcements and target rate changes within a quarter (potentially in
opposite directions).  The frequency of FOMC announcements can thus make it difﬁcult to cleanly isolate the effect of target
rate changes on a quarterly basis.  Second, the short-window analyses allow us to employ Federal funds futures to construct
a market-based measure of policy news that better distinguishes the unexpected component from the expected component
of target rate changes.  This measure is important because unexpected changes in the target rate, not expected changes, are
what trigger a market reaction.  The market-based measure of policy news also allows us to examine the extent to which the
aggregate earnings-returns association is affected by the strength of the market's reaction to policy news.  Third, by utilizing
one-day policy surprises and one-day announcement returns, we can isolate the rate surprises as well as the market's
reaction for each FOMC announcement, providing direct evidence on whether the market fully anticipates the policy news
in aggregate earnings. 
For the monthly analysis, we construct monthly aggregate earnings changes using the earnings announced in the
corresponding month.  To construct monthly policy surprises, we follow Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) and use Federal
funds futures data. 