 Introduction Shareholders hire a CEO and design the compensation contract to mitigate agency costs and motivate the CEO to make value-increasing decisions.  In addition to the compensation contract, the ﬁrm's debt contract terms and the possibility that the ﬁrm's creditors may wrest control of the ﬁrm also motivate the CEO.  From the perspective of the shareholders, who each year revise the CEO's compensation contract, the incentives provided by long-term debt contracts are pre-existing.  The shareholders potentially adjust the compensation contract such that the compensation incentives, layered on top of the debt contract incentives, modify the CEO's interests to align with those of the ﬁrm's owners.  Whether the pre-existing incentives provided by the debt contract are large enough to affect how compensation contracts are written is an interesting open question.  This study investigates whether the pre-existing debt contract provisions affect the compensation contract struck between the ﬁrm's owners and the CEO.  I document that when the ﬁrm's debt contracts include earnings-based covenants the CEO's cash compensation contract is less sensitive to earnings performance measures.  Prior studies that consider only the performance incentives embedded in the compensation contract potentially underestimate the strength of the CEO's incentives to perform.  Debt contracts are an important class of contracts that provide incentives to the CEO.  Prior literature explores the use of earnings performance measures in debt and compensation contracts, respectively, and documents that contracted performance measures inﬂuence the CEO.  However, the literature is silent on how the use of a performance measure in one contract relates to its use in the other.  In this study, I investigate how the inclusion of earnings-based performance measures in debt contracts inﬂuence the use of earnings-based performance measures in the CEO's compensation contract.  Moreover, this study speaks to the recent and repeated criticism of executive compensation practices in both academic literature and the business press.  Criticisms of the apparently weak relation between the CEO's compensation and the ﬁrm's earnings performance highlight the importance for researchers, investors, and the media to understand how the CEO's incentives are shaped.  By ignoring the earnings incentives provided by the ﬁrm's debt contracts, critics may underestimate the CEO's incentives to perform.  This study provides a unique view of the CEO's earnings incentives as the combined incentives provided by earnings-based provisions in debt contracts and earningsbased performance measures in compensation contracts.  Shareholders use contractible performance measures, such as earnings, to motivate CEOs to apply effort and make decisions in the shareholders’ best interests.  By tying cash compensation to earnings, shareholders provide the CEO with incentives to deliver higher earnings performance.  Empirical studies consistently corroborate theoretical predictions of positive correlations between earnings and CEO cash compensation (e. g. , Lambert and Larcker, 1987.  Sloan, 1993.  Baber et al. , 1996).  In debt contracts, earnings-based performance measures also motivate the CEO to focus on earnings.  Beneish and Press (1993, 1995) ﬁnd that violating ﬁnancial debt covenants results in real costs to the ﬁrm such as higher interest rates and renegotiation costs.  Incremental to these ﬁrm-speciﬁc costs, Nini et al.  (2012) document a personal cost for the CEO following technical default.  Holding other performance variables constant, Nini et al.  (2012) ﬁnd that the likelihood of forced CEO turnover increases by 60% upon technical default.  Additionally, violating the ﬁrm's debt contract terms may damage the CEO's relationship with the lender and strain future negotiations.  Thus, debt contracts provide the CEO with performance incentives such that CEOs will strive to maintain earnings above the level speciﬁed in earnings-based covenants.  Both debt and cash compensation contracts provide the CEO with incentives to focus on earnings through the explicit use of earnings-based performance measures. 1 When debt contract terms are pre-existing (i. e. , the debt contract is in place when the compensation contract is structured) shareholders should consider the effect of these terms and determine how much more (or less) earnings-based incentive to provide in the CEO's cash compensation contract.  I expect that shareholders will reduce the earnings-based incentives provided by the compensation contract when debt contracts provide the CEO with pre-existing earnings-based incentives.  Thus, the inclusion of earnings-based covenants in the debt contract relate to a tilting of the CEO's incentives in the compensation contract away from earnings performance.  However, the CEO's combined incentives, provided by the earnings-based measures in the debt and compensation contracts, are at the level that best serves the shareholders’ interests.  Consequently, I predict that earnings-based covenants are associated with a reduction in the CEO's cash compensation sensitivity to earnings (hereafter CCSE).  In addition to the inclusion of earnings-based covenants in the debt contract, earnings-based covenant slack (i. 