 Introduction Corporate takeovers have lon g been considered a governance mechanism that can help reduce management entrenchment and improve productive efficiency of management (e. g. , Grossman and Hart, 1980.  Fama, 1980.  Jensen and Ruback, 1983.  Scharfstein, 1988, Jensen, 1993). 1 Consequently, firms that have antitakeover provisions (henceforth ATPs) in place are often considered to be relatively inefficient.  Consistent with the perceived inefficiency of ATPs, a stream of research finds that high ATP firms have lower accounting performance, lower Tobin's Q, and lower reinvestment rates, relative to low ATP firms (e. g. , Gompers, Ishii and Metrick, 2003.  Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2003.  Bebchuk and Cohen, 2005.  Bebchuk, Cohen and Ferrell, 2009.  Cohen and Wang, 2013).  However, despite negative portrayals in much of the archival research and popular opinion, ATPs remain prevalent among the S&P 500 companies, with about 60% of these firms having staggered boards and poison pills in place.  These provisions are also common in the charters of initial public offerings (Daines, 2001.  Daines and Klausner, 2001).  If ATPs unambiguously lead to inefficiencies, the question arises as to why market forces have not eliminated their use over time.  In this paper we attempt to address this disconnect by exploring the potential role of ATPs in long-term value creation.  We identify a set of firms focused on long-term growth (innovative firms) that are most likely to benefit from ATPs and use an exogenous event to isolate the benefit. 2 We suggest that while the threat of corporate takeovers can curb managerial inefficiencies, it can also create incentives for myopic behavior by managers.  Fear of takeover and the associated employment risk may cause managers to take actions that are focused on maximizing short-term price rather than long-term value.  Jensen (2005) states that “when numbers are manipulated to tell the market what they want to hear … and when real operating decisions that would maximize value are compromised to meet market expectations, real long-term value is being destroyed. ”.  Stein (1988) argues that ATPs can help managers pursue long-term goals more effectively by insulating them from short-term market pressures.  The reasoning is that capital market pressures, including the threat of takeovers and the associated employment risk, can cause management to behave myopically, shun projects that may carry a higher risk of early failures, and focus on maximizing short-term price (Holmstrom, 1989).  Manso (2011) proposes a similar argument for managerial protection as a means of encouraging innovation.  Rather than taking a one-size-fits-all view of ATPs and estimating their average effect on all firms, we explore a setting where such provisions can be beneficial to investors. 3 We use a number of alternative designs to explore the effect of anti-takeover protection on innovative and non-innovative firms.  Our primary research design is to explore the effects of a state law change in Delaware that significantly increased the takeover costs of firms incorporated there.  Bebchuk and Cohen (2005), Low (2009), and Atanassov (2013) discuss how the implementation of state law change in Delaware in 1995 made it easier for firms to use certain takeover defenses such as poison pills to block hostile takeovers.  We examine the effect of this exogenous event on a firm's Tobin's Q.  Using a difference-in-difference approach, we examine the effect of the regime change on innovative firms incorporated in Delaware and compare it to the effect on other firms.  We find that after the change in state law, Delaware-based innovative firms enjoyed a significant improvement in their Tobin's Q compared to both Delaware-based non-innovative firms and non-Delaware-based innovative firms.  Given that the state law change was particularly relevant to firms with poison pills and staggered boards in place, we explore whether its effect is stronger for firms with above-average protection.  Using data obtained from the Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC), we partition the sample into protected and unprotected firms using three alternative measures of takeover protection.  presence or absence of poison pills (PPILL), presence or absence of staggered boards (SB) and above/below median value of the entrenchment index (EINDEX) proposed by Bebchuk et al.  (2009). 4 Using these three measures, we compare the effects of the Delaware law change for protected and innovative (PI) firms relative to the other groups.  We find that Delaware-based PI firms experience a statistically and economically significant improvement in their Tobin's Q subsequent to the state law change.  This improvement is greater than those experienced by all other Delawarebased firms, including the unprotected and innovative (UPI) firms and the protected and non-innovative (PNI) firms.  We perform additional analyses using an event study design around the dates on which the court rulings were announced.  The first date is January 11, 1995 when the Supreme Court of Delaware allowed Unitrin Inc.  to use both a poison pill and share repurchases to fend off a hostile takeover bid from American General Corp.  The second is December 4 1995, when the U. S.  District Court for the District of Delaware denied Moore Corp.  Ltd. ’s motion against the use of poison pills as an antitakeover mechanism by Wallace Computer Services Inc.  Using these two dates as our focal points, we examine 2-day and 4-day cumulative abnormal returns subsequent to the ruling dates for PI and UPI firms.  The results show that PI firms experience greater cumulative abnormal returns subsequent to the rulings than UPI firms do, and these results are statistically significant for PPILL- and EINDEX-based measures of protection.  In order to rule out the alternative explanation that PI firms outperform UPI firms in general and not just on the state law change dates, we bootstrap the empirical distribution of the difference between cumulative abnormal returns of PI and UPI firms around other dates.  Our results do not support the alternative hypothesis.  Overall, the results of our tests based on the state law change events are consistent with the idea that takeover protection can benefit a set of firms, and that markets seem to understand this benefit.  Therefore, while some firm managers can certainly use takeover protection to reap private benefits, others can use the protection to maximize long-term goals of shareholders more effectively.  We conduct additional analyses to compare Tobin's Q of PI and UPI firms in a cross-sectional setting.  Prior to this comparison, however, we employ a propensity score matching sample methodology to pair PI firms with UPI firms based on firm characteristics.  This helps to reduce the likelihood that the results of a cross-sectional analysis are driven by other omitted factors.  We find that PI firms’ Tobin's Q exceeds that of the UPI firms by an economically and statistically significant level.  This finding further supports our primary finding that ATPs can be beneficial to firms with a long-term focus.  Our results so far provide evidence that PI firms outperform UPI firms.  We attempt to identify empirical evidence on a possible mechanism for this.  Stein (1988) suggests that protected firms would be less susceptible to short-term market pressures, so we explore whether PI firms are less likely than UPI firms to engage in harmful real earnings management when faced with the pressure to meet or beat analyst forecasts.  Using an aggregate measure of real earnings management along the lines of Roychoudhury (2006) and Cohen et al.  (2015), we find that PI firms are less likely than UPI firms to engage in value-destroying activities, such as cutting investment in R&D and advertising expenditures, or boosting profit through overproduction, in order to meet or narrowly beat analysts’ earnings expectations.  Our paper contributes to the existing research in several important ways.  First, we provide empirical evidence that some firms use takeover protection to enhance performance and that stock market participants understand this benefit and price these firms accordingly.  This is in contrast to much of the earlier research that explores the average effects of ATPs on all firms and documents a negative association between ATPs and firm performance.  The finding that ATPs are beneficial for a group of innovative firms helps explain the persistence of these provisions and provides an explanation for the puzzling finding that many IPO firms, including ones backed by venture capitalists, either have ATPs in place at the time of the IPO or institute them soon thereafter. 5 Second, while much of the prior work linking ATPs to firm performance uses either a crosssectional research design or examines an endogenous event (such as management's decision to de-stagger the board), we use the exogenous event of state law change in Delaware to examine how firm performance is affected by innovation and pre-existing ATPs.  This setting allows us to address many of the endogeneity concerns that plague the other studies and provides us with a richer setting to tease out the effect of takeover protection.  Finally, by using multiple measures of ATPs and by conducting numerous tests using both an event-study approach and a cross-sectional design, we provide a comprehensive body of evidence in support of the beneficial role of ATPs, while reducing the risk that our findings are an artifact of a particular variable or research design choice.  The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 discusses the prior literature on the effects of ATPs, Section 3 describes the data, Section 4 discusses the research design and results of the primary tests using state law changes, Section 5 reports the results of additional analyses, Section 6 reports some sensitivity analyses, and Section 7 concludes the paper.  2.  Literature survey.  Theoretical literature on takeover defenses provides two longstanding views of the effects of ATPs.  One view, which stems from the seminal works of Fama (1980), Grossman and Hart (1980) and Jensen (1993), is that managers who are protected from takeover threats tend to shirk, and to engage in activities that are not necessarily in the best interests of shareholders.  this reduces shareholder wealth and operating efficiency.  Therefore, by removing the takeover threats, ATPs can lead to management entrenchment and inefficiency.  An alternative view is that takeover pressures can cause management to get overly focused on short-term goals, thereby neglecting projects that yield benefits over the long-term.  Holmstrom (1989) argues that market pressures can cause management to focus on short-term projects and neglect potentially value-enhancing long-term projects.  Stein (1988) develops a setting in which information asymmetry between managers and investors about the profitability of innovative long-term projects leads investors to undervalue firms that make long-term investments, exposing these firms to a greater threat of takeover.  In this setting, the existence of ATPs helps reduce management's incentive to choose projects that yield quicker returns in the short term.  Shleifer and Vishny (1990) raise similar concerns about takeover threats tempering innovation and growth.  Finally, Manso (2011) develops an analytical model showing that some degree of protection of management is helpful in motivating innovation.  It is significant to note that much of the early empirical work recognizes and discusses the pros and cons of ATPs as identified in theoretical literature and discussed in this paper.  However, much of the recent work highlights the negative theoretical underpinnings of ATPs.  Early work addressing this debate includes Linn and McConnell (1983), Jarrell and Poulsen (1987), Szewczyk and Tsetsekos (1992), and Melbrouek et al.  (1990).  Using an event study, Linn and McConnell (1983) find a positive reaction to the adoption of ATPs, while Jarrell and Poulsen (1987) find the announcement of various antitakeover amendments to have an insignificant effect on share prices, on average.  In an interesting early natural experiment study in this area, Szewczyk and Tsetsekos (1992) find that the passage of a 1990 Pennsylvania Senate bill, which reduced shareholders’ ability to challenge management through the proxy process, resulted in a decrease in shareholder value.  However, this study was limited to 56 firms and did not partition firms based on their likelihood of benefiting from ATPs.  Using a sample of 203 firms, Meulbroek et al.  (1990) attempt to directly test Stein's (1988) conclusion that ATPs can reduce myopic behavior.  They find results counter to expectations and consistent with the entrenchment hypothesis.  More recent studies using bigger samples and longer periods of coverage generally highlight the negative effects of ATPs.  Gompers et al.  (2003) document that firms with relatively greater number of ATPs in place have lower firm value and stock returns.  This is consistent with ATPs reducing the effectiveness of one form of monitoring mechanism, resulting in managerial inefficiencies.  Bebchuk et al.  (2009) come to similar conclusions using a selected subset of the ATPs reported in the IRRC.  Focusing on staggered boards only, Bebchuk and Cohen (2005) find a negative association between the presence of staggered boards and firm value.  It is important to note that all of these studies use a cross-sectional research design and examine the average effect of ATPs without considering the effects of ATPs across various subgroups.  One paper that does explore the effects of ATPs across different types of firms is Falaye (2007b).  Like Bebchuk and Cohen (2005), he uses a cross-sectional approach to examine the effect of staggered boards on firm value (Tobin's Q), and finds a negative association between the two.  Furthermore, he finds that this negative association continues to hold for firms with positive R&D.  Using the same research design as Falaye (2007b), we are able to replicate the results in that paper.  However, the cross-sectional approach suffers from significant endogeneity concerns, which can be addressed by using a natural experiment (as we do in this paper).  Using the state law change approach significantly alters Faleye's results and conclusions.  Furthermore, given our intent to identify firms that have a longer-term focus than their peers, we use partitions based on industry-adjusted R&D (rather than positive or negative R&D).  We find that these two design changes help explain why our results differ from his.  While much of the empirical work in this area provides evidence consistent with the entrenchment view of ATPs, some recent papers question the robustness of these findings.  In the context of staggered boards, Cremers et al.  (2014) find that in a time-series setting, firms that adopt staggered boards experience improvements in firm value, whereas firms that destagger their boards experience deterioration in value.  Ge et al.  (2014) examine firms that de-stagger their boards and find a number of negative effects, including a reduction in ROA and a decrease in R&D investments.  Larcker et al.  (2011) examine the market reaction to a broad set of recent legislative and regulatory events related to corporate governance regulation, and observe a negative relation between the market reaction to regulation increasing shareholder rights and the presence of staggered boards.  While recognizing that this finding is counter to prior work, they do not delve into the potential reasons for this finding. 6 Our work contributes to this literature in two key ways.  First, in contrast to much of the earlier research that explores cross-sectional differences or endogenous events (such as management's decision to change the board structure), our primary tests use an exogenous event of state law change to avoid long-standing concerns about endogeneity in governance studies.  Second, our study explicitly focuses on identifying whether ATPs are beneficial to a sub-sample of firms in the market, rather than tackle the broader question of whether ATPs are harmful or beneficial on average.  <Middle> Data.  Our initial sample consists of all firms with information on the ATP measures for the years 1990–2007 available in the Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC) database.  IRRC provides data on 24 anti-takeover provisions over this period, including information on corporate charter provisions such as poison pills and classified boards.  Bebchuk et al.  (2009) find that of the 24 ATPs, six have the strongest anti-takeover impact.  staggered boards, limits to shareholder bylaw amendments, poison pills, golden parachutes, and supermajority requirements for mergers and charter amendments.  They create an index (EINDEX) which is the number of these six provisions a firm has in place as their proposed measure of ATP.  We use this as one of our measures of ATP.  The 1995 state law change is primarily related to the use of poison pills.  In addition, a stream of research has focused special attention on staggered boards (e. g. , Bebchuk et al. , 2002.  Bebchuk and Cohen, 2005.  Bebchuk et al. , 2009.  Cohen and Wang, 2013) as an important anti-takeover provision.  We therefore use two separate indicator variables, PPILL and SB, to capture the effects of poison pills and staggered boards, respectively.  Beginning in 1998, the IRRC started providing information on ATPs every alternate year.  In some cases prior to this period, data were missing for two consecutive years.  Therefore, information on the measures is available only for the years where IRRC data are available.  Following most of the prior studies using these measures, we replace data in missing years with the last available year's information (e. g. , Gompers et al. , 2003.  Core et al. , 2006).  This helps us increase the sample size considerably but can also introduce noise to the extent that the indices change over this period.  However, research indicates that these indices are relatively stable over time (e. g. , Gompers et al. , 2003), suggesting the error resulting from this assumption may not be extreme. 7 We measure managerial long-term focus (innovation) based on R&D expenditure deflated by net sales (RND). 8 Our initial population consists of non-financial firms with available IRRC data and identifiable GVKEYs.  Depending on the nature of the tests being run, we apply various other screens to the initial sample, the final usable sample varies from test to test.  We describe these specific screens in each of the relevant sections.  4.  Tobin's Q and stock returns surrounding state law changes.  We use a number of alternative research designs to explore the link between takeover defenses and long-term focus of the firm.  Our primary set of tests, which we discuss in this section, uses the state law change in Delaware as a natural experimental setting to explore 1) the effects of ATPs on value creation, and 2) how the stock market reacts to the state law change.  We discuss the results of additional cross-sectional analyses in Section 5.  4. 1.  Tobin's Q surrounding state law change.  In 1995 there was a significant change in the takeover regime in Delaware, brought about by a number of court rulings that legitimized the use of poison pills and staggered boards to protect firms from hostile takeovers bids.  Before 1995, a target company seeking to fend off a hostile takeover needed to demonstrate that the takeover bid presented a threat, and that the defense used by the company was proportional to the threat (Unocal Corp v.  Mesa Petroleum Co.  (493 A. 2d 946, Del.  1985)).  Furthermore, the targets’ right to use a poison pill was not absolute, and any use of the pill was subject to judicial oversight. 9 The Delaware Supreme Court's ruling in Unitrin v.  American General Corp (651 A. 2d 1361, Del.  1995) in 1995 changed this environment by relaxing the conditions under which hostile bids were considered threats as well as by limiting the scope of judicial scrutiny.  The court indicated that a board's reasonable perception of threat is sufficient to establish the existence of a threat.  Therefore, the Unitrin ruling is considered to have increased management's power to “just say no” to hostile takeover bids.  A second 1995 ruling, in the case of Moore Corp.  Ltd.  v.  Wallace Computer Services, Inc.  (898F.  Supp.  D.  Del.  1995), further affirmed the boards’ use of poison pills to defend themselves against hostile takeovers. 10 Thus, the changes initiated by these events in Delaware in 1995 provide us a unique setting of an exogenous shock to firms’ takeover defense environment.  Focusing on this exogenous state law event allows us to address endogeneity concerns that may arise when firms are partitioned based on takeover defenses.  We follow prior research to identify 1995 as the year of the takeover regime change in Delaware (e. g. , Low 2009).  The period after the regime change is captured by the dummy AFT that takes the value 1 for the years 1996 and later.  0 otherwise (1995 is dropped from the analysis). 11 In order to keep the same number of years for the before and after periods, we use data up to year 2000 for this part of the analysis.  Our sample selection screens are shown in panel A of Table 1.  Starting from the sample of all non-financial firms with IRRC data for the periods 1990–1994 and 1996–2000 (10,934 observations), we lose 1,050 observations due to missing data on financial variables.  We further require the sample firms to be present in year 1994 before the Delaware court rulings occurred in 1995 in order to ensure that they have experienced the change in the anti-takeover environment.  Our final sample for this set of tests has 7,923 firm-years observations.  Summary statistics of the key variables used in the regression analyses are reported in panel A of Table 1.  To mitigate the effect of outliers, we winsorize the top and bottom 1% of all continuous variables.  About 58% of firms have poison pills, and 60% have staggered boards in place.  On average, firms have an EINDEX of 2. 3.  The average market value of the companies is $5 billion (median of $0. 99 billion).  The average market value is higher than the Compustat population because IRRC collects takeover defense information only for larger firms.  However, there is significant variation in market value across the sample, as indicated by the standard deviation of almost $19 billion.  On average, capital expenditures are about 7% of total assets.  about 21% of total assets are supported by borrowings.  average return on assets is 11%.  and average Tobin's Q is 1. 7.  Panel C provides the correlation matrix.  As would be expected, PPILL, EINDEX, and SB are highly correlated.  Our first set of tests focuses on the effect of the state law change on Tobin's Q.  If innovative firms in Delaware benefit from the state law change, these firms should experience an improvement in Tobin's Q.  We test this hypothesis by running a number of tests.  Our first specification is as follows, where the variables are as defined in Appendix A.  We estimate Eq.  (1) separately for innovative and non-innovative firms, incorporated both inside and outside of Delaware, respectively.  The results are reported in columns 2 through 5 of Table 2, panel A.  For the innovative firms in Delaware (column 2), we find that the coefficient for AFT is 0. 386 and statistically significant at the 0. 01 level.  For the non-innovative firms in Delaware (column 3), the coefficient is 0. 041 and not statistically significant.  For the innovative firms in non-Delaware states (column 4), the coefficient for AFT is 0. 196 and statistically significant at the 0. 01 level.  For the non-innovative firms in non-Delaware states (column 5) the coefficient is 0. 1 and statistically significant at the 0. 01 level.  A comparison of the coefficients of AFT shows that AFT had the strongest effect on Tobin's Q for innovative firms in Delaware.  In order to statistically compare the difference between the effect of state law change on innovative firms and non-innovative firms, we conduct a Z-test of the difference in coefficients for AFT across different groups (we also conduct the Chow test, which yields similar results). 12 The results are reported in panel B of Table 2.  Row 1 tests for the differences in the coefficients of AFT between Delaware-innovative and Delaware-non-innovative firms (columns 2 and 3 of panel A, Table 2), and shows that the difference is statistically significant at the 0. 01 level.  This is consistent with the hypothesis that innovative firms in Delaware experience a greater change in Tobin's Q, compared to non-innovative firms in that state.  A similar test of difference in the coefficient for AFT between innovative and non-innovative firms outside of Delaware (difference in the coefficients of AFT across columns 4 and 5 of panel A), reported in row 2 of panel B, shows that the coefficients are only weakly statistically different.  The fact that the coefficients are somewhat different even outside of Delaware may suggest that the state law change had a spillover effect, although the evidence in support of this is rather weak.  Next, we examine whether the difference in the coefficient for AFT between columns 2 and 3 is significantly different from the difference in the coefficient for AFT between columns 4 and 5.  To carry out this difference-in-difference test, we first estimate a pooled regression that combines the samples from all Delaware firms (columns 2 and 3).  In this regression, we run a fully interacted model by interacting the bivariate variable INNOV with all covariates, including industry fixed effects.  The interaction term, INNOV*AFT, is consistent with the Z-test reported in row 1 of panel B of Table 2.  Next we repeat this procedure to run a fully interacted regression by pooling all non-Delaware firms (columns 4 and 5 in Panel A).  In this regression, the interaction term, INNOV*AFT, is consistent with the Z-test of the difference between columns 4 and 5, as reported in row 2 of panel B of Table 2.  We then conduct the Z-test for the difference in the regression coefficient of INNOV*AFT across these two pooled regressions.  The results, reported in row 3 of Table 2 (panel B), show that the difference is positive and statistically significant at the 0. 01 level.  Overall, the results in Table 2 are consistent with Delaware innovative firms experiencing greater benefits from the state law change than do either Delaware non-innovative firms or non-Delaware firms.  4. 2.  ATPs and Tobin's Q surrounding state law change.  We extend the above analysis to a subset of firms that are more likely to be affected by the state law change.  Prior work suggests that the Delaware court rulings are more relevant to firms that already enjoy takeover protection, particularly those with existing poison pills.  Therefore, we examine whether protected and innovative (i. e. , PI) firms benefit more from the state law change relative to unprotected and innovative (i. e. , UPI) firms.  To identify these two groups of firms, we use information on ATPs from IRRC to partition firms into protected and unprotected in one of three ways.  PPILL, EINDEX, and SB (as defined in Appendix A).  For this analysis we focus only on Delaware firms, since these are the firms directly impacted by the state law change.  Our regression specification is the same as in Eq.  (1).  Columns 2 and 3 of Table 3 (Panel A) report the results of regression for innovative and non-innovative protected firms, respectively, while columns 4 and 5 report the results for the two groups of unprotected Delaware firms.  To conserve space, we report the regression results using only one measure of protection, based on the presence or absence of poison pills (PPILL), in Panel A.  In column 2 of the panel A, we observe that the coefficient for AFT is positive and statistically significant at the 0. 01 level as anticipated.  The coefficients on AFT are positive in all of the columns and statistically significant in columns 2–4.  However, as expected, the coefficient is largest in column 2.  To compare the difference in coefficients across two samples in panel A of Table 3, we use the Z-test and a pooled regression design similar to the one in Section 4. 1 above (Table 2).  Panel B provides results on the Z-test.  Row 1 compares the coefficients of AFT in columns 2 and 3 and suggests that AFT is significantly higher in column 2 (innovative firms) than in column 3 (non-innovative firms), using all three measures of protection.  An examination of row 2 suggests that a similar effect exists for unprotected firms, though the coefficients on AFT are smaller than in row 1, which is consistent with expectations.  Next, we examine whether the difference between columns 2 and 3 is significantly different from the difference between columns 4 and 5.  The results, reported in row 3, panel B of Table 3, show that the difference is positive and statistically significant at the conventional level in two of the three specifications.  This suggests that the differential increase in Tobin's Q for protected innovative firms as compared with non-innovative firms was greater than the differential increase experienced by unprotected firms, thereby indicating that the Delaware Court rulings in 1995 were particularly beneficial to firms that were protected and innovative.  4. 3.  Returns-based event study around state law change.  We perform further analysis to explore the link between takeover defenses and long-term focus of firms using an event study analysis around the dates on which the court rulings were announced.  The first date is Jan.  11, 1995, when the Supreme Court of Delaware allowed Unitrin Inc.  to use both a poison pill and share repurchases to fend off a hostile takeover bid from American General Corp.  The second is Dec.  4, 1995, when the U. S.  District Court for the District of Delaware denied Moore Corp.  Ltd. ’s motion against the use of poison pill as an antitakeover mechanism by Wallace Computer Services Inc.  Using these two dates as our focal points, we examine cumulative abnormal returns for a period of up to 3 days subsequent to the ruling dates.  Following Larcker et al.  (2011) and Cohen and Wang (2013), we integrate the two events in our announcement returns analysis by pooling the observations from both events.  This pooling has the advantage of increasing the sample size and the power of our empirical tests.  We examine whether PI firms experienced greater cumulative abnormal returns subsequent to the rulings than the UPI firms did.  In addition to the difference-in-difference research design using exogenous state law changes, the return-based specification is another way to alleviate the concerns related to endogeneity and omitted variable bias.  it significantly reduces the likelihood that unobserved, firm-specific factors may drive the results.  We start with 1,024 observations in year 1995 from the initial sample.  We keep the innovative firms only in order to compare PI and UPI firms.  We are able to collect the stock returns for all but 7 of the firms.  Panel A of Table 4 details our sample screen procedure.  Panels B and C of Table 4 report the results from pooled ordinary least squares regressions by regressing the combined cumulative abnormal returns around the January 11, 1995 and December 4 1995 court rulings on an indicator variable, PROTECT, which takes the value of 1 for protected firms and zero otherwise.  Panel B reports the results using the market model, where the market return is the equally-weighted CRSP return over the 200 trading days ending on 10 days before the court ruling date.  Panel C of Table 4 reports the results using each firm's loadings on the four-factor model based on Fama-French three factors (Fama and French, 1993) and the momentum factor (Carhart, 1997) over the 200 trading days ending 10 days before the court ruling date.  We compute cumulative abnormal returns over [0, 1] and [0, 3] return windows, where 0 represents the date the ruling was issued.  The results show that the coefficients of PROTECT are positive in all settings and statistically significant when protection is measured in terms of PPILL or EINDEX.  The results are not significant for protection measured in terms of SB.  These results are largely consistent with markets’ viewing the state law change positively for protected, innovative firms relative to non-protected, innovative firms, and they support the argument that takeover protection can be beneficial for innovative firms.  4. 4.  Comparing event date returns with non-event date returns.  The market reaction results reported in Section 4. 3 show that the PI firms experienced a stronger positive market reaction to the court rulings in Delaware, compared to the UPI firms.  However, it is possible that on average, on any given day, the PI firms experience higher returns than the UPI firms do.  If this is the case, the effect we observe may not be attributable to the state law change.  To deal with this possibility, we follow the Monte Carlo simulation design in Larcker et al.  (2011) to compare the difference in the coefficients for PROTECT across event (court ruling) dates and non-event dates.  We start by identifying the period between January 17 1995 and December 1 1995 as the non-event period. 13 For each day within this non-event period, we compute excess returns in two ways, as we did in Section 4. 3, using the market model and the fourfactor model.  Next we compute cumulative abnormal returns over two alternative windows.  [0, 1] and [0, 3].  This lets us compare the 2-day event returns with the 2-day non-event returns and, similarly, the 4-day event returns with the 4-day non-event returns.  We then bootstrap 1,000 non-event dates from this period to estimate the coefficient for PROTECT from the pooled ordinary least square regression of cumulative non-event abnormal returns on the indicator variable PROTECT, where PROTECT equals one when firms are in the PI group and zero when they are in the UPI group, for each bootstrapped non-event date.  As in Section 4. 3, we classify firms into PI and UPI separately based on PPILL, EINDEX, or SB for each bootstrapped non-event date.  The empirical distribution of these 1,000 coefficients can then be compared with that of the event dates to determine whether or not the protected firms experience greater abnormal returns around the event dates.  The results of our analysis are shown in Table 5.  Consistent with Larcker et al.  (2011) and Cohen and Wang (2013), we consider the dates of the two court rulings (Jan.  11 and Dec.  4) as separate events and compare the abnormal returns around these event dates to the abnormal returns on non-event dates to generate the simulated benchmark distributions.  Table 5 shows that for two-day returns [0, 1], the coefficients for the January and December events are significantly higher than the non-event returns over the same window length, and the difference is statistically significant at the 0. 01 level for five of six specifications based on the market model (shown in panel A), and for all specifications (panel B) based on the four-factor model.  For 4-day returns [0, 3], the coefficients for the January and December events are significant at the 0. 01 level for five of six specifications for both the market model specification as well as the four-factor model specification (panels C and D).  These results suggest that the abnormal returns observed for the PI firms around the state law change dates in Table 4 are not simply a result of these firms outperforming UPI firms on average.  5.  Additional cross-sectional analyses.  We conduct additional tests aimed at improving our level of comfort with the event-based results in the previous section, and discuss these additional tests below.  5. 1.  Takeover defenses and propensity score matching sample analysis.  Our first alternative approach in examining the link between ATPs and firms’ long-term value creation is to use a propensity score matching methodology.  Under this approach, we first develop a model of the likelihood of a firm being protected as opposed to unprotected, and use this model to generate a propensity score for each firm.  We then match each PI firm in our sample with the UPI firm that has the highest propensity score, and use this matched sample for our crosssectional tests.  This approach helps us identify two groups of firms that are similar except in their actual takeover protection levels, reducing the concern that the results of the cross-sectional analysis are driven by other omitted factors which could result in a functional form misspecification (Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983.  Shipman et al. , 2016).  This alternative approach helps provide additional support for the results from the regulatory change analysis.  Since PI and UPI firms differ in levels of takeover protection, we appeal to the literature on takeovers to identify factors that would influence the level of ATPs of firms (e. g. , Field and Karpoff, 2002.  Cremers et al. , 2009).  Drawing upon this work, we identify several firm characteristics that are relevant to takeover pressure, including CASH, PPE, ROA, LOGASSET, LEV, SALEGR, LOGAGE and INST (all variables are defined in Appendix A).  The data source for INST is Thomson Financial (derived from 13F filings on Common Stock Holdings & Transactions).  We include a variable, STATELAW, designed to capture differences across states in their legal stances towards takeover defenses (e. g. , Karpoff and Malatesta, 1989.  Field and Karpoff, 2002.  and Chemmanur et al. , 2011).  We also include a variable to capture industry takeover intensity (THREAT).  In addition, we include measures to capture a firm's corporate governance structure, in order to explain the differences in ATPs at firmyear level.  The data source for these governance features is Compact Disclosure and Corporate Library. 14 The empirical specification of the model estimated is as follows (all of the explanatory variables are measured at the beginning of the Where PROTECT takes the value 1 if a firm is a protected firm and 0 otherwise.  Focusing solely on PI and UPI firms (dropping non-innovative firms) we are left with 6,265 observations of non-financial firms with IRRC data for 1990–2007.  We then delete observations with missing financial and governance controls, resulting in 5,055 observations for our first stage estimation.  The sample selection process is described in panel A of Table 6.  Panel B of Table 6 reports the results of the estimation of Eq.  (2).  The table shows that PROTECT is associated with several firm characteristics, including size, leverage, and cash.  Interestingly, firms with greater institutional ownership are more likely to be protected, as are firms with greater board of directors’ size (LBRDSIZE) and a larger percentage of outside directors on the board (OUTDIR) at the beginning of the year.  The finding that, within the sample of firms with long-term focus, the likelihood of being protected is positively associated with measures of better governance quality may suggest that these factors play a part in explaining why the takeover defenses are being used to benefit the firm.  In other words, it is possible that good governance complements the takeover protections in place in influencing the long-term orientation of the protected firms in the sample.  We also find that PI firms are more likely to have a combined CEO/Chairman position at the beginning of the year. 15 Finally, as expected, firms located in states with anti-takeover laws are more likely to be in our PIThe results of the estimation of Eq.  (2) allow us to create a propensity score for each firm in our sample.  If a UPI firm has a score similar to a PI firm, the two firms are expected to be similar on multiple dimensions.  Based on the predicted probability of being in the PI group, we match each PI firm with the closest UPI firm within the same industry and year based on the propensity scores.  We allow replacement when drawing the control firms.  We set the neighbor distance at 0. 25 to ensure the closeness of the PI-UPI pairs.  Panel A of Table 7 reports the comparison of the PI-UPI pairs.  It shows that our matched sample produces good balance in firm characteristics.  Only a few dimensions of firm characteristics are found to be statistically different when protection is identified in terms of PPILL (2 of the 13), EINDEX (4 of the 13), and SB (1 of the 13), and even in these cases the economic differences seem minor. 16 Using this sample of matched firms, we compare the future Tobin's Q between the PI and UPI firms for the entire sample period (1990–2007).  We start with univariate comparisons and report the results in panel B of Table 7.  We find that the PI firms enjoy higher future Tobin's Q compared with the UPI firms in all three settings and the differences are statistically significant for PPILL and SB.  The differences are also economically significant.  For example, for PPILL, the difference is 5. 8% (0. 114/1. 98).  Overall, the results in panel B of Table 7 reinforce the findings from the state law change analysis in Section 4 that takeover defenses can be beneficial to a subset of firms focused on long-term value creation.  The propensity score matching approach allows us to control for differences across various firm characteristics, creating a sample that is matched in aggregate despite possible minor differences across some financial dimensions.  Therefore, we also carry out a regression analysis by including the financial controls used in Eq.  (1), since these variables are commonly used to explain the difference in Tobin's Q.  In addition, we include the variables for which we are unable to attain covariate balance between treated (PI) and untreated (UPI) firms in panel A of Table 7.  Finally, we control for year and industry fixed effects.  All standard errors have been adjusted for firm and year level clustering.  We run an ordinary least square regression of future Tobin's Q on an indicator variable PROTECT, where PROTECT is based on the value of PPILL, EINDEX, and SB, as defined in Section 4. 2.  The results, reported in panel C of Table 7, show that PI firms continue to have higher Tobin's Q than UPI firms even after controlling for differences in these financial variables, although the results are somewhat weaker than the univariate results of panel B.  5. 2.  Takeover defenses and market pressure.  We have argued that one of the benefits of ATPs is that they reduce management's incentive to behave myopically and make managers less susceptible to short-term market pressures (Stein, 1988.  Bar-Gill and Bebchuk, 2003).  If managers engage in myopic behaviors such as cutting R&D and advertising expenditures to meet or beat analysts’ expectations, these actions could hurt future productivity and therefore could reduce the long-term efficiency of the firm.  In this section we examine whether PI firms are less likely to succumb to market pressures and engage in potentially harmful myopic behaviors, compared to UPI firms.  We start by estimating three separate real earnings management components.  abnormal discretionary expenses (AB_DISEXP), abnormal cash flows from operations (AB_CFO), and abnormal production costs (AB_PROD), as in Roychoudhury (2006).  These three measures are the residuals from the following three models, respectively (estimated separately for each two-digit SIC code and year).  Where DISCEXP is the sum of R&D expenditures, advertising expenses, and selling, general, and administrative expenses for the year.  PROD represents production costs measured by the sum of costs of goods sold and change in inventory during the year.  CFO is cash flow from operations.  ASSET is total assets.  SALE is net sales.  and ΔSALE represents the change in net sales (current versus previous year).  We then aggregate the components to create a combined real earnings management measure as in Bradertscher (2011) and Cohen (2015).  The combined measure REM is such that the higher is REM, the more likely the firm is engaged in income-increasing real earnings management. 17 If PI firms are less likely to engage in income-increasing real earnings management than UPI firms are, we would expect REM to be lower for the PI group (relative to the UPI group). 18 In a recent paper, Cohen et al.  (2015), document that traditional real earnings management measures are misspecified and have high rejection rates (Type I error).  They suggest using performance-matched measures to correct for this problem. 19 Following their suggestion, we construct performance-matched measures by matching each treatment firm in a given year to all the firms in the same two-digit SIC code whose ROA are within 710% of the ROA of the treatment firm. 20 The difference in AB_DISEXP, AB_CFO, or AB_PROD, between the treatment firm and the matched firm is the performancematched real earnings management component.  Research shows that management has incentives to manage earnings to meet or beat analysts’ forecasts (e. g. , Degeorge et al. , 1999.  Robb and Payne, 2000.  Roychoudhury, 2006.  Bhojraj et al. , 2009).  For our empirical tests, we follow Bhojraj et al.  (2009), focusing only on the firms that meet, narrowly exceed (by 5 cents per share or less), or narrowly fall short (by 5 cents per share or less) of analyst forecasts, since these firms are likely to feel the most market pressure.  To determine the earnings surprise, we compare the median analyst forecast two months prior to the fiscal year end to the actual earnings.  The use of the analyst forecast two months prior to the fiscal year end rather than immediately prior to the actual earnings date allows us to capture the earnings performance pressures on managers at a time when the managers can still carry out real earnings management activities prior to the fiscal year-end. 21 The regression specification for the tests of market pressures is as follows.  Where REM is the composite performance-matched real earnings management measure defined in Eq.  (6).  Our main variable-of-interest, PROTECT, is measured in terms of either the poison pills, entrenchment index, or staggered boards.  The control variables are as defined in Appendix A.  We include MTB because high growth firms are penalized more by capital markets for missing earnings thresholds (Skinner and Sloan, 2002), and therefore would have stronger incentives to engage in real earnings management (Roychoudhury, 2006).  Roychoudhury (2006) posits that firms with higher DEBT are more likely to violate debt covenant restrictions and therefore would have stronger incentives to engage in real earnings management to avoid potential violations (Dichev and Skinner, 2002).  PROFITABILITY is included because profitable firms are less likely to be pressured into manipulating earnings.  CL captures management's incentive to engage in earnings management to avoid a negative reaction from short-term suppliers (stemming from suppliers’ concerns about management's ability to pay bills in time).  FLEX is the sum of receivables and inventories over total assets.  Roychoudhury (2006) argues that firms with large inventories and receivables are more able to engage in earnings management practices such as channel stuffing, shipping goods early, and offering discounts to dealers to purchase inventory.  Therefore, the coefficient for FLEX is expected to be positive.  All of the financial controls are measured at the end of year and expressed as the deviations from the corresponding industry-year median value.  Table 8 reports the regression results based on Eq.  (7).  For this test, we merge the innovative firm-years of our initial sample with the IBES dataset to identify cases where firms meet, beat, or fall short of analysts’ forecasts by at most 5 cents.  We lose some observations due to the lack of IBES data and since the data required for computing financial controls were missing for some firms.  Our resulting sample has 1,198 observations for firm-years that fall short of analyst forecasts by at most 5 cents per share and 2,685 observations for firm-years that fall short of or beat analyst forecasts by at most 5 cents per share.  Columns 2 to 4 report the results for firms falling short of analyst forecasts by at most 5 cents per share.  Columns 5 to 7 report the results for firms falling short of or beating analyst forecasts by at most 5 cents per share.  The coefficients for PROTECT are negative in all columns and statistically significant in 5 out of the 6 specifications.  Among the control variables, PROFITABILITY is negative and statistically significant in all regressions, as we expect.  The coefficient for FLEX is positive and statistically significant, also consistent with expectations.  The coefficient for CL is negative, which is inconsistent with Roychoudhury (2006)’s arguments.  However, we note that his empirical results on CL are also contradictory for two of the three real earnings management components that he explores.  Taken together, the results in Table 8 support our underlying argument that long-term-focused firms that enjoy greater takeover protection are less likely to engage in potentially harmful myopic behaviors (such as cutting valuable investment in R&D and advertising expenditures or boosting profit through overproduction or loose credit policies).  6.  Sensitivity analysis.  Our test results so far classify firms as innovative or non-innovative based on industry-median values of R&D expenditures to sales.  A number of recent papers use patent counts to measure firm innovation (Atanassov, 2012.  Sapra et al. , 2014).  The argument for using patent counts is that it is an outcome measure and therefore a less-noisy measure of managerial performance.  Consistent with this stream of work, we use patent counts as an additional measure of managerial farsightedness and classify firms with patent counts above the industry median as innovative.  We obtain data on patents from Google's patent project, which uses patent data hosted by the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO).  The patent data contains the patent assignee's name and patent number.  The matching between patent number and CRSP Permno is conducted in two stages.  For patents filed prior to 2002, the matching is available on the website of the National Bureau of Economic Research.  For all patents filed after 2002, we use Kogan et al.  (2012)’s matched sample.  We rerun all our tests using patent data to classify firms into innovative and non-innovative.  The results (untabulated) are quite similar to those reported in this paper using R&D intensity (Tables 2–8).  Therefore, we do not find our conclusions to be sensitive to the way innovative firms are identified.  We perform a number of other sensitivity tests.  For example, since IRRC data were available only for certain years, we run tests using data for the available years only, rather than backfill the missing years’ information.  This did not alter any of our earlier conclusions.  We also experiment with measuring financial controls at the beginning of the year rather than the end of the year, and this did not materially affect our results.  For our main state law change analysis (reported in Section 4. 1, Table 2), we carry out additional placebo tests using individual years other than 1995 as the event year.  These involve running the Eq.  (1) analysis year by year for the period from 1993 to 1999 (6 years excluding 1995) and testing for the statistical significance of α1.  Given that we have 3 specifications for PROTECT in each of the years (panel B of Table 3), there are 18 placebo coefficients to examine.  Our results (untabulated) show that of the 18 coefficients, only one is statistically significant (compared with two of the three in 1995).  The only difference that is positive and significant is the one where PPILL is used as the proxy for PROTECT and the cutoff year is 1996.  This is understandable, considering the second court ruling occurred in December 1995 and could have had a spillover effect in 1996.  <Conclusion> Conclusion.  In this paper we re-examine the fundamental premise in the ATP literature that ATPs are generally detrimental to firm performance by facilitating entrenchment and a quiet life.  In particular, we explore whether firms with long-term goals can use takeover protection to their benefit to better shield against short-term market pressures.  Using several approaches we consistently find evidence that firms with high ATPs and greater commitment to long-term performance (measured using R&D intensity and patent counts) experience higher Tobin's Q compared with other firms.  These firms also experience greater stock returns around the announcement of state law changes that strengthen firms’ takeover protection.  Furthermore, we find that the protected firms with a long-term focus are less likely to engage in real earnings management behavior, compared with similar firms that are not protected.  Based on these findings, we propose that takeover protections allow managers to more effectively pursue long-term objectives by reducing short-term market pressures. 