 1.  Introduction After the equity market collapsed in 2000, many institutions considered commodities a new asset class after the widely publicized discovery of a negative correlation between commodity returns and stock returns by Gorton and Rouwenhorst (2006) and Erb and Harvey (2006).  As a result, billions of investment dollars ﬂowed into commodity markets from ﬁnancial institutions, insurance companies, pension funds, foundations, hedge funds, and wealthy individuals (Wang et al. , 2015.  Mi et al. , 2017).  A sharp increase in the popularity of commodity investing in the past decade has triggered an unprecedented inﬂow of institutional funds into commodity futures markets, referred to as the ﬁnancialization of commodities (Basak and Pavlova, 2016).  In recent years, many experts have noticed the inﬂuence of ﬁnancialization on commodity markets or the correlation between commodity markets and ﬁnancial markets.  As stated by Tang and Xiong (2012), the large index investment ﬂow precipitated a fundamental process of ﬁnancialization among commodity markets, and the vast inﬂows led to a process of integration of commodity futures markets with other ﬁnancial markets in which portfolio rebalancing of index investors can cause volatility spillovers from outside to commodity markets.  Speciﬁcally, they document that the co-movement between oil and other commodities has risen dramatically following the inﬂow of institutional investors starting fromRecently, Adams and Glück (2015) show that large inﬂows into commodity investments, i. e. , ﬁnancialization, has changed the behavior and dependence structure between commodities and the general stock market, and predict that the spillovers between commodities and the stock market to remain high in the future, given that institutional investors continue to target funds into commodities.  Basak and Pavlova (2016) ﬁnd that with ﬁnancialization, i. e. , in the presence of institutional investors, the prices and volatilities of all commodity futures go up, but more so for the index futures than for non-index ones.  Meanwhile, the correlations among commodity futures as well as in equitycommodity correlations also increase, with higher increase for index commodities.  Some authors focus on the ﬁnancialization related with oil markets.  Based on the empirical results, Juvenal and Petrella (2015) support the view that the recent oil price increase is mainly driven by the strength of global demand but that the ﬁnancialization process of commodity markets also plays a role.  Yin and Yang (2016) conﬁrm that the predictive power of technical indicators outperforms the wellknown macroeconomic variables, and their ability to predict the oil price stems in part from its ability to predict changes in sentiment, suggesting the ﬁnancialization of oil markets. 