 1.  Introduction The trade-off between risk and return is a fundamental issue in asset pricing theory, which has been given much attention by researchers, market investors and analysts.  In general, investors require a larger expected return from a security that is riskier.  However, after decades of controversy, no consensus exists among researchers on the relation between risk and return across time.  Recently, the volatility implied from options prices is commonly considered as the best volatility forecast and risk measure (Mencia and Sentana, 2013).  Thus, interest in the relations between return and implied volatility has increased to provide new evidence to this debate.  During the 2008 global ﬁnancial crisis, a new implied volatility index (OVX) in the crude oil market was launched by the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE).  the index can measure the market's expectation of the 30-day volatility of crude oil prices by applying the well-known CBOE Volatility Index methodology to options on the United States Oil Fund (Liu et al. , 2013).  This index is the ﬁrst commodity-based implied volatility index.  research on its relations with oil price returns will help investors further improve their trading decisions and will contribute, as well, to the development of energy ﬁnance, which is what the current study hopes to achieve.  Previous empirical literature has been focused on the relations between returns and historical volatility in ﬁnancial markets (Leὁn et al. , 2007.  Wu and Lee, 2015.  Chang, 2016), while there is few research in energy market.  Recently, return–implied volatility relationship has been received extensive attention in traditional ﬁnancial markets, in which the stock market implied volatility index (VIX) is widely investigated (Sarwar, 2012.  Basher and Sadorsky, 2016).  Although much research has been done, no consistent conclusion on positive relations (Fleming et al. , 1995.  Giot, 2005.  Guo and Whitelaw, 2006) or negative relations (Dash and Moran, 2005.  Tanha and Dempsey, 2015) has been achieved.  Furthermore, the conclusion in the stock market cannot be simply applied to OVX because of the more complicated structure of crude oil options (Ji and Fan, 2016).  Research on OVX in the crude oil market has been a research hotspot in the ﬁeld of energy ﬁnance.  Existing research has focused on three aspects.  Firstly, the predictive ability of the implied volatility index in the oil market is investigated (Szakmary et al. , 2003.  Agnolucci, 2009.  Lux et al. , 2016).  Secondly, the spillover effect of the implied volatility indexes between oil and ﬁnancial markets is explored (Liu et al. , 2013.  Maghyereh et al. , 2016.  Bouri et al. , 2017).  Thirdly, the interdependence between oil price returns and the implied volatility index is investigated.  Only three studies have attempted to answer this problem.  Aboura and Chevallier (2013) applied the OLS regression model and found that the inverse leverage effect is the dominant effect that drove the WTI crude oil prices from 2007 to 2011.  Agbeyegbe (2015) used OLS regression to ﬁnd regular feedback and leverage effects between oil price returns and OVX changes, as well as employed the quantile regression copula method to ﬁnd a negative relationship between contemporaneous OVX and oil returns.  Ji and Fan (2016) utilised the time-varying parameter GARCH model and regression analysis to verify the role of OVX as a gauge of investor fear instead of risk preference.  The aforementioned studies mainly focus on a linear relationship, but little information on non-linear dependence and the risk spillovers between OVX and oil price returns is provided.  Although the quantile regression copula method was used by Agbeyegbe (2015), only a static relationship was explored.  The non-linear time-varying dependence between OVX and oil price return is therefore investigated further from the perspective of risk spillover to extend the current literature.  This non-linear dependence can help investors predict well the market risk and improve their portfolio strategy and hedging effectiveness.  The principal contributions of this study are as follows.  Firstly, six time-varying mixed copula models (TVMC) are constructed by selecting four copulas.  Secondly, the VaR for oil price returns conditional on OVX, as well as the CoVaR for oil price returns conditional on the VaR for OVX, are estimated on the basis of the TVMC models.  Then, the dynamic and asymmetric risk spillover effects between oil price returns and OVX are explored.  Third, the Kendall coefﬁcients are calculated on the basis of the TVMC model with the use of the Monte Carlo simulation method, which can show the dynamic dependence structure between oil price returns and OVX.  Fourth, structural change test of dependence proposed by Dias and Embrechts (2009) is introduced for division of subsamples and to investigate the robustness of our ﬁndings.  Finally, Brent is selected for comparison of the results with WTI.  The remainder of the paper is organised as follows.  Section 2 introduces our methodology of TVMC and the measure of VaR and CoVaR.  Section 3 presents the data and empirical results.  Finally, Section 4 concludes the paper.  <Middle> Methodology.  This section mainly models the risk spillover and the dynamic and asymmetric dependence between oil price returns and OVX.  The modelling process is divided into three parts.  Firstly, the upside and downside VaRs for oil price returns conditional on OVX, as well as the CoVaR for WTI returns conditional on the VaR of OVX, are measured to explore the risk spillover of OVX to WTI returns.  Secondly, four copulas that can ﬁt negative dependence are selected to construct six TVMC.  Then, the VaR and CoVaR measured above can be estimated.  The Monte Carlo simulation method is also used to compute the Kendall coefﬁcient on the basis of the TVMC model, which can measure the dynamic dependence between WTI returns and OVX.  Finally, structural change test for dependence is further introduced to detect the jump characteristics of dependence and conﬁrm the robustness of our analysis.  2. 1.  Measurement of VaR and CoVaR.  2. 1. 1.  VaR.  VaR is a most common measure of market risk used by ﬁnancial institutions due to its simplicity of calculation.  Intuitively, the α%-VaR is deﬁned as the worst loss over a target horizon that will not be exceeded with a given level of conﬁdence 1 − α (Jorion, 2007).  In this section, we measure the upside and downside risks for oil price returns using the VaR for short and long position, respectively.  Let rt be the log return of the underlying asset at time t, and given tail probability α, the VaR of a long ﬁnancial position is related to the lower tail of long)=α, whereas the VaR of a short ﬁnancial position is related to the upper tail of the return's distribution, short.  If the D is the αth quantile of the return's distribution, whereas the upside risk the return's distribution, i. e.  Pr(rt≤ −VaRα,t i. e.  Pr(rt≥VaRα,t distribution of crude oil return rt is continuous, the downside risk VaRα,tshort)=α.  Thus, we deﬁne the unconditional market downside risk VaRα,t U is the (1−α)th quantile of the return's distribution, i. e.  Since ﬁnancial time series may have the characteristics of autocorrelation and conditional heteroscedasticity, we employ ARMA-GARCH-t class model to construct their marginal distribution at time t conditional on observations through time t−1, Fi,t(∙| F t−1), i=1,2, as follows.  Through the distribution of standardised residual, we can obtain the conditional distribution of variable ri,t, i. e.  Then, from Eq.  (5), we can obtain the oil market downside risk VaR1,t D,α and upside risk VaR1,t U,α as follows.  Actually, in most previous literature, VaR is commonly estimated via one single series which only considers its own volatility information.  However, the VaR of returns may be inﬂuenced by market situation and other uncertainties.  Therefore, in this section, we further introduce the VaR for oil price returns conditional on OVX which can measure the inﬂuence of market uncertainty on market risk.  The VaR for oil price returns conditional on OVX contains not only volatility information of WTI returns, but also dependence information existing between oil price returns and OVX changes.  Especially, in the empirical section, LR tests proposed by Christoffersen (1998) is used to prove the better performance of VaR for oil price returns conditional on OVX relative to VaR for WTI.  Let ri,t, i=1,2, be the log return of oil price and the ﬁrst difference of OVX at time t, respectively.  Then, the crude oil market downside risk VaRα.  Then, the downside and upside risk conditional on the OVX changes can be obtained by solving the following equations.  Referring to Christoffersen (1998), we employ backtesting method to assess the accuracy of the VaR forecast, and ﬁrst deﬁne the sequence of hits, exceedances, as follows.  The unconditional coverage test is designed to assess whether the expected hit rate is equal to the tail probability α.  Testing for unconditional coverage can be formulated as the likelihood ratio test.  independence test is and nij is the number of observations with value i followed by value j in the sequence of hits.  The conditional coverage test combines the unconditional coverage test and independence test, and the likelihood ratio is and nj is the number of observations with value j in the sequence of hits.  The independence of the sequence of hits will be tested against an explicit ﬁrst-order Markov alternative.  The likelihood ratio for the, and nij is the number of observations with value i followed by value j in the sequence of hits.  The conditional coverage test combines the unconditional coverage test and independence test, and the likelihood ratio is.  2. 1. 2.  CoVaR.  Although VaR is useful to measure the risk exposure of asset returns, it only reﬂects a single institution's risk instead of reﬂection its connection to overall systemic risk.  Therefore, we introduce CoVaR proposed by Adrian and Brunnermeier (2016) to explore the risk spillover from OVX to oil price returns.  Recently, applications of CoVaR have been received more attention to investigate risk spillover or systemic risk among assets (Girardi and Ergün, 2013.  Reboredo and Ugolini, 2015.  Reboredo et al. , 2016.  Mensi et al. , 2017).  These research employs CoVaRs to measure risk spillover in capital markets, such as exchange rates, stock and sovereign debt markets.  As we know, this study is the ﬁrst research employing CoVaR in the oil market.  In this section, CoVaR is deﬁned as the VaR for oil price returns conditional on the fact that OVX exhibits an extreme movement.  The downside  U,α∣β for oil price returns are deﬁned as follows. 