 1.  Introduction Legislation in an increasing number of countries imposes that unavoidable biodiversity losses resulting from infrastructure development (road, railway line, new buildings etc.  …), be compensated by the creation of equivalent biodiversity gains, the so-called Biodiversity Offsets (BO).  McKenney and Kiesecker (2010) indeed review a set of offset policy frameworks—US wetlands mitigation, US conservation banking, Australian offset policies in New South Wales, Victoria, and Western Australia, and Brazilian industrial and forest offsets.  In the French context, BO requirements have been mainly fulﬁlled so far through the acquisition of agricultural or degraded land by developers, followed by their ecological restoration.  However, this solution faces land availability constraints and can be very costly in terms of initial investments.  Also it is not well accepted by farmers who consider it as an additional source of competition on the land market, driving prices up.  An alternative solution, based on the payment for environmental services principle, is emerging in France.  Developers ﬁnance agri-environmental biodiversity offset schemes (henceforth ABOS) in which they offer contracts to farmers settled in the area where the offset must be supplied (Calvet et al. , 2017).  Enrolled farmers accept to adopt farm management, land use and farming practices for a given period (5 years usually) in return for a payment, in order to create “equivalent” favorable habitats for species affected by development.  Of course, without farmers' participation, the ABOS option cannot be successful.  In practice, ABOS are very similar to existing Agri-Environmental Schemes (AES) ﬁnanced by the European Union to implement measures of biodiversity conservation on farmland.  Indeed, it is often the case that the type of habitat that must be created to offset biodiversity losses are also habitats that the European Union seeks to preserve in protected areas.  Thus, technical requirements, in terms of prescribed farming practices and land management, are often identical for ABOS contracts and AES contracts when proposed in the same farming area.  However ABOS and AES contracts, although similar in their technical requirements and overall design, differ systematically in speciﬁc features which do not change monetary cost-beneﬁt ratio for farmers but may have an impact on their subjective perceptions of the contracts and therefore on their willingness to participate.  First, contract purposes are presented in a very different way.  ABOS are presented to farmers as contracts aiming at compensating biodiversity damages generated by a development project, while AES are advertised as contracts aiming at the conservation or the improvement of biodiversity in response to societal demand.  As a direct consequence of this ﬁrst feature, farmers are aware that ABOS are offered and funded by the private sector while AES are traditionally designed and ﬁnanced by the public sector, usually at national or European levels.  The objective of this article is to determine whether these differences, all other things considered equal, have an impact on farmers' participation in agri-environmental contracts for biodiversity offsets.  Standard economic theory predicts that if the same payment is offered in ABOS and AES, then farmers should be indifferent between the two types of contracts.  Indeed since technical prescriptions are identical, expected compliance costs are the same.  However, insights from behavioural economics and previous empirical ﬁndings on farmers' motivations when joining agri-environmental schemes indicate that the contract framing may change farmers' willingness to accept.  It is well known that farmers' participation in AES is inﬂuenced by several behavioural factors such as the attitude towards the environment (Vanslembrouck et al. , 2002a.  Delvaux et al. , 1999) or social norms (Le Coent et al. , 2016).  Contract framing may therefore trigger these behavioural factors and inﬂuence farmers' participation.  A program ﬁnanced by public money and presented as a contribution to environmental improvement or conservation can be perceived differently from a program ﬁnanced by a “polluter” compelled by law to create environmental services in order to compensate the damages he has created elsewhere.  Since offsetting programmes are growing rapidly throughout the world (Masden et al. , 2011) including in France (Regnery et al. , 2013), it is crucial for public authorities to anticipate whether ABOS is a relevant mechanism to help developers to fulﬁll their legal obligation in terms of offset volumes.  Developers also need to measure the acceptability of such mechanism, i. e.  the impact of the speciﬁc features of ABOS on farmers' willingness to participate and on the payment they will request to join the scheme and provide adequate offsets.  Finally, it should be underlined that ABOS and AES aiming at biodiversity conservation are likely to be activated in the same protected areas.  There is therefore a risk of competition between these two types of contracts.  If ABOS are preferred by farmers, this may lead to their reduced participation in conservation AES, leading to a substitution of conservation efforts by compensation efforts, and possibly entailing reduced additionality.  Understanding the relative preference of farmers for the characteristics of these two contracts will therefore also help to estimate this risk.  Literature on biodiversity offsets has primarily focused on issues related to the calculation of biodiversity equivalence and uncertainties (Quétier et al. , 2014.  Bull et al. , 2013).  Economic contributions are more recent and concern the evaluation of offset efﬁciency for various program designs (McKenney and Kiesecker, 2010).  There is also some literature on social acceptance of offsetting.  Bougherara et al.  (2013) compare consumers' willingness to pay for products whose induced pollution is either abated by the producing ﬁrm itself or compensated by offset purchases.  Burton et al.  (2016) analyze the social acceptance at the community level of the attributes of a biodiversity offset programme.  Our contribution does not deal with the acceptance of biodiversity offsets by the general public but rather with the acceptance of biodiversity offset contracts by the potential adopters of these contracts.  the farmers.  Using a choice experiment method, we compare farmers' relative preferences for compensation contracts (ABOS) as compared to classic conservation contracts (AES).  The survey was conducted in the South-East of France, in a region where a vast biodiversity offset program has been carried out since 2011 following the construction of an 80 km railway bypass for a high-speed train (more speciﬁcally in the Gard department, between Nimes and Montpellier).  This railway project strongly affects habitats of an endangered bird species, the Little Bustard, Tetrax tetrax.  The construction and maintenance (25 years) of this project, including the responsibility for offsetting the project's impacts on biodiversity, is managed by a private company named “Oc'Via”, henceforth referred to as “the developer”.  The developer was required by law to implement a BO program on about 1800 ha for the next 25 years.  To this end, the developer has acquired land for speciﬁc management purposes but has also chosen to propose an ABOS scheme to farmers.  Contracts were signed on about 1100 ha of private farmland since 2011 (CENLR, 2013).  It was decided to carry out the choice experiment in this location because most farmers had a chance to be introduced to both ABOS contracts and AES for biodiversity conservation.  They are therefore familiar with both types of programs.  Section 2 provides a literature review of the behavioural factors that may inﬂuence farmers' willingness to accept for enrolling into biodiversity enhancing contracts.  Section 3 describes the choice modeling methodology used in this research.  Section 4 presents the results in terms of preference for the alternative contracts proposed and factors that may explain these preferences.  Section 5 discusses these results and concludes with policy implications.  2.  Why Would Farmers Prefer Compensation or Conservation Contracts.  In order to measure farmers' relative preference for ABOS and AES, we have conducted a choice experiment in which the two types of contracts were presented in one single attribute with two levels as follows.  • Level 1 — Conservation (AES) contracts.  they are proposed and funded by the public sector with the objective to create or maintain favorable habitats for threatened species • Level 2 — Compensation (ABOS) contracts.  they are proposed and paid by a private developer, compelled to compensate the degradation of favorable habitats for threatened species induced by its infrastructure project, by creating elsewhere on the territory equivalent favorable habitats.  The purpose of the contract (compensation vs conservation) and the contracting partner (private vs public) are logically linked.  The private developer who is responsible for the degradation pays for the restoration with his own private fund.  The society, demanding that biodiversity be conserved or improved, pays for this service with public money.  Presenting them as two separable attributes would have been perceived as highly unrealistic by farmers.  Indeed it would have led to a choice design in which conservation contracts beneﬁtting the whole society are ﬁnanced by private funds or conversely compensation requirements are paid for by public funds.  In order to ensure a full understanding of the two types of contracts by respondents, we therefore decided to keep the two information merged in the same attribute.  Several behavioural drivers are susceptible to inﬂuence farmers' preferences for ABOS versus AES.  Beyond the impact of contract purpose, which is at the center of our study, we also analyze how the notion of responsibility for damages and losses, and trust between contracting parties could inﬂuence preferences.  2. 1.  Purpose Difference.  Compensation vs Conservation.  The ﬁrst main difference between the two alternatives lies in the contract purpose.  compensating the degradation of habitats vs creating or maintaining habitats.  It can be considered a goal framing issue (Levin et al. , 1998).  Goal framing is about presenting the consequence of a choice or an action either as positive (it provides a beneﬁt or gain) or as negative (it prevents or avoids a loss).  Goal framing is thus associated with a change in the reference point of a decision.  Several experimental studies examine the effect of goal framing in the context of public good provision (Brewer and Kramer, 1986.  Fleishman, 1988.  Sonnemans et al. , 1998.  Andreoni, 1995).  The positive frame consists in giving to a public good fund, whereas in the negative frame subjects take from the public good fund to purchase private goods.  There is no clear conclusion from this literature on which frame, positive or negative, has the greater persuasive impact on contributions.  Relying on this literature, Blasch (2015) considers a different experiment in which contribution to a public good is framed as the neutralization of a negative externality.  She positions her experiment in the context of voluntary contributions to climate change mitigation.  She compares hypothetical donation choices made by respondents in an on-line survey when they are framed as “positive donation” (act of ‘doing good’ by donating money to a climate change mitigation project) or as “negative offset” (act of ‘undoing harm’ by donating to a carbon offset program neutralizing one's own CO2 emission).  She also emphasizes the importance of the reference point.  In the negative framing, the reference point is in the loss domain and the contribution brings the public good provision level back to the initial level, whereas in the positive framing, the contribution pushes the public good provision level into the gain domain.  Combined with elements of the loss aversion theory (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979.  Tversky and Kahneman, 1991), which states that the utility function does not display the same concavity in the gain and loss domains, she predicts that individuals should contribute more in the negative framing.  Gregory et al.  (1993) also introduce a reference point by investigating the effect of “past states” of the environment on the willingness to support mitigation policies.  They conduct an experiment in which students are asked to evaluate the desirability of an environmental improvement in several domains.  These environmental improvements are either framed as improvements of the current situation or as restoration after degradation (although they do not specify responsibilities).  Results reveal that respondents prefer to support the restoration to the initial state of a previous environmental loss rather than a net environmental improvement.  Gregory et al.  also invoke the prospect theory and loss aversion to explain the higher willingness of respondents to support an environmental improvement policy.  Restoring the environment as it was in the past, i. e.  compensating a loss, provides more utility especially for loss averse individuals, than in the environmental gainFollowing these studies, we should expect a greater willingness to contribute to environmental restoration than to environmental conservation or improvement.  Thus, the willingness to accept (WTA) for compensation contracts should be lower than for conservation contracts, if farmers are loss averse.  However there is a consistent literature demonstrating that farmers' environmental attitude inﬂuences their participation in agri-environmental programmes and we argue that this may inﬂuence preferences in the opposite direction.  Beedell and Rehman (2000) show that farmers belonging to an environmental association are more likely to adopt pro-environmental practices.  Mzoughi (2011) emphasizes that the motivation for “showing one's environmental concern to others” is important for organic farmers and farmers adopting integrated pest management practices as compared to conventional farmers.  The attitude towards the environment in AES seems to play a greater role for contracts requiring more efforts from farmers (Vanslembrouck et al. , 2002b.  Delvaux et al. , 1999).  From these ﬁndings, we formulate the hypothesis that farmers who care more for the environment pay greater attention to the expected additional impact their action may have on the environment.  They should therefore prefer conservation contracts over compensation contracts, since the former improve biodiversity whereas the latter restores biodiversity to its original level.  2. 2.  Responsibility for the Loss.  In Blasch (2015), the person who takes the decision to compensate is directly responsible for the degradation of the environment in the negative framing, since she is the CO2 emitter in the ﬁrst place.  In the case of biodiversity offsets, the responsibility of the degradation lies with a third party.  In this section, we investigate how the difference of responsibility of the degradation of the environment may affect preferences for either AES or ABOS.  Some studies investigate how willingness to pay for environmental restoration might be inﬂuenced by the causes of environmental damages.  They mainly focus on how human versus natural causes of environmental degradation inﬂuence the willingness to pay for mitigation interventions (Kahneman et al. , 1993.  Bulte et al. , 2005).  They ﬁnd that when human action is the cause of an environmental problem, the willingness to pay to repair damages is higher.  They argue that this is due to an “outrage effect” for human-caused environmental issues.  Walker et al.  (1999) study the same type of issue by comparing the willingness to accept to feel compensated for the removal of a street tree, either due to a disease (natural cause) or to the widening of a street (human cause).  Unlike previously cited studies, they ﬁnd a signiﬁcantly higher WTA for the latter.  They consider that the feeling of moral responsibility may play an important role in the WTA evaluation for human-caused environmental issues.  Indeed, accepting money for the removal of a tree for human development reasons entails a form of responsibility or complicity with this degradation of the environment that can be considered morally wrong.  Brown et al.  (2002) build on this hypothesis and consider that “the identiﬁcation of a negligent party that has the ability to pay for some sort of restitution (such as a corporation)” will increase people's WTA.  This result is however not conﬁrmed by Bulte et al.  (2005) who do not ﬁnd any difference between the willingness to pay for the protection of seals threatened by either global warming (common responsibility) or by oil drilling activities (responsibility directly assigned to a speciﬁc activity).  In compensation contracts, developers are clearly identiﬁed as responsible for the environmental degradation, farmers may therefore prefer not to feel accomplice and increase their WTA to enroll in these contracts.  2. 3.  Trust in Contracting Partners.  Trust between contracting partners is considered a major factor in the adoption of AES.  The perception of a trustworthy relationship facilitates participation by reducing transaction costs both before and during the transaction (Ducos et al. , 2009.  Ducos and Dupraz, 2007.  Louis and Rousset, 2010.  Peerlings and Polman, 2009).  In Europe, AES are generally signed between farmers and state authorities under the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) framework.  They are well-known contracts.  In the context of compensation contracts, developers are new stakeholders, generally little known in the farming sector.  The fact that they belong to the private sector may be perceived positively, as a source of efﬁciency and ﬂexibility compared to the bureaucratic red-tape and rigidities, but it may also raise suspicions on their capacity to guarantee payments over the duration of the contract.  It is also likely to play a role in farmers' preference for compensation or conservation contracts.  This literature review indicates that various behavioural drivers might be at play, often with opposite effects on farmers' decisions.  On the one hand, compensation could be considered as the restoration of a loss of biodiversity and should therefore be preferred, due to loss aversion.  On the other hand, in the compensation frame, the developer is clearly responsible for the environmental degradation and farmers may want to reduce their willingness to contribute to the realization of such contracts.  In addition, farmers who care more for the environment may also prefer conservation contracts that implicitly result in higher level of biodiversity.  Finally, trust (or lack of trust) in private and public entities may play in either directions.  There are therefore no clear-cut predictions which can be made from this literature on the relative preference for compensation versus conservation contracts.  Although we cannot test each driver separately, we have mobilized specific explanatory variables to disentangle the role played by farmers' environmental attitude, their feeling with respect to responsibility for loss and their trust in contracting partners.  The researcher does not observe βn, only its density f(β) is assumed to be known.  The probability of observing the sequence of T choices.  3.  Method.  3. 1.  Choice Experiment Approach and Model Speciﬁcation.  In order to determine the inﬂuence of ABOS contract characteristics on farmers' participation, we carry out a choice experiment (CE).  The CE approach is based on Lancaster's theory of consumer choice (Lancaster, 1966), which establishes that choices are determined by the utility that is derived from the attributes of a good, rather than from the good per se.  The econometric modeling is based on the random utility theory, which assumes that utility is composed of a deterministic component, which can be estimated based on observed choices and the characteristics of the alternative, assuming that individuals maximize utility, and a stochastic error component (McFadden, 1974).  The conditional logit is the most commonly used model to analyze CE.  It however requires two strong assumptions.  the Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives (IIA) and the homogeneity of preferences among respondents (Hausman and McFadden, 1984).  The IIA supposes that the relative odds of an alternative being chosen over another should be independent of the presence or absence of unchosen third alternatives (McFadden, 1974).  These conditions are likely to be violated in our case since we have introduced an opt-out alternative in each choice set.  Indeed, people may choose ‘none’ if there is no dominant alternative present in the choice set.  Haaijer et al.  (2001) underline that “the reasons to choose the no-choice may be different from choosing any of the other ‘real’ proﬁles in a conjoint choice experiment.  In this view, ‘no-choice’ cannot be seen as just another choice alternative, leading to potential violations of IIA”.  This potential violation of the IIA assumption was conﬁrmed in our case by the Hausman test carried out after a conditional logit estimation (not included in the paper).  In addition, it is likely that behavioural factors mentioned in the literature review affect farmers' preferences for compensation or conservation contracts in a heterogeneous manner.  The heterogeneity of preferences is therefore of particular interest in this study.  For these reasons, we have privileged the use of the mixed logit or random parameters logit model to analyze our data.  It allows preferences to vary randomly and continuously across individuals and does not require the IIA assumption (McFadden and Train, 2000).  In the mixed logit model, the utility that respondent n derives from choosing alternative i, in choice situation Ct (t = 1, … , T) is given by.  where Xint are the attributes of alternative i and the coefﬁcient vector βn, represents the vector of individual tastes.  Individual n will choose alternative i in choice situation t (Aint=1) among all other alternatives j, if this alternative gives him the highest utility in this choice situation.  Assuming that εint follows an extreme value distribution, the probability that Aint=1 conditional on vector βn is a standard conditional logit (McFadden 1974).  where f(β) can be speciﬁed to be normal or lognormal.  β~N(b, s) or ln β~N(b, s) (McFadden and Train, 2000).  The parameters b and s are respectively the mean and the variance of these distributions and are to be estimated by simulation.  In our estimations, we use 500 Halton draws to carry out this simulation.  We analyze the heterogeneity of preferences by interacting individual speciﬁc behavioural characteristics with attribute levels.  3. 2.  Contract Attributes.  There is a rapidly growing literature using choice experiments to measure farmers' preferences for various technical speciﬁcations of agri-environmental contracts.  Typically, they study two types of attributes.  those having a direct effect on farmers' compliance costs (levels and types of environmental efforts) and those related to contract design (length of contract, contract cancellation options, contract ﬂexibility etc. ).  Our experiment introduces a novel attribute, which can capture farmers' preferences for the ultimate purpose of the contract.  Broch and Vedel (2012) have also introduced a “purpose” attribute in a choice experiment related to Danish afforestation contracts but each level of this attribute (i. e.  biodiversity, water protection or recreation) implied different forest management options and therefore different implementation costs.  In our design, all hypothetical contracts include the same technical prescriptions.  eligible plots are ﬁelds which were either previously planted with cereals, temporary pasture or abandoned land, and must be planted, under contract, with an alfalfa crop, which is expected to provide suitable habitats for nesting birds.  They incur the same costs for the same farmer.  Therefore differences in WTA can be attributed to framing differences, thus triggering various motivations.  The hypothetical contracts offered in the CE differ on three attributes.  The main attribute of interest is the purpose of the contract (purpose).  it is presented either as a conservation or as a compensation contract, using the deﬁnitions introduced in Section 2.  The second attribute is linked to the speciﬁc needs of biodiversity conservation and is therefore relevant in the case of ABOS.  It introduces the option to impose (or not) a 20% minimum threshold of farmer participation to trigger the implementation of the contract scheme.  We justify the use of this threshold by the need to conserve habitats of a sufﬁcient size in order to ensure the successful conservation of bird species.  When a minimum level of practice or land use change is necessary to reach a signiﬁcant environmental impact on a given territory, the policy-maker may decide to set a minimum threshold of enrollment (Dupraz et al. , 2007).  In this context, if public authorities impose to the developer that such a threshold be attained, the developer may wonder whether revealing the existence of the threshold to farmers will encourage or hinder farmers' participation.  On the one hand, farmers who do not want to provide environmental effort without any positive environmental outcome might approve such a threshold which guarantees a minimum environmental impact of their land use change.  On the other hand, we can expect that farmers might be reluctant to condition their participation on the decisions of others.  The effect of such an announced threshold is indeed controversial in the literature.  In a threshold public good game experiment, Le Coent et al.  (2014) show that the introduction of a minimum threshold of contribution triggering the payment of a subsidy tends to increase subjects' contribution.  In a choice experiment, Kuhfuss et al.  (2014) found that farmers have a strong preference for the inclusion of a ﬁnancial bonus conditional to a minimum threshold of participation in agri-environmental contracts.  However, Villanueva et al.  (2015) reveal in a choice experiment that the inclusion of a collective threshold tends to discourage participation in agri-environmental contracts because farmers anticipate additional transaction costs.  The third attribute is the payment associated with the contract.  It is either 170, 200, 230 or 260€/ha/year.  The variation of payment is centered on the present level of payment for this measure in AES and ABOS which is 215€/ha/year.  We deliberately included a modest variation of payment because we expected that the payment level could play a very strong role in farmers' decisions as compared to the other two attributes.  The attributes and the payment levels were discussed with the organizations in charge of the implementation of the biodiversity offsets program carried-out in the ﬁeld.  the private company in charge of the infrastructure construction, the Conservatory of Natural Areas, an ecological association specialized in land management of natural sites, the Ornithological Centre of the Gard, an ecological association specialized in the study and protection of bird species, and the Chamber of Agriculture of the Gard, a farmers' institution strongly involved in the technical and administrative support to farmers.  In addition, the questionnaire was tested with a small sample of farmers to check that it was properly understood.  <Middle> Experimental Design.  The choice experiment questions were included at the end of a questionnaire dedicated to the identiﬁcation of the determinants of adoption of the current ABOS contracts (Calvet et al. , 2017).  This questionnaire covered the following topics.  i) farmer and farm socio-economic characteristics, and farmers' perception of ii) contract ﬂexibility, iii) transaction costs associated with the contract, iv) level of difﬁculty of the adoption of ABOS prescriptions, v) contract payment and their relation with costs, vi) attitude towards the environment, vii) social norms, viii) trust in the institutions involved in the contract, and ix) attitude towards BO.  Because this questionnaire was already quite lengthy, our constraint was to be parsimonious and to limit the set of choices that farmers had to make to a minimum.  A full factorial design with 2 alternatives would have required (2 × 2 × 4) × (2 × 2 × 4 − 1) = 240 possible choice situations.  We therefore used a fractional factorial design.  Huber and Zwerina (1996) show that if there are reasonable non zero-priors on the effects of attributes on choice, then these can be used to generate choice designs that are statistically more efﬁcient than a classic orthogonal design, because the alternatives in their choice sets are balanced in utility, i. e.  they have more similar choice probabilities.  It is common to run a pilot survey to estimate prior coefﬁcients to inform the ﬁnal design.  Given the small size of our target population, a pilot would have substantially reduced our sample size.  Instead, we use a D-efﬁcient design with a positive coefﬁcient on the payment attribute and set the other coefﬁcients to zero.  We generated a two block design with four choice sets each.  Each respondent was randomly assigned to one of the block and therefore was confronted with 4 choice sets.  In each choice set, respondents had to choose between 2 hypothetical contracts that presented a combination of the above mentioned attributes and an opt-out option which was “neither of the two contracts”.  The opt-out option is generally used in choice experiments to estimate the preference for agri-environmental contract attributes in order to ﬁt to a context in which farmers voluntarily chose to enroll or not (Espinosa-Goded et al. , 2010.  Broch and Vedel, 2012.  Christensen et al. , 2011.  Kuhfuss et al. , 2014.  Ruto and Garrod, 2009).  This opt-out option is included in order to avoid respondents face a forced choice (Dhar and Simonson, 2003.  Dhar, 1997.  Tversky and Shaﬁr, 1992.  Kontoleon and Yabe, 2003).  A sample choice set is presented in Appendix 1.  The coding of variables in a choice experiment with an opt-out option poses a number of challenges.  Haaijer et al.  (2001) determine that the best option is to use effect coding for the attributes.  Each attribute is coded with an additional level set to 0 for the opt-out alternative and the Alternative Speciﬁc Constant (ASC) is added in the model.  It takes value one for the two contract alternatives and value zero for the opt-out alternative.  This dummy variable can be interpreted as the respondent's difference in utility when choosing to enroll in a contract rather than choosing the status quo.  If negative, it captures a preference for the “no change” option (Vermeulen et al. , 2008) or a minimal WTA to enroll in a contract.  The coding is presented in Table 1.  3. 4.  Data Collection.  As presented in the Introduction, the survey took place in a region where an ABOS program is currently carried out, following the construction of a railway line.  The questionnaire was sent by post to the 1169 farmers who were initially contacted by the developer since 2011 to sign an ABOS contract, of which 100 (8. 5%) have effectively enrolled.  These farmers, eligible to ABOS contracts, are located in areas not directly affected by the construction of the railway line.  Note that the hypothetical contracts described in the CE were not presented as a substitute for their current contract but as new additional contracts on different land.  Only farmers who had available cereal ﬁeld, temporary pasture (without alfalfa) or abandoned land were invited to ﬁll the choice modeling part of the questionnaire.  We collected a total of 121 responses (response rate of 10. 3%) to the questionnaire of which 82 were usable replies to the choice modeling questions.  Descriptive statistics on the socio-economic characteristics of the sample are presented in Appendix 2 and are compared to the farmer population in the area.  These statistics show that our sample is not biased in terms of gender and age.  However, respondents are slightly more educated and farms are bigger than in the population of interest.  There are two major differences.  29% of our sample declare being “organic farmers”, variable ORGA, (they may be certiﬁed organic farmers, or in the process of certiﬁcation, or have organic practices without certiﬁcation) whereas the average share of certiﬁed organic farmers in the region is 12%.  It might be partly explained by the fact that the organic qualiﬁcation in our sample is broader and less restrictive than the deﬁnitions used in the ofﬁcial statistics.  We can also suspect that there is a self-selection bias.  farmers who are more susceptible to environmental issues, such as organic farmers, may have been more inclined to respond to a questionnaire dealing with biodiversity issues.  The second difference is contract enrollment.  among the 82 respondents, 25 (30% of our sample) have signed a compensation (ABOS) contract, 8 have signed a conservation (AES) contract and two have signed both.  Since only 100 of the 1169 farmers contacted in our survey have effectively a compensation contract, we also have an over-representation of farmers enrolled in compensation contracts in our sample (variable SIGN).  It may bias our results either in favour of compensation contracts (selection bias) or against it (if those who have signed have experienced dissatisfaction and express their discontent).  The questionnaire also includes questions that are used to test the effect of the three behavioural drivers presented in Section 2.  environmental attitude, responsibility and trust.  Respondents' environmental attitude is measured with two variables.  First farmers are requested to declare whether they are organic farmer or not (variable ORGA).  Several studies emphasize that the concern about environmental issues is a crucial determinant of adoption of organic farming (e. g.  Burton et al. , 1999.  Darnhofer et al. , 2005.  Best, 2010).  The second variable is built from an opinion question.  Respondents were asked to indicate whether they agreed (totally disagree, partially disagree, partially agree, totally agree and don't know) with the statement “The protection of threatened bird species is a priority for our territory” (variable BIODIV).  We measured respondent's feeling of environmental responsibility (variable RESP) by their level of agreement with the statement. 