
We examine acquisition outcomes when the same auditor audits the financial statements of both a bidder and a target
firm prior to an acquisition.  We hypothesize that shared auditors facilitate the flow of information between bidders and
targets, and that the benefits of such mitigated information asymmetry accrue primarily to the acquiring firm. 
External auditors have unique access to senior executives, participate in audit committee meetings, and have access to
board meeting minutes and general information about a firm in the conduct of their audits.  This access to senior executives
combined with information gathered during an audit provides auditors with an opportunity to discuss strategic initiatives
with their clients including, among others, the acquisition or disposition of assets.  Communication about such initiatives
may be in the form of “soft talk”.  Because auditors contract with a variety of companies, auditors have the potential to
become information intermediaries between prospective targets and acquirers, whether intentional or otherwise.  As shared
auditors are incentivized to align with the interests of larger clients, we anticipate a potential bias in favor of acquisitive
clients over target clients.  Hence, bidders that share an audit firm with a potential target could have an information
advantage relative to others in the process of bidding, and we anticipate that this advantage will manifest itself in an
increased likelihood of submitting a bid for a target. 
The impact of shared auditors likely extends beyond the point of bidding and target selection.  If shared-auditor bidders
have an informational advantage relative to competing bidders, bidders with shared auditors can leverage this advantage
into a better bargaining position with the target.  As other bidders have less information, they have less incentive to bid, thus
reducing bid competition.  With lower bid competition, an acquirer with a shared auditor has the opportunity to negotiate a
more favorable price for the target firm, thus reducing premiums paid. 
The opportunity for a shared auditor to become an information intermediary is likely increased if an acquirer and target
contract with the same auditor office.  This is due to a higher likelihood of overlap of audit personnel on client engagement
teams and increased informal contact between audit teams of the target and acquirer, i. e. , “water cooler” talk among
auditors in the same practice office.  Therefore, we expect the shared auditor effect on deal outcomes to be more pronounced
if the bidder and acquirer contract with the same auditor practice office. 
We anticipate that shared auditors may favor acquisitive clients over targets for at least two reasons.  First, an auditor's
long-term incentives (even within an auditor's practice office) are more closely aligned with those of their acquisitive
clients.  Our intuition follows that applied to shared investment bank advisors who are more likely to favor acquiring firms
when representing both a target and an acquirer in the same deal (Agrawal Name, 2013).  As audit firms and their practice
offices have an incentive to foster and maintain ongoing relationships with larger, more acquisitive clients, we anticipate
shared information at the auditor office level will benefit acquirers more so than targets. 