 1.  Introduction Aquaculture is a rapidly growing industry that has become a major supplier of ﬁsh and shellﬁsh to the global market (FAO, 2014).  Concern about the environmental effects of aquaculture is also growing.  The production of shrimp and salmon, two of the most lucrative and widely traded aquaculture products, is responsible for a range of environmental impacts due to the off-site effects of disease transmission, waste discharge, escapees, the use of chemicals and drugs, and the consumption of ﬁshmeal and ﬁsh oil (Naylor et al. , 1998).  The most important of the environmental externalities of salmon farming is the transmission of sea lice to wild ﬁsh stocks (Asche et al. , 2009.  Taranger et al. , 2015.  Lafferty et al. , 2015).  In this paper we focus on a particular disease externality of coastal salmon farms— the effect of sea lice on wild ﬁsh stocks.  This effect has been debated extensively.  Researchers agree that sea lice are one of many factors that affect wild stock levels.  However, there is disagreement about the size of the effect.  Some argue that lice are not instrumental in wild stock population decline (Marty et al. , 2010).  Others claim that where salmon net-pens provide ideal conditions for sea lice, they are the primary threat to vulnerable migrating wild juveniles (Krkošek et al. , 2006, 2007).  In both Norway and Canada, sea lice are argued to be a major threat to the sustainability of marine aquaculture and the viability of wild ﬁsheries, and are subject to strict regulations.  The generic problem in the management of wildlife disease externalities of aquaculture is the regulation of transmission risks due to contact between infected farmed stocks and susceptible wild stocks (Conrad and Rondeau, 2015.  Fischer et al. , 2015, 2016).  The mitigation of disease risk requires reduction in either the infection rate of farmed stocks or contact between farmed and wild stocks.  In the case of marine salmon aquaculture, the infection rate of farmed ﬁsh may be reduced by chemical controls.  Since farmed ﬁsh stocks have a reservoir-host effect on disease transmission, this also affects disease transmission to wild ﬁsh stocks.  From a social perspective, salmon farmers should ideally take account of the costs incurred by wild capture ﬁsheries when deciding how much in-farm disease control to apply.  Nor is the disease of wild salmon the only off-site effect to consider.  It may, for instance, change the structure and distribution of other species within the system (Burge et al. , 2014).  Since disease is an external cost of salmon production, however, it will not be considered in the absence of regulatory, property-rights, or tax-based initiatives by a ﬁshery authority.  This study focuses on the optimal management of sea lice externalities between salmon aquaculture and wild salmon ﬁsheries that run in both directions.  Sea lice are native ectoparasite copepods, common on wild adult salmon.  The salmon louse (L.  salmonis) has a free-living phase and a parasitic phase in its approximately 2-month life cycle (Frazer, 2009).  Once attached to salmon, lice feed on mucous, blood, and skin which causes both morbidity and mortality of salmon (Costello, 2006).  When wild stocks migrate to a fresh water environment in the fall for spawning, lice from wild stocks disperse into ﬁsh farms located on the migration route of wild stocks and infest the farmed ﬁsh. 