 Introduction How ﬁrms disseminate information to ﬁnancial markets, how the market responds to this information, and how the mechanism of information dissemination affects the market response are of great importance (e. g. , Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980.  Merton, 1987).  Perhaps the most common and most important vehicle by which ﬁrms release information to the market is through their earnings announcements.  In particular, one of the decision variables is the exact timing of the earnings release.  If the timing of the release affects the market's response to ﬁrms’ earnings, then ﬁrms may release news strategically, for instance, to hide bad news.  Prior studies examining the choice of weekday and, separately, time during the day for earnings announcements show that there is a higher concentration of bad news on Friday than on other weekdays (Penman, 1987.  Damodaran, 1989.  DellaVigna and Pollet, 2009.  Doyle and Magilke, 2009.  deHaan, Shevlin, and Thornock, 2015) and in the evening (after trading hours) than at other times of day (Patell and Wolfson, 1982.  Doyle and Magilke, 2009.  deHaan et al. , 2015).  Recent studies have recognized that the mere concentration of bad news on Friday and in the evening is not sufﬁcient to establish the existence of strategic announcement timing.  Doyle and Magilke consider opportunistic announcement switching and ﬁnd no evidence that managers switch announcements of bad earnings news to Friday or evening.  deHaan, Shevlin, and Thornock analyze variation in investor attention and ﬁnd evidence consistent with rational strategic announcing in the evening but not on Friday.  Our study extends the existing literature and contributes to the debate of whether and when ﬁrms strategically announce their earnings news in two ways.  First, because ﬁrms choose the weekday and time of their announcements jointly, we introduce the analysis of day-time combinations to the literature on opportunistic announcement timing.  Second, we provide new implications of strategic announcing, with a special focus on whether managers have potential beneﬁts from their announcement timing.  The analysis of announcement timing at the level of day-time combinations provides us with new insights about managers’ strategic timing behavior.  The higher concentration of bad news on Friday and, separately, in the evening found in the prior studies leads to a natural conjecture.  Announcements on Friday evenings, which are the intersection of Fridays and evenings, have the worst news and, thus, are the most susceptible to opportunistic announcing behavior.  This conjecture is also consistent with both the popular wisdom that ﬁrms and even government agencies tend to release bad news on Friday afternoon after 4 PM (Penman, 1987) and common knowledge in the ﬁnancial industry that analysts and other professional investors are less likely to be at work on Friday evenings (e. g. , Quenqua, 2010).  We ﬁnd that Friday evening announcements indeed contain by far the worst news of all day-time combinations.  In support of the strategic announcing hypothesis, we ﬁnd that ﬁrms switch to Friday evening when they have bad news.  A host of additional ﬁndings concerning the post-earnings announcement drift (PEAD), insider trading, delistings, and conference calls point out that strategic announcing occurs only on Friday evening.  We also ﬁnd that managers beneﬁt from their strategic choice through reduced market scrutiny and delayed market response to news announced on Friday evening.  The PEAD after Friday evening announcements allows managers to proﬁt through post-announcement buying and selling of the company's stock in the direction of the surprise.  The delayed market response to bad news can also provide managers with greater job security and beneﬁts associated with continued employment in the ﬁrm (Kothari et al. , 2009).  To analyze day-time combinations, we divide earnings announcements into three time-of-day slots—morning (between midnight and 9. 30 AM), during-trading (between 9. 30 AM and 4 PM), and evening (between 4PM and midnight)—and ﬁve weekdays, which creates a matrix of 15 timing cells.  We use a comprehensive dataset of earnings announcement timestamps for the period from 1999 to 2013, which we hand-collect from newswires to avoid the systematic errors in IBES timestamps (Bradley et al. , 2014.  Michaely et al. , 2014).  The timing cell resolution allows us to uncover new patterns in opportunistic announcements, and it also puts in perspective the well-documented results regarding bad news on Friday and in the evening.  We ﬁnd that Friday evening announcements are responsible for a disproportionately large portion of the bad news on Fridays documented in the literature—Friday evening announcements constitute 17% of Friday announcements but produce one third of the negative difference in earnings surprise between Fridays and other weekdays.  We also ﬁnd that while evenings have only marginally worse news than other times of the day, without Friday evening announcements in the sample, the evening effect completely disappears.  By itself, the high concentration of bad news at one time is insufﬁcient to conclude that strategic announcement timing is occurring.  We answer the question whether and when strategic announcement timing exists by focusing on ﬁrms’ decisions to switch the times and weekdays of their announcements depending on their earnings surprise.  We begin by analyzing to which timing cells ﬁrms switch when they have worse news relative to the previous quarter (Doyle and Magilke, 2009).  We also conduct a difference-in-differences test to examine whether ﬁrms that switch to a given cell have a greater decline in earnings surprise than ﬁrms that do not switch, i. e. , that have stayed in this cell since the previous quarter.  We ﬁnd that among all weekdays, times of day, and timing cells, only Friday evening robustly indicates strategic switching behavior.  Next, we test an important implication of the opportunism motive that managers are rational when they time earnings announcements, which means that they can ultimately beneﬁt from timing such announcements.  Successfully hiding news implies that the market does not fully incorporate the news into prices and has a delayed reaction to the earnings announced at a given timing cell.  Further, opportunistic announcements may allow insiders to beneﬁt from trading the company's shares after the public information is released and before the information is fully impounded into prices.  While the literature typically views opportunistic announcements as a strategy related to bad news, insiders can also beneﬁt from buying shares before a delayed market reaction to good news.  To test the conjecture that ﬁrms making announcements strategically can beneﬁt from delayed market reaction, we analyze the PEAD and document patterns in it after announcements at different combinations of weekdays and times of day.  We ﬁnd that both positive and negative news on Friday evening are followed by the largest drift in comparison to other timing cells.  The PEAD after good news on Friday evening lasts for up to 13 months, and the PEAD after bad news is longer, approximately 2 years.  A strategy with a long position in ﬁrms that announce positive news and a short position in ﬁrms that announce negative news yields 24. 4% in 13 months for Friday evening versus the average of 4. 2% over all ﬁfteen timing cells.  Our analysis of insider trading suggests that executives may be aware of the drift following Friday evening announcements.  We ﬁnd that, after these announcements, insiders tend to trade in the direction of the surprise, in contrast to the overall pattern of contrarian trading by insiders (Huddart et al. , 2007.  Jenter, 2005).  The ﬁnding that Friday evening stands out among other timing cells led us to survey investment managers regarding their thoughts about announcing earnings on Friday evening.  The main message in the survey results is that announcing earnings on Friday evening is interpreted as an attempt to hide bad news.  Another important point that was made is that many analysts have already left for the weekend when ﬁrms announce their earnings on Friday evening.  Building upon the intuition of the survey results, we ﬁnd further evidence suggesting that ﬁrms intend to reduce the number of analysts who review their announcements on Friday evening.  The time distribution of announcements on Friday evening is different from other evenings in that Friday evening announcements are made relatively late, while other weekday evening announcements are strongly concentrated immediately after the market closes.  Besides earnings ﬁgures, ﬁrms tend to concurrently release other performance measures and soft information about their current and future endeavors.  This raises a possibility that ﬁrms’ management tends to announce on Friday evening to hide not only earnings news but other information as well.  Following the intuition of this conjecture, ﬁrms should also be less likely to hold conference calls and, furthermore, give less notiﬁcation time about upcoming conference calls.  Our analysis of the distribution of conference calls associated with earnings announcements strongly supports this hypothesis for Friday evening.  For example, Friday evening announcements are followed by half as many conference calls and associated with 2–3 times fewer days between the announcements and actual dates of conference calls than other timing cells.  Finally, based on the ﬁndings that ﬁrms interact with analysts less at the time of Friday evening announcements and receive less market scrutiny as a result, we can identify events other than earnings news that managers may want to hide through opportunistic timing of earnings announcements.  Firms would be most inclined to proceed with opportunistic timing to hide information associated with the most critical events in a ﬁrm's life.  Two such events are when a ﬁrm goes bankrupt or is acquired, both of which typically lead to stock delisting.  A ﬁrm in ﬁnancial distress would wish not to elaborate on the extent of its difﬁculties to avoid further exacerbating the distress situation.  Similarly, a ﬁrm being too forthcoming can disrupt the ﬁrm's negotiations with prospective acquirers, causing managers to lose their unscheduled stock option grants (Fich et al. , 2011) or leading to ﬁnancial liability, such as a termination fee (Bates and Lemmon, 2003).  We ﬁnd that it is Friday evening announcements that are more likely to be followed by these two types of delisting events.  In particular, a ﬁrm is ﬁve times more likely to be liquidated or its stock to be dropped from the exchange in the 120 days following a Friday evening announcement compared with announcements in other timing cells.  A ﬁrm is also more than twice as likely to be acquired and, as a result, delisted during this period after Friday evening announcements.  Our ﬁndings support that Friday evening earnings announcements are motivated by managerial opportunism.  This raises a question how pervasive and important such opportunistic behavior is among publicly traded U. S.  ﬁrms.  One perspective is that only 1. 1% of earnings announcements are made on Friday evening, suggesting that managerial opportunism in the timing of earnings announcements is not a widespread phenomenon.  At the same time, we note that the number of ﬁrms (11% of ﬁrms in our data) that made announcements on Friday evening is comparable to the number of ﬁrms with accounting restatements, particularly, those due to intentional misreporting (e. g. , Hennes et al. , 2008).  A natural question is then what differentiates the ﬁrms engaging in strategic announcement timing.  We ﬁnd that ﬁrms that announce earnings on Friday evening are smaller, have lower institutional ownership, are followed by fewer analysts, and have a higher bookto-market ratio than ﬁrms that have never announced on a Friday evening.  The ﬁrst three characteristics suggest that ﬁrms that announce earnings on Friday evening are less visible than other ﬁrms.  This low visibility may explain why the management of such ﬁrms can hide news announced on Friday evening and why these ﬁrms are perhaps less concerned with “annoying the Street”, which our survey respondents suggest that Friday evening announcements do.  Because Friday evening announcers are different from other ﬁrms on several observed and, possibly, unobserved characteristics, we control for this fact to ensure that our results are not driven by selection bias.  The paper contributes to the literature on managerial opportunism concerning the timing of earnings releases along several dimensions.  First, in light of the mixed evidence on Friday and evening announcements in the literature, we suggest that strategic announcing can be studied by analyzing announcements at the timing cell resolution and ﬁnd that when Fridays as a whole or all evenings are examined, ﬁrms show no strategic behavior.  Rather, the strategic behavior concentrates on Friday evening alone.  Second, we contribute to the literature on the market's inattention to earnings news announced on Friday.  DellaVigna and Pollet (2009) ﬁnd evidence of market inattention on Friday, whereas more recent papers by deHaan et al.  (2015) and Michaely et al.  (forthcoming) ﬁnd no such evidence.  Our results are in agreement with the latter two studies in that there is no market inattention on Friday.  We also reﬁne the ﬁndings in deHaan, Shevlin, and Thornock that investors pay relatively less attention to evening announcements and show that investor inattention is present not on all weekday evenings but only on Friday evening.  Third, we discover evidence that managers’ timing of earnings announcements is related to not only earnings news itself but also the disclosure of other information to analysts.  The rest of the paper is structured as follows.  Section 2 describes the data.  Section 3 analyzes the relation between announcement timing and the sign of earnings surprise.  Section 4 conducts tests of opportunism by analyzing time switching patterns, the proﬁtability of PEAD trading strategies, and insider trading evidence.  Section 5 provides evidence on corporate events that occur after earnings announcements.  Section 6 discusses what distinguishes ﬁrms that make Friday evening announcements from other ﬁrms.  Section 7 concludes.  <Middle> Data.  Our study requires us to clearly identify the time of earnings announcements.  The initial sample consists of all quarterly earnings announcements in IBES from January 1999 to June 2013 that also have daily return data in CRSP. 1 Because there are errors in IBES timestamps (Bradley et al. , 2014.  Michaely et al. , 2014), we verify the IBES timestamps by using the newswires.  The newswires are Business Wire, PR Newswire, Dow Jones News, Reuters, and all other news sources in Factiva and LexisNexis.  First, we download all earnings announcements with their timestamps from the newswires during the sample period.  Next, using the full or partial ﬁrm name and, if necessary, the ticker, we run an algorithm that matches each announcement in IBES with the newswire announcements in the seven-day window around the announcement date in IBES.  We then manually identify the correct matches and choose the time with the earliest newswire timestamp. 