 Introduction Corporate directors have access to material non-public information, which makes them a potential information source for professional traders.  Directors are, of course, required to keep sensitive material private.  Delaware law recognizes a director's duty of conﬁdentiality, and corporations have comprehensive policies in place to prevent leaks.  Investors, too, face regulatory scrutiny and reputational costs if they use inside information in traceable manners, and these safeguards seem to be effective in some institutional settings (Grifﬁn et al. , 2012).  However, sensitive information can travel through education networks from senior corporate ofﬁcers to mutual fund managers and sell-side analysts (Cohen et al. , 2008, 2010).  This raises an important question.  to what extent do director networks transmit information that sophisticated traders are able to exploit.  We investigate whether the breadth of directors' professional connections systematically affects the likelihood of information leakage to sophisticated traders.  Well-connected directors interact with scores of people, and unguarded conversations can easily reveal sensitive facts.  In addition, Larcker et al.  (2013) show that ﬁrms beneﬁt from more connected boards because board connections are a conduit of information exchange.  Yet an important competitive advantage of connected directors stems from their ability to provide insights that would otherwise be inaccessible to less connected colleagues.  Fulﬁlling this role might require some deliberate sharing of sensitive material.  Sophisticated traders, who gather, analyze and interpret data from multiple sources, have a comparative advantage when piecing together information about ﬁrms with highly connected directors.  We therefore study possible information transmission from corporate directors to sophisticated traders by examining the relation between board connectedness and the informativeness of trades made by short sellers, option traders, and institutional investors.  Our results indicate that these investor groups are indeed more informed when trading stocks of companies with more connected boards.  We measure informed trading as the monthly level of short interest, the ratio of monthly option volume to stock volume, and weekly order imbalances of institutional traders.  From BoardEx, we obtain the number of ﬁrst-degree connections for each director, which includes links through educational institutions attended, current and previous employers, military service and civic institutions.  To ensure that our measure of board connectedness is not driven by factors that have been documented to affect the ﬁrm's information environment, we ﬁrst aggregate the connections of all board members and then orthogonalize them with respect to ﬁrm size, board size, ﬁrm age, the number of analysts and institutional ownership.  We examine portfolios sorted by board connectedness and each of the three measures of informed trading and ﬁnd that the annualized return difference between the highest and lowest quintile of informed trading in highly connected boards is signiﬁcantly more pronounced compared to the same return difference in ﬁrms with less connected boards.  The economic magnitude ranges from 4% for option volume and 5. 4% for short interest, to 7. 2% for institutional order imbalance.  Next, we examine whether the trades of sophisticated investors predict changes in ﬁrm fundamentals.  Our results indicate that a higher fraction of negative earnings news is embedded in prices of highly connected ﬁrms ahead of the announcement, and that sophisticated traders better anticipate earning surprises in ﬁrms with highly connected boards.  Indeed, their trades predict ﬁrm-speciﬁc news content more broadly, as our analysis of Thompson Reuters' public news data shows.  Changes in board connectedness are also positively associated with changes in measures of adverse selection costs, such as the probability of informed trading (PIN), bid–ask spreads and the price impact measure of Amihud (2002).  In a series of robustness checks we establish that neither family ownership, corporate governance quality, nor asset tangibility, drive our ﬁndings.  Our study contributes to several strands of the literature.  First, we add novel insights to recent studies examining the role of director networks in ﬁnancial markets.  Among directors these networks contribute to higher ﬁrm performance (Larcker et al. , 2013), the dissemination of CEO compensation practices (Wong et al. , 2015), stock option backdating (Bizjak et al. , 2009), and earnings management (Chiu et al. , 2012).  Board members and their social networks inﬂuence which companies become targets in change-of-control transactions (Stuart and Yim, 2010).  Directors of Finnish ﬁrms earn sizable abnormal returns by trading stocks where they have information advantages through their board connections (Berkman et al. , 2014).  We build on these insights by documenting that board connections in general affect the external corporate information environment, increase the potential for informed trading, and facilitate the dissemination of information into stock prices.  While prior research suggests that analysts, media outlets and managers have incentives to convey positive news (McNichols and O'Brien, 1997.  Kothari et al. 