 1.  Introduction The essence of the gasoline subsidy policy problem is its inefﬁciency.  The policy leads to overconsumption of gasoline since a subsidy drives consumers to purchase a good at a price that is cheaper than the cost of producing it (Harvey and Gayer, 2013).  Overconsumption also leads to negative externalities such as emission of local pollutants, trafﬁc congestions and accidents (Davis, 2014).  In the case of Indonesia, the problem is further aggravated by the fact that the government only provides a subsidy for regular gasoline, the lowest grade gasoline.  Malaysia and Egypt implemented a similar policy that only deregulates the higher grade of gasoline (Kojima, 2013).  Indonesia started off in the 1960s with only the national oil company, Pertamina, allowed in the domestic gasoline market.  There was only one grade of gasoline, and it was subsidized in the form of underpricing as the price was signiﬁcantly lower than the world market price.  Gasoline was subsidized as a way to protect people from the effects of inﬂation (Beaton and Lonton, 2010).  In 2001, a new regulation was introduced by the government that opened up the domestic gasoline market to multinational oil companies but only for high-octane gasoline.  This was done to combat the 1997 Asian ﬁnancial crisis.  Regular gasoline was left subsidized.  Such a scheme violates Ramsey's tax rule that taxing rival commodities should leave the consumer's relative choices unaltered (Ramsey, 1927).  Different tax rates on commodities and factors introduce a distortion between the marginal rate of substitution and the marginal rate of transformation (Stiglitz and Dasgupta, 1971).  In addition, Ito and Sallee (2014) found that taxation based on different characteristics of automobiles caused distortions in that market.  Similarly, the Indonesian subsidy policy distorts both the regular and premium grade gasoline market.  Another issue is the unequal beneﬁt of the policy (del Granado et al. , 2012).  As consumers purchase more regular gasoline, the government's expenditure on the subsidy increases signiﬁcantly while income distribution is distorted as high-income consumers that purchase a higher amount of regular gasoline, receive more beneﬁt (Pradiptyo and Sahadewo, 2012).  An obvious exit strategy from such undesirable outcomes is to eliminate the subsidy.  However, the government is reluctant to take this option because of its anticipated impact on consumer's welfare and the political repercussions.  A lot of studies have been done to analyze the economic impact of phasing out a gasoline subsidy in Indonesia.  Adam and Lestari (2008) estimated that an increase in the price of oil correlates negatively with households' welfare.  Clements et al.  (2007) showed that removing the subsidy increases aggregate price levels and reduces real output, while Dartanto (2013) found that there will be an increase of poverty.  Arguably, these outcomes might agitate the people and cause a signiﬁcant drop in the government's popularity.  Furthermore, a well-known economist in Indonesia said that removing the gasoline subsidy is against the constitution of Indonesia (Gie, 2011).  Although since late 2014 the price of crude oil has dropped signiﬁcantly and saved billions ofgovernment's budget without any interference to the policy, the government remains cautious and had not fully deregulates the regular gasoline market.  The fuel subsidy took about 15% of overall government expenditure in 2014 as shown in Fig.  1.  It amounts to about 250 trillion rupiahs or around 20 billion USD (1 USD = Rp 12,000).  Based on Indonesia's annual state budget, N80% is for gasoline, diesel and kerosene with gasoline being the highest portion.  The government is aware of the large cost of the policy but it has remained hesitant to act because of the risk of being overthrown by the political opposition and strong public resistance.  Numerous times the government had tried to cut the subsidy but retreated when met with public protests (Quiano, 2012.  Cochrane, 2013).  In December 2014, the government announced that the gasoline subsidy will be removed from the state's budget starting in 2015 (Sari, 2014).  It was met with relatively manageable public protest because in the process, the price of regular gasoline was relatively unchanged.  However, the government did not fully deregulate the regular gasoline market since the price is still being set by the government and only Pertamina is given the license to sell.  Another alternative is to reduce the distortion in the regular gasoline market while leaving the subsidy intact.  Using Ramsey's rule, the government should aim to steer the consumer's choice back to a nonsubsidy pattern.  We show this can be achieved by decreasing the price of premium gasoline, which means that the government should also subsidize premium gasoline.  However, if the new subsidy on premium gasoline is at the same rate as the current subsidy on regular gasoline, the government's expenditure will increase signiﬁcantly.  Thus, the rate of the new subsidy has to be lower than the current subsidy but large enough to generate savings for the government.  We have not found other studies that consider the revenue or welfare effects of this somewhat counter intuitive policy.  Thus, the contribution of this paper is to analyze this unique policy with a smaller subsidy for premium gasoline that could potentially reduce gasoline subsidy expenditures without the political backlash.  Arguably, subsidy reform is difﬁcult to enact because of the effect on purchasing power of the people and the resulting political instability.  By implementing a different pricing policy for different grades of gasoline, the issue of inﬂation and political instability can be avoided.  In addition, there has yet to be any studies that focus on the inefﬁciency in the market for different grades of gasoline.  Policy makers should be aware of the issue of inefﬁciency resulted in the markets for substitutes.  The model developed in this paper can also be used in other countries that plan to improve either their gasoline subsidy or tax.  The chosen subsidy rate will depend on the elasticities of demand for gasoline.  We predict that the substitutability of gasolines with different grades is what drives the magnitude of the savings.  However, we have found no literature on the own and cross-price elasticity for regular and premium gasoline for Indonesia.  Nor were our attempts to obtain Indonesian data successful.  Therefore, we set up a simulation experiment with differential subsidies for premium gasoline by benchmarking to Indonesian data using the elasticities estimated by Akimaya (2017) for Mexico, to our knowledge the only existing study on the cross-price elasticity of gasoline by grade.  We assume that the market has a perfectly elastic supply and only consumer welfare is analyzed.  Various simulations using different values for cross-price elasticity are done to determine whether there are cross-price elasticities that generate savings.  Also, it has to be noted that the new subsidy will distort the premium gasoline market.  There will be a welfare effect in both the regular and premium gasoline market.  In the next section, the mathematical model to prove the existence of a potential reduction in gasoline subsidy expenditure is analyzed.  In Section 3, the data is presented followed in Section 4 by the calibration process of Rutherford's (2002), which uses a translog unit cost function to calibrate the derived demand functions.  The necessary parameters for calibration are then presented in Section 5.  The parameters such as prices and share expenditures are based on Indonesia's gasoline market, while the baseline elasticity values are based on the estimated results in Akimaya (2017).  Next, the simulations for government spending based on benchmark values of elasticities are discussed further in Section 6.  Given the high degree of uncertainty in the values of the parameters chosen, sensitivity analyses are performed with inputs from studies that include substitutes for gasoline (i. e.  diesel fuel and ethanol).  These tests are presented in Section 7.  Since the new subsidy policy introduces a new distortion in both markets, the welfare effects on consumers are analyzed in Section 8 and the paper is concluded in Section 9.  <Middle> Mathematical model.  In Indonesia there are several different grades of gasoline but most of Pertamina's gas station sell Premium (octane level of 83), Pertamax (octane level of 87), and Pertamax Plus (octane level of 90).  The subsidized gasoline is Premium, which is lowest grade of gasoline, and the price is set by the government.  Pertamina's competitors are Shell that entered the gasoline market in 2005 (Shell Indonesia, 2017) and Total that entered in 2009 (Kompas, 2009).  Both Shell and Total are only permitted to sell gasoline with an octane level that is N87.  They each set their own prices for these grades of gasoline.  In July 2015, Pertamina, exclusively started selling Pertalite (octane level of 85) that is unsubsidized (Duta, 2015).  For simplicity of the model, we categorize gasoline into two groups, regular gasoline that has the lowest grade of gasoline in the market (83octane) and is subsidized and premium gasoline that is unsubsidized (87-octane and above).  We could not get any recent consumption data that includes Pertalite and thus, we categorize it together with the unsubsidized group.  In this paper, we will use the terms “regular gasoline” and “83-octane” interchangeably, as well as “premium gasoline” and “87-octane”.  Since we want to leave the price of regular gasoline intact, the government is left with a subsidy on premium gasoline in an attempt to steer aggregate consumption behavior.  The subsidy on premium gasoline can be implemented in the same way as for regular gasoline.  If enough consumers switch away from the highly-subsidize 83-octane, the government's expenditure on gasoline subsidies will be reduced.  The government then can satisfy its main goal of generating savings to fund other projects.  We know from the Slutsky equation that a change in price leads to an income and a substitution effect (Nicholson and Snyder, 2011).  By lowering the price of premium gasoline, we expect that there will be a change in the consumption bundle of gasoline by grade.  The substitution effect by which consumers of regular gasoline decide to purchase premium gasoline may be beneﬁcial to the government's objective.  For every unit of 83-octane being substituted with 87-octane, the government receives savings that equal the difference in the subsidy rate.  However, it must be noted that the newly introduced subsidy results in additional government expenditure because premium gasoline consumption increases.  The government has to ensure that the saving generated by the substitution effect is larger than the income effect that causes an additional expenditure on previously unsubsidized premium gasoline.  Therefore, we predict that the substitutability between the gasolines (i. e. , the cross-price elasticity) will play a major role in determining the existence of potential savings.  In our model, the objective of the government is to minimize its expenditure on the gasoline subsidy (G) by controlling the rate of subsidy for premium gasoline (s2).  The model is for a one-year analysis and to provide some degree of magnitude for potential savings by the government.  We assume that in the subsequent years the income of the people and the world market price of gasoline remain relatively stable and thus, the potential savings are similar.  The amount of the subsidy is given by total consumption of each gasoline multiplied by the rate of subsidy (s1 for regular and s2 for premium).  The demand for each gasoline depends on its own-price, the price of the other grade, as well as income.  We also include the price of all other goods (AOG) in the demand function because the income effect resulted from lowering the price of premium gasoline can be spent on goods other than gasoline.  The demand for regular gasoline is denoted by Q83, while for premium gasoline it is denoted by Q87.  Consequently, when the government is controlling the price of premium gasoline, it will also affect the demand for both regular and premium gasoline.  If the subsidy rate s2 is too small that most regular gasoline consumers are unaffected, gasoline subsidy expenses might increase since the quantity demanded for premium gasoline should increase with lower price.  In the case that the subsidy rate is too large that most regular gasoline consumers switch to premium gasoline, the income effect on premium gasoline will determine whether there are savings generated by the government.  The objective of the government is shown in Eq.  The ﬁrst order condition gives us.  We can solve for the optimal subsidy rate on premium gasoline using the ﬁrst order condition.  The result shows that the optimal rate depends on how consumption on each gasoline changes with the introduction of the subsidy and the initial sales of premium gasoline.  Since an increase in the amount of subsidy on premium gasoline equals the price change for a perfectly elastic supply, we know that ds2= −dP87.  The ﬁrst order condition becomes this.  Multiply the ﬁrst two expressions in the ﬁrst order condition by this.  We can now write the above equation in terms of cross and own price elasticities as follows.  Solving for the optimal subsidy on premium yields.  Eq.  (2) shows that the cross-price elasticity is a factor that affects the optimal value of the subsidy as well as the own-price elasticity of premium gasoline.  Since the gasolines are substitute (Ε(83,87)N0), when the consumption of premium gasoline is extremely low, the optimal subsidy rate should be positive.  In Indonesia, gasoline consumption is leaning heavily towards regular gasoline because of the signiﬁcantly cheaper price.  See Table 1.  Hence, the optimal rate of subsidy for premium gasoline should be greater than zero.  This condition is speciﬁc to Indonesia due to very low consumption of premium gasoline.  Notice that if premium gasoline consumption is large, the numerator can be positive and therefore the government should introduce a tax to minimize its gasoline subsidy expenditures.  However, Eq.  (2) does not provide a closed form solution for the optimal rate of subsidy.  The consumption of 83-octane and 87-octane are still in functional form.  An increase in the subsidy will lower the price of premium gasoline, which in turn increases the consumption of premium gasoline.  Therefore, without any further knowledge on the demand system for both regular and premium gasoline, we cannot use it to ﬁnd the optimal rate of subsidy.  Therefore, the next step is to determine the demand system for the gasolines.  A seminal research paper by Christensen et al.  (1973) gave rise to a ﬂexible functional form for production functions called the translog.  Christensen et al.  (1975) also developed a more complicated translog model for utility.  The logical choice is to use the model for utility.  However, under a speciﬁc set of assumptions, both approaches result in an identical calibrated model.  In our model, three goods will be included.  regular gasoline, premium gasoline and all other goods (AOG).  The lower price of premium gasoline after the subsidy means that people who have been purchasing 87-octane have extra money in their pocket.  The translog cost function gives us the change in share of each good.  It is a movement along the initial aggregate utility level, which is the substitution effect.  However, in reality, that extra money will be spent either on additional gasoline or AOG.  Therefore, we have to take into account the income effect experienced by the consumers.  Since the consumers' disposable income is ﬁxed, if the translog unit cost function is used based on the initial expenditures with the new prices, we will end up with shares of expenditure that have included the income effect.  With an assumption of homothetic preference, this approach results in an uncompensated demand function, which would result from the translog utility function.  For this calibration, we use the published calibration method proposed by Rutherford (2002).  Using this function, we will look at the effect of lowering the price of premium gasoline on the consumption of other goods and whether savings can actually be generated in Indonesia To have a demand function that replicates the gasoline market in Indonesia, the translog model is calibrated using expenditures, shares, prices and elasticities that are explained in further detail in the following section.  3.  Data.  For the analysis, 2012 data are used since they have been veriﬁed and ﬁnalized.  The annual consumption and price of regular gasoline is readily available at Nota Keuangan APBN (Fiscal Note of State Budget) (Departemen Keuangan, 2012).  The consumption data on premium gasoline were available upon request from BPH Migas (The Downstream Oil and Gas Regulatory Agency).  Pertamina, Shell and Total change their price of premium gasoline biweekly.  Therefore, the price ﬂuctuates throughout the year and region.  it ranges from Rp 8500 in January (Detikoto, 2012) to Rp 9800 in October (Kompas, 2012) for Pertamax.  There is no government institution that keeps track of the prices because the price of gasoline by grade, excluding regular, largely differs by region.  Therefore, the author used news reports to record the lowest price of gasoline other than regular.  See Fig.  2.  Arguably, the mean of the price for midgrade and premium gasoline for the year is Rp 9500.  The unsubsidized and subsidized gasoline consumption are used to accurately calibrate the parameters.  The household consumption data for the general equilibrium model is retrieved from Badan Pusat Statistik (2016b).  These data in kiloliters and local currencies are shown in the table below.  Notice that the price of AOG is required.  For the analysis, the CPI is used, which is 100.  Now that all benchmark expenditure shares for all the goods required in the model have been acquired, we can begin calibrating the translog cost function.  4.  Calibration process Following Rutherford (2002), the translog unit cost function is deﬁned as this.  From the unit cost function, the compensated demand function is derived and shown in Eq.  For the calibration process, the following restrictions need to be incorporated.  The calibration process involves ﬁnding the α and b parameters.  A measures the responsiveness of the compensated demand for one input for a change in one input price.  The formula is shown in Eq.  C is the compensated price elasticity.  Based on the structure of the calibration and the restrictions, only three compensated cross-price elasticities are required for calibration since combining them with the symmetry restrictions delivers the rest.  Notice that the income elasticity is also required in ﬁnding the compensated cross-price elasticity.  5.  Calibration setup and results.  As previously mentioned, knowledge of the elasticities of gasoline with different grades is limited.  We are aware of no previous studies aside from Akimaya (2017) that have estimated the cross-price elasticities between regular and premium.  Therefore, we will be using his cross-price elasticity result for Mexico.  We also include one standard deviation of this cross-price elasticity and its effect on the government expenditure.  In addition, a study by Hastings and Shapiro (2013) on U. S.  data found that gasoline expenditure is not exchangeable with other income leaving zero cross-price elasticities between AOG and the two gasoline grades.  The benchmark setup for calibration is shown in Table 2.  Notice that the income elasticities for both regular and premium gasoline are initially 1 because we assume that the utility function is homothetic.  Using Eqs.  (5) and (6), the calibration method is straightforward and the resulting parameters are shown in Table 3.  6.  Simulation.  Eq.  (4) provides the compensated demand function for each good.  Using the calibrated parameters in Table 3, the compensated demands can be used to determine the optimal rate of subsidy shown in Eq.  (2).  However, the non-linear nature of the translog function presents great difﬁculty in ﬁnding the closed form solution.  An alternative approach to measure the effectiveness of the new subsidy is to perform simulations.  We simulate the government's expenditure with different rates of subsidy for premium gasoline based on Eq.  (1).  The data for the subsidy rate of regular gasoline are unavailable, but we can work out the amount based on the fuel subsidy budget from Statistics Indonesia (Badan Pusat Statistik, 2016a).  According to the Fiscal Report and State Budget (Departemen Keuangan, 2012), 61% of the fuel subsidy is intended for gasoline.  We assume that the budget for gasoline subsidy is used up and thus, subsidy per liter can be calculated using the consumption data.  This approach results in a subsidy rate of approximately Rp 3500/liter.  Hence, the rate of subsidy for premium gasoline ranges from Rp 1 to Rp 3500 per liter.  In the benchmark scenario, the gasoline subsidy expenditure decreases by 11. 5% or roughly 11. 4 trillion rupiahs (or 950 million USD) when the subsidy rate is Rp 2254/liter.  The effect of the new subsidy is shown in Fig.  3.  The ﬁgure shows the range of savings generated with one standard deviation of cross-price elasticities.  Within one standard deviation, the decrease in gasoline subsidy expenditure ranges between 4. 2% and 19. 4% at the optimal rate.  The result illustrates that there is indeed potential savings induced by introducing the new subsidy scheme.  With a small rate of subsidy s2, the number of regular gasoline consumers who switch is also small.  Fig.  4 depicts the changes in consumption of regular and premium gasolines.  However, the difference in the subsidy rate between regular and premium gasoline are large and sufﬁcient to generate savings.  As a result, the government's expenditure starts declining.  As the government provides a higher subsidy rate, the difference in the subsidy rate get smaller and larger portion of the subsidy expenses will be for premium gasoline consumers as consumption increases.  The government's expenditure will eventually stop declining and starts increasing as the savings generated from the substitution effect is offset by the subsidy expenses from income effect on premium gasoline.  Since there is no substitutability between gasoline and AOG, there will be no changes in the share expenditures between gasoline and7.  Sensitivity analyses.  The simulation in the last section is based on the benchmark parameters that we chose.  The parameters are.  three cross-price and two income elasticities for each type of gasoline in Table 2.  Given the high degree of uncertainty for these parameters, we will do sensitivity tests on all ﬁve parameters.  We suspect that the cross-price elasticity will be important and we include cross-price sensitivity with all other parameters.  The elasticity values are based on earlier research on substitutes for gasoline such as diesel, alcohol and ethanol.  The crossprice elasticity values that will be used in the sensitivity analyses are shown in Table 4.  The sensitivity analyses involve changing the value of the parameters and thus the calibration process has to be repeated.  Since we are interested in the effect of the magnitude of the savings with changes in the parameters, we will look for the case for minimum government spending in each scenario that provides the maximum savings.  The results of the simulations can be used for policy makers to determine whether the new subsidy policy is considered worthwhile.  Again, we cannot refer to the existing literature for any income elasticities used for the parameters other than Akimaya (2017).  In the literature, income elasticities are only available for overall gasoline.  These values will be used in the sensitivity tests as they might reﬂect the true income elasticities for both regular and premium gasoline.  These elasticity values are shown in Table 5.  We also added a value of 0. 5 to cover a wide range of elasticities.  The ﬁrst sensitivity analyses are performed on different values for the income elasticity of 83-octane and the results are shown in Table 6.  When the cross-price elasticity is small (ﬁrst column), the savings are signiﬁcantly different.  For our base case income elasticity of regular gasoline (the fourth row), the savings range from 1. 14% to 20. 94%.  Meanwhile, it turns out that income elasticity of regular gasoline has a small impact on the savings generated.  The magnitude of the savings is basically robust to the income elasticity of regular gasoline.  We can clearly see that for our base case cross-price elasticity (the third column with cross-price elasticity of 0. 895), the savings generated range from 11. 47% to 11. 52%.  Also, notice that a higher income elasticity of regular gasoline (shown in the last row) is actually beneﬁcial to the success of the new subsidy scheme.  Although savings are generated for all scenarios, the magnitude depends largely on the cross-price elasticity between regular and premium gasoline.  The optimal rate of subsidy differs signiﬁcantly based on the cross-price elasticity but not on the income elasticity.  Next, sensitivity analysis is also performed with different income elasticity values of 87-octane.  We use the same income elasticity values as for regular above.  We expect that the income elasticities for premium gasoline will have a large impact on the magnitude of the savings generated.  As the price of premium gasoline is lower, there is an income effect for those who have been purchasing 87-octane gasoline.  If the income elasticity is high, most of the extra money in their pocket will be spent on additional premium gasoline.  The result of the sensitivity tests are shown in Table 7.  The base case cross-price elasticity is in the third column with cross-price elasticity of 0. 895.  The savings range from 10. 82% to 11. 91%.  This conﬁrms our prediction that the income elasticity of premium gasoline has a signiﬁcant effect on the magnitude of savings generated.  A higher value is detrimental to the success of the new subsidy scheme since least savings are in the last row, while the cross-price elasticity remains an important factor.  In addition, the optimal rate of subsidy is sensitive to a change in income elasticity of premium gasoline.  The last parameter to be tested is the cross-price elasticity between 87-octane and AOG.  The cross-price elasticity between 83-octane and AOG will not have any effect since the proposed subsidy only alters the price of premium gasoline.  Since we cannot refer to any studies on substitutability of gasoline and AOG, we use a range from 0 to 2 in increments of 0. 5.  The reason behind the positive values is because we would expect consumers to treat AOG as a substitute for gasoline.  Basically, the mindset is that if gasoline is cheaper, that means I can spend more on other goods.  We expect that high substitutability between 87-octane and AOG will reduce the savings generated.  If 87-octane and AOG are interchangeable, a decrease in the price of premium gasoline will bring consumers towards purchasing 87-octane.  This will increase the government's expenditure on subsidies.  The result is shown in Table 8.  As expected, the cross-price elasticity between 87-octane and AOG greatly affects the magnitude of the savings.  For our base case crossprice elasticity, shown in the third column with cross-price elasticity of 0. 895, the savings range from 10. 05% to 11. 49%.  The impact seems to be more signiﬁcant than the effect of different income elasticities of each regular and premium gasoline.  The optimal rate of subsidy also differs signiﬁcantly based on the cross-price elasticity of AOG and premium gasoline.  The assumption of no substitution between gasoline expenditure and AOG was based on U. S.  consumers, if this does not hold for Indonesia, the subsidy savings are lower.  The sensitivity analyses results indicate that the consumers' responsiveness to the changes in the price of premium gasoline is beneﬁcial for the government, especially if consumers switch from the highly subsidized regular gasoline.  For all cases, there is always a reduction in the gasoline subsidy expenditure.  However, it is up to the policy makers to decide whether this amount of savings is signiﬁcant enough to be considered worthwhile.  However, the new subsidy policy introduces a new distortion in both gasoline markets, and thus in the next section, we provide policy makers with the effect of the new subsidy on consumer welfare.  8.  Welfare effect.  In the case that the government is a social planner, the objective is to maximize social welfare rather than savings generated.  For tractability and simplicity, the welfare effect analysis is only on consumers.  We assume that the gasoline supply curve is perfectly elastic with no capacity constraint.  Consequently, we ignore any change in the welfare of gasoline producers.  In order to determine the change in the welfare of the consumers, we use the compensating variation (CV) approach.  The newly introduced subsidy on premium gasoline means that overall gasoline is more affordable.  Therefore, the aggregate utility level of consumers should be higher because they can purchase more goods.  If the consumers' utility level is unchanged, they are indifferent.  Hence, the amount of money that can be taken from the aggregate consumers, to get them back to the utility level before the introduction of the new subsidy, is the change in the consumers' welfare.  As an illustration, the demand curve for both regular and premium gasoline can be constructed using the same approach that we used for the simulations.  In this case, instead of looking at the government's expenditure, we look at the amount of gasoline, regular and premium, that is purchased by aggregate consumers at each price.  By solving the quantity purchased by the consumers at each price, we are basically drawing the inverse demand of both regular and premium gasoline market.  We still use the benchmark scenario with the subsidy of Rp 2254/liter for premium.  The inverse compensated demand for premium gasoline is shown in Fig.  5.  For the 87-octane market, the new subsidy will not affect the demand curve for premium gasoline and the only change is the supply curve.  Instead of having a perfectly elastic supply curve at Rp 9500, the curve shifted downwards to Rp 7246.  This is shown in the ﬁgure and labeled as optimal price.  There is a deadweight loss because of the new subsidy, which is the area between the world price and the demand as shown in the ﬁgure.  For regular gasoline, it is a little more complicated as shown in Fig.  6.  The new subsidy on premium gasoline causes the demand for regular gasoline to decrease, and thus shifts the demand curve left.  The decrease in demand is shown by the shift of initial inverse compensated demand curve (D) to the new demand curve (D′).  The quantity of regular gasoline purchased decreases from Q* to Q*′.  Initially, the deadweight loss is the area between the world price and the demand, shown by area A + B.  After the introduction of the new subsidy, the deadweight loss becomes the area A + C.  Therefore, there is an inefﬁciency reduction of B, but there is also an addition of C.  There will be an efﬁciency gain if B N C.  We compute these changes with the translog unit cost function as shown in Eq.  (3).  The expenditure level is basically aggregate household expenditure.  Thus, we only need to determine the difference in the required cost with the introduction of the new subsidy.  We use the benchmark parameters and the subsidy rate chosen for premium gasoline as based on the maximum saving generated, Rp 2254/liter.  According to our model, the amount of money that can be taken away from consumers to make them as well off as they were before the additional subsidy is 6. 8 trillion rupiahs or roughly 560 million USD.  We also check for one standard deviation of the cross-price elasticity value.  If the cross-price elasticity is one standard deviation higher, the consumers are better off by 9. 6 trillion rupiahs (or 802 million USD).  Meanwhile, with one standard deviation lower, the CV value is 3. 8 trillion rupiahs (or 315 million USD).  Since all the CV values are positive, this conﬁrms that the new subsidy not only lowers the government's expenditure on gasoline subsidies, but also the inefﬁciency in the gasoline market.  <Conclusion> Conclusion and shortcomings.  This essay contributes to the literature by providing an analysis of an alternative policy of different price control on gasoline with different grades.  Indonesia only provides a subsidy for regular gasoline and such a policy affects consumption preferences for both regular and premium gasoline.  The effects on both markets are analyzed for a new government subsidy on premium gasoline.  The simulation results conﬁrm that implementing a subsidy for premium gasoline is beneﬁcial for the government.  In the base case, it reduces the expenditure on overall gasoline subsidies by 11. 5% or around 950 million USD.  It also improves consumer welfare as the government can take away 6. 8 trillion rupiahs (or 560 million USD) from aggregate consumers and leave them as well off as before.  Even though the new policy introduces inefﬁciency in the premium gasoline market, the overall result is a reduction in inefﬁciency.  This new policy provides policy-makers with an alternative strategy to free up its expenditure budget to fund other programs with greater impact on economic growth.  Politically speaking, this alternative policy may be more easily executed by the government instead of removing the gasoline subsidy entirely.  Such a subsidy reduction faces strong resistance from the public and could cause a political backlash.  Even though the government has successfully removed the subsidy in 2015, it was done without much interference to the price of regular gasoline.  Given the volatility of the crude oil market as well as OPEC's intervention, if the oil price starts bouncing back, the government will be forced to increase the price of regular gasoline and potentially faces public oppositions.  The introduction of Pertalite (octane level of 85) in July 2015 is also worth to be examined.  Intuitively, the midgrade gasoline also serves as a substitute for regular gasoline but without an introduction of a new subsidy.  This could potentially affect the accuracy of the ﬁndings.  However, further research and data are necessary to conﬁrm the effects on the gasoline market.  It is uncertain whether such small increase in octane-level will have a similar substitution effect and signiﬁcantly alter the simulation results.  It has to be noted that the existence of potential savings is largely determined by the cross-price elasticity between regular and premium gasoline.  Given the very limited studies on this issue, the magnitude of the savings generated ranges signiﬁcantly.  For the case of Indonesia, further research on gasoline with different grades using Indonesian gasoline market data are required should the policy-makers require more accurate computations of the savings.  The approach developed can be used in other countries with different parameters and conditions. 