 1.  Introduction Renewable energy sources are increasingly used in order to curb CO2 emissions and mitigate climate change.  In particular, solar photovoltaic systems are being deployed at an exponential rate (see e. g. , IEA, 2016).  However, this technology has the drawback of generating electricity when residential demand is relatively low.  In fact, solar radiation is maximal around noon, when many homes are empty.  Conversely, households’ electricity usage peaks in the evening, when solar radiation is nil.  This mismatch constitutes a potential obstacle to the diffusion of electricity produced from solar sources, even if it can be mitigated in different ways.  Grid expansions would help in transporting electricity for remote consumption.  Storage capacities would allow delayed consumption.  Demand-response measures may be implemented so that electricity is used when and where it is produced.  While the ﬁrst two solutions are supply-side measures requiring high installation costs (Beaudin et al. , 2010) and involving losses (Denholm and Hand, 2011), demand-side management might prove relatively inexpensive and easy to implement.  An additional advantage of demand-side interventions is that they can be implemented rapidly, while deployment of new technologies on a large scale can only be achieved in the long run (Dietz et al. , 2009).  It has also been argued that different solutions like storage and demand management should be considered as complementing each other for grid balancing (Elliott, 2016).  Mitigating imbalances between electricity production and usage is a particularly serious issue in remote areas.  In fact, when large amounts of solar energy are produced in isolated regions at times of low demand, providers may ﬁnd the technical installations necessary to accommodate excess supply too expensive and could prefer to literally destroy the electricity produced. 1 This dismal anecdote illustrates how supply-side measures might fail when it comes to integrating electricity from renewable sources in the grid.  In such situations, demand-side management becomes crucial.  Even if this paper focuses on the misalignment of solar energy production and electricity consumption, its scope extends to the general issue of the increasing importance of renewable technologies.  Because the new renewable energy sources (sun and wind) are intermittent by nature, relying more on these will imply managing demand more actively in order to minimize the cost of using the electricity produced.  In this paper, using a randomized control trial, we investigate whether and by how much households shift intraday electricity usage when provided with incentives to do so.  More precisely, the objective of our intervention is to encourage households to increase their share of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  (when most solar radiation takes place), while discouraging any voluntary increase in overall consumption. 2 The ﬁrst treatment consists of information feedback sent monthly via paper mail.  Households included in this group obtain details about their own consumption, its pattern within the day, and similar information about households of comparable size.  The second treatment is a contest in which the best performers (i. e. , those who achieve the strongest shift in electricity usage while keeping total usage at reasonable levels) receive cash prizes determined by their position in the ranking.  Using a difference-in-differences approach, our results suggest that both treatments induce a reaction, but the type of reaction depends on the treatment.  Households exposed to information feedback globally decrease electricity usage regardless of the hours of the day, but they do not shift consumption toward the indicated hours.  Conversely, households exposed to ﬁnancial incentives display a signiﬁcant shift toward the solar energy production hours.  They achieve an increase in their proportion of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  by about 1 percentage point, which is not negligible considering this proportion is around 20% on average.  The remainder of the paper unfolds as follows.  Section 2 discusses how our contribution ﬁts into the recent literature.  Section 3 presents our experimental design.  Section 4 describes our dataset and provides a descriptive analysis of the impacts of our intervention.  Section 5 explains our econometric strategy and reports our empirical results.  Section 6 discusses the policy implications and concludes.  2.  Literature review.  Our paper is located at the intersection of two distinct bodies of literature.  The ﬁrst is composed of technical contributions that examine the feasibility of integration of large amounts of variable renewable energy sources (sun and wind) into the energy system (see the review by Kondziella and Bruckner, 2016).  This branch of the literature focuses on engineering solutions and essentially analyzes supply-side measures, whereby the issue is to render electricity distribution amenable through grid expansion and/or storage, and it makes assumptions to simulate consumers’ behavior.  For instance, Denholm and Margolis (2007) evaluate scenarios where up to an arbitrary 10% of demand can be shifted to absorb excess photovoltaic generation, and Steinke et al.  (2013) simply keep demand constant.  In our study, we tackle a similar problem but look at it from an opposite perspective, that is, focusing on demand management.  We obtain exact consumption data and observe actual households’ reaction, but we make simplifying assumptions concerning the supply of renewable energy.  Among the technical studies, Pina et al.  (2012) stand out as they analyze the impact of demand-side management strategies in an electricity mix characterized by high shares of renewable energy.  Their results are nevertheless based on simulations, both for the installation of new generation capacity and for electricity usage.  For example, they assume that because washing machines, dryers, and dishwashers can be easily programmed, these devices will be scheduled to operate when renewable electricity generation is high.  In some of their scenarios, around 40% of these activities are thus shifted.  The assumption that households (and other consumers) will actually change their habits is crucial, but far from obvious.  In the present paper, we are testing this assumption by investigating if and how real households do actually shift load when faced with incentives to do so.  The second relevant branch of the literature is composed of economic studies dealing with the effects of feedback on household electricity demand.  As documented in several literature reviews (Buchanan et al. , 2015.  Faruqui et al. , 2010.  Vine et al. , 2013) and meta-analyses (Delmas et al. , 2013.  Ehrhardt-Martinez et al. , 2010), this research ﬁeld is growing fast. 3 In these contributions, the usual objective is to induce electricity conservation.  Instead, our goal here is to induce load shifting across hours of the day without requiring any decrease (but still prevent increases) in total electricity usage.  As such, the present study is among the ﬁrst economic contributions targeting load shifting, and the main novelty of our intervention is that we intend to attract electricity usage toward some speciﬁc (sunlight) hours instead of trying to push it away from some speciﬁc (peak) hours.  In that sense, our intervention is opposed to the usual paradigm of peak shaving and in fact seeks to create a consumption peak that coincides with the peak of solar energy production.  Other remarkable features of our contribution are the duration of the experiment and the response rate of the pre-experiment survey.  Our experiment was conducted over an exceptionally long period of 18 months.  three months of pre-treatment observation, twelve months of treatment, and three further months of observation after the treatment was terminated.  By comparison, 60% of the studies considered in the meta-analysis by Delmas et al.  (2013) lasted three months or less.  Most studies moreover discontinue observation once the treatment is terminated, so that the availability of a post-treatment observation period is also an exceptional feature.  Furthermore, our pre-experiment survey reached a response rate of about 16%, a considerable ﬁgure when compared to other studies. 4 In Ito et al.  (2015) and Degen et al.  (2013), the response rates are about 1. 7% and 8. 7%, respectively.  Jessoe and Rapson (2014) sent 60,000 e-mails but use only 437 households in their analysis (0. 7%).  A high response rate tends to minimize the self-selection problems that might plague this type of experiment.  Finally, our experiment fulﬁlls all conditions to qualify as a “high-quality study” according to Delmas et al.  (2013).  dedicated control group, weather controls, demographic and household controls, and randomization.  <Middle> Experimental design.  Our ﬁeld experiment was conducted on households living in Cernier, a village of around 2000 inhabitants located in the canton of Neuchâtel (Switzerland).  In 2012, in the frame of a pilot study, the electricity provider Groupe e started to equip households with smart meters recording electricity usage in 15-min intervals.  In April 2013, we contacted 387 households already equipped or eligible to be equipped with smart meters, and invited them to ﬁll an online survey. 5 The invitation letter remained intentionally vague about the objective of the study, in order not to inﬂuence the households that would later be assigned to the control group.  It was simply stated that a “scientiﬁc study about electricity consumption” was undertaken to “investigate the ﬂexibility of electricity consumption, in order to adapt it to the production of electricity from renewable sources (in particular photovoltaic production). ” To foster participation, a lottery awarding CHF 200 in cash was organized among respondents, and a reminder letter was sent one month after the initial invitation letter.  For households of the control group, these two letters constitute the only direct interaction with the project.  A time lag of more than six months therefore took place between the information received by these households and the outset of the intervention in January 2014, and it appears very unlikely that their behavior could be affected by our letters.  Also, while we cannot formally exclude spillovers from households in the treatment groups to those in the control group, we argue that such effects are very unlikely to be strong, considering that the objective of the intervention is not straightforward.  If anything, potential spillovers would moreover tend to minimize the observed impact of our intervention, so that the treatment effects we obtain are possibly downward biased and can be considered as a lower bound of the true effects.  By mid-December 2013, 131 households had completed the online survey.  Among them, households facing a time-of-use tariff or already involved in other experiments were discarded, which left 65 households eligible to participate in our experiment. 7,8 The observation period lasted from October 2013 to March 2015, and treatments were administered from January to December 2014.  October–December 2013 thus constitute the pre-treatment period, while January–March 2015 constitute the post-treatment observation period.  In order to guarantee the internal validity of our study, the 65 eligible households have been randomly assigned to one control and two treatment groups of equal size using a stratiﬁcation procedure.  The goal of the procedure was to create groups as similar as possible with respect to the following selected characteristics.  preexperiment electricity usage per household member, dwelling size, and highest education level achieved by a member of the household.  Two households ﬁlled the online survey after the stratiﬁcation had been conducted but before the intervention started, and they have been included in the control group.  The data (survey and electricity usage) are complete for these late respondents, but it was not possible to inform them in due time of the starting date of the treatment.  During the observation period, four households moved out (two from the control and two from the treatment 1), and we discard these attrition households from the analysis because their observation period is truncated.  Two out of these four households even moved out before the treatment started.  Finally, one household (from the treatment 2) appears as a clear outlier and is also excluded from the analysis. 9 Our estimations are thus conducted on a sample comprising 62 households (with 22/19/21 in the control/treatment 1/treatment 2 groups).  To assess the outcome of the stratiﬁcation procedure, we test the average differences of the variables of interest between each treatment group and the control group.  As reported in Table B. 1 in Appendix B, the treatment and control groups appear largely comparable.  Except for two categories of age, all tests do not reject the equivalence of the characteristics between groups.  3. 1.  Treatment 1.  Information feedback.  Treatment 1 consists of information feedback designed to foster shifts of electricity usage toward the period from 11 a. m.  to 3 p. m.  Through this intervention, our goal is to assess whether information alone is a suﬃciently strong incentive for households to engage in load shifting.  The feedback is delivered via monthly letters and intended to enhance households’ knowledge and awareness of their electricity usage and load proﬁle. 11 The feedback concerns the household’s own electricity usage (what Fischer, 2008, deﬁnes as “historic” comparison) and that of households of similar size from the control group (“normative” comparison).  More precisely, as the sample letter reproduced in Fig.  C. 1 in Appendix C shows, the feedback refers to.  (i) The household’s electricity usage in the last three months, along with average usage of similar households (top right(ii) The household’s (average) daily load proﬁle, highlighting usage between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  (bottom left graph).  (iii) The proportion of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  and its evolution over the last three months (bottom right graph).  For the last month, the proportion for similar households is also provided as a benchmark.  Moreover, the text of the letter emphasizes the importance of shifting load toward the sunlight hours, as this would reduce imbalances between solar energy production and electricity consumption.  Every month, a different tip on how to shift electricity usage is also provided.  In order to facilitate participants’ understanding and mitigate potential boomerang effects (Schultz et al. , 2007), we complement the letters with injunctive messages under the form of happy, neutral, or sad faces.  The ﬁrst faces are based on the monthly evolution of the proportion of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  by the household.  The second faces compare the proportion of the household against that of similar households.  Green happy faces signal desired outcomes, that is, a relatively high proportion of electricity consumed between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m. , yellow neutral faces signal not good nor bad outcomes, and red sad faces signal undesired outcomes.  We use a scale going from three happy faces to three sad faces. 13 Similar interventions, based on information feedback containing descriptive and injunctive norms related to past electricity usage, have been implemented in previous contributions (e. g. , Allcott, 2011.  Allcott and Rogers, 2014).  Again, their objective was to induce electricity conservation, while we here target load shifting.  3. 2.  Treatment 2.  Financial incentives.  Treatment 2 is implemented as a contest, in which cash prizes are awarded to the 15 top-ranked households on a monthly basis.  Ranks 1–5, 6–10, 11–15 ascribe respectively CHF 50, 30, and 10. 14,15 Due to practical, political and legal aspects, the provider involved in the project decided not to implement any differentiated tariffs.  This is the main reason why this treatment is designed as a contest.  The objective of this intervention is to investigate whether monetary rewards without any precise information related to electricity usage can induce households to shift their load proﬁle.  In December 2013, a letter was sent to the selected households to inform them about the starting date of the contest (January 1, 2014).  The letter also explained intuitively what should be done to be well-ranked in the contest.  maximize the proportion of electricity consumed during the period from 11 a. m.  to 3 p. m. , while keeping total consumption unaltered.  The exact criteria used to establish the ranking (E) were provided in a webpage, but it was deemed unnecessary or even counterproductive to include all technical details in the information letter.  In fact, knowing the precise rules would not confer any speciﬁc advantage, and the only reasons for making them available to the participants were transparency and fairness concerns.  From January to December 2014, at the end of every month, households were sent personalized mails indicating their position in the ranking (a sample letter is provided in Fig.  C. 22 in Appendix C).  The monthly letters also recalled the contest goal and provided tips on how to shift load.  However, nothing concerning electricity usage was indicated.  For those ranked in the top 15, prizes were included in the form of banknotes in the envelopes.  Participants could check the detailed and complete ranking on www. unine. ch/ﬂexirank, using a personalized password. 16 We have to acknowledge that the design of our experiment makes rewards uncertain, unrelated to amounts of electricity used, and only indirectly linked to household’s actions.  In fact, a household increasing its proportion of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  could remain unrewarded if others fared better.  Conversely, a household not having changed anything could end up rewarded if others did worse.  Our results thus cannot be used to infer about the price-elasticity of electricity demand, and the external validity of this treatment is diﬃcult to assess.  4.  Data and descriptive statistics.  4. 1.  Data.  Households’ electricity usage comes from the electricity provider Groupe e.  It was recorded in 15-min intervals by smart meters, but consumers had no in-home display or any other device showing their real-time electricity use. 17 All feedback provided to households was thus indirect (Bernstein and Collins, 2014.  Darby, 2006) and came exclusively from the letters we sent during the experiment.  The observation period ran from October 2013 to March 2015.  The period from October to December 2013 has been used to monitor households’ “standard” electricity usage and we deﬁne it as the before period.  The treatment period expands from January to December 2014.  The period between January and March 2015, deﬁned as the after period, is used to investigate households’ behavior once the treatment was over.  Data on weather (temperature and radiation) were gathered from MeteoSwiss, the Swiss Meteorological Institute.  The data are available at the hour level and collected in a meteorological station located in Chaumont, which is 6 km away from Cernier and exactly at the same elevation.  Local holiday periods were retrieved from the oﬃcial calendars of the Canton of Neuchâtel.  Our ﬁnal dataset contains a total of 33,914 household-day observations.  62 households followed over 18 months (i. e. , 547 days).  When using hourly data, the dataset contains 813,812 householdhour observations.  Fig.  1 shows the monthly electricity usage for the control and treatment groups.  Average annual consumption is around 2850 kWh per household in our sample.  This value is slightly larger than the ﬁgures reported by Degen et al.  (2013) for their sample (2300 kWh) and the city of Zurich (2600 kWh).  Nevertheless, it only represents one fourth of the electricity used by an average US household, which is larger than 11,000 kWh (see Allcott and Rogers, 2014).  It is also twice smaller than the values reported by Ito et al.  (2015) concerning Japan.  By international standards, electricity used by Swiss households is thus low.  Before the beginning of the intervention, average household consumption in treatment 1 was above the corresponding series of the other two groups. 21 Since the beginning of the treatment, we observe a relative decrease for treatment 1, such that the series come closer during the experiment.  Electricity used by the control and treatment 2 groups evolves quite similarly.  At the end of the observation period, the spread between the three groups is very narrow.  Fig.  1 moreover highlights the seasonal pattern of electricity usage.  When the weather is warm and sunny, people naturally tend to stay outside longer, eat lighter and colder, use less artiﬁcial lighting, and wear lighter clothes.  These behaviors lead to lower consumption in the period of the year when weather conditions are good.  Note also that air conditioning, which could involve signiﬁcant electricity usage during the warm season, is virtually non-existent in Swiss households because of tight regulation (see Winkler et al. , 2014).  In 2014, space cooling and ventilation only accounted for 2. 6% of ﬁnal energy consumption whereas heating accounted for 28. 9% (SFOE, 2015).  Fig.  2 displays the proportion of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  by group.  While the control group displays relatively little variation over time, there is a clear increase at the beginning of the intervention period for both treatment groups.  Their proportion reaches a maximum after some months of treatment and it thereafter decreases, gradually returning toward its pre-experiment level.  We observe that households in treatment 2 performed particularly well (i. e. , increased their proportion of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m. ) from April to August.  Two alternative explanations (not mutually exclusive) might support this outcome.  First, the duration of the intervention might inﬂuence its effectiveness.  Households gradually changed their habits at the beginning of the treatment, but they stopped their efforts after some months.  The reversal observed after August would then be explained by some loss of enthusiasm or weariness caused by the intervention duration.  Second, because of the seasonal effects described above, it might be easier to shift load when the weather cooperates.  Because our intervention lasted 12 months and not more, it is complicated to assert which of these two explanations is correct.  One should either conduct a similar experiment over a longer period, or repeat the same experiment launching cohorts at different periods of the year to identify whether the pattern is aligned with calendar year or with intervention duration.  In their ﬁeld experiment on a sample of Swedish households, Bartusch et al.  (2011) make very similar observations.  After the introduction of peak (i. e. , weekdays between 7 a. m.  and 7 p. m. ) and off-peak pricing, they obtain substantial shifts in electricity consumption from peak to off-peak periods during the summer seasons but almost no change in the winter seasons.  Because their intervention spans two complete years, their ﬁndings support the explanation according to which the ability to shift load is related to the period of the year rather than to the duration of the intervention.  In Fig.  2, we ﬁnally observe that the average proportion 11 a. m. –3 p. m.  of the control group becomes larger than that of the two treatment groups in the after period.  This observation suggests that the intervention did not form long-run habits in the households.  4. 2.  Possible strategies.  In order to achieve increases in the proportion of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m. , households could follow different strategies.  (i) Increase usage during the period 11 a. m. –3 p. m.  (ii) Decrease usage outside the period 11 a. m. –3 p. m.  (iii) (Ideally) do both (i) and (ii), i. e. , actually shift load toward the solar energy production hours.  In the letters sent to treated households, we tried to prevent strategy (i) by highlighting that increases in overall consumption were to avoid as much as possible and providing tips on how to shift consumption.  Yet, we had no means to ascertain that the households would correctly interpret the letters. 22 Fig.  3 shows the daily average load proﬁle for each group, separating before and treatment periods.  Panel A displays electricity usage for every hour, while panel B collapses the hours into ranges that are relevant to our analysis.  Panel B is less detailed but allows to spot more easily how electricity usage evolved between before and treatment periods for each group.  If our intervention was effective, we should observe relative increases between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  and/or relative decreases outside this period for the treatment groups compared to the control group.  Fig.  3 ﬁrst shows that electricity usage is lower in the treatment period than in the before period.  This is primarily explained by seasonality.  The before period runs from October to December (i. e. , high-consumption months) while the treatment period spans an entire year.  Second, relative to the control group, treatment 1 households decrease usage in every hour of the day.  While their electricity usage was larger than that of the control group in the before period, the gap is much smaller in the treatment period.  This ﬁnding suggests that the content of the letters was probably not interpreted as intended.  What households might have understood from receiving frequent feedback is that they should conserve electricity, which is the message traditionally transmitted by actors of the energy sector.  For treatment 2, however, we observe a different pattern.  Relative to the control group, electricity usage decreased substantially in the evening and to a lesser extent in the morning, while it slightly increased between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  Treatment 2 households thus seem to have succeeded in shifting electricity usage toward the solar energy production hours.  5.  Econometric strategy and results.  5. 1.  Treatment effect on proportion 11 a. m. –3 p. m.  To assess the impact of information feedback (treatment 1) and ﬁnancial incentives (treatment 2), we use the following differencein-differences speciﬁcation, where propigt is the proportion of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  by household i of group g in day t, ande igt is an errorThe variables of interest are the treatment group indicators, Tgt, whichtakethevalue1ifhousehold iisintreatmentgroupg(=1,2)and day t is in the treatment period, and 0 otherwise.  The time ﬁxed effect dt is set equal to 1 during the treatment period, that is, for every day of the year 2014, and 0 otherwise.  A group ﬁxed effect ag is included for each of the two treatment groups.  In alternative speciﬁcations, we include household ﬁxed effects and additional controls (or day ﬁxed effects).  Since the dependent variable is a proportion, the coeﬃcients in Eq.  (1) must be interpreted as changes in percentage points associated with a change in the independent variables.  Also, the time unit is the day, since the proportion of electricity used over 11 a. m. –3 p. m.  can obviously not be computed at a higher frequency.  Note that our dataset is a panel with few individuals (62 households), very few clusters (3 groups), and a very large number of time periods (547 days).  This setting renders serial correlation and heteroskedasticity very likely. 24 We therefore need to carefully choose the estimation technique in order to appropriately quantify the uncertainty surrounding our estimates.  More generally, there are some serious warnings in the literature about potential failures in difference-in-differences estimations.  In an inﬂuential paper, Bertrand et al.  (2004) show that because of serial correlation, conventional standard errors may be severely underestimated.  They recommend the use of generalized least squares (GLS) for the estimation of difference-in-differences models.  Brewer et al.  (2013) and Cameron and Miller (2015) argue in the same direction and show that feasible generalized least squares (FGLS) offer substantial eﬃciency gains compared to OLS, that is, FGLS estimations combined with robust inference technique can increase statistical power considerably while maintaining correct test size.  Beck and Katz (1995) nevertheless demonstrate that FGLS may underestimate the standard errors in the context of longitudinal data, and they advocate using panel corrected standard errors (PCSE) instead.  For all these reasons, we will report results obtained using both FGLS and PCSE techniques.  In all cases, we allow for cross-sectional correlation and serial correlation with an AR(1) coeﬃcient common to all households.  Table 1 reports the results obtained using various speciﬁcations of Eq.  (1).  Using FGLS, column (1) reports the basic difference-indifferences regression, without either ﬁxed effects or any control variables.  Column (2) contains household ﬁxed effects and additional controls for outdoor temperature (in and out of the period 11 a. m. –3 p. m. ), holiday periods, and weekend days.  Finally, column (3) includes household ﬁxed effects and day ﬁxed effects.  Columns (4) to (6) repeat similar estimations using PCSE instead of FGLS.  In all estimations, the two treatment effect coeﬃcients display positive signs, implying that treated households tended to react as expected.  However, the coeﬃcients for the two treatments are of considerably different magnitude.  For the information feedback, the impact is small (0. 1–0. 5 percentage point) and at best weakly significant.  In contrast, the effect of ﬁnancial incentives is larger (0. 9–1. 4 percentage point) and always highly signiﬁcant.  Households who were administered this treatment have thus increased their share of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  from 20% to around 21%, which corresponds to a 5% increase of this share.  As already noted, the cash prizes distributed to households in the contest were generous.  Ranging from CHF 10 to 50, they were in fact as large as the electricity bills for some households in some months.  In the end, the cost of this intervention appears high compared to the amount of load that was shifted.  Yet, one might wonder if the reaction of households would have been different with lower cash prizes and/or more participants in the contest.  Considering that the cash prizes received by one household were uncertain and only indirectly linked to this household’s actions, one possible conjecture is indeed that lower expected gains might not necessarily trigger weaker reactions by the participants, thereby reducing the cost of shifting one kWh.  Our results must therefore simply be interpreted as evidence that ﬁnancial incentives have the potential to induce behavioral changes and load shifting, but we cannot provide any estimation of the households’ sensitivity to a given subsidy or a given price variation.  5. 2.  Treatment effect on electricity usage.  The analysis offered in previous section about the proportion of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  investigates whether households did alter their load proﬁle or not.  It does however not unravel the strategy followed to reach this target.  Therefore, it is of interest to evaluate how electricity used in different periods of the day has been affected by the intervention.  To this end, we separate the day into three periods (before 11 a. m. , from 11 a. m.  to 3 p. m. , and after 3 p. m. ) on which the treatments are expected to exert different effects, where kwhight is electricity usage by household i of group g in hour h of day t.  We transform this dependent variable using logarithms, so that the coeﬃcient of a dummy variable approximately indicates its percentage effect on electricity usage.  For this analysis, the time unit is the hour.  The variables Tgh∗t take the value 1 if household i is in treatment group g (= 1, 2), hour h falls in hour range h and day t is in the treatment period, and 0 otherwise.  This equation also encompasses an hour-range ﬁxed effect kh∗ for each period of the day (0 a. m. – 11 a. m. , 11 a. m. –3 p. m. , 3 p. m. –12 p. m. ).  If households did actually shift load toward the solar energy production hours in response to our intervention, we should observe for treatment groups a decrease in electricity usage in the morning (0 a. m. –11 a. m. ) and/or the evening (3 p. m. –12 p. m. ) combined with an increase in the period from 11 a. m.  to 3 p. m.  Results are reported in Table 2.  For the information feedback, in all periods of the day and all estimations, we obtain negative and (most often) signiﬁcant coeﬃcients.  We thus obtain electricity conservation regardless of the hour of the day.  This is not the expected outcome, but it might be explained if households interpreted the feedback “superﬁcially”.  As admitted above, information contained in the letters was somewhat abundant and sophisticated.  Households might therefore have understood that something related to electricity was going on, and they adopted electricity-saving behaviors without distinction between periods of the day.  Such ﬁndings can also be related to the Hawthorne effect (see Schwartz et al. , 2013).  In the context of energy, attention alone might change behavior because people are already aware of the issue and they (think they) know how to respond.  It is thus possible that our feedback simply increased salience of electricity usage, which triggered the observed reaction.  We have moreover conducted analyses to investigate potential heterogeneous effects across households by interacting the treatment dummies with selected characteristics (results are reported in Section S. 3 of the supplementary material).  Interestingly, one robust ﬁnding we obtain is that households with a high level of education have achieved a larger shift in their consumption.  These households have increased their proportion of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  by around 3 to 4 percentage points more than others, a reaction three times stronger than that of the average household.  Such a ﬁnding supports the hypothesis that the information provided was complicated.  Households with a higher level of education interpreted the letters more correctly and reacted more as requested.  It is worth mentioning that the reduction of consumption induced by information feedback appears substantial in some hour ranges (up to 7% for 11 a. m. –3 p. m.  according to FGLS), but not implausible and in line with the ﬁndings of recent studies.  In their literature review, Buchanan et al.  (2014) indeed observe that energy savings caused by information feedback on energy consumption typically fall in the region of 5–20 %. 28 Note also that the results we obtain here are not in contradiction with our previous ﬁndings about the proportion of electricity used between 11 a. m.  to 3 p. m. , which (if anything) slightly increased.  Even though we observe a stronger decrease for the hours between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  than for other periods, the former is only four hours long.  The hourly decrease is more modest during the rest of the day, but the greater number of hours leads to a large absolute decrease of consumption, henceforth yielding an increase in the proportion 11 a. m. –3 p. m.  Financial incentives induced different reactions.  Even though coeﬃcients vary somewhat from one speciﬁcation to another, we consistently obtain negative coeﬃcients for the evening period (3 p. m. –12 p. m. ).  Moreover, coeﬃcients for the 11 a. m. –3 p. m.  period are positive and highly signiﬁcant.  Hence, it turns out that households exposed to ﬁnancial incentives did actually shift electricity use from the evening period (3 p. m. –12 p. m. ) toward the solar energy production hours (11 a. m. –3 p. m. ).  The two effects combined led to the increase of the proportion of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  already discussed.  These ﬁndings are also consistent with the load proﬁles displayed in Fig.  3.  More detailed estimations with distinct treatment effects for each hour of the day (see Section S. 2 in the supplementary material) reveal that households shifted load mainly from the period 3 p. m. –7 p. m.  toward 12 a. m. –1 p. m.  5. 3.  Evolution of the treatment effect.  As already documented in Figs.  1 and 2, electricity consumption is characterized by seasonality.  This feature may have driven households’ reactions during the intervention.  The literature on energy conservation (e. g. , Allcott and Rogers, 2014.  Lynham et al. , 2016) moreover shows that treatment effects tend to decline over time.  To shed more light on this issue, we analyze how the treatment effects unfold during our intervention by disaggregating the treatment period into months where Tgm takes the value 1 if household i is in treatment group g (= 1, 2) and the month is m, and 0 otherwise.  Month ﬁxed effects dm and group ﬁxed effects ag are also included.  This equation allows to estimate monthly treatment effects, by comparing each month of the treatment period against the before period (October–December 2013).  The treatment coeﬃcients (bgm) are presented graphically inWe observe that it takes some months for the treatment effects to unfold, the coeﬃcients being close to zero in January and increasing during the ﬁrst three months of intervention.  For both treatments, the effect becomes statistically signiﬁcant in March.  For the information feedback, the maximum effect is observed after three months already, and the coeﬃcients thereafter decrease and return to zero in July.  Near the end of the treatment period, the point estimates even become negative (and slightly signiﬁcant in October), which is in contradiction with what was requested in the intervention.  The effect of the ﬁnancial incentives, on the other hand, rises steadily during the ﬁrst ﬁve months, stabilizes during the summer, and declines afterward.  The coeﬃcients estimated from May to August are large, all of them being around 0. 025 while all others are below 0. 015.  This evolution support the idea that the treatment effect is related to seasonal effects.  Increasing the proportion of consumption between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  appears to be easier during the summer months thanks to the different factors mentioned earlier.  During this period of the year, most activities take place outside, meals are lighter so that less cooking is done, and the light requirements are lower.  5. 4.  Habit formation.  In the previous section, we find that the treatment effects evolve non-linearly during the intervention.  An additional interesting question is then whether our intervention induced habit formation, that is, changes in households’ behavior that would continue even when treatments are withdrawn.  In order to explore potential habit formation, we collected electricity usage during three months after the treatments were terminated, from January to December 2015.  Households did not receive any direction or information at all during this period.  We assess lasting effects by estimating Eqs.  (1) and (2) using data from October–December 2013 (before period) to January–March 2015 (after period).  If households’ habits were permanently shaped by our intervention, the after coefficients should be similar to those obtained for the treatment period (Tables 1 and 2).  As shown in Table 3, this is however not the case for the proportion of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  The coefficients obtained for the after period are negative and sometimes even significant, which implies the proportion 11 a. m. –3 p. m.  was not impacted in the long run by our intervention.  While households reacted during the treatment (at least those exposed to ﬁnancial incentives), their proportion returned to its pre-experiment level after the end of the treatment or even became smaller than before the experiment.  However, when conducting a similar exercise on electricity usage (Table 4), we obtain largely different results.  Households included in the ﬁnancial incentives treatment display no difference in usage before and after the intervention.  Hence, these households appear to have returned to their pre-experiment behavior in every respect once the treatment was withdrawn.  On the contrary, households assigned to the information feedback intervention show a strong decrease in their electricity usage, not only during, but also after the intervention ended.  In the literature, only few studies investigate a period after withdrawing the treatment, and results are mixed.  Ito et al.  (2015) ﬁnd evidence of habit formation (i. e. , consumption decrease in the long run) for their economic incentives group, but not for their moral suasion group.  This is the opposite to what we obtain here.  Allcott and Rogers (2014) show that the treatment effects decay faster if the intervention is short (two to ten weeks), but the effects become more persistent as the intervention continues.  Lynham et al.  (2016) obtain substantial electricity conservation during one month even in households where in-home displays have been removed.  Overall, it appears that shaping households’ behavior in a sustainable way is diﬃcult, and habit formation might depend on the objective and the treatment.  In order to affect electricity usage in the long run, permanent measures (or at least longer than one year) should probably be implemented.  In (relatively) short interventions like ours, even though longer than most of the other experiments presented in the literature, it seems unlikely that households undertake “structural changes” such as replacing old devices by more recent ones.  Nevertheless, such changes appear as one way of achieving lasting effects, in particular when the objective is to shift electricity usage.  If new devices can be programmed to start at a given time, load shifting would become easier.  Indeed, several participants in our experiment complained that they could not do much about load shifting because they were out all day for work and thus had no grasp on their electricity usage between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  <Conclusion> Policy implications and conclusions.  Demand-side management is gaining momentum in the electricity sector.  On the one hand, decentralized generation of electricity is growing thanks to photovoltaic systems that are becoming widespread.  On the other hand, advanced technologies such as smart meters and in-home displays improved in the past few years and their cost has plummeted.  As a consequence, households are increasingly being equipped with such devices that provide real-time information on electricity usage.  These innovations transform households from mere electricity consumers to electricity producers, and they contribute in making them more aware of their electricity usage.  One particular issue with solar energy is that its production takes place at times when demand for electricity is not necessarily high.  Households’ electricity usage indeed peaks in the evening, when solar production energy is at best low.  Furthermore, the mismatch is not limited to hours of the day, but it also extends to periods of the year and to geographical regions.  A system relying on large amounts of solar (and wind) energy therefore needs storage capacities, backup power, and strong grid interconnections.  While such measures are necessary to reduce the gap between supply and demand, they are extremely costly.  Moreover, because of the time required for their implementation, they can only be considered as long-run measures.  In the meantime, complementary measures targeting the demand for electricity could be devised with the aim of reducing the gap in the short run.  In this paper, using a randomized control trial, we assess the impact of an intervention that seeks to influence residential electricity usage with information feedback and financial incentives.  While policies and research experiments generally push for electricity conservation, we here target load shifting.  We stimulate households to shift consumption toward the period of the day when the production of solar energy is expected to be the largest.  The final objective is to investigate whether imbalances between solar energy production and residential electricity usage can be reduced via load shifting, that is, changes in the patterns of consumption.  The relevance of such a study is enhanced in the current context, where many countries engage in their energy transition and plan to increase the share of renewable energy in they energy mix.  Our first treatment consisted of information feedback.  Every month, treated households have been provided with detailed information about their electricity usage and their typical daily load profile.  As a benchmark and in order to induce social competition, they have also been provided with comparable information from households of similar size.  The feedback letters moreover explained the importance of aligning electricity consumption with solar energy production and included tips to achieve this outcome.  No other motivation has been given.  The households of this treatment group did not succeed in shifting their load profile.  However, they achieved significant electricity conservation, which tends to indicate that participants interpreted our letters superficially and reacted as “traditionally expected” in this field, disregarding more sophisticated information.  Interestingly, this finding points to imperfections of the billing system currently used in Switzerland (and many other countries).  In fact, the only feedback received by most households on their electricity consumption is a bill every second month that does not even reflect true consumption because it is based on usage forecasts.  Actual electricity usage is measured only once a year through traditional meter readings and the balance is then billed or paid back to the consumer.  Kempton and Layne’s (1994) humorous comparison of the electricity market with a supermarket where prices are not displayed and the shopper receives a bill where only the total amount is indicated hence applies literally. 