Introduction Accounting research has long shown that managers face pressure to meet earnings benchmarks and that they react to this pressure by manipulating accruals and real activities when their firm is at risk of missing benchmarks (e. g. , Dechow et al.  2010, §5. 5).  Survey evidence suggests that, in order to meet benchmarks, managers prefer taking real actions over manipulating accruals (Graham et al. , 2005).  Empirical studies provide strong evidence for real activities management (e. g.  Roychowdhury, 2006.  Cohen et al. , 2008).  Importantly, real activities management is difficult for investors to detect in the short run (Kothari et al. , 2016) but potentially has negative consequences for firms’ long-run performance (e. g. , Bhojraj et al. , 2009.  Cohen and Zarowin, 2010).  In this study, we provide evidence of a previously undocumented consequence of real activities management to meet earnings benchmarks – compromises in workplace safety.  In particular, we show that benchmark beating is associated with higher workplace injuries and that the strength of this association varies with employee workloads and discretionary expenses that include safety-related expenditures.  Earnings benchmarks can relate to workplace safety in at least two ways.  First, if managers believe that the firm may miss expectations under the ordinary course of business, they may increase employees’ workloads or pressure them to work faster.  In response, employees can compromise safety by overexerting themselves or by circumventing safety procedures that slow the flow of work.  Second, managers may cut explicit and implicit safety costs, such as the costs of maintaining equipment and training employees, in their attempts to report higher earnings.  Along these lines, Graham et al.  (2005) report that some CFOs admit to cutting maintenance spending in order to meet earnings benchmarks.  To the extent managers take such actions, workplace safety will deteriorate when firms struggle to meet expectations.  We examine whether firms suspected of managing earnings to meet expectations exhibit higher workplace injury rates than other firms.  We follow prior research on earnings management and define firms that meet or just beat expectations as suspect firms (e. g. , Burgstahler and Dichev, 1997.  Degeorge et al. , 1999).  Using establishment-level (e. g. , store or factory) injury data from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) for the 2002–2011 period, we find that about one in every 24 employees is injured in firms that meet or just beat analyst earnings forecasts, compared to about one in 27 in firms that miss or comfortably beat forecasts.  In multivariate analyses, where we control for a variety of establishmentand firm-level characteristics as well as establishment (or firm) and year fixed effects to account for unobservable factors, we find that the association between benchmark beating and injury rates remains statistically and economically significant.  For example, controlling for other factors, injury rates are five to fifteen percent higher in periods where a firm meets or just beats analyst forecasts than in other periods.  We provide evidence that the relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety likely stems from two types of real actions that managers take.  high workloads and cuts to safety-related expenditures.  We utilize production per employee and revenue per employee as measures of employee workloads, and abnormal discretionary expenses per employee to gauge cuts to safety-related expenditures.  We find that injury rates are more strongly associated with production per employee in firms that meet or just beat forecasts.  We also find evidence that injury rates are higher when firms that meet or just beat forecasts have abnormally low per-employee discretionary expenditures. 1 Taken together, the evidence suggests that both pressure to increase worker productivity and cuts to safety-related expenditures contribute to the relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety.  We use three settings to examine cross-sectional variation in the relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety.  First, we find that the relation is weaker in industries with high union membership.  This is consistent with unions’ aim to ensure reasonable workloads, work speed, and safety (Kaufman, 2005).  It is also consistent with the findings in the literature that, compared to non-union workers, union workers are less likely to perceive that taking risks is a part of their job (Gillen et al. , 2002), and unionization leads to fewer workplace injuries (Morantz, 2013).  Consistent with unions’ goal of workplace safety, our evidence suggests that unions mitigate the extent to which pressure to meet earnings expectations translates into reduced safety.  Second, we find a weaker relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety when workers’ compensation insurance premiums are more sensitive to injury claims.  Workers’ compensation insurance is a state-mandated program and its premiums are primarily determined by state requirements.  Insurance premiums depend, in part, on a multiplier based on the employer's workplace safety record.  A given change in the multiplier thus has a greater dollar impact on premiums when the baseline insurance premium is higher.  We test and find that the association between benchmark beating and workplace safety is weaker in establishments that are located in states where each additional injury has a higher impact on workers’ compensation premium.  Third, we utilize government contracting as an incentive for keeping safer work environments.  Government contracts typically include terms that prohibit bids from firms deemed to have unsafe work environments.  Consistent with the government contractors’ heightened focus on safety, we find that the relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety is weaker for firms that do more business with the government.  In our main analyses, we focus on analyst forecasts as our measure of earnings expectations since prior research indicates that meeting analyst forecasts is a more important benchmark than meeting prior year's earnings or avoiding losses (Dechow et al. , 2003), and that the market perceives missing analyst forecasts as a more negative signal than a decrease in yearover-year earnings (Brown and Caylor, 2005).  In additional tests, we replicate our primary analyses for the zero-earnings and zero-earnings-change benchmarks.  We find higher injury rates in suspect firm-years identified by zero-earningschanges, but not for zero-earnings.  This may be because after the passage of Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) in 2002, the zeroearnings discontinuity, and to a lesser extent discontinuity around prior year's earnings, have dissipated whereas the discontinuity around analyst forecasts remain (Gilliam et al. , 2015).  Our study is related to the literature studying the forms and consequences of earnings management via real activities.  Extant research finds that managers cut research and development (e. g. , Baber et al. , 1991), advertising (e. g. , Cohen et al. , 2010), selling, administrative and general expenditures, and engage in over-production (e. g. , Roychowdhury, 2006) in order to meet earnings benchmarks, and that such activities potentially negatively affect a firm's long-run operating performance (e. g. , Bhojraj et al. , 2009.  Cohen and Zarowin, 2010).  Our study adds to this literature by documenting a novel and potentially opaque consequence of managing earnings via real activities – compromises in workplace safety.  Our findings highlight that costs of real activities management can accrue not only in monetary terms but also in terms of employee health.  The effects we document may represent the “tip of the iceberg” in terms of the overall employee health since OSHA collects data on only relatively serious and physical injuries/illnesses such as those that require hospitalization, days away from work, or job transfers.  Additionally, in the light of recent findings that investors face greater difficulty in detecting earnings management via real activities (Kothari et al. , 2016), our results suggest that timely disclosures about workplace safety can serve as signals to investors of certain forms of real activities management.  While some firms are considering providing such disclosures (e. g. , Silverman, 2016), these disclosures are typically not available to investors on a timely basis and in a systematic manner.  We also contribute to the literature on workplace safety and firms’ financial condition.  Cohn and Wardlaw (2016) predict and find that workplace injury rates are associated with high leverage and with negative cash flow shocks.  In a study of the operational performance of restaurant chains in Florida, Bernstein, and Sheen (2016) find that restaurants become safer and cleaner following private equity buyouts.  We focus on managerial attention to earnings targets and find that it diminishes managers’ focus on workplace safety.  Also related to our study, Rose (1990) finds a link between the safety of airline customers and the overall financial health of airlines, and Matsa (2011) finds that in the supermarket industry, competition increases service quality.  Unlike Rose (1990) and Matsa (2011), we focus on employee safety rather than service/product quality, and earnings benchmarks rather than the overall financial health of the firm.  Prior studies also find that accidents and absences are associated with high capacity and labor utilization (See survey by Pouliakas and Theodossiou (2013)).  The stronger association we document between production per employee and injury rates in suspect firm-years relative to nonsuspect firm-years is consistent with an association between workplace safety and high labor utilization.  Our findings do not speak to the magnitude of net welfare effects of compromises in workplace safety on firms or employees.  The socially optimal injury rate likely exceeds zero, and such compromises could overall be desirable if the benefits exceed the costs.  Nevertheless, the negative impact of such compromises on employee health represents a cost for the firms to the extent that it results in higher wage demands, fines, litigation, increased insurance premiums, and negative publicity, and a cost to employees in the form of pain, lost wages, and, in extreme cases, death.  2.  Background.  2. 1.  Safety regulation and incentives for workplace safety.  The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulates workplace safety for most private sector employers in the United States.  Exceptions include employers subject to safety regulation from other federal agencies, such as the Mine Safety and Health Administration and the Federal Aviation Administration.  OSHA promulgates standards including equipment safety, communication of hazards, and training programs. 2 It also regulates compliance by investigating worksites and employee complaints (Kniesner and Leeth, 2014).  From a regulatory perspective, OSHA faces a risk reduction mandate rather than a cost-versus-benefit mandate (Viscusi 1996a, 1996b).  In 2010, companies spent between $52 and $66 billion complying with OSHA regulations (Kniesner and Leeth, 2014), which amounts to between four and five percent of the $1351 billion domestic corporate profits in 2010 per the U. S.  Bureau of Economic Analysis.  This excludes indirect costs, such as the impact of safety measures on the speed of workflow.  Estimates of costs of OSHA regulations per life saved range from $100,000 for respiratory protection, to $78 billion for the regulation of formaldehyde (Viscusi, 2007, Table 2, in 2002 dollars). 3 Company incentives for safety stem from the costs of regulatory noncompliance, such as litigation, workers’ compensation premiums, and wage demands, and from the impact of safety on future revenues, investor/public perceptions, and the ability to attract and retain skilled employees.  OSHA enforces safety regulations by making regular inspections and investigating worker complaints.  Penalties for noncompliance range from citations and fines, which tend to be small, to jail time and court-ordered shutdown for extreme violations (Kniesner and Leeth, 2014).  Injury/illness frequency and severity is also used as a key input in the calculation of workers’ compensation insurance premiums.  According to the Liberty Mutual Workplace Safety Index, businesses’ total direct workers’ compensation costs– insurance, claims, and claims processing – for the top ten injury types amounted to $59. 58 billion in 2014.  Additionally, companies can face wage differentials to compensate employees for injury and illness risk (Wei, 2007.  Viscusi, 2010), and injuries can impede firms’ ability to win contracts that explicitly specify a minimum acceptable safety record as a prequalification condition. 4 For example, the U. S.  Army evaluates bidders’ safety practices in the pre-award phase and can disqualify bidders due to poor workplace safety (e. g. , U. S.  Army, 2012, §4).  Workplace safety can also influence a firm's market value through its effect on public and investor perceptions.  The frequency of injuries/illnesses is informative about operational risks and the likelihood of major accidents, but is not disclosed in a timely manner. ,5,6 Anecdotal evidence also suggests that investors request additional timely disclosures about workplace safety following major accidents that draw media attention (e. g.  Tait 2010.  Coetzee and Van Staden, 2011). 7 Relatedly, in two separate field studies, Longsteeth and Rosenbloom (1973) and Spicer (1978) find that institutional investors and bankers consider social responsibility disclosures in investment decisions.  In a more recent empirical work, Albuquerque et al.  (2015) show that firms with better corporate social responsibility ratings, which incorporates employee safety and rights, experience higher valuations.  Consistent with an impact of employee safety on firm valuation, some firms (e. g. , American Electric Power) use employee safety as an input in the calculation of executive compensation.  Workplace safety also affects employers via its impacts on employers’ ability to attract skilled workers and on employees’ demands for compensation.  Employees with high risk tolerance and low skills self-select into inherently riskier occupations (Hwang et al. , 1992.  DeLeire and Levy, 2004.  Orrenius and Zavodny, 2009).  While employees demand higher pay for riskier occupations (Thaler and Rosen, 1976.  Viscusi, 1978), risk-tolerant employees demand relatively low incremental pay as compensation for risk (Viscusi and Hersch 2001).  The latter result is intuitive because, conditional on having to pay a wage premium for workplace hazards, employers will find the premium less costly for risk-tolerant employees.  While employees can potentially pass some of the anticipated costs to employers via demands for higher wages, and pass ex post costs to employers via litigation or insurance, prior research provides evidence that employees and their families still bear significant costs of injuries.  In addition to deaths or permanent severe disabilities, which perhaps no compensation can cover, studies find that workers who had temporary injuries experience significant earnings losses in the years following injuries (Boden and Galizzi, 1999.  Boden, 2005) and are more likely to be contacted by collection agencies (Keogh et al. , 2000).  Galizzi and Zagorsky (2009) track 9186 employees from 1985 to 2000 and find that employees who spent time away from work due to workplace injuries have dramatically lower wealth and consumption.  Higher injury rates are also associated with lower job satisfaction and higher turnover intent (e. g.  Danna and Griffin, 1999.  McCaughey et al. , 2013).  2. 2.  The OSHA Data Initiative (ODI).  Under the OSHA Data Initiative Program (ODI), which was active from 1996 through 2011, OSHA surveyed private-sector establishments to obtain data on reportable work-related injuries and acute illnesses attributable to work-related activities that occurred during the prior year. 8 An establishment corresponds to a distinct physical location, such as an individual factory or store. 9 In addition to injury and illness data, the survey contains a unique identifier for each establishment and information about the establishment's name, location, number of employees, number of hours worked, and variables indicating unusual events, such as shutdowns, strikes, and natural disasters.  Each year OSHA surveys approximately 80,000 private-sector establishments.  All establishments under OSHA jurisdiction with 11 or more employees are required to keep records of injuries and illnesses unless OSHA exempts the industry due to a past history of low accident rates.  The survey covers primarily larger establishments (typically 40 or more employees) from industries that OSHA classifies as high-hazard, which we list in Appendix B.  Appendix B also lists the industries that OSHA deems low-hazard and exempt from ODI.  The sample selection is designed to ensure that each establishment in the potential data collection universe is surveyed at least once during a three-year cycle.  OSHA uses random sampling method to choose establishments, but establishments that had high injury rates or failed to respond in the prior year are more likely to be surveyed again.  ODI data become publicly available about two years after the year for which safety data are recorded.  OSHA does not give advance notice to establishments that must submit data for the survey, and all covered establishments must have the data ready for the event that they are included in the survey population.  OSHA enforces accurate data collection via audits and fines for detected failure to comply with recordkeeping requirements (See, for example, OSHA Directive 00–1 (CPL2)).  Nevertheless, there could be some degree of underreporting of incidents.  A summary of the 1996 to 1998 audits indicate that about 20% of establishments had recordkeeping errors, to which OSHA responded in 2001 with revised guidelines and practices to improve the recordkeeping (Federal Register number 66. 5916-6135).  <Middle> Research design.  We conduct our analysis using establishment-level data from the ODI survey.  Our dependent variable is the count of injuries, and we accordingly use a count model to estimate the relation between employee safety and the pressure to meet earnings benchmarks.  Based on Burgstahler and Dichev (1997)’s findings on earnings management, we measure periods of pressure to meet benchmarks (Suspect) as firm-years that meet or just beat their earnings benchmarks.  Prior literature provides evidence consistent with investors viewing analyst forecasts as a more important benchmark than prior years’ earnings and zero earnings (e. g. , Dechow et al. , 2003.  Brown and Caylor, 2005.  Gilliam et al. , 2015).  Accordingly, we focus on analyst forecasts as the primary earnings benchmark, and Suspect equals one if an earnings surprise is between zero and two cents, and zero otherwise.  In Section 7 we also report results from additional tests that use prior year's earnings, and zeroearnings as earnings benchmarks.  In our main analyses, we estimate the following model for establishment i in year t, where for a Poisson model, which permits establishment-level fixed effects but also imposes the assumption that the injury rates’ for a negative binomial model, which does not permit establishment-level fixed effects, and variance equals its mean (Cameron and Trivedi, 2015). 10 Establishment-level fixed effects, which subsume higher order (e. g. , firm or industry) fixed effects, allow us to control for unobservable factors affecting the rate of injuries/illnesses in a given establishment, and allow us to interpret the coefficient on Suspect as the injury rates relative to the establishments’ typical injury rates.  Establishment-level fixed effects have the drawback of requiring at least two observations for each establishment.  To control for various firm characteristics that may affect workplace safety, the regressions include the natural logarithm of beginning total assets (Ln(Assets)), the beginning-of-year ratio of total short- and long-term debt to total assets (Leverage), the beginning-of-year ratio of net property, plant and equipment to total assets (PPE/Assets), current period sales divided by beginning total assets (Turnover), current period capital expenditures divided by beginning total assets (CapEx/Assets), and the beginning-of-year ratio of market value of assets to book value of assets (M/B).  We measure market value of assets as the sum of market value of equity, book value of total liabilities, and liquidation value of preferred stock minus deferred tax liabilities.  Appendix C provides detailed variable definitions. 