 Introduction This paper examines whether the quality of mergers and acquisitions (M&As) is higher when the acquiring firm and target firm share the same external auditor. 1 Our intuition is that the acquisition process often involves considerable uncertainty, including information asymmetry between bidders and targets regarding their operations, financial health, risk and prospects as well as uncertainty related to post-acquisition operational synergies.  This uncertainty can negatively impact M&A quality by reducing managers' ability to identify the most profitable investment projects (Goodman et al. , 2014).  We argue that when an acquirer and target share a common auditor, the auditor can help reduce uncertainty along several dimensions.  First, auditors accumulate a considerable amount of information about their clients through conducting their audit procedures and through informal discussions with top management, allowing them to be helpful as information intermediaries both before the M&A (e. g. , identifying potential merger counterparties and assisting with due diligence) and after the M&A (e. g. , integrating accounting systems and internal controls).  Second, since each audit firm has its own unique style of interpreting and implementing accounting rules (Kothari et al. , 2010), firms represented by a common auditor are likely to have more comparable financial statements (Francis et al. , 2014), which leads to a reduction in uncertainty (De Franco et al. , 2011).  That is, a merging firm can better understand the assumptions and choices underlying accounting numbers in financial statements from other firms that share the same auditor.  In turn, this leads to a better understanding (i. e. , reduced uncertainty) of those firms' economics, as compared to those of firms using different auditors.  Finally, common auditors may be more likely to limit misreporting that asymmetrically benefits one party over the other.  Prior research indicates that acquirers (Louis, 2004.  Gong et al. , 2008) and targets (Anilowski et al. , 2009) manage earnings before M&As.  Thus, auditors that audit both the acquirer and target face greater litigation risk, as the common auditor may be sued for earnings management undertaken by either party.  Moreover, common auditors likely face greater scrutiny by stakeholders, given the potential for conflicts of interest.  As Agrawal et al.  (2013) show, deals with common M&A advisors attract securities class action lawsuits with greater frequency than deals with separate advisors.  Thus, a common auditor has arguably higher incentives to limit misreporting ex ante, leading to reduced uncertainty regarding the accuracy of the reported numbers. 