
Why do ﬁrms engage in corporate environmental responsibility
(CER) activities.  Understanding the incentives for CER engagement has
spurred a large academic literature.  In general, there are three distinct
perspectives on the determinants of CER.  The ﬁrst perspective focuses
on the role of social pressure from nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), suppliers, customers and regulators in CER (Delmas and Toffel,
2008).  The second perspective focuses on the ﬁrm-speciﬁc factors shaping CER, such as age, size, and ownership (Etzion, 2007.  Zeng Name,
2010), corporate governance (Kassinis and Vafeas, 2002.  de Villiers
Name, 2011.  Walls Name, 2012), and ﬁrm performance (Ye Name, 2013. 
Sueyoshi and Goto, 2014.  Bostian Name, 2016).  The third perspective
studies the effects of top executives on CER, which includes CEO demographic and psychological characteristics (Lewis Name, 2014.  Petrenko
Name, 2016), CEO incentives and turnover (Deckop Name, 2006.  Meng
Name, 2013). 
Nevertheless, the literature is silent on whether political connections
matter for a ﬁrm's propensity to engage in CER.  This paucity of research
is somewhat surprising given the fact that many researchers have
highlighted the effects of political connections on ﬁrm behavior and
strategic decisions (Fisman, 2001.  Li and Atuahene-Gima, 2001.  Faccio,
2006.  Zhou, 2013), and CER is increasingly viewed as an important
business strategy by researchers, investors, and society as a whole
(Etzion, 2007.  de Villiers Name, 2011).  The novel contribution of this
research is to explicitly introduce such political connections dimension
in an empirical study of corporate environmental practices.  Speciﬁcally
we are concerned in this paper with how political connections may
affect organizational CER in China. 
China offers an ideal setting to investigate this issue.  A distinct
feature of China is that the government plays a critical role in the
economy.  As a special form of business-government relationship, political connections are an important means of government intervention in
ﬁrms (Fan Name, 2007).  At the same time, political connections are also
an important channel for Chinese ﬁrms to access to valuable resources
and government protection (Li Name, 2008), which may in turn affect
the costs and beneﬁts of CER activities.  Therefore, as a governmentdominated transitional country with severe environmental problems,
China forms a good (quantitative) case study to evaluate the role of
political connections in CER. 
Our ﬁrst task is to examine whether political connections inﬂuence
ﬁrm's propensity to engage in CER. 