 1.  Introduction Accelerated economic growth over the past decades due to a globalized ﬂow of people and goods has substantially increased airlines' energy costs and CO2 emissions.  According to statistical data of the International Air Transport Association (IATA, 2015), in 2012, the total energy cost for airlines was N160 billion dollars, measured on a worldwide base.  Besides, the CO2 emission volume was N0. 676 billion tons at that time.  In fact, the aviation industry is one of the few sectors where energy consumption has increased at a rate of N6% over the past 10 years.  This research focuses on the technical efﬁciency of Chinese airlines by using a novel SNDEA model for network and ﬂight efﬁciency, built upon multivariate copulas and capable of handling undesirable outputs such as CO2 emissions and ﬂight delays.  It is important to mention now to readers the distinctive nature of the word “network” that appears in this research.  It appears both as the descriptor of the modeling approach adopted – Network DEA, for a productive process that encompasses several sequential stages – and as the name of one of the productive stages modeled within the ambit of the airlines' operation – network efﬁciency, for an airline that efﬁciently converts physical and human resources into landings and take-offs with minimal delays.  Previous research on airlines have adopted to use several methods such as (i) factor productivity approach (Bauer, 1990.  Oum and Yu, 1995.  Barbot et al. , 2008).  (ii) Stochastic Frontier Analysis or SFA models (Good et al. , 1993.  Baltagi et al. , 1995.  Tsionas et al. , 2017).  (iii) Turnquist total factor productivity index (Coelli et al. , 2003.  Barbot et al. , 2008).  (iv) Data Envelopment Analysis or DEA models (Merkert and Hensher, 2011.  Barros et al. , 2013.  Barros and Peypoch, 2009.  Barros and Couto, 2013.  Cao et al. , 2015.  Li et al. , 2015.  Wanke and Barros, 2016.  Cui and Li, 2017a, 2017b.  Zhang et al. , 2017).  and (v) multi-criteria decisionmaking models such as TOPSIS (Barros and Wanke, 2015.  Wanke et al. , 2015).  On the other hand, it is worth noting that, within the airline efﬁciency ambit, DEA-based studies are the most numerous when compared to the SFA-based methods and other minor approaches used (Wanke et al. , 2015.  Barros and Wanke, 2015.  Wanke and Barros, 2016.  Li and Cui, 2017.  Cui and Li, 2017a, 2017b).  This not only replicates a pattern that is found in papers focused on efﬁciency analysis in other industries such as ports and banking (e. g.  Wanke et al. , 2016a, 2016b), but may be also derived by the ﬂexibility provided by DEA models in modeling productive processes composed of two or more stages.  In fact, several different issues have been addressed by DEA-based airline research studies in different countries or regions.  Besides efﬁciency rankings and slack comparisons, it is possible to point out, for instance, that the impacts of network size, ownership, and regulatory measures on the performance of the airline industry have been addressed by regressing efﬁciency scores onto contextual or environmental variables (Barros et al. , 2013.  Barros and Wanke, 2015.  Cao et al. , 2015.  Li and Cui, 2017.  Cui and Li, 2017a, 2017b.  Zhang et al. , 2017).  Recent papers still maintain this focus (Wanke and Barros, 2016).  Readers should refer to these authors for a comprehensive literature review on this subject, which is synthesized in Appendix A with respect to the variables and methods used.  It is important to note, however, that only very recently, an increased focus on the energy/fuel efﬁciency of airlines is veriﬁed, although the treatment of CO2 emissions as an undesirable output is still scarce (Cui and Li, 2016, 2017a, 2017b.  Cui et al. , 2016.  Ko et al. , 2017).  For example, Babikian et al.  (2002) analyzed the fuel efﬁciency of different aircraft types and the results showed that fuel efﬁciency differences could be explained largely by differences in aircraft operations.  Morrell (2009) analyzed the potential for greater fuel efﬁciency by using larger aircraft and different operational patterns.  Miyoshi and Merkert (2010) evaluated the carbon and fuel efﬁciency of 14 European airlines during the period from 1986 to 2007 to understand the relationship between fuel efﬁciency and fuel price, distance ﬂown, and load factors.  Zou et al.  (2014) employed ratio-based, deterministic, and stochastic frontier approaches to investigate fuel efﬁciency of 15 large jet operators in the US.  The results showed that potential cost savings of mainline airlines could reach approximately 1 billion dollars in 2010.  Cui and Li (2015) applied a VFB-DEA to measure the energy efﬁciencies of 11 airlines from 2008 to 2012, and further they employed a dynamic Epsilon-Based Measure model to evaluate the dynamic efﬁciencies of 19 major international airlines from 2009 to 2014 (Cui and Li, 2017a).  They found out the global ﬁnancial crisis that broke out in 2008 has signiﬁcant negative effects on the airlines' energy efﬁciency.  Following the principle of CNG2020 strategy, Cui and Li (2017b) calculated the emission limit for each airline.  Two models, Network Range Adjusted Measure with natural disposability and Network Range Adjusted Measure with managerial disposability are proposed to discuss the efﬁciency change.  Yet, as regards the emerging research topics in airline efﬁciency, it is also important to note that the cross-impact of the quality of the services provided on airline efﬁciency is still understudied (Fan et al. , 2014).  To the best of our knowledge, as regards airline efﬁciency, only Wanke et al.  (2015) and Tsionas et al.  (2017) addressed the issue between quality of the services provided and technical efﬁciency within the ambit of the airline industry in Asia.  The authors found a positive, albeit weak, relationship between higher levels of service quality and efﬁciency.  This result may suggest the existence of a trade-in between operational/ ﬁnancial efﬁciency and service quality, different from the classical trade-off between efﬁciency and service where higher levels of service are obtained to the detriment of lower levels of efﬁciency.  An additional distinctive aspect of almost all these previously mentioned papers listed was their locus.  They mostly focused on airlines from the US (Barros et al. , 2013.  Greer, 2008.  Sjögren and Söderberg, 2011.  Evans and Schäfer, 2013.  Winchester et al. , 2015), Canada (Bauer, 1990.  Assaf, 2009), Europe (Distexhe and Perelman, 1994.  Greer, 2008.  Barros and Peypoch, 2009.  Pablo-Romero et al. , 2017), Asia (Baltagi et al. , 1995.  Wanke et al. , 2015), Africa (Barros and Wanke, 2015), and Latin America (Wanke and Barros, 2016).  Given the relative importance of China to the world economy, it is possible to afﬁrm that Chinese airlines consist of a relatively understudied topic in the academic ﬁeld.  As a matter of fact, only a few studies were devoted to this particular industry (Chow, 2010.  Wu et al. , 2013.  Cao et al. , 2015.  Wanke et al. , 2015.  Cui et al. , 2016.  Cui and Li, 2017a, 2017b.  Zhang et al. , 2017), without systematic analysis the energy efﬁciency as well as the service quality (Chai et al. , 2014.  Fan et al. , 2014.  Tsionas et al. , 2017).  Therefore, this paper builds upon the existing body of knowledge by presenting a novel SNDEA model for technical efﬁciency and undesirable outputs - like CO2 emissions and ﬂight delays - within the ambit of the Chinese airline industry.  Not only is China one of the fastest growing areas in the world, which justiﬁes the relevance of this study, but this paper also ﬁlls a literature gap by presenting and developing a model where overall airline efﬁciency is decomposed into network and ﬂight efﬁciency in light of multivariate random copulas to control for time (trend) and individual (DMU) effects.  Differently from previous researches, this paper presents several methodological innovations.  First of all, it is the ﬁrst time copulas are used within the ambit of NDEA models to bring up the stochastic aspects of inputs, outputs and intermediate variables uncertainty over the course of time and at the DMU level.  Second, this is the ﬁrst time that not only undesirable (CO2 emissions) and exogenous (delays) outputs are treated simultaneously in an airline efﬁciency study, but also that a trade-off is stablished between in them in terms of a non-cooperative game approach within the ambit of the NDEA modeling.  Third, to the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time a robust regression approach involving three well-known techniques – Tobit, Beta, and Simplex – is developed and applied to solve such problem.  This paper is structured as follows.  after this introduction, the contextual setting is presented including a description of the Chinese airlines.  Then, the methodology section, where the SNDEA model for undesirable outputs is further discussed, is presented.  Section 4 presents the discussion of the results.  Conclusions are presented in Section 5.  2.  Contextual setting.  It has not witnessed the rapid development of Chinese airline industry until 1978, when the government embarked on the “reform and opening up” policy and switched to a market-oriented economy from a central-planned one.  During the next three decades, China has experienced the growth miracle and blossoming of economy, rapidly increased trade with other countries around the world, as well as the fast expansion of civil aviation industry.  After entering the World Trade Organization (WTO), the economic globalization and regionalization of production has driven the growth of Chinese air transport business to new wave of high-level development (See Fig.  1).  Meanwhile, as the largest population and their increased income, the demand on air transport also push its mushroom development in China.  Despite that the Chinese airlines' revenue and proﬁts are mostly derived from domestic markets, the one with large scale continues to participate into the international market and ﬂights (Wang et al. , 2016).  Up to date, China has been the second largest aviation market in the world in terms of the volumes of passengers and air cargo moved in its domestic market since 2005 (Chen et al. , 2017).  In the expected future, the air transportation as well as the airline companies still will be in fast growing mode inBefore the year 1978, the air transport was fully and tightly controlled by the central government under the CAAC (Civil Aviation Administration of China), collaborating with the Air Force of China.  The CAAC was once a branch of the Ministry of Transport in 1958, and ﬁnally was afﬁliated to the State Council in 1962.  After the year 1978, the government successively established six state-owned airline companies,1 which were separated from the CAAC.  To decrease the monopoly power of existing airline companies, some new airline companies funded by the local governments or government-owned enterprises also entered into the market during this period (Jiang and Zhang, 2016).  The foreign investment has been allowed to ﬂow into the civil aviation sector since 1997.  Thereafter, the CAAC further deregulate the Chinese civil aviation sector and open it to private investors, and the number of private airlines has grown rapidly (Wang et al. , 2016), including the low-cost carrier.  To enhance the efﬁciency and competitiveness as well as avoid the vicious price war, the state-led and market-driven consolidation has also taken place during this period, especially after the Asian ﬁnancial crisis as well as the global ﬁnancial crisis that broke out since 2007.  More details can be found in the work of Wang et al.  (2016).  Through the M & A (merging and acquisition), the “Big three”, i. e.  Air China, China Southern and China Eastern, have seized most of the market share in the domestic civil aviation sector (Lei and O'Connell, 2011).  Like most of the state-owned companies in China, the “big three” or the local government owned airline companies successively implemented the joint-stock reform and have been listed on the stock market since the 1990s.  This can enhance the efﬁciency of their operation through introducing market supervision and reducing government intervention.  During the late 2000s, some private airline companies also seek to be listed on the stock market, in order to attract more funds and increase their scale.  Shenzhen Stock Exchange (www. szse. cn).  The majority of airline companies as well as the big ones located at the Mainland China are all included in the sample.  Other small airlines are dropped as the data is not available.  Because the data accessibility, the sample period is from 2006 to 2014.  The descriptive statistics for their productive resources (i. e. , inputs, desirable and undesirable outputs, and intermediate variables) as well as their contextual variables are presented in Table 1.  Inputs, (un)desirable outputs were not only chosen in accordance to data availability, but also observing the most common ones found in previous studies on airline efﬁciency.  Readers should refer to Wanke et al.  (2015, 2016a, 2016b, 2016c, 2016d) and Wanke and Barros (2016) for a comprehensive listing of airline efﬁciency studies over the past 25 years as well as the Appendix A part in this paper.  Broadly speaking, it is possible to afﬁrm that these variables are the most commonly used ones to describe airline operations at the macro-level, although there are some scant previous studies that try to capture the impact of ﬂeet mix – aircraft type and size – on airline efﬁciency levels.  <Middle> Methodology.  This section describes all the methodological steps adopted in this research.  It is structured into ﬁve subsections that are interconnected to each other.  Section 3. 1 depicts the inputs, (un)desirable outputs, intermediate variables, and contextual variables used in this research, addressing the major underlying hypotheses on how contextual variables would impact efﬁciency levels in airline operations.  Section 3. 2 focuses on the major steps adopted for determining the best distributional ﬁt for each airline-variable pair.  These results serve as the marginal distributions for Section 3. 3, where they are plugged into a single multivariate distribution by means of correlated copulas.  Once the data generation structured is deﬁned for the inputs, (un)desirable outputs, and intermediate variables, it is possible to design the SNDEA model for undesirable and exogenous outputs, as in Section 3. 4.  The concept of bi-level programming within the ambit of non-cooperative game approach is presented as a solving approach for the proposed SNDEA model.  At last, in Section 3. 5 a framework for robust regression - involving Tobit, Beta and Simples models - is given so that efﬁciency scores are properly regressed against the contextual variable set.  3. 1.  The data.  The data on 13 selected Chinese airlines were obtained from the Wind database (www. wind. com. cn) and their annual ﬁnancial reports on the website of Shanghai Stock Exchange (www. sse. com. cn) and 3. 1. 1.  Underlying hypothesis regarding contextual variables.  The impact of contextual variables related to the airline's age, ﬂeet mix (percentage of Boeing's aircrafts), stock market governance (whether or not listed in stock-markets), ownership type (whether public or private), network span (whether the airline ﬂies both domestic and international routes or only domestic routes), and whether or not it has undergone a previous merger and acquisition process (M&A) in the past.  Previous studies such as those conducted by Wanke et al.  (2015), Barros and Wanke (2015), and Wanke and Barros (2016) suggest that ﬂeet mix may affect airline efﬁciency levels by means of economies of scale (better match between aircraft number of seats and demands), while network span may affect them by means of economies of scope imposed by hub operations.  Although these authors also point out that public ownership may favor higher airline efﬁciency levels in development countries due to heavily subsidized operations, the general rule is to expect higher efﬁciency levels in private operations.  As for the M&A activities on airline efﬁciency, Merkert and Morrell (2012) ﬁnd the M&A/consolidation is seen as a “game-changer” and mandatory to survive in aviation markets.  However, there is an optimum size of airline companies to operate efﬁciency.  Lenartowicz et al.  (2013) further analyze the key success factor for M&A activities in the civil aviation industry of EU.  It means more robust corporate governance when listed on the stock market for an airline company.  Wang et al.  (2011) investigate the mechanism how the status being a listed airline companies affect the efﬁciency.  3. 2.  Distributional ﬁt.  The subsequent step to the collection of the inputs, intermediate variables, and (un)desirable outputs was their adjustment to best continuous distribution for each DMU.  The goodness of ﬁt procedure used in this research followed two steps.  ﬁrst, an indicative approach to the best ﬁt by the Cullen and Frey (1999) analysis.  Second, a Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) to derive the parameters of the chosen distributions in the ﬁrst step (Delignette-Muller and Dutang, 2014).  Delignette-Muller and Dutang (2014) warn that skewness and kurtosis are not considered to be robust, due to their high variance, and suggest a nonparametric bootstrap procedure in order to take into account the uncertainty of the estimated values of the data's degree of kurtosis and skewness (Efron and Tibshirani, 1994).  A resample size of 100 was adopted in this research.  Once selected, one or more parametric distributions may be ﬁtted to the data set.  The distribution parameters were estimated by maximizing the likelihood function, considering the observations of each criterion and the density function of the parametric distribution.  Numerical results returned the parameter estimates, the estimated standard errors (computed from the estimate of the Hessian matrix at the maximum likelihood solution), the log likelihood, the Akaike and Bayesian information criteria (the so-called AIC and BIC), and the correlation matrix between parameter estimates.  Tables 2 and 3 summarize the best ﬁtting probability distributions and their estimated parameters for each input, intermediate variable, and output at each airport (Delignette-Muller and Dutang, 2014).  Readers should note that distributional ﬁts were conducted by year and DMU separately.  This was done to control for, respectively, time (trend) and individual (DMU) effects.  Results suggest that beta distribution (B) exhibited the best ﬁt for almost all variables for different DMUs and years, with the exception of a few cases were gamma (G) and lognormal (logn) presented better ﬁts.  Besides, NAs for Donghai Airlines and China Post Air in Table 3 just indicate that these airlines do not operate passenger trafﬁc.  Therefore, it was not possible to perform a distributional ﬁt for them with respect to this variable.  These distributions and the respective parameters were used in the Multivariate Copula modeling presented next.  It is worth mentioning that all productive resources (inputs, intermediate variables, and undesirable/desirable outputs) were rescaled in a unity-based normalization, bringing all values into the range (0, 1).  3. 3.  Multivariate copula.  After adjusting the best distributional ﬁt to capture time and individual effects separately, it is necessary to incorporate the tail dependence structure within the ambit of the stochastics inputs, intermediate variables, and desirable/undesirable outputs, through the statistical measure of covariance.  Results for the non-parametric Kendall Tau's correlation are presented in Table 4.  Since all inputs are positively correlated with each other, as well as all other outputs and the intermediate variable - with the exception of ﬂight delays - are also positively correlated with each other, this implies that one variable is above (below) its mean value when the other variable is above (below) its mean value.  It is important to note that ﬂight delays impact linearly on fuel consumption and, therefore, CO2 emissions in the following manner, as explained by Horiguchi et al.  (2017).  These authors measured that “scheduled departure time” and “scheduled arrival time” are important features for predicting fuel consumption.  They affect the amount of fuel consumption because the congestion of runways and that of airways depend on time, and they cause extra time for take-off and landing, which consumes an amount of fuel.  Up to a certain extent, it appears to be a trade-in between CO2 emission and ﬂight delays, where reductions in the latter lead to reductions in the former.  3. 3. 1.  Background on multivariate copulas.  In fact, the concept of tail dependence can be embedded within the copula theory (Schmidt and Stadtmuller, 2006).  An n-dimensional distribution function C.  [0, 1]n - N [0, 1] is called a copula if it has onedimensional margins that are uniformly distributed on the interval [0, 1].  Copulas are functions that join or “couple” an n-dimensional distribution function F to its corresponding one-dimensional marginal distribution functions Fi, i = 1, …, n, in the following way.  F(x1, …, xn) = C (F1(x1), …, Fn(xn)).  Copulas have become a popular multivariate modeling tool in many ﬁelds where multivariate dependence is of interest (Yan, 2007).  They differ not so much in the degree of association they provide, but rather in which part of the distributions the association is the strongest (Nelsen, 1999).  They are particularly useful, for instance, if one wants to model the impact of tail dependence on decision-making (Wang and Pham, 2012).  Tail dependence describes the amount of dependence in the tail of a bivariate distribution.  In other words, tail dependence refers to the degree of dependence in the corner of the lower-left quadrant or upper-right quadrant of a bivariate distribution (Schmidt and Stadtmuller, 2006).  Precisely, a copula is a multivariate distribution whose marginals are all uniform over (0,1].  Combined with the fact that any continuous random variable can be transformed to be uniform over (0,1] by its probability integral transformation, copulas can be used to provide multivariate dependence structure apart from the marginal distributions (Yan, 2007).  According to Table 5, different choices of generators yield several important families of copulas.  Similarly, different dependence parameters are closely related to some level of bivariate dependence, measured by Kendall's τ coefﬁcient of non-parametric correlation (Yan, 2007).  It is worth noting that, although Archimedean copulas with dimension three or higher only allow positive association, negative association is allowed for bivariate Archimedean copulas (Yan, 2007).  Fig.  2 compares Clayton (1978), Frank (1979) and Gumbel (1960) copulas, with normal marginals, to the traditional bivariate normal distribution.  One can easily discern that, for different families of copulas and dependence values, the resulting bivariate distribution may indicate a stronger relationship between higher (lower) values of the variables under analysis (Nelsen, 1999).  Although copulas have been often used in actuarial and ﬁnance applications in banking, such as for risk assessment, measurement and pooling (Fantazzini, 2009.  Dobrić and Schmid, 2005) thus far their use within the ambit of DEA models has not been noticed or restricted to very few papers (Wanke et al. , forthcoming.  Huang et al. , 2017).  The Archimedean copulas are often chosen for modeling purposes due to their following characteristics.  (1) compatibility with “fat tail” distributions sensitive to large losses, but less sensitive to small losses.  (2) simple and robust parameter estimation methods.  (3) familiarity with practitioners and regulators.  and (4) easy to implement.  Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst criterion reﬂects a well-known phenomenon that large losses tend to come as surprises – the “fat tail”.  In this sense, Archimedean copulas outperform the elliptical class, as these copulas do not have fat tails.  These distinctive features can be noted in Figs.  3 and 4, where 2D and 3D scatter plots are presented for a 100 samples obtained for each generator – considering the data previously presented in Tables 2–4.  The next section discusses the SNDEA model developed in this research to handle both undesirable outputs – ﬂight delay and CO2 emissions.  At the end, a pseudo code for solving this model under multivariate copula generation is presented.  3. 4.  The proposed SNDEA model.  DEA was proposed by Charnes et al.  (1978) as an approach for measuring the efﬁciency of DMUs – DMUs - that use multiple inputs to produce multiple outputs.  One of the pitfalls of classic DEA modeling is that the internal process of a DMU (Decision Making Unit) is a “black box”.  Therefore, efﬁciency cannot be measured within the ambit of any speciﬁc sub-structure of a DMU.  In fact, a DMU may consist of several sub-substructures that may impact overall efﬁciency levels differently.  Network DEA models were proposed to overcome this limitation.  One of the earliest and simplest network structures is the two-stage DEA model, in which two serially connected productive processes or substructures are assumed to work together in the main DMU.  In other words, DMUs are composed of two stages connected in series, in which all the outputs from the ﬁrst stage become the inputs of the second one (Golany et al. , 2006).  This consists of a particular case of the multistage network structure ﬁrstly introduced in Fare (1991), and subsequently extended in Fare and Whittaker (1995), Fare and Grosskopf (1996a, 1996b, 2000) and Tone and Tsutsui (2009, 2010).  Readers should note that, when modeling network DEA, both multiplicative and additive efﬁciency decomposition can be proposed depending on the variations of two-stage structures and the CRS/VRS assumptions adopted.  One of the major computational issues in additive efﬁciency decomposition, as demonstrated by Guo et al. 