
Accounting research has long shown that managers face pressure to meet earnings benchmarks and that they react to
this pressure by manipulating accruals and real activities when their firm is at risk of missing benchmarks (e. g. , Dechow
Name 2010, §5. 5).  Survey evidence suggests that, in order to meet benchmarks, managers prefer taking real actions over
manipulating accruals (Graham Name, 2005).  Empirical studies provide strong evidence for real activities management (e. g. 
Roychowdhury, 2006; Cohen Name, 2008).  Importantly, real activities management is difficult for investors to detect in the
short run (Kothari Name, 2016) but potentially has negative consequences for firms’ long-run performance (e. g. , Bhojraj Name,
2009; Cohen and Zarowin, 2010).  In this study, we provide evidence of a previously undocumented consequence of real
activities management to meet earnings benchmarks – compromises in workplace safety.  In particular, we show that
benchmark beating is associated with higher workplace injuries and that the strength of this association varies with employee workloads and discretionary expenses that include safety-related expenditures. 
Earnings benchmarks can relate to workplace safety in at least two ways.  First, if managers believe that the firm may
miss expectations under the ordinary course of business, they may increase employees’ workloads or pressure them to work
faster.  In response, employees can compromise safety by overexerting themselves or by circumventing safety procedures
that slow the flow of work.  Second, managers may cut explicit and implicit safety costs, such as the costs of maintaining
equipment and training employees, in their attempts to report higher earnings.  Along these lines, Graham Name (2005)
report that some CFOs admit to cutting maintenance spending in order to meet earnings benchmarks.  To the extent
managers take such actions, workplace safety will deteriorate when firms struggle to meet expectations. 
We examine whether firms suspected of managing earnings to meet expectations exhibit higher workplace injury rates
than other firms.  We follow prior research on earnings management and define firms that meet or just beat expectations as
suspect firms (e. g. , Burgstahler and Dichev, 1997; Degeorge Name, 1999).  Using establishment-level (e. g. , store or factory)
injury data from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) for the 2002–2011 period, we find that about
one in every 24 employees is injured in firms that meet or just beat analyst earnings forecasts, compared to about one in 27
in firms that miss or comfortably beat forecasts.  In multivariate analyses, where we control for a variety of establishmentand firm-level characteristics as well as establishment (or firm) and year fixed effects to account for unobservable factors,
we find that the association between benchmark beating and injury rates remains statistically and economically significant. 
For example, controlling for other factors, injury rates are five to fifteen percent higher in periods where a firm meets or just
beats analyst forecasts than in other periods. 
We provide evidence that the relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety likely stems from two types of
real actions that managers take: high workloads and cuts to safety-related expenditures.  We utilize production per employee and revenue per employee as measures of employee workloads, and abnormal discretionary expenses per employee
to gauge cuts to safety-related expenditures.  We find that injury rates are more strongly associated with production per
employee in firms that meet or just beat forecasts.  We also find evidence that injury rates are higher when firms that meet
or just beat forecasts have abnormally low per-employee discretionary expenditures. 1 Taken together, the evidence suggests
that both pressure to increase worker productivity and cuts to safety-related expenditures contribute to the relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety. 
We use three settings to examine cross-sectional variation in the relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety. 
First, we find that the relation is weaker in industries with high union membership.  This is consistent with unions’ aim to ensure
reasonable workloads, work speed, and safety (Kaufman, 2005).  It is also consistent with the findings in the literature that,
compared to non-union workers, union workers are less likely to perceive that taking risks is a part of their job (Gillen Name, 2002),
and unionization leads to fewer workplace injuries (Morantz, 2013).  Consistent with unions’ goal of workplace safety, our evidence
suggests that unions mitigate the extent to which pressure to meet earnings expectations translates into reduced safety. 
Second, we find a weaker relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety when workers’ compensation insurance
premiums are more sensitive to injury claims.  Workers’ compensation insurance is a state-mandated program and its premiums
are primarily determined by state requirements.  Insurance premiums depend, in part, on a multiplier based on the employer's
workplace safety record.  A given change in the multiplier thus has a greater dollar impact on premiums when the baseline
insurance premium is higher.  We test and find that the association between benchmark beating and workplace safety is weaker in
establishments that are located in states where each additional injury has a higher impact on workers’ compensation premium. 
Third, we utilize government contracting as an incentive for keeping safer work environments.  Government contracts
typically include terms that prohibit bids from firms deemed to have unsafe work environments.  Consistent with the
government contractors’ heightened focus on safety, we find that the relation between benchmark beating and workplace
safety is weaker for firms that do more business with the government. 
In our main analyses, we focus on analyst forecasts as our measure of earnings expectations since prior research indicates
that meeting analyst forecasts is a more important benchmark than meeting prior year's earnings or avoiding losses (Dechow Name, 2003), and that the market perceives missing analyst forecasts as a more negative signal than a decrease in yearover-year earnings (Brown and Caylor, 2005).  In additional tests, we replicate our primary analyses for the zero-earnings
and zero-earnings-change benchmarks.  We find higher injury rates in suspect firm-years identified by zero-earningschanges, but not for zero-earnings.  This may be because after the passage of Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) in 2002, the zeroearnings discontinuity, and to a lesser extent discontinuity around prior year's earnings, have dissipated whereas the discontinuity around analyst forecasts remain (Gilliam Name, 2015). 
Our study is related to the literature studying the forms and consequences of earnings management via real activities.  Extant
research finds that managers cut research and development (e. g. , Baber Name, 1991), advertising (e. g. , Cohen Name, 2010), selling,
administrative and general expenditures, and engage in over-production (e. g. , Roychowdhury, 2006) in order to meet earnings
benchmarks, and that such activities potentially negatively affect a firm's long-run operating performance (e. g. , Bhojraj Name, 2009;
Cohen and Zarowin, 2010).  Our study adds to this literature by documenting a novel and potentially opaque consequence of
managing earnings via real activities – compromises in workplace safety.  Our findings highlight that costs of real activities
management can accrue not only in monetary terms but also in terms of employee health.  The effects we document may represent the “tip of the iceberg” in terms of the overall employee health since OSHA collects data on only relatively serious and
physical injuries/illnesses such as those that require hospitalization, days away from work, or job transfers.  Additionally, in the
light of recent findings that investors face greater difficulty in detecting earnings management via real activities (Kothari Name,
2016), our results suggest that timely disclosures about workplace safety can serve as signals to investors of certain forms of real
activities management.  While some firms are considering providing such disclosures (e. g. , Silverman, 2016), these disclosures are
typically not available to investors on a timely basis and in a systematic manner. 
We also contribute to the literature on workplace safety and firms’ financial condition.  Cohn and Wardlaw (2016) predict
and find that workplace injury rates are associated with high leverage and with negative cash flow shocks.  In a study of the
operational performance of restaurant chains in Florida, Bernstein, and Sheen (2016) find that restaurants become safer and
cleaner following private equity buyouts.  We focus on managerial attention to earnings targets and find that it diminishes
managers’ focus on workplace safety.  Also related to our study, Rose (1990) finds a link between the safety of airline customers and the overall financial health of airlines, and Matsa (2011) finds that in the supermarket industry, competition
increases service quality.  Unlike Rose (1990) and Matsa (2011), we focus on employee safety rather than service/product
quality, and earnings benchmarks rather than the overall financial health of the firm.  Prior studies also find that accidents
and absences are associated with high capacity and labor utilization (See survey by Pouliakas and Theodossiou (2013)).  The
stronger association we document between production per employee and injury rates in suspect firm-years relative to nonsuspect firm-years is consistent with an association between workplace safety and high labor utilization. 
Our findings do not speak to the magnitude of net welfare effects of compromises in workplace safety on firms or
employees.  The socially optimal injury rate likely exceeds zero, and such compromises could overall be desirable if the
benefits exceed the costs.  Nevertheless, the negative impact of such compromises on employee health represents a cost for
the firms to the extent that it results in higher wage demands, fines, litigation, increased insurance premiums, and negative
publicity, and a cost to employees in the form of pain, lost wages, and, in extreme cases, death. 
2.  Background. 
2. 1.  Safety regulation and incentives for workplace safety. 
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulates workplace safety for most private sector employers
in the United States.  Exceptions include employers subject to safety regulation from other federal agencies, such as the Mine
Safety and Health Administration and the Federal Aviation Administration.  OSHA promulgates standards including equipment safety, communication of hazards, and training programs. 2 It also regulates compliance by investigating worksites and
employee complaints (Kniesner and Leeth, 2014). 
From a regulatory perspective, OSHA faces a risk reduction mandate rather than a cost-versus-benefit mandate (Viscusi
1996a, 1996b).  In 2010, companies spent between $52 and $66 billion complying with OSHA regulations (Kniesner and
Leeth, 2014), which amounts to between four and five percent of the $1351 billion domestic corporate profits in 2010 per the
U. 