 1.  Introduction The price of crude oil declines by about 57%, from $102. 51 to $43. 58 between June 2014 and May 2016.  During that period, the CPI for airfare declines by about 12%.  This small decline is somewhat surprising.  jet fuel accounts for about 33% of average operating costs incurred by the airline industry (Berghofer and Lucey, 2014).  Consistent with this large percentage, industry analysts estimate that the reduction in oil prices will save US airlines about $20 billion in 2015 (New York Times, January 20, 2015).  The juxtaposition of a large cost saving and a relatively small price reduction is a topic for both academic researchers and policy enforcement.  From an academic perspective, airlines respond to changes in oil prices three ways.  (1) changing the energy efﬁciency of their operations (i. e.  changing the ﬂeet), (2) passing the cost increases (decreases) to passengers, and (3) hedging fuel costs (Morrell and Swan, 2006).  Of these, Berghofer and Lucey (2014) ﬁnd that hedging behavior and changes in ﬂeet diversity do not reduce exposure to the risk that is associated with changes in oil prices.  Furthermore, hedging may increase the risk premium and increase costs (Aabo and Simkins, 2005), perhaps by 1% of fuel costs (Rao, 1999).  Despite these costs, the accounting losses of hedging will be more than offset by lower fuel prices, such that US airlines will save $15 billion (New York Times, 2015).  Academic research suggests that the degree to which cost increases (decreases) are passed on to passengers may be inﬂuenced competition in the airline industry.  High levels of competition make it difﬁcult to raise ticket prices in response to rising prices for jet fuel (Carter and Simkins, 2004).  Consistent with this hypothesis, the Portuguese airline industry could not recover the full cost of higher fuel prices (Button et al. , 2011).  Recent research indicates that the intensity of competition among airlines is decreasing.  Concentration in the US airline industry increases between 2007 and 2009 (Johnston and Ozment, 2011).  The resultant reduction in competition may slow additions to capacity.  Robert Mann, a former airline executive states.  “The industry is full at these prices.  You can't stimulate additional revenue by cutting prices. ” Based on these concerns, in June 1015, the US Department of Justice opened an inquiry into whether the airline industry is colluding to limit seating.  Beyond a reduction in competition, the small effect (to date) of lower oil prices on airfares could be caused by asymmetric rates of adjustments in the relation among the price of crude oil, the price of jet fuel, and airfares.  If the price of jet fuel and/or airfares respond asymmetrically to changes in crude oil prices (or other components of the oil market), such that increases in crude oil prices are translated into higher prices for jet fuel and air travel faster than reductions in crude oil prices are translated into lower prices for jet fuel and air travel, the small decline in airfares as of June 2016 (the last month for which data are available) may be caused by an asymmetric rate of adjustment to lower prices for crude oil.  This hypothesis echoes an extensive literature on the relation between prices for crude oil and motor gasoline, which suggests that increases in crude oil prices translate into higher motor gasoline prices faster than lower crude oil prices translate into lower motor gasoline prices (e. g.  Perdiguero-Garcia, 2013.  Frey and Manera, 2007).  This pattern of asymmetric adjustment is termed a ‘rockets and feathers’ effect (Bacon, 1991).  To test for an asymmetric relation between the price of jet fuel and air travel, Wadud (2015) uses a method developed by Gately (1992), which decomposes jet fuel prices into three components.  price rises to a new all-time high, price declines, and price rises back towards a previous high.  Each of these price changes has a different effect on airfares such that a one dollar rise in the price of jet fuel to a new all-time high generates a larger increase in airfares than a one dollar rise in the price of jet fuel that leaves prices below the previous all-time high (Wadud, 2015).  These results suggest that the price of jet fuel does not deﬁne a unique price level for airfares.  That is, the relation between the price of jet fuel and air travel is ‘path dependent. ’ Although path dependency could explain the small effect of large reductions in crude oil prices (if the equilibrium response to price reductions is smaller than the equilibrium response to price increases), path dependency or regime change (e. g.  Holmes and Panagiotidis, 2009) are different from the asymmetric rates of adjustment that are described by the ‘rockets and feathers’ relation between the price for crude oil and motor gasoline.  Here, I test three hypotheses about how the oil market may cause airfares to fall by a small percentage relative to a large decline in the price for crude oil.  1) Airfares adjust very slowly to changes in airfares.  2) Airfares adjust asymmetrically to changes in the oil market.  3) The oil market adjusts asymmetrically to changes in the price of crude oil, and these asymmetric adjustments are communicated symmetrically to airfares.  These hypotheses are tested by estimating a cointegrated vector autoregression (CVAR) model from monthly data.  The cointegrating relations identify long-run relations for wholesale and retail prices for jet fuel, inventories of jet fuel, and airfares.  The results indicate that slow or asymmetric rates of adjustment cannot account for the small decline in airfares relative to the large drop in crude oil prices.  Surprisingly, the retail price for jet fuel adjusts faster to reductions in the price for crude oil, which is opposite the asymmetric rate of adjustment between prices for crude oil and motor gasoline in many markets.  I hypothesize that this ‘feathers and rockets’ effect is generated by the relative rigidity of reﬁnery yields for jet fuel, which generates a trade-of between the rate at which price changes are passed through to jet fuel and the reﬁner's cost of holding inventories of jet fuel.  Together these results indicate that the small decline in airfares cannot be attributed to relations within the oil market or the relation between the oil market and airfares.  The failure to identify an oil-related mechanism for the relatively small decline in airfares does not imply the converse, that airlines collude to set airfares.  nor does it rule out collusion.  These results and the methods used to obtain them are described in ﬁve sections.  The second section describes the data and the statistical methodology.  The statistical results are described in the third section.  Section 4 describes the long-and short-run relations among components of the oil market and their relation with airfares.  Section 5 concludes with a short discussion about what these results imply about possible causes for the small decline in airfares relative to crude oil prices.  <Middle> Methodology.  2. 1.  Data.  asymmetries at a weekly or daily frequency, but high frequency asymmetries could not generate the longer adjustments that are discussed in the introduction.  I include components of the oil market beyond the price of jet fuel because previous research suggests that omitted variables can bias statistical tests for symmetric rates of adjustment.  Including time series for the inventories of crude oil, inventories of motor gasoline, and reﬁnery utilization rates in the cointegrating relations and the error correction models for motor gasoline prices reduces the likelihood of rejecting the null hypothesis of symmetric rates of adjustment (Kaufmann and Laskowski, 2005).  Data on the U. S.  city average for airline fares (CUSR0000SETG01) are obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.  These data are deﬂated by monthly values of the U. S.  city average for all items (CUUR0000SA0) to generate real airfares (Fare).  Monthly data are compiled for six components of the US oil market.  (1) the average price of crude oil purchased by reﬁners (PCrude), (2) inventories of crude oil (CStock), (3) reﬁnery utilization rates (Util), (4) the wholesale price of jet fuel ( JetW), (5) the retail price of jet fuel (JetR), and (6) inventories of jet fuel ( JStock).  Observations for the nominal monthly price of crude oil (dollars per barrel) purchased by reﬁners (R0000____3) are obtained from the Energy Information Administration.  The same source is used to compile time series for the U. S.  kerosene-type jet fuel nominal wholesale/resale price (EMA_EPJK_PWG_NUS_DPG) by reﬁners (dollars per gallon), U. S.  fuel nominal retail sale prices by reﬁners kerosene-type jet (EMA_EPJK_PTG_NUS_DPG.  dollars per gallon), U. S.  ending stocks excluding SPR of crude oil (MCESTUS1 thousand barrels), U. S.  Ending Stocks of Kerosene-Type Jet Fuel (MKJSTUS1 –thousand barrels), and the US percent utilization of reﬁnery operable capacity (MOPUEUS2).  Prices for crude oil and jet fuel are deﬂated using the U. S.  city average for all items that is described above. 1 The availability of observations differs among variables.  Observations for some of the oil-related variables start in the 1970′s, but January 1989 is the ﬁrst observation for airfares.  Conversely, the data for airfares extend through June 2016, whereas May 2016 is the most recent observation for some of the oil market variables.  As such, the sample period includes 329 monthly observations from January 1989 through May 2016.  To eliminate the effects on inverting matrices with elements that differ greatly in size (due to different units of measurement), the time series for each variable is standardized as follows.  In which yt is the value (in original units), y is the average value over the sample period, and Var(y) is the variance over the sample period.  2. 2.  Statistical methodology.  The statistical methodology consists of two general stages. 2 In the ﬁrst stage, I estimate a CVAR model to quantify the long- and short-run relations among the six components of the oil market and their relation with airfares.  In the second stage, the long-run relations are used to calculate the disequilibria in each cointegrating relation, these disequilibria are decomposed based on the change in the price of crude oil, and these decomposed disequilibria are used in an error correction model to test the null hypothesis that variables adjust symmetrically.  I compile monthly data on airfares and six components of the oil market that may affect airfares.  Monthly data likely would fail to detect In the ﬁrst step, I estimate a CVAR model, for which the general form is given by, in which xt is a vector of (p) endogenous variables whose behavior is being modeled (CStock, Util, JetW, JetR, JStock, and Fare), wt is a vector of exogenous variables (PCrude), k0 is a vector of constant terms, M is a vector of eleven dummy variables, one for each month Jan-Nov, A0,A1,Φ1, Θ,and Π are matrices of regression coefﬁcients, Δ is the ﬁrst difference operator (Δxt=xt−xt−1), and ε is Niid(0,Ω).  When the time series are nonstationary, the long-run matrix Π can be formulated as, in which α is a p×r matrix of adjustment coefﬁcients (also known as loadings), β′ is an r×p matrix of cointegration coefﬁcients that deﬁne stationary deviations from long-run equilibrium relationships, and r is the number of long-run cointegrating relations.  The number of cointegrating relations present is given by the rank (r) of the Π matrix.  The cointegration rank r is determined by solving an eigenvalue problem in which the eigenvectors are estimates of β and α =f(β) can be found for a given β.  The eigenvectors, β, are determined by an orthogonality condition and are ordered according to their degree of stationarity (Juselius, 2006).  For a more detailed description of the CVAR model see Juselius (2006).  Several diagnostic tools are available to determine the rank of Π.  the most common is the likelihood based trace test (Johansen, 1996), which tests the null hypothesis of (p-r) unit roots against the alternative hypothesis of (p− r+ 1) unit roots.  The test procedure is based on a sequence of tests, starting from r=0 (no stationary relations among the endogenous and/or exogenous variables), r =1 (p-1 stochastic trends, one stationary cointegration relation) and ending with (r=p) (all cointegration relations are stationary).  The test is based on the null hypothesis of a unit root and, therefore, often has low power to reject a unit root when the true root is close to the unit circle.  The second stage tests the null hypothesis that the endogenous variables adjust symmetrically to disequilibria in each ofcointegrating relations.  This stage uses a four-step procedure (Granger and Lee, 1989).  (1) using estimates for β to calculate disequilibria in each cointegrating relation, (2) decomposing these disequilibria based on changes in the price of crude oil, (3) using these decomposed disequilibria to estimate an error correction model, and (4) testing restrictions that impose symmetric rates of adjustment.  The disequilibria (μ) for each cointegrating relation (r) are calculated as follows, in which ^β is the cointegrating vector for cointegrating relation (r) that is estimated from Eq.  (2).  In the second step, changes in the price of crude oil are used to decompose the disequilibria from each cointegrating relation as follows.  This decomposition is chosen to test the null hypothesis that changes in the price of crude oil affect the rate at which the oil market and/or airfares adjust towards equilibrium.  As such, it is similar to the decomposition used to analyze the relation between the prices for crude oil and motor gasoline (e. g.  Kaufmann and Laskowski, 2005).  But this decomposition differs from previous models of asymmetric price responses, which decompose the residual based on the sign of the residual (Granger and Lee, 1989) or changes in the residual (Escribano and Pfann, 1997).  Such speciﬁcations test a different set of hypotheses, such as whether the rate at which airfares adjust to conditions in the oil market depends on whether airfares are greater than or less than the equilibrium value.  In the third step, the decomposed residuals +εr,t and −εr, t are speciﬁed in an unrestricted error correction model that is given by, in which τ is a normally distributed random error term.  Eq.  (7) is estimated using OLS and the standard errors are calculated using the procedure developed by Newey and West (1987).  In the ﬁnal step, the null hypothesis that endogenous variable (x) adjusts symmetrically to disequilibrium in each cointegrating relation is tested by imposing individual restrictions + γi= −γi.  This null hypothesis is tested using the F-form of the Wald test, which can be evaluated against a χ2 distribution with one degree of freedom.  Cook et al.  (1999) ﬁnd that this test has a low power to reject the null hypothesis.  This suggests that statistics which reject the null hypothesis at p b 0. 10 may represent cases in which the null hypothesis should be rejected.  Rejecting the null hypothesis + γi= −γi.  indicates that changes in the price of crude oil affect the rate at which the dependent variable adjusts to disequilibrium in cointegrating relation i.  The nature of this asymmetry is given by the absolute size of + γi relative to −γi.  If (− 1 b + γi, −γi b0) and (|+ γi, | N|− γi, |) would indicate that the dependent variable (x) adjusts faster towards equilibrium when the price of crude oil rises (Fig.  1).  Such a result would be consistent with the ‘rockets and feathers’ effect.  3.  Results.  The rank of the Π matrix is determined using the the trace test.  This statistic strongly rejects (p b 0. 0001) the null that there are 0, 1, 2, or 3 cointegrating relations, but fails to reject (p N 0. 068) the null hypothesis that there are four cointegrating relations.  The Π matrix is assigned a rank of four based on the large increase in the p value from the ﬁrst four tests (p b 0. 0001) to the test of four cointegrating relations (p N 0. 068) along with the failure to reject four cointergating relations at the usual p = 0. 05 signiﬁcance level.  Identifying the long run structure of the CVAR requires several types of restrictions (Pesaran and Shin, 1994).  Greenslade et al. , (2002) suggest that the efﬁciency of identifying the long-run structure can be improved by ﬁrst attempting to reduce the number of endogenous variables.  I evaluate whether variables can be excluded from the x vector in Eq.  (2) by testing a restriction that makes all elements of α equal to zero in the equation for a given endogenous variable.  Results fail to reject the null hypothesis that the real price of crude oil (PCrude) is weakly exogenous (Table 1).  For all other variables, the test statistic rejects the null hypothesis (p b 0. 01).  Furthermore, for the equation for crude oil prices, I fail to reject a set of restrictions that makes the elements of the Γ1 matrix associated with the lagged ﬁrst difference of the six endogenous variable equal(χ2(6)=7. 45,p N0. 28).  Based on these results, the real price of crude oil is made weakly exogenous by transferring this variable from the x vector to the w vector in Eq.  (2).  Using this speciﬁcation,impose overidentifying restrictions on the CVAR.  I fail to reject (χ2(9)=6. 85, p N0. 65) an overidentiﬁed structure that imposes nine overidentifying restrictions (Table 2).  Each variable is present in one more or cointegrating relations, which is consistent with exclusion tests (Table 1).  The elements of α indicate that each cointegrating relation loads into the equation for one or more of the variables in the cointegrating relation in a way that moves that endogenous variable towards the equilibrium value that is implied by the cointegrating relation (Table 2).  This allows me to interpret each cointegrating relation as a long-run relationship for one or more endogenous variables.  As described in the next section, these interpretations clarify the linkages among components of the oil market and their relation with airfares.  Tests of + γi= −γi.  indicate that the assumption of symmetric rates of adjustment varies across endogenous variables and cointegrating relations (Table 3).  The null hypothesis of symmetry is rejected (p b 0. 05) for cointegrating relations that load into the equations for reﬁnery utilization rates, wholesale and retail prices for jet fuel, and inventories of jet fuel.  Conversely, I cannot reject restrictions that make the equations for inventories of crude oil and airfares adjust symmetrically to disequilibrium in each cointegrating relation.  <Conclusion> Discussion.  4. 1.  Interpreting long-run relations.  The ﬁrst cointegrating relation (CR #1) in Table 2 includes the price of crude oil, the wholesale price for jet fuel, and inventories of jet fuel.  Signs associated with the elements of β indicate a positive relation between the price of crude oil and the wholesale price for jet fuel and a negative relation between the wholesale price for jet fuel and inventories of jet fuel.  This negative relation is consistent with cost smoothing by reﬁneries.  Restrictions on the elements of β do not reject the null hypothesis that the price of crude oil and the wholesale price for jet fuel change on a onefor-one basis (χ2(1)=0. 31,pN0. 86).  Disequilibrium in CR #1 moves the wholesale price for jet fuel towards the equilibrium level that is implied by CR #1, but does not move inventories of jet fuel towards the longrun value that is implied by CR #1 (Table 2).  As such, CR #1 is interpreted as a long-run relation for the wholesale price for jet fuel.  The second cointegrating relation (CR #2) includes inventories of crude oil, the wholesale price of jet fuel and the retail prices for jet fuel.  Elements of β indicate that retail and wholesale prices are positively related and restrictions on these elements of β fail to reject (χ2(1)= 0. 81, p N0. 36) the null hypothesis that these prices change on a onefor-one basis.  The value of α3,2 is not statistically different from zero, which indicates that disequilibrium in CR #2 does not affect wholesale jet prices.  Conversely α4, 2 indicates that disequilibrium in CR #2 moves the retail price for jet fuel towards the long-run value implied by CR #2.  Furthermore, the point-estimate for ^α4. 2 ¼ −1. 05 is not statistically different from −1. 0 (t = 0. 13, p N 0. 91).  This implies that the retail price for jet fuel adjusts fully to disequilibrium in CR #2 within a single month.  As such, CR #2 can be interpreted as a long-relation for the retail price of jet fuel.  The third cointegrating relation includes reﬁnery utilization rates and inventories of jet fuel, and a constant (Fig.  2).  The elements of β indicate a positive relation between reﬁnery utilization rates and inventories of jet fuel.  The elements of α indicate that reﬁnery utilization rates adjust to disequilibrium in CR #3 in a way that moves it towards the long-run value that is implied by CR #3.  As such, CR #3 can be interpreted as a long-run relation for reﬁnery utilization rates. 