 
This paper examines whether and when the information environment of peer ﬁrms in 
an industry affects the cost of capital for other ﬁrms in the industry.  We predict and ﬁnd 
that the peer information environment is negatively associated with a ﬁrm’s cost of capital 
when there is less publicly available ﬁrm-speciﬁc information and this negative association 
shrinks as the amount of ﬁrm-speciﬁc information increases.  This paper provides evidence 
that information about peer-ﬁrms has externalities on the cost of capital for related ﬁrms 
and that these externalities are time-varying.  
We examine whether the information environment of peer ﬁrms (henceforth, peer information) affects the cost of capital 
for related ﬁrms in an industry and whether the importance of this effect depends on the amount of information available 
directly from the related ﬁrm (henceforth, ﬁrm information).  Speciﬁcally, we hypothesize that peer information has a larger 
economic effect on a ﬁrm’s cost of capital when ﬁrm information is scarce, and that these externalities reduce when the 
amount of ﬁrm information increases and substitutes for peer information.  Recent research ﬁnds evidence that a ﬁrm’s
disclosure has important economic consequences for its peers.  For example, a ﬁrm’s disclosure inﬂuences peer ﬁrms’ (i) 
stock prices, (ii) stock liquidity, and (iii) investment decisions (e. g. , Foster, 1981.  Bushee and Leuz, 2005.  Badertscher Name, 
2013 ).  We extend this literature by examining temporal changes in the importance of peer effects from when ﬁrms are 
newly public with limited ﬁrm information to when ﬁrms have a longer history of public disclosure and relatively more 
ﬁrm information.  
Our hypothesis is based on the idea that ﬁrms in an industry are affected by similar economic forces (e. g. , common 
demand/supply shocks).  Thus, peer disclosures have spillover effects that reduce information asymmetry between managers 
and investors, as well as among investors, for all ﬁrms operating in that industry.  Such reductions in information asymmetry 
can reduce ﬁnancing costs (in both debt and equity markets), as illustrated in corporate ﬁnance models with adverse selection ( Leland and Pyle, 1977.  Myers and Majluf, 1984.  Rock, 1986 ) and in asset pricing models with imperfect competition 
( Lambert Name, 2012 ).  
To the extent peer information affects information asymmetry and ﬁnancing costs, we predict that such externalities vary 
over time as a function of the amount of ﬁrm information available to investors.  Our intuition is similar to that presented in 
other streams of literature.  For example, models in the executive compensation literature (e. g. , Banker and Datar, 1989 ) show 
that the weights placed on different performance evaluation signals are proportional to relative “signal-to-noise” ratios.  In 
our setting, we expect investors to put less weight on peer information (the “noisy” signal) as more information becomes 
2 Nevertheless, ex ante there are several reasons why ﬁrm discloavailable from the disclosing ﬁrm (the “precise” signal).  
sures might not substitute for peer information.  For example, ﬁrm disclosures are often affected by managerial incentives to 
manipulate them, which can make them noisy and potentially less reliable than peer information.  or peer disclosures could 
complement (rather than substitute for) ﬁrm disclosures by providing richer context to interpret ﬁrm disclosures ( Section 2 
expands on these arguments).  
We test our hypothesis using private ﬁrms that raise public capital (debt or equity) for the ﬁrst time.  A principal beneﬁt 
of our setting is that private ﬁrms are not subject to SEC reporting requirements until they raise public capital.  as a result, 
there is (i) little publicly available ﬁrm information prior to the capital issuance and (ii) a large increase in the amount of 
publicly available ﬁrm information in the years immediately following the capital issuance.  Thus, this setting is especially 
powerful for studying the substitution between peer information and ﬁrm information as the amount of ﬁrm information 
rapidly increases while the amount of peer information stays relatively constant.  In addition, the relative lack of ﬁrm information in the initial year of capital issuance makes it more likely that peer information has a ﬁrst-order effect on the cost 
of capital.  
Drawing from the theoretical models of disclosure externalities (e. g. , Dye, 1990.  Admati and Pﬂeiderer, 20 0 0 ), we construct our measure of peer information to capture.  (i) the relevance of peer ﬁrms’ disclosures to non-disclosing ﬁrms and 
(ii) the aggregate amount of information available about peer ﬁrms.  We proxy for the relevance of peer information within 
an industry using the degree of earnings synchronicity in the industry.  Our intuition is that ﬁrms in industries with greater 
earnings synchronicity are more likely to be economically linked and therefore information about one ﬁrm’s future prospects 
is more likely to convey information about peer ﬁrms’ prospects.  We proxy for the aggregate amount of industry information 
available about peer ﬁrms using two proxies.  Our ﬁrst proxy is the percentage of public ﬁrms (relative to the total number 
of ﬁrms, public plus private) operating in the industry ( Badertscher Name, 2013 ).  Since publicly owned ﬁrms disclose both 
mandatory and voluntary information to the public and are analyzed by information intermediaries, there is an extensive 
amount of public information about these ﬁrms that is not available for private ﬁrms.  Therefore, the composition of public 
and private ﬁrms in an industry affects the information environment in that industry.  Our second proxy for aggregate industry information is the analyst coverage for ﬁrms in the industry (measured as the average number of forecasts per ﬁrm).  
Prior research ﬁnds that analysts not only supply information about ﬁrm prospects but also demand a greater quantity and 
quality of information from the ﬁrms they cover (see Beyer Name, 2010 for a review of the literature), thereby improving the 
industry information environment.  
We initially focus on the public debt issuances of private ﬁrms because proxies for the cost of debt (such as bond yield 
spreads) are relatively less subject to measurement error concerns than proxies for the cost of equity capital, which are 
notoriously noisy ( Elton, 1999.  Easton and Monahan, 2005 ).  We ﬁnd that peer information is negatively associated with
bond yield spreads (henceforth, “bond yields” for expositional ease) at the time of issuance, but this association gradually 
declines over time.  Speciﬁcally, a one standard deviation increase in our proxy for peer information lowers bond yields by 
17% in the ﬁrst year of issuance.  The effect declines to 3% in the third year after the bond issuance.  Similarly, when we 
break down our data into quarterly, rather than annual, observations, we observe a gradual decline in the relation between 
peer information and bond yields over the 12 quarters following the bond issuance.  These results are consistent with our 
prediction that peer information lowers the cost of capital for other ﬁrms in the industry when ﬁrm information is scarce 
and this effect declines as ﬁrm information increases.  
Next, we conduct two cross-sectional tests to further validate our inference that peer information and ﬁrm information 
serve as substitutes.  Speciﬁcally, we examine whether the effect of peer information on bond yields is smaller for ﬁrms with 
richer initial ﬁrm-speciﬁc information environments.  We proxy for the amount of ﬁrm information using (i) the level of 
disaggregation in ﬁrms’ ﬁnancial statements immediately before the bond issuance ( Chen Name, 2015 ), and (ii) bond trading 
volume in the ﬁrst quarter of its issuance, which proxies for the amount of private information aggregated into prices via 
the trading process (e. g. , Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980.  Kyle, 1985 ).  Consistent with our prediction that peer information 
serves as a substitute for ﬁrm information, we ﬁnd that the effect of peer information on bond yields is smaller when ﬁrms 
have richer ﬁrm-speciﬁc information environments.  
There are two primary concerns with our analyses thus far.  First, our proxy for peer information, which is constructed at 
the industry-year level and is fairly constant over time, could be picking up industry characteristics (besides peer information) that affect the cost of capital.  Second, our analyses focus on endogenous capital raising events and thus our inferences 
could be confounded by a correlation between our proxy for peer information and ﬁrms’ capital raising incentives.  We 
conduct three tests in the bond setting to mitigate these concerns.  The common theme of these tests is that we focus on 
settings in which ﬁrm information is rich and, as a result, peer information is predicted to be less important.  Showing that 
peer information matters less in certain settings mitigates the concern that our proxy for peer information is associated 
with bond yields due to an omitted correlated variable or a mechanical effect.  
First, we compare the effect of peer information on bond yields for our sample of private ﬁrms to that observed for 
a matched sample of public ﬁrms that issue bonds in the same industry-year, thereby holding peer information constant.  
Since public ﬁrms have richer information environments due to SEC disclosure requirements, voluntary disclosures, and 
information intermediary coverage, the importance of peer information for public ﬁrms is likely to be lower than that for 
observably similar private ﬁrms.  Consistent with this prediction, we ﬁnd that peer information has an insigniﬁcant effect on 
the yields of bonds issued by public ﬁrms.  
Second, we focus on a subsample of private ﬁrms that simultaneously issue both public bonds and bank loans.  Unlike 
bond markets, bank ﬁnancing is characterized by relationships between lenders and borrowers, where lenders have significant access to (hard and soft) non-public information about the borrowing ﬁrm (e. g. , Diamond, 1984.  Boot, 20 0 0 ).  As a 
result, peer information is likely less relevant to pricing private debt than to public debt.  This is precisely what we ﬁnd.  
peer information is not related to the cost of private debt but is related to the cost of public debt, holding the borrower and 
year constant.  
Third, we exploit an institutional feature of our sample which consists of bonds issued under Rule 144A.  Bonds issued 
under Rule 144A are initially marketed to institutional investors as private placements and are only subsequently registered 
with the SEC.  As a result, ﬁrms issuing bonds under Rule 144A are not required to comply with SEC disclosure requirements 
until they register the bond with the SEC.  If the temporal change in the relation between peer information and bond yields 
is due to changes in the amount of ﬁrm information available to investors (as we predict), we should not observe a decay 
in the relation between peer information and bond yields between the time of the bond’s issuance and its SEC registration.  
Rather, the decay in this relation should occur only after the bond is registered with the SEC.  Consistent with this prediction, 
we ﬁnd that the effect of peer information on bond yields begins to fade only following SEC registration.  
We next turn to the equity market tests.  We ﬁrst examine a sample of private ﬁrms that issue public equity for the ﬁrst 
time.  Similar to the bond setting, initial public offering (IPO) ﬁrms are also subject to SEC disclosure requirements only after 
their equity issuance and, as a result, experience a substantial increase in ﬁrm information post-IPO.  We document three 
results that parallel the ﬁndings above.  First, we ﬁnd that peer information is negatively associated with bid-ask spreads 
(our proxy for the adverse selection component of the cost of capital) in the ﬁrst year of a ﬁrm’s IPO, but that this relation 
monotonically decreases over time in the three years subsequent to the IPO.  Second, the effect of peer information on bidask spreads in the ﬁrst year of a ﬁrm’s IPO is smaller in the cross-section of IPOs with richer initial ﬁrm-speciﬁc information 
environments.  Third, analogous to our test comparing private ﬁrms issuing bonds to public ﬁrms issuing bonds, we predict 
and ﬁnd that peer information affects the bid-ask spreads of IPO ﬁrms (and that this effect decays over time), but there is 
no such effect for a matched sample of seasoned equity offering (SEO) ﬁrms.  
To further alleviate endogeneity concerns, we test whether the effect of peer information on bid-ask spreads increases as 
ﬁrm information decreases during pre-SEO quiet periods.  The Securities Act of 1933 restricted ﬁrms from disclosing information prior to their equity offering, which is popularly known as “gun-jumping” regulation.  
Consistent with this regulation affecting disclosure behavior, prior research ﬁnds that ﬁrms reduce their voluntary disclosure activity before SEOs (i. e. , during the SEO quiet period) and bid-ask spreads increase during this period ( Shroff Name, 2013 ).  We predict and ﬁnd that 
the increase in bid-ask spreads during SEO quiet periods documented in prior research is signiﬁcantly smaller for ﬁrms 
with richer peer information environments.  Importantly, the effect of peer information on bid-ask spreads during the quiet 
period disappears after the SEC relaxed quiet period disclosure restrictions with the Securities Offering Reform in 2005.  
This paper contributes to the literature on the externalities or peer effects of disclosure.  Early evidence documents the 
presence of intra-industry information transfers (i. e. 