 1.  Introduction Environmental sustainability, climate change and global warming have attracted increasing public awareness (Bloch et al. , 2012.  Ma, 2015).  Many countries have set and ratiﬁed nationally determined contributions in the recent Paris agreement, targeting to keep the global average temperature increase well below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels.  China, who accounts for half of the world coal consumption and contributes to 25% of the world carbon dioxide emission (Energy Information Administration, 2016), in particular, sets a goal of achieving the peak before 2030, lowering the emission per unit of GDP by 60–65% from its 2005 level, and increasing the non-fossil fuel share in the primary energy consumption to 20%.  A sweeping energy evolution is called for in China since 2014 with new priority placed on environmental goals and the deployment of clean energy. 1 However, it remains a challenge to meet the goal considering the uneven distribution of energy resources and unbalanced economic growth with a high degree of inequality (Herrerias et al. , 2013.  Song and Zheng, 2012).  For China to align the long-term low carbon energy strategy with economic development goals, the central government has set and broken down the carbon and energy intensity reduction target at the level of individual provinces.  Motivated by the context characterized by heterogeneous energy strategy and economic development paths in each of these provinces, this paper addresses three main questions.  1) does energy play a role in promoting provincial growth together with the physical and human capital.  2) how and to what extent the disaggregate energy source is responsible for economic growth.  and 3) what is the causal direction between total and disaggregate energy use and growth of economy in each of these provinces, if any.  The answers will provide rich policy implications for a better understanding of interaction between localized development path and energy conservation to set an implementable emission reduction target for sustainable development.  In the literature, many scholars examine the cointegration and Granger causal link between energy use and economic development in China using national time series data (Shiu and Lam, 2004.  Zhang and Cheng, 2009.  Bloch et al. , 2012).  While country level studies provide some insights on the relationship between energy consumption and economic growth, they have at least two major limitations.  In terms of method, the power of unit root and cointegration tests in time series studies is low due to a short time span (Campbell and Perron, 1991).  the conventional causality tests using time series have a high risk of wrongly rejecting the null hypothesis of no cointegration (Yalta and Cakar, 2012) and therefore can lead to inaccurate conclusions on the direction of causality.  In addition, previous studies using national-level time series ignore the signiﬁcant heterogeneity and interdependence across Chinese provinces.  The endowments of energy resources in China are unevenly distributed.  for example, coal is mainly reserved in Shanxi, while oil and natural gas are mainly in Xinjiang and Sichuan. 2 The economic structure and energy intensity have large variations across provinces as well.  Fig.  1 illustrates the provincial differences in economic structure and energy intensity in year 2014.  The blue, red and green bars indicate the share of gross output values from the primary, the secondary and the tertiary industry, respectively.  The purple solid line depicts the energy intensity for each of the 30 provinces (Tibet excluded).  The stacked bar chart shows that output from the tertiary industry exceeds that from the primary and the secondary industries for coastal rich provinces such as Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin, Hainan, Jiangsu and Zhejiang.  Among the 30 provinces, there are eight resource-rich provinces such as Hebei, Shanxi, Inner Mongolia, Guizhou, Gansu, Qinghai, Ningxia and Xinjiang with energy intensity above the average which is indicated by “*”.  Compared with existing studies, by using the provincial panel, our study offers improved test power over conventional time series methods, which also enables us to account for marked heterogeneity in economic structure and energy distribution across provinces.  The growth-energy nexus analysis at a disaggregated level matters for local regulators to evaluate and act on differentiated strategies of energy conservation and efﬁciency enhancement, and is also vital for the central government to coordinate the regional development and efforts in reducing resource costs and emissions for speciﬁc energy source.  A limited but growing number of studies recently exploit provincial data and panel techniques to investigate the energy-growth nexus in China, albeit producing mixed results (S. S.  Wang et al. , 2011.  Fei et al. , 2011.  Zhang and Xu, 2012.  Herrerias et al. , 2013).  For example, using data from 28 provinces over the period 1995–2007, Y.  Wang et al.  (2011) and S. S.  Wang et al.  (2011) ﬁnd a uni-directional causal relationship from GDP to energy consumption.  Zhang and Xu (2012) identify the bidirectional linkage for the eastern region, while Fei et al.  (2011) conclude the growth effect that energy consumption leads to economic development for the same part of China.  While no consensus has been obtained, results from the panel analysis are relatively more reliable than that from national studies.  One shortcoming of these studies is, however, that they did not explore the impact of disaggregate energy sources on the province-speciﬁc economic growth.  therefore, conclusions made on the analysis of aggregate energy cannot be generalized to disaggregate energy within each of the administrative boundary, that is, the nexus between total energy use and local growth may not hold and be equally applied to disaggregate energy source across provinces, and thus policy suggestions based on this body of studies are hard to implement (Soytas and Sari, 2006).  The brief review highlights the importance to account for provincial heterogeneity and examine not only the aggregate energy but also the disaggregate energy sources.  This paper ﬁlls the gap that little empirical work has been conducted to examine the causal relationship between economic development and energy consumption at both the aggregate and disaggregate levels using provincial data and most recent panel econometric methods within a human-capital augmented production framework.  Furthermore, this paper is one of the ﬁrst studies that incorporate sub-national level human capital in the multivariate framework with a focus in China.  Despite the fact that human capital is a crucial input to economic growth, it only attracts attention in the broad energygrowth nexus literature very recently (Pablo-Romero and SánchezBraza, 2015.  Fang and Chang, 2016.  Fang et al. , forthcoming), probably due to lack of quality human capital data. 3 Theoretically, human capital can be linked to energy consumption through multiple channels.  First, human capital can increase income, which may then cause more energy consumption.  Second, human capital can stimulate R&D of new energy and accelerate the transition to energy-efﬁcient technologies (Li and Lin, 2016).  This mechanism contributes to the negative association between human capital and energy.  Third, if human capital is accumulated through education and campaign on energy conservative awareness among the common people, more human capital is linked to less energy consumption (Fang et al. , forthcoming).  Lastly, economic structure also matters.  With the development of human capital, economies that experience rapid industrialization and urbanization may see huge reliance on energy.  but when the country develops to a service-led economy, energy reliance may be reduced with further development of human capital (Arbex and Perobelli, 2010).  By and large, the relationship between energy and human capital is uncertain and a rigorous analysis is required.  Our contributions to the existing energy-growth nexus literature lie in three aspects.  First, we incorporate the input of human capital to the energy-augmented neoclassical production function.  Due to reasons mentioned above, human capital should not be ignored in the multivariate framework for the energy-growth analysis.  However, due to data availability or other reasons, we do not ﬁnd many studies employing this framework.  At Chinese provincial level, the data availability, particularly that for a quality measure of human capital, is even more problematic.  Fortunately, the Chinese human capital database established by the China Center for Human Capital and Labor Market Research of Central University of Finance and Economics makes this research possible.  It includes national and provincial human capital stock in both the nominal and real terms for years starting from 1985 to 2014.  The uniqueness of the data makes our paper the ﬁrst of its kind.  Second, this paper takes into consideration the cross-sectional dependence and provincial heterogeneity using the advanced panel econometric techniques and provides more reliable test results and fresh empirical evidences on the nature of the relation between economic growth and energy consumption.  Speciﬁcally, the crosssectionally augmented IPS (CIPS) test proposed by Pesaran (2007) is used to check the stationarity of the data.  Westerlund (2007)’s errorcorrection based test is bootstrapped to examine the presence of cointegrating relationship relaxing the assumption of cross-sectional independence.  Furthermore, we adopt the continuously-updated fully-modiﬁed OLS approach (Bai et al. , 2009) which is valid under the cross-sectional dependence rather than the panel heterogeneous FMOLS (Pedroni, 2001) and DOLS (Stock and Watson, 1993) to estimate the coefﬁcients of the long-run relationship.  None of the existing studies on China have employed these toolkits to avoid lack of test power and biasness of estimates when there are strong interdependences across provinces.  The presence and direction of the causality between variables are also examined using a panel bootstrap method (Emirmahmutoglu and Kose, 2011) that allows for heterogeneity and cross-sectional dependence.  Third, we examine the causal relationship between economic growth and both aggregate and disaggregate energy sources that are available from the China Energy Statistical Yearbooks (various years 1995–2014), including raw coal, coke, crude oil, petroleum products (fuel oil, gasoline, diesel, kerosene), natural gas, and electricity.  This is one of the few studies that comprehensively investigate the disaggregate energy consumption types.  Rich policy recommendations based on these results are thus credibly provided.  Our results indicate strong cross-sectional dependence in the provincial panel, and we conﬁrm the presence of cointegration relationship between GDP, investment, human capital and various energy variables even after taking into consideration interdependence across provinces.  Using a continuously updated fully modiﬁed estimation proposed by Bai et al.  (2009), we ﬁnd that human capital is a crucial factor input which exerts about 2–3 times effects that investment has on GDP.  energy, both in aggregate or disaggregate forms as coal, crude oil, petroleum products, natural gas and electricity, plays a signiﬁcant role in economic development in China as well.  Therefore, both human capital and energy are indispensable in stimulating economic growth.  Using the bootstrap panel Granger causality test which is appropriate within the cross-sectional dependence framework, we ﬁnd Granger causal relationships running from GDP to petroleum products and electricity, and bi-directional relationship between GDP and coal, coke, natural gas and total energy consumption in the whole China.  For individual provinces, causal relationships vary signiﬁcantly.  This has important policy implications to especially local governments in the sense that while following the macro- and strategic policies from the central government, local governments should take initiatives and evaluate their unique stages of economic development and energy status as well as the causal relationship between the two before taking micro- and speciﬁc measures.  The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 reviews the energy proﬁle for China as a whole and the energy balance structure of the primary energy sources for each of the 30 provinces as well as the energy-growth nexus literature with a focus on China.  Section 3 provides data descriptions and a preliminary analysis.  Econometric methods are discussed in Section 4.  Main results are presented and discussed in Section 5 and the last section concludes with policy recommendations.  <Middle> An overview of Chinese energy proﬁle and energy-growth nexus studies.  2. 1.  Energy proﬁle in China.  As the world's most populous country with a fast-growing economy, China becomes increasingly inﬂuential in the world energy market with rapidly rising energy demand because of the swiftly modernizing economy and sizeable industrialization.  China becomes the world's largest global energy consumer in 2011.  It is also the world's top coal producer, consumer and the world's second-largest oil consumer behind the United States (Energy Information Administration, 2015).  This subsection ﬁrst provides an overview of the energy proﬁle for China as a whole.  Subsequently, by exploiting information from the energy balance table of the primary energy sources4 for individual provinces, we show the link of production, consumption and inter-province trade of coal, oil, gas, and electricity, using the annual average values during the period of 1995–2014.  Fig.  2 shows the annual growth rate of GDP and total energy consumption from 1980 to 2015.  Two observations are drawn from the ﬁgure.  First, there seems to be a co-movement of growth in output and energy consumption.  speciﬁcally, energy consumption growth before 1995 is slightly lagging behind economic growth, while afterwards the growth cycle in energy is moving ahead of economic growth.  To rigorously examine the relationship between the two variables, a cointegration analysis is necessary.  Second, the ﬁgure shows that the growth rate of energy consumption is slower than GDP growth rate until 2002 and later exceeds GDP growth rate within a short period of time during 2003–2005.  this suggests a clear downward trend of energy intensity (deﬁned as the ratio of energy consumption to GDP) with an interruption during 2003–2005. 