 1.  Introduction Many countries subsidise the production and consumption of fossil fuels.  Most subsidies are given downstream, to reduce the cost of consuming fossil fuels (Coady et al. , 2016).  While these subsidies beneﬁt fuel consumers, at least in the short run, they also have a number of negative effects (IEA, 2014).  First, they contribute to ﬁscal imbalances and thus crowd out other government spending.  Second, subsidies stimulate excessive fossil fuel consumption contributing to increased emissions of harmful pollution such as CO2.  Finally, in the long run low oil prices encourage the development of energy-intensive industries and discourage development of renewable technologies.  Despite the negative effects, it has proven difﬁcult to remove fossil fuel subsidies.  In many countries fossil fuel subsidies were originally introduced to improve consumer welfare, and proposals to remove such subsidies could result in citizen protests.  We ﬁnd, however, that the biggest subsidisers may increase their welfare by removing their oil subsidies.  The reason is that subsidy removal allows these countries to shift oil from the domestic market to the international market where prices are higher.  The biggest fossil fuel subsidisers are also major producers and exporters of oil and gas.  In fact, the heaviest fossil fuel subsidisers are the OPEC countries, mostly located in the Middle-East and North-Africa (MENA) region.  Public spending on subsidies – estimated as the gap between international and domestic prices – is, on average, much higher in the oil exporting MENA region than in other countries.  In particular, there are extensive subsidies in the transport sector.  According to IMF (2014), subsidies to gasoline and diesel in the MENA countries amounted to almost 4% of the regional GDP in 2012.  Oil products used in the transport sector are also subsidised to a certain degree in other Non-OECD countries.  Price control is often a key element in fossil fuel subsidies.  However, subsidies can also include cash transfers directly to consumers, as well as tax exemptions and rebates.  Assessing the magnitude of fossil fuels subsidies in all its forms is a task challenged by poor data quality, limited data availability and lack of data comparability (Ellis, 2010).  Like many other studies, we use the price-gap method, calculating the combined effect of reducing the wedge between domestic and international (reference) prices (Koplow, 2009).  The reference price on goods that are traded on the international market, like oil, is usually the international or border price adjusted for market exchange rates, transport and distributional costs, and country speciﬁc taxes and tariffs.  As we focus on price-gap subsidies in the transport sector, we can apply a consistent and uniform dataset as in GIZ (2014) (formerly GTZ), which lists the retail prices of diesel and gasoline in 174 countries, and assess the effects of subsidy reforms. 1 The oil price fall in late 2014 has presented countries with a unique opportunity to phase out fossil fuel consumption subsidies, since the wedge between the global and domestic regulated prices has been reduced.  As a result, consumers would be less hurt by subsidy removal, at least in the short run.  In addition, the recent drop in the oil price has reduced government incomes in OPEC countries, and removal of fossil fuel subsidies would help improve ﬁscal balances.  Several OPEC countries have recently reduced (implicit) subsidies on gasoline and diesel, including Angola, UAE, Saudi-Arabia, Iran, Kuwait, Qatar and Venezuela (IEA, 2016a.  Bloomberg, 2016).  According to IEA (2016b) this has slowed consumption and increased the potential for export.  Other countries outside OPEC, such as India, have also started similar price reforms on gasoline and diesel (IEA, 2016a).  This paper analyses how removal of oil consumption subsidies in the transport sectors might affect oil consumption and production in major geographic regions in the world.  The transport sector currently accounts for 54% of the world's fuel liquid consumption, and the share is expected to increase towards 2040 (IEA, 2014).  We focus on subsidy removal primarily in OPEC countries, but also to a certain extent in other countries.  We also consider a situation where all subsidising countries introduce moderate fuel taxes.  We compare the welfare effects of these policies for different regions, distinguishing between effects on consumers, producers and the government.  To analyse these effects, we use a numerical model of the international oil market called Petro2 (Aune et al. , 2017).  The model incorporates dynamic behavior by oil producers and distinguishes between competitive producers and producers with market power.  The model is described in more detail below.  Our analysis suggests that OPEC countries may achieve signiﬁcant welfare gains by removing the oil subsidies in their transport sector.  On the one hand, OPEC consumers experience a loss due to the higher consumer prices.  There is also a producer surplus loss following a lower world market oil price.  On the other hand, removing oil subsidies involves a huge transfer from oil consumers to the government (or to oil producers, depending on who is in fact paying the subsidies), such that the losses from reduced subsidies are dominated by government gains.  The reason is that subsidy removal reduces OPEC oil consumption, and this oil can be sold in the global oil market at signiﬁcantly higher prices.  In other words, the willingness to pay for oil is higher in the global oil market than within OPEC (before subsidies are removed).  Further, we ﬁnd that when all countries remove oil subsidies in the transport sector, the global welfare gains increase.  However, our analysis suggests that this leads to lower welfare gains for OPEC as the value of their oil resources deteriorates due to lower oil prices.  Although subsidy removal may be proﬁtable for OPEC, it could have some feedback effects in the oil market that are worth studying.  One feedback mechanism is leakage, i. e. , reduced demand for oil in the transport sector in OPEC may lead to lower oil prices and correspondingly higher consumption in other countries (Felder and Rutherford, 1993.  Böhringer et al. , 2014).  Another feedback mechanism is related to the “green paradox” (Sinn, 2008.  van der Ploeg and Withagen, 2012), that is, fossil fuel suppliers might ﬁnd it proﬁtable to accelerate extraction if they foresee reduced demand in the future, for example due to gradual phasing out of subsidies, more stringent climate policies etc.  The two feedback mechanisms are related to each other, and both are highly dependent on the price responsiveness of demand and supply in the energy markets.  The more price responsive demand is relative to supply, the bigger the leakage effects.  The green paradox effect depends heavily on the timing of the subsidy removal, but also on the price responsiveness.  Two characteristics of the oil market may be of particular importance when we study the feedback mechanisms of subsidy removal, namely market power and intertemporal behavior.  There is little consensus in the literature regarding OPEC's behavior in the oil market, except that most studies reject the hypothesis of competitive behavior (see e. g.  Smith, 2005.  Hansen and Lindholt, 2008.  Kaufmann et al. , 2008.  Huntington et al. , 2013.  Nakov and Nuño, 2013.  Boug et al. , 2016).  We present a model where we assume Cournot behavior meaning that a core of countries within OPEC takes Non-OPEC's and OPEC-Non Core's extraction path as given, but maximizes joint proﬁts taking into account the price responsiveness on the demand side.  Similar assumptions have been made in earlier simulation models of the oil market (e. g. , Salant, 1982.  Berg et al. , 1997, 2002.  Aune et al. , 2010.  Okullo et al. , 2015).  However, none of these studies analyse the effects of phasing out subsidies.  Another potentially important feature is the fact that oil is an exhaustible resource, i. e. , extraction of oil has intertemporal effects as it reduces available resources in the future (Hotelling, 1931).  This is taken into account in our model, as oil producers are forward-looking and maximize their net present value of oil extraction.  This dynamic feature is important for the “green paradox” effect.  Many studies have analysed different effects of reducing fossil fuel subsidies.  Ellis (2010) surveys ﬁve studies that examine the effect of reducing subsidies on fossil fuels.  All studies ﬁnd welfare increase in the subsidising countries.  Burniaux and Chateau (2014) analyse a phase-out of fossil fuel subsidies using a general equilibrium model, ﬁnding that such a subsidy reform will reduce GHG-emissions and improve welfare for the world as a whole, although some regions will experience reduced welfare.  The above-mentioned studies do not consider impacts on the global oil market.  Other studies (Larsen and Shah, 1992.  Salehi-Isfahani, 1996.  Gurer and Ban, 2000) use oil supply and demand elasticities to study the effects of fuel subsidy removal on the subsidising country's welfare.  We have only found one study that focuses on the effects of fuel subsidy removal on the global oil market, i. e. , Balke et al.  (2015).  They ﬁnd that subsidy removal in 24 oil-producing countries generally is welfare enhancing for both oilimporting and oil-exporting countries.  Their model is based on competitive behavior and static modeling of oil supply, which means that they cannot include transition dynamics like in our study.  The paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 describes the Petro2 model, Section 3 presents the policy scenarios analysed, the approach used in the analysis of welfare effects, and results from the numerical model.  Section 4 concludes.  <Middle> Model description.  Petro2 is a dynamic simulation model that permits the analysis of policy changes or other external shocks to the market (e. g. , shifts in cost or oil reserve levels) on oil markets.  The model has previously been used in Aune et al.  (2017), who study the effects of fuel efﬁciency improvements in the oil market.  The main outputs from the model are oil prices and production/consumption in different regions and sectors, both in the short and long run.  Petro2 has seven regions.  Western Europe, United States, Rest of OECD, China, Russia, OPEC and Rest of World.  We further distinguish between six end-users within each region with greater detail among transport sectors, and one transformation sector.  Each sector in each region demands oil, natural gas, electricity, coal, biomass and biofuel.  The time path of the oil price (and thus oil product prices) is endogenous, whereas the prices of the other (non-oil) energy goods are exogenous (based on price projections from the IEA, 2013).  In this study we focus on oil in the transport sectors. 