
Buy-side analysts play an important role in equity markets because their research directly impacts the investing decisions of portfolio managers (Cheng Name, 2006; Frey and Herbst, 2014; Rebello and Wei, 2014).  These analysts usually work
for an investment ﬁrm (e. g. , mutual fund, hedge fund, pension fund), and they perform their research activities exclusively
for the ﬁrm that employs them.  In contrast to sell-side analysts whose stock recommendations are distributed widely to
their clients and who often receive coverage in the business press, buy-side analysts' stock recommendations are not
available to anyone outside their own ﬁrm.  Thus, although buy-side analysts are much closer than sell-side analysts to the
ultimate investing decision, they are rarely the subject of academic research.  The purpose of this study is to expand our
understanding of the activities of buy-side analysts and their role in the capital markets. 
We survey 344 buy-side equity analysts employed by 181 institutional investment ﬁrms and conduct 16 detailed followup interviews on a wide range of topics.  We examine the factors that determine their compensation, their motivation to
issue proﬁtable stock recommendations, the inputs to their stock recommendations, the frequency and value of their
interactions with company management, and their assessments of ﬁnancial reporting quality.  Further, because buy-side
analysts are an important consumer of sell-side research, we examine the nature and frequency of their interactions with
sell-side analysts and the attributes of sell-side analysts they ﬁnd most important. 
One important takeaway of our paper relates to the role of sell-side analysts in buy-side research.  Speciﬁcally, although we
ﬁnd that buy-side analysts have strong ﬁnancial incentives to produce proﬁtable stock recommendations, fewer than 3% of
them indicate sell-side stock recommendations are a very useful input for their own stock recommendations.  Nevertheless, we
ﬁnd that sell-side analysts add value to buy-side analysts in other ways.  For example, buy-side analysts typically follow more
companies spread across more industries than do sell-side analysts, so they often rely on the sell side to quickly get up to speed
on a particular industry.  Further, buy-side analysts indicate that industry knowledge is the most useful input to their stock
recommendations, which are the primary determinants of their compensation.  Our ﬁndings help explain why institutional
investors consistently rate industry knowledge so highly in Institutional Investor's (II) annual rankings of sell-side services. 
Relatedly, buy-side analysts indicate that private communication with senior management is an important input into
their stock recommendations, and that sell-side analysts play a pivotal role in facilitating access to management.  Collectively, our ﬁndings suggest buy-side analysts rely on sell-side analysts for raw information (e. g. , industry knowledge) and
access to company management, which help inform their own stock recommendations; however, buy-side analysts do not
look to sell-side analysts when translating this information into their own stock recommendations. 
Despite prior research suggesting that sell-side analysts employed by large brokerages have more resources (Clement,
1999; Clement and Tse, 2003; Hong and Kubik, 2003), and that II All-Stars are superior sell-side analysts (Asquith Name,
2005; Leone and Wu, 2007; Stickel, 1992), fewer than 3% of the buy-side analysts say brokerage size and All-Star status are
important attributes of sell-side analysts when deciding whether to use information they provide.  In contrast, sell-side
analysts' experience following a company and the frequency of their communication with senior management are the two
most important determinants of buy-side analysts' decisions to use information sell-side analysts provide. 
Concerns that ﬁnancial reports lack timeliness and suffer from information overload have grown in recent years (White,
2013).  Despite these concerns, nearly half (48%) of the buy-side analysts indicate that the recent 10-K or 10-Q report is very
useful for determining their stock recommendations.  These ﬁnancial reports are more useful to them than quarterly conference calls, management earnings guidance, and recent earnings performance.  Buy-side analysts also believe the most
important attribute of high-quality earnings is that earnings are backed by operating cash ﬂows.  When we asked about “red
ﬂags” of management effort to intentionally misrepresent ﬁnancial results, many “red ﬂags” identiﬁed by prior research
received strong support, including internal control weaknesses and weak corporate governance, suggesting buy-side analysts are concerned about the integrity of ﬁnancial reports. 
We make several contributions to the literature.  Prior research documents that buy-side analysts play an important role
in institutional investment decisions (Cheng Name, 2006; Crawford Name, 2014; Frey and Herbst, 2014; Rebello and Wei,
2014).  However, the determinants of buy-side analysts' stock recommendations remain unclear, so our ﬁndings represent an
important step forward for the literature. 