 1.  Introduction 1. 1.  The problem.  A popular product sold by energy companies to medium-to-large customers is one where an unspeciﬁed amount of power can be bought at a ﬁxed price during a certain time-interval.  We call this a ﬁxed price, unspeciﬁed consumption contract or simply a ﬁxed price agreement.  The business-to-business electricity market in Denmark in 2014 was 23. 1 TWh, about MEUR 800 million in monetary terms.  60% was sold as ﬁxed price agreements in some form.  Having entered into the ﬁxed price agreement, the energy company must asses and manage the risks associated with the obligations of the contract.  This is challenging for several reasons.  If the seller faced only the risk from price-ﬂuctuations, he could simply buy forward contracts to set up a full, perfect hedge.  However, with a criterion function that takes into account both (expected) gains and losses, this is expensive if forward-prices are typically above expected future spot-prices.  This so-called contango is the norm in Nordic power markets, as demonstrated by both Botterud et al.  (2002) and our analysis in Section 5. 1.  Another complicating factor is quantity risk.  If the consumer’s quantity choice were all-or-nothing, the contract would have payoff akin to call options.  Handling that would require modelling the price randomness of the electricity market which has several characteristics that are different from standard ﬁnancial markets such as stocks and exchange rates.  But the consumer has more ﬂexibility and because energy demand is created by physical use, her choice will not be all-or-nothing.  Demand will be positively correlated with the price as high demand drives up the price.  For the contract seller that creates what in other areas of ﬁnance would be known as wrong-way risk.  He will have to deliver a lot of energy for a ﬁxed price when buying it in the spot market is expensive.  In this paper, we will deal with these risks with a joint model of spot-price and consumption load.  1. 2.  Previous work, related literature.  The non-storability of electricity is a key complicating factor in energy markets.  It makes physical hedging inoperable and it causes highly volatile spot-markets with structural price jumps, see for instance Benth et al.  (2008).  As a consequence, the problem of joint quantity and price risk on electricity markets is commonly studied in the literature and it stresses the importance of incorporating price–quantity correlation into the models.  For an example, Bessembinder and Lemmon (2002) consider an equilibrium market model for which the correlation has a signiﬁcant impact on optimal hedging strategies in forward markets.  Their model has been extended by, for instance, Willems and Morbee (2010) who study the effect of including options onto the market.  From the retailer’s perspective with an exogenously given spot and forward market, Oum et al.  (2006) use utility maximisation to derive optimal hedge strategies that exploit the correlation to manage price–quantity risk in a single period setting.  As another example, Boroumand et al.  (2015) address the problem of price–quantity risk on an intra-day scale and demonstrate with a simulation approach that intra-day hedging outperforms daily and longer term portfolios.  We also take the retailer’s perspective and model the spot-price/consumption-load correlation with a bivariate model where both the spot and load have temporal dependency.  Based on that model, we set out to hedge the price–quantity risk of a ﬁxed price agreement with forward contracts.  In relation to our approach, Coulon et al.  (2013) develop an intricate three-factor model and consider hedging strategies based on options that are priced with closed form expressions.  In contrast, we do not consider the problem of pricing derivatives under our model, but concentrate on a operational hedging approach based on exogenously given market forward-price data.  1. 3.  Structure, contributions, and ﬁndings.  The rest of the paper is organised as follows.  In Section 2, we formulate a dynamic model for electricity spot-price and consumptionload — a two-dimensional Gaussian Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model with a seasonality component.  In Section 3, we analyse expected loss minimisation.  Looking speciﬁcally at static hedging strategies with forward contracts, a main contribution of the paper is the derivation of explicit formulas for optimal hedge portfolios based on three different loss functions.  the square, the exponential, and the “hockey stick”.  the two latter based on asymmetric risk measures appear new.  Section 4 is an empirical study of the hedging performance based on publicly available consumption, spot- and forward-prices from the Nordic region.  The empirical results demonstrate substantial beneﬁts for the derived asymmetric hedges over the common industry benchmark that uses a position in forward contracts equal to the expected load.  It should be noted that unlike many sources in the literature, the hedge experiments in this paper truly test outof-sample performance.  The hedge portfolio constructed at, say, time t uses only information about state-variables and model parameters that was truly available at time t.  Section 5 investigates the robustness of the results.  First, we test if forward-prices add information that can be easily exploited in the hedge constructions.  We ﬁnd this not to be the case.  Second, we consider a model extension with jumps (or spikes) in which we derive optimal hedges and implement these.  We ﬁnd little to no empirical improvement over the original hedge performance.  Section 6 concludes and describes directions for future research.  <Middle> The electricity price and consumption model.  Our approach will be to model jointly the electricity spot price and the consumption load with a continuous stochastic process.  Both the price and the load exhibit seasonal patterns – the time of the day, day of the week and climatological season naturally effect the spot price and consumption, see Benth et al.  (2008) and Haugom (2011) – and we will ﬁt deterministic periodic functions to capture this seasonality.  The residual price and load will then be modelled with a stationary process and we conveniently choose the continuous Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process for this purpose. 1 2. 1.  The bivariate Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process.  The bivariate mean-reverting Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process (Xt, Yt)t≥0 is given by the solution to the stochastic differential equation, where jx, jy, s x, s y are positive parameters, hx, hy ∈ R and the Brownian motions W(1), W(2) are correlated with qw ∈ [−1, 1].  The standard trick of multiplying by integrating factors, i. e.  using the Ito formula on e−jxtX(t) and e−jytY(t), gives us the more explicit expressions, from which we see that the univariate covariance functions are here, and that the cross-covariance function is this, where we have deﬁned the parameters.  From Eq.  (1) it also follow that (X, Y) is a Gaussian process, in particular the conditional distribution is bivariate normal (BVN) and given by this, with mean vector and covariance matrix.  2. 2.  Parameter estimation.  2. 3.  The seasonal Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model.  With observed data we refer to a set of observations made at n+1 time-points t0, .  .  .  , tn with Di = ti − ti−1 denoting the spacings of the time grid.  An observed path x = (x0, .  .  .  , xn) of the process (Xt)t≥0 is a set of observations where xi is the observed value of Xti for i = 0, .  .  .  , n.  From Eq.  (2) we write the log-likelihood for the observed path x of the univariate Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process as a function of the parameters x = (j, h, s) where 0 is the normal density function, here with (conditional) mean li+1|i = xie−jDi+1 + h(1 − e−jDi+1 ) and variance s 2 t+1|i = s 2(1 − e−2jDi+1 )/(2j).  The decomposition of the density comes from the fact that X is a Markov process.  since the Markov property gives that f(xi+1|xi, .  .  .  , x0) =f (xi+1|xi) for the conditional density, we can write f (x0, .  .  .  , xn) = f (xn|xn−1) .  .  .  f (x1|x0)f (x0).  The maximum likelihood estimate  x is the argument that maximizes the log-likelihood which may be obtained by a numerical optimiser. 2 Calculating the observed information matrix by numerical differentiation at estimated values gives an estimatedstandard error of the j(cid. 5)th parameter as xx and ˆ denotes element i, j of the inverse matrix of A.  Further, if ˆare univariate estimates from two observed paths x and y, gives an estimator of qw where ˆq(x, y) is the sample correlation coeﬃcient between x and y.  A bivariate observation (x, y) from the bivariate OrnsteinUhlenbeck process with parameters xxy = (jx, hx, s x, jy, hy, s y, qw) yields the log-likelihood from Eq  where li+1|i ≡ lti+Di|ti and Si+1|i ≡ Sti+Di|ti are the conditional mean vector and covariance matrix given in the previous section.  Here 02 denotes the bivariate normal density and the maximum likelihood estimate ˆxxy may be obtained by numerical optimisation along with estimated standard errors from the numerically calculated information matrix.  Since the price and consumption of electricity exhibit seasonal behaviours, we will work with a model for the spot-price S and consumption-load L as given by so-called seasonal OrnsteinUhlenbeck model, where (˜S, ˜L) follows a bivariate Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process while HS(t) andH L(t) are deterministic seasonality functions of time.  For this purpose, we let H(t) be a periodic function deﬁned by and the regression matrix A(0) of dimension [n × p + 1] is a function of the phase vector.  If, for a moment, we consider the phases to be ﬁxed, then the estimation of the amplitudes is a standard least-squares optimisation problem.  ie.  a function of the phase vector a∗ = a∗(0).  This lead us to perform the estimation in two steps.  by numerical optimisation.  Then we perform the regression to obtain parameter estimates (ˆa, ˆ 0) of the periodic function.  Our estimation approach ﬁts the seasonal functions to price and load in the ﬁrst step and an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process to the deseasonalised price and load in the second step.  2 For equidistant observations estimators can be found in closed, but slightly lengthy, form.  Remark 1.  As an alternative to a two-step estimation of the seasonal Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process, note that we may write the likelihood of the full model.  Following the notational convention that we introduce in Section 3. 2 and denoting the respective amplitude- and phase vectors with aS, 0S, aL, 0L, the 4p + 9 parameter vector goes into the Gaussian likelihood of the same form as Eq.  (3) with conditional mean being a function of amplitudes and phases as well, see Eqs.  (8)–(9).  Numerical optimisation of the likelihood is, however, unstable due to the large number of parameters.  For example, in the empirical study of Section 4 we use ﬁve periods for the seasonal components which yields 29 parameters in total.  We found the numerical optimisation of the likelihood on market data with respect to the full vector Eq.  (5) to be unstable.  For this reason, we employ the robust two-step approach instead.  3.  Risk-minimising static hedging The hedging problem we are facing is to replicate a future uncertain ﬁnancial obligation.  That is, one tries to replicate the future payment with other ﬁnancial products, typically liquid contracts that are traded in the market, and in our case we will use forward contracts.  We design a static hedging strategy.  a buy-and-hold position in the forward contract that aims at hedging our ﬁnancial obligation.  Our approach to determine the forward position will be the method of expected loss minimisation.  To this end, let pT denote the payoff at time T of the hedged position, that is, the ﬁnancial obligation we want to hedge together with a portfolio of hedging instruments.  Then −pT gives the loss of the position and E[u(−pT)]gives a measure of risk for some speciﬁed loss function u (see Artzner et al.  (1999) for details of risk measures).  The problem at hand is to choose the hedging portfolio such that this risk is minimised.  Hence, the task is to choose both type of hedging instruments and positions to buy/sell of these instruments at initiation.  Notice that if we were to set up a dynamic hedging strategy instead, then we would have to choose the time-points or events at which to rebalance the hedging portfolio. 3 3. 1.  Hedging a ﬁxed price agreement.  Assume that we want to hedge a ﬁxed price agreement that expires at a speciﬁed future time T > t0 where t0 is the initiation time.  This is a ﬁnancial contract with payoff (ST − Ffpa)LT at time T for the long position and its features can be explained by the following situation.  At time t0, we enter a contract with a counterparty where we obligate ourselves to deliver an unspeciﬁed quantity LT of electricity at time T for the agreed price Ffpa.  The quantity will be the unknown consumption of the counterparty.  At the expiry time T, we will have to cover our contracted delivery of electricity by purchasing the same quantity from the spot market at a price ST.  Our cash-ﬂow for the position at time T then amounts to FfpaLT − STLT which is the short position of the ﬁxed price agreement.  7. 2 and references therein.  To set up a static, buy-and-hold, hedge at time t0 for the naked position (notice that ST and LT are unknown at t0), we enter a forward contract with expiry time T and forward price F.  This is a contract with payoff ST − F at time T and we enter the forward with a position V to be determined at initiation.  If we assume that the ﬁxed price agreement has a price relative to the forward Ffpa = F + m, where m is some non-negative margin, then the total payoff of our hedged position is this.  The hedging problem is to specify, at initiation time t0, the forward position V in an optimal way.  For this purpose, we employ the approach of minimising the risk measure Eq.  (6) speciﬁed with three different loss functions.  (i) the positive loss u(x) =max(x, 0), (ii) the quadratic loss u(x) =x 2 and (iii) the exponential loss u(x) =exp(x).  Our aim is thus to minimise the risk of the hedged portfolio with respect to the forward position, that is.  Common to all three loss functions is that they are convex which makes the corresponding risk measures convex as well, see Föllmer and Schied (2011).  A second property which holds for the positive loss and exponential loss is monotonicity.  if the outcome of position A is certainly smaller than that of position B, then position A will have greater risk.  This means that these measures take downside risk into account while, in contrast, the quadratic-loss measure is symmetric.  both positive and negative variations of the loss are equal contributors to the risk.  The expected positive loss also satisﬁes the sub-additivity property part of the coherent risk measure deﬁnition.  A monetary interpretation of this property means that one will beneﬁt from diversiﬁcation.  the risk of a portfolio of assets is less or equal to the risk of the individual assets.  Financial contracts traded at the exchange for power derivatives are typically not speciﬁed with a single expiry-time as in the previous example.  A power forward obligate the counterparties to settle the difference between spot and ﬁxed price at a set of time-points during a speciﬁed period, for example a month, quarter or a year.  There is typically a base-load and a peak-load version of the contract as well, where the latter has settlements on peak-hours only, that is weekdays 08. 00 to 20. 00 for the Nordic market, while the former has settlements on every full hour during the expiry period.  We consider ﬁxed price agreements and forwards that are speciﬁed with an expiry month M and we let M(p) denote peak-hours during this month and M(op) the remaining off-peak hours.  The payoff at time Ti for the hedged position during off-peak is thus for all Ti ∈ M(op), where V b is the position in thebase-load forward with price Fb.  Notice that we assume the pricing Fb-fpa = Fb +m with margin m ≥ 0 for delivery during off-peak of the ﬁxed price agreement, in particular, we let m = 0.  For a time-point (cid. 20) during peak periods we have the choice to include in our hedge portfolio a position Vp in the peak-load forward with price Fp ≥ Fb where we assume a pricing Fp-fpa ≥ ˜F + m with margin m ≥ 0 and we set m = 0 here as well.  To determine the optimal hedge for the entire month M with the expected loss measure, we minimise the function for the off-peak and peak contract respectively.  Starting with the positive loss function u(x) = max(x, 0), the expected loss may be written as such that the minimising argument load forward positions of our hedge.  Remark 2.  Note that, as the loss functions are convex, and convex (cid. 24) functions are invariant under aﬃne transformations, we have that V (cid. 9)→ u(−(S − F)(V − L)) is a convex map, as well as the total risk V (cid. 9)→ iu(−(Si−F)(V−Li)).  Thus, we have that any local minimum is indeed a global minimum and the same holds for minimising f(Vb, V p) jointly with respect to (Vb, Vp) due to linearity.  3. 2.  Hedging with the seasonal Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model.  To be able to minimise the total expected loss of a monthly contract and ﬁnd the optimal hedge we will derive an expression for the expectation in Eq.  (7) with the margin set to zero.  To simplify the notation, assume a current time t0 = 0 with given spot-price S0 = s and load L0 = l such that ˜S0 = ˜s = s − HS(0) and ˜L0 = ˜l = l − HL(0) are the current values of the de-seasonalised spot and load.  Let (jS, jL, hS, hL, s S, s L, qW) be the parameters of the OrnsteinUhlenbeck process (˜S, ˜L).  The distribution of (S, L) at a future time T,  are independent standard normal variables and we have such that we can write the expected positive loss.  For a general Gaussian variable, X ∼ N (l, s 2) , straightforward calculations give this, where V and 0 are the standard normal distribution and density respectively.  These expressions may readily be used for h1 and h2.  Note that the ﬁrst moments depend on both the time t and timelag D while the second moments depend on the time-lag only.  In effect we may write the payoff at time T of the hedged position as the product of two linear functions of Z and Z, that is, the payoff is a product of two correlated normal variables dependent on F, V, where F, V will play the role of Fb, Vb and ˜F, Vb +Vp which gives us a ﬁnal expression for the expected positive loss, this simpliﬁes the expected positive loss to a closed-form expression.  The expected loss calculated with dependency between the deseasonalised spot and load4 is shown in Fig.  1 along with the expected loss calculated from the independent speciﬁcation of the model.  The difference between the two expected loss functions is small.  In particular, the minimum expected loss from the two models is obtained at the same argument, that is, the zero-correlation case yields the same optimal hedge position as the dependent case.  For the exponential loss function u(x) = exp(x) we again have by this.  we obtain a ﬁnal expression for the expected exponential loss.  Where the moment generating function of g(Z, Z mally distributed as in Eq.  (10) is used for the second equality.  Expanding the square, we may write the exponent as a quadratic function of Z, and hence, with the coeﬃcients a, b, c, deﬁned as above.  For the quadratic loss function u(x) = x2 we have the expected squared loss measure where the conditional expectation is this.  Substituting this back into Eq.  (11) gives, after a few simpliﬁcations, the quadratic loss measure, where we have employed the fact that E[Z] =E [Z3] = 0 while E[Z2] = 1 and E[Z4] = 3 for a standard normal variable.  Differentiation with respect to V and equating to zero yields this where is chi-squared distributed with one degree of freedom and non-centrality parameter b2/(4c2).  Using the moment generating function of the non-central chi-squared distribution generated outcomes from the standard normal distribution which is the forward position of the optimal hedge obtained from minimising the expected quadratic loss.  Notice here that quadratic hedging suggests a forward position equal to the expectation of the load in the case when the de-seasonalised spot and load are assumed Upon inspection of Fig.  2, we see that both the spot-price and load series exhibit seasonal patterns, particularly evidently for the load.  Power consumption inherently varies with the time of the day and day of the week.  Due to electrical heating during winter (and air cooling during summer) there is a variety with the climatological season as well.  The seasonality of consumption is transferred to the spot price as demand for electricity affects its price.  Further, as the climatological season affects the production of hydroelectricity, there will also be seasonal dependent factors that affects supply, and thus the price.  Finally, notice that the spot price may turn negative with some remarkably large negative values recorded around the new years of 2012, 2013 and 2014. 6 uncorrelated.  The hedging strategy is hence completely independent of our expectation of the future spot price.  I particular, the loss (ST−F)(LT−V) will potentially be substantial for the hedger when the load is at high levels (above expectation) since then the spot-price is typically high as well, due to the actual positive correlation between the two (the wrong-way risk).  On the other hand if one assumes a non-zero positive correlation, the hedge position Eq.  (12) will be increased if the spot is expected to be high, lS > F, which in turn decreases the potential large losses in high-spot-high-load scenarios.  4.  Empirical study.  In this section, we present an empirical study of the performance of our hedging approach.  We base the study partly on publicly available market data, partly on a set of proprietary load data obtained from DONG Energy who is a major player in the Danish power market.  The data is presented in the next section along with ﬁtted seasonal functions and estimated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck parameters from the residual processes.  Next, we report the results from our hedging approach based on expected loss minimisation and compare these with a benchmark average-load strategy which is widely used by the industry.  Finally, we present a simple extension of our model to account for spikes in the spot price and investigate how this affects the hedging results.  4. 1.  Data and ﬁtted model.  We test the empirical performance of the model-based loss-minimising hedges using spot-prices, forward-prices and consumption-load data from the price area DK1 of the Danish power market. 5 The price and load data are recorded with an hourly observation frequency during the period 1 January 2012 to 31 December 2014 and it is shown in Fig.  2.  The spot price (top panel) is measured in EUR/MWh (euros per megawatt hour) while the load data (bottom panel) is measured in MWh.  In addition to the publicly available consumption data in Fig.  2, we have access to a set of proprietary load data that has been made available to us from DONG Energy.  This data has been anonymized by scaling with the maximum load and it is shown in Fig.  2 in the Appendix.  We return to the data from DONG Energy in Section 4. 3.  We use market quotes of peak and base forwards with monthly expiries for the DK1 price area in addition to the spot-price and load data.  We initiate our hedge approximately two weeks prior to the expiry month of the forward contract and we have listed the corresponding forward prices in Table 1.  Remark 3.  The data from the Nordic power market contains quotes of base and peak forwards noted on the Nord-Pool system spot-price and certiﬁcate of difference forwards (CDF) for the different Nordic price areas, see Table 5 in the Appendix.  As the CDF forward for the DK1–system difference is quoted for a base version only, we are, in fact, subject to a basis risk that we do not hedge against.  However, since the basis affects peak-hours only with the DK1-system spotprice difference (typically an order of magnitude smaller than the actual price) and with the peak-position (typically half the size of the base-position), we chose to ignore the basis and perform our hedging experiment as if the peak-forward was noted on the DK1 spot price as well.  We ignore the same basis for the average-load hedge to be able to fairly compare the two strategies.  To achieve a better ﬁt for the seasonality functions, we separate weekends (including holidays) from weekdays (Monday to Friday) and ﬁt two periodic functions separately to each of the two data sets. 7 The combined seasonality functions ﬁtted to the load and spot price from the period 2012-01-01 to 2012-12-31 (Fig.  3) clearly capture a seasonal behaviour where the ﬁtted function for the load is particularly reminiscent of the original data.  We used ﬁve periods of 12, 24, 168 (one week), 4380 (half year) and 8760 (one year) hours for this purpose.  Notice that the axes’ scales of Fig.  3 are kept unchanged from Fig.  2 to highlight how the amplitude of ﬁtted periodic functions compare to the amplitude of unﬁtted data.  The residual processes (the de-seasonalised data shown in the middle panels of Fig.  5) are then ﬁtted to a bivariate Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process with resulting estimated parameters and standard errors recorded in Table 2.  We do a rough investigation of the goodness-of-ﬁt of our model before we continue with the hedging problem.  The histogram of deseasonalised spot-price data in Fig.  4 shows a decent ﬁt to the normal distribution (the marginal distribution of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process) while the load data shows a strong ﬁt.  Next, if we compare simulated paths from the bivariate Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process (left panels of Fig.  5) with the de-seasonalised data (middle panels of Fig.  5), we ﬁnd that the simulated processes are fairly reminiscent of the data we intend to model.  Obviously, our model can not generate any jump discontinuities – the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process and the periodic function are continuous functions – or jump-like extremes and thus the model fails to capture the jumps of the market data.  This is particularly evident when we look at the simulated spot-spice (ie.  the simulated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process added to the ﬁtted seasonality function, top right Fig.  5) compared to the original data (top Fig.  2), while it is not as evident for the load.  However, as our ultimate objective is to ﬁnd an eﬃcient hedging strategy and not to ﬁnd the best ﬁtting time-series model, we are continue with our model while aware of some of its shortcomings. 8 If we look at the sample autocorrelation functions of the deseasonalised data and compare to the correlation function e−jD of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process, we ﬁnd a mediocre match (left panel of Fig.  6).  However, notice that the sample autocorrelation of the spot and load (middle panel of Fig.  6) are quite similar to the sample autocorrelation functions of the simulated processes (right panel of Fig.  6).  This is due to fact that the temporal dependency is partly captured by the seasonality functions.  Remark 4.  When we derived an expression for the expected positive loss under the seasonal Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model (Section 3. 2), we obtained a simpler, closed-form expression in the case when there is no cross-correlation between the de-seasonalised processes.  We then compared to the dependent case with an example, and found that the two loss functions where close (in particular, their minimum was obtained at the same argument).  An explanation for this is that the cross dependency is partly captured by the seasonality functions, partly by the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process (just as for the temporal dependency).  Indeed.  for the 2012 data, the empirical cross-correlation is 0. 37 of the de-seasonalised price and load, and 0. 93 of the respective seasonality functions.  This means that we might hedge well enough with the closed-form expression of the uncorrelated model speciﬁcation, since much of the cross dependency is still captured by the seasonality functions.  4. 2.  Empirical hedging experiment.  We set up an out-of-sample empirical experiment for the DK1 market to hedge 24 ﬁxed-price agreements with monthly expires during 2013 and 2014.  At initiation time t0, set to be approx 15 days prior to the ﬁrst day of the expiry month, we enter a ﬁxed price agreement with reference load according to the consumption data presented in previous section and a ﬁxed price with zero margin according to the corresponding t0 market forward price of Table 1.  To hedge the contract, we enter forwards (on the same expiry month) with hedge positions decided from either the minimum expected loss functions (the model hedge strategies) or from the benchmark average-load strategy which takes the average load of the contract month as the forward position.  If the spot and load are uncorrelated, hedging at the expected load gives the minimal variance position — a deﬁning property of expectation.  Thus, it is a robust approach commonly used by the industry, but it does still leave the expected load to be speciﬁed by the user.  A range of proprietary models are used by practitioners to estimate the expected load, some of which are probably more accurate than our Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model.  In order not to stick our hands in a wasps’ nest, we simply use realised average loads from the actual contract months.  In effect, this also gives an upper bound on minimal-variance hedge performance.  For the experiment, we rescale the load data with the maximum load to improve stability of the numerical optimisation and to obtain a time-series that corresponds to the rescaled load data from DONG Energy.  This just means that our hedging positions (Vb, Vp) are expressed as percentages of the maximum load.  To begin with the January-13 contract, we employ six months of spot and rescaled load data up until t0, that is 2012-06-18 to 2012-12-17, to estimate the seasonal Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model in the ﬁrst step (parameters recorded in Table 6 in the Appendix).  We use three periods of 12, 24 and 168 h.  Including periods of a half/one year will improve the ﬁt within the estimation set, while extrapolation from long periods will impair the out-of-sample ﬁt, ie.  the prediction of the periodic function throughout the expiry month.  To demonstrate with the positive loss measure, we calculate the expected loss based on estimated parameters as a function of peakand base forward positions in the hedge portfolio (Fig.  7) and ﬁnd the argument (V b*,V p*)=(0. 