
The world has known for over a century an important economic
development.  Industrial developments, the increase in the number of
vehicles and domestic equipments have led to a signiﬁcant increase in
energy demand.  Energy is an essential basis for social and economic
development.  States must ensure adequate supply of energy for their
citizens while ensuring the sustainability of that supply.  Energy supply
is a permanent challenge for our societies, especially as the need for
states continues to increase.  Overall, the SMCs are facing rapid population growth coupled with relatively low incomes, as well as an accelerated pace of urbanization, added to signiﬁcant needs of socio-economic
development.  This is reﬂected in a growing demand for energy services
and associated infrastructure.  Indeed, in all SMCs, energy demand is
constantly increasing.  To meet their energy needs, the SMCs use about
95% of fossil fuels.  If the trend observed has continued for 30 years,
energy consumption could increase by 65% between 2000 and 2025
and be 97% would be satisﬁed by fossil energies in 2025.  Such a scenario
will have many consequences, such as: increased energy dependency
and insecurity, high energy bills (importing countries), reduced export
proﬁts (exporting countries), vulnerability of the production and
distribution system, high local air pollution and as well as climate
change.  In the same context, the question of ﬁnancing goes far beyond
that of mobilizing the ﬁnancial resources of international cooperation. 
The ﬁnancial development can provide efﬁcient ﬁnancial service for
foreign banking markets, and improve the access of both foreign and
domestic ﬁrms to ﬁnancial goods and services (Dasgupta Name, 2001;
Barth Name, 2004; Lee and Chang, 2008).  According to Karanﬁl (2008)
and (2009), the causality between economic growth and energy consumption is not justiﬁed just by a simple bivariate model.  He suggested
adding one of the ﬁnancial variables such as domestic credit to private
sector, stock market capitalization or liquid liabilities into the model. 
He also argued that interest rate and exchange rate can affect the energy
consumption through energy prices.  Furthermore, Fung (2009) study
found that an efﬁcient ﬁnancial system creates more products, and
the inputs for these products increase the demand for energy.  Thus,
ﬁnancial development is a factor which should be taken into account
in energy consumption.  (See Fig.  1. )
Sadorsky (2011) pointed three effective channels of ﬁnancial
development over energy consumption.  First, there is a direct effect. 
When the ﬁnancial development improves, consumers can borrow
easier and cheaper in order to buy durable goods which consume a lot
of energy.  Secondly, improved ﬁnancial development helps businesses
to access to ﬁnancial capital easily and less costly.  Additionally, stock
market development can also affect businesses by providing them
with additional funding source.  These ones can let businesses expand
(business effect).  Thirdly, the wealth effect: increased stock market
activity usually affects the conﬁdence of consumers and businesses by
creating wealth effect.  Increased economic conﬁdence may expand
the economy and promote energy demand.  The relationship between
ﬁnancial development and energy consumption has been discussed in
recent previous studies (Mielnik and Goldemberg, 2002; Sadorsky,
2011; Islam Name, 2013; Shahbaza Name, 2016).  The econometric
approach of empirical studies often is based on a linear dynamic panel
model (Sadorsky, 2010; Ozturk and Al-Mulali, 2015; Shahbaz Name,
2017), autoregressive distributed lag (ARDL) bounds (Fuinhas and
Marques, 2012; Shahbaza Name, 2016; Bekhet Name, 2017), a
cointegration model (Islam Name, 2013; Mahalik Name, 2017), or Granger
causality (Dan and Lijun, 2009; Furuoka, 2015).  Energy is seen as the indispensable tool for sustainable development.  In these circumstances,
determining the causal link between energy consumption, ﬁnancial
development and economic growth is of particular importance to
researchers and decision-makers.  Indeed, it allows deducing the implications of adequate energy, economic and ﬁnancial policies to achieve
the objective of economic development.  To the best of our knowledge,
there has never been an attempt to investigate the short and long run
causality among economic growth, energy consumption and ﬁnancial
development for SMCs.  There are few studies available in the existing
literature investigating the causal relationship between economic
growth, energy consumption and ﬁnancial development (Alam Name,
2015; Mahalik Name, 2017; Bekhet Name, 2017).  According to the conclusion derived from these studies, the previous literature that focuses on
the cointegration and causal relationship between growth, energy and
ﬁnancial development is not conclusive to provide policy recommendation that can be applied across countries.  This paper therefore aims at
fulﬁlling this gap and contributing to empirical literature.  The purpose
of this study is to investigate the relationship between economic
growth, energy consumption and ﬁnancial development in the 6 SMCs
for the period 1995–2015 using multi-steps methodology: Stationary,
Co-integration tests, autoregressive distributed lag (hereafter ARDL)
and vector error correction model (hereafter VECM).  The ARDL bounds
testing approach investigates short run as well as long run parameter
instantaneously. 
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 provides a literature review on ﬁnancial development, energy consumption and
economic growth.  Section 3 describes empirical methodology for this
study. 