 1.  Introduction Studies have shown that gold extraction and processing can signiﬁcantly degrade natural environments (including soil and sediments, water, and air quality) and, with that, human health and livelihoods (Hilson, 2000.  Akpalu and Parks, 2007.  Obiri, 2007.  Leder et al. , 2012.  Saldarriaga-Isaza et al. , 2013.  Ako et al. , 2014.  Ansa-Asare et al. , 2015).  The pollution mainly occurs during gold extraction and processing, which includes carbon-in-leach, heap leaching with cyanide, biological oxidation and roasting (Hilson, 2002.  Leder et al. , 2012).  However, the existing laws in developing countries fail to effectively regulate the gold mining industries leading to excessive environmental degradation (Hilson, 2000).  Thus, in gold-rich countries in Africa, gold miners, both large- and small-scale, routinely discharge toxic chemicals such as mercury (typically used by small scale miners), cyanide and arsenic and their harmful compounds into water bodies, exposing workers and residents to a range of health risks including lower respiratory tract infections, cardiovascular diseases (Franchini and Mannucci, 2007, 2009, and Franchini and Mannucci, 2012.  Mergler et al. , 2007.  Banchirigah, 2008.  Obiri et al. , 2010), skin infections, and cancerous infections (Amegbey and Adimado, 2003.  Adei et al. , 2011.  Obiri et al. , 2010). 1 A recent review of arsenic concentration in surface and underground water, for example, found mining as a major cause of high concentration of the hazardous substance in several African countries (Ahoulé et al. , 2015).  Some of the environmental and human damage can be irreversible (see e. g. , Naicker et al. , 2003.  Stephens and Ahern, 2001).  In Ghana, for example, several studies have documented heaped waste materials at mining sites, which have resulted in the release of toxic chemicals into the environment (see e. g. , Akabzaa et al. , 2005.  Essumang et al. , 2007.  Yidana et al. , 2007.  and Armah et al. , 2010).  The Council on Ethics of the Norwegian ‘Government Pension Fund Global’ carried out a detailed survey on mining pollution at the oldest gold mining town (Obuasi) and found evidence of severe environmental and health damage due to high level of concentration of arsenic, cyanide and heavy metals (e. g.  cadmium, manganese, lead and copper) in water bodies (Leder et al. , 2012).  An earlier study also cited eight cases of cyanide spillage within a decade and a half (Amegbey and Adimado, 2003), which prompted the Ghana's Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to remark that the nation is likely to experience water stress in less than a decade (Banchirigah, 2008).  In addition to water pollution, the use of heavy machinery in extracting the ore, coupled with the surface mining techniques commonly employed by miners in developing countries, generates substantial dust which can cause or exacerbate respiratory disorders (Ayine, 2001.  ILO, 2005.  Kumah, 2006).  Yet, such damages are rarely internalized by the miners.  It has been argued that the strong desire to earn foreign exchange from mineral extraction has weakened the resolve of resource-rich African states to pass, or enforce, mining-related environmental regulations (McMahon, 2011).  In Ghana, although mining companies have generally improved their environmental reporting in recent times, the ecosystem and health damage persist over the long-term (Leder et al. , 2012).  Moreover, the pollution generated by small scale miners continues to escalate (Leder et al. , 2012).  Although a number of studies have been undertaken on the health impact of gold extraction (see, e. g. , Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2013.  and Currie et al. , 2014), there is little research quantifying the welfare impact of mining externalities, especially in Africa.  To help ﬁll that gap, this study presents a simple hedonic-type model that links private healthcare costs (both preventive and curative) to exposure to gold mining-related pollution, and empirically veriﬁes the model using data from Ghana.  Our results support the hypothesis that, all else being equal, healthcare expenditure is higher the closer the household is to a tailing site or the mine.  Furthermore, using anecdotal evidence about the relationship between distance to the tailing site and concentration of nitrogen dioxide (NO2), which is considered a surrogate for other toxic substances released during mining activities (WHO, 2006), we are able to directly link pollution concentration to residents' willingness to accept (WTA) compensation due to the mining pollution.  Other statistically signiﬁcant covariates of the healthcare expenditure model include household income and age of the household head, both of which positively impact the dependent variable.  and subjective health status and the variable ‘health insurance paying a greater portion of healthcare bills’, both of which had a negative impact.  2.  An Overview of Gold Extraction and Extraction Externalities inGhana has produced and exported gold since the ﬁfteenth century (Akabzaa and Darimani, 2001).  Before the nation's independence, gold mining was controlled and restricted to proﬁt the European companies.  After independence, however, increasing government involvement reduced foreign control of the sector.  Over time, the mining infrastructure suffered neglect and the mines were operated inefﬁciently leading to decline in proﬁts in the late 1960s through the dawn of the 1980s (Akabzaa and Darimani, 2001).  A national decision was made in the early 1980s to attract substantial injections of international capital (primarily European and more recently North American) into the sector.  To make the mining sector more attractive to foreign investment, Ghana's Minerals and Mining Law was passed in 1986, offering generous capital allowances and concessions such as delayed or reduced income taxes.  The speciﬁc ﬁscal incentives granted include a signiﬁcant reduction in corporate tax rate, permission to write off three-fourth of capital investment against taxes in the ﬁrst year and one-half for subsequent years, a reduction in royalty rate from 6 to 3%, and the scrapping of all other duties and taxes (Akabzaa and Darimani, 2001.  Aryee, 2014).  The government also permitted companies to use offshore bank accounts for the servicing of loans, dividend payments, and expatriate staff remuneration.  Furthermore, the mining companies could retain between 25 and 45% of gross foreign exchange earnings from minerals sales in company accounts.  In response to these incentives, and with rising gold prices, between 1985 and 1990 alone eleven new mining companies became active in the sector, with foreign participation representing an investment total of US$541 million.  Overall production gradually recovered and by 1992 Ghana's gold production had surpassed 1 million ﬁne ounces (i. e. , 31,103 kg), signiﬁcantly up from 327,000 in 1987.  Output continued to rise, reaching 3. 2 million ﬁne ounces in 2013.  This output expansion, signiﬁcantly, came on the heels of continued investment in the sector, which total approximately US$6. 9 billion between 2000 and 2011.  There is little denying that the macroeconomic gains made by Ghana's mining sector since 1986 have beneﬁted the economy in terms of exports (see e. g. , Akabzaa, 2009.  Gough and Yankson, 2012).  It is however argued that mining activity made only a marginal contribution to GDP.  generate limited job opportunities, especially for the individuals in mining communities.  took away farmlands and thereby worsening the livelihoods of individuals within the mining communities (Anyemedu, 1992.  Essumang et al. , 2007.  Armah et al. , 2012.  Boateng et al. , 2012.  Hilson and Garforth, 2012.  Ferring et al. , 2016).  Throughout Ghana, there is sufﬁcient evidence of serious environmental and health damages due to gold mining activities (Ahmad and Carboo, 2000.  Hilson and Nyame, 2006.  Leder et al. , 2012.  Mensah et al. , 2015).  Decades of laissez-faire and even reckless mining, tolerated by a lax regulatory regime focused more on output than on health, have resulted in increased concentrations of heavy metals and other pollutants in numerous water bodies and soils (Bempah et al. , 2013.  Boateng et al. , 2012.  Antwi-Agyei et al. , 2009.  Armah et al. , 2012).  This has been accompanied by massive deforestation, the forced relocation of entire communities due to mining activities, and the associated outright destruction of a wide range of cultural resources (Hilson, 2004.  Britwum et al. , 2001).  Several reports have been made, both ofﬁcially and anecdotally, of instances of cyanide mismanagement in gold mining areas, resulting in the widespread contamination of freshwater sources, ﬁsh populations, and the crops on which many individuals within the mining communities depend for their survival.  According to Amegbey and Adimado (2003), between 1989 and 2003 there were 11 ofﬁcially reported cyanide spillages in Tarkwa and Obuasi, located in the Western and Ashanti Regions, respectively.  Most of these occurred with catastrophic consequences (Akabzaa, 2000).  Elevated concentrations of heavy metals in various media such as soils, streams (including sediments), food crops (e. g. , cassava and plantain), ﬁsh (e. g. , mudﬁsh), plants (e. g. , water ferns and elephant grass) and humans have been reported.  <Middle> The Basic Theoretical Model.  The theoretical model employed in the study is an extension of the work of Chang and Trivedi (2003).  Their model formalizes self-medication, which is a risky investment, by assuming that a rational utilitymaximizing agent balances the beneﬁts and costs associated with selfmedication.  Like Chang and Trivedi (2003), we assume that a rational agent maximizes an expected utility function that depends on health status (h) and consumption of a composite good (x), subject to a budget constraint.  Let the utility function be deﬁned as this  with ux N0, uh N0, uxh=uhxN0 and uxx,uhhb0.  Chang and Trivedi (2003) assume that improvement in health status results from either professional care, which is relatively risk-free, or self-medication, which is risky. 3 In this study, we assume that health status depends on investment in health (M), which is a derived demand.  Because of a number of exogenous environmental factors, the returns to such an investment are partly deterministic and partly stochastic.  The stochastic component is assumed to have a one-sided distribution.  Several factors could account for the uncertain health outcome, including misdiagnosis and reinfection resulting from repeated exposure to the emission of dangerous gases from the mines or leakage of heavy metals to water that is later used domestically.  As noted earlier, enormous amounts of inorganic mercury and high concentrations of arsenic are present in areas close to gold mines (see, e. g. , Smedley, 1996.  andTelmer and Veiga, 2009).  The health status can therefore be deﬁned as this where h0 is the initial or “endowed” health status (long-term health), and r − ε is the return to healthcare investment, r being the deterministic marginal return to the investment in health, and ε being the stochastic marginal return.  Suppose the price of the composite good x is normalized to one.  Then the agent's budget constraint is this.  Following Chang and Trivedi (2003), let the utility function be additive and separable in x and h, so that.  Let μ=E(r−ε) be the expected returns on healthcare investment and σ2=E(r−ε−μ)2 be the variance of (r−ε).  The mean-variance formulation of Eq.  (7) is this.  Maximizing Eq.  (8) with respect to the choice variable (that is, M) yields the following ﬁrst-order condition.  Eq.  (9) stipulates that, in equilibrium, the marginal health beneﬁt from an increased investment in health—that is, (ρ−ho−μM). μ−σ2M—must balance the marginal utility cost of the investment, which is uM(B−M).  It can easily be shown that Mdecreases in ho and σ2, but increases in B and μ.  Thus, dM N 0.  The implications are that individuals with better long-term health status will make fewer investments in improving their health.  and secondly, that high variance of the returns to health is likely to discourage healthcare spending.  On the other hand, richer individuals will spend more on their healthcare, and higher returns on healthcare expenditure are likely to stimulate healthcare spending.  Finally, let the stochastic component of the health outcome depend on exposure to mining externalities, such as cyanide spillage, as well as a vector of individual characteristics (A).  The assumption follows Johansson's (1994) postulation that the impact of pollution on an individual's health status cannot be predicted with certainty.  As a result, μ=μ(z. A) and σ=σ(z. A), where z is a vector of mining externalities (for example, nearness to the mining site, which is a proxy for exposure to pollution, or noise pollution from blasting, etc. ).  It is hypothesized that increased pollution decreases the expected returns to health expenditure, but the variance in pollution increases (i. e. , μz b0 and2 N0) so that dM b0 .  We can then specify the general form of healthcare investment equation as.  Eq.  (10) is a hedonic-type equation, in which the economic cost of healthcare (both preventive and curative) depends on the level of environmental hazard to which an individual is exposed (z), after controlling for other social, economic, and biophysical characteristics.  4.  Methodology.  4. 1.  Primary Data Type and Source.  The data for the empirical analysis were collected through cluster sampling of 558 households in the Obuasi Municipality of the Ashanti Region of Ghana between May and July 2014. 