
Business risks stemming from a firm's business model and operating environment are important determinants of its cost of
equity capital (Modigliani and Miller, 1958).  One characteristic that regulators, researchers, and practitioners view as important in
assessing the risks inherent in a firm's current and future cash flows is the concentration of the firm's customer base.  For instance,
Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No.  131 (previously SFAS No.  14) requires firms to disclose information about
major customers because these customers represent “a significant concentration of risk. ” The SEC under Regulation S-K Item 101
also has similar disclosure requirements.  Further, anecdotal evidence suggests that firms explicitly recognize this risk. 4 While
approximately 45% of public firms report relying on at least one customer for a sizeable portion of revenues (Ellis Name, 2012),
there is surprisingly little empirical evidence on whether customer concentration risk affects firms’ financing costs.  In this study,
we aim to fill this gap by investigating the relation between the concentration of a supplier’s customer base and its cost of equity. 
Depending on a major customer for a large portion of sales can be risky for a supplier for two primary reasons. 5 First, a
supplier faces the risk of losing substantial future sales if a major customer becomes financially distressed or declares bankruptcy,
switches to a different supplier, or decides to develop products internally.  Consistent with this notion, Hertzel Name (2008) and
Kolay Name (2015) document negative supplier abnormal stock returns to the announcement that a major customer declares
bankruptcy. 6,7 Further, a customer's weak financial condition or actions could signal inherent problems about the supplier’s
viability to its remaining customers and lead to compounding losses in sales.  Second, a supplier faces the risk of losing
anticipated cash flows from being unable to collect outstanding receivables if the customer goes bankrupt. 8 This assertion is
consistent with the finding that suppliers offering customers more trade credit experience larger negative abnormal stock
returns around the announcement of a customer filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy (Jorion and Zhang, 2009; Kolay Name, 2015). 
While the above evidence suggests that a concentrated customer base can increase a supplier’s risk, whether this risk is
priced into a supplier’s cost of equity is unclear and thus an empirical question. 