
We examine acquisition outcomes when the same auditor audits the financial statements of both a bidder and a target
firm prior to an acquisition.  We hypothesize that shared auditors facilitate the flow of information between bidders and
targets, and that the benefits of such mitigated information asymmetry accrue primarily to the acquiring firm. 
External auditors have unique access to senior executives, participate in audit committee meetings, and have access to
board meeting minutes and general information about a firm in the conduct of their audits.  This access to senior executives
combined with information gathered during an audit provides auditors with an opportunity to discuss strategic initiatives
with their clients including, among others, the acquisition or disposition of assets.  Communication about such initiatives
may be in the form of “soft talk”.  Because auditors contract with a variety of companies, auditors have the potential to
become information intermediaries between prospective targets and acquirers, whether intentional or otherwise.  As shared
auditors are incentivized to align with the interests of larger clients, we anticipate a potential bias in favor of acquisitive
clients over target clients.  Hence, bidders that share an audit firm with a potential target could have an information
advantage relative to others in the process of bidding, and we anticipate that this advantage will manifest itself in an
increased likelihood of submitting a bid for a target. 
The impact of shared auditors likely extends beyond the point of bidding and target selection.  If shared-auditor bidders
have an informational advantage relative to competing bidders, bidders with shared auditors can leverage this advantage
into a better bargaining position with the target.  As other bidders have less information, they have less incentive to bid, thus
reducing bid competition.  With lower bid competition, an acquirer with a shared auditor has the opportunity to negotiate a
more favorable price for the target firm, thus reducing premiums paid. 
The opportunity for a shared auditor to become an information intermediary is likely increased if an acquirer and target
contract with the same auditor office.  This is due to a higher likelihood of overlap of audit personnel on client engagement
teams and increased informal contact between audit teams of the target and acquirer, i. e. , “water cooler” talk among
auditors in the same practice office.  Therefore, we expect the shared auditor effect on deal outcomes to be more pronounced
if the bidder and acquirer contract with the same auditor practice office. 
We anticipate that shared auditors may favor acquisitive clients over targets for at least two reasons.  First, an auditor's
long-term incentives (even within an auditor's practice office) are more closely aligned with those of their acquisitive
clients.  Our intuition follows that applied to shared investment bank advisors who are more likely to favor acquiring firms
when representing both a target and an acquirer in the same deal (Agrawal Name, 2013).  As audit firms and their practice
offices have an incentive to foster and maintain ongoing relationships with larger, more acquisitive clients, we anticipate
shared information at the auditor office level will benefit acquirers more so than targets.  Second, with a shared auditor,
target auditors may be more forthcoming in the due diligence process, as target auditors may be more willing to disclose
information to co-workers rather than auditors from another audit firm, especially when the information is concentrated
within an auditor's practice.  We hence anticipate that bidders that share auditor offices with their targets will gain superior
acquisition-related information about their targets and experience lower bid competition for those targets.  Both effects
would yield favorable transaction outcomes for acquirers. 
As sharing confidential information about target clients with acquirer clients appears to be a violation of conflict of
interest rules, we expect that higher (lower) quality auditors would be less (more) likely to act as information intermediaries
in merger and acquisition deals.  Further, as the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX) strengthened auditor independence rules
and increased awareness of auditor independence concerns, we expect the shared-auditor effect on M&A deals to be
stronger prior to SOX. 
Using data on public transactions from 1985 to 2010, we examine the impact of shared auditors on the outcomes of all
acquisitions and the subset of acquisitions between targets and acquirers who are audited by Big-N audit firms.  We find that
over this period approximately 26% of all acquisitions among clients of Big-N audit firms have a shared auditor.  The
substantial percentage of deals with shared auditors suggests that auditors facilitate acquisitions among client firms.  We
also find that deals with shared auditors have fewer bidders relative to deals without, consistent with increased bargaining
power for acquirers with shared auditors. 
We further find that premiums paid by acquirers in shared-auditor deals are nearly 4. 2% lower than deals in which the
target and acquirer have different auditors.  This finding is economically significant as it represents a reduction of 9. 2% in the
average premium of 45. 8%, or an average discount of $36 million U. S.  dollars in the purchase price. 1 We also find that
average announcement day returns are 1. 80% lower for targets and 0. 70% higher for acquirers in deals with shared auditors. 
We find that this shared-auditor effect on premiums, target returns, and deal completion rates is driven by deals with
shared-auditor offices as the shared-auditor effect increases nearly twofold (as compared to magnitudes noted above) if the
target and the acquirer are audited by the same auditor practice office. 2 This result is consistent with our expectation as the
opportunity to transfer information in violation of conflict of interest rules is stronger within an auditor's practice office,
likely due to the higher probability of auditor personnel overlap and opportunity for “water cooler” talk.  These results are
robust to controls for geographic distance between the target and acquirer, for the involvement of shared directors or of
shared advisors, as well as for other control variables that prior studies have shown to influence acquisition outcomes (Uysal
Name, 2008; Agrawal Name, 2013; Cai and Sevilir, 2012).  These results are also robust to concerns of endogeneity arising from
the potential endogenous choice of an auditor by the target and acquirer. 
We next examine whether this shared-auditor effect is less pronounced for auditors that are anticipated to be of higher
quality.  We measure auditor quality with two proxies following prior literature (see DeFond and Zhang, 2014, for an
extensive review).  First, we start with the size of the target.  We expect auditors would be more likely to cater to larger target
clients in the transaction process relative to smaller target clients as prior research has shown that auditors provide lower
audit quality to smaller clients (Reynolds and Francis, 2000).  Correspondingly, we anticipate shared auditors will be less
likely to favor an acquirer of a large target relative to a small target as large target managers are more likely to take
prominent roles at the acquirer following the acquisition.  Therefore, we expect the shared auditor effect to be less
pronounced for acquisitions of larger targets.  Second, as prior literature suggests longer tenured auditors provide higher
quality audits (e. g.  Myers Name, 2003), we anticipate longer tenured auditors will be less likely to favor acquirers at the
expense of target shareholders. 
We find the shared-auditor effect on deal outcomes is concentrated in deals with smaller targets consistent with shared
auditors being less willing to cater to acquirers of larger targets.  We also find that longer tenured auditors appear less likely
to cater to acquirers at the expense of target shareholders.  Again, these results are robust to controls for geographic
proximity, the presence of shared directors, and the presence of shared advisors.  Lastly, we find that the shared-auditor
effect is stronger in the pre-SOX period relative to the post-SOX period.  However, subsequent to SOX, deals with shared
auditor's offices still reduce deal premiums and target announcement returns in the subsample of deals within the Big-N. 
We interpret these findings to suggest that the impact of shared auditors (offices) on transaction outcomes is reduced, but
not eliminated, with the passage of SOX. 