 1.  Introduction  The information contained in earnings announcements plays an important role in the determination of stock prices.   Despite its importance, numerous studies show that stock prices do not immediately and fully incorporate all of the information in earnings announcements and that various accounting-based measures and ﬁnancial statement components have  the ability to predict future stock prices.  Among the reasons offered for these apparent ineﬃciencies are limits on investor  attention, which lead investors to focus on subsets of information, and investors’ inability to fully understand the complexities of the information contained in earnings reports (e. g. , Bartov et al. , 20 0 0 .  Hirshleifer et al. , 2011 .  Doyle et al. , 2006 .   DellaVigna and Pollet, 2009 .  You and Zhang, 2009 ).   Prior research has shown that bond prices, like stock prices, react to earnings news.   This literature, though, does not examine whether corporate bonds incorporate earnings news more eﬃciently than stocks.  The reason why they might is that  the bond market is more heavily dominated by sophisticated investors than is the stock market ( Bessembinder et al. , 2009 .   De Franco et al. , 2009 .  Ronen and Zhou, 2013 ).  These investors have greater resources at their disposal to analyze earnings  reports and are arguably less constrained than are individual investors by either limited attention or diﬃculties in interpreting the information in earnings announcements.  This is supported by Bartov et al.  (20 0 0) and Doyle et al.  (2006) who  show that greater sophisticated investor presence enhances the ability of share prices to quickly incorporate the information  contained in earnings announcements and to mitigate the post-earnings announcement drift.  Consistent with this, Campbell  et al.  (2009) show that institutions trade aggressively to exploit the post-earnings announcement drift.  These results suggest  that if sophisticated investors are more dominant in the bond market than in the stock market, then earnings news would  be incorporated more quickly into bond prices than into stock prices.  Consequently, the bond price reaction to earnings  announcements would, similar to a number of accounting-based measures, have predictive power for future stock returns.   Counterbalancing this is the fact that bonds are typically less liquid and less actively traded than stocks.   Lower levels of liquidity could lead to an increase in the cost of trading and a reduction in the speed with which sophisticated bond  investors trade to their new positions, reducing the relative eﬃciency of the bond market.  For the equity market, the link  between liquidity and the speed of price adjustment has been well documented.  For example, Chordia et al.  (2008) show  that return predictability diminishes in the presence of greater liquidity, while Bhushan (1994) ﬁnds liquidity to be inversely  related to the magnitude of the post-earnings announcement drift.  Evidence for a link between liquidity and bond market  eﬃciency is reported in Ronen and Zhou (2013) .  If lower levels of liquidity in the bond market impede the eﬃciency of  bonds prices, then the ability of bond returns to predict post-announcement stock returns may be restricted to ﬁrms whose  bonds are more liquid.  Testing whether, and under what circumstances, the bond price reaction to earnings announcements  has predictive power for future stock returns is the central focus of this study.   For my tests I use the TRACE database to calculate raw and abnormal bond returns around 19,518 quarterly earnings  announcements of 770 unique ﬁrms between the years 2005 and 2014.  As a ﬁrst step in my analysis I partition ﬁrms each  quarter into deciles according to the bond price reaction to that quarter’s earnings announcement.  For a ﬁrm with multiple  bonds, the ﬁrm’s bond price reaction is the value-weighted average of the ﬁrm’s individual bond returns.  For each decile I  then calculate the average buy-and-hold abnormal stock return over the 60 days subsequent to an earnings announcement.   For the decile with the highest raw (abnormal) bond price reactions, the average buy-and-hold abnormal stock return is 1. 07  (1. 11) percent.  This compares to −1. 70 (−0. 96) percent for the lowest decile.  The difference of 2. 77 (2. 08) percentage points  is signiﬁcantly positive and provides preliminary evidence that the reaction of a ﬁrm’s bonds to its earnings announcements  has predictive power for the ﬁrm’s post-announcement stock return.   Next,  I  test  whether  bonds’  predictive  ability  is  stronger  in  bonds  of  non-investment  grade  ﬁrms  than  for  those  of  investment-grade ﬁrms.  I conjecture that this will be true because bonds of investment-grade ﬁrms are in little danger  of default, and so earnings news is unlikely to have much of an effect on their prices.  In contrast, the prices of bonds of  non-investment grade ﬁrms, which are riskier, should be more sensitive to earnings information.  This is consistent with  existing empirical evidence that the price sensitivity to ﬁrm-speciﬁc information is greater for non-investment grade bonds  than for investment-grade bonds (e. g. , Easton et al. , 2009 and Defond and Zhang, 2014 ).   Applying  the  same  univariate  analysis  above,  I  ﬁnd  that  the  difference  between  the  average  buy-and-hold  abnormal  stock returns of the highest and lowest raw (abnormal) bond return deciles of the bonds of non-investment grade ﬁrms is  a positive and signiﬁcant 7. 49 (6. 35) percentage points, while it is insigniﬁcant for the subsample of bonds of investmentgrade ﬁrms.  These results suggest that the ability of bond returns to predict stock prices comes exclusively from the bonds  of non-investment ﬁrms, consistent with my conjecture.  Moreover, these results also show that, within non-investment  grade ﬁrms, the predictive ability is driven mostly by bonds that have a negative price reaction to earnings announcements,  consistent with bond investors being more sensitive to downside risk.   I next test whether the ability of the bond price reaction to earnings announcements is incremental to that of unexpected  earnings and accruals.  To do so, I ﬁrst sort my sample into quintiles according to standardized unexpected earnings ( SUE)  every quarter.  Within each of these quintiles, I again sort into quintiles based on the bond price reaction.  I ﬁnd that for  the lowest SUE quintile the difference between the 60-day average buy-and-hold abnormal stock return of the highest and  lowest quintile of the raw (abnormal) bond price reaction is a signiﬁcant 2. 95 (2. 55) percentage points.  The difference is  a signiﬁcant 2. 64 (2. 01) percentage points for the highest SUE quintile.  These results provide evidence that the predictive  ability of the bond price reaction to earnings announcements for future stock prices is incremental to that of unexpected  earnings.   Separately analyzing the investment-grade and non-investment grade ﬁrm subsamples shows that bonds’ incremental  predictive ability over unexpected earnings is driven by the subsample of non-investment grade ﬁrms, consistent with the  prior univariate results.  Focusing on the subsample of non-investment grade ﬁrms, we see that in the lowest SUE quintile,  where we would expect negative future stock returns, the mean return is actually positive when the bond price reaction to  the earnings announcement is high.  Similarly, in the highest SUE quintile, where we would expect future stock returns to  be positive, the mean stock return is actually negative when the bond price reaction to the earnings announcement is low.   In these cases, the bond price reaction, not the SUE , predicts the sign of the future stock return.   Next, I repeat the previous analysis using accruals, rather than unexpected earnings, as the initial partitioning variable.   I ﬁnd that for the lowest Accruals quintile the difference between the 60-day average buy-and-hold abnormal stock return  of the highest and lowest quintile of the raw (abnormal) bond price reaction is a signiﬁcant 3. 30 (3. 76) percentage points.   The difference is a signiﬁcant 2. 19 (1. 71) percentage points for the highest Accruals quintile.  These results provide evidence  that the bond price reaction to earnings announcements has predictive ability for future stock prices incremental to that of  accruals.   Separately analyzing the investment-grade and non-investment grade ﬁrm subsamples shows that bonds’ predictive ability is again driven by the subsample of non-investment grade ﬁrms.  Focusing on the non-investment grade ﬁrms subsample,  we see that in the lowest Accruals quintile, where we would expect positive future stock returns, the mean return is actually  negative when the bond price reaction to the earnings announcement is low.  In this case, the bond price reaction, not the  level of accruals, predicts the sign of the future stock return.   Having established that bond returns around earnings announcements can predict future stock returns, I next examine  factors that affect the strength of their predictive ability.  Since my results thus far show that the predictive ability of bond  returns is concentrated in the non-investment grade ﬁrms, the remainder of my analysis focuses on this subsample.  I turn  ﬁrst to an examination of the effect of institutional share ownership on bonds’ predictive ability for post-announcement  stock returns.  This analysis is motivated by the conjecture that the greater level of investor sophistication in the bond market relative to the stock market is a driving force behind bonds’ ability to predict future stock returns.  Consistent with this  conjecture, I ﬁnd that the ability of bond returns at the time of earnings announcements to predict post-announcement  stock returns is stronger in ﬁrms with lower institutional share ownership.  This result is consistent with that of Bartov et al.   (20 0 0) and Doyle et al.  (2006) who ﬁnd that the level of investor sophistication, as proxied for by institutional stock ownership, is negatively correlated with the magnitude of the post-announcement drift and with that of Collins et al.  (2003) who  ﬁnd that the returns on an accrual-based hedge portfolio are signiﬁcantly smaller for ﬁrms with more sophisticated investors.   Next, I turn to bond liquidity.  If a lack of liquidity in the bond market negatively impacts bond price eﬃciency, then  the ability of bond returns to predict post-announcement stock returns should be stronger for ﬁrms whose bonds are more  liquid.  To test this, I split the non-investment grade ﬁrms subsample into two subsamples based on bond liquidity.  For  the subsample of bonds with above-average liquidity I ﬁnd evidence that bond returns can predict post-announcement  stock returns.  there is no evidence of predictive ability in the subsample of bonds with below-average liquidity.  This is  consistent with Ronen and Zhou (2013) who ﬁnd that institutional bond trading following earnings announcements is highly  concentrated in the more liquid bonds.   My study makes three main contributions.  First, to the best of my knowledge, this paper is the ﬁrst to provide evidence  that bond prices can predict post-announcement stock returns using information released in earnings announcements.  By  doing so, it complements existing research which shows that accounting information released in earnings announcements is  useful in predicting stock returns.  Second, and more importantly, my study provides a better understanding of when bond  prices have a greater ability to predict future stock returns.  Speciﬁcally, the paper shows that bonds’ predictive ability is  stronger in more liquid bonds.  Third, it is also the ﬁrst study to examine the impact that sophisticated stock traders have on  the relative eﬃciency of bond and stock prices, ﬁnding that the predictive ability of bonds is weaker for ﬁrms with greater  institutional shareholdings.  Previous work concentrated on investigating the relation between sophisticated traders in the  equity market and the eﬃciency of stock prices ( Bartov et al. , 20 0 0 .  Doyle et al. , 2006 ).   2.  Prior research on the lead-lag relation between stock and bond returns.  Several prior  studies  have examined  the  lead-lag relation  between stock  and  bond  returns.   An  early  study  by  Kwan  (1996) examines the correlation between weekly returns on individual stocks and the weekly yield changes of individual  bonds issued by the same ﬁrm, using a sample of 702 corporate bonds issued by 327 ﬁrms and a sample period of 1986– 1990.  He ﬁnds that lagged stock returns have explanatory power for current bond yield changes, but that lagged bond yield  changes are unrelated to current stock returns.  The study obtains bid yields from dealer quotes from Merrill Lynch.  These  quotes consist of weekly closing bid yields calculated from the bid prices of the last transaction quotes on each Friday  between January 1986 and December 1990 for a sample of corporate bonds quoted in Bloomberg.   Using a sample of about 1700 corporate bonds issued by approximately 430 ﬁrms and a sample period of 1973–1996,  Gebhardt et al.  (2005) show that stock returns over a six month period predict bond returns over the following six months.   For their study, they employ the Lehman Brothers Fixed Income database, where returns are calculated from month-end bid  prices of a single market maker, instead of from transaction prices.  They exclude non-investment grade bonds from their  sample because there is a lack of data on these bonds in the Lehman Brothers database before 1992.   Using the TRACE database, Downing et al.  (2009) analyze hourly and daily bond returns.  They focus on 30 0 0 bonds  issued by 439 ﬁrms and their associated stocks for a relatively short sample period beginning in October 2004 and ending  in December 2005.  They ﬁnd evidence that hourly stock returns lead bond returns for non-convertible junk and BBB-rated  bonds, and that stock returns lead bond returns for convertible bonds in all rating classes.   In  a  more  recent  study  that  also  uses  the  TRACE  database  and  covers  the  seven-year  period  from  2002  to  2008,  Bittlingmayer and Moser (2014) test whether bond prices lead stock prices.  Employing a sample of 1167 corporate bonds  issued by 442 ﬁrms, they ﬁnd evidence of bond prices leading stock prices (speciﬁcally, they ﬁnd that a decline of 10% in a  ﬁrm’s bond prices over a three month period is associated with a subsequent decline of 3% –6% in its stock price).  Further,  they show that this effect is stronger among lower rated bo nds and for bonds with greater trading volume.   None of these papers examine the relation between bond and stock prices at the time of earnings announcements, when  there is evidence of an increase in the level of bond trading and liquidity, especially among large investors (see Easton et al. ,  2009 .  Ronen and Zhou, 2013 , and Table 1 in the following section).  One paper that does focus on earnings announcements  is Hotchkiss and Ronen (2002) .  Employing a small sample of 34 high-yield bonds for 26 ﬁrms, and using prices recorded  on NASD’s Fixed Income Pricing System (FIPS) for the year 1995, they ﬁnd that corporate news are quickly incorporated  into both bond and stock prices.  However, their small sample size and short sample period make it diﬃcult to draw ﬁrm  conclusions from their ﬁndings.  Another paper that focuses on earnings announcements is Ronen and Zhou (2013) .  Using a  small sample of 66 ﬁrms, they identify factors that affect the speed with which bond and stock prices react to the news in  earnings during the minutes and hours (up to ten hours) after an earnings announcement.  While these papers do focus on  earnings announcements, they do not examine whether, and under what circumstances, the bond price reaction to earnings  announcements has predictive ability for future stock returns, which is the central question addressed in this paper.   <Middle> Sample selection, variable deﬁnitions, and descriptive statistics.  My initial sample consists of all quarterly earnings announcements contained in the CRSP-Compustat quarterly ﬁle for  ﬁrms  with  at  least  one  traded  bond  available in  the  TRACE  database  of  corporate  bond  trades.   I  use  the  Mergent  Fixed  Income Securities ( FISD ) database to obtain bond-speciﬁc information (including bond issue size, issue date, bond features,  bond ratings, coupon rate, and frequency of payment).  My sample spans the period January 2005 through December 2014.  I  choose January 2005 as the beginning of my sample period because this is when TRACE extended its coverage from a small  subset of bonds to 99% of the U. S.  corporate bond market.   I exclude observations for which the earnings announcement date recorded in I/B/E/S differs by more than ﬁve trading  days from the date recorded in Compustat .  If the dates differ by between one and ﬁve trading days, then the earlier of  the two is used as the earnings announcement date for my analysis (e. g. , DellaVigna and Pollet, 2009 ).  If the precise time  of the earnings announcement is also available and is after trading hours, I advance the earnings announcement date by  one trading day.  Additionally, I exclude bonds denominated in foreign currency, convertible bonds, rule 144A issues, bonds  5 To establish the link between the Mergent FISD  that are privately placed, and bonds with less than one year to maturity.   6  My ﬁnal sample consists of 19,518  and Compustat databases I use the linking table employed in Kerr and Ozel (2015) .   ﬁrm-quarter observations for 770 unique bond issuers.   Table  1  provides  descriptive  statistics  on  bond  and  stock  trading  activity  on  earnings  announcement  days  and  nonearnings announcement days.  Consistent with the notion that bond trading is relatively infrequent, the mean (median) number of bond trades per day is 6. 57 (1. 00) on earnings announcement days and 5. 59 (1. 00) on non-earnings announcement  days.  While the economic magnitude of the difference in trading activity between earnings announcement and non-earnings  announcement days is relatively small, it is still statistically signiﬁcant for both the mean and median.  The mean daily trading volume for bonds and stocks on earnings announcement days is relatively similar ($8. 18 million for bonds and $7. 28  million for stocks).  However, since bond trades reported in TRACE are capped at $5 ($1) million for investment-grade (noninvestment grade) bonds, mean daily trading volume for bonds is actually likely to be signiﬁcantly higher than for stocks.   The distribution of daily bond trading volume is more positively skewed (the median daily volume is $320,0 0 0) than the  distribution of daily stock trading volume (the median daily volume is $2. 5 million).  The mean (median) daily dollar trading volume relative to the total dollar amount of bonds outstanding is 23 basis points (2 basis points) around earnings  announcements compared to 19 basis points (0 basis points) on non-earnings announcement days.  The corresponding numbers for stocks are much higher.  mean (median) daily dollar trading volume relative to the total dollar amount of shares  outstanding is 115 basis points (30 basis points) around earnings announcement days and 80 basis points (20 basis points)  on non-announcement days.  Again, the bond numbers are downwardly biased due to the capping of bond trades in TRACE .   To compute daily bond returns, I ﬁrst calculate daily prices for each traded bond.  In order to do so, I eliminate cancelled,  corrected, and commission trades, as well as special trades.  The top and bottom 1% of the remaining clean trade prices  TRACE database.  Following the recommendation of Bessembinder et al.  (2009) , I also exclude all trades whose values are  8 Bessembinder et al.  (2009) provide  less than $10 0,0 0 0 and weight each of the remaining bond trades by its dollar value.   evidence that this method minimizes the noise in computed bond prices.  I denote by P ijt  the computed price of bond issue j of ﬁrm i on date t .   Using the Mergent FISD database, accrued interest for bond issue j of ﬁrm i as of date t, AI ijt  , is computed as follows, where C ij is the coupon payment for bond issue j of ﬁrm i, D ijt  is the number of days between date t and the date of  the prior coupon payment, and freq ij  is the number of coupon payments per year for bond issue j of ﬁrm i .  The dates of  the coupon payments are determined by coupon frequency and by the date of the ﬁrst coupon payment (both reported in  Mergent FISD ).  The bond return for date t is then given by, where C ijt  is the coupon payment (if any) on date t .  In the case of a ﬁrm that has more than one traded bond, I aggregate  the individual bond returns at the ﬁrm-level by taking a value-weighted average over all of the ﬁrm’s bonds.   Treating each bond as a separate observation would have biased the sample toward larger ﬁrms with many bonds.  More importantly, with  bond returns for the same ﬁrm being correlated, it would have led to biased test statistics (e. g. , Bessembinder et al. , 2009 ).   The bond price reaction to the announcement of ﬁrm i ’s earnings for quarter q, Bond iq −1,1), is then calculated as the value(  weighted average of the cumulative returns of the ﬁrm’s bonds over the three-day announcement window of the earnings  for quarter q (days  −1, 0, and 1, where day 0 denotes the date of the earnings announcement).   In addition to computing the raw bond price reaction, I estimate the abnormal bond price reaction to the announce−1,1).  Estimating  ment of ﬁrm i ’s earnings for quarter q over the three-day announcement window, denoted by AR_Bond iq abnormal bond returns presents some unique challenges that do not arise when estimating abnormal stock returns.  First,  some ﬁrms have multiple bond issues, with differing maturities, special features (for example, whether they are puttable  and whether they have collateral), levels of liquidity, and in some instances even ratings.  Second, given that the maturity of  bonds is always decreasing, which implies that bond sensitivity to risk factors is constantly changing, it is hard to benchmark bond returns against a static return metric.  Third, infrequent trading in the bond market makes it problematic to  compute abnormal daily bond returns since it becomes diﬃcult to calculate either matched portfolio returns or expected  returns.  Due to these issues, I report results for both raw bond returns as well as abnormal bond returns.   I employ the most frequently used method to compute abnormal bond returns, which is the mean-adjusted model introduced by Handjinicolaou and Kalay (1984) .  Following Bessembinder et al.  (2009) , I ﬁrst compute the premium holding  period return for bond j of ﬁrm i for day t, PBR ij  (t) , minus the risk free  rate on that day (the return on a Treasury security with similar maturity).  The expected risk premium for bond j of ﬁrm i  and quarter q, EBR ijq  (t) over a 126 day window ending 15 days prior to the announcement  − 1, 0, 1}, of the quarter q earnings  of quarter q earnings.  The abnormal return for bond j of ﬁrm i for each day t, t  (t) , is equal to PBR ij  announcement window, AR_Bond ijq  .  The abnormal return for the bond over the three-day  −1,1) , is the sum of AR_Bond ijq  announcement window, AR_Bond ijq  (t) over the three days surrounding the announcement of quarter q earnings.   For my analysis, I convert Mergent’s FISD ratings from a letter grade to a numerical scale, ranging from 1 to 22 (where AAA   22).   Ratings  of  1  through  10  (AAA  through  BBB-)  are  classiﬁed as  investment-grade bonds and ratings of 11 through 22 are classiﬁed as non-investment grade bonds.  Of the 19,518 total  ﬁrm-quarter observations, 4969 (25. 45%), are from ﬁrms with non-investment grade bonds.  In the subsequent analysis, a  ﬁrm whose bonds’ unweighted average rating is 10 or below at the time of the announcement of earnings for quarter q  is referred to as an investment-grade ﬁrm, while a ﬁrm whose bonds’ average rating is above 10 is referred to as a noninvestment grade ﬁrm.   The buy-and-hold abnormal stock return for ﬁrm i over trading days 1 through n, Stock i, where R it  is the expected  return on day t for that ﬁrm.  To estimate expected stock returns, I use Carhart’s (1997) four-factor model.  Similar to Cohen  and Wang (2013) and Balakrishnan et al. , (2010) , I ﬁrst estimate the following regression using a 40 trading day period,  starting 55 trading days prior to the earnings announcement date.   is the daily return for ﬁrm i on day t , inclusive of dividends and other distributions, and, ER it  (1,n), is given by, where RF t is the one-month treasury bill return on day t, RMRF t is the day t excess return on a value-weighted aggregate  equity market proxy, SMB t is the day t return on a zero-investment factor mimicking portfolio for size, HML t is the day t  return on a zero-investment factor mimicking portfolio for book-to-market value of equity, and UMD t is the day t return on  a zero-investment factor mimicking portfolio for the momentum factor.  I then use the estimated slope coeﬃcients from  Eq.  (4) , to compute the expected return for ﬁrm i on day t as follows.  My analyses include two accounting variables that have been widely shown to have predictive power for post-earnings  announcement stock prices.  Both are available at the time of the ﬁrm’s earnings announcement.  The ﬁrst, SUE iq  (standardized unexpected earnings), is equal to the difference between ﬁrm i ’s earnings before extraordinary items for quarter q  − 4, normalized by the share price at the end of  ( Compustat item EPSPXQ ) and the corresponding earnings for quarter q  quarter q .  The second, Accruals iq , is the difference between ﬁrm i ’s net income before extraordinary items for quarter q  and its cash ﬂow from operations for that quarter, scaled by the average of the total assets at the beginning and end of  quarter q.    My analyses also include the buy-and-hold abnormal stock return of ﬁrm i over the three-day announcement window  −1,1).  The motivation for including this variable is the ﬁnding of Chan et al.  (1996) that  of the earnings of quarter q, Stock iq the stock price reaction to an earnings announcement has predictive power for future stock returns.  Including this variable  assures that the bond return’s predictive ability is not subsumed by that of the stock return over the earnings announcement  window.   My proxy for the level of sophisticated trading in a ﬁrm’s stock is the fraction of shares held by institutional investors  (e. g. , Bartov et al. , 20 0 0 , and Collins et al. , 20 03 ).  The fraction of institutional stock ownership in ﬁrm i ’s shares at the  time of the announcement of the earnings for quarter q , denoted by IS iq  , is deﬁned as the number of outstanding common  shares held by institutional investors at the end of quarter q divided by the number of common shares outstanding at  that time.  Thomson Financial Institutional Holdings is the source of data on institutional holdings.  Data on institutional share  ownership is available for 19,407 ﬁrm-quarter observations.  My measure for the level of bond liquidity for ﬁrm i in quarter  q, Bond_Liquidity iq  , is the bond’s average daily dollar trading volume relative to the total dollar amount of bonds outstanding,  calculated over the three-day window surrounding quarter q ’s earnings announcement.   Panel A of Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for all of the above variables.  For brevity, I focus only on the summary  statistics of the return variables.  As shown in the panel, the mean (median) value-weighted bond return over the three-day  earnings announcement window is 0. 12 (0. 07) percent.  The mean (median) value-weighted abnormal bond return over the  −0. 71 (0. 00) percent.  The negative average abnormal bond return may be due to the presence  same three-day window is  of outliers, as is suggested by the median average abnormal bond return, which is close to zero.  The standard deviations  of the raw and abnormal bond returns around earnings announcements, 0. 01 and 0. 04, respectively, are small relative to  the standard deviation of abnormal stock returns (0. 06).  This is not surprising, given that bond prices tend to respond less  to earnings announcements than do stock prices.  The mean (median) post-announcement abnormal stock return for the 60  days following an earnings announcement is 0. 18 (0. 29) percent.   Cross-variable Spearman correlations are presented in Table 2 , panel B.  Of particular note, the correlation between both a  ﬁrm’s announcement-window raw and abnormal bond returns and its buy-and-hold abnormal stock return during the postannouncement period is positive but insigniﬁcant.  In untabulated results, I ﬁnd that both raw and abnormal bond returns  are signiﬁcantly positively correlated with buy-and-hold abnormal stock returns during the post-announcement period for  the non-investment grade ﬁrms subsample, but not for the subsample of investment-grade ﬁrms.  These untabulated results  suggest that the earnings announcement bond price reaction for non-investment grade ﬁrms is better able to predict postannouncement stock returns than is the bond price reaction for investment-grade ﬁrms.  (This is explored further in Section  4 ).  The signiﬁcantly positive correlation between standardized unexpected earnings and post-announcement abnormal stock  returns reported in the table is consistent with stock prices underreacting to earnings surprises.  The signiﬁcantly negative  correlation between the accruals variable and post-announcement abnormal stock returns during the post-announcement  period is consistent with the documented underperformance (outperformance) of the shares of ﬁrms with a high (low)  level of accruals.   4.  The bond price reaction to earnings announcements as a predictor of post-announcement stock returns.  In  this  section,  I  test  whether  the  bond  price  reaction  to  earnings  announcements  has  predictive  ability  for  postannouncement stock returns.  I begin by partitioning each quarter’s observations into deciles according to the magnitude  of the earnings announcement window bond price reaction.  As mentioned previously, if a ﬁrm has more than one publicly  traded bond, I compute the bond reaction as the value-weighted average return of the individual bonds.  I then calculate  the average buy-and-hold abnormal stock return over the succeeding 60 days within each decile.  Table 3 , panel A presents  the results using both the raw and abnormal bond price reaction as the partitioning variables.  For the raw (abnormal) bond return partitions, the average abnormal stock return is 1. 07 (1. 11) percent for the highest decile and  percent for the lowest decile.  The difference between the average buy-and-hold abnormal stock returns for the highest  and lowest deciles of raw (abnormal) bond price reaction is a signiﬁcant 2. 77 (2. 08) percent.  These ﬁndings provide preliminary evidence that the reaction of a ﬁrm’s bonds to an earnings announcement has predictive power for the ﬁrm’s  post-announcement stock price.   I conjecture that the predictive ability of bond prices for post-announcement stock returns will be stronger for bonds  whose prices are more sensitive to ﬁrm-speciﬁc information.  To test this conjecture, I make use of the ﬁnding of Easton  et al.  (2009) and Defond and Zhang (2014) that price sensitivity to ﬁrm-speciﬁc information is greater for non-investment  grade bonds than for those that are investment grade.  Their result is consistent with earnings information having a greater  effect on the expected payoff of bonds with a higher probability of default.  To test this conjecture, I repeat the analysis  reported in panel A for the subsamples of investment-grade and non-investment grade ﬁrms.  As reported in panel B for the  subsample of investment-grade ﬁrms, I ﬁnd that the difference in the average buy-and-hold abnormal stock return between  the highest and lowest bond return deciles (either raw or abnormal) is insigniﬁcant.  In contrast, as reported in panel C for  the subsample of non-investment grade ﬁrms, I ﬁnd that the difference in the average buy-and-hold abnormal stock return  between the highest and lowest raw (abnormal) bond return deciles is a positive and signiﬁcant 7. 49 (6. 35) percentage  points.  This evidence is consistent with my conjecture that sensitivity to ﬁrm-speciﬁc information is a factor affecting the  ability of bond returns to predict future stock prices.  16 Panel C also reveals that bonds’ predictive ability is concentrated in the lowest three deciles and the top decile, which represent about 10% of my entire sample.  These results are consistent with Defond and Zhang (2014) who find that a timely bond market reaction to earnings announcements is only evident among non-investment grade bonds and in response to announcements of bad news, which is about 10% of their entire sample.  They are also consistent with Easton et al.  (2009) who show that the incidence of bond trading during the days surrounding earnings announcements is greater when earnings convey bad news and for bonds that are more risky.  In an untabulated analysis, I find that for the 1st–5th raw (abnormal) bond return percentiles the average abnormal stock return is a significant −2. 92 ( −4. 79) percent, while for the 6th–10th percentiles it is a significant −4. 79 ( −4. 71) per- cent.  Within the 91st–95th raw bond return percentiles the average abnormal stock return is insignificant.  For the 91st–95th abnormal bond return percentiles the average abnormal stock return is a significant 2. 77%.  For the 96th–100th raw (abnor- mal) bond return percentiles the average abnormal stock return is a significant 5. 63 (3. 41) percent.  These results show that the predictive power of bonds is not limited to the extreme observations within the top and bottom deciles.  I next test whether the ability of the bond price reaction to earnings announcements is incremental to that of unexpected earnings and accruals.  To do so, I first sort my sample into quintiles according to SUE every quarter.  Within each of these quintiles, I again sort into quintiles based on the bond price reaction.  Panels A, B and C of Table 4 present the results for the highest and lowest quintiles of SUE using the raw and abnormal bond price reaction for the full sample, the subsample of investment-grade firms, and the subsample of non-investment grade firms, respectively.  As shown in panel A, for the lowest SUE quintile the difference between the 60-day average buy-and-hold abnormal stock return of the highest and lowest quintile of the raw (abnormal) bond price reaction is a significant 2. 95 (2. 55) percentage points.  The difference is a significant 2. 64 (2. 01) percentage points for the highest SUE quintile.  These results provide evidence that the predictive ability of the bond price reaction to earnings announcements for future stock prices is incremental to that of unexpected  earnings.   A comparison of Panels B and C shows that bonds’ predictive ability is again driven by the subsample of non-investment  grade ﬁrms, consistent with the results in Table 3 .  Focusing on the subsample of non-investment grade ﬁrms, we see that  in the lowest SUE quintile, where, unconditionally, we would expect future stock returns to be negative, the mean return is  positive when the bond price reaction to the earnings announcement is high.  Similarly, in the highest SUE quintile, where  we would expect future stock returns to be positive, the mean stock return is negative when the bond price reaction to the  earnings announcement is low.  In these cases, the bond price reaction, not the SUE , predicts the sign of the future stock  return.   In Table 5 , I report the results of repeating the previous analysis using accruals, rather than unexpected earnings, as  the initial partitioning variable.  As shown in panel A, for the lowest Accruals quintile the difference between the 60-day  average buy-and-hold abnormal stock return of the highest and lowest quintile of the raw (abnormal) bond price reaction  is a signiﬁcant 3. 30 (3. 76) percentage points.  The difference is a signiﬁcant 2. 19 (1. 71) percentage points for the highest  Accruals quintile.  A comparison of Panels B and C shows that bonds’ predictive ability is again driven by the subsample of  non-investment grade ﬁrms.  Focusing on the subsample of non-investment grade ﬁrms, we see that in the lowest Accruals  quintile, where, unconditionally, we would expect the future stock return to be positive, the mean future stock return is  negative when the bond price reaction to the earnings announcement is low.  In this case, the bond price reaction, not  the Accruals , predicts the sign of the future stock return.  Since my results thus far do not show that the bond returns of investment-grade firms are predictive of future stock returns, the remainder of my analysis focuses on the subsample of non-investment grade firms.  I alternatively test whether the bond price reaction has incremental predictive power over unexpected earnings and ac- cruals, as well as over the three-day stock price reaction to earnings announcements, by estimating the following regression.  In this regression, the bond price reaction to earnings announcements, standardized unexpected earnings, the ratio of accruals to cash flows, and the stock price reaction to earnings announcements are all included as explanatory variables for the 60-day post-announcement stock return.  To mitigate the impact of outliers and to facilitate the interpretation of the regression coefficients, I follow Livnat and Mendenhall (2006) , and separately sort each of the independent variables into quintiles, numbered 0 through 4, within each calendar quarter. 