 Introduction Prior research examines and ﬁnds that ﬁnancial statement audits help reduce the cost of debt capital for small, private ﬁrms (e. g. , Blackwell et al. , 1998.  Minnis, 2011).  The premise underlying this relation is that an audit helps increase the quality and reliability of ﬁnancial statement disclosures, which reduces information asymmetry and thus the cost of capital.  We argue that, in addition to the value provided by the audit with respect to the quality of the ﬁnancial disclosures, the choice to obtain an audit itself can provide incremental information to creditors, which can reduce ﬁnancing frictions.  In particular, we argue that the observable choice to get an audit can convey information about the ﬁrm's future prospects because audits are costly in terms of audit fees paid as well as management time and effort spent preparing for, and engaging in, the audit.  Thus, ﬁrms will voluntarily subject themselves to an audit to obtain ﬁnancing if they foresee themselves generating sufﬁcient future proﬁts from their investment opportunities to recover the cost of the audit.  In this paper, we examine whether the choice to obtain an audit eases ﬁnancing frictions by conveying information about ﬁrms' future prospects that is independent of the information generated from the audit itself.  Understanding whether the decision to voluntarily get an audit contains information that reduces ﬁnancing frictions is important from a regulatory point of view because audits are mandated for private ﬁrms in many countries and the vast majority of public ﬁrms across the world.  If the choice to obtain an audit does indeed contain information that relaxes ﬁnancing frictions, such information would be hidden by the audit mandate.  Thus it is important to know the economic signiﬁcance (if any) of information revealed from observing the audit choice.  Broadly, the intuition for our research question follows from two distinct (but related) theories.  First, the audit choice can be thought of as a costly signal initiated by low risk ﬁrms that allows them to separate themselves from high risk ﬁrms (e. g. , Spence, 1973.  Jensen and Meckling, 1976.  Melumad and Thoman, 1990).  For example, Jensen and Meckling (1976) discuss that ﬁrms can incur “bonding costs,” such as an audit, to create a separating equilibrium where high quality ﬁrms commit to getting an audit that is too costly for low quality ﬁrms to mimic.  Here the ability to incur the audit cost informs ﬁnanciers that the ﬁrm is likely to generate sufﬁcient future proﬁts to recoup the audit related costs.  Second, the audit choice can be characterized as a screening mechanism used by external ﬁnanciers to separate the good credit risk ﬁrms from the bad credit risk ﬁrms (Guasch and Weiss, 1981).  The idea is that ﬁrms that are willing to incur the cost of an audit to obtain external ﬁnancing are likely to have more proﬁtable investment opportunities, and thus lower credit risk, than those unwilling to pay for an audit.  The above theories differ in terms of why the audit choice conveys information and who initiates the audit, but they both suggest that the choice to incur the cost of an audit conveys information about the ﬁrm's future prospects because ﬁrms with better prospects are more willing to incur this cost ex ante, as they are more likely to recoup this cost in the future.  Empirically testing whether the audit choice conveys any information that relaxes ﬁnancing frictions is challenging because the economic effects of the audit choice is confounded by the economic effects of the audited ﬁnancial information.  In other words, since ﬁrms that choose to obtain an audit will have better quality and more credible ﬁnancial statements than ﬁrms that do not receive audits, it is difﬁcult to empirically separate the economic effects of the audit choice from that of the audited reports.  Further, the choice to get an audit is likely to be confounded by changes in growth opportunities because ﬁrms are more likely to get voluntarily audits when they require external funds to ﬁnance those opportunities.  We overcome these challenges by using a natural experiment involving U. K.  private ﬁrms.  External audits were mandatory for U. K.  private ﬁrms with sales above d1 million or assets above d1. 4 million until 2004, but ﬁrms below these size thresholds were exempt from the audit requirement.  In 2004, this audit exemption was extended to private ﬁrms with sales (assets) in between d1 and 5. 6 million (d1. 4–2. 8 million), i. e. , audits became voluntary for additional ﬁrms within the prescribed size threshold.  Using this audit regime shift as an exogenous shock to the observability of the audit choice, we examine the change in the investment and ﬁnancing behavior of ﬁrms that mandatorily receive audits before 2004, but voluntarily receive audits post-2004 (henceforth referred to as treatment ﬁrms).  That is, our treatment ﬁrms are ﬁrms that have always received an audit, but their audit choice is observed by external investors only after 2004 when they qualify for an audit exemption but choose to continue receiving audits.  Consequently, the economic effects of supplying audited reports to investors, such as those documented by Minnis (2011), remain unchanged pre- and post-2004.  This enables us to empirically isolate the economic effects of the audit choice from those of the audited reports.  To mitigate the concern that the treatment ﬁrms' investment/ﬁnancing behavior changes as a result of changes in their growth opportunities (or other confounding changes) rather than a relaxation in their ﬁnancing frictions (via the audit regulation), we construct two samples of benchmark ﬁrms and use a difference-in-differences estimator.  Our ﬁrst control sample consists of ﬁrms that were exempt from the audit requirement even before 2004, but choose to voluntarily receive audits despite the exemption.  Similar to the treatment ﬁrms, these control ﬁrms also choose to voluntarily get audits, but their audit choice is observable both before and after 2004.  Our second control sample consists of ﬁrms that are subject to the audit mandate both before and after 2004. 1 That is, we construct three samples of ﬁrms whose audit choice is (i) observable pre- and post-2004, (ii) unobservable pre-2004, but observable post-2004, and (iii) unobservable pre- and post-2004.  Sample (ii) serves as our treatment ﬁrm sample, and samples (i) and (iii) serve as our control samples (see Fig.  1 for a diagrammatic representation of our design).  To ensure that the treatment and control ﬁrms have similar investment and ﬁnancing opportunities, we match these ﬁrms on the determinants of investment and ﬁnancing documented in prior research (i. e. , debt, growth, performance, and liquidity).  Importantly, all ﬁrm-years in our data (treatment and control) receive audits and only the observability of the audit choice varies over time for our treatment ﬁrms.  We also require all ﬁrms in our sample to have at least one observation in the pre- and post-treatment period to mitigate the concern that changes in sample composition affect our results.  In sum, our research design parses out economic effects of the information in the audit choice from all the other effects of the audit because (i) our entire sample of treatment and control ﬁrms obtain audits over the entire sample period, thereby holding the economic effects of the audits constant, and (ii) the regulatory change allows us to use the ﬁrm as its own control and thus the reasons why the ﬁrm chose to obtain an audit will not affect our results unless the ﬁrm changed at the same time as the audit regulation.  We ﬁnd that the treatment ﬁrms signiﬁcantly increase their total debt and investment following the regulation as compared to both sets of control ﬁrms.  Our coefﬁcients indicate that treatment ﬁrms increase debt by approximately 4–7%, and investment by approximately 7–12% following the regulation, depending on the control sample used.  We also ﬁnd that our treatment ﬁrms observe a 4–9% reduction in the cost of debt after the regulation.  This evidence is consistent with the audit choice conveying important information to capital providers (independent to that conveyed by audit itself) and thus relaxing ﬁnancing constraints.  We then examine whether the treatment ﬁrms improve their investment efﬁciency and operating performance following the audit regime shift, as the information in the audit choice reduces ﬁnancing constraints.  Consistent with our expectation, we ﬁnd that the treatment ﬁrms become signiﬁcantly more responsiveness to their investment opportunities and observe a 6–12% increase in their operating income after the regulation relative to that of the control ﬁrms.  These results provide additional evidence that the choice to obtain an audit contains information that relaxes ﬁnancing frictions, leading to more efﬁcient investment and better ﬁrm performance.  We conduct numerous additional tests to further validate our inferences and mitigate endogeneity concerns.  For example, we empirically show that the parallel trends assumption, which is the central assumption of our difference-indifferences estimator, is satisﬁed in the pre-treatment years spanning 2001–2003, and take a number of measures to ensure this assumption holds post-treatment as well (which we discuss in detail in Section 5. 2).  We conduct cross-sectional tests using on variation in the treatment ﬁrms' ﬁnancing constraints and access to ﬁnance to help reinforce our main inference.  We use dynamic regression models to show that the economic effects we document are absent the year before the regulatory change and take effect only in the years following the regulation.  We show that neither audit quality nor earnings quality change around the regulation.  We also conduct tests to show that the information revealed from observing the audit choice is indeed hidden in the mandatory audit regime.  Collectively, these tests signiﬁcantly narrow down the probability that any alternative hypothesis explains our ﬁndings.  We discuss these tests in detail in Sections 5 and 6.  Finally, a potential alternative hypothesis is that our treatment ﬁrms choose to obtain an audit post-2004 because they have had a shock to growth opportunities that (i) coincides with the 2004 regulation and (ii) does not affect the control ﬁrms (even though they are observably similar and get audits).  To address this concern, we ﬁrst directly examine whether the treatment ﬁrms have an increase in growth opportunities from 2003 to 2004 relative to that for the control ﬁrms.  Consistent with our expectation, we ﬁnd that there is no increase in treatment ﬁrm's growth opportunities at the time of the regulation.  Second, we examine the sub-sample of our treatment ﬁrms that move back to a mandatory audit regime because they grow and surpass the d5. 6 (d2. 8) million sales (asset) threshold necessary to qualify for the audit exemption, thereby making their audit choice unobservable again.  Essentially, these ﬁrms' audit choice is unobservable pre-2004, becomes observable for one to three years post-2004, and then becomes unobservable again.  We ﬁnd that the treatment ﬁrms that move back to a mandatory audit regime see a reduction in debt and an increase in their cost of debt once their audit choice becomes unobservable again compared to those treatment ﬁrms whose audit choice continues to be observable.  We also observe a marginal reduction in investment that is signiﬁcant at the one-tailed 10% level.  These results are especially helpful in mitigating alternative explanations because they show that ﬁrms' investing/ﬁnancing behavior shifts in a predictable manner that is contingent on the observability of the audit choice.  Our paper contributes to the growing research on the role of audits in a private ﬁrm setting.  For example, Minnis (2011) ﬁnds that by verifying ﬁnancial statements, audits increase earnings quality and lower the cost of debt for U. S.  private ﬁrms.  Lisowsky et al.  (2015) ﬁnd that the veriﬁcation role of audits helps increase the portfolio quality in the commercial loan market. 2 These prior studies focus on the veriﬁcation or assurance role of an audit, and try to control for selection effects, such as the information in the audit choice.  Our ﬁndings extend this literature by showing that aside from the veriﬁcation beneﬁts of an audit, information embedded in the audit choice is incrementally informative to external investors.  This incremental information in the audit choice (that is orthogonal to information in the audited reports) helps reduce ﬁnancing frictions, leading to increases in debt, investment and overall ﬁrm performance.  Our ﬁndings, and the distinction between the audit choice and the veriﬁcation beneﬁt of audits, are particularly important because they have different regulatory implications.  Speciﬁcally, the veriﬁcation beneﬁt of audits is often used to justify mandatory audits for ﬁrms.  However, our results suggest that regulation that mandates ﬁrms to receive audits conceals the information contained in a ﬁrm's endogenous choice to receive the audit.  We ﬁnd that the information in the audit choice is distinct from the information conveyed by audited reports and, as such, is lost when audits are mandatory.  It is worth noting that ﬁnancial statement audits are mandatory for many private ﬁrms across the world (e. g. , Australia, Brazil, India, and Russia, among others) and almost universally mandated for public companies with dispersed ownership.  Although policy implications cannot be made without more analysis, our results indeed suggest that the audit mandate has some economically signiﬁcant drawbacks.  Finally, our paper builds on recent work by Lennox and Pittman (2011), who ﬁnd that ﬁrms that choose to obtain audits receive higher credit scores than those that choose to be unaudited.  Our paper differs from Lennox and Pittman (2011) in two key respects.  First, our analyses focus on real decisions made by ﬁrms – i. e. , ﬁnancing and investment, whereas Lennox and Pittman (2011) examine a credit score supplied by Qui Credit Assessment, a small regional ﬁrm.  Second, Lennox and Pittman (2011) draw their inferences by comparing ﬁrms that choose to obtain audits to those that choose to be unaudited.  As a result, they turn two dials in their analyses – (i) the observability of the audit choice and (ii) the veriﬁcation of ﬁnancial statements.  Thus, it is unclear whether their results are driven by information in the audit choice or a drop in the control ﬁrms' reporting quality/credibility from being unaudited.  Our analyses contribute by parsing out these competing explanations.  The rest of the paper proceeds as follows.  Section 2 develops our hypotheses.  Sections 3 and 4 discuss our setting and data.  Sections 5 and 6 present our results, and Section 7 concludes.  2.  Hypothesis development.  A primary role of an audit is to verify the accuracy of ﬁnancial statement disclosures and thereby assure users that ﬁnancial statements are reliable (DeFond and Zhang, 2014).  Theory suggests this veriﬁcation beneﬁt of an audit reduces ﬁnancing frictions, such as adverse selection and moral hazard between managers and capital providers, which improves resource allocation and contracting efﬁciency (Jensen and Meckling, 1976.  Watts and Zimmerman, 1983).  For example, audits can reduce information problems ex ante by increasing the credibility of ﬁnancial statements (Minnis, 2011.  Lisowsky et al. , 2015).  Ex post, audits can assure contracting parties that the ﬁnancial statements have been prepared in accordance with the provisions of the contract (Watts and Zimmerman, 1978, 1983).  See Armstrong et al.  (2010) and DeFond and Zhang (2014) for surveys of the contracting and auditing literatures, respectively.  A relatively underexplored aspect of obtaining audits is whether the choice to obtain an audit conveys any incremental information to external stakeholders, distinct from the information in the audited reports.  We posit that an audit can provide information to external investors about a ﬁrm's future prospects when the choice to obtain the audit is publicly observable, because the audit is costly for ﬁrms in terms of money paid to the auditors and considerable management time/ effort necessary to prepare for, and oversee, the audit process.  Thus, the willingness of management to voluntarily incur these audit costs informs external parties that the ﬁrm expects to make sufﬁcient future proﬁts to recoup the cost of theOur intuition draws primarily from two theories.  First, our intuition can be derived from the ‘signaling’ literature (e. g. , Spence, 1973.  Jensen and Meckling, 1976.  Melumad and Thoman, 1990), where high quality economic agents/ﬁrms undertake costly actions to separate themselves from low quality agents/ﬁrms.  For example, Jensen and Meckling (1976, p.  325) discuss that ﬁrms can incur “bonding costs” such as a contractual guarantee to have the ﬁnancial statements audited to protect creditors against malfeasance on the part of the manager.  Here the audit serves to create a separating equilibrium where high quality ﬁrms commit to getting an audit that is too costly (i. e. , not net beneﬁcial) for low quality ﬁrms to mimic.  Similarly, Melumad and Thoman (1990, p.  79) show analytically, “a ﬁrm would rather hire an uninformative auditor [i. e. , an audit that provides no information] and be known as an average risk ﬁrm than not hire an auditor and be thought of as a high risk by lenders. ” In our setting, ﬁrms with the most proﬁtable investment opportunities are more willing to incur the costs associated with audits, as they are in the best position to reap beneﬁts from those costs.  Second, our intuition also comes from the ‘screening’ literature, and in particular the theory developed in Guasch and Weiss (1981), who develop a labor market model, where an employer is screening applicants for potential employment.  Guasch and Weiss (1981) show that aside from requiring applicants to take a pass-fail test to screen for better candidates, having applicants pay a fee to take the test conveys incremental information about the quality of the applicant, as test results can be imperfect.  Their intuition is that the fee deters low ability applicants from applying for the job because they know that they are more likely to fail the test.  Applying their intuition to our setting, the ﬁrm undergoing an audit to acquire capital is analogous to the applicant paying to take the test.  The decision to undergo an audit (that is costly for the ﬁrm) conveys incremental information to external ﬁnanciers about the quality of the ﬁrm and its prospects, over and above the information provided by the audited ﬁnancial statements. 4 Note that the two theories are very similar.  In particular, in the Guasch and Weiss (1981) setting, it is the signal receiver (employer/bank) requiring the signal rather than the signal sender (applicant/ﬁrm) initiating the signal.  In other words, when banks require ﬁrms to obtain audits as a pre-requisite for lending, the act of getting the audit can be viewed as a ‘screen’ rather than a ‘signal. ’ However, as Spence (1976, p.  592) indicates, “We can refer to the subject as signaling or screening interchangeably, bearing in mind that they are opposite sides of the same coin. ” Thus, our intuition applies irrespective of which economic agent initiates the signal.  in either case, ﬁrms must choose whether they want to undertake the cost of the audit to obtain ﬁnancing.  Our interest lies in determining whether that choice conveys information to lenders, irrespective of which party initiated the signal.  The above discussion leads to our main hypothesis.  H.  A ﬁrm's choice to voluntarily obtain an audit provides information about the ﬁrm's future prospects that reduces ﬁnancing frictions, leading to an increase in debt and investment.  <Middle> Institutional setting.  We use a setting in the U. K.  that provides a unique opportunity to test our hypothesis.  In the U. K. , the Companies Act of 1967 (now part of the Companies Act 1985) required all limited liability companies, private and public, to ﬁle their ﬁnancial statements annually with the Registrar. 5 Further, all ﬁnancial statements must be prepared in accordance with U. K.  accounting standards and must be audited by a registered auditor.  Failure to comply with these rules is a criminal offense.  Critics of the Companies Act argued that the imposition of universal regulatory standards results in a disproportionately high cost for small companies.  Speciﬁcally, prior studies and industry groups argued that complying with regulation has large ﬁxed cost elements and small companies are generally unable to take advantage of the economies of scale (see e. g. , DTI, 1985.  Rutteman, 1985).  In an effort to reduce the burden of regulation, the Companies Act 1985 relaxed the above reporting requirements, including the audit requirement.  Audit exemptions were ﬁrst granted to the very smallest private ﬁrms in the U. K.  in 1994, because the regulation was viewed as disproportionately expensive and of limited beneﬁt for small ﬁrms (Keasey et al. , 1988).  Post-1994, companies with sales not exceeding d90,000 and assets not exceeding d1. 4 million were exempt from the audit requirement via Section 249A of the Companies Act 1985 (SI 1994/1935) even though their ﬁnancial statements were required to be ﬁled in a public repository (the Companies House).  Subsequently, the size thresholds to qualify for the audit exemption were progressively relaxed in 1997, 2000, 2004, 2008, and most recently in 2012.  In this study, we focus on the 2004 regulatory change, which allowed companies with ﬁscal years ending after March 30, 2004, to opt-out of an audit if their sales did not exceed d5. 6 million and total assets did not exceed d2. 8 million.  Prior to 2004, only ﬁrms with sales less than d1 million and total assets less than d1. 4 million were exempt from the audit requirement. 6 This regulatory change allows us to construct a sample of ﬁrms that went from being audited under a mandatory audit regime pre-2004 to being voluntarily audited post-2004.  We focus on the 2004 regulation because.  (i) it is the largest increase in the threshold limits, thereby allowing a larger number of companies to qualify for the exemption and thus increasing our sample size, and (ii) it provides us with a panel dataset of companies with at least three years of data both before and after the regulatory change.  Since our dataset (discussed later) covers ﬁrms with ﬁscal years ending between 2000 and 2010, we do not have pre- and/or post-regulation data for the audit exemptions in 1994, 1997, 2000, and 2012.  Although the 2008 exemption allows us to construct a dataset of ﬁrms with pre- and post-regulation data, the size thresholds increased by just 16% for both sales and assets, i. e. , from d5. 6 to d6. 5 million in sales and d2. 8 to d3. 3 million in assets, compared to a 560% (100%) increase in the sales (assets) threshold in 2004.  Thus, the 2008 regulatory change is simply not as powerful as the 2004 change. 7 The U. K.  setting is almost ideal to test our hypotheses for three reasons.  First, our sample ﬁrms are small, privately owned ﬁrms with highly concentrated ownership.  As a result, ﬁnancing frictions are likely to be a ﬁrst order concern for them, and any relaxation of ﬁnancing constraints via the information in the audit choice is likely to have a signiﬁcant effect on the investment and ﬁnancing decisions of these ﬁrms.  Second, audits are especially costly for these ﬁrms (as indicated by the intent of the regulation to ease the burden of audits on these small ﬁrms), thereby satisfying the condition that audits have to be costly. 8 Third, this setting allows us to identify a sample of ﬁrms that switched from obtaining mandatory audits to voluntary audits due to the 2004 regulatory change, and as a result, hold constant the veriﬁcation role of the audit to isolate the incremental effect of the audit choice.  Importantly, since the audit exemptions were granted to ﬁrms in a staggered manner from 1994 to 2012, we can construct control groups that are similar in almost every respect to the treatment ﬁrms except that they are unaffected by the 2004 regulation.  We provide a detailed discussion of our research design strengths below.  4.  Data sources and sample selection.  Financial statement data for private ﬁrms are obtained from the Financial Analysis Made Easy (FAME) database supplied by Bureau Van Dijk.  FAME contains data from income statements and balance sheets along with basic information, such as SIC industry codes, on over two million public and private British companies with up to 10 years of data for each company. 9 We obtain access to data for companies with ﬁscal years ending between December 2000 and 2010.  To construct our sample, we begin by identifying companies that qualify for the 2004 audit exemption (i. e. , private ﬁrms with sales less than d5. 6 million and assets less than d2. 8 million) as of 2003 and 2004.  Further, we require these companies to have at least d1 million in sales or d1. 4 million in assets to ensure that they were not exempt from the audit requirement prior to 2004.  As a result, these companies were required to obtain audits pre-2004, but could opt-out of the audit requirement post-2004.  These ﬁrms serve as our treatment sample.  We require treatment ﬁrms to.  (i) have a matched control ﬁrm (described below), (ii) operate in a non-ﬁnancial industry, (iii) have non-missing data for all the variables used in our analyses, and (iv) have both assets and sales greater than d15,000.  In addition, all ﬁrms are required to have at least one observation both before and after the regulatory change.  We match each treatment ﬁrm with at least one of two control ﬁrms that have non-missing data for all variables used in our main analyses.  The ﬁrst control sample includes ﬁrms that voluntarily obtain audits both before and after the regulatory change (henceforth referred to as the “voluntary audit” control sample).  These ﬁrms have sales less than d1 million and assets less than d1. 4 million prior to 2004 and obtain an audit (voluntarily) throughout our sample period. 10 The second control sample includes ﬁrms required to obtain audits both before and after the regulatory change (henceforth referred to as the “mandatory audit” control sample).  This control sample is comprised of ﬁrms with sales greater than d5. 6 million and/ or assets greater than d2. 8 million during our sample period.  Fig.  1 provides a diagram of our research design.  Our sample period runs from 2001 to 2006, giving us three years before and after the regulatory change in March 2004.  Table 1 describes our sample selection procedure in detail.  5.  Research design, validating key assumptions, and results.  5. 1.  Research design.  We estimate the following difference-in-differences regression to test our predictions, where i (t.  ind) indexes ﬁrms (years.  industries), yi. t is investment (INVESTMENT) or total debt (DEBT), αi, αt, and αind are ﬁrm, year, and industry ﬁxed effects, TREATMENT_FIRM is an indicator variable that equals one (zero) for treatment (control) ﬁrms, POST_REG is an indicator variable that equals one for ﬁscal years ending after March 30, 2004, and X is a vector of controls that includes sales growth, ﬁrm size, proﬁtability, liquidity, and audit fees. 11 Sales growth proxies for growth opportunities (Shin and Stulz, 1998.  Whited, 2006.  Badertscher et al. , 2013).  size, proﬁtability, and liquidity proxy for the availability of ﬁnancing to engage in investment (Kaplan and Zingales, 1997.  Hadlock and Pierce, 2010).  Audit fees captures differences in the veriﬁcation value of an audit (Simunic, 1980.  Hay et al. , 2006).  The identifying assumption in our difference-in-differences regression is that the treatment and control ﬁrms have parallel trends in investment/debt.  To satisfy this assumption, we match the treatment ﬁrms to control ﬁrms based on their growth opportunities and access to ﬁnance.  Speciﬁcally, we match on the following variables within each industry and year before the regulatory change (i. e. , March 2004).  sales growth (SALES_GR).  debt (DEBT), return on assets (ROA), and liquidity (LIQUIDITY).  We use nearest neighbor matching within caliper, which is set at 0. 5 times the standard deviation of the variable (Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1985). 12 Although ﬁrm size is a commonly used proxy for ﬁnancing constraints, we do not match on size because the regulation partitions ﬁrms based on size thresholds and thus the treatment and control ﬁrms do not overlap along this dimension.  Nevertheless, we conduct all our tests using two control samples.  (i) smaller ﬁrms that were exempt from the audit requirement even before 2004 (i. e. , the voluntary audit control sample) and (ii) larger ﬁrms that are required to obtain audits mandatorily even after 2004 (i. e. , the mandatory audit control sample).  Since the mandatory (voluntary) audit control ﬁrms are systematically larger (smaller) than the treatment ﬁrms, any monotonic relation between ﬁrm size and investment cannot explain our ﬁndings.  Table 2, Panel A compares the mean values of the matching variables for our treatment sample with those for the two control samples, each year before the regulation.  The table indicates that our matching procedure results in no statistically signiﬁcant difference between our treatment ﬁrms and the two sets of control ﬁrms with respect to the matched variables in each of the pre-treatment years.  Therefore, our control ﬁrms are observably similar to the treatment ﬁrms before the regulatory change in terms of their investment opportunities and access to ﬁnance.  5. 2.  Parallel trends assumption and research design strengths.  The identifying assumption central to the interpretation of our difference-in-differences estimates is that treatment and control ﬁrms share parallel trends in debt and investment.  Table 2, Panel B shows that the pre-treatment trends in both debt and investment are indeed indistinguishable.  The question then (for any difference-in-differences design) is whether the post-treatment trends would have continued to be parallel had it not been for the audit regime change.  Our empirical design takes several steps to mitigate the concern that the treatment ﬁrm trend would have changed even in the absence of the regulation.  First, we include industry-year ﬁxed effects in all our regressions to difference away unobserved time varying or dynamic post-treatment trends at the industry level in investment and debt.  Second, we include ﬁrm-ﬁxed effects in our regressions to difference away unobserved ﬁrm-speciﬁc trends in investment and debt levels.  Third, we control for standard ﬁrm-level characteristics (such as size, growth, and proﬁtability) that could cause trends to diverge post-treatment for reasons unrelated to the audit regime change.  We ﬁnd that adding these controls has very little effect on our treatment effect, implying that the audit regime change is most likely exogenous.  Notwithstanding the above, we conduct two crosssectional tests that exploit differences in ﬁrms' ex ante characteristics to further mitigate identiﬁcation concerns.  A few observations about our research design are in order.  First, we require control and treatment ﬁrms to have at least one observation in both the pre- and post-treatment periods.  Thus, changes in sample composition do not affect our results.  Second, we require both sets of control ﬁrms and the treatment ﬁrms to have audits over the pre- and post-regulation periods.  This ensures that any differences across the treatment and control samples are not due to differences in the existence of an audit.  Importantly, ﬁrms comprising the voluntary control sample also choose to obtain an audit every year during our sample period and essentially differ from our treatment ﬁrms only because their choice to obtain an audit is observable both before and after 2004, but our treatment ﬁrms' choice to obtain an audit is observable only post 2004.  As a result, the only change from the pre- to post-regulation audit regimes is that our treatment ﬁrms' decision to obtain an audit becomes observable by external investors, but not for the control ﬁrms even though every ﬁrm-year in our sample obtains an audit.  Second, it is possible that the treatment ﬁrms systematically have an increase in investment opportunities at the time of the regulation that is not shared by the control ﬁrms (which would be a violation of the parallel trends assumption).  It is precisely to address this concern that we use control samples matched on the determinants of investment and ﬁnancing.  Further, our treatment ﬁrms are sandwiched between two sets of control ﬁrms that are slightly larger in size (mandatory audit control group) and slightly smaller in size (voluntary audit control group) than the treatment sample.  Given the similarities in all the observable characteristics, the indistinguishable pre-treatment trends in investment/debt, and the fact that the voluntary control ﬁrms also choose to obtain audits, it is unlikely that any changes in investment opportunities in 2004 will only be localized to our treatment ﬁrms but not control ﬁrms.  Nevertheless, we conduct two additional tests to address this potential concern in Section 6. 1.  5. 3.  Descriptive statistics.  Table 3 presents summary statistics for our variables of interest.  Panel A (B) reports the statistics for the treatment sample and its matched voluntary (mandatory) audit control sample both before and after the regulation.  For brevity, we discuss the summary statistics for only our key variables of interest.  Panel A shows that treatment ﬁrms and the voluntary audit control ﬁrms have similar DEBT before the regulation, but the treatment ﬁrms observe a relative increase in DEBT after the regulation.  The average INVESTMENT is 4. 1% of total assets before 2004 and increases to 4. 3% following the regulation for our treatment sample.  In contrast, the voluntary audit control sample's average INVESTMENT reduces from 3. 9% to 3. 6% over the same period.  In Panel B, which presents the summary statistics for the treatment sample and the matched mandatory audit control sample, DEBT is statistically indistinguishable for the treatment and control samples before 2004, but the treatment ﬁrms have signiﬁcantly higher DEBT after the regulation.  Further, treatment (control) ﬁrms increase (decrease) INVESTMENT from 4. 1% to 4. 3% (4. 4% to 3. 9%) after the regulation.  These patterns are consistent with that observed in Panel A for the voluntary audit control sample.  5. 4.  Validating necessary conditions for the audit choice to provide information to investors.  The theoretical framework we rely on has two necessary conditions for the audit choice to provide information to external investors that relaxes ﬁnancing frictions.  First, we require that external ﬁnanciers cannot ex ante distinguish between ﬁrms that would obtain audits voluntarily from those that would not do so in the mandatory audit regime.  Only to the extent that external investors fail to separate these ﬁrms can the audit choice provide incremental information in the voluntary audit regime.  Second, the audit has to be sufﬁciently costly that ﬁrms with weak or doubtful future prospects do not ﬁnd it worthwhile to voluntarily get and pay for the audit.  To validate the ﬁrst assumption, we compute the probability of type I (false positive) and type II (false negative) classiﬁcation errors for the entire sample of ﬁrms that qualify to opt out from the audit mandate in 2004.  Speciﬁcally, we estimate a logistic regression where the dependent variable equals one for ﬁrms that choose to obtain audits post-2004 and zero for ﬁrms that choose to opt out of the audit requirement post-2004.  The independent variables include the following ﬁrm characteristics that are likely to be associated with the probability of obtaining a voluntary audit.  (i) investment growth, sales growth, ROA growth, and debt growth, which proxy for investment opportunities and growth, (ii) liquidity and ROA, which proxy for external ﬁnancing needs, (iii) ﬁrm size and the number of directors on the board, which proxy for monitoring difﬁculties and agency costs, and (iv) audit fees and the use of a big-4 auditor, which proxy for ﬁrms' desire to obtain higher quality audits, beyond the minimum requirement imposed by the audit mandate. 13 Table 4, Panel A presents the results from the logistic regression.  We ﬁnd that although a number of variables in our model are signiﬁcantly related to the probability of getting a voluntary audit, the model has limited explanatory power (pseudo r-squared¼10%).  Panel B presents the classiﬁcation errors from using the model to predict the probability that a ﬁrm obtains an audit after 2004.  We ﬁnd that the model leads to large type I and type II errors and, as such, is unlikely to be very useful in separating ﬁrms that are likely to obtain voluntary audits ex ante.  For example, using ﬁrms above the median predicted probability of obtaining a voluntary audit as the cut-off, we ﬁnd that 27. 6% of the ﬁrms that do not obtain audits are classiﬁed as obtaining audits, and 42. 5% of the ﬁrms that obtain audits are classiﬁed as not obtaining an audit by the model.  These results suggest that, ex ante, external ﬁnanciers are unlikely to have been able to accurately distinguish between ﬁrms that would and would not obtain audits voluntarily.  To validate the second assumption (i. e. , audits are costly), we examine the audit fees paid by the typical ﬁrm.  Table 3, Panel A, shows that the average treatment ﬁrm in our sample pays d5,316 (d6,017) for an audit before (after) the regulation.  While some may argue the absolute magnitude of the fee is small, it is important to consider that it represents approximately 6% of the average ﬁrm's earnings.  Further, the above cost does not include non-monetary costs incurred during an audit related to signiﬁcant managerial time and effort devoted to getting through the process.  In fact, the large burden of audit and other regulatory costs is precisely what led to the relaxation of the audit requirement for small ﬁrms (DTI, 1985).  To further examine whether the audit does indeed represent a non-trivial cost for our sample ﬁrms, we follow Bernard et al.  (2014) and exploit the fact that the audit mandate for U. K.  private ﬁrms is contingent on ﬁrms exceeding “bright-line” size thresholds.  If the audit represents a signiﬁcant cost, then at least some ﬁrms near the size thresholds are likely to manipulate their size (i. e. , assets and/or sales) downwards to obtain an exemption from the audit requirement.  To test this prediction, we follow the approach in Burgstahler and Dichev (1997) and examine the frequency distributions of ﬁrms along the continuum of size (sales and assets) bins.  Consistent with our expectations and the evidence in Bernard et al.  (2014), Fig.  2, Panels A and B show that from 2001 to 2003 there is an unusually higher (lower) frequency of ﬁrms in the size bins immediately below (above) the threshold to qualify for an audit exemption (with the discontinuity signiﬁcant at the 1% level).  Further, this discontinuity in the frequency of ﬁrms around the size bins near the pre-2004 regulatory threshold disappears when the size thresholds to qualify for the audit exemption change in 2004.  These results suggest that ﬁrms manage their size to qualify for the audit exemption and thus indicate that audits represent a non-trivial cost for small private ﬁrms in the U. K.  It is also noteworthy that the discontinuity in the distribution of sales is especially stark near the regulatory threshold (see Fig.  2, Panel A).  This is consistent with our expectation because the sales threshold was lower than the assets threshold pre-2004 (d1 million vs.  d1. 4 million) and thus was more likely to be the binding constraint. 14 5. 5.  Tests of the main hypothesis.  the effect of the audit choice on debt and investment.  Table 5 presents our main results.  In Panels A and B, we tabulate the results concerning the effect of the audit choice on debt level and the cost of debt, and Panel C presents the investment results.  In each panel, we present three sets of regression results that correspond to using (i) a baseline speciﬁcation without any control sample, (ii) ﬁrms obtaining voluntary audits before and after the regulation as the primary control sample, and (iii) ﬁrms obtaining mandatory audits before and after the regulation as an alternative control sample.  The coefﬁcient of interest in the regressions without a control sample is that for POST_REG, and the coefﬁcient of interest in regressions with control samples is that for POST_REG  TREATMENT_FIRM. 15 Table 5, Panel A shows that our treatment ﬁrms signiﬁcantly increase their debt levels across all speciﬁcations.  In particular, our baseline speciﬁcation without any control sample suggests that the treatment ﬁrms increase debt by 0. 9 percentage points following the regulation (i. e. , coefﬁcient on POST_REG¼0. 009.  t-statistic¼4. 37) and the difference-in-differences speciﬁcations suggest that our treatment ﬁrms increase debt by 1. 6 (1. 0) percentage points relative to the voluntary audit control sample (mandatory audit control sample).  To provide some sense for the economic signiﬁcance, the coefﬁcient in the voluntary (mandatory) audit control sample regression suggests that debt increases by d8,546, or 6. 7% (d5,578, or 4. 8%).  Next, we examine whether the audit choice signal leads to a reduction in the cost of debt.  To the extent the audit choice conveys incremental information about the quality of the borrowers' future prospects (and thus their credit risk) to creditors, we should observe a reduction in the cost of the borrower's debt.  Following Minnis (2011), we proxy for the cost of debt using interest expense scaled by debt because we do not have data on actual interest rates charged to the ﬁrm.  Further, to determine whether there is a change in the cost of debt from the pre- to the post-regulation regime, this analysis is conducted only on ﬁrms that have non-zero debt both before and after the regulation.  Table 5, Panel B shows that our treatment ﬁrms have a lower cost of debt after the audit regime change, across all speciﬁcations.  The coefﬁcients for POST_REG (in column 1) and POST_REG  TREATMENT_FIRM (in columns 2 and 3) are negative and statistically signiﬁcant at the 10% level or better.  The coefﬁcients imply that cost of debt reduces between 3. 8% (or d617) and 9. 3% (or d1,093).  These results provide further support for our inference that the audit choice conveys information that reduces ﬁnancing frictions.  The examination of the cost of debt helps us calibrate our results with that documented in prior research.  For example, Minnis (2011) ﬁnds that interest rates decrease by 69 basis points (ranging between 25 and 105 basis points) for his sample of U. S.  private ﬁrms because of the veriﬁcation role of an audit.  Our analysis indicates that the audit choice signal leads to a 30–80 basis points reduction in interest rates, depending on the control sample used.  Thus, our results suggest that the audit choice signal has an economic beneﬁt that is similar to that derived from the veriﬁcation role of an audit, which is arguably the primary role of an audit.  Finally, Table 5, Panel C presents the results examining the effect of the audit choice signal on investment.  Column 1 shows that the coefﬁcient for POST_REG is 0. 002, and it is statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level (t-stat. ¼2. 68).  This coefﬁcient suggests that ﬁrms increase their investment by 0. 2 percentage points following the regulatory change that allows them to signal their future prospects by obtaining a ﬁnancial statement audit.  In economic terms, this coefﬁcient represents a d9,719 increase in investment for the average treatment ﬁrm and corresponds to a 7% increase in investment from its conditional mean.  Columns 2 and 3 present the regression results using ﬁrms obtaining voluntary and mandatory audits as the control sample, respectively.  We ﬁnd the coefﬁcient for POST_REG  TREATMENT_FIRM is 0. 009 (0. 005) when the control sample comprises of ﬁrms obtaining voluntary (mandatory) audits and the coefﬁcient is statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level.  These coefﬁcients indicate that the treatment ﬁrms increase investment by 0. 9 (0. 5) percentage points more than the voluntary (mandatory) control ﬁrms do, on average.  In terms of economic magnitude, these coefﬁcients suggest that investment increased by d12,279 (d14,278), representing approximately a 12% (9%) increase relative to the voluntary (mandatory) audit control sample.  Table 5 also shows that the coefﬁcients for the control variables are consistent with prior research.  For example, in Panel C, we ﬁnd that the coefﬁcients for SALES_GR, ROA and LIQUIDITY are positive and statistically signiﬁcant at the 5% level or better in all regressions, suggesting the ﬁrms with greater investment opportunities, proﬁtable ﬁrms and ﬁrms with greater liquidity tend to invest more.  Similarly, the coefﬁcient for LSIZE is negative and statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level, suggesting that larger ﬁrms tend to invest less.  To further corroborate our inferences above, we examine the dynamic effects of the audit regime shift on the debt levels, the cost of debt and investment of our treatment ﬁrms.  Speciﬁcally, we replace the POST_REG indicator variable with the following four indicator variables.  POST_REG [-1], POST_REG [0], POST_REG [1], and POST_REG [2], where POST_REG [-1] is an event time indicator that equals one for the year immediately preceding the audit regime shift, POST_REG [0] is an indicator that equals one for the year of the audit regime shift, and POST_REG [1] and POST_REG [2] are indicators that equal one for the year immediately following the audit regime shift and two years after the audit regime shift, respectively.  These indicator variables enter our regressions as interactions with the TREATMENT_FIRM indicator, and their main effects are absorbed by the inclusion of year  industry ﬁxed effects.  To the extent the audit regime shift was a relatively exogenous event and not part of any pre-existing trend, we should ﬁnd that our treatment ﬁrms increase their debt and investment levels only when the regulatory change became effective.  Table 6 presents the results.  For brevity, we only tabulate the results for the voluntary audit control sample.  however, our inferences are similar using the mandatory audit control sample to benchmark treatment effects.  We ﬁnd that the coefﬁcient for POST_REG [ 1]  TREATMENT_FIRM is statistically insigniﬁcant in all three regressions.  debt, cost of debt, and investment.  Further, the coefﬁcients for POST_REG [0]  TREATMENT_FIRM, POST_REG [1]  TREATMENT_FIRM, and POST_REG [2]  TREATMENT_FIRM are all statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level (10% level or better) in the investment and debt (cost of debt) regressions.  These results signiﬁcantly strengthen our inference by mitigating endogeneity concerns related to the existence of a pre-existing trend in our variables of interest.  5. 6.  The effect of the audit choice information on investment efﬁciency and ﬁrm performance.  We next examine whether the information in the audit choice allows ﬁrms to respond more quickly to their growth opportunities and improve their overall operating performance.  Our hypothesis is that the information in the audit choice conveys incremental information to external ﬁnanciers about the ﬁrms' future prospects, thereby increasing the ﬁrm's access to ﬁnance (i. e. , debt capacity) and their ﬁnancial ﬂexibility.  Prior research suggests that ﬁnancial ﬂexibility enables ﬁrms to avoid ﬁnancial distress in the face of negative shocks, and to readily fund investment when proﬁtable opportunities arise (Gamba and Triantis, 2008).  Speciﬁcally, ﬁnancial ﬂexibility facilitates easier and cheaper access to ﬁnancing, thereby allowing ﬁrms to rapidly increase investment in response to growth opportunities.  Further, ﬁnancial ﬂexibility also allows ﬁrms to decrease and/or abandon investment during downturns because their ﬁnancing terms are less restrictive (e. g. , fewer/less restrictive covenants, no/fewer restrictions on asset sales, etc. ) and their assets are less likely to be tied up as collateral (Bradley and Roberts, 2004).  To test whether the information in the audit choice makes ﬁrms more responsive to their growth opportunities, we augment equation 1 by interacting sales growth (SALES_GR) – our proxy for growth opportunities – with TREATMENT_FIRM and POST_REG.  As before, we present three sets of results that correspond to the baseline speciﬁcation without any control sample and two difference-in-differences regressions using ﬁrms obtaining voluntary audits before and after the regulation or ﬁrms obtaining mandatory audits before and after the regulation as control ﬁrms.  The variable of interest in our baseline speciﬁcation is SALES_GR  POST_REG and the variable of interest in the difference-in-differences speciﬁcations is SALES_GR  POST_REG  TREATMENT_FIRM.  The coefﬁcients for these variables capture the incremental investment-growth sensitivity following the regulatory change in 2004.  Table 7, Panel A presents the regression results.  Consistent with our prediction, we ﬁnd that the coefﬁcient for SALES_GR  POST_REG is positive and statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level (coef. ¼0. 008.  t-stat. ¼2. 99) in column 1.  This coefﬁcient suggests that our treatment ﬁrms become more responsive to their growth opportunities following the regulation.  Similarly, columns 2 and 3 show that the coefﬁcient for SALES_GR  POST_REG  TREATMENT_FIRM is also positive and statistically signiﬁcant at the 10% level.  In economic terms, our regressions suggest that prior to the regulation a 1% increase in sales growth leads to a 0. 3% increase in investment pre-regulation, and a 1. 1–1. 2% increase in investment postregulation.  In Panel B, we examine whether the information in the audit choice leads to an increase in the operating performance of our treatment ﬁrms.  We measure operating performance as earnings before extraordinary items (scaled by average assets in the pre-regulation period).  To test our prediction, we modify equation 1 by changing the dependent variable to operating performance.  Consistent with our prediction, we ﬁnd that the coefﬁcient for POST_REG is positive and statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level (coef. ¼0. 034.  t-stat. ¼8. 80) in column 1.  This coefﬁcient suggests that our treatment ﬁrms increase their operating performance following the regulation by 12. 2%, amounting to approximately d1,687 per year.  Similarly, columns 2 and 3 show that the coefﬁcient for POST_REG  TREATMENT_FIRM is also positive and statistically signiﬁcant at the 5% level (or better), suggesting that the audit choice signal leads to an increase in operating performance.  These results support our hypothesis that the information conveyed by the audit choice following the removal of the audit requirement reduces ﬁnancing frictions and consequently leads to an improvement in ﬁrm performance.  For brevity, we tabulate only the difference-in-differences speciﬁcation using ﬁrms obtaining voluntary audits as the control sample for the remainder of our analyses.  Nevertheless, we ﬁnd that our inferences from the remaining tests are robust to estimating regressions without any control sample and using ﬁrms obtaining mandatory audits as the control sample.  In addition, we do not tabulate additional results using the cost of debt as the dependent variable given the measurement error inherent in our interest expense proxy.  more ﬁnancially constrained.  The intuition for our proxy follows from the evidence in Hadlock and Pierce (2010), who show that ﬁrm size and age are the best predictors of ﬁnancing constraints. 16 Table 8, Panel A shows that the coefﬁcient for POST_REG  TREATMENT_FIRM  FIN_CONSTRAINED is positive and statistically signiﬁcant at the 10% level when both debt and investment are the dependent variables (coef. ¼0. 016 and 0. 007, tstat. ¼1. 74 and 1. 76).  The table also shows that the coefﬁcient for POST_REG  TREATMENT_FIRM is positive and statistically signiﬁcant at the 5% level in both regressions.  These coefﬁcients indicate that both groups of treatment ﬁrms increase their debt and investment following the regulation, consistent with ﬁnancial constraints on these ﬁrms.  However, the more ﬁnancially constrained ﬁrms increase debt and investment by a signiﬁcantly larger magnitude than the less constrained ﬁrms.  Speciﬁcally, the coefﬁcients suggest that the more (less) ﬁnancially constrained treatment ﬁrms increase their debt and investment by 2. 7 and 1. 4 (1. 1 and 0. 7) percentage points, respectively following the regulatory change.  In economic terms, these coefﬁcients represent a d13,379 increase in debt and d20,533 increase in investment from its conditional mean, which corresponds to an 11% (20%) increase in debt (investment) for the average more-constrained treatment ﬁrm.  The lessconstrained ﬁrms, on the other hand, increase debt by d6,322 and investment by d8,213 from its conditional mean, which corresponds to a 5% (8%) increase in debt (investment).  Next, we examine whether ﬁrms that resort to other avenues to convey information about their future prospects during the mandatory audit regime receive lower beneﬁts from the information in the audit choice.  That is, to the extent ﬁrms use alternative means to reduce information asymmetry with external ﬁnanciers, the ﬁrm's audit choice is less likely to provide incremental information to external ﬁnanciers.  As a result, the regulation should have a smaller impact on such ﬁrms.  One potential mechanism through which private ﬁrms can reduce information asymmetry about their prospects is by hiring a high quality auditor, as these audits are typically more costly.  Therefore, unless the ﬁrm is conﬁdent about its future prospects, it is unlikely to incur the additional costs necessary to hire a high quality auditor.  We construct an indicator variable that equals one if the ﬁrm hires a Big 4 ﬁrm (BIG4).  To test our prediction, we augment equation 1 by including additional covariates based on the interaction between BIG4, TREATMENT_FIRM and POST_REG.  Table 8, Panel B presents the results.  We ﬁnd that the coefﬁcient for POST_REG  TREATMENT_FIRM  BIG4 is negative in both the debt and investment regressions, but statistically signiﬁcant only in the investment regression.  The coefﬁcient for POST_REG  TREATMENT_FIRM is positive and statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level in the debt and investment regressions.  Our results in Panel B indicate that treatment ﬁrms increase their debt and investment following the regulation.  However, those ﬁrms that hire a Big 4 auditor before the regulation increase investment by a signiﬁcantly smaller magnitude than ﬁrms that did not do so.  While the investment effect is consistent with our prediction, the debt result is not.  We do not offer any ex post explanation for this result.  6.  Additional analyses.  6. 1.  Is the audit choice a proxy for growth opportunities.  An important alternative interpretation for our results is that the audit choice is correlated with a ﬁrm's growth opportunities, and thus ﬁrms that choose to receive audits tend to increase investment and ﬁnancing as a result of these growth opportunities.  In other words, we ﬁnd that our treatment ﬁrms increase debt and investment after the regulation, and we attribute this change to the observability of the audit choice, which relaxes ﬁnancing constraints.  However, a potential alternative hypothesis is that our treatment ﬁrms experience a shock to growth opportunities in 2004 that did not affect the control ﬁrms (despite our matching approach).  To address this concern, we conduct two additional tests.  First, we directly test whether the treatment ﬁrms observe an increase in growth opportunities relative to the control ﬁrms in 2004.  Again, our assumption is that the treatment ﬁrms have high growth opportunities pre-2004, but are unable to fund and exploit these opportunities because of ﬁnancing constraints.  Thus, our hypothesis is that the observed increase in debt and investment is the result of a relaxation in ﬁnancing constraints and we do not expect to observe an increase in growth opportunities post-2004.  We ﬁnd (in an untabulated analysis) no evidence that treatment ﬁrms have an increase in growth opportunities in 2004.  This ﬁnding supports our intuition and helps partially mitigate the concern that ﬁrms are simply responding to an increase in growth opportunities in 2004.  Second, we split our treatment ﬁrms into two groups.  (A) those that eventually grow larger than the audit exemption threshold—d5. 6 (d2. 8) million sales (asset)—sometime after 2004 and thus move back to a mandatory audit regime, and (B) those that remain under the audit exemption threshold after 2004, i. e. , remain in the voluntary audit regime.  We then compare investment/ﬁnancing for these two sets of ﬁrms.  The intuition is that for both sets of treatment ﬁrms, the audit choice is unobservable pre-2004 and becomes observable post-2004.  However, the audit choice for treatment ﬁrms in group (A) becomes unobservable again, as their assets/sales exceed the exemption thresholds.  Thus, the information in the audit choice is no longer observed by external investors.  If our inferences are correct, we should see a reduction in their investment/ﬁnancing, as information in the audit choice is lost again.  However, we should not observe such a reduction in investment/ﬁnancing for treatment ﬁrms in group (B) since their audit choice continues to be observable.  In contrast, if the audit choice is ‘irrelevant,’ or the audit choice is sorting ﬁrms based on their growth opportunities, there is no reason to expect the treatment ﬁrms in groups (A) and (B) to behave any differently after the group (A) ﬁrms reach the audit exemption threshold, particularly since all ﬁrms still get an audit but just differ on whether the audit is mandatory or not.  Note that the group (A) treatment ﬁrms exceed the exemption thresholds faster than the group (B) treatment ﬁrms primarily because these ﬁrms are larger to begin with and thus closer to the threshold limits. 