 Introduction The auditor's report is the primary channel through which auditors communicate with financial statement users information discovered during the auditing process.  Financial analysts and regulators have criticized the existing auditor's reporting model as having little communicative value, and additional disclosures have been proposed to enhance the value of the audit report (Church et al. , 2008.  PCAOB, 2013). 1 Under the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) requirement and Generally Accepted Auditing Standards (GAAS), the auditor's reporting options are to issue either an unqualified opinion or an unqualified opinion with explanatory language, commonly called a modified audit opinion (MAO). 2 This inclusion of discretionary explanatory language, such as citing a lack of accounting consistency, emphasizing a material uncertainty, or expressing a going concern (GC) opinion, is the only difference between a standard clean opinion and an MAO. 3 In fact, an MAO is the sole way for auditors to communicate audit-specific information to outsiders. 4 There is still debate, however, about the extent to which the auditor's report communicates relevant information to financial statement users (Church et al. , 2008.  DeFond and Zhang, 2014).  In this study, we empirically investigate the relevance of MAOs in private debt contracting.  A large portion of the prior research that studied modified opinions focuses on the market reaction to the auditor's report and provides evidence that equity investors react negatively to the issuance of a nonstandard opinion, especially to a GC opinion (e. g.  Loudder et al. , 1992.  Fleak and Wilson, 1994.  Menon and Williams, 2010).  We investigate the relevance of auditor reporting from the perspective of debtholders for several reasons.  First, accounting information is often a direct input in debt contracting.  for example, debt covenants may rely on accounting numbers to monitor firm performance.  If an MAO indicates low financial reporting quality, lenders will change the relative use of accounting-based covenants and general covenants in loans issued after MAOs.  Second, debt contracts provide multi-dimensional information about borrowers.  loan contracts allow us to investigate the effects of audit opinions on both price and non-price costs of debt, including loan covenants, loan size, loan maturity, and collateral requirements.  Finally, debtholders, whose payoffs are concave in relation to firm value, demand a timely shift of control rights in order to discipline managers in the case of poor firm performance (Dewatripont and Tirole, 1994.  Ball et al. , 2008).  This implies that debtholders should react to information in MAOs for both pricing and monitoring purposes, because MAOs are likely to communicate negative news about clients’ financial reporting quality and credit worthiness.  Thus, examining lenders’ responses to MAOs can enhance our understanding of the usefulness of auditor reporting.  Lenders are likely to find the audit report relevant and useful in two ways.  First, through the audit opinion and associated explanatory language, the auditor communicates information about the quality of financial reports for debt contracting purposes.  The relevance of MAOs in debt contracting depends on the severity of the auditor's concern as expressed in the explanatory language.  Second, MAOs communicate private information about clients’ credit risk to lenders that is not available elsewhere.  Therefore, we expect the relevance of MAOs to lenders varies with the risks conveyed in the MAO.  To analyze the relevance of MAOs in debt contracting, we first categorize audit opinions into clean and modified opinions.  If an MAO indicates low financial reporting quality and potential credit risk, we predict that loans issued to firms after an MAO will be associated with a higher cost of debt, reflected across different contract terms.  To examine the incremental relevance of explanatory language, we classify MAOs into two general types, which we further partition into four groups by their cause.  Inconsistency opinions are caused by an Accounting Change or a Restatement.  and Inadequacy opinions are caused by Material Uncertainty or a GC Opinion. 5 MAOs issued because of an accounting Inconsistency alert financial statement users about the incomparability of data contained in the financial statements.  MAOs issued for Inadequacy reasons express auditors’ more serious concerns about the quality of the financial statements because of unrecognized losses or risk.  Material uncertainty concerns are related to the resolution of future economically relevant unknowns (e. g. , contingent liabilities, litigation risk, and business uncertainty), and GC opinions indicate that a key assumption of the accounting model is violated (i. e. , that the firm will continue as a going concern for at least one year).  The severity of the auditor's concern is greater in Inadequacy opinions than in Inconsistency opinions.  Among the four types of MAOs, GC opinions require the most auditor judgment and, therefore, are likely to convey more of auditors’ private information than other types of MAOs. 6 We find that loans initiated after MAOs have higher loan spreads (on average, 17 basis points higher) compared to loans initiated after clean opinions, controlling for other determinants of the interest rate.  In addition, the effects of MAOs on loan spreads vary significantly depending on the type of explanatory language.  The loan spread effect increases from 0 basis points after an Accounting Change to 25, 49, and 107 basis points, on average, after Restatement, Material Uncertainty, and GC Opinions, respectively.  These results support our prediction that interest rates increase after an MAO and that the effect varies with the type of MAO.  We also find that lenders decrease the use of financial covenants and increase the use of general covenants in loans initiated after an MAO.  Specifically, lenders decrease the use of financial covenants by 3. 8% and increase the use of general covenants (such as restrictions on dividend payouts or on the uses of borrowed funds) by 4. 2%, on average, after an MAO.  Again, the relevance of an MAO depends on the type of modification.  We find that Inconsistency MAOs have a smaller, but still significant, effect on the use of financial and general covenants than do Inadequacy MAOs.  Within Inadequacy MAOs, Material Uncertainty opinions are associated with an average increase of 18. 2% in the use of general covenants but have no effect on the use of financial covenants.  In contrast, GC opinions are associated with an average decrease of 9. 1% in the number of included financial covenants and an average increase of 12. 3% in the number of included general covenants.  The results from the debt covenant tests suggest that MAOs convey relevant information to lenders and that the use of the financial reports in debt contracting varies with the type of concern expressed by the auditor in the MAO.  We provide further evidence on the relevance of MAOs on other loan terms including loan size, the likelihood of requiring collateral, and loan maturity.  Consistent with our predictions, we find that lenders reduce loan sizes and increase the likelihood of requiring collateral following an MAO.  The results on loan maturity show a significant decrease in loan maturities after a GC opinion, which is consistent with GC opinions communicating the auditor's information about the client's credit risk to lenders.  The overall decrease in loan term favorability and the variation of the effects of MAOs suggest that MAOs communicate information useful to lenders in negotiating debt contracts. 