1.  Introduction  We provide evidence on the effects of bank mergers and acquisitions (M&As) in the U. S.  on borrowers’ voluntary disclosure of ﬁrm-speciﬁc information to public ﬁnancial markets.  The past three decades have witnessed waves of consolidations  through M&As in the U. S.  banking industry.  This trend has signiﬁcantly reduced the number of banking institutions, and a  few large banks now hold the bulk of assets.  Researchers argue that the consolidation has fundamentally altered the nature  of banks as ﬁnancial intermediaries, both directly by affecting how banks monitor and ﬁnance borrowers (e. g. , changing the  type and nature of products and services banks offer), and indirectly by affecting borrowers’ demand for products and services from alternative (public) ﬁnancial markets.  Evidence on how bank mergers affect borrowers’ disclosure adds to our  understanding of their consequences, and contributes to the growing literature that seeks to understand how ﬁrms’ incentive to produce and disseminate public information is affected by various institutional mechanisms in a country’s ﬁnancial  markets (e. g. , Ball et al. , 20 0 0.  Leuz et al. , 2003.  Bushman et al. , 2004 ).  Furthermore, to the extent that public information  is a key determinant of the development of stock markets, such evidence can shed light on the interaction between public  stock markets and bank markets ( Allen and Gale, 20 0 0.  Levine, 2005 ).   We posit that bank mergers affect borrowers’ incentive to disclose information publicly by affecting the monitoring and  ﬁnancing services provided by banks.  Prior work, however, has not reached consensus on the speciﬁc nature and degree  of the monitoring and ﬁnancing effects of bank mergers, especially for publicly listed borrowers.  Therefore, whether bank  mergers can cause economically meaningful public information spillover through increased disclosure by borrowers is ex  ante unclear and ultimately an empirical question.   On the monitoring side, mergers can change borrowers’ disclosure incentives by changing the nature and extent of bank  monitoring.  Traditional banking literature emphasizes the unique role played by banks because of their ability to produce  soft, private information about their borrowers.  This ability allows banks to serve as delegated monitors for public capital  providers who ﬁnd it diﬃcult to monitor ﬁrms for which much of the information is soft (e. g. , Diamond, 1984, 1991.  Fama,  1985 ).  Following bank mergers, borrowers’ incentive to disclose may increase or decrease depending on how mergers affect  bank monitoring.  On one hand, mergers can alter the nature of bank monitoring from being more soft information based to  being more hard information based, as mergers create more complex and hierarchical organizations that are less effective  at collecting and processing soft information but may be more eﬃcient at processing hard information (e. g. , Stein, 2002.   Berger et al. , 2005 ).  This can lead to increased public disclosure by borrowers for two reasons.  First, merged banks themselves may rely more on hard information that can be eﬃciently collected through public disclosures ( Gormley et al. , 2012 ).   Second, to the extent that banks’ comparative advantage in monitoring primarily emanates from their ability to process soft  information, public capital providers may rely less on bank monitoring after mergers and instead demand additional public  disclosure to facilitate their own monitoring efforts.  On the other hand, to the extent that mergers discipline banks plagued  by agency problems, monitoring effort may increase at banks that did not suﬃciently monitor their borrowers prior to the  mergers.  This may increase the willingness of public capital providers to delegate the monitoring role to banks, reducing  the public capital providers’ demand for public disclosure.   On the ﬁnancing side, borrowers’ disclosure can change if mergers affect their access to bank credit.  Bank mergers are  often motivated by eﬃciency gain considerations, and banks take actions and make changes in their operations to realize  these gains.  While these changes may beneﬁt the merging banks, they are not necessarily welfare improving to all borrowers  ( Karceski et al. , 2005.  Berger et al. , 1999.  DeYoung et al. , 2009 ).  Some borrowers may be adversely affected by these changes  and might experience reduced credit availability.  For example, the merged entity may re-balance and re-optimize their portfolios to achieve better risk management.  When merged banks have signiﬁcant geographic overlap, they may reduce loans  to some existing borrowers to reduce their exposure to the local area ( Amore et al. , 2013 ).  Or, following the disciplinary  acquisition of a poorly run bank, the merged entity may cut lending to borrowers who were beneﬁtting from ineﬃciently  priced cheap loans from the acquired bank.  Reduced credit availability might prompt these borrowers to increase public  disclosure to improve their access to alternative ﬁnancing sources ( Diamond and Verrecchia, 1991.  Baiman and Verrecchia,  1996 ).  At the same time, these changes may also beneﬁt some borrowers whose disclosure may decrease or remain unchanged.  Therefore, whether bank mergers can cause any meaningful public information spillover via the ﬁnancing channel  is also an empirical question.  Our analysis is based on a comprehensive sample of nearly 13,0 0 0 syndicated loan contracts where the lead lenders  are commercial banks or bank holding companies and the borrowers are publicly traded companies in the U. S.  exchanges  with ongoing lending relationships with their banks.  We use a difference-in-differences (DiD) design in which we compare  changes in the disclosure of borrowers whose banks are involved in M&As during their contract periods to contemporaneous  changes in the disclosure of borrowers whose banks are not involved in M&As.   Using the incidence of conference calls as our main measure of disclosure, we ﬁnd that borrowers signiﬁcantly increase  disclosure after their lending banks engage in M&As.  The disclosure increases are not concentrated in periods immediately  after mergers.  instead, they persist throughout post-merger periods.  These effects are robust to the inclusion of controls for  known determinants of disclosure and to alternative measures of disclosure based on earnings forecasts.   In cross-sectional analyses, we ﬁnd that the effects of bank mergers are stronger for borrowers who are more vulnerable  to disruptions in banking services following mergers.  Speciﬁcally, the disclosure increases are larger for borrowers who are  more reliant on the merging banks to ﬁnance their assets and who do not have alternative existing banking relationships.   Consistent with the monitoring channel, we also ﬁnd that disclosure increases are larger when banks perform a stronger  monitoring role (as proxied by the number of covenants in the borrowers’ existing covenants), when information about  borrowers’ operations tends to be soft (as proxied by a composite score based on borrowers’ intangible assets and R&D  expenditure), and when their banks’ pre-merger organizational structures are more suitable for soft-information monitoring  (as proxied by the number of branches operated by the banks).  Finally, consistent with the ﬁnancing channel, we ﬁnd that  the effects of mergers are stronger for borrowers when the merging banks have more correlated geographic exposures and  thus are more likely to cut lending to their existing borrowers for risk diversiﬁcation purposes.   We examine the sensitivity of our results to two alternative explanations.  The ﬁrst one is that changes in local economic  conditions coinciding with bank mergers could be driving our results.  We conduct three analyses to address this concern.   First, we show that our ﬁndings are robust to the inclusion of a comprehensive set of controls for location-level economic  conditions.  Second, we ﬁnd that our results are robust to the inclusion of state-year or MSA-year interactive dummies that  ﬂexibly absorb the effect of any time-varying local-level economic shocks.  Finally, our ﬁndings are also robust to estimating  the DiD speciﬁcation on a propensity score matched sample in which each treatment borrower (affected by bank mergers) is  matched to an economically similar control borrower (unaffected by bank mergers) from the same location.  These ﬁndings  suggest that the disclosure increase is unlikely to be driven by changes in local economic conditions.  A second alternative  explanation is that our results reﬂect the effect of poor ﬁnancial health of banks engaged in mergers.  We note that prior  studies show that bank mergers in the U. S.  have largely been driven by regulatory, technological, and competitive changes,  and most mergers involved healthy ﬁnancial institutions ( Pilloff, 2004 ).  In addition, we ﬁnd that the disclosure increase does  not vary with proxies for bank performance and also manifests when banks are in good health prior to mergers.   We also document two ﬁndings consistent with the premise that bank mergers cause disruptions in borrowers’ banking  service.  First, we ﬁnd that relative to borrowers whose banks did not engage in M&A activities, borrowers of merged banks  reduce their reliance on bank credit and increase their reliance on public bond ﬁnancing following mergers.  Second, we  document signiﬁcant negative stock price reactions to borrowers upon the announcement of their bank mergers.  Collectively,  these ﬁndings are consistent with the interpretation that the disclosure increase reﬂects borrowers’ response to disruptions  in banking services caused by mergers at their existing lending banks.   Our study contributes to the literature on bank mergers.  Merger waves over the last three decades have fundamentally  altered the nature of banks as ﬁnancial intermediaries in the U. S. , and a growing literature seeks to understand the economic consequences of this development.  Our study is the ﬁrst to explore the consequences of this change for the public  information environment in the banking market.  Our results suggest that banking consolidation prompts borrowers to increase transparency to improve access to alternative ﬁnancing sources and to meet the informational demands of capital  providers in a changed monitoring environment in which both public capital providers and banks rely more on public, hard  information for monitoring purposes.  The large number of bank mergers in the U. S.  over the last three decades suggests  that our ﬁndings can shed light on the over-time increases in voluntary disclosure by U. S.  public companies ( Bushee et al. ,  2004 ).  More generally, because the availability of public information affects the ability of stock markets to allocate resources  eﬃciently, our ﬁnding of a spillover effect from bank mergers also improves our understanding of the channels through  which ﬁnancial markets affect resource allocation in the economy, and informs the debate on bank- versus market-based  ﬁnancial systems ( Allen and Gale, 20 0 0 .  Levine, 20 05 ).  While our main focus is on the consequences for the public information environment, our ﬁndings on borrowers’ ﬁnancing changes around mergers add to our understanding of how U. S.   bank mergers affect bank credit supply to publicly listed borrowers.   Our study also contributes to recent research establishing the importance of banking relations on ﬁrms’ public information disclosure behaviors.  Lo (2014) ﬁnds that borrowers increase disclosure following deterioration in their banks’ ﬁnancial  health, consistent with the hypothesis that ﬁrms increase disclosure to facilitate access to public ﬁnancing when continued  access to bank ﬁnancing is under threat.  Vashishtha (2014) ﬁnds that borrowers reduce disclosure after covenant violations.   he concludes that reduced disclosure reﬂects a delegation of monitoring to banks by shareholders who consequently demand less disclosure.  Gormley et al.  (2012) ﬁnd an increase in timely loss recognition after foreign bank entry in India due  to these banks’ greater demand for hard, public information for screening and monitoring borrowers.  Martin and Roychowdhury (2015) ﬁnd evidence of a decrease in timely loss recognition after the initiation of trading in credit default swaps, consistent with a reduction in lenders’ monitoring incentives following this development.  Our study shares with these papers  the common theme that borrowers optimally change disclosure in response to changes in their banking relationships.   The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 develops our hypotheses.  Section 3 describes the data and sample.   Main results are presented and discussed in Section 4 .  Section 5 presents additional analyses and robustness tests, and  Section 6 concludes.   2.  Hypotheses development.  Prior work argues that bank merger waves have signiﬁcantly altered the scope and nature of banks’ operations, as well  as their ability and incentives to monitor and ﬁnance borrowers ( Berger et al. , 1999 ).  We posit that these changes can affect  borrowers’ disclosure incentives in response to changes in borrowers’ monitoring environments (the monitoring channel),  and to changes in banks’ ﬁnancing services to borrowers (the ﬁnancing channel).  In this section, we summarize the relevant  arguments.   2. 1.  The monitoring channel.  Under the monitoring channel, bank mergers can cause borrowers to increase disclosure because the banks’ monitoring  style evolves from being based primarily on soft information to being based more on hard, quantitative information.  The  traditional literature on relationship banking recognizes banks’ role as delegated monitors because of their unique ability to  access and produce soft, private information about their borrowers (e. g. , Diamond, 1984, 1991.  Fama, 1985.  James, 1987 ).   Because dispersed public capital providers rely mainly on hard, public information for monitoring, they ﬁnd it too costly  to monitor and provide capital to ﬁrms for which much of the information is soft.  As a result, for such borrowers, public  capital providers optimally delegate (at least part of) the monitoring effort to banks.  this reduces public capital providers’  own demand for public disclosure for monitoring purposes ( Ball et al. , 20 0 0.  Vashishtha, 2014 ).   Recent work argues that bank mergers could fundamentally change the nature of banks’ monitoring by altering their  organizational structures (e. g. , Stein, 2002.  Berger et al. , 2005 ).  Speciﬁcally, mergers result in larger, more complex, and  more hierarchical banking organizations that are less effective at collecting and processing soft information but may be more  eﬃcient at processing hard information.  Theoretical studies show that complex, hierarchical organizations rely less (more)  on  soft  (hard)  information  because  such  organizations  face  higher  costs  in  motivating  agents  to  produce  and  truthfully  represent soft information, as well as in accurately communicating soft information within organizations.   Several empirical studies provide evidence that banks’ organizational structure affects their relative reliance on soft versus hard information,  and consequently their lending practices.   The shift in the nature of bank monitoring could generate higher demand for public disclosures from capital providers.   The higher demand can come from banks themselves.  To the extent that much of the hard information can be eﬃciently  collected through public disclosures, after M&As, banks may reduce their costly private information collection effort s and  may instead rely more on public disclosures.  Consistent with this possibility, Gormley et al.  (2012) ﬁnd that foreign banks  demand more conservative accounting reports to facilitate their screening and monitoring effort s.  Higher demand may also  come from other external capital providers.  To the extent that banks’ comparative advantage in monitoring emanates primarily from their ability to process soft information, after M&As, public capital providers may rely less on bank monitoring  and instead demand additional public disclosure to facilitate their own monitoring effort s.   On the other hand, mergers could also affect bank monitoring in ways that could lead to a decrease in borrowers’ disclosure.  The literature on the market for corporate control argues that mergers can act as a disciplining device for ﬁrms  plagued by agency problems (e. g. , Shleifer and Vishny, 1997 ).  As a result, monitoring efforts may increase following mergers  at banks that were not suﬃciently monitoring their borrowers prior to the mergers.  This can in turn increase public capital  providers’ incentive to rely more on bank monitoring, reducing their own demand for public disclosure.   2. 2.  The ﬁnancing channel.  Under the ﬁnancing channel, public information spillovers may result if bank mergers adversely affect the availability of  credit to some borrowers who may increase disclosure in their effort to offset the consequences of reduced access to credit.   While mergers are usually motivated by eﬃciency gains, these gains may not be welfare improving for all borrowers.  For  example, in disciplinary mergers that involve the acquisition of poorly run target banks plagued by agency problems, target  banks’ borrowers may be beneﬁtting from below-cost cheap credit prior to mergers.  Following such mergers, efforts by the  new management of the merged entity may reduce or completely eliminate credit to such borrowers.   In general, actions taken by merging banks to realize eﬃciency gains may adversely affect credit availability to some  borrowers even when these borrowers are proﬁtable to banks.  For example, following the increased complexity in organizational structure and associated changes in monitoring style (e. g. , Stein, 2002 ), the merged entity may realize that it  is no longer proﬁtable to lend to borrowers whose credit relevant information tends to be soft ( Berger et al. , 2005 ), such  banks may decide to refocus their lending more on borrowers that can be more cost-effectively monitored based on hard  information and cut lending to borrowers that do not generate reliable hard information.  Mergers can also create adverse  effects on some borrowers because of risk management and portfolio optimization considerations (e. g. , Berger et al. , 1999 ).   For example, following mergers between banks with geographic overlap, the merged entity may cut lending to some existing borrowers to achieve better loan portfolio diversiﬁcation ( Amore et al. , 2013 ).  Finally, anecdotal evidence suggests that  banks may become more selective in lending after mergers, as they gain access to alternative markets and clienteles and  have more proﬁtable business opportunities to pursue than lending to existing borrowers ( Sapsford, 2004 ).   The adverse ﬁnancing effect can prompt banks’ existing borrowers to increase public disclosure for two possible reasons.   First, to the extent that reduction/discontinuation of credit supply by the merged bank is also accompanied by reduced  monitoring effort, the existing shareholders of these borrowers may increase their demand for public disclosure to facilitate  their own monitoring.  Second, borrowers may also increase public disclosure to improve their access to alternative sources  of ﬁnancing to offset the lost bank credit.  Speciﬁcally, ﬁrms with relatively easy access to public ﬁnancing (e. g. , ﬁrms with  above investment grade credit rating or large, ﬁnancially strong ﬁrms) may attempt to offset the loss of bank credit by  accessing public debt markets ( Sapsford and Sherer, 2001 ).  These ﬁrms could increase public disclosure because public disclosure is a more cost-effective way than private communications to resolve information asymmetries and improve their  terms of ﬁnancing with a dispersed set of potential, public capital providers ( Diamond and Verrecchia, 1991.  Baiman and  Verrecchia, 1996) ).  Firms with no easy access to public ﬁnancing (e. g. , those with severe information asymmetries) may resort more to private sources for alternative ﬁnancing.  When this is the case, they may rely more on private communications  to reduce information asymmetries with these investors.  However, to the extent that public disclosure can help attract the  attention of alternative private funding sources in the ﬁrst place, they may also have incentive to increase public disclosure  for this reason.   While mergers may adversely affect some borrowers’ access to bank credit, they may at the same time increase bank  credit availability to other borrowers who might beneﬁt from some of the eﬃciency gains generated from bank mergers.   These borrowers may increase their reliance on bank ﬁnancing, which leads to no change or even a decrease in public  disclosure.  Therefore, the net effect from the ﬁnancing channel can be ambiguous.   Prior research offers no direct evidence on the extent to which mergers alter banks’ monitoring style and effort.  Similarly, while prior studies ( DeYoung et al. , 2009 ) document signiﬁcant improvements in bank performance following mergers  (consistent with the presence of eﬃciency gains), the evidence is inconclusive on what changes banks implement to realize  these gains, and on the extent to which banks pass on the eﬃciency gains to customers.  The evidence is close to nonexistent  for publicly traded borrowers in the U. S. .  For example, while Berger and Udell (1996) and Erel (2011) ﬁnd lower post-merger  loan rates for small and medium businesses in the U. S. , Park and Pennacchi (2009) ﬁnd lower deposit rates in markets with  large banks, suggesting rent extraction from depositors.  Black and Strahan (2002) ﬁnd that the formation of new businesses  increases as the share of small banks decreases, consistent with the idea that banking consolidation improves ﬁnancing for  new businesses.  At the same time, Garmaise and Moskowitz (2006) ﬁnd evidence of decreased credit availability and higher  rates in areas with signiﬁcant bank mergers, and Erel (2011) ﬁnds higher post-merger loan prices when merged banks have  9 The lack of consensus on how mergers change banks’ monitoring and ﬁnancing besigniﬁcant overlap in their markets.   haviors suggests that whether mergers can have a meaningful effect on borrowers’ disclosure on average is ultimately an  empirical question.  That question is the focus of our study.   <Middle> Sample construction and description.  3. 1.  Sample construction.  We draw data from multiple sources to construct our main sample, which spans from 1999 to 2008.   To construct our base sample, we start with ﬁrms in the Compustat database for which data on bank loans are available in the Loan Pricing  Corporation’s (LPC) Dealscan database.  We then identify the lead banks for all loan contracts for these ﬁrms using the lender  information provided in the Dealscan database.  Following prior literature (e. g. , Bharath et al. , 2011 ), we identify a bank as  the lead bank if the Dealscan database indicates that it is the lead arranger.  When the lead arranger credit is missing, we  identify the lead arranger as the lender whose role has been speciﬁed as Admin Agent, Agent, Arranger or Lead Bank in the  database.   Dealscan typically reports as lead arranger the name of the institution listed on the cover page of a loan document.   As a result, regional branches or oﬃces are often listed as the lender of record.  Because these distinctions are often legal  rather than operational, we aggregate these entities into their parent institutions using the Federal Financial Institutions  Examination Council’s National Information Center (NIC) and annual reports as a source of ownership information when  necessary.   We collect information on the merger activities of lead banks using the SNL Financial Bank Mergers and Acquisitions  Database (SNL database).  SNL Financial is a private data vendor that provides comprehensive information on the M&A activities of banking institutions in the U. S. .  We hand-match the lead banks identiﬁed from loan contracts to the SNL database using bank names and geographic information, whenever available.  We verify the accuracy of the match between the Dealscan  loan data and the SNL merger data using information from NIC and press articles available on the internet.  The match results in a total of 892 mergers, staggered over 1995–2008.  Table 1 , Panel A provides the time-series distribution of merger  occurrences and the percentage of loan contracts affected by mergers.  As expected, as the industry consolidates, the number of mergers gradually declines over time.  However, the percentage of loan contracts affected by mergers stays relatively  stable at around 50%, suggesting that approximately half of the observations in our sample are affected by mergers.  The  staggered distribution of bank mergers enables us to apply the DiD design to identify the effect of mergers.   3. 2.  Measuring disclosure.  Our main measure of disclosure is based on the incidence of management conference calls.  Conference calls are a ﬂexible and rich disclosure medium that allows for the release of a wide variety of information through both quantitative and  qualitative disclosures.  Prior research shows that conference calls convey material information to outsiders ( Frankel et al. ,  1999.  Bowen et al. , 2002 ), are persistent/recurring once initiated ( Skinner, 2003 ), and can help reduce pricing ineﬃciency  ( Kimbrough, 2005 ).  In addition, the open nature of conference calls allows sophisticated analysts/investors to directly communicate with and scrutinize managers ( Mayew, 2008.  Mayew et al. , 2013 ), making it diﬃcult for managers to hide bad  news ( Hollander et al. , 2010 ).  Collectively, these ﬁndings suggest that the use of conference calls reﬂects a signiﬁcant commitment by ﬁrms to create a transparent information environment.   We obtain data on conference calls from BestCalls. com from 1999 to 2008.  We measure conference call activity using  a dummy variable (CONF_CALL) for the issuance of at least one conference call during a quarter.  Since prior studies ﬁnd  no known issues with the coverage of BestCalls. com, we code CONF_CALL as zero for ﬁrms that never appear in the BestCalls. com database.  Our inferences, however, remain unchanged if we remove ﬁrms that never appear in the BestCalls. com  database.  We also note that such data-coverage issues are unlikely to affect our ﬁndings because we do not expect changes  in data coverage of borrowers to systematically coincide with bank mergers.  The mean value for CONF_CALL is 0. 589 (see  Table 1 , Panel B).   Our ﬁnal sample comprises a maximum of 12,955 contracts from 121 lead banks corresponding to 3611 borrowers for  which all  required information is  available for  our  main estimation  equations.  We  collect  data  on  required variables at  quarterly frequency over the contract duration for each contract-bank combination.  Our unit of analysis is at the contractbank-quarter level.  Our sample contains a maximum of 118,269 contract-bank-quarter observations for analyses.  The average  (median) contract term in our sample is 17 (19) quarters.  Table 1 , Panel B presents the summary statistics for the main  variables used in the analyses, and their deﬁnitions and calculations are described in Appendix A .  It shows that bank loans  are an important source of ﬁnancing for our sample ﬁrms.  on average, borrowers in our sample ﬁnance more than a quarter  of their assets with bank loans.  Given that close to 50% of our observations are affected by mergers, these statistics suggest  that bank mergers can affect a signiﬁcant portion of borrowers’ external ﬁnancing.   3. 3.  Empirical speciﬁcation.  We estimate the effects of mergers on borrowers’ disclosure using the following speciﬁcation.  equals 1 if ﬁrm i conducts at least one conference call in quarter t during the period it has an ongoing  where CONF is a dummy variable that equals 1 for all quarters after the completion  syndicated loan contract with bank b.  MERGER i,b, t  of the merger in which bank b is involved, and zero otherwise.  MERGER i,b, t  is set to zero for the entire duration of the  loan contract if bank b is not involved in any merger during that period.  We drop the transition quarters between the  announcement and the completion dates of the mergers.  The mean (median) duration of the transition period is 1. 76 (1. 67)  quarters.  In untabulated analyses, we ﬁnd that our inferences remain unchanged if we retain the transition period and set  the MERGER i,b, t  is a set of ﬁrm-quarter control variables commonly used  γ t ) and contract-bank  in the literature to explain ﬁrms’ voluntary disclosures.  Eq.  (1) also includes quarterly time dummies ( ﬁxed effects (  ) to remove the effect of any time-speciﬁc common shocks and any unobservable time-invariant crosssectional differences across borrower-bank combinations.   dummy for the transition period to be 1 or zero.  Eq.  (1) represents a linear probability model for CONF_CALL.  We use the linear model as our main speciﬁcation because  prior research shows that non-linear logit or probit models with ﬁxed effects can produce biased coeﬃcient estimates due  to the incidental parameters problem ( Neyman and Scott, 1948.  Lancaster, 20 0 0.  Greene, 20 04 ).  Linear models may, however, introduce heteroscedastic and non-normal errors.  To address these issues, we use standard errors that are robust to  deviations from the assumption of homoscedastic and normal distribution of errors ( Wooldridge, 2002 .  page 454).  Linear  models may also produce predicted probabilities that fall outside the unit interval.  We do not see this as a signiﬁcant drawback as our main purpose is to estimate the average marginal effects, which, as explained in Angrist and Pischke (2009) and  Wooldridge (2002) , can be estimated reasonably well using linear probability models.  In a robustness check discussed later,  we ﬁnd that our inferences remain unchanged if we use a non-linear logit model.   With the inclusion of time and contract-bank ﬁxed effects, Eq.  (1) represents a difference-in-differences speciﬁcation  similar to the one in Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003) .  The coeﬃcient on MERGER represents the average causal effect  of bank mergers on their borrowers’ disclosure, under the assumption that the timing of bank mergers is exogenous with  respect to individual borrowers’ disclosure decisions.  We believe this assumption is plausible as prior studies indicate that  bank merger waves were largely driven by regulatory, technological, and competitive changes ( Pilloff, 2004 ).  Because our  unit of analysis is at the contract-bank-quarter level, ﬁrms with multiple syndicated loan contracts and ﬁrms with multiple  lead banks on a single contract will appear multiple times in our sample for a given quarter.  We therefore obtain all standard  errors after clustering at the ﬁrm level to allow for arbitrary forms of correlation between observations from the same ﬁrm.   About 30% of observations in our sample are from contracts where the lending banks did not experience mergers during the  contract periods.  For these observations, the MERGER dummy is not estimable because of the inclusion of the contract-bank  ﬁxed effects.  These observations serve as the control group to help obtain sharper coeﬃcient estimates.  Our results are not  affected by excluding these observations.   4.  Main results.  4. 1.  Main effect of bank mergers on borrower disclosure.  Table 2 shows the main results for the effect of bank mergers on borrowers’ disclosure.  Column (1) presents the results  from regressing CONF_CALL on only contract and quarter ﬁxed effects and no control variables.  The estimated coeﬃcient for  β) is 0. 024, statistically signiﬁcant at less than the 1% level.  Relative to the pre-merger average value of CONF_CALL for treatment borrowers (59%), the estimate represents about a 4% (   2. 4/59) increase in CONF_CALL frequency.  In Section  4. 2. 2 , we evaluate more directly the economic signiﬁcance of the effects for borrowers most expected to be affected by  bank mergers and ﬁnd the effects to be more substantial (8% to 35%).  The explanatory power of the regression is reasonably  high.  with just the ﬁxed effects, the adjusted R-squared is 0. 73.  In Column (2), we include time-varying ﬁrm-speciﬁc control  variables and ﬁnd that they have little effect on the estimated coeﬃcient for MERGER.  it remains statistically signiﬁcant  with a magnitude similar to that in Column (1), suggesting that bank mergers do not systematically coincide with changes  in ﬁrm characteristics.  This lends support to the assumption that bank mergers are likely to be exogenous with respect to  ﬁrm characteristics that determine disclosure choices.   To further assess causality, we augment Eq.  (1) with an indicator variable for the two quarters prior to the merger announcements (PreMERGER).  If mergers cause higher disclosure, we should observe a positive coeﬃcient only for the MERGER  variable but not for the PreMERGER variable.  Column (3) shows that this is indeed the case.  the coeﬃcient estimate for  PreMERGER is economically small and statistically indistinguishable from zero.  In robustness checks (not shown), we ﬁnd  similar results when we replace PreMERGER with the indicator variable for the periods prior to the two quarters before the  merger announcements.  In Table 5 (to be discussed later), we ﬁnd that the effects of mergers are not temporary and persist  throughout the post-merger periods.   In Column (4) we split the MERGER dummy into two indicator variables, one for mergers of acquiring banks (ACQUIRER) and one for target banks (TARGET).  We ﬁnd that the effect of mergers on target banks’ borrowers (coeﬃcient  although the difference is not statistically signiﬁcant at conventional levels (t-statistic  is economically larger than that for acquiring banks’ borrowers (coeﬃcient   1. 06).   In Column (5), we examine the robustness of our ﬁndings to the estimation of a conditional logit model with contractlevel  and  time  ﬁxed  effects.   Because  average  marginal  effects  are  not  estimable  from  ﬁxed-effect  logit  models  (e. g. ,  11 Estimates in Column (5) show  Wooldridge, 2002 ), we present estimates of the effect of each covariate on the odds ratios.  that the incidence of merger signiﬁcantly increases the odds ratio for a conference call (coeﬃcient estimate   1. 61 and t= statistic   3. 912).  This result suggests that our inferences are unlikely to be driven by unmodeled nonlinearity.   4. 2.  Cross-sectional variations in the effects of bank M&As.  In this subsection, we explore cross-sectional variations in the effect to further aid the causal interpretation of our ﬁndings and to shed light on the economic forces underlying the effect.  The general idea is that if the disclosure increase  reﬂects borrowers’ response to their lending banks’ merger activities, the effects should be larger when borrowers are more  sensitive to the changes in banks’ monitoring and ﬁnancing services caused by merger shocks.   4. 2. 1.  Sensitivity to shocks from bank mergers.  We use three partitioning variables to capture the sensitivity of borrowers to merger activities of their lending banks.   We posit that borrowers are more affected when they are more reliant on the loans from the merging banks and when they  have fewer alternative banking relationships to replace the merging bank.  We use the proportion of assets ﬁnanced by the  existing loan (%BankLoan) to measure the degree of reliance on the existing banking relationship.  We expect the disclosure  increases to be larger for borrowers with larger %BankLoan.  We use two proxies for borrowers’ access to alternative banking  relationships.  The ﬁrst is a dummy variable (MULTI_REL) for whether the borrower has an existing relationship with another  lead arranger (not involved in the merger) in any of the outstanding loan contracts at the time of the merger announcement.  We expect the effect of mergers on borrower disclosure to be stronger for borrowers with no alternative, existing  banking relationships.  As in prior studies ( Carvalho et al. , 2015.  Gopalan et al. , 2011.  Suﬁ, 2007.  Detragiache et al. , 20 0 0.   Ongena and Smith, 20 0 0 ), more than half of our sample ﬁrms have just one relationship with their lead banks, and the  average ﬁrm has 1. 67 relationships at the time of mergers.   The second proxy is based on the number of alternative non-merging banks located within a 25-mile radius of borrowers,  with the distance measured following the approach in Dass and Massa (2011) .   The prediction for this proxy is less clearcut.  On one hand, to the extent that it is relatively easier for borrowers to establish new relationships in short period of time  when they have more banks nearby, we expect their disclosure to be less sensitive to mergers at their existing banks.  On the  other hand, to the extent that it may take a long time for new lenders to acquire soft information and establish effective  monitoring relations, the new lenders may rely primarily on public disclosure for monitoring purposes in the beginning.   Meanwhile, the existing shareholders may not feel comfortable completely relying on the monitoring by the new lenders  and may demand more disclosure to aid their own monitoring effort.  Furthermore, it is also possible that borrowers with  more nearby banks may ﬁnd it advantageous to rely on public disclosure (instead of private communications) to attract  these lenders’ attention in the ﬁrst place.   We estimate the following speciﬁcation to examine how the effects of bank mergers vary by subsamples indicated by  the partitioning variables, where I (  speciﬁcation,  ) takes the value of 1 if the observation belongs to the subsample as described by the partitioning variable.  In this  estimate the effect of mergers on the disclosure of borrowers in subsample 1 and 2, respectively.  We  also provide test statistics for the differences between b and b.  We examine the effect of continuous partition variables  by creating dummy variables using median cut-offs.  All partition variables are measured as of the end of the quarter prior  to the merger announcement.   Table 3 , Panel A presents the results of this analysis.  In Column (1), the coeﬃcient estimate for the MERGER dummy  3. 39), as compared to a coeﬃcient of 0. 013  for borrowers with above-median reliance on bank credit is 0. 036 (t-statistic  (t-statistic   1. 51) for borrowers with below-median reliance on bank credit.  The difference in coeﬃcient estimates is significant at less than the 1% level, consistent with the prediction that the effect of bank mergers is stronger for borrowers more  reliant on loans from the merging banks.  Column (2) shows that the effects of mergers manifest mostly in borrowers with  no existing, alternative banking relationships.  the coeﬃcient for the MERGER dummy for borrowers with multiple banking  relationships is statistically indistinguishable from zero at traditional signiﬁcance levels, whereas the coeﬃcient for borrow= ers with no multiple banking relationship is 0. 040 and signiﬁcant at less than the 1% level (t-statistic   3. 6).  Estimates in  Column (3) indicate that the disclosure increase is signiﬁcant both for borrowers with above- and below-median numbers  of nearby banks, and the difference between the two subsamples is statistically insigniﬁcant.  This suggests that the borrowers’ disclosure response does not vary by the number of alternative, non-merging banks located nearby.  Viewed collectively,  the above results suggest that the borrowers’ disclosure response is stronger when they are more reliant on the merging  bank for monitoring and ﬁnancing services and when they do not have an established, alternative relationship to offset the  disruptions from bank mergers.   4. 2. 2.  Effects via monitoring and ﬁnancing channels.  We next examine whether the cross-sectional variations in the effect of bank mergers are consistent with the predictions of the monitoring channel and the ﬁnancing channel.  Speciﬁcally, the monitoring channel predicts greater disclosure  increases following mergers that cause larger changes in merging banks’ monitoring styles and for borrowers that are more  reliant on soft-information-based monitoring.  The ﬁnancing channel predicts stronger effects when mergers are more likely  to cause disruptions in continued credit availability from the merging banks.   We use three partitioning variables to examine the predictions from the monitoring channel.  First, we use the number of  pre-merger branches to proxy for the effect of mergers on banks’ soft-information-based monitoring.  To the extent that soft  information is easier to transmit within banks with fewer branches, banks with fewer branches are more likely to rely on  soft-information-based monitoring prior to mergers.  We therefore predict greater disclosure increase for their borrowers, as  these banks are more likely to experience greater transformation in their monitoring style because of larger changes in their  organizational structure and hierarchy following mergers ( Stein, 2002 ).  We use two variables to proxy for the extent of borrowers’ reliance on banks’ monitoring.  The ﬁrst is the number of covenants in borrowers’ existing loan contracts.  Because  the presence of a large number of covenants indicates banks’ intention to closely monitor borrowers prior to mergers, we  predict that the effects of changes in banks’ monitoring are likely to be larger for borrowers with more covenants.  We also  posit that information is more likely to be soft for ﬁrms with more intangible assets and high R&D intensity ( Lo, 2014 ), and  therefore these ﬁrms are more likely to be affected when banks adopt a more hard-information-based monitoring style.  We  test this prediction by partitioning the sample based on the ﬁrst principal component of borrowers’ intangible assets and  R&D expenditure, both scaled by borrowers’ total assets.  We measure intangible assets as one minus the ratio of tangible  assets (i. e. , sum of property, plant, and equipment.  inventories.  cash and marketable securities.  and accounts receivable) to  total assets.  Panel B of Table 3 reports the results from these partitioning variables.  As predicted, estimates in Columns (1)–(3) show  that mergers have stronger effects on the borrowers of banks with fewer pre-merger branches (coeﬃcient   5. 85), borrowers that have more covenants in their loan contracts (coeﬃcient   0. 071 and t= 0. 047 and t-statistic  statistic   3. 409), and = borrowers whose information tends to be soft in nature (coeﬃcient   3. 717).  In contrast, the effects   0. 037 and t-statistic  of  mergers  for  borrowers  of  banks  with  more  branches,  borrowers  with  fewer  covenants,  and  borrowers  with  less  soft  information are statistically and economically insigniﬁcant.  While these ﬁndings are broadly consistent with the monitoring  channel, we caution readers that they do not provide deﬁnitive evidence.  In addition, they cannot inform us whether the  additional demand for hard information disclosure is coming primarily from banks due to their changed monitoring style or  from external capital investors who are increasing their own hard-information-based monitoring.   We use three partitioning variables to examine the predictions from the ﬁnancing channel.  First is the remaining time  to maturity in the existing loan (MATURITY).  Borrowers with less time remaining in their existing contracts would have a  more urgent need to respond to any expected disruptions to credit availability from the merging banks.  We therefore expect these borrowers to have stronger incentives to increase public disclosure to facilitate access to external ﬁnancing.  As  explained in Section 2 , we expect disruptions to credit availability to existing borrowers to be more likely when merging  banks have greater overlap in geographic exposure.  The idea is that the banks in these mergers are more likely to reduce  lending to existing borrowers for risk diversiﬁcation purposes ( Amore et al. , 2013 ).  Therefore, we expect greater disclosure increases by borrowers following bank mergers with greater geographical overlap.  We use two variables to proxy for  the geographic overlap between merging banks.  The ﬁrst variable is an indicator variable for in-state mergers, deﬁned as  mergers between banks headquartered in the same state.  We posit that banks in-state mergers have more overlap in their  pre-merger operations, and we expect greater disclosure increase for borrowers of banks involved in-state mergers.  Among the borrower-bank relationships affected by bank mergers, 28. 6% involve mergers between banks headquartered in the same  state.  The second variable is based on the approach in Amore et al.  (2013) and captures the correlation in the economic activity of the geographic regions in which the merging banks operate (CORR_MERGEDBANK).  To calculate this measure, we  ﬁrst retrieve the monthly coincident indices for each state from the Federal Research Bank of Philadelphia.  The index provides a composite measure of economic activity in each state by combining data on nonfarm payroll employment, average  hours worked in manufacturing, unemployment rate, and wage and salary disbursements deﬂated by the consumer price  index.  We then construct a bank-level coincident index as the weighted average of the state-level index, with the weights  given by the proportion of deposits held by the bank in each state prior to the merger.  CORR_MERGEDBANK is calculated  as the correlation coeﬃcient between the merging banks’ coincident indices over the ﬁve-year period prior to the merger  announcement date, with higher values indicating more geographic correlation between the merging banks’ operations.   Results from these partitioning variables are reported in Panel C, Table 3 .  Column (1) shows that the coeﬃcient estimate  for MERGER for borrowers with above-median levels of remaining maturity is 0. 007 and insigniﬁcantly different from zero  at conventional levels, whereas the estimate for borrowers with shorter remaining maturity is positive and statistically sig= niﬁcant at less than the 1% level (0. 035, t-statistic   3. 99).  The estimates in Column (2) show that while in-state mergers  increase the probability of conference calls by 9. 4%, the estimates for out-of-state mergers are economically and statistically insigniﬁcant.  Similarly, Column (3) shows a signiﬁcant positive coeﬃcient on the MERGER dummy for borrowers when  merging banks have an above-median level of geographic correlation, whereas the coeﬃcient is insigniﬁcantly different from  zero for borrowers when the merging banks have low geographic correlation.   The cross-sectional analyses indicate that the economic magnitudes of the effects of bank mergers can be quite large.   For example, the increase in conference call frequency of 4. 7% for borrowers with a large number of covenants represents  an increase of about 8% over the pre-merger frequency of 59% for these borrowers.  For borrowers of banks involved in-state  mergers, a 9% increase in conference call frequency represents a 35% increase over the pre-merger frequency of 27%.  The  effects are similarly large for other partitions of borrowers more affected by mergers.   While the ﬁndings of cross-sectional variations are consistent with the presence of both monitoring and ﬁnancing channels, we caution that the evidence is not deﬁnitive.  The interpretation of these results is subject to the caveat that some  partitioning variables such as the number of covenants, the degree of soft information, and the remaining maturity are not  exogenous to ﬁrm characteristics.  Furthermore, some variables used to capture monitoring disruptions (e. g. , more covenants  and more soft information) can potentially capture ﬁnancing disruptions as well if these ﬁrms also experience more credit  disruptions following mergers.   5.  Sensitivity to alternative explanations and additional analyses.  5. 1.  Can local economic conditions explain the ﬁndings.  Prior work shows that banking deregulation, which removed regulatory hurdles to bank mergers, triggered signiﬁcant  local economic growth (e. g. , Jayaratne and Strahan, 1996 ), entrepreneurship ( Black and Strahan, 2002 ), and corporate innovation ( Chava et al. , 2013.  Amore et al. , 2013 ).  These changes in local economic conditions can affect borrowers’ incentives to  disclose.  To the extent that the ﬁrm-speciﬁc control variables do not fully absorb the effect of these changes, the coeﬃcient  of MERGER can reﬂect the effect of local conditions.   We perform three analyses to mitigate this concern.  First, we directly control for several state-level measures of local  economic conditions.  These control variables include (i) per capita GDP growth rate, (ii) personal income growth rate, (iii)  asset-weighted market-to-book ratio, (iv) total sales growth, (v) total capital expenditure growth, (vi) total R&D growth, and  (vii) the total number of patents granted to companies headquartered in the state.  Growth rate for sales, capital expenditure,  and R&D is computed by summing these variables for all public ﬁrms headquartered in a state.  We include these measures  for each of the three years centered on the ﬁscal year of the quarter for which disclosure is measured.  We expect these  variables to absorb the confounding effect of any past or anticipated changes in local economic conditions that may take  place in the same periods as bank mergers.  Column (1) in Table 4 , Panel A presents the results of this analysis.  Estimates  show  that  adding  these  controls  has  little  effect  on  our  main  inference.   The  coeﬃcient  estimate  for  MERGER  increases  slightly from 0. 025 ( Table 2 , Column 2) to 0. 027 and remains signiﬁcant.  In untabulated analyses, we also cluster standard  errors at the state level and our inferences remain unchanged.   In the second analysis, we alter the DiD design such that the control group of observations is obtained from the same  geographic location and year as the treatment observations.  Speciﬁcally, we include location-year interactive dummies in  the regressions with the location measured either by state or by the Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) as deﬁned by  the  Bureau  of  Census.   In  this  speciﬁcation,  the  identiﬁcation  comes  only  from  within  state-year  or  MSA-year  variation,  borrowers.  Because the treatment and control ﬁrms in this design face similar local conditions, the estimates are unlikely  to be confounded by changes in local growth prospects.  We note that this speciﬁcation is conservative, as the coeﬃcient  on MERGER is estimated only from the subsample of treatment observations with at least one control observation in the  same location-year.  The estimates in Columns (2) and (3) of Panel A of Table 4 show that the effects of MERGER remain  economically and statistically signiﬁcant.  Relative to the estimate in the baseline speciﬁcation (0. 025), the coeﬃcients for  MERGER are 0. 024 (t-statistic  3. 07) and 0. 029 (t-statistic   3. 74) when state-year and MSA-year interactive dummies are  included, respectively.  The above approach implicitly assumes that changes in local economic conditions have an equal effect on treatment and  control ﬁrms within the same geographic location.  In the ﬁnal analysis, we address the possibility that local ﬁrms are differentially affected by changes in local conditions by estimating Eq.  (1) on a propensity score matched sample.  Speciﬁcally,  we propensity-score match each treatment borrower to a control borrower from the same state (or MSA) based on industry  membership (using the Fama-French 48-industry classiﬁcation), size (measured as book value of assets), growth opportunities (measured as market-to-book ratio), and the time period of the contract.  To ensure high match quality, we impose  the restriction of common support.  Because treatment and control ﬁrms in this analysis are forced to be economically similar, they are more likely to respond similarly to changes in local conditions ( Smith and Todd, 2005 ).  The disadvantage of  this approach is that it reduces sample size by dropping unmatched borrowers.  Despite the reduced sample size, results  in Columns (4) and (5) show that the coeﬃcients of MERGER remain economically and statistically signiﬁcant.  Speciﬁcally,  the coeﬃcient estimate is 0. 023 (t-statistic ) when the location is matched by MSA.  We conclude from these additional analyses that our baseline result is robust to the  effects of local economic conditions.   5. 2.  Are results driven by borrowers of poorly performing banks.  Because some mergers in our sample may involve acquisition of poorly performing banks, we examine whether our results are driven by poor bank health and not bank mergers per se ( Lo, 2014) .   Moreover, to the extent that poor bank performance results from poor borrower performance, our results could also be confounded by poor borrower performance.   To examine this possibility, we partition our sample based on three measures of bank performance.  annual stock return,  return on assets, and the percentage of non-performing loans, all measured over the year prior to mergers.  For each performance measure, we create an indicator variable that equals 1 if the measure falls above the sample median value.  The bank  health explanation predicts that the effect of mergers would be more pronounced for borrowers whose banks performed  poorly prior to the mergers.  Table 4 , Panel B presents the results of this analysis.  Inconsistent with the bank health explanation, the estimates in Columns (1) and (2) indicate that the effect of a merger on borrowers’ disclosure does not differ  signiﬁcantly by bank performance as measured by stock return or return on assets.  The estimates in Column (3) suggest  that the disclosure actually increases more for borrowers of banks with fewer non-performing loans, with the difference  marginally signiﬁcant at the 10% level.   5. 3.  Persistence of the disclosure effects.  Prior studies on disclosure emphasize the importance of the commitment to transparency to facilitating ongoing monitoring, which in turn helps ﬁrms obtain capital from investors in the ﬁrst place (e. g. , Diamond and Verrecchia, 1991.  Baiman  and Verrecchia, 1996 ).  This implies that the post-merger disclosure increase should persist over time under both the monitoring and ﬁnancing channels.  To examine whether this is the case, we replace the MERGER dummy in our main speciﬁcation with two separate indicators.  NearTerm , which equals 1 for the ﬁrst four quarters following the merger completion  date, and zero otherwise.  and LongTerm , which equals 1 for all quarters following the fourth quarter after the merger completion date, and zero otherwise.  A signiﬁcant coeﬃcient estimate on LongTerm would suggest that the disclosure increase  is persistent.   The ﬁrst row of Table 5 , Panel A shows the results for the whole sample.  the effect of mergers is statistically significant in the near term with the coeﬃcient estimate of 0. 026 (t-statistic  3. 32), but the magnitude decreases to 0. 015 (t-statistic 1. 46) after the ﬁrst four quarters.  This suggests that some borrowers experience only temporary disruptions from  mergers, and they reverse the disclosure increase once these disruptions are resolved.  20 We next examine the persistence of the disclosure effects separately for subgroups of borrowers for which we expect the monitoring and financing disruptions to be stronger and persistent.  Speciﬁcally, we partition the effect of NearTerm and LongTerm dummies using all partitioning  variables (Z) examined in Table 3 .  With the exception of the partition by geographic correlation measure, the disclosure  increase is persistent for all subgroups of borrowers that are expected to experience stronger and continued disruptions because of bank mergers.  Collectively, these ﬁndings suggest that the disclosure increase reﬂects a commitment to increased  transparency in response to changes caused by bank mergers.   5. 4.  Evidence of banking service disruption.  Our ﬁndings so far suggest that borrowers increase public disclosure as a response to disruptions in the banking services  from merged banks.  In this subsection, we provide two additional analyses consistent with the existence of such disruptions.   5. 4. 1.  Changes in borrowers’ ﬁnancing pattern after bank mergers.  First, we examine whether there are any observable changes in the ﬁnancing patterns of borrowers of merger banks after  their current loan contracts expire relative to the ﬁnancing patterns of borrowers of non-merger banks.  We use data after  the expiration of loan contracts because that is when we expect changes in reliance on bank credit to be observable.  We  compare ﬁnancing arrangements up to four years after the expiration of current loan contracts to ﬁnancing arrangements  up to three years prior to the initiation of the contracts.  Because on average mergers are announced one year after the  initiation of the contracts, this approach allows us to compare four years of post-merger ﬁnancing to (on average) four years  of pre-merger ﬁnancing.   We estimate a DiD speciﬁcation similar to Eq.  (1) on a sample of a maximum 118,714 contract-year observations for  which the required data are available, where FIN TERM is equal to the natural logarithm of either the total credit available under the most recent loan contract  γ t are contract and year ﬁxed effects,  ( TOTCREDIT) or the total amount of public debt outstanding ( TOTBOND) ,  and Z i,t  is a vector of time-varying control variables known to affect credit terms (details described in the caption for Table  5 ,  Panel  B).   We  gather  these  data  for  each  borrower  at  the  end  of  each  year  in  the  sample  period.   We  calculate  total  bond outstanding using the Mergent database, which provides comprehensive coverage of bond issuances.  The coeﬃcient of  interest, which is estimates the percentage change in ﬁnancing arrangements of borrowers affected by mergers relative  to borrowers unaffected by mergers.   The coeﬃcient estimate on the merger dummy in Column (1) Panel B, Table 5 indicates that changes in bank credit  for borrowers of merging banks are 8. 6% lower than contemporaneous changes in bank credit for the control group.  The  magnitude is economically meaningful and is in line with that documented in Bonaccorsi di Patti and Gobbi (2007) .  At the same time, Column (2) shows a 9. 3% (t-statistic   2. 104) increase in public debt for borrowers of merging banks relative to  contemporaneous changes in the control group.  We also examine whether mergers are more likely to result in relationship  termination by estimating Eq.  (3) with an indicator for relationship termination ( TERMINATION ) as the dependent variable.   We consider a borrower to have experienced a relationship termination in year t if its lead arranger at the end of year t is  different from the one in the previous loan contract or if the borrower does not appear in the Dealscan database at the end  of year t .  Estimates in Column (3) show that bank mergers signiﬁcantly increase the likelihood of relationship termination by 24 Overall, these ﬁndings are consistent with the existence of signiﬁcant disruptions in borrowers’  10. 3% (t-statistic  banking services after mergers of their lending banks.  We note that evidence of ﬁnancial disruptions cannot be uniquely  attributed to the ﬁnancing channel, and can in fact be consistent with the monitoring channel.  For example, under the  monitoring channel, if merged banks no longer feel they can effectively monitor borrowers under the changed monitoring  environment, they may reduce their lending to these borrowers.   5. 4. 2.  Borrowers’ stock price response to bank mergers.  To  the  extent  that  borrowers  cannot  perfectly  offset  the  disruptions  from  bank  mergers  through  changed  disclosure  strategies and access to alternative sources of ﬁnancing, they might experience a net reduction in ﬁrm value.   To see if this is the case for our sample ﬁrms, we examine cumulative stock returns of all borrowers around the merger announcement dates using the following equation is the cumulative return of borrower b around the announcement date of merger m measured over the 8-day  where MERGER b,m  is a dummy variable indicating whether the announced mergers involve the borrowers’ current lending banks, and X b,m  period starting 2 days before and ending 5 days after the announcement date.   is the set of borrower-speciﬁc  control variables including the logarithm of borrowers’ market capitalization, book-to-market ratio, and leverage ratio, all  measured in the year preceding the merger announcement. 