
In a typical corporate report, the textual narrative represents the great majority of the disclosure— an average of 80% of
an annual report, for instance—versus the remainder that consists of numbers and representations of quantitative data.  The
clarity of this large component of mandatory disclosure is crucial to understanding and to interpreting the information
contained in the report.  The U. S.  Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has been very forthright about the overly
complex corporate reports.  Christopher Cox, Chairman of the SEC, suggested using direct measures of narrative clarity to
enforce plain English communication.  SEC seems to believe that “the jargon of lawyers has taken over” and the trend
towards hard-to-read disclosures is due to the fact that “the main purpose of the drafting exercise has shifted from informing investors to insuring the issuer and the underwriter against potential claims” (SEC, 2007).  In this paper, we examine
whether managers use of complex disclosures goes beyond the presence of “legalese”, but also whether they use complex
disclosure to hide information from investors. 
The seminal work of Li (2008) explored the relationship between the readability of annual reports and financial performance.  Borrowing the Fog Index from computation linguistics, where a higher reading on the Fog Index indicates disclosures that are more difficult to understand, Li finds a negative relationship between Fog and the level of earnings.  It is
unclear, however, whether this result is due to managers providing complex disclosures to obfuscate bad performance or
that bad news is simply harder to be communicated (Bloomfield, 2008).  To further explore these alternative explanations,
obfuscation or ontology, and to better understand managers’ use of complex disclosures, we look at instances in which firms
are more likely to have managed earnings upwards to meet or beat an earnings target (Burgstahler and Dichev, 1997).  In
these cases, although firms are releasing good news about meeting a benchmark, they have incentives to hide the tools used
to achieve it, as suggested by Warren Buffett.  In other words, when reported performance differs from underlying fundamentals, we expect managers to try to make it harder for investors to identify such earnings management behavior and the
underlying performance.  Our results suggest that the readability level of financial disclosures goes beyond the one derived
from the ontological explanation of good vs.  bad news being disclosed.  Instead, we find that managers strategically use
corporate disclosure to mislead or to influence investors’ understanding of firm's value. 
Our study is motivated by the importance and richness of the textual component of financial disclosures.  The SEC
highlighted the importance of textual disclosures when it issued a set of rules requiring plain English disclosures.  Christopher Cox, Chairman of the SEC, went further and suggested “just as the Black-Scholes model is commonplace when it
comes to compliance with the stock option compensation rules, we may soon be looking to the Gunning-Fog and FleschKincaid models to judge the level of compliance with the plain English rules. ” If readability is going to be used as a measure
of compliance, then we should understand the factors that affect how managers choose the level of readability. 