
The trade-off between risk and return is a fundamental issue in asset
pricing theory, which has been given much attention by researchers,
market investors and analysts.  In general, investors require a larger
expected return from a security that is riskier.  However, after decades
of controversy, no consensus exists among researchers on the relation
between risk and return across time.  Recently, the volatility implied
from options prices is commonly considered as the best volatility
forecast and risk measure (Mencia and Sentana, 2013).  Thus, interest
in the relations between return and implied volatility has increased to
provide new evidence to this debate. 
During the 2008 global ﬁnancial crisis, a new implied volatility index
(OVX) in the crude oil market was launched by the Chicago Board
Options Exchange (CBOE).  the index can measure the market's
expectation of the 30-day volatility of crude oil prices by applying
the well-known CBOE Volatility Index methodology to options on
the United States Oil Fund (Liu Name, 2013).  This index is the ﬁrst
commodity-based implied volatility index.  research on its relations
with oil price returns will help investors further improve their trading
decisions and will contribute, as well, to the development of energy
ﬁnance, which is what the current study hopes to achieve. 
Previous empirical literature has been focused on the relations
between returns and historical volatility in ﬁnancial markets (Leὁn
Name, 2007.  Wu and Lee, 2015.  Chang, 2016), while there is few research
in energy market.  Recently, return–implied volatility relationship has
been received extensive attention in traditional ﬁnancial markets, in
which the stock market implied volatility index (VIX) is widely investigated (Sarwar, 2012.  Basher and Sadorsky, 2016).  Although much
research has been done, no consistent conclusion on positive relations
(Fleming Name, 1995.  Giot, 2005.  Guo and Whitelaw, 2006) or negative
relations (Dash and Moran, 2005.  Tanha and Dempsey, 2015) has been
achieved.  Furthermore, the conclusion in the stock market cannot be
simply applied to OVX because of the more complicated structure of
crude oil options (Ji and Fan, 2016). 
Research on OVX in the crude oil market has been a research hotspot
in the ﬁeld of energy ﬁnance.  Existing research has focused on three
aspects.  Firstly, the predictive ability of the implied volatility index in
the oil market is investigated (Szakmary Name, 2003.  Agnolucci, 2009. 
Lux Name, 2016).  Secondly, the spillover effect of the implied volatility
indexes between oil and ﬁnancial markets is explored (Liu Name, 2013. 
Maghyereh Name, 2016.  Bouri Name, 2017).  Thirdly, the interdependence
between oil price returns and the implied volatility index is investigated. 
Only three studies have attempted to answer this problem.  Aboura and
Chevallier (2013) applied the OLS regression model and found that the
inverse leverage effect is the dominant effect that drove the WTI crude
oil prices from 2007 to 2011.  Agbeyegbe (2015) used OLS regression to
ﬁnd regular feedback and leverage effects between oil price returns
and OVX changes, as well as employed the quantile regression copula
method to ﬁnd a negative relationship between contemporaneous OVX
and oil returns.  Ji and Fan (2016) utilised the time-varying parameter
GARCH model and regression analysis to verify the role of OVX as a
gauge of investor fear instead of risk preference. 
The aforementioned studies mainly focus on a linear relationship,
but little information on non-linear dependence and the risk spillovers
between OVX and oil price returns is provided.  Although the quantile
regression copula method was used by Agbeyegbe (2015), only a static
relationship was explored.  The non-linear time-varying dependence
between OVX and oil price return is therefore investigated further
from the perspective of risk spillover to extend the current literature. 
This non-linear dependence can help investors predict well the market
risk and improve their portfolio strategy and hedging effectiveness. 
The principal contributions of this study are as follows.  Firstly,
six time-varying mixed copula models (TVMC) are constructed by
selecting four copulas.  Secondly, the VaR for oil price returns conditional
on OVX, as well as the CoVaR for oil price returns conditional on
the VaR for OVX, are estimated on the basis of the TVMC models. 
Then, the dynamic and asymmetric risk spillover effects between oil
price returns and OVX are explored.  Third, the Kendall coefﬁcients are
calculated on the basis of the TVMC model with the use of the Monte
Carlo simulation method, which can show the dynamic dependence
structure between oil price returns and OVX.  Fourth, structural change
test of dependence proposed by Dias and Embrechts (2009) is introduced for division of subsamples and to investigate the robustness of
our ﬁndings.  Finally, Brent is selected for comparison of the results
with WTI. 
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows.  Section 2 introduces our methodology of TVMC and the measure of VaR and CoVaR. 
Section 3 presents the data and empirical results.  Finally, Section 4
concludes the paper. 
<Middle> Methodology. 
This section mainly models the risk spillover and the dynamic and asymmetric dependence between oil price returns and OVX.  The modelling
process is divided into three parts.  Firstly, the upside and downside VaRs for oil price returns conditional on OVX, as well as the CoVaR for WTI returns
conditional on the VaR of OVX, are measured to explore the risk spillover of OVX to WTI returns.  Secondly, four copulas that can ﬁt negative dependence are selected to construct six TVMC.  Then, the VaR and CoVaR measured above can be estimated.  The Monte Carlo simulation method is also
used to compute the Kendall coefﬁcient on the basis of the TVMC model, which can measure the dynamic dependence between WTI returns and
OVX.  Finally, structural change test for dependence is further introduced to detect the jump characteristics of dependence and conﬁrm the robustness
of our analysis. 
2. 1.  Measurement of VaR and CoVaR. 
2. 1. 1.  VaR. 
VaR is a most common measure of market risk used by ﬁnancial institutions due to its simplicity of calculation.  Intuitively, the α%-VaR is deﬁned
as the worst loss over a target horizon that will not be exceeded with a given level of conﬁdence 1 − α (Jorion, 2007).  In this section, we measure the
upside and downside risks for oil price returns using the VaR for short and long position, respectively. 
Let rt be the log return of the underlying asset at time t, and given tail probability α, the VaR of a long ﬁnancial position is related to the lower tail of
long)=α, whereas the VaR of a short ﬁnancial position is related to the upper tail of the return's distribution,
short.  If the
D is the αth quantile of the return's distribution, whereas the upside risk
the return's distribution, i. e.  Pr(rt≤ −VaRα,t
i. e.  Pr(rt≥VaRα,t
distribution of crude oil return rt is continuous, the downside risk VaRα,tshort)=α.  Thus, we deﬁne the unconditional market downside risk VaRα,t
U is the (1−α)th quantile of the return's distribution, i. e. 
Since ﬁnancial time series may have the characteristics of autocorrelation and conditional heteroscedasticity, we employ ARMA-GARCH-t class
model to construct their marginal distribution at time t conditional on observations through time t−1, Fi,t(∙| F t−1), i=1,2, as follows. 
Through the distribution of standardised residual, we can obtain the conditional distribution of variable ri,t, i. e. 
Then, from Eq.  (5), we can obtain the oil market downside risk VaR1,t
D,α and upside risk VaR1,t
U,α as follows. 
Actually, in most previous literature, VaR is commonly estimated via one single series which only considers its own volatility information. 
However, the VaR of returns may be inﬂuenced by market situation and other uncertainties.  Therefore, in this section, we further introduce the
VaR for oil price returns conditional on OVX which can measure the inﬂuence of market uncertainty on market risk.  The VaR for oil price returns conditional on OVX contains not only volatility information of WTI returns, but also dependence information existing between oil price returns and OVX
changes.  Especially, in the empirical section, LR tests proposed by Christoffersen (1998) is used to prove the better performance of VaR for oil price
returns conditional on OVX relative to VaR for WTI. 
Let ri,t, i=1,2, be the log return of oil price and the ﬁrst difference of OVX at time t, respectively.  Then, the crude oil market downside risk VaRα. 
Then, the downside and upside risk conditional on the OVX changes can be obtained by solving the following equations. 
Referring to Christoffersen (1998), we employ backtesting method to assess the accuracy of the VaR forecast, and ﬁrst deﬁne the sequence of hits,
exceedances, as follows. 
The unconditional coverage test is designed to assess whether the expected hit rate is equal to the tail probability α. 
Testing for unconditional coverage can be formulated as the likelihood ratio test. 
independence test is and nij is the number of observations with value i followed by value j in the sequence of hits. 
The conditional coverage test combines the unconditional coverage test and independence test, and the likelihood ratio is
and nj is the number of observations with value j in the sequence of hits. 
The independence of the sequence of hits will be tested against an explicit ﬁrst-order Markov alternative.  The likelihood ratio for the, and nij is the number of observations with value i followed by value j in the sequence of hits. 
The conditional coverage test combines the unconditional coverage test and independence test, and the likelihood ratio is. 
2. 1. 2.  CoVaR. 
Although VaR is useful to measure the risk exposure of asset returns, it only reﬂects a single institution's risk instead of reﬂection its connection to
overall systemic risk.  Therefore, we introduce CoVaR proposed by Adrian and Brunnermeier (2016) to explore the risk spillover from OVX to oil price
returns.  Recently, applications of CoVaR have been received more attention to investigate risk spillover or systemic risk among assets (Girardi and
Ergün, 2013.  Reboredo and Ugolini, 2015.  Reboredo Name, 2016.  Mensi Name, 2017).  These research employs CoVaRs to measure risk spillover in
capital markets, such as exchange rates, stock and sovereign debt markets.  As we know, this study is the ﬁrst research employing CoVaR in the
oil market.  In this section, CoVaR is deﬁned as the VaR for oil price returns conditional on the fact that OVX exhibits an extreme movement.  The
downside 
U,α∣β for oil price returns are deﬁned as follows. 
D,α∣β and upside,t. 
From the conditional distribution of oil price return r1,t given r2,t, i. e.  Ft(x1|x2, F t−1. θ) in Eq.  (8), CoVaR1∣2,t
D,α∣β and CoVaR1∣2,t
U,α∣β can be obtained by
solving the following equations. 
2. 2.  Market risk modelling. 
Copula model is widely considered as a powerful tool to capture the dependence structure across markets, especially the extreme
comovement under risk situations. 
It's because copula has advantages to well model nonlinear and tail dependence without any
constraints on the marginal distributions of random variables (Liu Name, 2017).  Thus, copulas have been widely used in the ﬁeld of
market contagion and risk spillover (Wen Name, 2012.  Aloui Name, 2016).  As the dependence pattern between bivariate time series is
always complex, single copula can hardly capture its evolution characteristics effectively (Liu Name, 2017), whereas the mixed copula
model can capture the various patterns of the dependence structure (Hu, 2006).  Thus, this section constructs the time-varying mixed
copula among Normal copula (N), t copula (t), 90-degree rotated Clayton (R1 C) and 270-degree rotated Clayton (R2 C), and then
computes the VaR conditional on OVX, CoVaR conditional on the VaR for OVX and the time-varying Kendall coefﬁcient between oil price returns
and OVX. 
Furthermore, referring to Reboredo and Ugolini (2015) and Mensi Name (2017), we employ the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) test to verify the
signiﬁcance of risk spillover effects and asymmetric effects of CoVaRs.  First, we test two downside and two upside risk spillover effects
U,0. 05∣0. 95=
with null hypothesis as H01. CoVaROIL∣OVX
U , 0. 05.  The null hypothesis of these four tests indicate that there is no signiﬁcant difference between VaR and CoVaR considering¼ CoVaRU. 0. 05j0. 95
the market uncertainty risk.  Second, we test
H06 .  CoVaRD. 0. 05j0. 95
.  These four tests are calculated using CoVaR
normalised by its corresponding VaR and can verify whether there is signiﬁcant difference between CoVaRs in response to different upside and
downside VaRs for OVX. 
four asymmetric effects with null hypothesis as H05 .  CoVaRD. 0. 05j0. 95. 
2. 2. 1.  Time-varying mixed copula modelling. 
Referring to Patton (2006), Patton (2009) and Patton (2012), for bivariate time series rt = (r1 , t, r2 , t), given the observations through time
t − 1, F t − 1 = {rt − 1, rt − 2, ⋯ , r1}, the dynamic joint distribution of rt can be expressed by the conditional mixed copula dependence structure and
conditional marginal distributions as follows. 
F is the conditional mixed copula density, and f1 , t(∙| F t − 1) and f2 , t(∙| F t − 1) are conditional marginal densities. 
We employ inference for margins (IFM) method, proposed by Joe and Xu (1996), to estimate the parameter θ as follows. 
Step 1.  Estimate the conditional marginal distribution parameters θi, i. e. 
veriﬁes the property of asymptotic normality under regular conditions, i. e. 
where G(θ) is the Godambe information matrix. 
2. 2. 2.  Time-varying dependence parameter for the selected copulas. 
Referring to Patton (2006), for the Normal copula and the t copula of the mixed copula model, we construct the time-varying process of the dependence parameter as follows. 
where Φρ is a bivariate standardised normal distribution with correlation ρ, and ϕ is a univariate standardised normal distribution. 
2. 2. 4.  Monte Carlo simulation for mixed copula. 
As the mixed copula function Cjk, j≠k∈{N,t,R1C,R2C} is complex in computation, especially when the mixed copula includes normal copula or t
copula, computing the Kendall coefﬁcient via double integration for the product of distribution and density of this mixed copula is difﬁcult.  Thus,
we propose the mixed copula's Monte Carlo simulation method to compute the dynamic Kendall coefﬁcient on the basis of Section 2. 2. 2.  This
simulation method repeatedly generates the random vector (U1,U2), obeying the distribution Cjk, and then constructs the necessary statistics via the
bivariate series of U1 and U2. 
We use the Monte Carlo simulation of the mixed copula to compute the Kendall coefﬁcient as follows. 
Step 1.  Generate two independent random numbers, U2 and z, in accordance with the uniform distribution on the interval (0, 1). 
Step 2.  Solve the equation to obtain its root u1 via the bisection. 
Step 3.  Repeat steps 1 and 2 N times to obtain N simulated samples of the random vector, (U1,U2), in accordance with the distribution Cjk. 
Step 4.  Compute the Kendall coefﬁcient τU1,U2 through the above N simulated samples. 
2. 2. 5.  Structural change test on dependence parameter
Since the oil market undergoes both ﬁnancial crisis and calm times during our sample period, the dependence characteristics between oil returns
and OVX changes may be disturbed and present structural changes.  How to reasonably divide the whole sample into different subsamples is vital to
characterize structural changes of dependence.  Therefore, in this section, we introduce the structural change test for dependence (Dias and Embrechts,
2009) to solve this problem, where we assume that the speciﬁcation of marginal distribution model remains unchanged during different periods. 
For random vector Ut=(U1t,U2t) in [0, 1]2 with univariate uniformly distributed margins and copula C(u. θt), whereθt∈Θ⊆ℝn, considering
H0. θ1 ¼θ2 ¼ ⋯ ¼θT vs.  HA. θ1 ¼ ⋯ ¼θk ≠θkþ1 ¼ ⋯ ¼θT . 
whether the structural changes exist in the copula parameter vector or not, we test the following hypothesisIf we reject the null hypothesis H0, k∗ is the time of structural change in dependence.  Thus, we construct the likelihood ratio statistic as follows. 
Obviously, 2logΛ(k) can be obtained via maximum log-likelihood method.  Given the level α, if the value of 2logΛ(k) is large enough, we will reject
the null hypothesis H0.  Since the location of change point k is unknown, we test the hypothesis by using the statistic ZT, where ZT ¼ max
2logΛðkÞ,and the null hypothesis H0 will be rejected by a large value of the statistic ZT.  Referring to Csörgő and Horváth (1997), the approximation for
the distribution of ZT,
where h= l= (logT)3/2/T.  Thus, given the level α and above statistic's value zT, if Pr(ZT
then the estimation of change point time. 
Since the number of the change point is unknown, we employ a binary segmentation procedure proposed by Vostrikova (1981) to simultaneously
detect the number and the location of change points.  That is, when we detect out one change point, we divide the sample into two subsamples
according to its location and test the hypothesis for both of them.  If we ﬁnd one change point in any one of above subsamples, we will continue
the segmentation procedure in the corresponding subsample until we cannot ﬁnd any change point in any subsample. 
3.  Data and empirical analysis. 
3. 1.  Time-varying mixed copula estimation. 
In this study, the data of OVX are published by CBOE since the middle
of 2007.  The WTI futures price is obtained from the US Energy Information Administration.  Daily data are selected, and the sample covers the
period from May 10, 2007 to November 28, 2016.  Table 1 presents the
summary statistics of WTI returns and OVX changes.  The table shows
that the mean of WTI returns is negative at −0. 013, whereas that of
OVX changes is positive at 0. 011.  WTI returns and OVX changes have a
similar standard deviation, and both exhibit a non-normal distribution
with signiﬁcant Jarque-Bera statistics.  In addition, signiﬁcant LjungBox Q and Q2 statistics indicate the existence of autocorrelation and
heteroscedasticity.  The Lagrange Multiplier test also shows the existence of ARCH effects for WTI returns and OVX changes indicating the
use of the GARCH model. 
Table 2 presents the coefﬁcient estimation of the conditional marginal distribution model.  According to Akaike information criterion,
ARMA (2, 2)-GJRGARCH (1, 1) is modelled for WTI returns, and ARMA
(2, 2)-GARCH (1, 1) with standard student-t distribution is modelled
for OVX changes.  Table 3 presents the estimation results of the six
TVMC.  Comparison of the values of log likelihood indicates that the
time-varying mixed copula between t copula and R2 Clayton copula
(270-degree rotated Clayton) is the best ﬁtting copula. 
Without loss of generality, the selected four single copulas are also
estimated, and they are shown in Table 4.  The table indicates that the
time-varying R2 Clayton copula (270-degree rotated Clayton) ﬁt best
among the four single copulas.  However, the value of log likelihood of
the time-varying R2 Clayton copula is smaller than most of the values
of the time-varying mixed copulas shown in Table 3, indicating the
modelling advantage of mixed copulas.  Therefore, the time-varying
mixed copula between t copula and R2 Clayton copula is selected to
estimate the VaRs, CoVaRs and dynamic dependences shown in the
following section. 
3. 2.  Risk spillover measured by VaRs and CoVaRs. 
In this section, the VaR for WTI returns conditional on OVX is ﬁrstly
compared with the VaR for WTI returns.  The VaRs for WTI returns are
estimated with the ARMA (2, 2)-GJRGARCH (1, 1) model, whereas the
VaRs for WTI returns conditional on OVX are estimated by the timevarying mixed copula between t copula and R2 Clayton copula with
the ARMA (2, 2)-GJRGARCH (1, 1) marginal model.  Table 5 presents
the LR tests of unconditional coverage, independence and conditional
coverage for downside and upside VaRs at the 1%, 5% and 10% risk levels,
respectively.  The LR test of unconditional coverage checks whether the
estimated model has the correct violation ratio, the LR test of independence checks whether the sequence of violations for the VaR model is
serially independent and the LR test of conditional coverage is simply
a combination of the previous two tests (Christoffersen, 1998).  Table 5
shows that almost all the tests for VaRs cannot reject the null
hypothesis, except two VaR tests for WTI returns.  Comparison of the P
value of each test between VaR and VaR conditional on OVX indicates
that taking the condition of the OVX into account can slightly improve
the accuracy of the VaR estimates for WTI returns.  However, no essential
difference exists between the VaR for WTI and the VaR for WTI conditional on OVX. 
Table 6 presents the summary statistics of the VaRs and CoVaRs for
WTI returns and various risk spillover and asymmetric effect tests
over the whole sample period.  The summary results in Panel A of
Table 6 show that the mean of downside VaR for WTI returns is larger
than the mean of downside CoVaR conditioned by the upside VaR for
OVX, whereas it is smaller than the mean of downside CoVaR conditioned by the downside VaR for OVX.  The risk spillover tests between
VaR and CoVaR rejected the null hypothesis at the 1% signiﬁcant level,
indicating that the downside VaR for WTI returns is signiﬁcantly larger
than the downside CoVaR conditioned by the upside VaR for OVX, and
is signiﬁcantly smaller than the downside CoVaR conditioned by the
downside VaR for OVX.  It means the decrease of WTI returns is more
sensitive to the extreme upside movement of OVX.  It's because rising
OVX means an increase in panic in the oil market which will lead to
increasing short positions by market investors and result in oil price
decrease.  Therefore, the magnitude of absolute CoVaR values for WTI
returns considering the upside extreme risk of OVX is larger than the
VaR for WTI returns.  There exists signiﬁcant risk spillover from upside
OVX to downside WTI returns. 
In panel B of Table 6, the upside risk and risk spillover tests from OVX
to WTI are estimated.  The mean of upside VaR for WTI returns is smaller
than the mean of upside CoVaR conditioned by the downside VaR for
OVX, whereas it is larger than the mean of upside CoVaR conditioned
by the upside VaR for OVX.  The risk spillover tests also support the ﬁndings that the upside VaR for WTI returns is signiﬁcantly smaller than the
upside CoVaR conditioned by the downside VaR for OVX, and is signiﬁcantly larger than the upside CoVaR conditioned by the upside VaR for
OVX.  The test results are similar to that of downside CoVaRs.  Our ﬁndings show that there also exists signiﬁcant risk spillover from downside
OVX to upside WTI returns, which means calming market condition will
reduce extreme downside risk in the oil market. 
Both results in panels A and B of Table 6 point to the consistent conclusion that a signiﬁcant risk spillover effect from OVX to WTI returns
exists.  This result can be supported by ﬁndings that when OVX exhibits
extreme upside movements, the downside risk of WTI returns will
become worse.  Conversely, when OVX exhibits extreme downside
movements, the upside risk of WTI returns will become larger.  These
ﬁndings are consistent with Ji and Fan (2016)'s conclusion that an
increased OVX will increase market panic and then further suppress
oil prices.  Therefore, our ﬁndings also support the conclusion that OVX
plays a better role as the fear gauge of oil price returns. 
In panel C of Table 6, the asymmetric effects of upside and downside
CoVaR are examined.  The results show that the downside CoVaR normalised by the downside VaR is signiﬁcantly larger than the upside
CoVaR normalised by the upside VaR, with the condition of upside
VaR for OVX given.  On the contrary, with the condition of downside
VaR for OVX given, the upside CoVaR normalised by the upside VaR is
signiﬁcantly larger than the downside CoVaR normalised by the downside VaR.  It means the downside risk of oil price returns is more sensitive to the upside extreme movement of OVX, while the upside risk of
oil price returns is more sensitive to the downside extreme movement
of OVX.  These ﬁndings are consistent with the above test results for
risk spillover that OVX has a negative inﬂuence on oil price returns. 
Moreover, these results show strong evidence of the asymmetric behaviour of the upside and downside risk spillover from OVX to WTI returns. 
Fig.  1 presents the dynamics of upside and downside VaR and CoVaR. 
The line of the VaR is in the middle of the two lines of CoVaRs on the
same side.  In general, during the given sample period, two signiﬁcant
hike periods of the CoVaR are observed.  The ﬁrst one happened during
the period from 2008 to 2009, which was triggered by the global
ﬁnancial crisis.  At that time, OVX kept increasing, induced by the
worries of the weak oil demand, whereas oil prices underwent a
slump.  The second one occurred since the second half year of 2014. 
During this period from 2014 to 2016, OVX increased continuously,
induced by the oversupply of oil production, whereas oil prices fell by
more than half.  It's worth noting that although these two hikes have
the similar higher panic, they lead to reverse price changes. 
WTI and OVX.  In addition, the lower-upper tail dependence is signiﬁcantly larger than the upper-lower tail dependence, indicating that oil
price returns are more sensitive in response to OVX increase relative
to the OVX decrease.  This ﬁnding also conﬁrms the judgement by
Agbeyegbe (2015) and Ji and Fan (2016) that OVX is preferred to be a
gauge of investor fear than risk preference. 
3. 4.  Robustness analysis. 
Generally speaking, the empirical results are usually inﬂuenced by
sample length and objective selection.  Without loss of generality, structural change test is introduced to analyse the subsample ﬁndings and
Brent is selected for comparison with WTI.  All the modelling process
and calculation are repeated for subsample results and Brent analysis. 
3. 3.  Dynamic Kendall dependence and tail dependence. 
3. 4. 1.  Subsample diagnosis. 
We further analyse the relationships between WTI and OVX via
dynamic Kendall dependence and the four tail dependences used by
Liu Name (2017).  Fig.  2 presents the dynamic Kendall dependence
between WTI and OVX.  The ﬁgure shows that the time-varying dependence between WTI and OVX is almost negative, but it is not always
negative.  The integral Kendall dependence is volatile around −0. 2. 
During the 2008 global ﬁnancial crisis, the negative dependences
between OVX and WTI increased signiﬁcantly.  However, during the
period from 2014 to 2016, no signiﬁcant change in the dynamic
dependence between WTI and OVX was observed, although WTI prices
experienced a slump.  These ﬁndings are consistent with the conclusions
veriﬁed by Aboura and Chevallier (2013) and Ji and Fan (2016) that the
contemporaneous returns and OVX changes are negatively correlated
named feedback effect in the oil market.  It means if volatility is priced
by market participants, an anticipated increase in volatility would
raise the required rate of price returns, which leads to a current price
decline (Bekaert and Wu, 2000).  Feedback effect usually ampliﬁes
negative asset returns which can well explain the asymmetric effect of
oil price returns in response to different movements of OVX. 
Fig.  3 presents the four dynamic tail dependences between WTI and
OVX.  Tail dependence is also an important measure to track the extreme
comovement between oil returns and OVX changes.  It can measure the
dependence degree between oil returns and OVX changes when these
two indexes are under extreme conditions.  Higher tail dependence
means higher comovement under the extreme situation, which will result in a larger gap between CoVaR and VaR.  It can be clearly seen from
Fig.  3 that the lower-upper or upper-lower tail dependence is obviously
larger than the upper-upper and lower-lower tail dependence, which
also reveals the asymmetric effect of the dependence structure between
Since our sample is ranging from 2007 to 2016 which includes the
2008 global ﬁnancial crisis and some speciﬁc events in the oil market,
there may exists endogenous structural changes of dependence
between WTI returns and OVX changes.  Therefore, we further detect
the break points of dependence employing the test introduced in
Section 2. 2. 5.  Table 7 presents the diagnosis results of structural breaks. 
Before diagnosing, the optimal copula should be selected according to
the log-likelihood value.  It's worth noting that the structural break test
of dependence can only be achieved using single copula so far.  Table 7
shows that t copula is the optimal ﬁtting copula, while R2C copula is
suboptimal.  Panel B of Table 7 presents the structural change test results
for both the optimal and suboptimal copulas.  The results are similar that
there is only one structural break occurring on April 17, 2009.  It means
that the dependence mechanism between WTI returns and OVX has
changed after the 2008 global ﬁnancial crisis. 
Therefore, the whole sample is divided into two subsamples for
further analysis.  Firstly, the optimal time-varying mixed copula model
should be conﬁrmed for each subsample.  Table 8 shows the same result
with the whole sample that the time-varying mixed copula between t
and R2C is optimal.  Table 9 presents the LR tests of unconditional
coverage, independence and conditional coverage for downside and
upside VaRs at the 1%, 5% and 10% risk levels, respectively in two subsamples.  The results show that most tests for VaRs cannot reject the
null hypothesis, indicating the rationality of our estimation.  The results
of VaRs conditional on OVX in the two subsamples are better than the
corresponding VaRs estimation by comparing the P value. 
Furthermore, we also do the same tests for VaRs and CoVaRs for the
two subsamples shown in Tables 10 and 11.  The results show that
structural change has weak effect on the risk spillover but no effect on
asymmetric effects in subsample I.  However, the results in subsample
II are similar with the results in the whole sample.  Speciﬁcally, the
downside VaR for WTI returns conditional on the upside VaR for OVX
is always signiﬁcantly smaller than the downside VaR for WTI returns
at the 1% signiﬁcant level in each subsample.  This provides strong
evidence that the negative inﬂuence of increasing OVX on decreasing
WTI returns is stable.  In addition, there also exists signiﬁcant asymmetric effect between the upside and downside risk spillover from OVX to
WTI returns in the two subsamples. 
Finally, dynamic upside and downside VaRs and CoVaRs in the
two subsamples are depicted in Fig. 