 1.  Introduction There is an ongoing debate about the role of oil and gold in hedging equity portfolios, which has become topical since the ﬁnancial crisis and the subsequent ﬂuctuations in the prices of these assets.  In the literature, the role of oil and gold as hedges is not universally accepted, and it seems to depend on geopolitical, economic, as well as other idiosyncratic factors.  This topic is of particular interest for oil-exporting countries, which are usually rich in these assets.  However, most of the literature has focused on developed countries (Baur and McDermott, 2010.  Hood and Malik, 2013.  Choi and Hammoudeh, 2010.  Creti et al. , 2013.  Ciner et al. , 2013), while developing countries have only recently started receiving further attention (Basher and Sadorsky, 2016).  Using data from the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries1 from January 2004 to May 2016, this paper employs a dynamic conditional correlation model (DCC-GARCH) to ﬁrst examine the shock transmissions between the equity markets and the two commodities, and then evaluate the hedging opportunities arising from including crude oil and gold in equity portfolios.  Our paper is the ﬁrst to consider the dynamic relationships between oil, gold and equities in the GCC countries, therefore further contributing to the debate.  Examining the interconnectedness between oil, gold and equities is of great importance for GCC countries, as they are net exporters of oil, while they hold gold reserves to secure against US dollar ﬂuctuations, which is the trading currency for both commodities.  At the same time, GCC countries hold about 1. 3% of the world's gold reserves, hence our study may also be of interest to local monetary authorities. 2 Finally, given the absence of a derivatives market for GCC stocks, traditionally used for hedging, it is important for GCC investors to ﬁnd alternative risk management options.  In light of the above, this paper examines the interconnectedness between the GCC exchanges and oil and gold, as well as the usefulness of the two commodities in hedging GCC-based equity portfolios.  The period considered, which spans from January 2004 to May 2016, is rich in events, as it begins with the post-Iraqi war era, and covers the ﬁnancial crisis, the historic peak of gold prices in 2010 and the subsequent fall, as well as the recent oil crisis which began in June 2014.  During the ﬁnancial crisis, the price of oil fell signiﬁcantly, but the rising price of gold balanced the negative effects of the crisis.  in fact, the GCC countries experienced signiﬁcant economic growth during that period, despite the slowdown in the global economy.  The recent crises in the gold and oil markets, though, led to a substantial revenue slowdown for GCC oil exporters, while central bank reserves were also affected negatively.  This adds to the on-going political turbulence in the Middle East, which creates more investment uncertainty, and therefore makes the topic in hand an interesting case to examine.  Our study contributes to the growing literature in energy ﬁnance, that includes studies such as Arouri and Nguyen (2010), Baur and McDermott (2010), Choi and Hammoudeh (2010), Filis et al.  (2011), Arouri et al.  (2011), Awartani and Maghyereh (2013), Awartani et al.  (2013), Ciner et al.  (2013), Creti et al.  (2013), Guesmi and Fattoum (2014), Hoang et al.  (2015), Basher and Sadorsky (2016).  Most of these studies examine the dynamic correlations between oil and equities, while only a few studies consider additional commodities, such as Mensi et al.  (2013, 2015).  We estimate return and volatility spillovers using the dynamic conditional correlation, general autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity (DCC-GARCH) model of Engle (2002).  For the returns equation, we use a VAR speciﬁcation that endogenously accounts for structural breaks, while we follow the multivariate GARCH approach of Ling and McAleer (2003) to model volatility.  The DCCs between GCC equities and the two commodities are then used to compute dynamic hedge ratios and portfolio weights.  Our results reveal signiﬁcant return and volatility transmissions from oil to equities, highlighting the link between oil production and corporate cash ﬂows in GCC economies, whereas the inﬂuence of gold on equities appears insigniﬁcant and negligible.  In the opposite direction, we do not ﬁnd convincing evidence that the GCC stock markets can inﬂuence the two commodity markets, which we attribute to the relatively small capitalisation of the exchanges.  Our analysis of dynamic correlations and dynamic hedge ratios indicates that, although the two commodities are cheap hedges, and in contrast to previous studies, they cannot be considered as good ones due to their weak dynamic correlations with equities.  We therefore conclude that oil and gold can instead be used for portfolio diversiﬁcation, which is an important result for GCC equity holders, given that the local exchanges list relatively few corporations from a narrow selection of sectors.  The rest of this paper is structured as follows. 