 1.  Introduction  In the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (hereafter, the “Dodd–Frank Act”), policymakers made an unprecedented move towards using securities regulation to address issues unrelated to the Securities  and Exchange Commission’s (SEC) core mission of protecting investors and maintaining the fair and eﬃcient functioning  of ﬁnancial markets ( Lynn, 2011 ).  Section 1503 of the Dodd–Frank Act requires SEC-registered ﬁrms to include information regarding mine-safety performance in their ﬁnancial reports.  In this paper, we examine the real effects (i. e. , changes  in mining-related citations, injuries, and labor productivity) of the mandatory inclusion of mine-safety disclosures in the  ﬁnancial reports (“MSD”) of the 151 SEC-registered ﬁrms whose ownership of a U. S.  mine make them subject to Section  1503 of the Dodd–Frank legislation.  A key feature of our setting is that the information provided through MSD is already  publicly available on the Mine Safety and Health Administration’s (MSHA) website.  this allows us to isolate and estimate  the magnitude of the incremental real effects of including information in ﬁnancial reports.   Section 1503 of the Dodd–Frank Act requires reporting citations for violations of mine-safety regulations both periodically in mine owners’ ﬁnancial reports (i. e. , Forms 10K and 10Q) and immediately upon the receipt of an imminent danger  order (IDO) through a Form 8K ﬁling.  MSD advocates make the implicit argument that including this information in ﬁnancial reports has implications that such information does not have when only disclosed on the MSHA website.  However, it  is unclear whether the information included in MSD is news to investors or other interested parties.  One reason the inclusion of safety information in ﬁnancial reports could have an incremental effect is because ﬁnancial reports broadcast the  information to a wide range of interested parties, thereby increasing awareness of ﬁrms’ safety records.   If MSD increases awareness of ﬁrms’ safety records, then political costs, reputational concerns, and/or activism by investors or other parties could provide an incentive for managers to improve mine safety.  For example, if managers anticipate  that the revelation of poor safety performance will have a negative effect on ﬁrm value, they may invest more in safety to  limit such effects.  Investors may react negatively to poor safety performance either because of the future cash ﬂow consequences or because of their non-cash-ﬂow-based preferences.  Cash ﬂow effects could occur, for example, through ﬁnes,  mine closures, or other costs imposed by activists.  Non-cash-ﬂow-based preferences could also lead investors to require  higher returns for ﬁnancing the operations of ﬁrms engaging in activities that conﬂict with those preferences, such as maintaining relatively unsafe working conditions (e. g. , Fama and French, 2007.  Friedman and Heinle, 2016 ).  If MSD increases the  implications of safety issues for ﬁrm value, then MSD will give managers an incentive to alter resource allocation decisions  to improve safety.  It is also possible that MSD could affect managers’ safety-investment decisions through channels other  than ﬁrm value, such as, for example, negative reputational costs arising from the public revelation that a manager operates  a ﬁrm with poor safety conditions.   Using data obtained from the MSHA, we ﬁrst assess the effect of MSD on the incidence rate of citations for violations  of mine-safety regulations.  For these analyses, we employ a difference-in-differences (“DiD”) design that compares changes  in citations issued to mines owned by SEC registrants (“MSD mines”) with those issued to mines owned by non-SEC registrants (“non-MSD mines”) around the effective date of Dodd–Frank.  We control for ﬂexible time trends and static, mine-level  differences by including both year and mine ﬁxed effects.  We document a decrease in citations per inspection hour of approximately 11% for MSD mines relative to non-MSD mines.  Our evidence suggests this reduction in citations is attributable  to an increase in compliance with mine safety regulations rather than a change in inspector behavior.   Next, we analyze the effect of MSD on injury rates.  An im plicit assum ption of MSD, which focuses almost exclusively on  the reporting of citations for safety violations, is that a decrease in citations will translate into a reduction in injuries.   However,  the  link  between  compliance  with  mine  safety  regulations  and  actual  safety  improvements  is  debatable  (e. g. ,  Ruffennach, 2002.  Gowrisankaran et al. , 2015 ).  Consistent with a meaningful improvement in safety, we document a 13%  decrease in injuries for MSD mines relative to non-MSD mines.  For the average ﬁrm, this 13% reduction translates into  approximately 0. 2 fewer injuries annually per 100 full-time employees (the equivalent of 200,000 mine-hours worked).   While the above results suggest that MSD has substantial beneﬁts, it is unlikely that the observed safety improvements  are costless.  Gowrisankaran et al.  (2015) posit that mines produce a joint output of safety and mineral production, which  suggests that an increase in safety could lead to lower mineral production per hour worked.  We examine this tradeoff by  testing whether productivity in coal mines, where we have measures of production and labor quantities, changes around the  adoption of MSD.  Using a DiD research design, we ﬁnd evidence of a signiﬁcant reduction in labor productivity following the  implementation of MSD.  The observed decline translates into increased labor costs of approximately 0. 9% of total revenue.   A critical assumption of our identiﬁcation strategy is that the trends in mine safety and productivity for MSD and nonMSD mines would have been the same in the absence of MSD (i. e. , the parallel-trends assumption).  We assess the validity  of this assumption by mapping out the counterfactual treatment effect of MSD in the pre-MSD period (from 2002 to 2009).   This analysis shows that the trends for MSD and non-MSD mines are similar.  Even given similar pre-treatment trends, other  factors, such as public outrage over a mining disaster, which differentially affect MSD and non-MSD mines, could potentially  confound our inferences.  To address this possibility, we ﬁrst demonstrate that there is no difference in the reactions of MSD  and non-MSD mines to another major regulatory event (the 2006 MINER Act) that pertains to all mines and was triggered  by events similar to those that led to MSD.   To provide evidence that an increased public awareness of safety issues is a likely explanation for the observed real  effects, we assess whether more attention is paid to safety after MSD.  First, we provide descriptive evidence of an increase in  media and analyst coverage.  Second, we compare short-window stock returns and changes in mutual fund holdings around  IDO disclosures before and after MSD.  We ﬁnd a 155 (140) basis point more negative average (median) market reaction  when a safety citation is reported in an 8K ﬁling and disclosed on the MSHA’s website, compared to the period when such  citations are disclosed only on the website.  These market reactions are most negative for ﬁrms operating primarily in the  mining industry, where safety violations likely have the greatest implications for ﬁrm value.   For mutual fund holdings, in the pre-MSD period, we ﬁnd a signiﬁcant reduction in ownership in the quarter following an  IDO announcement, indicating that some sophisticated investors were aware of, and responded to, IDO website disclosures  prior to MSD.  In the post-MSD period, the reduction in ownership when the safety information is also disseminated through  an 8K is signiﬁcantly larger, which suggests that mutual fund managers care more about safety issues when other parties’  awareness of these issues increases.  These effects are particularly pronounced for funds with explicitly stated preferences  for socially responsible investment.   Our paper contributes to the existing literature by documenting the magnitude of the real effects of including information  on social responsibility in ﬁnancial reports.  Prior research shows accounting disclosures can have real effects because.  (i)  disclosure reduces information asymmetry and agency costs (e. g. , Biddle and Hilary, 2006 .  Biddle et al. , 2009 .  McNichols and  Stubben, 2008 ), (ii) accounting numbers are used in contracts and regulation (e. g. , Holthausen and Leftwich, 1983 ), and (iii)  managers learn new information from their own disclosures and the disclosures of peers (e. g. , Shroff, 2017 ).  There is also a  literature that shows that disclosure through channels other than ﬁnancial reports can have real effects ( Jin and Leslie, 2003.   Chuk, 2013 ).  Our paper contributes to this prior work primarily because mine-safety records are already publicly available  outside of a ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial reports, which allows us to isolate and estimate the incremental effect of including information  in ﬁnancial reports as opposed to the effects of disclosing information not previously publicly released elsewhere.   Understanding  the  real  effects  of  regulations  requiring  information  on  social  responsibility  in  ﬁnancial  reports  is  increasingly important given the recent trend towards employing such policies ( Leuz and Wysocki, 2016 ).  U. S.  policymakers  are currently considering implementing similar reporting requirements for political contributions, conﬂict minerals from  the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and, more broadly, the standards issued by the Sustainability Accounting Standards  Board.  The European Union (EU) also recently mandated disclosures related to ﬁrms’ environmental, social, and governance  performance ( Grewal et al. , 2015 ).  Although our relatively narrow focus on the mining industry and MSD regulation could  limit the generalizability of our ﬁndings, our study nonetheless provides direct evidence on the real effects of mandating the  inclusion of information on social responsibility in ﬁnancial reports—a feature that is common to all of the aforementioned  initiatives.   2.  Institutional background.  The mining industry is both an economically important and historically unsafe sector of the U. S.  economy.  In 2014, the  mining industry contributed $225. 1 billion to GDP and nearly two million jobs to the U. S.  economy ( NMA, 2014 ).  Since 1900,  more than 10 0,0 0 0 workers have died and many more have been injured in U. S.  mines ( MSHA, 2014 ).  Although mining is  no longer among the ten most dangerous jobs in the U. S.  (based on fatalities), it remains one of the most heavily regulated  sectors in terms of employee health and safety.   As is often the case with policy interventions, catastrophic events frequently trigger mine-safety regulation ( Ruffennach,  2002 ).  The Upper Big Branch disaster, which killed twenty-nine miners in West Virginia on April 5, 2010, is among these.   However, in an unprecedented move, policy-makers turned to securities regulation for a solution.  Following the congressional practice of tacking off-topic provisions onto other pieces of proposed legislation, West Virginia Senator Jay Rockefeller  IV introduced MSD into the Dodd–Frank Act, which primarily focuses on regulations intended to reform the ﬁnancial services sector.  Public comments suggest that MSD was explicitly motivated by the intention to improve safety rather than aid  1 Senator Rockefeller himself publicly indicated that the goal of the  investors in assessing ﬁnancial performance ( Lynn, 2011 ).   regulation was to “make mine safety a top priority” (Senator John D.  Rockefeller IV, Press Release May 07, 2010), and, not  surprisingly, the strongest supporters of MSD in comment letters on the regulation written to the SEC were organizations  representing mine workers (e. g. , the United Mine Workers of America).   Dodd–Frank Section 1503(a) requires SEC-registered mine owners to include their safety records for U. S.  mines in their  periodic reports (i. e. , 10Qs and 10Ks for domestic issuers and 20Fs and 40Fs for foreign issuers).  Under the Federal Mine  Safety and Health Act of 1977 (the Mine Act), the MSHA is required to inspect surface mines at least twice a year and  underground mines at least four times a year.  Inspections are also conducted in response to hazardous condition complaints.   If inspectors identify violations of safety and health standards, they issue citations or orders, which may carry monetary  penalties or, in some cases, result in mine closures.  Under MSD, from these inspections, issuers must report.  severe citations  for violations of the Mine Act, proposed penalties, legal actions, and fatalities.  Section 1503(b) of the Act also requires issuers  Unlike most SEC reporting requirements,  issuers must report safety records even if their omission is unlikely to inﬂuence the decisions of ﬁnancial report users (i. e. ,  there is no materiality threshold for MSD ﬁlings).  In Appendix A , we provide an example of a typical MSD 8K and 10K ﬁling,  a screenshot from the MSHA website, and a more detailed description of the MSD reporting requirements.   Importantly, since 20 0 0, the MSHA has disclosed all information included in MSD ﬁlings on its website, typically within  twenty-four hours, making it a timelier source than the ﬁnancial reports.  The prior disclosure of the safety records allows us to estimate the effect of including this information in ﬁnancial reports independent from the effects of disclosing the  information for the ﬁrst time.   <Middle> Reasons MSD could have real effects.  If the inclusion of safety information in ﬁnancial reports increases public awareness of safety records, MSD could have  real effects through managers’ rational anticipation of its implications for cash ﬂows, discount rates, and/or their own reputation.  MSD could affect cash ﬂows by exposing a ﬁrm to heightened political costs, reputational concerns, and activism  by safety-conscious stakeholders.   Information on safety could affect a ﬁrm’s discount rate if a signiﬁcant proportion of investors prefer owning ﬁrms with  strong safety records for reasons independent of the cash ﬂow implications of those safety records.  If a ﬁrm conducts an  activity in opposition to some investors’ non-cash-ﬂow-based preferences, revelation of this activity will likely decrease the  demand of those investors, which could in turn affect the ﬁrm’s stock price ( Fama and French, 2007 ).  Friedman and Heinle  (2016) build on Fama and French (2007) to model the asset pricing implications of CSR, which, given the subject of MSD, is  directly relevant in our setting.  Their model predicts that, given a suﬃcient number of investors with non-cash-ﬂow-based  preferences, the market will price CSR disclosures.   It is also possible that MSD affects managers’ safety-investment decisions through channels other than ﬁrm value.  In the  mining industry, because of the potential political consequences, the importance of safety goes beyond its direct implications  for ﬁrm value.  For instance, managers are likely to face reputational costs from the public revelation that they operate  a ﬁrm with poor safety conditions.  Such costs could manifest on a personal (e. g. , shame) or professional level (e. g. , career  5 Dewatripont et al.  (1999) show how managerial incentives can be shaped not only by explicit incentive contracts  concerns).   but also by personal reputation and career concerns.  If managers of ﬁrms with poor safety records are less attractive labor  market candidates, they have a strong incentive to improve safety performance.   Regardless of the explanation for why safety information affects safety, what creates tension, and allows us to separate the effect of including information in ﬁnancial reports from the ﬁrst-time disclosure of that information, is that all  mine-safety records in the ﬁnancial reports are already publicly available on the MSHA’s website.  Thus, for MSD to affect  managers’ incentives to invest in safety, it must increase awareness of ﬁrms’ safety records or lead some interested parties  to assign greater importance to safety issues.   One reason MSD could increase awareness is that the information in ﬁnancial reports is more broadly disseminated than  the information on the MSHA website.  SEC-required disclosures on Forms 8K, 10Q, and 10K are effectively the billboards  of the ﬁnancial community.  Since ﬁnancial reports are so widely disseminated and have such low incremental acquisition  costs, after MSD, investors, ﬁnancial analysts, and the news media that follow SEC ﬁlings are more likely to become aware  of violations of the Mine Act—even if they are not explicitly looking for them.   Even if relatively sophisticated investors were already familiar with mine safety records prior to MSD, as less sophisticated parties also become aware of safety violations, the cost of investing in a ﬁrm that owns an unsafe mine could increase  after MSD.  For example, increased awareness that an institutional investor owns a company with a poor safety record could  lead to heightened public disapproval—particularly if third parties, such as the news media, scrutinize the investor’s portfolio holdings (as may be the case, for example, with university endowments, public pensions, or mutual funds).   Even if all investors were already fully informed about safety issues, citations might nevertheless become more costly to ﬁrms if other  stakeholders able to impose costs on ﬁrms (e. g. , activists) become aware of safety issues after MSD.   In the end, whether the mandatory inclusion of information on social responsibility in ﬁnancial reports has economically  signiﬁcant real effects is an empirical question.  Our goal in this paper is to estimate the magnitude of any such effects.   4.  Real effects of MSD.  In our analyses of the real effects of MSD, we focus on changes in safety citations, mining-related injuries, and labor  productivity around the enactment of MSD.   4. 1.  Implications of MSD for mine safety.  In this section, we assess the effect of MSD on the incidence rate of citations for violations of the Mine Act and miningrelated injuries.  Our empirical strategy relies on the fact that only SEC-registered ﬁrms are subject to Dodd–Frank and,  hence,  only  mines  owned  by  SEC-registrants  have  their  safety  records  included  in  ﬁnancial  reports.   We  use  a  standard  difference-in-differences (DiD) framework, where mines owned by non-SEC registrants are the control group.  Our baseline  model, suppressing year and mine subscripts.  The dependent variable is either the incidence rate of citations per inspection hour ( Citations ) or injuries per 20 0,0 0 0  hours worked ( Injuries ).  To mitigate the concern that our inferences could be affected by a change in inspection hours, in  the citation analysis, we alternatively include the log of inspection hours as a control variable and scale by mine hours  worked (see Internet Appendix Table IA1).  MSD , the variable of interest, is an indicator coded as one after Dodd–Frank for  mines disclosed in ﬁnancial reports.  We include year ﬁxed effects to control for changes over time in safety technology and  regulations other than Dodd–Frank, which likely have a similar effect on both MSD and non-MSD mines.  We include mine  ﬁxed effects to control for differences in production technologies and other time-invariant factors among mines.   In this speciﬁcation, we identify the effect of MSD from changes in incidence rates around the entry-into-force date of Dodd–Frank  for MSD relative to non-MSD mines.  We estimate block-bootstrapped standard errors at the mine-owner level, which adjust  for the lack of independence within mine owner (e. g. , Bertrand et al. , 2004 ).   The block bootstrap approach adjusts standard errors to account for the lack of independence within mine owner by  resampling observations (over 100 iterations) at the mine-owner level (i. e. , keeping mine-level observations for a speciﬁc  owner together).  As an alternative approach, we cluster observations at the mine-owner level using the OLS speciﬁcation  (see Internet Appendix Table IA1).   We estimate Eq.  (1) using a standard OLS regression, where we measure incidence rates over both one- and two-year periods.  Although one-year incidence rates are consistent with the length of the 10K reporting period, one year is a relatively  short interval over which to measure infrequent outcomes such as citations and injuries.  To mitigate this concern, we also  estimate Eq.  (1) using incidence rates measured over two years.  However, even when measured over two years, the infrequency of citations and injuries still results in a high density of observations at zero.  An OLS regression does not effectively  account for this concentration of observations, which could lead to biased estimates of the treatment effect ( Wooldridge,  2002 ).  We therefore also estimate Eq.  (1) using a Poisson regression.   The Poisson probability distribution captures the infrequent and discrete nature of citations and injuries and is widely  used to model similar events (e. g. , Rose, 1990.  Li et al. , 2012 ).  In the Poisson speciﬁcation, the dependent variable is the  count of citations or injuries.  In the case of citations (injuries), we use inspection hours (hours worked) as the exposure  variable—meaning the interpretation of the estimated coeﬃcient on MSD is comparable to the OLS speciﬁcation.  We report  average  treatment  effects  for  both  the  OLS  and  Poisson  regressions  where  incidence  rates  are  measured  over  one-  and  two-year periods, but because it conceptually best addresses low incidence rates, our preferred speciﬁcation is the Poisson  regression with incidence rates measured over two years.   We  obtain  mine-level  data  from  the  U. S.   Department  of  Labor  MSHA  Open  Government  Data  website,  which  compiles  an array of datasets on health and safety for mining operations located in the U. S.  We use the Inspection, Violation, Accident/Injuries , and CDC Address/Employment (AE) databases.  We include all observations from 2002 to 2013 that meet our  sample criteria.  We restrict the analyses of injuries to mine-years with at least ﬁve full-time equivalent employees (i. e. ,  more than 10,0 0 0 hours worked) to reduce the inﬂuence of very small mines.  In the OLS regressions, we truncate the top  1% of incident rates.  We do not truncate the incidence rates in the Poisson speciﬁcation because it is essentially a log-linear  model, which can effectively deal with outliers without truncation.  We include a relatively long pre-period (six years) to  enable a better assessment of the parallel-trends assumption (see Section 4. 3. 2 ).   We determine which mines in the MSHA database are disclosed in ﬁnancial reports (and therefore are included in our  treatment sample) through a comprehensive search of all relevant ﬁlings in the SEC’s Edgar database.  We provide a detailed  description of this data collection procedure in Appendix B .  Our control sample consists of all non-MSD mines available in  the MSHA database (i. e. , those not identiﬁed as MSD mines through the Edgar search).   Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for the 151 issuers subject to MSD.  The average MSD issuer owns about 24 mines.   Relative to the average issuer in Compustat , MSD ﬁrms are larger, with an average book value of total assets of $15B (the  Compustat average is $12B).  Coal-mining companies represent 11% of our sample and non-coal mining companies 18%— making mining the most frequent primary industry sector of MSD issuers.  However, mining is not the main business activity  of many SEC registrants owning mines.  In fact, 75% of the ﬁrms that own coal mines have a primary industry that is not  coal mining.   4. 1. 1.  Compliance with the Mine Act.  In this section, we present the results for our analysis of the effect of MSD on citations.  Table 2 provides descriptive  statistics for the variables used in the citation analysis.  After excluding inactive mines and truncating the top 1% of citations  per inspection hour, the dataset contains 2,726 MSD mines and 23,533 non-MSD mines.  For MSD (non-MSD) mines, on  average, one inspection hour results in 0. 08 (0. 10) citations.  Minimum, median, and maximum values are also similar.  We  provide further evidence on the covariate balance between MSD and non-MSD mines in connection with the matching  analysis in Appendix C .  Overall, the descriptive statistics indicate that MSD and non-MSD mines are similar in terms of the  citations they receive before conditioning on MSD.   We present results for the estimated average effect of MSD on the incidence of citations in Table 3 .  In Columns (1) and  (3), we estimate Eq.  (1) using OLS and measuring Citations over one- and two-year periods, respectively.  In both speciﬁcations, the coeﬃcient on MSD is negative and signiﬁcant (−0. 011 and −0. 009, respectively).  The estimated coeﬃcients imply a reduction in Citations of between 11% and 13% when we compare the coeﬃcient on MSD to the mean incidence rate of  citations for MSD mines prior to MSD.  In Table 3 Columns (2) and (4), we estimate Eq.  (1) using Poisson regressions over  one- and two-year periods, respectively.  For both speciﬁcations, the coeﬃcient on MSD is negative and signiﬁcant (  −0. 112 and −0. 113, respectively) and the estimated magnitudes imply a reduction in Citations of 11%.  Overall, the estimates for the  average effect of MSD in Table 3 are consistent across speciﬁcations and indicate a signiﬁcant reduction in the incidence of  citations for MSD mines relative to non-MSD mines subsequent to Dodd–Frank.   An important caveat makes it diﬃcult to unambiguously interpret the results from the citation analysis in Table 3 — it is not clear whether the observed reduction in citations is attributable to increased compliance with the Mine Act or  changes in MSHA enforcement.  Given that our objective is to assess whether MSD improves compliance, ideally, we would  examine actual violations of the Mine Act, rather than citations for violations.  However, violations do not result in citations  when they go undetected or when inspectors use the discretion available to them in the Mine Act to exercise forbearance.   Inspectors might consider the consequences of citing a mine for a violation before writing the citation and, knowing the  consequences are greater subsequent to MSD (i. e. , a severe citation must be included in the ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial reports), might  ignore violations by MSD mines (but not non-MSD mines)—Jin and Leslie (2003) document a similar effect for restaurant  hygiene inspectors.  Managers may also recognize the consequences of including citations in ﬁnancial reports and, subsequent  to MSD, spend more resources persuading inspectors to ignore violations (e. g. , through arguments or bribes).   To address this possibility, we separately examine Severe Citations , which for MSD-mines are included in ﬁnancial reports,  and  Not-Severe  Citations ,  which  are  not  included  in  any  ﬁnancial  reports.  We  deﬁne  Severe  Citations ,  for  both  MSD  and  non-MSD mines, as those citations classiﬁed by the MSHA as Severe and Signiﬁcant (“S&S”) violations.  We deﬁne all other  citations as Not-Severe Citations .  As shown in Table 2 , Severe Citations comprise about one fourth of all citations.  Table 4  Columns (1) and (2) report regression results separately for Severe Citations and Not-Severe Citations .  If MSD causes a change  in inspector behavior, we would expect to see a decrease only for Severe Citations , because it is only these citations that  are disclosed under MSD (we assume that there is a cost to inspectors of ignoring legitimate violations).  On the contrary,  and consistent with MSD increasing compliance with the Mine Act, we ﬁnd a negative and statistically signiﬁcant coeﬃcient  on MSD for both Severe and Not-Severe Citations .  It is not clear why inspectors would have any incentive to change their  behavior around MSD for citations that are not included in ﬁnancial reports.   Overall, the evidence in this section indicates that compliance with the Mine Act increased in response to MSD.  However,  because it is not obvious what impact compliance with the Mine Act will have on safety (e. g. , Ruffennach, 2002 ), it is  diﬃcult to interpret reductions in citations as providing suﬃcient evidence to conclude that safety has improved.   4. 1. 2.  Injuries.  In this section, we present results for injury rates.  MSD focuses on the reporting of Mine Act compliance records.  Yet, a  reduction in injury rates is clearly the ultimate policy objective (e. g. , Rockefeller, 2010 ).  Following mine-industry standards,  we deﬁne the injury rate as the number of injuries per 20 0,0 0 0 employee hours worked.  To mitigate any effects of injury reporting bias, we include only injuries that lead to an absence of at least one week, permanent disability, or a fatality.   Table provides descriptive statistics.  After excluding mine-year observations with less than 10,0 0 0 hours worked and truncating  the top 1% of injury rates, the dataset contains 2,168 MSD mines and 8,321 non-MSD mines.  Injury rates are similar across  MSD and non-MSD mines—there are on average 1. 45 and 1. 34 injuries per 20 0,0 0 0 hours worked, respectively.  Reﬂecting  these low incidence rates, the median injury rate is zero for both MSD and non-MSD mines.   Table 5 reports results for the baseline speciﬁcation, where we estimate the average effect of MSD on injury rates.  In  Columns  (1) and  (3), we  estimate OLS  regressions measuring injury  rates  over  one- and  two-year periods,  respectively.   −0. 231, respectively).  The estimated  The coeﬃcient on MSD is negative and signiﬁcant in both speciﬁcations (  coeﬃcients imply a reduction in injury rates for MSD mines of between 12% and 16% subsequent to MSD.   −0. 196 and  In Table 5 Columns (2) and (4), we estimate Poisson regressions measuring injury rates over one- and two-year peri−0. 130  ods, respectively.  The coeﬃcients on MSD are also negative and signiﬁcant in both speciﬁcations.  The coeﬃcients of  (in both speciﬁcations) imply a 13% reduction in the incidence rate of injuries for MSD mines subsequent to MSD, which  translates into 0. 21 fewer injuries per 100 full-time work-years (20 0,0 0 0 mine-hours worked).   Overall, the estimates for the average effect of MSD are consistent across speciﬁcations and indicate that the regulation  reduced injury rates by between 12% and 16%.  The estimated reduction in injury rates are close to the 11% reduction we  estimate for citations in Section 4. 1. 1 , and are consistent with substantial safety improvements.   4. 2.  Labor productivity in coal mines.  In this section, we investigate whether the improvements in safety around MSD impose a measurable cost on coal mines  in terms of lower labor productivity (productivity is unobservable for non-coal mines).  We focus on labor productivity rather  than investments because most citations are issued for failure to take some time-consuming safety precaution (e. g. , failure  to set up a fence before working in an elevated area), not for equipment malfunctions.   To assess empirically whether MSD affects labor productivity, we estimate an OLS DiD speciﬁcation similar to Eq.  (1) using the natural log of tons of coal mined per mine hour worked ( Labor Productivity ) as the dependent variable.  Again, we  include year and mine ﬁxed effects.  We obtain data on coal-mine production from the CDC’s AE database.  One important  difference in this analysis is that, because of data availability constraints, we are only able to observe productivity for coal  mines since 2006.   Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for Labor Productivity .  Average productivity for MSD and non-MSD mines is at 4. 1  and 3. 2 tons of coal per hour, respectively.  Table 6 presents results for our analysis of the effect of MSD on labor productivity.  The results suggest that, following the adoption of MSD, labor productivity decreased by 7. 4% for MSD mines relative  11 The observed reto non-MSD mines, which translates into an increase in labor costs of approximately 0. 9% of revenues.   duction in labor productivity is consistent with an increased focus on safety and highlights one potential cost of MSD.  For  comparison, in Columns (2) and (3) of Table 6 , we present results for citations and injuries for the subsample of coal mines.   The estimated treatment effects for coal mines are similar in magnitude, albeit statistically weaker (as expected, given the  smaller sample size), to those reported in Tables 3 and 5 .   Another way ﬁrms could improve safety in response to MSD, without reducing productivity, is to close their most dangerous mines.  In an untabulated analysis, we ﬁnd that the likelihood of closing a mine with citations per inspection hour  above the top decile of the citation distribution in 2009 increases in the post-MSD period by about 1% for MSD relative to  non-MSD mines.   4. 3.  Assessing identiﬁcation assumptions.  In this section, we assess the validity of two critical assumptions underlying our identiﬁcation strategy.  1) that the MSD  information included in ﬁnancial reports is publicly available elsewhere, and 2) the parallel-trends assumption.   4. 3. 1.  Availability of MSD information on the MSHA website.  The ideal setting to isolate and estimate the magnitude of the incremental real effects of including information in ﬁnancial reports would be one where the exact same safety reports included in ﬁnancial reports were already publicly available  elsewhere.  Our setting falls short of this experimental ideal because the structure of the data on the MSHA website differs  from the exhibit included in the 10K.  The MSHA website reports data at the mine-level and only aggregates this data based  on the mine’s legal owner, which for approximately 25% of mines is a subsidiary whose name differs substantially from  that of its SEC-registered parent company.  A potential concern is that MSD provides a previously unknown link between a  mine’s legal owner and its SEC-registered parent company, making it diﬃcult to isolate the incremental effect of including  information in ﬁnancial reports.  However, given that a ﬁrm’s subsidiaries are disclosed in Exhibit 21 of the 10K, the task of  compiling the same information included in MSD from the MSHA’s website is unlikely to be insurmountable, at least for  sophisticated users.   Nonetheless, we address this concern by estimating Eq.  (1) excluding MSD-mines with legal owners that do not have  virtually the same name as their SEC-registered parent company.  Our assumption is that, if the names of the mine’s legal  owner and SEC-registered parent ﬁrm are the same, the mapping between the MSHA website and the ﬁnancial reports is  straightforward.  The estimated treatment effects for this subsample, reported in Table 7 , are very similar to those for the  full sample of mines, which suggests that the effects in the main analyses are not driven by MSD providing previously  non-public information.   4. 3. 2.  The parallel-trends assumption.  A key assumption underlying our identiﬁcation strategy is that MSD and non-MSD mines would have had parallel trends  in citations, injuries, and productivity in the absence of MSD.  The inclusion of mine-level ﬁxed effects in our analyses precludes any time invariant differences across mines from affecting our results.  However, several potential concerns related to  correlated omitted variables that change around MSD and differentially affect MSD and non-MSD mines remain.  We conduct  a number of additional analyses to address these concerns.   First, we examine differences in pre-Dodd–Frank trends in our outcome variables across MSD and non-MSD mines by  mapping  out  counterfactual  treatment  effects  over  our  sample  period.   Using  two-year  Poisson  regressions,  we  map  out  these effects by replacing the single MSD variable with separate interactions between the MSD-mine indicator and indicators for each of the two-year sample periods.  We exclude the indicator for the two-year period immediately before MSD  takes effect, making 20 08–20 09 the benchmark period.  We depict these results in Fig.  1 Panels A–C.  In all three panels,  the  counter-factual  treatment  effects  in  the  pre-regulation  periods  are  small  and  statistically  indistinguishable  from  the  Second, we explore the possibility that other unobservable factors, such as public outrage over a mining disaster, that  occur in conjunction with new mining regulations in general, and MSD in particular, represent alternative explanations for  our results.  To explore this possibility, we examine responses to the MINER Act, another regulatory act focused on improving  mine safety that shares many similarities with MSD.  The MINER Act, which was adopted in July 2006 shortly after the Sago  Mine disaster, applies equally to all U. S.  mines regardless of whether they are owned by a public or private ﬁrm (i. e. , it  pertains to both our treatment and control mines).  This approach rests on the assumption that similar unobservable factors  led to both the MINER Act and MSD.  However, it is important to note that, as long as there is a substantial increase in,  for example, the level of public outrage around both events, we can gauge the extent to which public outrage affects our  analysis, even if the level of outrage is not exactly the same for both events.   In Fig.  2 , we plot two proxies for public interest in mine safety, the total number of U. S.  newspaper articles and Google  searches referring to mine safety (both indexed at 100 at the time of the Sago Mine disaster on January 2, 2006).  Many  potentially concerning unobservables are likely positively associated with public interest in mine safety.  For both proxies,  sharp spikes in interest are evident around the mining disasters preceding the MINER Act and MSD.  To the extent the two  proxies are associated with unobservable factors that led to regulation, the graph suggests that these unobservables change  in the same direction around both MSD and the MINER Act.  Hence, we can use the MINER Act to assess whether MSD and  non-MSD mines react similarly to unobservables that preceded MSD.  In Fig.  1 , Panels A–C, we indicate the timing of the  adoption of the MINER Act.  In none of the three ﬁgures is there evidence of a differential response between MSD and nonMSD mines to the MINER Act, which suggests that publicly and privately owned mines respond similarly to unobservables  preceding regulation.   Third, in Appendix C , we repeat our analyses based on a sample of matched MSD and non-MSD mines.  This approach  directly addresses selection on observables and, to the extent observable and unobservable mine characteristics are related,  provides a way to gauge the magnitude of any potential selection effect ( Altonji et al. , 2005 ).  A disadvantage of matching is  that it alters the sample composition and hence prevents the estimation of treatment effects for the population of mines.   Descriptive statistics presented in Appendix C indicate that MSD and non-MSD mines differ signiﬁcantly along two dimensions, mine size (based on hours worked) and mine type (coal versus non-coal and surface versus underground).  We match  ﬁrms based on these characteristics, in addition to mine location, and ﬁnd that matching has little effect on the estimated  treatment effects (see Appendix C ).   In the Internet Appendix, we discuss the results of several additional analyses intended to address a variety of other  threats  to  our  identiﬁcation,  including  assessments  of  1)  the  extent  to  which  unobservables  associated  with  the  Upper  14  2)  the  possibility  that  MSD  and  non-MSD  ﬁrms  respond  differently  to  changes  Big  Branch  disaster  affect  our  results.   in macroeconomic conditions around the time of the adoption of Dodd–Frank.  3) the potentially confounding effects of two  concurrent MSHA regulatory initiatives, which could differently affect MSD and non-MSD ﬁrms.  4) the extent to which our  results could be attributable to MSD ﬁrms selling their most citation- and accident-prone mines to non-MSD ﬁrms.  and 5)  the possibility that our results could be affected by contemporaneous changes in managers’ compensation contracts.  In all  ﬁve cases, we ﬁnd no evidence that any of these concerns materially affect our inferences.   5.  MSD ﬁlings and awareness of safety violations.  The potential explanations (discussed in Section 3 ) for why MSD could create an incentive for managers to improve  safety depend on increased public awareness of ﬁrms’ safety records.  Most of these explanations are also consistent with  greater or more timely security price implications of safety issues.  To substantiate whether more attention is paid to safety  after MSD, we provide descriptive evidence on who uses MSD ﬁlings and compare short-window stock returns and changes  in mutual fund holdings around the disclosure of IDOs before and after MSD.  Importantly, although we use equity returns  and mutual fund holdings to assess whether awareness of safety issues increases after MSD, several (related) explanations  could lead to real effects in our setting.  Ultimately, we are unable to quantify the relative importance of each.   5. 1.  Descriptive evidence on who uses MSD ﬁlings.  In this section, we provide descriptive evidence on the users of MSD ﬁlings.  Using data on the entities that download  MSD 8K ﬁlings, we ﬁnd that ﬁnancial institutions, such as brokerage houses/investment banks account for approximately  50% of 8K downloads, and the news media account for approximately 26%, making these groups the most frequent down15 Consistent with these two user groups paying more attention to safety issues subsequent to  loaders of MSD 8K ﬁlings.   MSD, we ﬁnd a substantial increase in media coverage of IDOs (based on a Factiva search of U. S.  media articles that mention “imminent danger order” in the pre- and post-MSD periods) and a modest increase in the frequency with which safety  is discussed in earnings conference calls around the time of MSD (based on a keyword search for “safety” in the Q&A section  of the earnings conference calls of our MSD sample ﬁrms in the pre- and post-MSD periods).  Speciﬁcally, from the pre to  post-MSD periods, we ﬁnd that the number of news articles mentioning IDOs increases from near zero to more than 50 per  year and that the frequency with which safety is mentioned in earnings calls increases marginally from 2. 