
The trade-off between risk and return is a fundamental issue in asset
pricing theory, which has been given much attention by researchers,
market investors and analysts.  In general, investors require a larger
expected return from a security that is riskier.  However, after decades
of controversy, no consensus exists among researchers on the relation
between risk and return across time.  Recently, the volatility implied
from options prices is commonly considered as the best volatility
forecast and risk measure (Mencia and Sentana, 2013).  Thus, interest
in the relations between return and implied volatility has increased to
provide new evidence to this debate. 
During the 2008 global ﬁnancial crisis, a new implied volatility index
(OVX) in the crude oil market was launched by the Chicago Board
Options Exchange (CBOE).  the index can measure the market's
expectation of the 30-day volatility of crude oil prices by applying
the well-known CBOE Volatility Index methodology to options on
the United States Oil Fund (Liu Name, 2013).  This index is the ﬁrst
commodity-based implied volatility index.  research on its relations
with oil price returns will help investors further improve their trading
decisions and will contribute, as well, to the development of energy
ﬁnance, which is what the current study hopes to achieve. 
Previous empirical literature has been focused on the relations
between returns and historical volatility in ﬁnancial markets (Leὁn
Name, 2007.  Wu and Lee, 2015.  Chang, 2016), while there is few research
in energy market.  Recently, return–implied volatility relationship has
been received extensive attention in traditional ﬁnancial markets, in
which the stock market implied volatility index (VIX) is widely investigated (Sarwar, 2012.  Basher and Sadorsky, 2016).  Although much
research has been done, no consistent conclusion on positive relations
(Fleming Name, 1995.  Giot, 2005.  Guo and Whitelaw, 2006) or negative
relations (Dash and Moran, 2005.  Tanha and Dempsey, 2015) has been
achieved.  Furthermore, the conclusion in the stock market cannot be
simply applied to OVX because of the more complicated structure of
crude oil options (Ji and Fan, 2016). 
Research on OVX in the crude oil market has been a research hotspot
in the ﬁeld of energy ﬁnance. 