
OPEC has a fragile cartel structure.  It does not have a formal
enforcement mechanism in place (except for the occasional price war)
to incentivize its members to comply with their quota allocations
(Alhajji and Huettner, 2000).  As a result, non-compliance to the quota
has become a norm among OPEC members over the past decades. 
In every single quarter from 1993 to 2005, total OPEC production
exceeded the sum of its members’ quotas.  In this period, an OPEC
member over-produced its quota by an average of 6. 7%.  In this paper,
we provide a framework to explain such a persistent non-compliance
pattern based on strategic interactions among members inside OPEC. 
Quota violations vary signiﬁcantly among different countries.  For
example, Saudi Arabia’s overproduction averaged around 3. 2% from
1995 to 2007 but Qatar’s overproduction averaged around 18. 5% during the same period.  In extreme cases, some members overproduce
their quotas by a large margin.  For example, in the second quarter of 1998, OPEC requested that Qatar cut its production to reach a
quota of 384 thousand bpd due to falling oil prices, but Qatar kept its
production level at 670 thousand bpd–a 75% quota non-compliance. 
Another extreme example is Algeria who overproduced its quota by
more than 50% in 13 out of 24 quarters between 2002 and 2006. 
Moreover, as suggested by a large body of theoretical literature1, the
diﬃculty of supporting collusion varies with the economic state of
the market.  Based on these preliminary observations, we ask the following.  is non-compliance related to oil market conditions.  If so, is
it a pro-cyclical or a counter-cyclical behavior.  How does the degree
of non-compliance differ for smaller vs.  larger producers.  To what
extent does OPEC rely on the quota system. 
There are a number of prominent empirical studies on OPEC
behavior, but the majority of them focus on whether OPEC behaves
as a cartel or not, rather than analyzing the nature of quotas and
violations.  To name a few, Griﬃn (1985), tests the market-sharing
hypothesis by looking at the co-movement of each country’s production with that of the rest of OPEC.  He concludes that “OPEC is a looser
cartel” given that market sharing considerations only partially affect
production decisions.  Gülen (1996) uses a similar intuition to test
for parallel movements in members’ output levels.  He ﬁnds evidence
of coordination among members, especially during the rationing
period, 1982–1993.  Dahl and Yücel (1991) ﬁnd no evidence in support of several hypotheses for OPEC behavior including dynamic
optimization, target revenue, cartel, competitive, and swing producers.  Therefore, they conclude that “loose coordination or duopoly” is
the closest description to OPEC behavior.  However, as pointed out
by Smith (2005), there are serious concerns regarding the low power
of the statistical tests employed in these studies and the extent to
which they are capable of distinguishing between collusive and competitive behavior within OPEC.  He describes OPEC as “much more
than a non-cooperative oligopoly, but less than a friction-less cartel. ”
Instead of calling this strand of literature inconclusive, we prefer
the conclusion that some of the studies reach—such as Geroski Name
(1987), Almoguera Name (2011) and Kaufmann Name (2008)—that
OPEC behavior cannot be ﬁtted into a single model, but rather it
follows a varying-conduct model that switches between collusive
and non-cooperative behavior over time.  We use the same notion
in our theory model by formulating the proposed framework as a
combination of a cooperative game and a non-cooperative behavior. 
Although the empirical evidence for OPEC’s collusion behavior
is mixed, the ﬁeld of industrial organization provides a sharp predictions for one of the factors affecting collusion.  the link between
market conditions and the incentive to cheat in a cartel.  The standard
approach in this literature is to repeat game models in which cartel members interact via their choice of production levels or prices. 
In this approach, members choose to cooperate or cheat in each
period by comparing the net value of cooperation vs.  that of deviation.  If they cooperate, they receive a moderate period payoff for
cooperation with a continuation of this payoff in the future.  However, if they decide to cheat, they will enjoy a high period payoff
but will face punishment in the future.  The prediction of this literature is that it’s harder to collude in booms because the incentive to
cheat is higher2.  For example, Rotemberg and Saloner (1986) show
that with an i. i. d.  demand structure collusion is harder to support in
booms, simply because the net gains of deviation are higher.  Assuming a cyclical demand, Haltiwanger and Harrington Jr (1991) show
that the incentive to cheat is stronger at the end of a boom when
the demand is about to fall.  This is because with falling demand the
value of cooperation is at its lowest.  Consistent with Rotemberg and
Saloner (1986), Kandori (1991) and Bagwell and Staiger (1995) generalize this result for the cases of serially correlated and Markov
demand shocks respectively.  Overall, the theory predicts a monotonic relationship between market conditions and the incentives to
cheat.  the more favorable the market conditions, the more diﬃcult
it is to support collusion. 3 Staiger and Wolak (1992) introduce the
capacity-constraints features to previous models and show that large
excess capacities can result in severe price wars. 
We use a less complex economy to characterize the noncompliance behavior of an OPEC-like cartel.  Our model consists of
a small and a large capacity country.  We use a simple multistage
model where in the ﬁrst period countries choose their optimal level
of capacity.  In the second stage the optimal aggregate production
of the cartel and the quota level for each member are determined
through maximizing the joint proﬁt of the cartel members.  In the
third stage countries decide their production level and in the fourth
stage possible deviations from the quota might be punished. 
The model implies that OPEC members take into account the
investment cost of building capacity with the possible beneﬁt of
obtaining a larger quota.  We show that for the small member, the
endogenously chosen capacity work as an implicit quota enforcement mechanism in good times and leaves very little room for
non-compliance.  Therefore, we predict that OPEC relies on its quota
and punishment system more in bad times than in good times. 
We also allow the punishment reaction of the cartel’s police (Saudi
Arabia) to vary in a range (between very weak enforcement to a
full enforcement) to study the reaction of investment and production decisions of small members to changes in the stringency of the
punishment mechanism.  We show that while more stringent punishment results in lower quota violations, it increases investment in
capacity expansion. 
The key feature of our theoretical framework is to model the
decision making process by the cartel members inside and outside
of OPEC.  We do this by highlighting the role of an important variable, under-emphasized in literature, as the key variable explaining
the compliance behavior of cartel members.  More speciﬁcally, we
emphasize the role of capacity as the fundamental heterogeneity
among cartel members in three ways.  First, empirical and anecdotal evidence support the idea of a direct link between the production
capacity of a country and its share of total quota.  Second, we introduce convex capacity building costs, which pin down the optimal
maximum production capacity for each member.  We argue that the
marginal cost of oil production is much smaller than the initial cost
of building capacity, as pointed out by Gault Name (1999).  Therefore, some of results are driven by the capacity limits.  Third, larger
capacity provides the option to produce in high-demand states for
the larger member in the production game that follows the quota
allocations. 
Our empirical analysis supports these predictions.  Using quarterly data for the period of 1995 to 2007, during when OPEC had a
stable structure, we build a panel data model to test the statistical
signiﬁcance of the predictions of our theory model.  We use Instrumental Variable approach to control for potential endogeneity of
the size measure, Capacity.  Consistent with the notion that capacity
constraint works as an enforcement mechanism in good times, we
ﬁnd that unlike the police that always holds spare capacity to keep
the potential punishment credible, other OPEC members become
more capacity constrained when oil prices are higher.  Next, consistent with OPEC relying on quota system in bad times, we ﬁnd that
OPEC meets more frequently when oil prices are lower.  Moreover,
consistent with a size-dependent punishment mechanism, we provide empirical evidence that shows non-compliance relative to quota
levels is more common among the smaller countries especially in badThree things distinguish our paper from earlier studies on OPEC
non-compliance.  First, our paper is one of the few studies that
look into strategic interactions and cheating behavior inside OPEC,
instead of looking at the behavior of OPEC as a whole.  Second, unlike
the bulk of the literature on OPEC that are merely empirical (e. g. ,
Molchanov, 2003), we provide a theoretical model that is tuned to
resemble the OPEC decision-making process and delivers empirically
testable predictions along with our empirical analysis.  Third, we offer
a more universal framework that integrates the effects of general
market conditions (e. g. , demand ﬂuctuations) and country-speciﬁc
characteristics (e. g. , cost of capacity building) on quota violations
into a single framework.  This is in contrast to other studies such as
Dibooglu and AlGudhea (2007) and Kaufmann Name (2008) that look
at cheating behavior on a country-by-country basis. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 1 presents
the theory model in two stages.  the cooperative quota-setting stage
and the non-cooperative production game.  Section 2 describes the
empirical design and the data.  Section 3 illustrates empirical analysis
and estimation results, and Section 4 contains the conclusion. 
2.  Theoretical model. 
This section introduces a series of stylized models of OPEC members’ behavior.  The objective of the modeling exercise is to identify
major determinants of capacity building and production decisions,
which can potentially include a deviation from the assigned quota
(among other factors).  The model highlights trade-offs between
members investment and production decisions. 
In its most complete form, our theoretical model consists of a
four-stage game.  In the ﬁrst stage countries endogenously choose the
optimal level of capacity investment.  In the second stage production
quotas are allocated (taking into account the installed capacities). 