
A long strand of literature suggests the great importance of
commodities' predictive power to stock market, in which few, if any,
other commodities have received more attention for their perceived
economic signiﬁcance than oil.  Theoretically and empirically, the critical
role of oil market for understanding macroeconomic ﬂuctuations has
been well documented (see, for example, Hamilton, 1983, 2005. 
Backus and Crucini, 2000.  Kilian and Park, 2009.  Bodenstein etal. ,
2011.  Alquist etal. , forthcoming).  Among various oil market variables,
oil shock is a noteworthy one as there are voluminous studies, for
instance, on the short and long-runco-movements and causation relationships between oil shocks and stock volatility (see, e. g. ,Arouri etal. ,
2011, 2012.  Creti etal. , 2013.  Conrad etal. , 2014.  Du and He, 2015. 
Kang etal. , 2015.  Ewing and Malik, 2016).  It is, therefore, of interest to
deeply investigate the effect of oil market volatility on stock markets. 
However, not much has been done on the subject of predictive ability of oil to stock volatility from an out-of-sample perspective.  Existing
researches are largely, almost all, based merely on in-sample empirical
work.  Admittedly, it is more of reason to employ an out-ofsampleapproach
in the sense of prediction although in-sample results
appear for reference and comparison (see, e. g. ,Campbell and
Thompson, 2005.  Rapach etal. , 2010).  Therefore, in this paper, we investigatewhether
the oil volatility risk is useful in explaining the future volatility
of international stock market returns.  In particular, our
forecasting exercise using a recursive out-of-sample test, confirms that
oil volatility risk does exhibit statistically and economically significant
and robust in-sample and out-of-sample forecasting power, clearly exceeding
some of well-known macroeconomic variables.  Investigating
such volatility patterns in this way is critical to many fundamental issues
in asset pricing, investment, corporate finance, and risk management
(Bali etal. , 2005). 
In this paper, oil volatility risk is captured with variance risk premium
(oil VRP) of West Texas Intermediate crude oil (WTI).  The variance risk
premium measures the price of a hedge against variance ﬂuctuations,
and it is equal to the difference between the expected variance, under
the physical and the risk-neutral measures, which are thought to capture
a market-wide measure of uncertainty (Bali and Zhou, 2016).  We choose
this proxy since it well measures the volatility risk generated within oil
market and its time-varying characteristic better covers information of
the market over time.  Therefore, oil VRP better captures macroeconomic
dynamics and tend to perform more accurate in predicting stock volatilities forecast. 
While there is strong evidence relating oil prices to the business cycle,
attempts by economists to forecast equity returns using lagged oil prices,
have largely failed to ﬁnd consistent evidence.  i. e. ,the nature of the relationship is nonlinear, time varying.  Consistent with its perceived economic signiﬁcance, some empirical results generally imply that oil should be
an important determinant of asset prices (Ferson and Harvey, 1993. 
Backus and Crucini, 2000).  Confounding this, Chen etal.  (1986) who use
deduced oil risk premium Fama-MacBeth type regressions to predict
the cross-section of asset prices yield insigniﬁcant results.  Huang etal. 
(1996) ﬁnd virtually no relation between futures returns and U. S.  stock
market returns.  Moreover, even when they have come up signiﬁcantly,
oil-price-based return predictability is not explained by a time-varying
risk premium (Driesprong etal. , 2008.  Narayan and Sharma, 2011. 
Scholtens and Yurtsever, 2012).  These negative ﬁndings may due to
geopolitical events, wars, changes in economic structures, technologies,
and other reasons.  Until recently, Chiang etal.  (2015) introduce a novel
structural approach to extracting the factors, link oil factors to the
macroeconomy, and establish their signiﬁcance in pricing the broader
cross-section of equities.  Their results provide evidence that oil risk adequately ﬁltered from noisy price data, is one of a handful of fundamental
factors that affect the pricing effect, whereas information adequately
ﬁltered from derivatives prices does carry signiﬁcant risk premium with
rational economic interpretations.  They suggest that stochastic oil volatility is as important, if not more so, for the macro economy than oil price
itself.  Alternatively, factors extracted from derivative prices may provide
less noisy information for future economic fundamentals because they
may be seen as a vehicle for aggregating both differences in interpretation
of news and changes in heterogeneous expectations about the future
state of the economy, shocks to hedging and liquidity demands as well
as market sentiment.  Along this of reasoning, oil VRP better captures
macroeconomic dynamics and provides more accurate stock volatilities
forecasts.  To provide new insights, we show that the oil VRP provide
more accurate forecasts of stock volatilities than lagged oil prices. 
In this paper, oil VRP is computed merely with oil market returns of
WTI oil derivatives (Cushing, OK Crude Oil Future Contract 1, which is
downloaded from the EIA website).  Theoretically, we think it is reasonable to proxy global oil market volatility using VRP estimated in this
way since previous studies have used different evidence to illustrate the
world oil market is globalized and integrated.  Early, the world oil market
is deﬁned as ‘one great pool’, that is to say, the changes of a particular oil
market can rapidly spread to other oil markets (Adelman, 1984).  Later,
Gülen (1997, 1999) shows the signiﬁcant empirical evidence that the
world oil market is integrated as a unity.  In the process of globalization,
this integration tends to be enhanced and the degree of globalization for
the world crude oil market is being further investigated.  Recently, Ji and
Fan (2016) document that crude oil markets of adjacent countries or regions tend to link together.  Particularly, the crude oil markets in the
U. S. , Angola and Saudi Arabia take up the dominant position of the international oil economy.  Based on these studies, it is reasonable to measure
the volatility derived from the world oil market with oil VRP from US. 
We contribute to the existing literature on the predictability of stock
return volatility in several ways.  Because a model's in-sample predictive
performance tends to correlate poorly with its ability to deliver good
out-of-sample forecasts, we conduct out-of-sample forecasting exercise
using a recursive window, which suggests that the in-sample forecasting relationship holds out-of-sample.  Using daily data, we provide a
fresh perspective that oil VRP can forecast stock volatility.  We utilize
the standard predictive regression framework to examine the stock
return predictability of the oil VRP indicator for the next-day over the
sample from January 4, 2000 through June 30, 2016, in which the period
from January 4, 2000 to December 30, 2007 is set to perform in-sample
estimates and the remaining part is for out-of-sample forecast evaluation.  Time-variationout-of-sample R2 statistic is here employed as the
major evaluation metric to assess the performance of oil volatility risk
premium in forecasting stock volatility.  Moreover, we compare the predictive power of oil VRP over different cyclical periods and volatility
levels since literature (Neely Name, 2014) suggests stock market predictability is affected by different economic times, for example, economic
expansions and recessions.  Our forecasting exercise is also conducted
for longer horizons.  We ﬁnd the signiﬁcant predictability for the horizons of up-to-ten periods.  We also ﬁnd that the predictive power of
oil VRP is robust after controlling for domestic stock market volatility
risk measured as the lagged or daily change of realized volatility.  Further, to check whether oil VRP has been covered by macro variables considered in the literature, we include 11 fundamental variables reﬂecting
stock market activity in the benchmark of autoregressive model.  Our
empirical results indicate that the oil information is not overlapped
with traditional macro information, which is still helpful in predicting. 
These ﬁndings provide insights to one new channel that could drive
time variation in stock market volatility.  Existing channels include timevarying volatility in shocks to fundamentals (Bansal and Yaron, 2004),
nonlinear relations between time-varying expected returns and the
business cycle (Mele, 2007.  Choudhry etal. , 2016), learning effects
related to investors' uncertainty about fundamentals (Veronesi, 1999. 
Adam etal. , 2016), information demand and supply (Vlastakis and
Markellos, 2012) and ampliﬁcation of shocks to asset markets via ﬁnancial intermediation (Brunnermeier and Pedersen, 2009).  Through this
aforementioned channel, predictability of stock volatility revealed by
oil VRP exhibits solid theoretical basis. 
The second contribution arise from the international evidence to the
role of oil VRP in stocks volatilities.  Unlike existing researches which mainly concentrate on the US market, our study investigates effects of oil VRP
in G7 developed markets.  An analysis of this sort seems interesting for several reasons.  First, as Bodnaruk and Ostberg (2009) proposed, the relationship between uncertainty and stocks returns relies on the shadow cost of
incomplete information, which turns out to depend on relative market
size, institutional development, propensity of herd-like behavior and
overreaction and other country-speciﬁc characteristics.  Taking an international perspective allows us to test this hypothesis.  Second, using international stock volatilities provides a natural out-of-sample test for earlier the
US ﬁndings and pooling data across countries increases the power of tests
which yields more reliable estimates (Ang and Bekaert, 2007). 
Finally, we explore the economic driving forces of our ﬁndings. 