 In South Africa, the hake ﬁshing industry is an important contributor to income in coastal communities, generating some 30,000 jobs (Rademeyer et al. , 2008).  It is also the country's most valuable ﬁshery (Butterworth and Rademeyer, 2005.  Petersen et al. , 2010), generating an estimated 5 billion South African Rand (ZAR) per year at present.  The costs, revenues and proﬁts in this industry are much the same as those incurred by ﬁsheries internationally, such as fuel and market price for ﬁsh (e. g.  the target species Merluccius capensis and M.  paradoxus).  It is, however, a highly consolidated and vertically integrated industry with heterogeneous business models and a high level of complexity (Cooper et al. , 2014).  This makes the relative importance and complex interactions and trade-offs among different drivers like fuel price and environmental variability for the industry and its proﬁts hard to estimate at a glance.  It is known that economic, ecological and social dimensions must be appropriately considered to ensure successful management for the sustainability of ﬁsheries (Folke et al. , 2007.  Garcia and Charles, 2008.  Pitcher and Lam, 2010).  Effective policies for the sustainability of human (social and economic) and natural systems are underpinned by untangling the complexities of these systems, such as emergent properties and reciprocal effects (Liu et al. , 2007).  To be able to meaningfully incorporate ecological and human dimensions into management through appropriate objectives with measurable outcomes or indicators for South Africa's hake ﬁshery, it is necessary to ﬁrst have insight into the functioning of the industry and how its proﬁts are affected by changes in some of its major drivers.  Proﬁtability is a signiﬁcant incentive for commercial ﬁshing companies (Sumaila et al. , 2008).  A modelling approach can provide insight into this type of complex system and its structure, function and dynamics (Liu et al. ,2007), particularly in a situation such as South Africa's where publically available economic data on the ﬁsheries is scarce.  Scenario testing provides further understanding of how changes in external drivers affect the industry's structure, function or dynamics.  Achieving insight into the South African offshore demersal hake trawl ﬁshery was the impetus behind the building of HakeSim, an agent-based model (ABM) of the ﬁshery (Cooper, 2015.  Cooper and Jarre, 2017).  HakeSim captures the complex industry structure, complete with heterogeneous company, vessel and market agents, as well as important factors that affect the industry's proﬁtability such as fuel price, total allowable catch, environmental variability (through a proxy), domestic and international market price and demand for hake.  Fuel price is one factor that majorly affects running costs and therefore proﬁtability of the offshore hake trawl industry.  It can account as much as 60% of running costs for ﬁshing companies (Sumaila et al. , 2008).  It is well known as a core issue affecting ﬁsheries economics and dynamics worldwide and, for example, has been identiﬁed as particularly signiﬁcant for the proﬁtability of wetﬁsh trawlers that land fresh ﬁsh in neighbouring Namibia (BCLME, 2006.  Gasalla et al. , 2010.  Sumaila et al. , 2008).  Even where it accounts a lower percentage (10 or 25%), such as in other trawl industries, it can hinder ﬁsheries in the case of a price increase (Sumaila et al. , 2008).  Arnason (2007) point out that increased fuel prices from 2004 meant signiﬁcant increases in cost and reductions in proﬁt, which could push companies already not making a proﬁt into exiting the ﬁshery.  Anecdotally, the South African industry complained of critical interactions between fuel price and catch per unit effort (CPUE) during high fuel price periods and that it was difﬁcult to sustain proﬁts at these times.  Previous modelling scenario analysis with HakeSim demonstrated that prices above ZAR 18. 783 per litre, prices that could occur with a large fuel price increase or removal of fuel subsidies, caused all modelled companies to make a loss and lower fuel prices than this could cause companies to make an unacceptably low return on investment to continue operations (Cooper and Jarre, 2017).  Should such an increase occur in future, in light of a deteriorating currency (ZAR), a global fuel price rise or a decrease in fuel subsidy, it is possible that industry could offset losses by increasing revenue streams.  It is unknown to what extent this is possible or how different companies might cope with these kinds of challenges.  To be able to assess this it is useful to consider different types of costs and revenues for companies and the variation between these variables at an individual company or vessel level.  Additionally, there may be other variable costs to the industry such as labour or storage costs, and ﬁxed costs such as repairs and maintenance or insurance (Whitmarsh et al. , 2000).  On the other hand, since it is an export-dominated ﬁshery (Crosoer et al. , 2006), market demand and international price (in Euros or US dollars) for hake, as well as the foreign exchange rate for the ZAR are important determinants of income to local companies.  Indeed, exchange rate is known to be an important factor for ﬁsheries and countries that export ﬁsh worldwide (Asche, 2014).  The changes to and interactions among these and other variables that affect costs and revenue determine short-term gross proﬁts.  They also determine economic proﬁts over the long term together with depreciation and opportunity costs (Whitmarsh et al. , 2000).  Understanding how proﬁts of different types of companies might be affected is signiﬁcant since changes to proﬁt not only affect companies and their employees, but are also of social and environmental signiﬁcance, for example on government decisions for public support or subsidies (Arnason, 2007).  It is not just the overall proﬁt that is important to companies, but also variance in proﬁt, which is a form of risk.  Since companies in the South African offshore hake trawl industry differ in their rightsholdings, the composition and numbers of vessels that they own, the products that they sell and their core business structure (Cooper et al. , 2014), they might make different trade-offs between proﬁt and risk.  They can also be quite differently affected by increased risk due to (environmental) variability in catches.  This type of individual level variability and the collective, emergent properties at a ﬁsheries system level that result from the interactions of these individual companies, vessels and markets are not captured in traditional economic models, but can be captured with an ABM.  Furthermore, the overall ﬂeet size and composition of the entire hake trawl industry has changed signiﬁcantly through time (Cooper et al. , 2014), and this presumably reﬂects trade-offs between proﬁt (i. 