 1.  Introduction A long strand of literature suggests the great importance of commodities' predictive power to stock market, in which few, if any, other commodities have received more attention for their perceived economic signiﬁcance than oil.  Theoretically and empirically, the critical role of oil market for understanding macroeconomic ﬂuctuations has been well documented (see, for example, Hamilton, 1983, 2005.  Backus and Crucini, 2000.  Kilian and Park, 2009.  Bodenstein etal. , 2011.  Alquist etal. , forthcoming).  Among various oil market variables, oil shock is a noteworthy one as there are voluminous studies, for instance, on the short and long-runco-movements and causation relationships between oil shocks and stock volatility (see, e. g. ,Arouri etal. , 2011, 2012.  Creti etal. , 2013.  Conrad etal. , 2014.  Du and He, 2015.  Kang etal. , 2015.  Ewing and Malik, 2016).  It is, therefore, of interest to deeply investigate the effect of oil market volatility on stock markets.  However, not much has been done on the subject of predictive ability of oil to stock volatility from an out-of-sample perspective.  Existing researches are largely, almost all, based merely on in-sample empirical work.  Admittedly, it is more of reason to employ an out-ofsampleapproach in the sense of prediction although in-sample results appear for reference and comparison (see, e. g. ,Campbell and Thompson, 2005.  Rapach etal. , 2010).  Therefore, in this paper, we investigatewhether the oil volatility risk is useful in explaining the future volatility of international stock market returns.  In particular, our forecasting exercise using a recursive out-of-sample test, confirms that oil volatility risk does exhibit statistically and economically significant and robust in-sample and out-of-sample forecasting power, clearly exceeding some of well-known macroeconomic variables.  Investigating such volatility patterns in this way is critical to many fundamental issues in asset pricing, investment, corporate finance, and risk management (Bali etal. , 2005).  In this paper, oil volatility risk is captured with variance risk premium (oil VRP) of West Texas Intermediate crude oil (WTI).  The variance risk premium measures the price of a hedge against variance ﬂuctuations, and it is equal to the difference between the expected variance, under the physical and the risk-neutral measures, which are thought to capture a market-wide measure of uncertainty (Bali and Zhou, 2016).  We choose this proxy since it well measures the volatility risk generated within oil market and its time-varying characteristic better covers information of the market over time.  Therefore, oil VRP better captures macroeconomic dynamics and tend to perform more accurate in predicting stock volatilities forecast.  While there is strong evidence relating oil prices to the business cycle, attempts by economists to forecast equity returns using lagged oil prices, have largely failed to ﬁnd consistent evidence.  i. e. ,the nature of the relationship is nonlinear, time varying.  Consistent with its perceived economic signiﬁcance, some empirical results generally imply that oil should be an important determinant of asset prices (Ferson and Harvey, 1993.  Backus and Crucini, 2000).  Confounding this, Chen etal.  (1986) who use deduced oil risk premium Fama-MacBeth type regressions to predict the cross-section of asset prices yield insigniﬁcant results.  Huang etal.  (1996) ﬁnd virtually no relation between futures returns and U. S.  stock market returns.  Moreover, even when they have come up signiﬁcantly, oil-price-based return predictability is not explained by a time-varying risk premium (Driesprong etal. , 2008.  Narayan and Sharma, 2011.  Scholtens and Yurtsever, 2012).  These negative ﬁndings may due to geopolitical events, wars, changes in economic structures, technologies, and other reasons.  Until recently, Chiang etal.  (2015) introduce a novel structural approach to extracting the factors, link oil factors to the macroeconomy, and establish their signiﬁcance in pricing the broader cross-section of equities.  Their results provide evidence that oil risk adequately ﬁltered from noisy price data, is one of a handful of fundamental factors that affect the pricing effect, whereas information adequately ﬁltered from derivatives prices does carry signiﬁcant risk premium with rational economic interpretations.  They suggest that stochastic oil volatility is as important, if not more so, for the macro economy than oil price itself.  Alternatively, factors extracted from derivative prices may provide less noisy information for future economic fundamentals because they may be seen as a vehicle for aggregating both differences in interpretation of news and changes in heterogeneous expectations about the future state of the economy, shocks to hedging and liquidity demands as well as market sentiment.  Along this of reasoning, oil VRP better captures macroeconomic dynamics and provides more accurate stock volatilities forecasts.  To provide new insights, we show that the oil VRP provide more accurate forecasts of stock volatilities than lagged oil prices.  In this paper, oil VRP is computed merely with oil market returns of WTI oil derivatives (Cushing, OK Crude Oil Future Contract 1, which is downloaded from the EIA website).  Theoretically, we think it is reasonable to proxy global oil market volatility using VRP estimated in this way since previous studies have used different evidence to illustrate the world oil market is globalized and integrated.  Early, the world oil market is deﬁned as ‘one great pool’, that is to say, the changes of a particular oil market can rapidly spread to other oil markets (Adelman, 1984).  Later, Gülen (1997, 1999) shows the signiﬁcant empirical evidence that the world oil market is integrated as a unity.  In the process of globalization, this integration tends to be enhanced and the degree of globalization for the world crude oil market is being further investigated.  Recently, Ji and Fan (2016) document that crude oil markets of adjacent countries or regions tend to link together.  Particularly, the crude oil markets in the U. S. , Angola and Saudi Arabia take up the dominant position of the international oil economy.  Based on these studies, it is reasonable to measure the volatility derived from the world oil market with oil VRP from US.  We contribute to the existing literature on the predictability of stock return volatility in several ways.  Because a model's in-sample predictive performance tends to correlate poorly with its ability to deliver good out-of-sample forecasts, we conduct out-of-sample forecasting exercise using a recursive window, which suggests that the in-sample forecasting relationship holds out-of-sample.  Using daily data, we provide a fresh perspective that oil VRP can forecast stock volatility.  We utilize the standard predictive regression framework to examine the stock return predictability of the oil VRP indicator for the next-day over the sample from January 4, 2000 through June 30, 2016, in which the period from January 4, 2000 to December 30, 2007 is set to perform in-sample estimates and the remaining part is for out-of-sample forecast evaluation.  Time-variationout-of-sample R2 statistic is here employed as the major evaluation metric to assess the performance of oil volatility risk premium in forecasting stock volatility.  Moreover, we compare the predictive power of oil VRP over different cyclical periods and volatility levels since literature (Neely et al. , 2014) suggests stock market predictability is affected by different economic times, for example, economic expansions and recessions.  Our forecasting exercise is also conducted for longer horizons.  We ﬁnd the signiﬁcant predictability for the horizons of up-to-ten periods.  We also ﬁnd that the predictive power of oil VRP is robust after controlling for domestic stock market volatility risk measured as the lagged or daily change of realized volatility.  Further, to check whether oil VRP has been covered by macro variables considered in the literature, we include 11 fundamental variables reﬂecting stock market activity in the benchmark of autoregressive model.  Our empirical results indicate that the oil information is not overlapped with traditional macro information, which is still helpful in predicting.  These ﬁndings provide insights to one new channel that could drive time variation in stock market volatility.  Existing channels include timevarying volatility in shocks to fundamentals (Bansal and Yaron, 2004), nonlinear relations between time-varying expected returns and the business cycle (Mele, 2007.  Choudhry etal. , 2016), learning effects related to investors' uncertainty about fundamentals (Veronesi, 1999.  Adam etal. , 2016), information demand and supply (Vlastakis and Markellos, 2012) and ampliﬁcation of shocks to asset markets via ﬁnancial intermediation (Brunnermeier and Pedersen, 2009).  Through this aforementioned channel, predictability of stock volatility revealed by oil VRP exhibits solid theoretical basis.  The second contribution arise from the international evidence to the role of oil VRP in stocks volatilities.  Unlike existing researches which mainly concentrate on the US market, our study investigates effects of oil VRP in G7 developed markets.  An analysis of this sort seems interesting for several reasons.  First, as Bodnaruk and Ostberg (2009) proposed, the relationship between uncertainty and stocks returns relies on the shadow cost of incomplete information, which turns out to depend on relative market size, institutional development, propensity of herd-like behavior and overreaction and other country-speciﬁc characteristics.  Taking an international perspective allows us to test this hypothesis.  Second, using international stock volatilities provides a natural out-of-sample test for earlier the US ﬁndings and pooling data across countries increases the power of tests which yields more reliable estimates (Ang and Bekaert, 2007).  Finally, we explore the economic driving forces of our ﬁndings.  The success of oil VRP in forecasting stock volatilities is no dues ex machina.  It follows from the fact that the oil VRP appears to have an economically and statistically signiﬁcant predictive ability for international macroeconomic variables, such as industrial production growth, ted Spread, CPI inﬂation (Producer Price Index/Consumer Price Index) and policyrelated economic uncertainty.  In the spirit of the component model (Engle etal. , 2013) and the no-arbitrage model (Corradi etal. , 2013), these indicators should predict stock volatilities.  Our paper is closely related to Chiang etal.  (2015), who extract oil factors from derivative markets and show that oil factors carry signiﬁcant risk premium and identify them as most important to the macroeconomy and cross-section of expected returns.  Recent works that explicitly models the role of oil in the pricing of securities also include Baker and Routledge (2011) and Ready (2012), Ready etal.  (2013).  Our ﬁndings are best viewed as a complement and thorough attempt to study the role of oil risks in pricing securities from the perspective of volatility.  Our work is also related to the literature on the predictability of stock return volatility using macroeconomic variables.  Though a ﬂood of literature evidence stock return volatility reacts to changes in economic fundamentals (see, e. g. ,Bansal and Yaron, 2004.  Mele, 2007.  Engle and Rangel, 2008.  Engle etal. , 2013.  Corradi etal. , 2013), the out-of-sample predictive ability over the benchmark of autoregressive model is discouraging (Paye, 2012.  Christiansen et al. , 2012).  In this paper, we improve upon existing studies by revealing both in-sample and out-ofsample predictability of stock volatility using oil VRP indicator, which is helpful to understand the economic source of changes in stock volatility.  Our main ﬁndings also survive a series of robustness checks.  These include using an alternative evaluation criterion of predictability, using an alternative proxy of volatility and using a rolling window estimation scheme.  The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.  Section2 provides the data description about dependent and explanatory variables.  This section also describes the data we employ and present the evidence on the connection between oil VRP and macro variables as well as the fundamentals used as control variables.  Section3 shows the econometric methodology for volatility forecasting.  Sections 4 present the in-sample estimation and out-of-sample results and analysis.  The relationship between oil VRP and real economy is described in Section5.  Section6 retest the predictive power of oil VRP as robustness check.  The last section concludes.  <Middle> Data.  2. 1.  Measuring stock volatility.  As a widely accepted conditional volatility measurement in literature (Wu etal. , 2015), realized volatility has advantages over the squared monthly or quarterly returns in capturing the ex-post variance.  We, following Paye (2012), proxy stock realized volatility as the square-rooted monthly summation of the square stock daily return, which is given by this, where SRVt−τ,t denotes the stock realized volatility at time t with the average maturity τ and srt denotes the log return of the stock price, τ is the number of business days in each month.  This measure of stock market volatility, i. e.  SRVt, well captures the relationship between market volatility and intra-period market returns.  It emphasizes the connection between the estimation method (1) and the realized volatility literature that employs Intra-period returns to measure return variation as proposed in Paye (2012).  Andersen etal.  (2003) and Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2002) have shown that with the increase of intra-period sample frequency, this computation converges in probability to the quadratic variation of a frictionless, arbitrage free asset price process.  We choose typical stock index from G7 countries to calculate stock return realized volatility including S&P 500 composite index ofthe U. S. , FTSE 100 index of the U. K. , NIKKEI 225 stock average index of Japan, CAC 40 index of France, DAX 30 performance index of Germany, FTSE MIB index of Italy and S&P/TSX composite index of Canada.  All the daily stock returns are downloaded from Thompson Reuters database.  Apart from the realized volatility, the implied volatility also serves an efﬁcient measure of stock volatility (Kim and Lee, 2013.  Wu etal. , 2015).  We obtain the stock implied volatility data of the G7 countries directly from the Thomson Reuters Database.  2. 2.  Measuring oil volatility.  In this section, we construct oil volatility risk premium (oil VRP), which serves as the main predictor of the regressions.  As in Carr and Wu (2011), we deﬁne oil volatility risk premium as the difference between the risk-neutral and the physical expectation.  Simply we calculate it as the difference between oil realized volatility and oil implied volatility as in it,  where OVt is the oil volatility risk premium at time t, ORt is the oil realized volatility at time t and OIt is the oil implied volatility at time t.  This approach is widely employed in prediction tests.  It makes the oil VRP can be directly observed at time t without any modeling assumptions and is consistent with the stylized fact that realized volatility is highly persistent.  Therefore, we can proxy the volatility risk premium over the [t, t +τ] period as the difference between the ex post realized volatility and the ex an implied volatility as in Della Corte etal.  (2016).  The oil realized volatility is given following the same approach with the stock realized volatility where ORt denotes the realized volatility of oil on time t, n denotes thenumber of trading times in a given day and rot−i is the log return of oil options on time t−i.  Remarkably, here we use the price of WTI oil derivatives (Cushing, OK Crude Oil Future Contract 1, which is downloaded from the EIA website) to compute the log return instead of the spot price because the information incorporated in the derivatives are less noisy as proposed by literature.  Since our empirical work are mainly based on daily data, we use intraday oil returns to compute the realized volatility index.  The implied volatility of oil, known as OVX index, is directly downloaded from the FRED Database.  Concerning the limitation of oil market implied volatility, the OVX index released by CME begins in 2007.  The data of the front periods before 2007 is calculated using the same algorithm to construct OVX.  Fig.  1 depicts the realized volatility and implied volatility of oil for the whole sample period, in which both series are stationary.  We note that the OVX constructed before 2007 is consecutive with the later part as expected, which is theoretical and reasonable.  Table 1 summarizes the basic statistics for the variables used in this paper, which suggests the time-series are all stationary over time.  2. 3.  Other variables.  To better detect the predictive power of oil volatility risk premium (oil VRP) under the traditional regression frameworks, we employ a total of 11 fundamental predictors, which can be seen as macroeconomic variables to forecast stock returns (see, e. g. ,Neely etal. , 2014.  Dangl and Halling, 2012.  Rapach etal. , 2010) and stock volatility (see, e. g. , Christiansen et al. , 2012), as control variables, among which the ﬁrst 10 are used in Welch and Goyal (2008) and available at the homepage of Amit Goyal.  To brieﬂy present these variables, we give a short description of the predictors as follows.  • Dividend-price ratio (DP).  the log of dividends on the S&P 500 index minus the log of stock prices.  • Earning-price ratio (EP).  the log of earnings on the S&P 500 index minus the log of stock prices.  • Book-to-market ratio (B/M).  the ratio of book value at the end of the previous year divided by the end-of-month market value for the DJIA.  • Treasury bill rate (TBL).  the second market rate of the 3-monthUS Treasury bills.  • Long-term yield (LTY).  the long-term government bond yields.  • Net equity expansion (NTIS).  the ratio of a twelve-month moving sum of net equity issues by NYSE-listed stocks to the total end-ofyearmarket capitalization of NYSE stocks.  • Risk free rate (RF).  the risk-free interest rate.  • Inﬂation (INFL).  the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for all urban consumers.  The one-month lagged CPI is because CPI is published with a delay of one month.  • Long-term return (LTR).  the returns on long-term government bond.  • Stock variance (SVAR).  the sum of squared daily returns on the S&P 500.  • Economic policy uncertainty (EPU).  the economic policy uncertainty index obtained from the FRED Database.  When investigating whether oil volatility risk premium (oil VRP) is related to the real economy, we try to using oil volatility risk premium as the explanatory variable of a variety of macroeconomic variables by both in-sample relationship and out-of-sample prediction, which includes the economic policy uncertainty (EPU) for G7 countries, the producer price index (PPI), consumer price index (CPI), ADS indicator proposed by Aruoba etal.  (2009), the macroeconomic uncertainty (MACU) and ﬁnancial uncertainty (FINU) for h = 1,3, 12 months proposed by Jurado et al.  (2015), unemployment rate, industrial production index and TED spread of the U. S.  and Chicago Fed National Activity Index (CFNAI).  As in Rapach etal.  (2013), the U. S.  has a predictive power for other countries in stock markets, so the predictability of the variables of the U. S.  can serve as a good detection when investigating the global economic meaning of oil volatility risk premium.  Due to the limited availability of data, the variables described in this subsection (Section2. 3) are all at monthly frequency.  In accordance, market volatility indexes used in these models are also adjusted to be at monthly frequency.  3.  Econometric methodology In this section, we present the predictive regression framework.  Both in-sample analysis and out-of-sample tests are employed as to better detect the signiﬁcance and robustness of the predictive power of oil VRP.  3. 1.  In-sample predictive regressions.  A standard benchmark to forecast stock volatility at horizon of one month is the following autoregressive model (AR) where the error term εt is assumed to follow an independent and identically normal distribution.  In this paper, to catch a practical meaning, the lag order p is set to be 5 and 10 to proxy for one and two trading weeks, respectively.  Moreover, we set the lag order to be 28, which is the maximum lag order produced by AIC and SC criteria, to optimally eliminate the impact caused by the autocorrelation in stock volatility.  To investigate the predictive content of oil volatility, the benchmark model, the conventional econometric predictive framework is employed as the benchmark model given as this, where SRVt denotes the stock realized volatility at time t and OVt−1denotes the oil volatility risk premium at time t−1.  Traditionally, the null hypothesis of no predictive power, i. e.  β=0, can be tested using a standard t-statistic.  Apart from that, a one-sided alternative hypothesis provided by Inoue and Kilian (2004), which can improve the power ofin-sample tests, is also adopted, that is to say, we also test the nullof β=0 against the alternative of βN0 by calculating a heteroskedasticityconsistentt-statistic.  Empirical literature (Neely et al. , 2014) suggests that the strength of the predictability of stock market is related with different economic times, such as economy cycles.  Here we use NBER-datedbusiness-cycle expansions and recessions to label economy periods and calculating R2 statistics for cyclical expansions and recessions, respectively.  Since R2statistic describes the degree of the predictive power and has no deﬁnite decomposition for full sample regression, we redefine the R2 statistic following Neely where It is a dummy variable that equals to 1at the NBER-dated expansion (recession) periods and zero otherwise.  dSRVt is the forecast value and SRVt is the mean of the stock realized volatility.  Different from the full-sample R2 statistics, the Rb 2 statistics can be negative in value as the forecast error produced by predictive model may be greater than that for historical average method.  3. 2.  Out-of-sample forecasts.  3. 2. 1.  Forecast approach.  Theoretically, out-of-sample tests have advantages in the sense prediction comparing to in-sample regressions (Rapach etal. , 2010).  As a widely-accepted method of out of sample tests, ﬁrstly we separate the full data spanning into two subsamples.  the initial m periods of samples are for in sample parameter evaluation and the remaining r periods are for out of sample forecast.  Parsimoniously identical predictive framework with the in-sample analysis is adopted to test and compare the predictability.  Here the recursive estimation window raised by Welch and Goyal (2008) is employed and the ﬁrst out-of-sample forecast of stock return realized volatility based on oil volatility risk premium is given by, where ^αm and ^βm are the ordinary least squares (OLS) regression on a constant vector and results from regressing {SRV}t = 2 m − 1.  Following this approach the second out-of-sample fore{OV}t = 1 cast of stock return realized volatility should be.  In this manner, a series of dSRV from period where ^αmþ1 and ^βmþ1 are, similarly, the ordinary least squares m + 1 on a constant (OLS) regression results from regressing {SRV}t = 3 vector and {OV}t = 2 m + 1 to m + r is generated.  For the daily-frequency tests, the initial 1987 periods and 2364 periods are used for the in-sample parameter estimation, respectively, since both the time points are NBER business cycle turning points.  3. 2. 2.  Forecast evaluation.  The accuracy of prediction using out-of-sample forecast is emphasized in this part.  We ﬁrstly calculated out-of-sample R2 (OOS_R2), a widely-used evaluation, to investigate whether the out-of-sample forecast outperforms the historical average benchmark.  The out-of-sample R2 is calculated by.  where SRVm+k denotes the true value of stock return realized volatility, the true value. The out-of-sample R2 statistic measures the improvement of forecast power for using out-of-sample prediction comparing Taking Eqs. (9)and (10) into consideration jointly, a positive value of OOS_R2 means a reduction in MSFE when using out-of-sample forecast instead of the historical average benchmark, indicating the better performance of out-of-sample prediction comparing with the historical average.  Furthermore, the MSFE-adjusted statistic is also used as an evaluation criteria.  Clark and West (2007) provide a one-sided (upper-tail) test method which is performed to test the null hypothesis that the benchmark forecast MSFE is less than or equal to competing forecast MSFE against the alternative hypothesis that the benchmark forecast MSFE is greater than the competing forecast MSFE.  As an amendment of Diebold and Mariano (2002) statistic, this MSFE-adjusted statistic has efﬁcient evaluation power for nested models, which is calculated as.  where MSFEi(i=1,2) denotes the MSFE statistic calculated using model1 and model 2,dSRVt. i ði ¼ 1.  2Þ denotes the forecast of stock return realized volatility using model 1 and model 2, respectively and r denotes the length of out-of-sample forecast periods.  Finally, we also adopt an evaluation statistic (GW) proposed by Giacomini and White (2006) to test the superior predictive ability.  Different from the Clark and West (2007) statistic, GW statistic provides a two-sided test method whose null hypothesis emphasizes expectations of the estimated MSFE instead of the population MSFE of two different predictive models, which is given by, where E is the expectation operator and F t is the information set as time t.  According to the framework developed by Giacomini and White (2006), the GW statistic is, where ^σ is a heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent estimator of asymptotic variance.  4.  Empirical results 4. 1.  In-sample results and analysis.  Firstly, the predictive power of oil VRP is test using the bivariate model.  Table2 reports the full sample regression results which is based on the econometric model (5).  Panel A demonstrates the results generated by the basic framework, in which the lag order of stock realized volatility in model (5) is set to be 1.  The coefﬁcients of oil volatility risk premium to forecast international stock realized volatility are shown in the ﬁrst line of panel A, of which the corresponding t-statistics are shown in the ﬁrst row of panel B.  For all the G7 countries, the slope coefﬁcients are all around 0. 004, which are all followed with a standard error of one basis point.  What's more, all the coefﬁcients are labeled with three asterisks, indicating that all the G7 countries' stock realized volatility can be signiﬁcantly forecast by oil volatility risk premium, due to the standard t-statistic absolutes are all N25.  Theoretically, the Stambaugh (1999) bias will inﬂate the magnitude of the t-statistics potentially.  To eliminate this bias the one-sided (upper-tail) test proposed by Inoue and Kilian (2004), which tests the null hypothesis of β=0 against β N0, is also performed and the one-sidedt-statistics are shown in the second row of panel B.  We can see that the one-sidedtvalue absolutes are all N20, great enough to make sure the predictive power is signiﬁcant.  The bottom row demonstrates the R2 statistic for each regression, which shows that the explanatory power of the oil volatility risk premium is considerable.  At ﬁrst glance, it seems that the R2 statistics appear too small.  However, a monthly R2statistic near 0. 5% is big enough to represent an economically signiﬁcant predictive power as proposed by Campbell and Thompson (2008).  For daily data, a smaller magnitude of R2 statistic can stand for a strong effect.  In the bottom line, 7 R2 statistics are all above 18%, indicating the explanatory power of this model is big enough.  Moreover, looking at panel B,C and D, which represent the results produced by model (5) with 5, 10 and 28 lags of stock realized volatility, respectively.  Generally, we ﬁnd that for most countries, oil VRP still has a signiﬁcant predictive power although the strong correlation of stock volatility is eliminated.  Overall, our oil volatility risk premium does have a signiﬁcant in-sample predictive ability to forecast stock market volatility.  4. 2.  Out-of-sample results and analysis.  basic model.  Although the in-sample analysis provides efﬁcient parameter estimates and thus more precise pricing differentials forecast, Welch and Goyal (2008), among others, argue that out-of-sample tests seem more relevant for assessing genuine predictability in real time and avoid the in-sampleover-ﬁtting issue.  In addition, out-of-sample tests are much less affected by the small-sample size distortions such as the Stambaugh bias and the look-ahead bias concern.  Hence, it is of interest to investigate the out-of-sample predictive performance of oil VRP.  Following Goyal and Welch (2008), we run the out-of-sample analysis by estimating the predictive regression model recursively based on individual oil VRP indicator.  Table3 summarizes the out-of-sample forecast evaluation metrics for the bivariate model.  This top row gives the mean squared forecast error (MSFE) computed from the historical average benchmark and the second row shows MSFE computed from the out-of-sample recursive window based on model (5).  A smaller mean squared forecast error signals a better forecast effectiveness.  Comparing the MSFE statistics, we note that the MSFE statistics in the second row are several basis points smaller than those in the ﬁrst row, suggesting using oil volatility risk premium as a predictor to forecast stock realized volatility outperforms using the historical average method for all G7 countries.  The out-of-sample R2 statistics (OOS_R2 hereafter) are shown in the fourth row of the table, which exactly measure the proportional reduction in mean squared forecast error (MSFE) for the predictive method of the oil volatility risk premium relative to the historical average benchmark.  As has talked above, a positive value of OOS_R2 represents a better predictive power of the predictor model comparing with the historical average while a negative value indicates the opposite.  All the 7 OOS_R2 are positive and N10%.  Similar with their in-sample counterparts, the predictive power is signiﬁcant enough as these OOS_R2 statistics are all signiﬁcantly great.  The MSFE-adjusted statistics provided by Clark and West (2007), also known as the CW statistics, are shown in the third row of the table, which test the null hypothesis that the historical average mean squared forecast error (MSFE) is equal to or less than the MSFE computed from the predictor model against the alternative that the historical average MSFE is greater than that of the predictor model.  According to these MSFE-adjusted statistics, the MSFEs for the oil VRP are signiﬁcantly less than those for the historical benchmark, echoing the results of the positive OOS_R2 statistics.  Besides, looking at the GW statistics shown at the bottom row of this table, which emphasize the information of expectation, we ﬁnd that all the GW statistics are 1000 basis points or so, among which the maximum is 0. 3522 and the minimum is 0. 2024.  These positive values again prove that the MSFE statistics for the predictive model withoil VRP is less than the MSFE statistics for the historical average benchmark.  Overall, the predictive power of the model using oil VRP as the predictor outperforms the historical average method in the sense of mean squared forecast error.  All the OOS_R2 statistics are positive and N0. 5%, even exceeding 10%.  Plus, the CW statistics and the GW statistics prove the reduction in MSFE is signiﬁcant.  Again, matching the in-sample results, the out-of-sample tests tells that the predictability of stock realized volatility based on oil VRP is economically signiﬁcant.  To intuitively present the outperformance of oil VRP predictive framework over the HA benchmark, time-series plots of the difference between the cumulative square forecast error (CSFE) for the historical average benchmark prediction and the cumulative square forecast error (CSFE) for the oil VRPout-of-sample forecasting model is introduced as in Welch and Goyal (2008).  Statistically, an increasing trend means the difference of the cumulative square forecasting error between the historical average and oil VRP predictive model gets larger over time, which suggests the out-of-sample framework outperforms the historical average.  Particularly, we compare the height of the plot at the two points corresponding to the beginning and end of a given out-of-sample period.  if the curve is higher (lower) at the end of the out-of-sample period than at the beginning, the oil VRP predictive model (historical average) has a lower MSFE over the out-ofsampleperiod.  A predictive model that always outperforms the historical average for any out-of-sample period, therefore, will have a curve that is always sloping up.  the closer a predictive regression model is in this sense, the greater its forecasting power to consistently beat the historical average in terms of MSFE.  Fig.  2 shows these CSFE-difference graphs.  Generally, we ﬁnd that all the 7 countries see generally sloping-up over time despite of some small ﬂuctuations.  From 2010, the curves are all above the horizontal line, indicating the positive difference of the error between HA and our VRP model.  This quantitively suggests the outperformance of the outof-sample predictive model over the benchmark.  Meanwhile, we see that the curves see some drops during particular periods, in which the forecasting error of our predictive model may be larger that of HA.  Overall, during recent times, we document an excessive forecasting power of oil VRP than the historical average benchmark.  It is of interest to get a sense of potential bias-efﬁciency tradeoffs in the forecasts.  According to the deﬁnition of mean squared forecast error (MSFE), it is decomposed into squared forecast bias and variance components, where a denotes the squared error of the forecasts andVarð^eÞ denotes the forecast error variance.  The results for decomposition of the MSFE for historical average are reported in the sixth and seventh row in Table3 and the results for decomposition of the MSFE for out-ofsample predictive model are reported in the eighth and ninth row in Table3.  It is interesting to note that the squared error of the forecasts for historical average and the out-of-sample predictive window are almost equal, at several basis points or so.  However, the forecast error variance sees an apparent decrease.  From the table, all Varð^eÞs generated from the out-of-sample predictive model are tens of basis points less than those generated from historical average, among which the reduction inVarð^eÞfor S&P/TSX volatility even exceeds seven basis points.  Therefore, the out-of-sample forecast based on the oil volatility risk premium are generally less variance biased and more efﬁcient than the historical average.  4. 3.  Predictability with longer horizons.  The aim of this paper is at the predictability of stock realized volatility based on the oil volatility risk premium, to deeply study this effect we investigate the predictability over longer horizons in this subsection.  In this process, the bivariate model (5) is adjusted to.  where SRVt+i denotes the stock realized volatility at time t+i and OVt denotes the oil volatility risk premium at time t.  Different from the benchmark bivariate model, this long-horizon forecast model focuses on the predictive power of more time periods apart, here serving as a robustness check of the predictability.  Table4 reports the in-sample and out-of-sample results of the predictive power over long horizons from overnight to ten days apart.  Panel A summarizes the slope coefﬁcients of oil volatility risk premium estimated from model (15).  For all the regressions to forecast 7 stock realized volatilities, the coefﬁcients of oil volatility risk premium see a gradual increase, from 0. 004 or so for overnight to about 0. 04 for ten days apart, indicating the long-time impact of oil volatility on stock market volatility may be more powerful comparing with a short time.  The t-statistics produced from the one-sided tests are shown in panel B.  With the increase of time horizon, the t-statistics are dropping down to a rather small degree.  The signiﬁcances of the slope coefﬁcients are stably over 99%, with even for a ten-day-long time horizon the t-statistic absolutes all above 20.  Then to test the out-of-sample forecast ability of oil volatility risk premium, out-of-sample tests are performed and the out-of-sample R2 statistics are shown in the panel C of Table4.  A positive out-of-sample R2 statistic indicates a smaller mean squared forecast error (MSFE) comparing with the benchmark, which means the out-of-sample forecast method outperforms the historical average.  Shown in the form of percentage, the out-of-sample R2 statistics are all positive and bigger than 0. 5, making sure the predictability.  Since the data frequency we use is daily and all the R2 statistics are above 10%, the predictive power of oil volatility risk premium is efﬁcient in practice.  The R2 statistics also see a gradual increase with the increase of time horizon length, indicating the explanatory degree is decreasing over time.  4. 4.  Predictability during expansions and recessions.  Economic cyclical periods can have an effect on the predictability of markets.  As literature suggests (Neely et al. , 2014), the predictability of stock market sees some different results during business expansions and recessions.  To take a further insight into the ability of oil VRP to forecast stock realized volatility, we use OECD-dated business cycle to deﬁnite the business expansions and recessions and then calculate the R2 statistics in Eq. (9) for different economic periods in both in-sample regressions and out-of-sample forecast tests.  Table5 reports the R2 statistics computed for business expansions and recessions, respectively.  The R2 statistics for economic recessions are all greater and R2 statistics for economic expansions are all less than the full-sample R2 statistics as the benchmark.  All the R2 statistics for economic recession times are positive while some of the R2 statistics for economic expansion times are negative, indicating the explanatory power of oil volatility risk premium mainly comes from its predictive power at economic recession periods.  Six out of seven R2 statistics for economic expansions even exceed 40% while four out of seven R2 statistics for economic recessions are b0.  Overall, the predictability of stock realized volatility based on oil volatility risk premium is stronger during economic recessions than that during economic expansions.  The higher the R2 statistics for economic recessions all exceed the full-sample benchmark while for economic recessions all below.  4. 5.  Predictability under the circumstances of high/low volatility .  It is also of interest to investigate the predictive power of oil VRP during different volatility level of the both stock markets and oil markets.  To classify high and low stock market volatility level, we set the median of stock realized volatility as the benchmark and compare it with all the stock realized volatility indexes.  The higher ones are deﬁned as high stock volatility and the lower ones are deﬁned as low stock volatility.  The high/low volatility of oil is also classiﬁed in this way, which means the higher oil market volatility are deﬁned as high oil VRP and the lower ones are deﬁnes as low oil volatility.  Here we use the high/low volatility indicator to separate the data spanning and calculating the R2 statistics during different level of volatility.  Since we focus on the predictability of the stock volatility, we use out-of-sample tests here to calculate the R2 statistics and make comparison to identify the high/low volatility effect.  The comparison results are illustrated inPanel A of Table6 reports the R2 statistics calculated for different levels of stock volatility.  Three rows ofR2 statistics are all positive in value, suggesting the predictive power of oil predictor model outperforms historical average whether in high or low stock market volatility.  What's more, the R2 statistics for low stock volatility times are signiﬁcantly greater than those for high stock volatility times, representing a stronger predictive power at low volatility times.  Generally, the R2 statistics at low stock volatility times are several percentiles bigger than those for the full sample and tens of percentiles bigger than those for the high stock volatility times.  During low stock volatility times, six out seven R2 statistics exceed 7% and the biggest one even reaches 47%, which shows a strong explanatory power.  Panel B of Table6 reports the R2 statistics computed for different levels of the oil market volatility.  Two out of seven R2 statistics for low oil market volatility periods are negative, signifying the poorer performance of the predictor compared to historical average method.  Similar with the results in panel A, the R2 statistics during low oil volatility periods are mostly greater than the full-sample R2 statistics, ﬁve of seven of which are even N40%.  Therefore, the ability of oil market volatility to forecast stock volatility performs better at low oil volatility periods.  To sum up, the predictability of stock volatility based on the oil VRP performs better at low volatility times.  Out-of-sample R2 statistics for lower stock realized volatility or lower oil market volatility periods are greater than those for high volatility periods, thus indicating a stronger predictive power.  In particular, the R2 statistics during low volatility times can even reach 60%, which can lead to a considerable economic4. 6.  Predictive power in an incremental framework.  Apart from the conventional tests of the predictor's ability, it is also of interest to capture its predictive power in an incremental model.  We employ the framework proposed by Chen.  where ΔSRVt−1 denotes the innovation in stock realized volatility.  Table7 reports the results estimated based on model (16).  Panel A reports the in-sample results.  It can be seen that when the information of daily stock volatility change is incorporated, the slope coefﬁcients of oil VRP are the level of 0. 004 or so, all of which are estimated with one basis point of deviation.  Looking at the standard and the one-sided (upper tail) t-statistics, we ﬁnd the conﬁdence level of this predictive power far exceeds 99%, signifying the economic signiﬁcance of oil VRP's ability.  Noticeably, the in-sample R2 statistics, which is placed on the bottom line in panel A, are close to 0. 2 (20%), if not above, representing a strong explanatory power.  The out-of-sample results are reported in Panel B.  For sake of comparing the additional predictive power of oil volatility risk premium, we compute the mean squared forecast error (MSFE) statistics based on two ways, where the one is calculated for using ΔSRVt−1 alone to forecast stock realized volatility, recorded as MSFE0, and the other is calculated for using both ΔSRVt−1 and OVt−1 as predictors, recorded as MSFE1.  Using these two MSFEs we obtain the out-of-sample R2 statistics, which is displayed in the bottom line of the panel.  It can be seen the R2 statistics are all positive and ﬁve of them are even N30%, that is to say, after incorporating the information of oil VRP, the predictability of stock realized volatility improves to a considerable degree, again suggesting the forecasting ability of oil VRP to predict stock realized volatility.  4. 7.  Predictive power with control variables.  Numerous literature provides a series of variables which can inﬂuence stock markets in terms of stock returns and stock market volatility.  To identify whether the predictive power of oil volatility is affected by these variables, we use these variable as control variables to test the forecast effectiveness of oil volatility risk premium.  Parsimoniously, we compute the in-sample and out-of-sample R2 statistics to evaluate the predictive power of oil volatility risk premium,  where CLt−1 denotes the control variables.  In the process, 11 control variables are employed as explanatory variable one by one, respectively.  Table8 displays the in-sample and out-of-sample R2 statistics estimated from models (17) and (18).  Panel A reports the insampleR2 statistics, in which the ﬁrst line of each row shows theR2 statistics for model (17) and the second line shows theR2 statistics for model (18).  Clearly can be seen that when incorporating the information of oil volatility risk premium, theR2 statistics for the predictive framework see signiﬁcant increase by dozens of basis points, suggesting that the predictive power of the model are economically signiﬁcantly improved.  Panel B of Table8 summarizes the out-of-sample R2 statistics for these two models.  Different from the out-of-sampleR2 statistics using historical average as the benchmark, the out-of-sampleR2 statistics here is calculated by setting model (17) as the benchmark and comparing the mean squared forecast error (MSFE) of model (17) and model (18) to compute the R2 statistics since we focus more on the predictive power of oil volatility risk premium.  For all G7 countries, theR2 statistics are nearly all positive in value for any control variables, indicating the information of oil volatility risk premium do help predict the stock realized volatility. 