 Introduction Corporate directors have access to material non-public information, which makes them a potential information source for professional traders.  Directors are, of course, required to keep sensitive material private.  Delaware law recognizes a director's duty of conﬁdentiality, and corporations have comprehensive policies in place to prevent leaks.  Investors, too, face regulatory scrutiny and reputational costs if they use inside information in traceable manners, and these safeguards seem to be effective in some institutional settings (Grifﬁn et al. , 2012).  However, sensitive information can travel through education networks from senior corporate ofﬁcers to mutual fund managers and sell-side analysts (Cohen et al. , 2008, 2010).  This raises an important question.  to what extent do director networks transmit information that sophisticated traders are able to exploit.  We investigate whether the breadth of directors' professional connections systematically affects the likelihood of information leakage to sophisticated traders.  Well-connected directors interact with scores of people, and unguarded conversations can easily reveal sensitive facts.  In addition, Larcker et al.  (2013) show that ﬁrms beneﬁt from more connected boards because board connections are a conduit of information exchange.  Yet an important competitive advantage of connected directors stems from their ability to provide insights that would otherwise be inaccessible to less connected colleagues.  Fulﬁlling this role might require some deliberate sharing of sensitive material.  Sophisticated traders, who gather, analyze and interpret data from multiple sources, have a comparative advantage when piecing together information about ﬁrms with highly connected directors.  We therefore study possible information transmission from corporate directors to sophisticated traders by examining the relation between board connectedness and the informativeness of trades made by short sellers, option traders, and institutional investors.  Our results indicate that these investor groups are indeed more informed when trading stocks of companies with more connected boards.  We measure informed trading as the monthly level of short interest, the ratio of monthly option volume to stock volume, and weekly order imbalances of institutional traders.  From BoardEx, we obtain the number of ﬁrst-degree connections for each director, which includes links through educational institutions attended, current and previous employers, military service and civic institutions.  To ensure that our measure of board connectedness is not driven by factors that have been documented to affect the ﬁrm's information environment, we ﬁrst aggregate the connections of all board members and then orthogonalize them with respect to ﬁrm size, board size, ﬁrm age, the number of analysts and institutional ownership.  We examine portfolios sorted by board connectedness and each of the three measures of informed trading and ﬁnd that the annualized return difference between the highest and lowest quintile of informed trading in highly connected boards is signiﬁcantly more pronounced compared to the same return difference in ﬁrms with less connected boards.  The economic magnitude ranges from 4% for option volume and 5. 4% for short interest, to 7. 2% for institutional order imbalance.  Next, we examine whether the trades of sophisticated investors predict changes in ﬁrm fundamentals.  Our results indicate that a higher fraction of negative earnings news is embedded in prices of highly connected ﬁrms ahead of the announcement, and that sophisticated traders better anticipate earning surprises in ﬁrms with highly connected boards.  Indeed, their trades predict ﬁrm-speciﬁc news content more broadly, as our analysis of Thompson Reuters' public news data shows.  Changes in board connectedness are also positively associated with changes in measures of adverse selection costs, such as the probability of informed trading (PIN), bid–ask spreads and the price impact measure of Amihud (2002).  In a series of robustness checks we establish that neither family ownership, corporate governance quality, nor asset tangibility, drive our ﬁndings.  Our study contributes to several strands of the literature.  First, we add novel insights to recent studies examining the role of director networks in ﬁnancial markets.  Among directors these networks contribute to higher ﬁrm performance (Larcker et al. , 2013), the dissemination of CEO compensation practices (Wong et al. , 2015), stock option backdating (Bizjak et al. , 2009), and earnings management (Chiu et al. , 2012).  Board members and their social networks inﬂuence which companies become targets in change-of-control transactions (Stuart and Yim, 2010).  Directors of Finnish ﬁrms earn sizable abnormal returns by trading stocks where they have information advantages through their board connections (Berkman et al. , 2014).  We build on these insights by documenting that board connections in general affect the external corporate information environment, increase the potential for informed trading, and facilitate the dissemination of information into stock prices.  While prior research suggests that analysts, media outlets and managers have incentives to convey positive news (McNichols and O'Brien, 1997.  Kothari et al. , 2009), we show that negative news, in particular, ﬂows through director networks.  Second, we contribute to research into the information sources of sophisticated traders.  Short sellers predict the outcome of earnings surprises (Christophe et al. , 2004), detect ﬁnancial misconduct (Karpoff and Lou, 2010), and uncover hidden bad news in high levels of accruals (Hirshleifer et al. , 2011).  Short sellers excel in processing publicly available news (Engelberg et al. , 2012) and receive tips ahead of analyst downgrades (Christophe et al. , 2010).  Option trades (Pan and Poteshman, 2006.  Johnson and So, 2012) and institutional trades (Grifﬁn et al. , 2003.  Campbell et al. , 2009.  Puckett and Yan, 2011) also predict future stock prices.  Our ﬁndings suggest that more connected directors contribute, directly or inadvertently, to the information set of short sellers, option traders, and institutional investors.  More generally, we advance an emergent literature that examines how a ﬁrm's organizational structure affects its information environment.  Anderson et al.  (2012) report that family ownership increases informed trading.  We complement their ﬁndings by directly linking the governance structure of the ﬁrm to sophisticated trading in the ﬁrm's stock.  <Middle> Identiﬁcation strategy and hypotheses development.  How does material non-public information ﬂow from corporate insiders to sophisticated investors.  What organizational characteristics restrain or exacerbate the magnitude of information transmission.  How does this affect trading and security prices.  These questions, while essential to understand, are difﬁcult to answer.  Insiders can be found on every level of the corporate hierarchy, the sophistication of traders is not readily apparent, both groups have incentives to keep their conversations about privileged information secret, and traders frequently disguise trades that could trigger regulatory attention.  In light of these challenges, we develop a novel identiﬁcation strategy that focuses on the possible information transmission between two important groups of people.  we investigate whether patterns in trading behavior and securities prices suggest that privileged information ﬂows from corporate directors to sophisticated traders.  By focusing on the board of directors, we study a group of clearly identiﬁable corporate insiders with privileged information about their ﬁrms.  Unfettered access to material, non-public information is necessary to monitor and advise management, the social networks of directors are observable, and recent studies suggest that these networks are important conduits of information exchange.  We argue that sophisticated traders can obtain privileged information from directors and trade proﬁtably on that information before it becomes available to the broader market.  If information is channeled towards sophisticated traders, their proﬁtability will be high.  In contrast, if connected directors disseminate sensitive information broadly, prices will quickly incorporate it, leaving smaller proﬁt opportunities for sophisticated traders.  As possible transmission channels we consider inadvertent information leakage, deliberate sharing of sensitive information, and “mosaic” information gathering.  We discuss each channel in turn.  The risk of inadvertent information leakage increases with the size of the network of people who are privy to material non-public information. 1 Steele (1989) formalizes this idea, and models the likelihood of disclosing a secret as proportional to the square of the number of people who know the secret.  More connections increase the difﬁculty of guarding against the unintended disclosure of private information.  We therefore expect that inadvertent information leakage will be more pronounced for companies with more connected boards.  Directors also face incentives to share sensitive information deliberately.  After all, an important competitive advantage of broadly connected directors stems from their ability to obtain and share insights that would otherwise be inaccessible to less connected colleagues.  Molm (2003) suggests that reciprocal information sharing increases the status and inﬂuence of an individual within a network.  Fisman et al.  (2012) remark that “board membership more broadly creates a context for a kind of reciprocal attraction and friendship among a fraternity of individuals. ” While SEC enforcement actions allege that directors have deliberately provided information to traders,2 our study does not assess the legality of directors' actions.  Reciprocal sharing of sensitive material by connected directors does not necessarily harm shareholders.  the beneﬁts of connectedness may outweigh the costs.  Incentives related to reciprocal sharing simply suggest that highly connected directors are more likely to divulge some sensitive information.  More connected directors may increase the amount of publicly available information in ways that favor “mosaic” information gathering by sophisticated investors.  Jarrell (2011) argues.  “Securities analysts and investment managers legally gather, analyze and interpret large quantities of information from multiple sources.  From this information, investment recommendations and decisions are routinely made.  Not until the ‘bits and pieces’ of stray information are compiled together into a ‘complete picture of the company’ does it sometimes reveal material, non-public information.  It is my understanding that under the ‘mosaic theory,’ analysts and investment managers are free to act on this compilation of information without risking liability under the insider trading laws. ”3 Due to their extensive networks, more connected directors provide better access to these “bits and pieces”.  they are members of clubs, societies, and other ﬁrms, they are often invited to give speeches, and frequently interpret publicly available information about their ﬁrm.  While most investors lack the resources to piece together this kind of public information, sophisticated traders physically track directors,4 comb through public records of their large consumer and asset purchases and attend their invited speaking events.  Some directors are even spied on. 5 The more connected the members of corporate boards are, the greater the amount of difﬁcult-to-process information that sophisticated trades might be able to access.  While inadvertent information leakage, deliberate tipping, and “mosaic” information gathering are three possible channels of information transmission, it is not clear that companies with more connected directors are indeed associated with more informed trading.  Federal regulations prohibit selective disclosure, Delaware law recognizes the duty of conﬁdentiality as part of a director's duty of loyalty, and corporate lawyers have developed comprehensive conﬁdentiality policies to prevent leaks.  In addition, Grifﬁn et al.  (2012) argue that institutional investors are reluctant to use inside information in traceable manners.  Our null hypothesis is that there is no systematic link between board connectedness and informed trading.  Banerjee and Eckard (2001) , however, doubt that insider trading regulations effectively limit informed trading.  Many studies document informed trading among short sellers, option traders and institutional investors, and more connected boards might increase the information ﬂow to these sophisticated traders.  The information channels that we identify are not the only possible ones, they are not necessarily illegal or mutually exclusive, and we are not assessing their relative importance.  Our alternative hypothesis simply states that sophisticated investors' trades are more informed when they trade shares in ﬁrms with more connected boards.  3.  Sample selection, variables and descriptive statistics.  3. 1.  Sample selection.  The BoardEx database tracks connections of corporate directors and executives from 2002 onward.  Since we rely on BoardEx to quantify board connections, our sample period begins in January 2002 and ends in December 2011.  Stock prices, trading volume and shares outstanding are from CRSP, book-to-market ratios, leverage, ROA, R&D, industry segments, and other accounting variables are from COMPUSTAT, options data come from Ivy OptionMetrics, institutional ownership and insider trading data are provided by Thomson Financial, and analysts' forecasts by I/B/E/S.  We limit our analysis to common stocks (share code 10 or 11) of non-ﬁnancial ﬁrms traded on AMEX, NYSE, or NASDAQ and require stocks to have at least 12 months of past return data, at least 10 days per month with available trades and return data, a month-end stock price above one dollar, and sufﬁcient data from COMPUSTAT to compute accounting ratios as of December of the previous year. 