
Understanding the forces that shape financial reporting outcomes is an important goal in accounting research.  A large
prior literature provides evidence on how financial reporting choices are affected by explicit and implicit contracts.  Explicit
debt contracts with firms’ creditors (Watts and Zimmerman, 1986; DeFond and Jiambalvo, 1994; Dichev and Skinner, 2002),
and compensation contracts with firms’ executives (Healy, 1985), have been shown to influence financial reporting choices. 
Implicit contracts with equity investors as reflected in these investors’ expectations have also been shown to influence
financial reporting choices (Graham Name, 2005; Badertscher Name, 2012).  Relatively less attention has been devoted
however to understanding the potential influence of implicit contracts between firms and rank and file employees. 
Firms sell employees a package of explicit and implicit claims, with explicit claims expressed through explicit
employment contracts and implicit claims expressed through promises about long-run working conditions and employment and advancement opportunities (Cornell and Shapiro, 1987).  The value of the ongoing implicit claims depends on
employee expectations about the firm’s future financial conditions (Bowen Name, 1995).  Firms have an incentive to maximize
the value of the package of explicit and implicit claims they offer by maximizing employees’ perceived value of the ongoing
implicit claims, and this incentive is a potentially important determinant of corporate financial and reporting policies
(Bowen Name, 1995; Agrawal and Matsa, 2013).  In this paper we provide new evidence on whether and how financial
reporting choices are affected by the implicit claims of rank and file employees. 
The prior literature has suggested two ways in which rank and file employees can potentially affect financial reporting. 
The first is in the context of union negotiations.  The hypothesis posited in the literature is that firms are expected to manage
earnings downwards in the short-run during union negotiations in order to justify resistance to union calls for enhanced pay
and benefits.  This hypothesis predicts firm behavior when shareholder-employee conflicts of interest are pronounced and
employees are unionized, and empirical tests of the hypothesis appear to yield mixed results (Liberty and Zimmerman,
1986; DeAngelo and DeAngelo, 1991; D’Souza Name, 2001; Comprix and Muller 2011; Bova Name, 2015). 
The second hypothesis posited in the literature, which is the focus of this paper, is that firms are expected to make longrun earnings-increasing choices in order to project financial security, as this reduces the cost of employee hiring and
retention in competitive labor markets.  The hypothesis is predicted to hold more generally when shareholder-employee
conflicts of interest are not salient, and the hypothesis is not conditioned on the presence of labor unions.  This idea is
advanced in a number of papers in the accounting literature.  Bowen Name (1995), Burgstahler and Dichev (1997), Matsumoto
(2002), and Cheng and Warfield (2005), among others, argue that firms manage their financial statements to make them
appear rosier in order to improve their implicit terms of trade with various stakeholders including employees, and Graham
Name (2005) report consistent evidence from a survey of CFOs. 
As in the prior literature, by long-run earnings-increasing choices (or “long-run earnings management”) we mean
management of cumulative earnings over an extended period that results in a sustained wedge between ‘true’ and reported
cumulative earnings.  Cumulative earnings can potentially be managed through a combination of long-run income increasing
choices such as depreciation, inventory, and bad debt recognition policies, and short-run accrual and real-earningsmanagement choices when the wedge is in jeopardy.  In particular, the upward management of cumulative earnings does
not require upward earnings management in every single reporting period, which makes it relatively more challenging to
detect empirically.  Bowen Name (1995) provide one test of the long-run-earnings management hypothesis by examining
whether firms with high labor intensity are more likely to adopt long-run income-increasing accounting policies, and find
supportive results.  In this paper we adopt a potentially more powerful approach by testing for changes in earnings
management around an exogenous shock to employees’ cost of unemployment. 
A large labor economics literature documents that employees bear substantial costs of involuntary unemployment (e. g. ,
Gibbons and Katz, 1991; Gruber, 1997).  Employees therefore care about the financial security of their employer (Brown and
Matsa, 2013), and one way they assess this is through their employer’s earnings performance (e. g. , Burgstahler and Dichev,
1997; Matsumoto, 2002; Cheng and Warfield, 2005; Graham Name, 2005).  Firms bear at least two costs of exposing workers
to unemployment risk.  First, firms bear ex ante costs of compensating employees for the level of employment risk that exists
at the initiation of employment.  These “compensating differentials” are substantial and can take the form of higher wages
and benefits, and better working conditions (Smith, 1976; Abowd and Ashenfelter, 1981; Topel, 1984; Hamermesh and
Wolfe, 1990).  The economic significance of compensating wage differentials is suggested by empirical estimates that it is up
to 14% of wages (Abowd and Ashenfelter, 1981), and that up to 41% of interindustry variation in wages is explained by
unemployment risk (Li, 1986; Hamermesh and Wolfe, 1990).  Second, firms bear substantial turnover costs as employees
seek more stable employment, and heightened search costs as potential employees shy away (Brown and Matsa, 2013), if
there are significant increases in unemployment risk. 
We expect firms try to mitigate these costs by managing long-run earnings in order to manage employee perceptions of
unemployment risk.  This implies firms’ long-run-earnings management incentives change when employees’ unemployment
risk changes.  Employees’ unemployment risk (and the firm’s cost of exposing employees to unemployment risk) is
increasing in (i) the unemployment probability, (ii) employee risk aversion, and (iii) costs borne by workers during
unemployment (Agrawal and Matsa, 2013).  Our research design exploits exogenous shocks to employees’ unemployment
risk through a decrease in the costs borne by workers during unemployment.  This follows Agrawal and Matsa (2013) who
show that the same exogenous shock affects firms’ financial policies through increased leverage. 
State-level unemployment insurance (UI) programs are intended to lower employees’ unemployment costs by providing
temporary income when they are involuntarily unemployed and actively seeking new employment, and UI has been shown
to have economically significant effects on employee behavior and aggregate labor supply (Topel, 1984; Meyer, 1990, 1995). 
An increase in UI benefits decreases employees’ cost of separation from, and likely therefore their dependence on, their
employers.  When employees are better insured against unemployment we expect they are relatively less sensitive to their
employers’ financial performance.  This observation forms the basis for the empirical tests: for firms in a given U. S.  state, we
examine discretionary earnings decreases around large state-level increases in UI benefits as these state-level changes are
relatively exogenous to the firm. 
One way to view this is that cumulative or long-run earnings management results in a ‘bloated’ balance sheet.  Managers
likely look for opportune moments to partially clean up the bloat, and as long as one determinant of this bloat is managing
employee perceptions of unemployment risk, we expect a reduction in bloat (or partial unwinding of prior upward earnings
management) when there is a reduction in unemployment risk.  As such, we are effectively testing changes in balance sheet
bloat, rather than levels of bloat in the cross-section, which allows a relatively more powerful test of the hypothesis. 
The empirical tests employ a difference-in-differences design by examining earnings management measures before
versus after an exogenous increase in UI benefits, for treatment firms versus control firms.  The treatment firms are those
headquartered in states with a large increase (410%) in maximum UI benefits, while control firms are those headquartered
in matched neighboring states without an increase in benefits.  We find no differences in macroeconomic conditions
between treatment and control states as indicated by state-level GDP growth, unemployment rates, stock returns and stock
return volatilities of firms headquartered in those states, and UI payroll taxes. 
Of the four earnings management measures employed, one is a model-implied estimate of abnormal accruals, while
three are model-free measures.  The abnormal accrual estimate is from the Dechow and Dichev (2002) model, and results are
robust to a variety of other models.  The model-free measures are special items, write downs, and net income-reducing
restatements.  Across all earnings management measures, results suggest significant unwinding of prior upward earnings
management for treatment firms relative to control firms in the year following an increase in UI benefits.  This suggests firms
are relatively more likely to partially unwind prior upward earnings management when employees are better insured
against unemployment, consistent with the main hypothesis.  A battery of further tests examining alternative specifications,
and the potential influence of state-level political forces and unobserved economic conditions, indicate robustness of the
main result. 
A number of cross-sectional predictions are tested.  We expect upward earnings management is more likely at firms
where employees’ perceptions of unemployment risk are relatively more important, such as firms that are more labor
intensive, have higher layoff propensity, and employ relatively more low-wage workers.  Therefore, we expect relatively
greater unwinding of earnings management at these firms following an increase in unemployment benefits.  Further, we
expect partial unwinding is less likely at firms with other strong incentives to maintain the upward earnings management,
such as firms that need to tap the capital markets, meet or beat earnings expectations, avoid debt covenant violations, or
inflate executive compensation.  These tests yield significant and consistent results. 
The evidence in this paper contributes to the accounting literature by providing new evidence on the role of employee
perceptions in shaping financial reporting choices.  The evidence suggests that managing employees’ perception of
unemployment risk is one determinant of firms’ long-run-earnings management.  The prior accounting literature has
largely examined the influence of organized labor unions negotiating explicit contracts.  In contrast, the evidence here sheds
light more generally on the role of rank and file employees and their implicit contract with employers.  The results
contribute to the literature on the determinants of financial reporting choices, and further our understanding of the role
therein of a key factor of production. 
In what follows, Section 2 describes the hypotheses; Section 3 describes the data; Section 4 presents the main results;
Section 5 describes cross-sectional tests; and Section 6 concludes. 
2.  Hypothesis development. 
An extensive literature in labor economics supports the idea that workers bear substantial costs of becoming
involuntarily unemployed, including significant decreases in consumption (Gruber, 1997) and difficulty in finding another
wage-equivalent job (Farber, 2005; Gibbons and Katz, 1991).  As such, employees care deeply about unemployment risk. 
Firms in turn bear significant costs of exposing workers to unemployment risk, including compensating wage differentials
(Abowd and Ashenfelter, 1981; Topel, 1984; Hamermesh and Wolfe, 1990), turnover costs as employees seek more stable
employment, and heightened search costs as potential employees shy away (Brown and Matsa, 2013). 
Reported earnings are useful for employees to assess the likelihood of becoming involuntarily unemployed.  This implicit
use of accounting numbers likely creates ongoing incentives to manage earnings upward, as recognized in a number of prior
papers including Bowen Name (1995).  Burgstahler and Dichev (1997) argue that lowering transactions cost with stakeholders
such as employees is one incentive for upward earnings management.  Matsumoto (2002) and Cheng and Warfield (2005)
hypothesize and find that one incentive for firms to avoid negative earnings surprises stems from the implicit claims of
employees as proxied by labor intensity.  Choudhary Name (2009) hypothesize and find that labor intensity is one incentive
for firms to manage income even absent cash flow effects.  Zechman (2010) hypothesizes that employees’ implicit claims also
present an incentive for balance sheet management.  Finally, Graham Name (2005) indicate a significant majority of surveyed
CFOs agree that managing earnings to manage stakeholder perception is descriptive of actual practice. 
Employees do not necessarily have to be direct consumers of financial statements in order for their perceptions to be
shaped by reported earnings.  As long as earnings are part of the public information set used by the media, analysts, ratings
agencies and other parties to generate forecasts and reports, and employees are consumers of these forecasts, reports and
news, reported earnings can shape employee perceptions of unemployment risk. 
2. 1.  The U. S.  Unemployment Insurance (UI) System. 
The UI system provides temporary income to eligible workers who are involuntarily unemployed and actively seeking
new employment, in order to mitigate the loss of income from unemployment.  The basic framework for insurance
provisions under the joint federal-state system is common across all states, though individual states have the autonomy to
set the program’s parameters: Who is eligible, the duration of benefits, and the amount of weekly unemployment
benefits paid. 
A state’s benefit formula typically calculates the earnings realized by a worker in four of the last five quarters and seeks to
replace approximately half of those wages through weekly payments, subject to minimum and maximum bounds.  Much of
the interstate and intertemporal variation in UI benefits stems from changes to the maximum bounds, and the elasticity of
actual compensation payments to maximum total benefits is approximately one (Agrawal and Matsa, 2013; Hsu Name, 2013). 
The maximum bound of benefits therefore effectively captures the generosity of UI benefits, and is inversely related to
workers’ consumption loss during unemployment. 
State-level changes in maximum total UI benefits are motivated by both state-level macroeconomic conditions and
political forces.  Since these underlying macroeconomic conditions could also be associated with the financial reporting
outcomes examined here, our empirical tests ensure that treatment and control states have similar economic conditions. 
This is analogous to achieving covariate balance under a propensity score matching method.  The other determinant of
changes in the maximum bound, political forces, is considered in Section 4. 2. 
States finance their UI programs through payroll taxes levied on employers.  The firm-level effective tax rates are tailored
to the unemployment history of the individual firm through a method referred to as experience rating, and states have the
authority to set their own state-level experience rating scheme.  Firms with a recent history of layoffs have higher effective
unemployment tax rates under this system.  We address in two ways any potential concern that changes in UI payroll tax
rates concurrent with changes in maximum total UI benefits explain the financial reporting outcomes examined here.  First,
we examine UI payroll taxes paid around the event year, and find no changes either for treatment or control states.  Second,
the regressions control for UI payroll taxes. 
2. 2.  Hypotheses. 
The primary hypothesis is that firms have an incentive to manage long-run-earnings upward in order to manage
employee perceptions of unemployment risk, and therefore that changes in unemployment risk are expected to be
associated with changes in earnings management incentives.  As such, we expect to empirically observe a partial reversal of
prior upward earnings management following an increase in state-level UI benefits, where the earnings management
reversal is expected to manifest in negative discretionary accruals, special items, write downs, and income-reducing
restatements. 
As noted in the prior literature, there are a number of incentives to manage earnings upward, including incentives
stemming from the need to tap capital markets, meet or beat earnings expectations, avoid debt covenant violations, and
inflate executive compensation.  These incentives are likely episodic, while the incentive to manage employee perceptions of
unemployment risk is likely ongoing.  For example, it is unlikely that a firm taps the capital markets every year, is on the cusp
of meeting or beating analyst forecasts every period (it might meet or beat comfortably in many periods), is in danger of
violating a debt covenant every period, or that the incremental compensation payoff from earnings management is equally
strong every period (the payoff could be non-linear in earnings as in Healy (1985)).  In contrast, firms have ongoing needs to
retain and attract talent, which implies that the unemployment risk incentive is long-run and therefore less likely to be
irrelevant for managerial actions.  Our hypothesis is about the incremental effect on earnings management of the
unemployment risk incentive, and the tests control for other earnings management incentives. 
A number of cross-sectional predictions are tested.  Firms with high labor intensity are likely more vulnerable to
employee perception of employment security than firms with low labor intensity, and are therefore more likely to manage
earnings upward on an ongoing basis.  As such, we expect a larger reversal of prior upward earnings management at more
labor-intensive firms following an increase in UI benefits. 
Reported earnings are likely more important to employees’ perception of unemployment risk at firms with higher layoff
propensity.  Such firms likely have greater incentive to manage earnings upward in order to minimize their own costs of
exposing workers to unemployment risk.  As such we expect a larger reversal of prior upward earnings management at firms
with high layoff propensity, following an increase in UI benefits. 
Low-wage workers are likely to benefit relatively more from an increase in UI benefits since they have lower savings at
the time of job loss (Browning and Crossley, 2001; Bloemen and Stancanelli, 2005).  As such, increases in UI benefits likely
affect relatively more the earnings management incentives of firms with a higher fraction of low wage workers.  We
therefore expect such firms to have a larger reversal of prior upward earnings management following an increase in UI
benefits. 
Finally, when other upward earnings management incentives are strong (weak), an increase in UI benefits is less (more)
likely to lead to partial unwinding of prior upward earnings management.  As such, we expect a significant (insignificant)
partial unwinding of prior upward earnings management when incentives to tap capital markets, meet or beat earnings
expectations, avoid debt covenant violations, and inflate executive compensation, are weak (strong). 
<Middle> Data. 
We employ a matched sample for testing, where the sample is developed as follows.  First, state-years with increases in
the upper bound of unemployment benefits exceeding 10% (“the event”) are identified, yielding 128 such state-years.  The
10% cutoff lies at the 85th percentile of the distribution of annual changes in the upper bound of unemployment benefits,
and allows us to balance the magnitude of the change versus sample size considerations.  Results are robust to using other
cutoffs such as 5% or 15% increases in the upper bound of unemployment benefits.  Second, each event-year is matched to at
least one adjacent state that does not experience a large increase in maximum unemployment benefits in the same year and
the prior year.  This yields 290 matching state-years for the 128 event-years, since some states are matched to more than one
state in a given year.  Table 1 shows the sample of 128 event-years between 1976 and 2010 with an increase in maximum
total benefits exceeding 10%, and without a large increase in unemployment benefits in the pre-event year.  As the table
shows, event-years are not clustered in any particular state. 
The economic significance of the Treatment effect (the reduction in employees’ unemployment risk resulting from a 10%
increase in unemployment benefits) is suggested by two sets of evidence.  First, the evidence in Agrawal and Matsa (2013)
suggests a 10% increase in unemployment benefits leads to a 0. 5 percentage point increase in financial leverage (debt/
assets), which appears economically significant.  Second, we calibrate the dollar magnitude of implied wage savings as a
result of the reduction in unemployment risk from a 10% increase in unemployment benefits (derivation details are
presented in Appendix A).  The analysis suggests the reduction in employees' unemployment risk resulting from a 10%
increase in unemployment benefits is, ceteris paribus, associated with an implied wage reduction of 8% of earnings for
Treatment sample firms.  This appears to be an economically meaningful shock for firms. 
The tests use data from all firms headquartered in these state-years.  Financial statement and stock price data are sourced
from Compustat and CRSP, restatement data from Audit Analytics, analyst forecasts from IBES, debt covenant data is from
Dealscan, executive compensation data is from Execucomp, unemployment benefit data from the United States Bureau of
Labor Statistics, and state-level GDP growth data from the Census Bureau.  Political condition variables are obtained from the
U. S.  Bureau of the Census Statistical Abstracts.  The final sample is from 1992 to 2010, which is the longest period for which
we have all necessary data for the empirical tests. 1 All variable definitions are presented in Appendix B. 
Compustat reports a firm’s current rather than historical headquarter location, and ignoring this source of measurement
error could introduce bias.  To remedy this we extract historical headquarter locations from other data sources.  For the
period between 1992 and 1995, we locate a firm’s headquarter by searching Compact Disclosure.  For each year from 1996
onwards, we search each firm’s 10-K report via EDGAR for its headquarter address.  Overall, Compustat’s reported current
location is different from the historical location for 17% of firm-year observations. 
3. 1.  Earnings management measures. 
The main tests use two broad categories of earnings management measures: model-implied estimates of abnormal
accruals, and model-free measures.  The accrual model is the Dechow-Dichev (2002) model as modified in McNichols (2002). 
Following Ball and Shivakumar (2006) this model is estimated for each three-digit SIC industry with more than 30
observations (we exclude financials and utilities in estimating the accruals models) as follows,
where t indexes the year; Accruals is income before extraordinary items minus operating cash flows; CFO is operating cash
flows; ΔSales is the change in sales; and PPE is the end of year property, plant and equipment.  All variables are scaled by
lagged total assets.  The residual from eq.  (1) is the first measure of earnings management (Abnormal accruals).  Results are
robust to estimation by industry-year, and the use of three other accrual models: (i) the modified cross-sectional Jones
(1991) model of Dechow Name (1995) as used in Dechow Name (2003) and Cohen Name (2008); (ii) the performance-matched
approach in Kothari Name (2005); and (iii) the piecewise-linear model from Ball and Shivakumar (2006). 
The three model-free measures of earnings management are special items (Special items), total write down (Write down)
and an indicator equal to one for firms that have income-reducing restatements (Restatement).  The data for write downs and
restatements are available for 2000–2010 only. 
4.  Empirical tests and results. 
In this section we test the hypothesis that prior upward earnings management reverses around large unemployment
benefit increases.  Section 4. 1 examines the primary relation (Hypothesis 1), while Section 4. 2 describes tests intended to
enhance identification and test robustness. 
4. 1.  Earnings management reversal around large unemployment benefit changes. 
We begin by examining macroeconomic conditions in the treatment and control samples in order to shed light on
whether differences in the underlying macroeconomic conditions, rather than differences in treatment, have an effect on
the outcome of interest.  Table 2 shows means of state-level macroeconomic indicators in the event-year and pre- event-year
in both the treatment and control samples, along with a test of differences.  The macroeconomic indicators include statelevel GDP growth and unemployment rates, stock returns and stock return volatilities of all firms headquartered in these
states as summary indicators of state-level economic conditions, and UI payroll taxes calculated as the average UI tax rate
multiplied by average taxable wages in each state. 
The last column of Table 2 shows a test of differences across the treatment and control samples in macroeconomic
changes between the event-year and pre- event-year.  As that column shows, treatment and control samples differ only in
the change in maximum unemployment benefits between the event-year and pre- event-year.  This suggests underlying
macroeconomic conditions are unlikely to explain differences in examined outcomes across the treatment and control
samples. 
The subsequent tests are conducted on firm-year observations, where the firms are those headquartered in treatment
and control states.  Table 3 shows descriptive statistics for the 8,272 firm-years in the sample.  The mean of Abnormal accruals
is  0. 022, the mean of Special items is  1% of assets, mean Write down is  0. 1% of assets, and 4. 1% of firm-years report
income-reducing restatements.  Benefit equals the log of maximum total unemployment benefits, and is calculated as the
product of the maximum weekly benefit amount and the maximum duration allowed.  The mean and standard deviation of
Benefit are 9. 094 and 0. 328, respectively, close to values reported in Agrawal and Matsa (2013). 
The regression specification takes the form,
where DepVar is the dependent variable that equals any one of the four earnings management measures described earlier;
“i” indexes the firm, “t” indexes the year, and “j” indexes the jth control for j42.  The panel regressions include firm- and
year-fixed effects, and standard errors are clustered by state (Petersen, 2009).  The inclusion of firm- and year-fixed effects
represents a generalization of the difference-in-differences design that allows causal inference in a regression setting
(Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2003; Angrist and Pischke, 2009; Armstrong Name, 2012).  The controls include lagged
dependent variables2; other earnings management incentives including the need to tap capital markets in the future, meet
or beat analyst expectations, avoid debt covenant violations, and inflate executive compensation; firm characteristics such
as total assets, operating cash flows, asset growth, leverage, and cash flow volatility that are likely associated with the
dependent variables (Myers Name, 2003; Ashbaugh Name, 2003; Butler Name, 2004); as well as state-level macroeconomic
indicators such as GDP growth, unemployment rate, stock returns and stocks return volatilities of firms headquartered in
the state, and UI payroll taxes. 
Panel A of Table 4 shows coefficients, and t-statistics in parentheses, from pooled regression estimation of Eq.  (1).  The
dependent variable in each specification is indicated in the column header.  The primary independent variable of interest is
Benefit, and given the inclusion of firm fixed effects in the regression, results can be interpreted as showing that an increase
in Benefit significantly predicts changes in the dependent variable. 
As the table shows, an increase in Benefit significantly predicts a reduction in Abnormal accruals (two-tailed
p-valueo0. 05), more negative Special items (two-tailed p-valueo0. 05) and Write downs (two-tailed p-valueo0. 01), and
an increased likelihood of income-reducing Restatements (two-tailed p-valueo0. 01).  In terms of economic significance,
Table 4 suggests a 10% increase in Benefit predicts a change in:3
(i) Abnormal accruals of –0. 0012, which is 4% of earnings (given the mean ROA of 3% for our treatment sample firms). 
(ii) Special items of  0. 0005, which is 1. 7% of earnings. 
(iii) Write down of  0. 0002, which is 0. 7% of earnings. 
(iv) Restatement probability of 1. 17 percentage points, which is about a 29% increase from the mean probability of incomereducing Restatements. 
The firm-specific independent variables in Table 4 are motivated by the prior literature (Myers Name, 2003; Ashbaugh
Name, 2003; Butler Name, 2004), and the signs of their coefficients are consistent with the prior literature.  In particular, the
signs of the coefficients of other earnings management incentives are consistent with expectation, providing some comfort
about proxy validity and regression specification: When the Tap capital market, Meet or beat, Tight covenant, and
Compensation incentives are stronger, generally abnormal accruals are higher, special items and write downs are lower in
magnitude (less negative), and the probability of income-reducing restatements is lower (considering both Panels A and B). 
In an untabulated falsification test we examine whether non- income-reducing restatements, which constitute 0. 8% of all
firm-years and 16. 3% of the restatement firm-years in our sample, are higher following an increase in unemployment
benefits.  We re-estimate the regression specification in Panel A with non- income-reducing restatements as the dependent
variable, and find the coefficient of Benefit is insignificant (t-statistic¼0. 26) as expected. 
Panel B of Table 4 shows results when a more ‘traditional’ difference-in-differences specification is estimated.  Treat is an
indicator equal to 1 for the treatment sample, and zero otherwise, while Post is an indicator equal to 1 in the year following
the increase in unemployment benefits, and zero otherwise.  The main independent variable of interest is Treat Post, and it
loads significantly negatively in all specifications consistent with the result in Panel A. 
Collectively the results in Panels A and B of Table 4 are consistent with the hypothesis that firms manage earnings
upward in order to manage employee perceptions of unemployment risk, and this incentive is incremental to other known
earnings management incentives. 
4. 2.  Further tests. 
In this section we describe a number of tests intended to enhance identification and examine robustness.  Given the large
number of dependent variables examined above, all subsequent results are tabulated using Abnormal accruals as the
dependent variable. 
4. 2. 1.  Extended windows around the event. 
The main tests in Table 4 compare observations for years t and tþ1 for firms in treatment and control states.  We next
examine robustness with respect to expanded windows around the event, ensuring that these windows do not contain
other large changes in Benefit (so each window only contains one event for a given treatment state).  As shown in Panel A
of Table 5, Benefit loads significantly negatively in samples of three years (two-tailed p-value o0. 10), and five years (twotailed p-value o0. 10), around the event year, indicating robustness of the main result in Table 4. 
4. 2. 2.  All states, all years. 
The main tests use a matched sample approach and therefore only include firms in treatment and control states.  An
alternative as in Agrawal and Matsa (2013) is to estimate a pooled regression across all available states and years, without
matching treatment state-years to control state-years.  As shown in Panel B of Table 5, results are robust to this test approach
as Benefit loads significantly negatively (two-tailed p-value o0. 10). 
4. 2. 3.  State-level political forces and discretionary accruals. 
Benefit changes can be associated with political conditions (Agrawal and Matsa, 2013), and political conditions can
influence discretionary accruals (Jones, 1991; Ramanna and Roychowdhury, 2010).  To ensure that the effect of Benefit is not
due to omitted political forces in the main tests, we control for state-level political conditions in a number of ways.  First,
gubernatorial election years could be associated with downward earnings management in order to avoid public scrutiny and
becoming a political scapegoat, if the election involves economic issues that would adversely affect businesses.  Downward
earnings management could also assist affiliated politicians hoping to unseat incumbents, since being able to point to lower
profitability of area businesses likely helps political contenders challenge the economic record of incumbents.  As such we
entertain these possibilities4 by controlling for gubernatorial elections held in the year of the observed decrease in
discretionary accruals (‘Election year’).  Second, these issues are likely more pronounced when the race is tightly contested,
and so we entertain this possibility by controlling for the margin of victory in the election outcome (‘Election year tight
margin’). 
Third, Democrats are often perceived to be less business-friendly than Republicans, so unseating a Democrat incumbent
and helping a more business-friendly challenger could be an incentive for downward earnings management.  As such we
entertain this possibility by controlling for election years in which the incumbent is a Democrat governor (‘Election year
Democrat governor’).  Fourth, if Democrats control both legislative houses, they are likely able to pass their policies more
easily, which could provide a greater incentive for businesses to assist more business-friendly challengers in winning the
(state) executive branch.  As such we entertain this possibility by controlling for election years in which Democrats hold the
majority of seats in both houses (‘Election year Democrat both houses’).  The results are shown in Panel C of Table 5.  The main
variable of interest in this study, Benefit, loads significantly in all specifications consistent with the hypothesis. 
4. 2. 4.  Correlated omitted state-level economic conditions. 
A potential concern is that unobserved state and regional economic conditions that are correlated with Benefit subsume
its relation with the reporting outcomes examined in the main tests.  We address this concern in three ways.  First, the
research design in the main tests matches firms in treatment states with firms in contiguous states, thereby minimizing
regional economic differences across firms. 
Second, if unobserved state-level economic conditions have some persistence, they are likely to muddy the relation
between lagged unemployment benefit changes and downward earnings management.  In the first column of results
in Table 6, we add Benefittþ 1 and Benefittþ 2, but observe that only Benefitt continues to load significantly (two-tailed pvalueo0. 10) while future benefits do not load.  This suggests it is unlikely Benefitt is simply capturing unobserved correlated
economic conditions if these economic conditions have some persistence. 
Third, firms with a high fraction of revenues from sales to out-of-state customers likely have financial reporting
outcomes that are less sensitive to economic conditions in their headquarter state.  Using the 2007 Commodity Flow Survey
from the Bureau of Transportation Statistics, we measure interstate sales at the industry-state level as the percent of the
value of product shipments from one state to non-neighboring states.  Sales to neighboring states are excluded because these
states are likely susceptible to similar economic conditions.  The second column of results in Table 6 shows Benefit loads
significantly (two-tailed p-valueo0. 05) even among firms with interstate sales greater than 70%.  The use of the 70% cutoff
follows Agrawal and Matsa (2013), but results are robust to using 65% or 75% as the cutoff. 
Collectively these tests mitigate concerns about correlated omitted state-level economic conditions driving the main result. 
4. 2. 5.  Geographically dispersed employees. 
Firms in the treatment sample are those headquartered in states with a large increase in unemployment benefits, and the
main hypothesis is that these firms reverse prior upward earnings management when unemployment insurance becomes
more generous.  However, employees are covered by the unemployment benefit program in the state in which they work
rather than the state in which their employer is headquartered, and many firms have geographically dispersed employees. 
While we expect this weakens the ability to reject the null hypothesis of no relation between unemployment benefit
increases and earnings management reversal, we conduct a further test to address the issue.  In particular, we exclude from
the sample firms in retail, wholesale, and transport industries that likely have more geographically dispersed employees.  As
the third column of results in Table 6 shows, Benefit continues to load significantly (two-tailed p-valueo0. 05) after the
exclusion. 
4. 2. 6.  Abnormal accrual estimates. 
Owens Name (2014) examine discretionary accrual estimates and suggest they might be affected by business model
shocks.  While all our results are robust to the use of model-free earnings management measures as described earlier, we
follow the suggestion in Owens Name (2014) and exclude firm-years with unsigned market-adjusted stock returns greater
than 20% in any month within the last three years to mitigate concerns about business model shocks.  We then re-estimate
the regression specification in Table 4 with abnormal accruals as the dependent variable and find in untabulated results that
Benefit loads significantly negatively (two-tailed p-value o0. 10) as predicted. 
4. 2. 7.  Loss incidence. 
The hypothesis tested in this section is that a reduction in earnings (through negative discretionary accruals) becomes
more likely when unemployment benefits increase.  An implication is that if the earnings reduction happens to cross the
zero earnings threshold, reported losses become more likely as above.  We re-estimate the regression specification in Table 4
with Losstþ 1 as the dependent variable, which is an indicator equal to 1 if the firm reports a loss and equal to 0 otherwise,
and find in untabulated results that Benefit loads significantly positively (two-tailed p-valueo0. 10).  This indicates that after
the increase in Benefit (when unemployment risk is lower), the frequency of reported losses increases more for treatment
firms relative to control firms, as predicted. 
5.  Cross-sectional tests. 
In this section we test a number of cross-sectional predictions derived from the main hypothesis.  These tests invoke
variation in the relative importance of unemployment risk as a determinant of firms’ labor cost, and variation in other
earnings management incentives. 
5. 1.  Labor intensity. 
This hypothesis is motivated by the idea that upward earnings management to manage employee perceptions of
employment security is more likely at firms that are more labor intensive.  As such, we expect greater earnings management
reversal at more labor intensive firms following unemployment benefit increases.  Labor intensity is calculated as the
average ratio of total labor compensation to the total value of production at the three-digit NAICS level, using data from 1992
to 2010 from the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics.  As the first pair of columns in Table 7 shows, Benefit loads
significantly negatively (two-tailed p-valueo0. 10) for firms with high (above median) labor intensity but does not load for
firms with low (below median) labor intensity.  This suggests greater reversal of prior upward earnings management at more
labor intensive firms, as hypothesized. 
5. 2.  Layoff propensity. 
This hypothesis is motivated by the idea that unemployment insurance is likely more important to employees in
industries with high layoff propensity.  As such, firms in these industries are predicted to engage in greater upward earnings
management when unemployment benefits are low.  We therefore predict greater reversal of prior upward earnings
management at such firms when there is an increase in unemployment benefits.  Layoff propensity at the three-digit NAICS
level is the average annual fraction of workers separated from work as part of a mass layoff, and is obtained from Agrawal
and Matsa (2013).  As the second pair of columns in Table 7 shows, Benefit loads significantly negatively (two-tailed
p-valueo0. 10) for firms in industries with high (above median) layoff propensity, but does not load for firms in industries
with low (below median) layoff propensity.  This suggests greater reversal of prior upward earnings management at firms
with higher layoff propensity, as hypothesized. 
5. 3.  Percentage of low-wage workers. 
This hypothesis is motivated by the idea that unemployment insurance generosity is likely more important to low-wage
workers because these workers have lower savings at the time of job loss (Browning and Crossley, 2001; Bloemen and
Stancanelli, 2005).  As such, firms with a higher proportion of low-wage workers are more likely to engage in upward
earnings management when unemployment benefits are less generous, and we therefore predict a larger reversal of prior
upward earnings management for such firms when unemployment benefits become more generous.  The fraction of low
wage workers is calculated at the three-digit NAICS level and is defined as the fraction of workers earning less than $50,000
annually based on the 2000 Census.  This data is obtained from Professor David Matsa.  As the third pair of columns in Table 7
shows, Benefit loads significantly negatively (two-tailed p-valueo0. 05) for firms with a high (above median) fraction of lowwage workers, but does not load for firms with a low (below median) fraction of low-wage workers.  This suggests greater
reversal of prior upward earnings management at firms with more low-wage workers, as hypothesized. 
5. 4.  Other earnings management incentives. 
Other upward earnings management incentives known from the prior literature could offset the incentive to partially
unwind prior upward earnings management resulting from an exogenous decrease in unemployment risk.  In such a case we
would not observe the predicted effect.  In particular, firms expecting to raise equity or debt in the upcoming year likely have
an incentive to manage earnings upward in order to appear more financially robust, and we capture this incentive through
the variable Tap capital market.  Firms on the cusp of meeting or beating analyst forecasts likely have an incentive to manage
earnings upward in order to avoid adverse, or generate positive, stock price reaction, and we capture this incentive through
the variable Meet or beat.  Firms on the verge of violating a debt covenant likely have an incentive to manage earnings
upward, and we capture this incentive through the variable Tight covenant.  Finally, managers at firms with executive
compensation structures that are more sensitive to earnings likely have an incentive to manage earnings upward, and we
capture this incentive through the variable Compensation.  We further combine these incentives into a composite incentive
variable, Composite.  Detailed variable definitions are presented in Appendix B.  We expect that Benefit loads significantly
when these incentives to maintain upward earnings management are weak. 
The sample is partitioned based on whether Tap capital market is above the median, whether the indicator variable Meet
or beat is equal to one, whether the indicator variable Tight covenant is equal to one, whether Compensation is above the
median, and whether Composite is above the median.  We then estimate a regression of abnormal accruals on Benefit (our
independent variable of interest) including as controls all variables listed in column 1 of Table 4, Panel A.  The regressions are
estimated in subsamples with high versus low incentives, and results are shown in Table 8.  As the table shows, Benefit loads
significantly when other earnings management incentives are weak, but not when they are strong, in all cases except
Compensation (in the case of the compensation incentive the sign of the Benefit coefficient is in the predicted direction and
marginally significant at 10% in a one-tailed test when Compensation is low). 
Collectively the cross-sectional tests shed further light on the relation between unemployment benefits and earnings
management, and reinforce the main results. 
<Conclusion> Conclusion. 
A long-standing interest in accounting research has been to identify and explain the forces that shape managers’ financial
reporting choices.  The literature has provided evidence of the role of explicit contracts such as debt (Watts and Zimmerman,
1986; DeFond and Jiambalvo, 1994; Dichev and Skinner, 2002) and executive compensation contracts (Healy, 1985), and the
role of implicit contracts such as those with shareholders (Graham Name, 2005; Badertscher Name, 2012) and the general
public (Watts and Zimmerman, 1986).  To date however there is less evidence on the potential role of rank and file
employees in influencing financial reporting choices.  We contribute to the literature by providing new evidence in thisEmployees bear substantial costs in the event of involuntary unemployment and therefore require an unemployment
risk wage premium in competitive labor markets, as documented by a large labor economics literature.  Firms bear
substantial costs of exposing workers to unemployment risk, and these costs can take the form of compensating wage
differentials, turnover costs, and search costs.  As such, we expect firms have an incentive to engage in ongoing upward
earnings management in order to project an appearance of security and mitigate their costs of exposing workers to
unemployment risk.  The ongoing nature of this hypothesized earnings management makes it more difficult to test
empirically.  Our contribution is to identify a setting that facilitates a more powerful test. 
Employees’ unemployment risk (and the firm’s cost of exposing employees to unemployment risk) is increasing in (i) the
unemployment probability, (ii) employee risk aversion, and (iii) costs borne by workers during unemployment.  These
determinants of unemployment risk motivate our empirical identification strategy – we expect firms’ earnings management
incentives change when there is an exogenous shock to employees’ unemployment risk through a decrease in the costs
borne by workers during unemployment. 
In particular, we test for partial reversals of prior upward earnings management around increases in state-level
unemployment benefits. 