 1.  Introduction OPEC has a fragile cartel structure.  It does not have a formal enforcement mechanism in place (except for the occasional price war) to incentivize its members to comply with their quota allocations (Alhajji and Huettner, 2000).  As a result, non-compliance to the quota has become a norm among OPEC members over the past decades.  In every single quarter from 1993 to 2005, total OPEC production exceeded the sum of its members’ quotas.  In this period, an OPEC member over-produced its quota by an average of 6. 7%.  In this paper, we provide a framework to explain such a persistent non-compliance pattern based on strategic interactions among members inside OPEC.  Quota violations vary signiﬁcantly among different countries.  For example, Saudi Arabia’s overproduction averaged around 3. 2% from 1995 to 2007 but Qatar’s overproduction averaged around 18. 5% during the same period.  In extreme cases, some members overproduce their quotas by a large margin.  For example, in the second quarter of 1998, OPEC requested that Qatar cut its production to reach a quota of 384 thousand bpd due to falling oil prices, but Qatar kept its production level at 670 thousand bpd–a 75% quota non-compliance.  Another extreme example is Algeria who overproduced its quota by more than 50% in 13 out of 24 quarters between 2002 and 2006.  Moreover, as suggested by a large body of theoretical literature1, the diﬃculty of supporting collusion varies with the economic state of the market.  Based on these preliminary observations, we ask the following.  is non-compliance related to oil market conditions.  If so, is it a pro-cyclical or a counter-cyclical behavior.  How does the degree of non-compliance differ for smaller vs.  larger producers.  To what extent does OPEC rely on the quota system.  There are a number of prominent empirical studies on OPEC behavior, but the majority of them focus on whether OPEC behaves as a cartel or not, rather than analyzing the nature of quotas and violations.  To name a few, Griﬃn (1985), tests the market-sharing hypothesis by looking at the co-movement of each country’s production with that of the rest of OPEC.  He concludes that “OPEC is a looser cartel” given that market sharing considerations only partially affect production decisions.  Gülen (1996) uses a similar intuition to test for parallel movements in members’ output levels.  He ﬁnds evidence of coordination among members, especially during the rationing period, 1982–1993.  Dahl and Yücel (1991) ﬁnd no evidence in support of several hypotheses for OPEC behavior including dynamic optimization, target revenue, cartel, competitive, and swing producers.  Therefore, they conclude that “loose coordination or duopoly” is the closest description to OPEC behavior.  However, as pointed out by Smith (2005), there are serious concerns regarding the low power of the statistical tests employed in these studies and the extent to which they are capable of distinguishing between collusive and competitive behavior within OPEC.  He describes OPEC as “much more than a non-cooperative oligopoly, but less than a friction-less cartel. ” Instead of calling this strand of literature inconclusive, we prefer the conclusion that some of the studies reach—such as Geroski et al.  (1987), Almoguera et al.  (2011) and Kaufmann et al.  (2008)—that OPEC behavior cannot be ﬁtted into a single model, but rather it follows a varying-conduct model that switches between collusive and non-cooperative behavior over time.  We use the same notion in our theory model by formulating the proposed framework as a combination of a cooperative game and a non-cooperative behavior.  Although the empirical evidence for OPEC’s collusion behavior is mixed, the ﬁeld of industrial organization provides a sharp predictions for one of the factors affecting collusion.  the link between market conditions and the incentive to cheat in a cartel.  The standard approach in this literature is to repeat game models in which cartel members interact via their choice of production levels or prices.  In this approach, members choose to cooperate or cheat in each period by comparing the net value of cooperation vs.  that of deviation.  If they cooperate, they receive a moderate period payoff for cooperation with a continuation of this payoff in the future.  However, if they decide to cheat, they will enjoy a high period payoff but will face punishment in the future.  The prediction of this literature is that it’s harder to collude in booms because the incentive to cheat is higher2.  For example, Rotemberg and Saloner (1986) show that with an i. i. d.  demand structure collusion is harder to support in booms, simply because the net gains of deviation are higher.  Assuming a cyclical demand, Haltiwanger and Harrington Jr (1991) show that the incentive to cheat is stronger at the end of a boom when the demand is about to fall.  This is because with falling demand the value of cooperation is at its lowest.  Consistent with Rotemberg and Saloner (1986), Kandori (1991) and Bagwell and Staiger (1995) generalize this result for the cases of serially correlated and Markov demand shocks respectively.  Overall, the theory predicts a monotonic relationship between market conditions and the incentives to cheat.  the more favorable the market conditions, the more diﬃcult it is to support collusion. 3 Staiger and Wolak (1992) introduce the capacity-constraints features to previous models and show that large excess capacities can result in severe price wars.  We use a less complex economy to characterize the noncompliance behavior of an OPEC-like cartel.  Our model consists of a small and a large capacity country.  We use a simple multistage model where in the ﬁrst period countries choose their optimal level of capacity.  In the second stage the optimal aggregate production of the cartel and the quota level for each member are determined through maximizing the joint proﬁt of the cartel members.  In the third stage countries decide their production level and in the fourth stage possible deviations from the quota might be punished.  The model implies that OPEC members take into account the investment cost of building capacity with the possible beneﬁt of obtaining a larger quota.  We show that for the small member, the endogenously chosen capacity work as an implicit quota enforcement mechanism in good times and leaves very little room for non-compliance.  Therefore, we predict that OPEC relies on its quota and punishment system more in bad times than in good times.  We also allow the punishment reaction of the cartel’s police (Saudi Arabia) to vary in a range (between very weak enforcement to a full enforcement) to study the reaction of investment and production decisions of small members to changes in the stringency of the punishment mechanism.  We show that while more stringent punishment results in lower quota violations, it increases investment in capacity expansion.  The key feature of our theoretical framework is to model the decision making process by the cartel members inside and outside of OPEC.  We do this by highlighting the role of an important variable, under-emphasized in literature, as the key variable explaining the compliance behavior of cartel members.  More speciﬁcally, we emphasize the role of capacity as the fundamental heterogeneity among cartel members in three ways.  First, empirical and anecdotal evidence support the idea of a direct link between the production capacity of a country and its share of total quota.  Second, we introduce convex capacity building costs, which pin down the optimal maximum production capacity for each member.  We argue that the marginal cost of oil production is much smaller than the initial cost of building capacity, as pointed out by Gault et al.  (1999).  Therefore, some of results are driven by the capacity limits.  Third, larger capacity provides the option to produce in high-demand states for the larger member in the production game that follows the quota allocations.  Our empirical analysis supports these predictions.  Using quarterly data for the period of 1995 to 2007, during when OPEC had a stable structure, we build a panel data model to test the statistical signiﬁcance of the predictions of our theory model.  We use Instrumental Variable approach to control for potential endogeneity of the size measure, Capacity.  Consistent with the notion that capacity constraint works as an enforcement mechanism in good times, we ﬁnd that unlike the police that always holds spare capacity to keep the potential punishment credible, other OPEC members become more capacity constrained when oil prices are higher.  Next, consistent with OPEC relying on quota system in bad times, we ﬁnd that OPEC meets more frequently when oil prices are lower.  Moreover, consistent with a size-dependent punishment mechanism, we provide empirical evidence that shows non-compliance relative to quota levels is more common among the smaller countries especially in badThree things distinguish our paper from earlier studies on OPEC non-compliance.  First, our paper is one of the few studies that look into strategic interactions and cheating behavior inside OPEC, instead of looking at the behavior of OPEC as a whole.  Second, unlike the bulk of the literature on OPEC that are merely empirical (e. g. , Molchanov, 2003), we provide a theoretical model that is tuned to resemble the OPEC decision-making process and delivers empirically testable predictions along with our empirical analysis.  Third, we offer a more universal framework that integrates the effects of general market conditions (e. g. , demand ﬂuctuations) and country-speciﬁc characteristics (e. g. , cost of capacity building) on quota violations into a single framework.  This is in contrast to other studies such as Dibooglu and AlGudhea (2007) and Kaufmann et al.  (2008) that look at cheating behavior on a country-by-country basis.  The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 1 presents the theory model in two stages.  the cooperative quota-setting stage and the non-cooperative production game.  Section 2 describes the empirical design and the data.  Section 3 illustrates empirical analysis and estimation results, and Section 4 contains the conclusion.  2.  Theoretical model.  This section introduces a series of stylized models of OPEC members’ behavior.  The objective of the modeling exercise is to identify major determinants of capacity building and production decisions, which can potentially include a deviation from the assigned quota (among other factors).  The model highlights trade-offs between members investment and production decisions.  In its most complete form, our theoretical model consists of a four-stage game.  In the ﬁrst stage countries endogenously choose the optimal level of capacity investment.  In the second stage production quotas are allocated (taking into account the installed capacities).  Countries make decisions regarding the actual production (and possible deviations from quotas) in the third stage.  We do not assume that the third stage’s production plans fully follows the allocated quotas because endogenous deviations from quotas are allowed.  The fourth stage includes monitoring the actual performance of members by the large producer (aka the police) and potentially implementing a random punishment strategy.  In our model capacity levels, quota allocation, actual production, quota violations, and punishment are all endogenous.  2. 1.  Key components and assumptions of the model.  OPEC is a sophisticated and non-transparent organization.  A lot of politics is involved in OPEC. s bargaining, agreements, and decision making.  We recognize that a stylized model, such as the one presented in this paper, cannot fully capture all aspects of OPEC’s dynamics.  Moreover, given the size limitations of the current paper we have to make certain assumptions and take a pragmatic approach for building and solving the model in order to come up with empirically testable hypothesis.  2. 1. 1.  Focus on the key message related to the empirical section of the2. 1. 1. 1.  Objectives and functions of OPEC.  OPEC acts as a cartel maximizing the total proﬁt of its members4.  OPEC’s objective in reality is a mix of proﬁt-maximizing and price-stabilizing goals.  Especially in recent years, OPEC has tried to keep the crude oil prices around a reasonable bound (appx $50–$60) to reduce the incentives of the demand side to invest in alternative forms of energy5.  We model OPEC only as a proﬁt-maximizing cartel6.  2. 1. 1. 2.  Cartel members.  The cartel consists of a large producer (aka the police, who monitors other members production and their deviations from quotas) and a fringe of small producers.  We assume the production capacity of the police is K1 and the aggregate production capacity of all fringe members together is K2.  To keep the algebra simple we solve the game between one large producer and one representative small player.  Thus, we abstract from strategic interactions between small producers.  Since the interest of the paper is in quota violations of non-police members, we only model the endogenous capacity investment, quota allocation, and production decisions of the representative small producer.  The production capacity of the police is exogenous.  2. 1. 1. 3.  Cartel’s police.  In order to preserve the stability of a cartel, there should be some credible punishment strategies vis-a-vis noncomplying members.  We assume Saudi Arabia is the de facto police of the OPEC cartel.  No other member has the production or ﬁscal capacity to punish defying members.  We assume the police holds an exogenously-speciﬁed level of excess capacity beyond the levels of any other OPEC member to support a credible threat against deviations from the cartel allocations7.  2. 1. 1. 4.  Demand.  The demand for crude oil has a standard linear functional form.  P = h − cQ.  Hereh is the demand shift parameter and c is the ﬁxed parameter representing the sensitivity of prices to quantities.  We will ﬁrst solve a deterministic model and then introduce a stochastic demand.  The stochastic demand shift parameter includes two states which follow a discrete i. i. d distribution of hH (high demand) and hL (low demand), with probabilities of pH and pL, respectively.  2. 1. 1. 5.  Capacity building costs.  OPEC members face convex capacity building costs.  This assumption is in line with the order of extraction hypothesis in the resource economics literature (Amigues et al. , 1998).  According to the order of extraction theory, resource holders (OPEC members here) ﬁrst extract the most eﬃcient resource base and then move to ﬁelds with higher costs (less eﬃcient ﬁelds or types of reserves such as offshore, and deep water) if the demand is highWe assume that the marginal cost of production is zero8.  The major component of the total cost function is the ﬁxed cost of building capacity.  The capacity cost is modeled as a stream of annualized payments (i. e. , all equipment are perpetually leased).  The limiting case of the convex capacity cost is a hard capacity constraint, which is equivalent to a locally inﬁnite marginal cost (i. e.  a vertical part of the cost curve).  However, countries have different levels and curvatures in their cost curves.  This heterogeneity for the size and quality of reserves distinguishes a large producer such as Saudi Arabia from a small producer like Gabon or Qatar.  Fig.  1 shows a stylized view of this model.  Under an eﬃcient planner solution the country with a lower capacity building cost (i. e.  cost curve to the right) will optimally build a larger capacity and receive a higher production quota.  2. 1. 1. 6.  Allocation rule of OPEC.  The theoretical foundations for the internal allocation of aggregate production to cartel members is a matter of debate (see Cave and Salant, 1995).  We assume that the cartel uses a two-layer allocation rule.  In the strategic layer the allocation rule minimizes the cartel’s production cost (surplus maximization strategy) for capacity investment.  In the production layer (when capacities are not binding due to a low demand) the rule suggests an allocation proportional to existing capacities.  Anecdotal evidences suggest that the established capacity is a key factor in assigning initial quotas to OPEC members.  In the strategic version of the model we will discuss how a proportional allocation rule incentivizes member countries to build excess capacity.  Sandrea (2003) suggests that the following eight factors have been used in the initial stage.  reserves, production capacity, historical production share, domestic oil consumption, production costs, population, dependence on oil exports, and external debt.  Reynolds and Pippenger (2010) use Venezuela as an example and shows that in the long-run, production capacity and actual productions of countries Granger-cause their OPEC quotas.  2. 1. 1. 7.  Punishment.  In reality, constant deviations from assigned quotas occur for multiple reasons.  First, countries are typically not content with the officially assigned quota and prefer to produce more.  Second, it is both difficult and costly for OPEC to constantly punish non-complying members.  The problem with the standard definition of punishment in cartels (i. e the strategy of flooding the market with overproduction and thus reducing the price) is that it not only punishes the non-compliant member but also other “innocent” members (including the police itself)9.  This causes the punishment strategy to be ex-post sub game perfect but not negotiation-proof.  We are not aware of other credible punishment mechanisms (such as trade embargoes), which have been used by OPEC members.  During important historical incidents (e. g.  the oil price war of 1986) Saudi Arabia overproduced to punish the other members.  In order to have a credible punishment strategy, cartel members need to have enough spare capacity, able to identify the deviant member (Green and Porter, 1984), and not be jammed by demand uncertainty noises.  2. 1. 1. 8.  Punishment technology.  Punishment in our model is random and the probability of punishment (conditional on cheating) is m ∈A special case is the size-independent punishment technology, which will react to all positive deviations with a constant probability m.  The random punishment can be interpreted as a mixed strategy played by the police.  In the case of size-independent punishment, when m → 1 the punishment is very effective, and when m → 0 the ability or the incentive to punish is very weak.  When m → 0 the non-police members are conﬁdent that the cartel will never punish their quota violations.  The inability to accurately observe members’ actual production, the lack of a political will to punish the deviating member, or internal disagreements within the OPEC are several frictions that can result in a partially effective punishment technology.  We summarize all of these forces using the single parameter m.  2. 2.  Four versions of the model.  A step-by-step development of cartel models is presented in the following order.  1.  A planer’s11 solution for a cartel with a convex capacitybuilding costs under certainty 2.  A planer’s solution for a cartel with a convex capacity-building costs under uncertainty 3.  A cartel with quota allocation and full enforcement of quotas 4.  A cartel with quota allocation, possibility of quota violation, and endogenous punishment for quota violation.  2. 3.  Model 1.  eﬃcient allocation under certainty.  The benchmark case is a two-country cartel problem with asymmetric convex capacity building cost curves c(Ki) = 1 i , where 0i is the coeﬃcient of resource eﬃciency and Ki is the installed capacity.  For countries with a larger resource base, 0 is a smaller parameter.  We also assume a full enforcement of OPEC quota rules (through a planner).  We ﬁrst introduce this benchmark to provide the key intuitions from an eﬃcient allocation and then will move to a more realistic case with capacity limits and incentives to cheat.  We assume that the two countries choose the optimal production capacity based on an eﬃcient internal allocation mechanism.  Since the capacity has not been built, one can treat the annualized cost of capacity like marginal cost.  Members of the cartel are bound by their maximum capacity.  thus, even if the operational marginal cost is zero, they will not be able to deviate upward from the eﬃcient solution.  Moreover, no party has an incentive to build more capacity than what we recommend here because the marginal cost of building an additional unit of capacity exceeds the marginal beneﬁts (taking the behavior of the other members as given).  The optimal cartel solution is here where c(K1) and c(K2) are the total cost of building K1 and K2 units of capacity.  The cartel problem in this version of the model is the same as the standard multi-plant monopolist problem, which maximizes the joint proﬁt of all plants.  The FOCs of the cartel problem results in the following system of equation, in which the marginal cost of each member is equal to the marginal revenue of the cartel.  Given that the right hand sides are equal, we immediately observe that c(cid. 4)(K1) = c(cid. 4)(K2) ⇒ K1 .  Since capacity is set in the model, we also note that 01 > 02 ⇒ K2 > K1, implying that the member with a less eﬃcient cost curve (represented by a higher 0) will receive a lower production quota.  Plugging in the speciﬁc functional forms for ci and P.  The solution to the system of equation characterizes an eﬃcient  internal allocation while maximizing the total proﬁt of the cartel.  2. 4.  Model 2.  eﬃcient allocation under uncertainty.  When the uncertainty is introduced, the optimization problem of the planner consists of two stages.  In the ﬁrst stage (before the resolution of uncertainty) member countries choose their optimal capacity levels (by considering the expected value of capacity over different states).  In the second stage with the ﬁxed capacity installed in the ﬁrst stage, countries produce according to a proﬁt-maximizing program.  The demand states are distributed according to hL, pL and hH, pH, where pL, pH are the probability of low and high states, respectively.  We denote the production at the high and low states by qH A key point to note is that the choice of capacity is prior to the resolution of uncertainty regarding the demand state.  Therefore, the country maximizes based on the expectation of proﬁts.  However, production decisions are taken after observing the realized demand state (i. e after the uncertainty regarding the demand is resolved. ) Since the production in the low demand state will always be below the capacity, the marginal value (i. e.  shadow price) of capacity at this state is zero.  Therefore, the choice of capacity will be driven by the high state optimal production plan.  In other words, there are four equations for qL,1, qH,1, qL,2, qH,2, out of which two are binding (in the H-state) and two are always slack (in the L-state).  Therefore, Ki = qHThe optimization problem of the planner looks very similar to the previous case except that the marginal value of capacity is only relevant in the high state12.  Solving the system of equations using the assumed functional conditioned on actual capacities, OPEC decides on the aggregate supply and then allocates quotas to members.  Economic theory has little to say about the internal allocation in the low demand state when members have excess capacities (especially when the marginal cost of production is zero).  In practice, OPEC uses a combination of economic, social, and political factors to determine the quotas.  We assume the allocation is based on installed capacities.  The cartel ﬁrst ﬁnds the monopoly production quantity.  Since we assumed marginal cost is equal to zero the cartel just maximizes revenues14.  Two types of deviation can be identiﬁed.  an operational deviation by producing more than assigned quota (the focus of this paper) and an investment deviation by building too much initial capacity15.  The operational deviation is more frequently observed in practice.  Given the nature of our motivating empirical observations, our theoretical focus is on operational deviations.  Consequently, we only model the punishment mechanism for the operational deviations and abstract from modeling the punishments for the investment deviations.  2. 5.  Model 3.  strategic incentives for capacity investment.  We now consider the incentives of OPEC members to build excess capacity (ex-ante) in order to gain a larger quota in the low demand state.  Our assumption of the strategic effect of capacity is in line with the intuition offered by some recent papers (e. g.  Fagart, 2016).  We assume a reduced-form proportional quota allocation rule, which assigns quota based on the relative share of countries’ installed capacities.  If the theoretical share of country i is greater than its actual capacity, the quota will be capped at capacity.  Combining cartel total production and allocation rules.  The equations above pin down the binding capacity (and hence the production plans) in the H state.  Note that when pH = 1 the solution is the same as Model 1.  We also need to characterize the optimal production in the L state.  In state L, after observing the realized state of demand and Note that OPEC members’ individual capacities do not affect the optimal level of the cartel’s production (as long as the total capacity of the cartel is large enough).  Moreover, the proportional rule does not guarantee that members will get quotas equal to their production capacities.  As long as the aggregate capacity of OPEC is larger than the optimal cartel production, some members will receive quotas below their capacities16.  The objective function of the nested optimization problem is here where players choose the capacity in the ﬁrst stage by considering its effect both in the low and the high demand states (and taking the capacity strategy of others as a given. ) The new feature of this version of the model takes into account the strategic effect of capacity on the assigned quota for the low state (i. e.  bargain for a higher quota) Under this structure and with qH 1 = K1 , the key equation to pin down the endogenous choice of capacity by a small cartel member is this.  We derive the value of the expression in the second bracket in the next subsection.  2. 5. 1.  Marginal quota effect of capacity.  The proposed allocation rule allows us to derive the marginal “allocation value” of a unit of capacity.  Assuming that the marginal effect on the total capacity of cartel is negligible, the marginal allocation value can be deﬁned as follows.  Denoting the assigned quota in the low demand state by qL.  We see that with a larger total capacity of OPEC members, the quota allocation effect of additional unit of capacity for an individual member becomes weaker.  Note that Q is the total production of cartel in the low state and Ki is the total production in the high state.  Thus, closer production values in the two states results in a higher incentive for bargaining.  The marginal value of capacity in the low state then can be calculated.  Eq.  (13) suggests that when the total installed capacity of the cartel is large, the demand in the low state is weak, and the sensitivity of price to quantity is high, the incentives for building excess capacity (for quota bargaining purposes) would become smaller.  The small member of the cartel compares the marginal value of capacity with the marginal cost of building (an almost unused) unit of excess capacity.  If capacity costs are relatively low, the country may build and keep spare capacity for bargaining purposes.  however, if capacity investment costs are high, the country may give up building excess capacity.  The optimality condition to pin-down the equilibrium capacity for the representative small member is here. 