
In order to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+), policies could either attempt to reduce the proﬁtability
of agriculture, e. g.  by removing agricultural subsidies, or offer positive
incentives such as payment for environmental services (PES) that aim
to put a price on forest externalities (Angelsen, 2010.  Palmer, 2011). 
The latter have come to dominate both project and nascent jurisdictional-scale REDD+ strategies (see e. g.  Mahanty Name, 2013.  Sills Name,
2014).  Acre State in Brazil, the setting for our paper, is currently at the
forefront of efforts to institutionalize jurisdictional-scale REDD+.  At
an estimated cost of US$260 million, the State government's objective
is to reduce deforestation by 80% by 2020,
thus conserving
5. 5 million ha of forest in order to prevent the release of 62. 5 Mt of
CO2 emissions (Herbert, 2010).  To this end, Acre has established a
‘PES-like’ scheme known as the Incentive System for Environmental
Services (SISA) framework.  Its objective is to internalize values associated with forest carbon, as well as biodiversity and hydrological services,
by incentivizing landowners to conserve forest on their landholdings. 
In this paper, we model a hypothetical SISA payment in order to address two related questions.  First, given the extent of uncertainty in
land-use returns from forest conversion, what is the minimum level of
payment that Acre's government should pay to landowners to ensure
forest conservation with a 90% probability.  Reﬂecting the common
practice of Latin American incentive payment schemes, our payment
is held constant over time.  The ‘90% probability’ is illustrative of a setting
in which there is a relatively strong commitment on the part of the
policymaker to enforce conservation contracts and hence, keep land in
forest.  That said, should alternative land uses become more proﬁtable,
e. g.  due to rising commodity prices, it may not be possible to prevent
contract breach altogether thus reﬂecting imperfect enforcement of
conservation contracts (e. g.  Engel and Palmer, 2008.  MacKenzie Name,
2012.  Jayachandran, 2013). 
Our model is applied to municipality-scale, publicly-available data,
which allows us to estimate the uncertain returns of an ‘average’ landowner within each municipality, one faced with the decision of whether
to keep land in forest or convert it to an alternative land use.  For each of
Acre's municipalities, we estimate the uncertain returns for three alternative land uses.  cattle, corn, and coffee.  These three land uses are
among the most popular ones adopted in Acre and have relatively
good data availability.  We then identify the minimum per hectare cost
to the policymaker of conserving forest in each of Acre's 22 municipalities before ranking the municipalities according to ascending payment
levels, i. e.  moving from the municipalities with the lowest opportunity
costs to those with the highest ones.  The second question we ask is
whether and (if so) how this ranking of municipalities changes when
we consider their carbon stocks.  Finally, our estimates of policy costs
are combined with carbon stock data to give a novel measure of municipality-scale environmental cost-effectiveness.  the minimum relative
cost, in terms of the forgone proﬁts from alternative land uses under uncertainty, per tonne of carbon. 
In studies that evaluate the cost-effectiveness and efﬁciency of PES,
two key assumptions are typically made.  First, it is often assumed that
future returns from forest conversion are known with certainty (e. g. 
Ferraro and Simpson, 2002.  Börner Name, 2010.  Groom and Palmer,
2010.  Palmer and Silber, 2012.  Curran Name, 2016).  Yet, up-front investments combined with greater uncertainty in agricultural returns create
incentives to delay the decision to convert forest to an alternative use
(Schatzki, 2003).  This implies that a lower level of incentive would be
required to prevent forest conversion.  In general, a failure to consider
uncertainty in future agricultural returns results in estimates of the opportunity costs of forest conservation that are biased upwards.  The consequence is that payment levels would be set higher than necessary in
order to incentivize forest conservation. 
Second, it is also commonly assumed that the environmental beneﬁts from conserving forest are homogenous across space.  However, it
has become increasingly clear that this assumption is erroneous.  For example, Saatchi Name (2011) demonstrate wide variation in forest carbon
stocks, even at the local scale, e. g.  within municipalities.  A failure to consider heterogeneity in forests and their corresponding eco-system services can thus lead to under- or over-estimates of beneﬁts from
conservation (see Vincent, 2016). 
In Acre, funds for SISA remain dependent on public sources of funding
despite a Memorandum of Understanding signed in 2010 with the US
State of California to provide REDD+ credits.  There is currently little
scope for the use of carbon markets and offsetting to augment Acre's conservation budget.  Given this limited budget, the basic idea behind our
analysis is to identify municipalities in Acre where it might be possible
to conserve a lot of carbon at relatively low cost.  Our paper contributes
to Acre's ongoing efforts to design an efﬁcient and effective set of forest
conservation institutions, particularly with respect to jurisdictional
REDD+, which are described in Section 2.  We do so by adapting the
model of uncertain land-use returns by Engel Name (2015), in Section 3. 
First, we adapt their model so that it is more consistent with most Latin
American PES schemes, namely by changing the incentive from a variable
to a ﬁxed, area-based payment and by creating a shorter payments period
(ﬁve years instead of 30).  Second, in examining three different land uses
and with 22 different starting points, i. e.  one for each municipality in
Acre, we move away from their focus on a single alternative land use
and a single starting point for estimating policy costs. 
We exploit spatial heterogeneity in land-use returns and model these
returns over time using publicly available data, which are described in
Section 4.  Since similar data are increasingly available for other tropical
countries, in addition to other Brazilian States, our model can easily be applied to other settings and land uses.  Further, we exploit the spatial variation in forest carbon stocks across the State and by comparing these with
the relative land use returns, provide an economic rationale for the
targeting of REDD+ payments.  Building upon Engel Name (2015), our
analysis therefore not only estimates the spatial variation in the cost of
keeping forests standing but also integrates these costs with forest carbon
stock data in order to derive a measure of cost-effectiveness across municipalities.  In sum, our model offers a novel and straightforward way of allocating scarce conservation resources and while our focus is on forest
climate beneﬁts, it can easily be expanded to accommodate other ecosystem services and biodiversity. 
Presented in Section 5 and discussed in Section 6, our results suggest
that although pasture and cattle ranching is not particularly proﬁtable, it
is the land use which results in the highest (relative) returns to landowners under uncertainty, in 19 out of 22 municipalities.  With relatively low conversion costs and little volatility in its returns process, pasture
determines the minimum payment level in these areas.  Upon ranking
municipalities by payment level and by carbon stock, we ﬁnd that
cheaper municipalities tend not to have higher stocks.  However, this
type of ranking masks wide differences among municipalities.  Our empirical exercise demonstrates evidence of substantial, economicallymeaningful and policy-relevant variation among municipalities.  On
the basis of cost per tonne of carbon, we identify 13 municipalities in
which it might be possible to obtain a substantially larger ‘carbon
bang’ for one's ‘buck’ in contrast to the other nine municipalities. 
2.  Background to Acre State, BRAZIL. 
Acre in western Brazil has become a world leader in reducing deforestation while growing its economy (Schwartzman, 2015).  The State is
home to around 750,000 people.  Almost half live in the capital, Rio
Branco, while the remainder resides among its 22 municipalities.  Since
the election of The Acre Workers Party and their allies The Popular
Front in 1998, the State government has followed the vision of legendary rubber tapper and environmental activist Chico Mendes towards a
sustainable development pathway for the State. 
About 14. 3 million ha (143,000 km2) of intact, richly diverse forest, approximately 87% of its total area, is found within State borders.  Primary
forest makes up over 85% of forest cover.  The majority of this forest is covered by some form of protection, whether indigenous territory, parks or
reserves.  Deforestation has fallen over recent years, from an average annual deforestation rate of 60,200 ha (602 km2) per year between 1996
and 2005, to 49,600 ha (496 km2) per year between 2001 and 2010. 
Acre State set itself two main deforestation goals, to reduce levels by
60% of the 1990–2005 average by 2012, and by 80% by 2020.  Total emissions for the State were estimated at 22. 7 Mt CO2e in 2010, of which 97%
came from deforestation and land degradation.  The reduction in deforestation rates has meant that Acre has managed to move forward in issuing veriﬁed emission reduction credits to the tune of 11. 5 Mt CO2e
through the Markit registry (Forest Trends, 2015).  In order to meet
the State's deforestation goals and achieve veriﬁable emission reductions it has created the SISA framework, along with operational principles for a system of incentives, not only for forest carbon but also
biodiversity and hydrological services. 
The majority of deforested lands are now pasture (TerraClass, 2011)
and this is representative of the typology of the agricultural sector in
Acre.  Pasture lands make up approximately 8% of total land area of the
State.  By contrast, temporary crops take up 1% of total land area, of
which cassava and corn account for the greatest share.  The acreage of
permanent crops is much smaller, just 0. 1% of land area.  The largest permanent crop is banana, approximately 60% of the total, followed by rubber and coffee, at around 11% each. 
Acre has 22 municipalities.  A major land-zoning exercise in 2006, focusing on both economic and ecological concerns, created four major
land-use zones (Governo do Estado do Acre, 2011).  Zone 1 (25% of State
land) is private land or agricultural settlements of which approximately
half is deforested.  Zone 2 (49%) is intact primary or managed forests in indigenous territories, sustainable use reserves, settlement projects, state
and national production forests, and strictly protected areas.  Zone 3
(26%) has largely intact forest cover but has land tenure that is unclear
or where claims overlap.  and, Zone 4 (0. 2%) is deﬁned as urban. 
<Middle> Model. 
Engel developed a general model of a conservation payment scheme with ﬁxed and variable components in which the latter is
either indexed to the value of one or more services provided by forest,
e. g.  carbon, or to the expected net returns from forest conversion, e. g. 
soya bean production.  By tracking carbon or soya prices, this variable
component thus allows the payment to vary over time.  The scheme's
objective is to provide sufﬁcient incentives to keep land in forest rather
than convert it to an alternative use.  In this paper, we retain their objective and basic model but adapt the latter in three ways. 
First, since shorter contracts are typically found in Latin American
payment for environmental services (PES) schemes, e. g.  in Costa Rica
(Pagiola, 2008), we model a conservation contract of ﬁve rather than
30 years.  Second, also in common with many Latin American PES
schemes, we model a payment that is not indexed but instead is ﬁxed
and unchanging over time.  Finally, although our payment
is characterised as an incentive provided by Acre's government to conserve forest carbon stocks (a generic ‘REDD+ payment’), it does not reﬂect the social value of the carbon in a given hectare of forest.  Rather, it
is calculated as the minimum payment required to keep forest standing
when the net returns from alternative land uses are uncertain.  Below,
we reproduce the model of Engel Name (2015) and intuitively explain
the theory underlying our adaptation of their model. 
3. 1.  Landowner's decision. 
For a single hectare of land, proﬁts can be generated from one of two
alternative uses.  forest (F) or agriculture (A).  For simplicity, we do not
specify A in this section, although as explained in Section 4 it can be pasture (cattle), corn, or coffee.  Whenever land use is changed from F to A,
conversion costs, CCFA, are sunk immediately.  Proﬁts to a landowner
from forest conservation are generated by a REDD+ payment scheme
implemented by Acre's State government.  This payment is paid annually and is ﬁxed at F, i. e.  future returns from forest are certain.  Net proﬁts
from agriculture are generated from crop sales1 and future returns from
agriculture are uncertain. 
In theory, the presence of uncertainty in agricultural returns should
delay land conversion until the value of non-use beneﬁts equals the
value of land in the next-best alternative use plus conversion costs
plus an option value.  Our aim is to identify an F that makes this option
value sufﬁciently large to deter land conversion for a total of ﬁve years. 
New information about the uncertain returns from agriculture is assumed to become available at various times such that they may be
modelled as a stochastic process (e. g.  geometric Brownian motion,
GBM).  The net returns from agriculture to the land owner, A, is private
information which evolves as a function of the constant trend parameter μA and the (positive) constant uncertainty parameter A where dWA=ϵ√dt with ϵ distributed as a standard normal random variable, e. g.  ϵ∈N(0,1).  A positive (negative) μA indicates that net agricultural proﬁts are, on average, increasing (decreasing).  In Section 5, we
parameterize the agricultural returns processes. 
On each day, dt, a landowner receives Fdt if the land is in forest or Adt
if the land is in agriculture.  With a starting point of land in forest, the
landowner decides, every six months, whether to continue conserving
forest or to convert the forest to agriculture.  The decision to change
land use generates instantaneous proﬁts net of conversion costs.  Alternatively, the landowner can delay the decision to deforest and continue
to receive REDD+ payments.  Thus, the value of a single hectare of forest
is this. 
The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of Eq.  (2) describes the
returns if the land is kept in forest.  In this case, the landowner receives a payment of Fdt and the discounted future expected returns
from forest conservation.  Therefore, πF represents the sum of the
landowner's returns from non-use beneﬁts of the forest (current
land use) and the future value of land in the next-best alternative
use (forest or agriculture) where E is the expectation operator.  All returns are valued by
discounting their expected values at the constant, continuously
compounded, risk-free discount rate r.  The second term of Eq.  (2)
represents the returns when the land is converted from forest to agriculture.  The landowner incurs sunk conversion costs equal to
{CCFA}.  Using the same line of reasoning and with a starting point of
land in agriculture, we can obtain the equation that describes the
returns if the land is kept in agriculture, g(F,A,t) and the expression
πA that represents the sum of landowner's returns from agriculturalTo solve the land use change problem, we ﬁrst evaluate the optimal
conversion boundaries as in Engel Name (2015).  These depend upon the
parameters of the returns from forest F and agriculture A, respectively,
the conversion costs {CCFA} and the discount rate r.  We then solve for
the optimal land-use change numerically.  Instead of modelling the
price and crop yield uncertainties separately, the agricultural returns
processes are modelled directly.  This simpliﬁes our analysis considerably and allows us to utilize existing numerical techniques, used by
e. g.  Miranda and Fackler (2002), Dangl and Wirl (2004), to solve the optimal land–conversion problem.  In practice, the landowner compares
two alternative land uses as described below. 
3. 2.  REDD+ payment parameters. 
Our model is used to simulate REDD + payment scenarios in
order to estimate the level of incentive needed to ensure that the
landowner continues to postpone the decision to switch from forest
to agriculture.  The landowner's opportunity costs of forest conservation are the forgone returns to agriculture, A.  Given A we estimate the
level of the REDD + payment that ensures forest conservation.  We
assume that Acre's government seeks to achieve conservation at
the lowest possible cost and that the landowner will not always comply with the REDD+ contract.  Thus, we introduce the possibility that
at some point it might be more proﬁtable for the landowner to convert forest to agriculture.  The potential for contract breach is
modelled using a probability-based criterion, in which p is deﬁned
as the probability of avoiding deforestation and (1 − p) corresponds
to the probability of deforestation. 
For a given hectare of forest, we establish an illustrative probability
level of p = 0. 9 and a time horizon of T = 5 and estimate the REDD+
payment necessary to ensure that the land remains in forest.  We
argue that a 90% probability of avoiding deforestation reﬂects Acre's ongoing efforts to build institutional capacity for REDD+ at the jurisdictional level, including institutions for monitoring and enforcement. 
Thus, this 90% probability is illustrative of a setting in which there is a
relatively strong commitment on the part of the policymaker to enforce
conservation contracts and hence, keep land in forest. 2 Note that, operationally, we implement the same payment regime as Engel Name
(2015) but identify a constant per-hectare payment F. 3 In our adaptation, the landowners' opportunity costs of forest conservation are
based on uncertain returns from the production and sale of coffee,
corn or cattle. 
To determine the REDD+ payment that satisﬁes this criterion, we
ﬁrst evaluate the optimal conversion boundaries as described above
given a speciﬁc set of model parameters.  For a given REDD+ payment
level, we simulate the returns from agriculture.  When these returns
are below the conversion boundary CFA, the landowner prefers to switch
land use, converting forest to agriculture.  This comparison is assessed
every six months.  The simulation yields a converted path when agriculture becomes more proﬁtable than forest at any given comparison node. 
With forest conversion, the contract is breached and REDD+ payments
cease, which is equivalent to imposing a conditionality clause on the
REDD+ contract.  Dividing the total number of non-converted paths
by the number of simulations, we compute the likelihood of a landuse change from forest to agriculture not occurring, ^p.  The probabilitybased criterion is met when ^p≥p ¼ 0. 9. 
4.  Data. 
Our model in Section 3 is based on the land-use decision faced by a
landowner.  In the absence of landowner-level data, we apply our
model to publicly-available agricultural data at the municipality scale. 
Thus, we compare differences in average net proﬁts for three, different
land uses, which are estimated at the municipality scale from data reported by farmers and landowners sampled within municipalities. 
Applying the model presented in Section 3 to real-world data requires ﬁrst identifying the commonest land-use transitions from forest
conversion in Acre State over a ﬁve-year period.  From Section 2, pasture
for cattle ranching was clearly more common than any of the other land
uses put together.  We also select corn as one of the most popular temporary crops and coffee, a permanent crop, which has been gaining in
popularity in the region.  While there are other, similarly popular
crops, e. g.  cassava, banana, our choice is also determined by data availability.  Municipality-level production data are shown in Appendix 1. 
Note that for the ﬁve-year duration of contract it was often the case
that land once planted, and with conversion costs sunk, would remain
either in pasture or coffee for the whole of this time.  For corn, however,
farmers could switch to a different land use after three years thus incurring another round of conversion costs.  We are unable to build another
land-use decision into our model simulations for corn and for tractability instead assumed that corn was planted for ﬁve years.  Switching from
corn to beef or coffee within ﬁve years would not, however, signiﬁcantly
change the ranking of municipalities by minimum payment level. 
4. 1.  Daily proﬁts. 
The returns from converting a hectare of land from forest to agriculture depend upon a variety of factors including production costs, clearance and conversion costs, yields, prices and transportation costs.  We
combine these factors in order to estimate daily proﬁts, Adt.  The perhectare return (in US$) on day t from agricultural commodity x is
given by X where P is the price of commodity x in US$/tonne, Y is its yield (tonne/
ha), L is its labour cost (US$/ha), Fe is its fertiliser cost (US$/ha), Fu is its
fuel cost (US$/ha), Fix is its ﬁxed cost (US$/ha), and M is the cost of
transporting x to market (US$/ha). 
For each of corn, cattle and coffee, we estimate the value of each of
these variables for each day in the ﬁve-year period between March 31,
2006 and December 30, 2010, before calculating daily returns.  Daily agricultural price data are combined with quarterly data on labour costs,
annual yield data, and overall costs per hectare for ﬁxed, labour,
fertiliser and fuel in order to create daily revenue and cost time-series,
with the costs subtracted from the revenue series to give net proﬁts. 
We draw the majority of data from the Brazilian Agricultural Census
of 2006 (IBGE, 2006).  More detail on data sources and individual factors,
including our measure of carbon stock density, are presented in
Appendix 2 and Appendix 3.  Despite relatively good data availability,
we face a number of challenges when creating suitable daily price series
for our chosen commodities in Acre State. 
First, there are gaps in the price data.  In order to create a daily
price series for each commodity, we converted the daily price series
for São Paulo and via benchmarks for prices in Rio Branco created
price series for Acre.  Since this approach factors in differences in
prices due to assumptions about the location of demand for each
commodity - and hence, where it is transported - it potentially underestimates transportation costs in more remote regions of Acre
state.  This is particularly the case for corn and cattle that are not
shipped to Rio Branco to be sold. 
Second, there are some missing data in the Agricultural Census for
some of the cost components of corn and coffee production.  Since we
have seen no evidence to suggest that there may be, on average, substantial differences in the costs of coffee and corn production at the municipality scale in the Legal Amazon, we ﬁlled these gaps by applying
regression analysis to municipality-scale data for the whole Legal Amazon.  This approach assumes that agricultural production in Acre state
follows the same techniques, and utilizes the same mix of inputs, as
used by the average Amazonian farmer. 
Third, the Agricultural Census reports at the municipality level and is
biased towards the sampling of larger farms.  At this scale of aggregation,
we may therefore overlook important intra-municipality variation in
terms of costs and returns.  If larger farmers have different yields, mix
of inputs and costs in contrast to their smaller counterparts our estimates of average returns may not be perfectly representative, especially
in municipalities with greater shares of smaller farmers.  We return to
the issue of potential variation in proﬁtability among landowners and
farmers within municipalities in Section 6. 
5.  Results. 
We ﬁrst present our estimates of daily net proﬁts for our three agricultural land uses (pasture (cattle), corn, and coffee) at the municipality
scale over a ﬁve-year period.  These estimates are used to calculate our
model parameters, which are then combined with our estimates of
up-front clearance costs in order to simulate the returns processes
under uncertainty for each land use in each and every municipality in
Acre State.  The returns are then ranked to give the policymaker's cost
of the minimum payment to landowners in each municipality.  Cost
per municipality is then compared with the distribution of carbon densities across the State.  From our estimates of minimum payment and
data for mean carbon stock, we derive a novel measure of relative environmental cost-effectiveness.  the minimum relative cost, in terms of
the forgone proﬁts from alternative land uses under uncertainty, per
tonne of carbon. 
5. 1.  Daily net proﬁts. 
Table 1 presents a summary of patterns in the daily per hectare net
proﬁts from pasture, corn and coffee between 2006 and 2010.  Only
one of these land uses remains proﬁtable over the whole period in 11
municipalities, typically corn.  Pasture appears to result in consistent
negative net proﬁts in most municipalities. 
Negative net proﬁts are obtained due to the use of observable market
prices, which proxy for landowners' returns from alternative land uses. 
We conjecture that commercial production may simply be unproﬁtable
in much of Acre given remoteness and high costs.  For instance, we may
be underestimating prices.  The São Paulo price, even with adjustment
may not reﬂect higher prices in local markets due to their remoteness. 4
Subsistence agriculture dominates in a lot of municipalities, which is unlikely to be accounted for in government-collected statistics.  Sampling in
the Brazilian Agricultural Census tends to be biased towards larger farms. 
Since larger farms are more likely to hire in labour in contrast to smallholders, we may overestimate costs.  Finally, we may be underestimating
yields and note that our estimates may be missing subsidies that effectively reduce costs or increase proﬁts, e. g.  credit subsidies. 
Fig.  1 illustrates net proﬁts for selected municipalities.  Bujari is a
good example of one where there is a clearly ‘strictly dominant’ proﬁtable land use, in this case coffee.  There, a rational land owner would
convert forest to this land use rather than either of the other two. 
Feijó, on the other hand, illustrates a case where ‘the lines cross’ and
the relative proﬁtability of one land use changes such that at different
times it would be rational to switch from one of corn, coffee or pasture,
to one of the other two, and back again at a later date. 
In general, and of relevance for modelling returns processes under
uncertainty, coffee appears to have the most volatile net proﬁts while
beef has the least.  Recall that greater volatility in returns is predicted
to lead to a greater incentive to delay land-use change, from forest to agriculture.  A measure of volatility is more important than the absolute
level of proﬁts in determining the relative level of returns under uncertainty, and the likelihood of whether the landowner is likely to stay with
forest or convert to an alternative land use.  This implies that there are
no limitations in using negative net proﬁts to estimate the volatility of
the returns process under uncertainty. 
5. 2.  Clearance costs. 
From net proﬁts, which allow us to estimate the volatility in
returns over time, we now turn our attention to the second key component needed to estimate land-use returns under uncertainty.  upfront clearance costs.  For each municipality, these costs are presented in Table 2. 
By a factor of three to four, and often more, Table 2 shows that clearing forest for coffee is more expensive than corn or pasture in all municipalities.  Clearance costs of the latter two are broadly equivalent,
although those of corn are typically lower.  This implies that the decision
to delay is likely to be greatest for landowners considering converting
forest to coffee, followed by pasture and corn, and indicates that coffee
has a lower degree of reversibility than the other two land uses.  In
sum, given the trends in volatility and clearance costs, the cultivation
of coffee would appear to give the greatest incentives to delay the decision to convert forest in comparison to pasture or corn.  We now turn to
calibrating these variables more precisely in order to estimate landowners' returns under uncertainty. 
5. 3.  Returns under uncertainty and minimum payment levels. 
The model presented in Section 3, namely the constant trend parameter, μ, and the variance, σ, is calibrated using the estimated daily
proﬁts.  Table 3 shows the calibrated parameters for each land use for
all of Acre's municipalities.  The three columns represent the three alternative land uses from forest conversion, i. e.  forest-corn, forest-coffee
and forest-pasture.  Recall that a positive (negative) μ indicates that
net agricultural proﬁts are, on average, increasing (decreasing).  by comparing net proﬁts in Table 1 with the trend parameters in Table 3 this
pattern can be clearly discerned. 
For each municipality, we compare the opportunity costs of forest
conservation (for three different alternative land uses.  coffee, corn, cattle) under uncertainty with a certain REDD+ payment in order to ensure the land stays in forest with a probability p of 90% over a time
period T of ﬁve years.  Thus, the level of REDD+ payment is ‘set’ to
make forest the preferable ‘alternative’ 90% of the time/simulations. 
From this, we can estimate the minimum level of payment Acre's government should make in order to ensure forest conservation with a
90% probability given uncertain land-use returns from forest
conversion. 
After estimating the uncertain returns for pasture, corn, and coffee in each municipality, we then assume that a rational landowner
would choose the one that would earn her the highest returns.  This
establishes the minimum level at which the REDD+ payment should
be set by the policymaker. 
It is characterised as a cost to
the policymaker, highlighted in one of the three ‘Cost’ columns of
Table 4 for each municipality.  Note that ‘Cost’ is given as a relative
rather than an absolute number due to the predominance of negative
net proﬁts reported in Table 1.  Fig.  2 displays the data for all three
‘Cost’ columns' for each municipality and Fig.  3 displays the data
for the highlighted column (minimum payment) for each municipality in geographic form. 
5. 4.  Ranking municipalities and environmental cost-effectiveness. 
Relative ‘Cost’ allows for a comparison of minimum REDD+ payments both across land uses within municipalities and across municipalities.  Municipalities are ranked according to ‘Cost’, lowest ﬁrst,
highest last.  Thus, Brasiléia has the lowest relative cost of all the municipalities if we assume that landowners in every municipality were to
convert forest and choose the agricultural land use with the highest opportunity cost in that municipality in the absence of a payment. 
Table 4 shows where a policymaker in Acre might target conservation funds if minimising costs per hectare - thus spreading the budget
among as many hectares of forest as possible – is assumed to be the
sole aim of policy.  The ﬁnal column of Table 4 presents the data underlying the carbon density map (Fig.  A1) along with the ranks used to create Fig.  A2.  From this, the most carbon dense municipality, on average,
Assis Brasil, is ranked 17 according to policy cost, i. e.  one of the more expensive municipalities in which to pay landowners to conserve forest. 
While there are no clear patterns with regards to cost ranking and carbon ranking, Jordão stands out as a place where a payments scheme
may be cheap (ranking #3) and carbon beneﬁts are likely to be high
(ranking#2). 
Perhaps a more efﬁcient way of targeting payments, at least given
the distribution of carbon stocks, is to move away from a ranking
based on costs alone.  Given wide variation in mean carbon stocks
among the municipalities, cheaper areas may not contain as much carbon as some of the more expensive ones.  Fig.  4 presents the relative
cost per tonne of carbon, indexed to the municipality with the lowest
cost.  Santa Rosa do Purus.  On this basis, we can see that Assis Brasil,
our most carbon-dense municipality, is ranked second and only just a
bit more costly than Santa Rosa do Purus.  By contrast, Jordão is over
50% more expensive than either of these two municipalities.  The most
expensive municipalities by far are Rodrigues Alves and Placido de Castro, which are, respectively, over three and 2. 5 times more expensive
than Santa Rosa do Purus. 
<Conclusion> Discussion. 
In this paper, we estimated the returns under uncertainty from three
different, alternative land uses for each and every municipality in Acre
State, Brazil.  Since these land uses have been shown to drive the decision of whether or not to deforest, addressing them should be central
to the formulation of REDD+ policy in the State, in particular, ongoing
efforts to design a programme of incentive payments such as SISA. 
Building upon the model of conservation payments by Engel Name
(2015), we modelled our REDD+ payment on the basis of a ﬁxed ﬁnancial incentive, which allowed us to estimate the minimum level of payment that might be sufﬁcient to incentivise a ﬁve-year delay in the
decision to convert forest to pasture, corn or coffee.  We then combined
the relative cost of the payment with mean amounts of carbon found in
each municipality in order to assess how much ‘carbon bang’ a policy
maker might obtain for a given ‘buck’. 
When conversion costs are sunk and the returns from alternative
land uses are uncertain, it is optimal for land owners to delay land
use change (Schatzki, 2003.  Engel Name, 2015).  Land use can be considered a real asset with an attached perpetual option to convert it to
another land use at any time.  The beneﬁt of waiting rises with the degree of uncertainty.  the larger the volatility of the returns from the
alternative land uses, the larger the option value to delay land conversion.  Equally, the lower is the required REDD + payment to
delay deforestation.  Thus, uncertainty about the returns from agriculture and sunk conversion costs lowers the payment needed to
make forest conservation more proﬁtable than agricultural
production. 
Cattle-ranching determines the level of the minimum payment in
most municipalities.  Despite not being a highly proﬁtable land use,
pasture has relatively low up-front costs and generates stable
returns over time, certainly in contrast to coffee.  The incentive to
delay conversion to pasture is often lower than that for coffee thus
necessitating a higher payment to a landowner considering the former rather than the latter.  In other words, the returns from coffee
are subject to greater volatility than pasture (or corn), which lowers
the opportunity cost of forest conservation and consequently, generates a larger option value to delay forest conversion.  This indicates
that coffee has a lower degree of reversibility than the other two
land uses. 
Looking across Acre, the most expensive municipalities in which to
conserve forest are those in the middle of the State, following the
main highway, BR364.  The cheaper municipalities are mostly located
in more remote areas in the North West and the South East.  We note
that these more remote municipalities are also likely to be at less immediate risk of deforestation than the more centrally located ones.  Yet, municipalities identiﬁed as having minimum payments at the lower end of
the scale tend not to be the ones with the highest carbon stocks.  Our
ranking of carbon stocks obscures the wide variation among (and within) municipalities.  We account for this variation by estimating the cost
per tonne of carbon and hence, can identify a group of 13 municipalities
in which costs vary by up to 25%.  Our estimates imply that these 13 municipalities could be prioritised for cost-effective conservation of forest
carbon stock and hence, help determine the allocation of limited
REDD+ funds in Acre State.  Furthermore, if the policymaker is able to
identify the municipalities of greatest deforestation risk in this group
then the number of municipalities subject to policy targeting could be
further reduced. 
In generating our results, we assumed a certain REDD+ payment
over time.  There remains, however, great uncertainty about the future
of REDD+ both in terms of the policy architecture and its funding
(Laing Name, 2016).  This helps explain why we opted to model ﬁveyear contracts in Acre, a State that has already gone some way to positioning itself not only as ‘conservation friendly’ but also as a jurisdiction
for implementing REDD+ policies.  That said, our approach is applicable
in other settings, where there may be less certainty with respect to
REDD+ funding and policy.  Indeed, our results hold if the REDD+ payment is uncertain but relatively less uncertain than the returns from agriculture.  Our model can easily be extended to accommodate a longer
time-scale than ﬁve years in settings where policymakers aim to conserve forest carbon stocks over time-scales that are more consistent
with broader climate policy.  However, over a time scale of say
30 years, as modelled by Engel Name (2015), we note that there is likely
to a much less predictive power in using past data to model future agricultural returns processes.  Instead, more up-to-date data could be used
to re-calibrate the model and reset minimum payment levels every fewMinimum REDD+ payment levels are modelled using estimates of
daily net proﬁts and conversion costs.  Negative net proﬁts predominate,
likely due to data constraints, which are an obstacle to obtaining absolute rather than relative cost estimates.  Yet, given that our analysis is determined by the volatility of returns over time, the use of relative proﬁts
is sufﬁcient to illustrate the application of our model to Acre State.  We
ﬁnd that minimum payment levels are quite similar across municipalities, the calculation of which necessitated the use of aggregate data at
the municipality scale rather than more granular data collected at the
landowner scale.  That said, the extent of heterogeneity in the variability
of agricultural returns is arguably better than expected given the granularity of the available data. 