 1.  Introduction Accelerated economic growth over the past decades due to a globalized ﬂow of people and goods has substantially increased airlines' energy costs and CO2 emissions.  According to statistical data of the International Air Transport Association (IATA, 2015), in 2012, the total energy cost for airlines was N160 billion dollars, measured on a worldwide base.  Besides, the CO2 emission volume was N0. 676 billion tons at that time.  In fact, the aviation industry is one of the few sectors where energy consumption has increased at a rate of N6% over the past 10 years.  This research focuses on the technical efﬁciency of Chinese airlines by using a novel SNDEA model for network and ﬂight efﬁciency, built upon multivariate copulas and capable of handling undesirable outputs such as CO2 emissions and ﬂight delays.  It is important to mention now to readers the distinctive nature of the word “network” that appears in this research.  It appears both as the descriptor of the modeling approach adopted – Network DEA, for a productive process that encompasses several sequential stages – and as the name of one of the productive stages modeled within the ambit of the airlines' operation – network efﬁciency, for an airline that efﬁciently converts physical and human resources into landings and take-offs with minimal delays.  Previous research on airlines have adopted to use several methods such as (i) factor productivity approach (Bauer, 1990.  Oum and Yu, 1995.  Barbot et al. , 2008).  (ii) Stochastic Frontier Analysis or SFA models (Good et al. , 1993.  Baltagi et al. , 1995.  Tsionas et al. , 2017).  (iii) Turnquist total factor productivity index (Coelli et al. , 2003.  Barbot et al. , 2008).  (iv) Data Envelopment Analysis or DEA models (Merkert and Hensher, 2011.  Barros et al. , 2013.  Barros and Peypoch, 2009.  Barros and Couto, 2013.  Cao et al. , 2015.  Li et al. , 2015.  Wanke and Barros, 2016.  Cui and Li, 2017a, 2017b.  Zhang et al. , 2017).  and (v) multi-criteria decisionmaking models such as TOPSIS (Barros and Wanke, 2015.  Wanke et al. , 2015).  On the other hand, it is worth noting that, within the airline efﬁciency ambit, DEA-based studies are the most numerous when compared to the SFA-based methods and other minor approaches used (Wanke et al. , 2015.  Barros and Wanke, 2015.  Wanke and Barros, 2016.  Li and Cui, 2017.  Cui and Li, 2017a, 2017b).  This not only replicates a pattern that is found in papers focused on efﬁciency analysis in other industries such as ports and banking (e. g.  Wanke et al. , 2016a, 2016b), but may be also derived by the ﬂexibility provided by DEA models in modeling productive processes composed of two or more stages.  In fact, several different issues have been addressed by DEA-based airline research studies in different countries or regions.  Besides efﬁciency rankings and slack comparisons, it is possible to point out, for instance, that the impacts of network size, ownership, and regulatory measures on the performance of the airline industry have been addressed by regressing efﬁciency scores onto contextual or environmental variables (Barros et al. , 2013.  Barros and Wanke, 2015.  Cao et al. , 2015.  Li and Cui, 2017.  Cui and Li, 2017a, 2017b.  Zhang et al. , 2017).  Recent papers still maintain this focus (Wanke and Barros, 2016).  Readers should refer to these authors for a comprehensive literature review on this subject, which is synthesized in Appendix A with respect to the variables and methods used.  It is important to note, however, that only very recently, an increased focus on the energy/fuel efﬁciency of airlines is veriﬁed, although the treatment of CO2 emissions as an undesirable output is still scarce (Cui and Li, 2016, 2017a, 2017b.  Cui et al. , 2016.  Ko et al. , 2017).  For example, Babikian et al.  (2002) analyzed the fuel efﬁciency of different aircraft types and the results showed that fuel efﬁciency differences could be explained largely by differences in aircraft operations.  Morrell (2009) analyzed the potential for greater fuel efﬁciency by using larger aircraft and different operational patterns.  Miyoshi and Merkert (2010) evaluated the carbon and fuel efﬁciency of 14 European airlines during the period from 1986 to 2007 to understand the relationship between fuel efﬁciency and fuel price, distance ﬂown, and load factors.  Zou et al.  (2014) employed ratio-based, deterministic, and stochastic frontier approaches to investigate fuel efﬁciency of 15 large jet operators in the US.  The results showed that potential cost savings of mainline airlines could reach approximately 1 billion dollars in 2010.  Cui and Li (2015) applied a VFB-DEA to measure the energy efﬁciencies of 11 airlines from 2008 to 2012, and further they employed a dynamic Epsilon-Based Measure model to evaluate the dynamic efﬁciencies of 19 major international airlines from 2009 to 2014 (Cui and Li, 2017a).  They found out the global ﬁnancial crisis that broke out in 2008 has signiﬁcant negative effects on the airlines' energy efﬁciency.  Following the principle of CNG2020 strategy, Cui and Li (2017b) calculated the emission limit for each airline.  Two models, Network Range Adjusted Measure with natural disposability and Network Range Adjusted Measure with managerial disposability are proposed to discuss the efﬁciency change.  Yet, as regards the emerging research topics in airline efﬁciency, it is also important to note that the cross-impact of the quality of the services provided on airline efﬁciency is still understudied (Fan et al. , 2014).  To the best of our knowledge, as regards airline efﬁciency, only Wanke et al.  (2015) and Tsionas et al.  (2017) addressed the issue between quality of the services provided and technical efﬁciency within the ambit of the airline industry in Asia.  The authors found a positive, albeit weak, relationship between higher levels of service quality and efﬁciency.  This result may suggest the existence of a trade-in between operational/ ﬁnancial efﬁciency and service quality, different from the classical trade-off between efﬁciency and service where higher levels of service are obtained to the detriment of lower levels of efﬁciency.  An additional distinctive aspect of almost all these previously mentioned papers listed was their locus.  They mostly focused on airlines from the US (Barros et al. , 2013.  Greer, 2008.  Sjögren and Söderberg, 2011.  Evans and Schäfer, 2013.  Winchester et al. , 2015), Canada (Bauer, 1990.  Assaf, 2009), Europe (Distexhe and Perelman, 1994.  Greer, 2008.  Barros and Peypoch, 2009.  Pablo-Romero et al. , 2017), Asia (Baltagi et al. , 1995.  Wanke et al. , 2015), Africa (Barros and Wanke, 2015), and Latin America (Wanke and Barros, 2016).  Given the relative importance of China to the world economy, it is possible to afﬁrm that Chinese airlines consist of a relatively understudied topic in the academic ﬁeld.  As a matter of fact, only a few studies were devoted to this particular industry (Chow, 2010.  Wu et al. , 2013.  Cao et al. , 2015.  Wanke et al. , 2015.  Cui et al. , 2016.  Cui and Li, 2017a, 2017b.  Zhang et al. , 2017), without systematic analysis the energy efﬁciency as well as the service quality (Chai et al. , 2014.  Fan et al. , 2014.  Tsionas et al. , 2017).  Therefore, this paper builds upon the existing body of knowledge by presenting a novel SNDEA model for technical efﬁciency and undesirable outputs - like CO2 emissions and ﬂight delays - within the ambit of the Chinese airline industry.  Not only is China one of the fastest growing areas in the world, which justiﬁes the relevance of this study, but this paper also ﬁlls a literature gap by presenting and developing a model where overall airline efﬁciency is decomposed into network and ﬂight efﬁciency in light of multivariate random copulas to control for time (trend) and individual (DMU) effects.  Differently from previous researches, this paper presents several methodological innovations.  First of all, it is the ﬁrst time copulas are used within the ambit of NDEA models to bring up the stochastic aspects of inputs, outputs and intermediate variables uncertainty over the course of time and at the DMU level.  Second, this is the ﬁrst time that not only undesirable (CO2 emissions) and exogenous (delays) outputs are treated simultaneously in an airline efﬁciency study, but also that a trade-off is stablished between in them in terms of a non-cooperative game approach within the ambit of the NDEA modeling.  Third, to the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time a robust regression approach involving three well-known techniques – Tobit, Beta, and Simplex – is developed and applied to solve such problem.  This paper is structured as follows.  after this introduction, the contextual setting is presented including a description of the Chinese airlines.  Then, the methodology section, where the SNDEA model for undesirable outputs is further discussed, is presented.  Section 4 presents the discussion of the results.  Conclusions are presented in Section 5.  2.  Contextual setting.  It has not witnessed the rapid development of Chinese airline industry until 1978, when the government embarked on the “reform and opening up” policy and switched to a market-oriented economy from a central-planned one.  During the next three decades, China has experienced the growth miracle and blossoming of economy, rapidly increased trade with other countries around the world, as well as the fast expansion of civil aviation industry.  After entering the World Trade Organization (WTO), the economic globalization and regionalization of production has driven the growth of Chinese air transport business to new wave of high-level development (See Fig.  1).  Meanwhile, as the largest population and their increased income, the demand on air transport also push its mushroom development in China.  Despite that the Chinese airlines' revenue and proﬁts are mostly derived from domestic markets, the one with large scale continues to participate into the international market and ﬂights (Wang et al. , 2016).  Up to date, China has been the second largest aviation market in the world in terms of the volumes of passengers and air cargo moved in its domestic market since 2005 (Chen et al. , 2017).  In the expected future, the air transportation as well as the airline companies still will be in fast growing mode inBefore the year 1978, the air transport was fully and tightly controlled by the central government under the CAAC (Civil Aviation Administration of China), collaborating with the Air Force of China.  The CAAC was once a branch of the Ministry of Transport in 1958, and ﬁnally was afﬁliated to the State Council in 1962.  After the year 1978, the government successively established six state-owned airline companies,1 which were separated from the CAAC.  To decrease the monopoly power of existing airline companies, some new airline companies funded by the local governments or government-owned enterprises also entered into the market during this period (Jiang and Zhang, 2016).  The foreign investment has been allowed to ﬂow into the civil aviation sector since 1997.  Thereafter, the CAAC further deregulate the Chinese civil aviation sector and open it to private investors, and the number of private airlines has grown rapidly (Wang et al. , 2016), including the low-cost carrier.  To enhance the efﬁciency and competitiveness as well as avoid the vicious price war, the state-led and market-driven consolidation has also taken place during this period, especially after the Asian ﬁnancial crisis as well as the global ﬁnancial crisis that broke out since 2007.  More details can be found in the work of Wang et al.  (2016).  Through the M & A (merging and acquisition), the “Big three”, i. e.  Air China, China Southern and China Eastern, have seized most of the market share in the domestic civil aviation sector (Lei and O'Connell, 2011).  Like most of the state-owned companies in China, the “big three” or the local government owned airline companies successively implemented the joint-stock reform and have been listed on the stock market since the 1990s.  This can enhance the efﬁciency of their operation through introducing market supervision and reducing government intervention.  During the late 2000s, some private airline companies also seek to be listed on the stock market, in order to attract more funds and increase their scale.  Shenzhen Stock Exchange (www. szse. cn).  The majority of airline companies as well as the big ones located at the Mainland China are all included in the sample.  Other small airlines are dropped as the data is not available.  Because the data accessibility, the sample period is from 2006 to 2014.  The descriptive statistics for their productive resources (i. e. , inputs, desirable and undesirable outputs, and intermediate variables) as well as their contextual variables are presented in Table 1.  Inputs, (un)desirable outputs were not only chosen in accordance to data availability, but also observing the most common ones found in previous studies on airline efﬁciency.  Readers should refer to Wanke et al.  (2015, 2016a, 2016b, 2016c, 2016d) and Wanke and Barros (2016) for a comprehensive listing of airline efﬁciency studies over the past 25 years as well as the Appendix A part in this paper.  Broadly speaking, it is possible to afﬁrm that these variables are the most commonly used ones to describe airline operations at the macro-level, although there are some scant previous studies that try to capture the impact of ﬂeet mix – aircraft type and size – on airline efﬁciency levels.  <Middle> Methodology.  This section describes all the methodological steps adopted in this research.  It is structured into ﬁve subsections that are interconnected to each other.  Section 3. 1 depicts the inputs, (un)desirable outputs, intermediate variables, and contextual variables used in this research, addressing the major underlying hypotheses on how contextual variables would impact efﬁciency levels in airline operations.  Section 3. 2 focuses on the major steps adopted for determining the best distributional ﬁt for each airline-variable pair.  These results serve as the marginal distributions for Section 3. 3, where they are plugged into a single multivariate distribution by means of correlated copulas.  Once the data generation structured is deﬁned for the inputs, (un)desirable outputs, and intermediate variables, it is possible to design the SNDEA model for undesirable and exogenous outputs, as in Section 3. 4.  The concept of bi-level programming within the ambit of non-cooperative game approach is presented as a solving approach for the proposed SNDEA model.  At last, in Section 3. 5 a framework for robust regression - involving Tobit, Beta and Simples models - is given so that efﬁciency scores are properly regressed against the contextual variable set.  3. 1.  The data.  The data on 13 selected Chinese airlines were obtained from the Wind database (www. wind. com. cn) and their annual ﬁnancial reports on the website of Shanghai Stock Exchange (www. sse. com. cn) and 3. 1. 1.  Underlying hypothesis regarding contextual variables.  The impact of contextual variables related to the airline's age, ﬂeet mix (percentage of Boeing's aircrafts), stock market governance (whether or not listed in stock-markets), ownership type (whether public or private), network span (whether the airline ﬂies both domestic and international routes or only domestic routes), and whether or not it has undergone a previous merger and acquisition process (M&A) in the past.  Previous studies such as those conducted by Wanke et al.  (2015), Barros and Wanke (2015), and Wanke and Barros (2016) suggest that ﬂeet mix may affect airline efﬁciency levels by means of economies of scale (better match between aircraft number of seats and demands), while network span may affect them by means of economies of scope imposed by hub operations.  Although these authors also point out that public ownership may favor higher airline efﬁciency levels in development countries due to heavily subsidized operations, the general rule is to expect higher efﬁciency levels in private operations.  As for the M&A activities on airline efﬁciency, Merkert and Morrell (2012) ﬁnd the M&A/consolidation is seen as a “game-changer” and mandatory to survive in aviation markets.  However, there is an optimum size of airline companies to operate efﬁciency.  Lenartowicz et al.  (2013) further analyze the key success factor for M&A activities in the civil aviation industry of EU.  It means more robust corporate governance when listed on the stock market for an airline company. 