 Introduction Corporate takeovers have lon g been considered a governance mechanism that can help reduce management entrenchment and improve productive efficiency of management (e. g. , Grossman and Hart, 1980.  Fama, 1980.  Jensen and Ruback, 1983.  Scharfstein, 1988, Jensen, 1993). 1 Consequently, firms that have antitakeover provisions (henceforth ATPs) in place are often considered to be relatively inefficient.  Consistent with the perceived inefficiency of ATPs, a stream of research finds that high ATP firms have lower accounting performance, lower Tobin's Q, and lower reinvestment rates, relative to low ATP firms (e. g. , Gompers, Ishii and Metrick, 2003.  Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2003.  Bebchuk and Cohen, 2005.  Bebchuk, Cohen and Ferrell, 2009.  Cohen and Wang, 2013).  However, despite negative portrayals in much of the archival research and popular opinion, ATPs remain prevalent among the S&P 500 companies, with about 60% of these firms having staggered boards and poison pills in place.  These provisions are also common in the charters of initial public offerings (Daines, 2001.  Daines and Klausner, 2001).  If ATPs unambiguously lead to inefficiencies, the question arises as to why market forces have not eliminated their use over time.  In this paper we attempt to address this disconnect by exploring the potential role of ATPs in long-term value creation.  We identify a set of firms focused on long-term growth (innovative firms) that are most likely to benefit from ATPs and use an exogenous event to isolate the benefit. 2 We suggest that while the threat of corporate takeovers can curb managerial inefficiencies, it can also create incentives for myopic behavior by managers.  Fear of takeover and the associated employment risk may cause managers to take actions that are focused on maximizing short-term price rather than long-term value.  Jensen (2005) states that “when numbers are manipulated to tell the market what they want to hear … and when real operating decisions that would maximize value are compromised to meet market expectations, real long-term value is being destroyed. ”.  Stein (1988) argues that ATPs can help managers pursue long-term goals more effectively by insulating them from short-term market pressures.  The reasoning is that capital market pressures, including the threat of takeovers and the associated employment risk, can cause management to behave myopically, shun projects that may carry a higher risk of early failures, and focus on maximizing short-term price (Holmstrom, 1989).  Manso (2011) proposes a similar argument for managerial protection as a means of encouraging innovation.  Rather than taking a one-size-fits-all view of ATPs and estimating their average effect on all firms, we explore a setting where such provisions can be beneficial to investors. 3 We use a number of alternative designs to explore the effect of anti-takeover protection on innovative and non-innovative firms.  Our primary research design is to explore the effects of a state law change in Delaware that significantly increased the takeover costs of firms incorporated there.  Bebchuk and Cohen (2005), Low (2009), and Atanassov (2013) discuss how the implementation of state law change in Delaware in 1995 made it easier for firms to use certain takeover defenses such as poison pills to block hostile takeovers. 