
The Nordic electricity market was liberalized in the late 90’s to
increase competition and create incentive to invest in new generation capacity and modernize existing production.  At the same time,
the liberalization reduced the barriers on import and export between
countries, allowing for more eﬃcient use of many power production
technologies. 
Currently, the Nordic market covers the countries in the Nordic
and Baltic regions, i. e.  Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Estonia,
Latvia and Lithuania. 
It is divided into 17 bidding areas with individual area prices based on local supply and demand.  Furthermore, an overall market price for electricity, referred to as the system
price, is determined for contractual purposes.  This price is based
on aggregated supply and demand and disregards transmission constraints between bidding areas.  In contrast, the bidding areas are
established to avoid congestion in the system.  The area price and the
local load are, therefore, highly correlated.  It is important to account
for this market design in the derivation of hedging strategies. 
In this paper we study the hedging problem of a Nordic
distribution company that has agreed to deliver electricity to customers at a ﬁxed price.  The company has to buy electricity in the
spot market, but knows neither the future electricity demand of the
customers nor the future market price of electricity.  As trades in the
spot market are settled at the area price, the distributor is thereby
exposed to both volume risk and area price risk.  To mitigate risk,
the company can lock in part of its proﬁt by buying ﬁnancial contracts on electricity, in advance and at a ﬁxed price.  In the Nordic
electricity market, however, ﬁnancial contracts are settled against
the system price and not the area price.  With signiﬁcant differences
between the system price and the area price, especially for periods with high load, this introduces considerable basis risk.  Basis risk
may be managed using forward contracts on the price difference. 
Nevertheless, only monthly contracts are available.  As a result, the
distribution company cannot completely eliminate risk from ﬁxed
price agreements.  In spite of this, in 2010 more than 50% of contracts
for electricity were based on ﬁxed price agreements in the Nordic
market and in EU 60% of contracts were ﬁxed price agreements. 1 This
paper contributes to the literature by developing a joint model for
the area price, the system price and the load, accounting for both
cross-correlations and auto-correlations, and by suggesting strategies for hedging in the presence of local volume risk.  In addition to
using base load and peak load contracts for hedging, we study the
impact of including contracts for difference.  Furthermore, since the
proﬁt distribution is asymmetrical, we complement the traditional
variance-based approach by using a one-sided measure of risk in the
hedging problem.  We benchmark against the strategy that ignores
correlation and hedges at the expected load, as is common practice
in the industry. 
The importance of accounting for correlation between electricity
price and load has already been demonstrated in the existing literature.  As an example, Bessembinder and Lemmon (2002) develop
an equilibrium-based market model and ﬁnd that correlation has a
substantial impact on the optimal hedging strategies in a forward
market.  Closer to our work is Oum Name (2006), who consider a
load serving entity and study the inﬂuence of correlation on the
residual risk following optimal hedging.  The authors derive analytical solutions to the hedging problem for speciﬁc utility functions
and approximate these solutions by call options to compensate for
the lack of contracts to hedge volume risk.  Their results likewise
show that correlation has a signiﬁcant impact on the payoff structure as well as on the hedging strategy.  Whereas these references
use a single-period setting, we include multiple periods and thereby
capture the basis risk that arises as contracts cover an entire month. 
This makes our hedging strategies applicable to the Nordic Market. 
An example of using a more advanced electricity price model
for hedging is provided by Coulon Name (2013), who develop a
three-factor model with load-based regime switching to model the
electricity market of Texas.  The authors study variations of daily
payoffs, using spark spreads or call options and considering a single day and one-dimensional hedging.  The inclusion of load-based
regime switching makes calibration and estimation much more diﬃcult on longer time horizons, and, therefore, is not considered in this
paper.  For further electricity price modeling, Erlwein Name (2010)
and Weron Name (2004) develop advanced reduced-form models that
involve jumps and regime switching and present algorithms to calibrate their models to price data.  In addition to such single-factor
models, multi-factor models with jumps and regime switching have
also been used by Deng (1999) and Schwartz and Smith (2000),
capturing both short-term and long-term dynamics of electricity
prices.  Moreover, their approach is extended in Burger Name (2004)
to include a demand component in the pricing of derivatives.  For a
thorough review of electricity price models, see also Carmona and
Coulon (2014), covering both structural and reduced-form models. 
In contrast to these references, our price model is speciﬁcally tailored to the Nordic market by including both load, area and system
prices, whereas the modeling of each component is restricted to a
single factor and does not involve jumps.  The inclusion of area and
system prices makes it possible to use contracts for difference when
hedging.  To the best of our knowledge, the literature has not previously addressed hedging strategies to manage differences between
the area and system prices in the Nordic market. 
The paper is organized as follows.  The spot and forward markets are described in Section 2.  This includes the dynamics of the
system price, the area price and the load as well as the ﬁnancial contracts used to manage the uncertainty of payoffs.  Section 3 covers the
various sources of risk faced by a company trading in the spot and
forward markets and offering ﬁxed price agreements, whereas we
formally introduce the accompanying hedging problem in Section 4. 
Section 5. 1 analyzes the load and price data, deﬁnes seasonal components and describes calibration and Section 5. 2 develops the joint
model for the system price, the area price and the load.  When calibrated to data from 2012 and applied to data from 2013 and 2014, we
analyze the corresponding hedging strategies in Section 6.  We study
the effect of using another risk measure, the impact of including the
contracts for difference and the implications of improved forecast of
average prices.  Finally, in Section 7, we summarize our ﬁndings and
discuss future work. 
2.  The trading of electricity. 
In this section we describe the market dynamics of the Nordic
electricity market and the ﬁnancial instruments that will be used for
hedging.  We focus on the Nordic spot market, Nord Pool Spot, and the
corresponding forward market at Nasdaq Commodities. 
2. 1.  Area price and system price. 
In the Nordic and Baltic region, the system price provides an overall market price for electricity and is determined by an equilibrium
that disregards the grid.  In contrast, the area prices should ensure
that electricity is produced in the least expensive way, aiming at a
market equilibrium that accounts for transmission.  In the absence
of transmission congestion, all area prices coincide with the system
price.  In its presence, area prices are determined on the basis of
the system price by adjusting for transmission.  By raising the area
price, local supply will increase and local demand will decrease.  Similarly, by reducing the area price, local supply will decrease whereas
local demand will increase.  Thus, by raising the area price in bidding areas that would ideally be importing beyond their transmission
limits, import is reduced.  Likewise, by reducing the area price in
bidding areas that would be exporting beyond their transmission
limits, export is reduced.  Thus, in equilibrium, bidding areas with low
marginal cost will be exporting at full transmission capacity and bidding areas with high marginal cost will be importing at full capacity,
and so, electricity is produced at minimal costs. 
The load on the grid varies signiﬁcantly throughout the day,
which produces variations in both area price and system price. 