 1.  Introduction Renewable energy sources are increasingly used in order to curb CO2 emissions and mitigate climate change.  In particular, solar photovoltaic systems are being deployed at an exponential rate (see e. g. , IEA, 2016).  However, this technology has the drawback of generating electricity when residential demand is relatively low.  In fact, solar radiation is maximal around noon, when many homes are empty.  Conversely, households’ electricity usage peaks in the evening, when solar radiation is nil.  This mismatch constitutes a potential obstacle to the diffusion of electricity produced from solar sources, even if it can be mitigated in different ways.  Grid expansions would help in transporting electricity for remote consumption.  Storage capacities would allow delayed consumption.  Demand-response measures may be implemented so that electricity is used when and where it is produced.  While the ﬁrst two solutions are supply-side measures requiring high installation costs (Beaudin et al. , 2010) and involving losses (Denholm and Hand, 2011), demand-side management might prove relatively inexpensive and easy to implement.  An additional advantage of demand-side interventions is that they can be implemented rapidly, while deployment of new technologies on a large scale can only be achieved in the long run (Dietz et al. , 2009).  It has also been argued that different solutions like storage and demand management should be considered as complementing each other for grid balancing (Elliott, 2016).  Mitigating imbalances between electricity production and usage is a particularly serious issue in remote areas.  In fact, when large amounts of solar energy are produced in isolated regions at times of low demand, providers may ﬁnd the technical installations necessary to accommodate excess supply too expensive and could prefer to literally destroy the electricity produced. 1 This dismal anecdote illustrates how supply-side measures might fail when it comes to integrating electricity from renewable sources in the grid.  In such situations, demand-side management becomes crucial.  Even if this paper focuses on the misalignment of solar energy production and electricity consumption, its scope extends to the general issue of the increasing importance of renewable technologies.  Because the new renewable energy sources (sun and wind) are intermittent by nature, relying more on these will imply managing demand more actively in order to minimize the cost of using the electricity produced.  In this paper, using a randomized control trial, we investigate whether and by how much households shift intraday electricity usage when provided with incentives to do so.  More precisely, the objective of our intervention is to encourage households to increase their share of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  (when most solar radiation takes place), while discouraging any voluntary increase in overall consumption. 2 The ﬁrst treatment consists of information feedback sent monthly via paper mail.  Households included in this group obtain details about their own consumption, its pattern within the day, and similar information about households of comparable size.  The second treatment is a contest in which the best performers (i. e. , those who achieve the strongest shift in electricity usage while keeping total usage at reasonable levels) receive cash prizes determined by their position in the ranking.  Using a difference-in-differences approach, our results suggest that both treatments induce a reaction, but the type of reaction depends on the treatment.  Households exposed to information feedback globally decrease electricity usage regardless of the hours of the day, but they do not shift consumption toward the indicated hours.  Conversely, households exposed to ﬁnancial incentives display a signiﬁcant shift toward the solar energy production hours.  They achieve an increase in their proportion of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  by about 1 percentage point, which is not negligible considering this proportion is around 20% on average.  The remainder of the paper unfolds as follows.  Section 2 discusses how our contribution ﬁts into the recent literature.  Section 3 presents our experimental design.  Section 4 describes our dataset and provides a descriptive analysis of the impacts of our intervention.  Section 5 explains our econometric strategy and reports our empirical results.  Section 6 discusses the policy implications and concludes.  2.  Literature review.  Our paper is located at the intersection of two distinct bodies of literature.  The ﬁrst is composed of technical contributions that examine the feasibility of integration of large amounts of variable renewable energy sources (sun and wind) into the energy system (see the review by Kondziella and Bruckner, 2016).  This branch of the literature focuses on engineering solutions and essentially analyzes supply-side measures, whereby the issue is to render electricity distribution amenable through grid expansion and/or storage, and it makes assumptions to simulate consumers’ behavior.  For instance, Denholm and Margolis (2007) evaluate scenarios where up to an arbitrary 10% of demand can be shifted to absorb excess photovoltaic generation, and Steinke et al.  (2013) simply keep demand constant.  In our study, we tackle a similar problem but look at it from an opposite perspective, that is, focusing on demand management.  We obtain exact consumption data and observe actual households’ reaction, but we make simplifying assumptions concerning the supply of renewable energy.  Among the technical studies, Pina et al.  (2012) stand out as they analyze the impact of demand-side management strategies in an electricity mix characterized by high shares of renewable energy.  Their results are nevertheless based on simulations, both for the installation of new generation capacity and for electricity usage.  For example, they assume that because washing machines, dryers, and dishwashers can be easily programmed, these devices will be scheduled to operate when renewable electricity generation is high.  In some of their scenarios, around 40% of these activities are thus shifted.  The assumption that households (and other consumers) will actually change their habits is crucial, but far from obvious.  In the present paper, we are testing this assumption by investigating if and how real households do actually shift load when faced with incentives to do so.  The second relevant branch of the literature is composed of economic studies dealing with the effects of feedback on household electricity demand.  As documented in several literature reviews (Buchanan et al. , 2015.  Faruqui et al. , 2010.  Vine et al. , 2013) and meta-analyses (Delmas et al. , 2013.  Ehrhardt-Martinez et al. , 2010), this research ﬁeld is growing fast. 3 In these contributions, the usual objective is to induce electricity conservation.  Instead, our goal here is to induce load shifting across hours of the day without requiring any decrease (but still prevent increases) in total electricity usage.  As such, the present study is among the ﬁrst economic contributions targeting load shifting, and the main novelty of our intervention is that we intend to attract electricity usage toward some speciﬁc (sunlight) hours instead of trying to push it away from some speciﬁc (peak) hours.  In that sense, our intervention is opposed to the usual paradigm of peak shaving and in fact seeks to create a consumption peak that coincides with the peak of solar energy production.  Other remarkable features of our contribution are the duration of the experiment and the response rate of the pre-experiment survey.  Our experiment was conducted over an exceptionally long period of 18 months.  three months of pre-treatment observation, twelve months of treatment, and three further months of observation after the treatment was terminated.  By comparison, 60% of the studies considered in the meta-analysis by Delmas et al.  (2013) lasted three months or less.  Most studies moreover discontinue observation once the treatment is terminated, so that the availability of a post-treatment observation period is also an exceptional feature.  Furthermore, our pre-experiment survey reached a response rate of about 16%, a considerable ﬁgure when compared to other studies. 4 In Ito et al.  (2015) and Degen et al.  (2013), the response rates are about 1. 7% and 8. 7%, respectively.  Jessoe and Rapson (2014) sent 60,000 e-mails but use only 437 households in their analysis (0. 7%).  A high response rate tends to minimize the self-selection problems that might plague this type of experiment.  Finally, our experiment fulﬁlls all conditions to qualify as a “high-quality study” according to Delmas et al.  (2013).  dedicated control group, weather controls, demographic and household controls, and randomization.  <Middle> Experimental design.  Our ﬁeld experiment was conducted on households living in Cernier, a village of around 2000 inhabitants located in the canton of Neuchâtel (Switzerland).  In 2012, in the frame of a pilot study, the electricity provider Groupe e started to equip households with smart meters recording electricity usage in 15-min intervals.  In April 2013, we contacted 387 households already equipped or eligible to be equipped with smart meters, and invited them to ﬁll an online survey. 5 The invitation letter remained intentionally vague about the objective of the study, in order not to inﬂuence the households that would later be assigned to the control group.  It was simply stated that a “scientiﬁc study about electricity consumption” was undertaken to “investigate the ﬂexibility of electricity consumption, in order to adapt it to the production of electricity from renewable sources (in particular photovoltaic production). ” To foster participation, a lottery awarding CHF 200 in cash was organized among respondents, and a reminder letter was sent one month after the initial invitation letter.  For households of the control group, these two letters constitute the only direct interaction with the project.  A time lag of more than six months therefore took place between the information received by these households and the outset of the intervention in January 2014, and it appears very unlikely that their behavior could be affected by our letters.  Also, while we cannot formally exclude spillovers from households in the treatment groups to those in the control group, we argue that such effects are very unlikely to be strong, considering that the objective of the intervention is not straightforward.  If anything, potential spillovers would moreover tend to minimize the observed impact of our intervention, so that the treatment effects we obtain are possibly downward biased and can be considered as a lower bound of the true effects.  By mid-December 2013, 131 households had completed the online survey.  Among them, households facing a time-of-use tariff or already involved in other experiments were discarded, which left 65 households eligible to participate in our experiment. 7,8 The observation period lasted from October 2013 to March 2015, and treatments were administered from January to December 2014.  October–December 2013 thus constitute the pre-treatment period, while January–March 2015 constitute the post-treatment observation period.  In order to guarantee the internal validity of our study, the 65 eligible households have been randomly assigned to one control and two treatment groups of equal size using a stratiﬁcation procedure.  The goal of the procedure was to create groups as similar as possible with respect to the following selected characteristics.  preexperiment electricity usage per household member, dwelling size, and highest education level achieved by a member of the household.  Two households ﬁlled the online survey after the stratiﬁcation had been conducted but before the intervention started, and they have been included in the control group.  The data (survey and electricity usage) are complete for these late respondents, but it was not possible to inform them in due time of the starting date of the treatment.  During the observation period, four households moved out (two from the control and two from the treatment 1), and we discard these attrition households from the analysis because their observation period is truncated.  Two out of these four households even moved out before the treatment started.  Finally, one household (from the treatment 2) appears as a clear outlier and is also excluded from the analysis. 9 Our estimations are thus conducted on a sample comprising 62 households (with 22/19/21 in the control/treatment 1/treatment 2 groups).  To assess the outcome of the stratiﬁcation procedure, we test the average differences of the variables of interest between each treatment group and the control group.  As reported in Table B. 1 in Appendix B, the treatment and control groups appear largely comparable.  Except for two categories of age, all tests do not reject the equivalence of the characteristics between groups.  3. 1.  Treatment 1.  Information feedback.  Treatment 1 consists of information feedback designed to foster shifts of electricity usage toward the period from 11 a. m.  to 3 p. m.  Through this intervention, our goal is to assess whether information alone is a suﬃciently strong incentive for households to engage in load shifting.  The feedback is delivered via monthly letters and intended to enhance households’ knowledge and awareness of their electricity usage and load proﬁle. 11 The feedback concerns the household’s own electricity usage (what Fischer, 2008, deﬁnes as “historic” comparison) and that of households of similar size from the control group (“normative” comparison).  More precisely, as the sample letter reproduced in Fig.  C. 1 in Appendix C shows, the feedback refers to.  (i) The household’s electricity usage in the last three months, along with average usage of similar households (top right(ii) The household’s (average) daily load proﬁle, highlighting usage between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  (bottom left graph).  (iii) The proportion of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  and its evolution over the last three months (bottom right graph).  For the last month, the proportion for similar households is also provided as a benchmark.  Moreover, the text of the letter emphasizes the importance of shifting load toward the sunlight hours, as this would reduce imbalances between solar energy production and electricity consumption.  Every month, a different tip on how to shift electricity usage is also provided.  In order to facilitate participants’ understanding and mitigate potential boomerang effects (Schultz et al. , 2007), we complement the letters with injunctive messages under the form of happy, neutral, or sad faces.  The ﬁrst faces are based on the monthly evolution of the proportion of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  by the household.  The second faces compare the proportion of the household against that of similar households.  Green happy faces signal desired outcomes, that is, a relatively high proportion of electricity consumed between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m. , yellow neutral faces signal not good nor bad outcomes, and red sad faces signal undesired outcomes.  We use a scale going from three happy faces to three sad faces. 13 Similar interventions, based on information feedback containing descriptive and injunctive norms related to past electricity usage, have been implemented in previous contributions (e. g. , Allcott, 2011.  Allcott and Rogers, 2014).  Again, their objective was to induce electricity conservation, while we here target load shifting.  3. 2.  Treatment 2.  Financial incentives.  Treatment 2 is implemented as a contest, in which cash prizes are awarded to the 15 top-ranked households on a monthly basis.  Ranks 1–5, 6–10, 11–15 ascribe respectively CHF 50, 30, and 10. 14,15 Due to practical, political and legal aspects, the provider involved in the project decided not to implement any differentiated tariffs.  This is the main reason why this treatment is designed as a contest.  The objective of this intervention is to investigate whether monetary rewards without any precise information related to electricity usage can induce households to shift their load proﬁle.  In December 2013, a letter was sent to the selected households to inform them about the starting date of the contest (January 1, 2014).  The letter also explained intuitively what should be done to be well-ranked in the contest.  maximize the proportion of electricity consumed during the period from 11 a. m.  to 3 p. m. , while keeping total consumption unaltered.  The exact criteria used to establish the ranking (E) were provided in a webpage, but it was deemed unnecessary or even counterproductive to include all technical details in the information letter.  In fact, knowing the precise rules would not confer any speciﬁc advantage, and the only reasons for making them available to the participants were transparency and fairness concerns.  From January to December 2014, at the end of every month, households were sent personalized mails indicating their position in the ranking (a sample letter is provided in Fig.  C. 22 in Appendix C).  The monthly letters also recalled the contest goal and provided tips on how to shift load.  However, nothing concerning electricity usage was indicated.  For those ranked in the top 15, prizes were included in the form of banknotes in the envelopes.  Participants could check the detailed and complete ranking on www. unine. ch/ﬂexirank, using a personalized password. 16 We have to acknowledge that the design of our experiment makes rewards uncertain, unrelated to amounts of electricity used, and only indirectly linked to household’s actions.  In fact, a household increasing its proportion of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  could remain unrewarded if others fared better.  Conversely, a household not having changed anything could end up rewarded if others did worse.  Our results thus cannot be used to infer about the price-elasticity of electricity demand, and the external validity of this treatment is diﬃcult to assess.  4.  Data and descriptive statistics.  4. 1.  Data.  Households’ electricity usage comes from the electricity provider Groupe e.  It was recorded in 15-min intervals by smart meters, but consumers had no in-home display or any other device showing their real-time electricity use. 17 All feedback provided to households was thus indirect (Bernstein and Collins, 2014.  Darby, 2006) and came exclusively from the letters we sent during the experiment.  The observation period ran from October 2013 to March 2015.  The period from October to December 2013 has been used to monitor households’ “standard” electricity usage and we deﬁne it as the before period.  The treatment period expands from January to December 2014.  The period between January and March 2015, deﬁned as the after period, is used to investigate households’ behavior once the treatment was over.  Data on weather (temperature and radiation) were gathered from MeteoSwiss, the Swiss Meteorological Institute.  The data are available at the hour level and collected in a meteorological station located in Chaumont, which is 6 km away from Cernier and exactly at the same elevation.  Local holiday periods were retrieved from the oﬃcial calendars of the Canton of Neuchâtel.  Our ﬁnal dataset contains a total of 33,914 household-day observations.  62 households followed over 18 months (i. e. , 547 days).  When using hourly data, the dataset contains 813,812 householdhour observations.  Fig.  1 shows the monthly electricity usage for the control and treatment groups.  Average annual consumption is around 2850 kWh per household in our sample.  This value is slightly larger than the ﬁgures reported by Degen et al.  (2013) for their sample (2300 kWh) and the city of Zurich (2600 kWh).  Nevertheless, it only represents one fourth of the electricity used by an average US household, which is larger than 11,000 kWh (see Allcott and Rogers, 2014).  It is also twice smaller than the values reported by Ito et al.  (2015) concerning Japan.  By international standards, electricity used by Swiss households is thus low.  Before the beginning of the intervention, average household consumption in treatment 1 was above the corresponding series of the other two groups. 21 Since the beginning of the treatment, we observe a relative decrease for treatment 1, such that the series come closer during the experiment.  Electricity used by the control and treatment 2 groups evolves quite similarly.  At the end of the observation period, the spread between the three groups is very narrow.  Fig.  1 moreover highlights the seasonal pattern of electricity usage.  When the weather is warm and sunny, people naturally tend to stay outside longer, eat lighter and colder, use less artiﬁcial lighting, and wear lighter clothes.  These behaviors lead to lower consumption in the period of the year when weather conditions are good.  Note also that air conditioning, which could involve signiﬁcant electricity usage during the warm season, is virtually non-existent in Swiss households because of tight regulation (see Winkler et al. , 2014).  In 2014, space cooling and ventilation only accounted for 2. 6% of ﬁnal energy consumption whereas heating accounted for 28. 9% (SFOE, 2015). 