 1.  Introduction Environmental sustainability, climate change and global warming have attracted increasing public awareness (Bloch et al. , 2012.  Ma, 2015).  Many countries have set and ratiﬁed nationally determined contributions in the recent Paris agreement, targeting to keep the global average temperature increase well below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels.  China, who accounts for half of the world coal consumption and contributes to 25% of the world carbon dioxide emission (Energy Information Administration, 2016), in particular, sets a goal of achieving the peak before 2030, lowering the emission per unit of GDP by 60–65% from its 2005 level, and increasing the non-fossil fuel share in the primary energy consumption to 20%.  A sweeping energy evolution is called for in China since 2014 with new priority placed on environmental goals and the deployment of clean energy. 1 However, it remains a challenge to meet the goal considering the uneven distribution of energy resources and unbalanced economic growth with a high degree of inequality (Herrerias et al. , 2013.  Song and Zheng, 2012).  For China to align the long-term low carbon energy strategy with economic development goals, the central government has set and broken down the carbon and energy intensity reduction target at the level of individual provinces.  Motivated by the context characterized by heterogeneous energy strategy and economic development paths in each of these provinces, this paper addresses three main questions.  1) does energy play a role in promoting provincial growth together with the physical and human capital.  2) how and to what extent the disaggregate energy source is responsible for economic growth.  and 3) what is the causal direction between total and disaggregate energy use and growth of economy in each of these provinces, if any.  The answers will provide rich policy implications for a better understanding of interaction between localized development path and energy conservation to set an implementable emission reduction target for sustainable development.  In the literature, many scholars examine the cointegration and Granger causal link between energy use and economic development in China using national time series data (Shiu and Lam, 2004.  Zhang and Cheng, 2009.  Bloch et al. , 2012).  While country level studies provide some insights on the relationship between energy consumption and economic growth, they have at least two major limitations.  In terms of method, the power of unit root and cointegration tests in time series studies is low due to a short time span (Campbell and Perron, 1991).  the conventional causality tests using time series have a high risk of wrongly rejecting the null hypothesis of no cointegration (Yalta and Cakar, 2012) and therefore can lead to inaccurate conclusions on the direction of causality.  In addition, previous studies using national-level time series ignore the signiﬁcant heterogeneity and interdependence across Chinese provinces.  The endowments of energy resources in China are unevenly distributed.  for example, coal is mainly reserved in Shanxi, while oil and natural gas are mainly in Xinjiang and Sichuan. 2 The economic structure and energy intensity have large variations across provinces as well.  Fig.  1 illustrates the provincial differences in economic structure and energy intensity in year 2014.  The blue, red and green bars indicate the share of gross output values from the primary, the secondary and the tertiary industry, respectively.  The purple solid line depicts the energy intensity for each of the 30 provinces (Tibet excluded).  The stacked bar chart shows that output from the tertiary industry exceeds that from the primary and the secondary industries for coastal rich provinces such as Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin, Hainan, Jiangsu and Zhejiang.  Among the 30 provinces, there are eight resource-rich provinces such as Hebei, Shanxi, Inner Mongolia, Guizhou, Gansu, Qinghai, Ningxia and Xinjiang with energy intensity above the average which is indicated by “*”.  Compared with existing studies, by using the provincial panel, our study offers improved test power over conventional time series methods, which also enables us to account for marked heterogeneity in economic structure and energy distribution across provinces.  The growth-energy nexus analysis at a disaggregated level matters for local regulators to evaluate and act on differentiated strategies of energy conservation and efﬁciency enhancement, and is also vital for the central government to coordinate the regional development and efforts in reducing resource costs and emissions for speciﬁc energy source.  A limited but growing number of studies recently exploit provincial data and panel techniques to investigate the energy-growth nexus in China, albeit producing mixed results (S. S.  Wang et al. , 2011.  Fei et al. , 2011.  Zhang and Xu, 2012.  Herrerias et al. , 2013).  For example, using data from 28 provinces over the period 1995–2007, Y.  Wang et al.  (2011) and S. S.  Wang et al.  (2011) ﬁnd a uni-directional causal relationship from GDP to energy consumption.  Zhang and Xu (2012) identify the bidirectional linkage for the eastern region, while Fei et al.  (2011) conclude the growth effect that energy consumption leads to economic development for the same part of China.  While no consensus has been obtained, results from the panel analysis are relatively more reliable than that from national studies.  One shortcoming of these studies is, however, that they did not explore the impact of disaggregate energy sources on the province-speciﬁc economic growth.  therefore, conclusions made on the analysis of aggregate energy cannot be generalized to disaggregate energy within each of the administrative boundary, that is, the nexus between total energy use and local growth may not hold and be equally applied to disaggregate energy source across provinces, and thus policy suggestions based on this body of studies are hard to implement (Soytas and Sari, 2006).  The brief review highlights the importance to account for provincial heterogeneity and examine not only the aggregate energy but also the disaggregate energy sources.  This paper ﬁlls the gap that little empirical work has been conducted to examine the causal relationship between economic development and energy consumption at both the aggregate and disaggregate levels using provincial data and most recent panel econometric methods within a human-capital augmented production framework.  Furthermore, this paper is one of the ﬁrst studies that incorporate sub-national level human capital in the multivariate framework with a focus in China.  Despite the fact that human capital is a crucial input to economic growth, it only attracts attention in the broad energygrowth nexus literature very recently (Pablo-Romero and SánchezBraza, 2015.  Fang and Chang, 2016.  Fang et al. , forthcoming), probably due to lack of quality human capital data. 3 Theoretically, human capital can be linked to energy consumption through multiple channels.  First, human capital can increase income, which may then cause more energy consumption.  Second, human capital can stimulate R&D of new energy and accelerate the transition to energy-efﬁcient technologies (Li and Lin, 2016).  This mechanism contributes to the negative association between human capital and energy.  Third, if human capital is accumulated through education and campaign on energy conservative awareness among the common people, more human capital is linked to less energy consumption (Fang et al. , forthcoming).  Lastly, economic structure also matters.  With the development of human capital, economies that experience rapid industrialization and urbanization may see huge reliance on energy.  but when the country develops to a service-led economy, energy reliance may be reduced with further development of human capital (Arbex and Perobelli, 2010).  By and large, the relationship between energy and human capital is uncertain and a rigorous analysis is required.  Our contributions to the existing energy-growth nexus literature lie in three aspects.  First, we incorporate the input of human capital to the energy-augmented neoclassical production function.  Due to reasons mentioned above, human capital should not be ignored in the multivariate framework for the energy-growth analysis.  However, due to data availability or other reasons, we do not ﬁnd many studies employing this framework.  At Chinese provincial level, the data availability, particularly that for a quality measure of human capital, is even more problematic.  Fortunately, the Chinese human capital database established by the China Center for Human Capital and Labor Market Research of Central University of Finance and Economics makes this research possible.  It includes national and provincial human capital stock in both the nominal and real terms for years starting from 1985 to 2014.  The uniqueness of the data makes our paper the ﬁrst of its kind.  Second, this paper takes into consideration the cross-sectional dependence and provincial heterogeneity using the advanced panel econometric techniques and provides more reliable test results and fresh empirical evidences on the nature of the relation between economic growth and energy consumption.  Speciﬁcally, the crosssectionally augmented IPS (CIPS) test proposed by Pesaran (2007) is used to check the stationarity of the data.  Westerlund (2007)’s errorcorrection based test is bootstrapped to examine the presence of cointegrating relationship relaxing the assumption of cross-sectional independence.  Furthermore, we adopt the continuously-updated fully-modiﬁed OLS approach (Bai et al. , 2009) which is valid under the cross-sectional dependence rather than the panel heterogeneous FMOLS (Pedroni, 2001) and DOLS (Stock and Watson, 1993) to estimate the coefﬁcients of the long-run relationship.  None of the existing studies on China have employed these toolkits to avoid lack of test power and biasness of estimates when there are strong interdependences across provinces.  The presence and direction of the causality between variables are also examined using a panel bootstrap method (Emirmahmutoglu and Kose, 2011) that allows for heterogeneity and cross-sectional dependence.  Third, we examine the causal relationship between economic growth and both aggregate and disaggregate energy sources that are available from the China Energy Statistical Yearbooks (various years 1995–2014), including raw coal, coke, crude oil, petroleum products (fuel oil, gasoline, diesel, kerosene), natural gas, and electricity.  This is one of the few studies that comprehensively investigate the disaggregate energy consumption types.  Rich policy recommendations based on these results are thus credibly provided.  Our results indicate strong cross-sectional dependence in the provincial panel, and we conﬁrm the presence of cointegration relationship between GDP, investment, human capital and various energy variables even after taking into consideration interdependence across provinces.  Using a continuously updated fully modiﬁed estimation proposed by Bai et al.  (2009), we ﬁnd that human capital is a crucial factor input which exerts about 2–3 times effects that investment has on GDP.  energy, both in aggregate or disaggregate forms as coal, crude oil, petroleum products, natural gas and electricity, plays a signiﬁcant role in economic development in China as well.  Therefore, both human capital and energy are indispensable in stimulating economic growth.  Using the bootstrap panel Granger causality test which is appropriate within the cross-sectional dependence framework, we ﬁnd Granger causal relationships running from GDP to petroleum products and electricity, and bi-directional relationship between GDP and coal, coke, natural gas and total energy consumption in the whole China.  For individual provinces, causal relationships vary signiﬁcantly.  This has important policy implications to especially local governments in the sense that while following the macro- and strategic policies from the central government, local governments should take initiatives and evaluate their unique stages of economic development and energy status as well as the causal relationship between the two before taking micro- and speciﬁc measures.  The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 reviews the energy proﬁle for China as a whole and the energy balance structure of the primary energy sources for each of the 30 provinces as well as the energy-growth nexus literature with a focus on China.  Section 3 provides data descriptions and a preliminary analysis.  Econometric methods are discussed in Section 4.  Main results are presented and discussed in Section 5 and the last section concludes with policy recommendations.  <Middle> An overview of Chinese energy proﬁle and energy-growth nexus studies.  2. 1.  Energy proﬁle in China.  As the world's most populous country with a fast-growing economy, China becomes increasingly inﬂuential in the world energy market with rapidly rising energy demand because of the swiftly modernizing economy and sizeable industrialization.  China becomes the world's largest global energy consumer in 2011.  It is also the world's top coal producer, consumer and the world's second-largest oil consumer behind the United States (Energy Information Administration, 2015).  This subsection ﬁrst provides an overview of the energy proﬁle for China as a whole.  Subsequently, by exploiting information from the energy balance table of the primary energy sources4 for individual provinces, we show the link of production, consumption and inter-province trade of coal, oil, gas, and electricity, using the annual average values during the period of 1995–2014.  Fig.  2 shows the annual growth rate of GDP and total energy consumption from 1980 to 2015.  Two observations are drawn from the ﬁgure.  First, there seems to be a co-movement of growth in output and energy consumption.  speciﬁcally, energy consumption growth before 1995 is slightly lagging behind economic growth, while afterwards the growth cycle in energy is moving ahead of economic growth.  To rigorously examine the relationship between the two variables, a cointegration analysis is necessary.  Second, the ﬁgure shows that the growth rate of energy consumption is slower than GDP growth rate until 2002 and later exceeds GDP growth rate within a short period of time during 2003–2005.  this suggests a clear downward trend of energy intensity (deﬁned as the ratio of energy consumption to GDP) with an interruption during 2003–2005.  The driving forces governing energy intensity change in China have been widely debated in the literature. 5 First, China's industrial structure has shifted from energy-intensive heavy industries toward export- and consumption-oriented tertiary industries (Kambara, 1992.  Huang, 1993).  Using the decomposition analysis, Song and Zheng (2012) ﬁnd that the structural change does not play a major role in reducing energy intensity while Garbaccio et al.  (1999) reach the opposite conclusion.  Using the econometric analysis and a panel dataset of 30 provinces from 2000 to 2012, Yan (2015) concludes that the structural change toward more energy-intensive industries explains the rise in energy intensity.  Zeng et al.  (2014) show that the slight increase in energy intensity since 2002 to 2005 is associated with the construction boom across the nation as well as the heavy industrialization strategy for provinces along the coast, which leads to the boosted production of energy-intensive products such as aluminum, cement and steel.  Second, though the role played by structural change in reducing energy intensity remains controversial, the previous studies seem to agree on the role played by technological progress which lowers energy consumption required to produce a speciﬁc product in a particular sector (Fisher-Vanden et al. , 2004.  Li and Lin, 2014.  Wang et al. , 2013).  Third, the market reform in the energy sector (Liao et al. , 2007.  He and Wang, 2007) improves energy efﬁciency and incentivizes the deployment of new material (Sinton and Fridley, 2000.  Wu, 2012).  Glomsrød and Wei (2005) point out since 1994 the dual-price system in the energy sector was gradually reformed and there is a deep level of marketization since then.  In addition to the main driving forces, several other studies identify alternate inﬂuential factors such as urbanization, total population, export and sectoral ownership structure to explain the nature and causes of energy intensity change in China (Yan, 2015.  Yang et al. , 2016.  Zheng et al. , 2011.  Yu, 2012).  Fig.  3 presents the consumption dynamics of three major energy sources—coal, crude oil and natural gas for 1980–2015.  We can see that China's energy consumption is dominated by coal, the energy source that China can increase in the short term and is available in many provinces.  The demand for energy increases tremendously after 2000s since joining the World Trade Organization (WTO).  This leads to an export-oriented industrial expansion and the associated rise in demands for energy, especially for coal.  An alternative driving force of the rise in energy demand, primarily for oil, is the exponential growth of motor vehicles.  From 2001 to 2014, the privately-owned cars increase from 7. 7 million to 123. 4 million, at a rate of 24% per annum (National Bureau of Statistics, 2016).  Fig.  4 portrays the shares of disaggregate energy sources in total energy consumption from 1980 to 2015.  Before the occurrence of ﬁnancial crisis in China, fossil fuels including coal, crude oil and natural gas account for 92. 5% of China's energy consumption in year 2007, followed by hydro-, nuclear and wind power.  In 2009, China pledged to cut its carbon intensity by 40%–45% by 2020 compared with the 2005 level of carbon emission per unit of GDP under pressure from international climate change negotiations.  To meet this voluntary emission reduction target, there is an upward trend in the consumption of natural gas, a relative cleaner burning alternate compared to coal and petroleum products in the industrial sector.  In fact, the share of natural gas consumption in the total energy consumption has been tripled from 1. 9% to 5. 7% during the period 1994–2014.  In comparison, the share of coal consumption has been declined from 75% to 65. 6% within the same period.  The declining trend of coal consumption, on one hand, comes from energy efﬁciency and the China's goal to increase environmental sustainability when the Chinese government plans to cap coal use to 62% of total primary energy consumption by 2020 in the commitment to reduce air pollution and carbon emission (Energy Information Administration, 2015).  On the other hand, it might be attributed to slower economic growth especially since 2012 as ﬁxed asset investment, industrial production and exports declined (Cattaneo et al. ,Next, we present the energy balance tables detailing production, consumption and trade for each of the primary disaggregate energy sources—coal, oil, natural gas and electricity— individually so as to lay out the background information before the empirical analysis.  2. 1. 1.  Coal.  The underpricing of coal products and abundant domestic stocks during the central planning era6 leads China to rely heavily on coal consumption (Crompton and Wu, 2005), with the share of coal in total energy consumption hovering around 70% during 1985–2011.  The share starts to shrink from the beginning of the eleventh Five Year Plan (2006–2010).  As mentioned above, this might be attributed to much of China's effort to promote energy efﬁciency and emission reduction by clamping down on its downstream user (mainly heavy industry) and limiting the growth of coal use. 7 The downward trend in the share of coal consumption is also associated with the economic slowdown in coal-consuming sectors, moderate demand growth of electricity, and price reform in the coal market.  Table A1 in the appendix presents the annual average supply, demand, and trade of coal during the period of 1995–2014 across Chinese provinces located in seven different regions. 8 There are three balance relationships.  (1) The total primary energy supply equals the sum of indigenous production, trade balance and the stock change, where the trade balance measures the difference between imports and exports.  (2) The total energy consumption equals loss plus end energy consumption less of the net input value during the transformation process.  (3) The statistical difference accounts for the error between total supply and total consumption.  The last column reports the annual average ratio of trade balance to the total energy supply during 1995–2014.  A negative value implies that on average a province is the producer and exporter of coal.  a positive value shows that a province is scarce of and highly dependent on coal imports.  Among the 30 provinces, Shanxi, Shaanxi, Inner Mongolia, Xinjiang, Ningxia and Henan in the northern and central part of China contain and export most of their coal resources.  Guizhou is the only southern province which has abundant coal resources.  In comparison, Hainan, Shanghai, Tianjin, Guangdong and Zhejiang located along the eastern coastal line are economically developed, but N90% of supply of coal depends on imports from inland provinces.  2. 1. 2.  Oil.  Although coal is the dominant energy source, oil and petroleum products are also essential.  China's oil demand growth is boosted by several factors, such as economic growth, trade, reﬁning capabilities, petroleum inventory building and shift of transportation sector (Energy Information Administration, 2015).  The increase in the number of passenger vehicles with the rising middle class in China, along with expansion of petrochemical industries might be one of the most important factors driving the consumption of oil and petroleum products in China, among which diesel and gasoline dominate other oil types such as fuel oil and kerosene (see Fig.  5).  The share of oil in the total energy consumption, as shown in Fig.  4, peaks at 22% in year 2000.  After 2010 the annual growth of oil consumption slows down, reﬂecting the impacts of global ﬁnancial crisis and economic downturn as well as China's efforts to reduce capacity overbuilding and excessive investment in pollution-intensive industries.  Different from the coal consumption met by the indigenous production, China as the world's second largest oil consuming country (Energy Information Administration, 2016), heavily relies on oil imports and searching for new reserves in Tarim Basin in the northwest and offshore in the South China Sea.  Fig.  6 provides a graphical illustration of oil consumption, production and the surplus ratio in China during the period of 1965–2015.  It shows that the surplus ratio turns from positive to negative from 1994 and the demand-supply gap enlarges since then.  In Table A2 of the appendix, we present oil production, consumption and trade across Chinese provinces.  All variables are measured as the annual average during the period of 1995–2014.  Total supply of oil comprises of indigenous production, import net of export, and the stock change.  Total energy consumption is decomposed into the net input, loss in the oil production and transmission and end consumption in varied sectors such as farming, forestry and animal, industry, construction, transportation, storage, postal services and telecommunications, wholesale, retail, catering, and residential consumption.  Sorted by the ratio of trade balance to total supply, Table A2 shows that the top ﬁve exporters of oil are provinces of Heilongjiang, Xinjiang, Qinghai, Shaanxi and Tianjin, all located in the northern part of China.  Shandong, in close proximity to the Bohai bay and East China Sea is the second largest oil producer just after Heilongjiang, while on average still depends on imports to ﬁll the gap between supply and demand.  Guangdong is the only southern province rich in oil resource with N50% of supply depending on imports.  It is worth noting that more than half of Chinese provinces including the developed ones such as Beijing, Shanghai and Jiangsu, with total oil consumption heavily dependent on imports.  2. 1. 3.  Natural gas.  The natural gas reserve distributes in nine basins including Tarim (Xinjiang), Sichuan, Ordos (Inner Mongolia) and Qaidam (Qinghai), accounting for around 84% of the total recoverable resources in China.  With the development and formation of national and regional natural gas pipeline networks, China's natural gas consumption surges from 173 million m3 in 1994 to 1869 million m3 in 2014, with an average annual growth rate of about 12%.  Based on energy balance data from China Energy Statistical Yearbooks (1996–2015), Table A3 in the appendix shows that among the top ﬁve gas consumers, Sichuan, Xinjiang and Chongqing are self-dependent and export to other provinces, while economically developed large consumers such as Beijing, Jiangsu and Shanghai depend on imports.  Notably, Guangdong stands out as the largest producer of gas in the south and export to its close neighbors Guangxi, Hunan and Fujian.  2. 1. 4.  Electricity.  Historically, the electric power industry experiences rehabilitation and reconstruction during 1949–1951 since the establishment of the country's ﬁrst generation plant in Shanghai, and then a slow expansion in big cities along the coastal regions during the ﬁrst and second ﬁve-year plans (1953–1962) before the Cultural Revolution.  Power shortages and a short fall in coal supply were associated with the social turmoil during 1966– 1975, bringing adverse effects on the rest of the economy (Shiu and Lam, 2004).  With the open door policy in 1978 that leads to a series of structural reforms and injection of market incentives, the fast growth of the electricity industry started from early 1980s and continued into late 1990s.  Because of the large size of domestic reserves, coal among other fossil fuels, makes up almost 80% of power generation sources (NBS, 2014).  Oil-ﬁred generation remains a small portion.  Natural gas serves as a fuel source for power primarily in the southern coastal cities where gas is more competitive and available (Energy Information Administration, 2015).  In the long run, China is determined to shift from coal-ﬁred to more gas-ﬁred power generation, spending efforts has the highest trade dependence ratio.  Guangdong, Jiangsu, Shandong, Zhejiang and Hebei are large consumers of electricity while b20% of supply depends on imports from other provinces.  2. 2.  A brief review on energy-growth nexus studies.  The relationship between economic growth and energy consumption has long been a controversial topic with rich implications in the design of conservative and efﬁcient energy policies.  The traditional economic growth theory takes the role of energy in the production process as being neutral (Solow, 1956.  Galor, 2005).  This perspective is challenged by Cleveland et al.  (1984) from the biophysical and ecological perspective, by Stern (1997) with thermodynamic concerns and by Beaudreau (1995) from an engineering perspective.  They argue that an engineering production is infeasible without energy input, which attracts great attention from energy and ecological economists to reexamine the GDP-energy nexus in a systematic way (Kander and Stern, 2012.  Bhattacharya et al. , 2016).  Interestingly, even within the economics discipline, the dispute has been far from settled with results highly sensitive to the scope of study, the period of time, the data structure, the analysis framework, the number of variables and the methodology used.  Since the seminal work by Kraft and Kraft (1978), the topic has invoked a large volume of relevant studies for the developed and developing countries at both the aggregated and disaggregated levels (Ozturk, 2010).  In this sub-section, we restrict the review on energy-growth nexus studies that have a focus on China.  Table 1 provides a summary of these studies in chronicle order by type of data used.  causality results between growth and both aggregate energy and disaggregate energy, together with time period covered, are listed.  As shown in Table 1, Shiu and Lam (2004) may be one of the earliest studies that have used the error-correction models to examine the presence and direction of causal relationship between electricity consumption and economic growth in China.  Using annual data from 1971 to 2000, they ﬁnd that electricity consumption Granger causes GDP but not vice versa.  This is to increase gas supply, regulate coal use, and improve gas transmission infrastructure. 