 1.  Introduction Aquaculture is the world's fastest growing food production technology, and in 2014 it surpassed wild ﬁsh as a source of seafood for human consumption (FAO, 2015).  However, aquaculture is also a controversial food production technology that constitutes a new way of using the environment, which creates new negative externalities (Naylor et al. , 2000).  This has led to a negative perception of aquaculture in many markets and several studies indicate a consumer preference for wild ﬁsh (Salladarré et al. , 2010.  Roheim et al. , 2012.  Uchida et al. , 2014a).  Recently, the Aquaculture Stewardship Council (ASC) introduced an ecolabel certifying that the production process for the labeled ﬁsh is environmentally sustainable.  Using survey data, this study investigates the effect of the ASC label for salmon, a popular species that is available as both wild and farmed in Germany.  If the ASC label has a positive effect, it is of particular interest whether this effect is large enough to negate the disadvantage of not being wild as well as how the ASC compares with ecolabels for wild ﬁsh such as the Marine Stewardship Council (MSC) label.  Environmentally sustainable production processes for seafood initially focused on wild ﬁsh, as many ﬁsheries were perceived to be over-ﬁshed.  This has led to a number of sustainability schemes and ecolabels being implemented since the turn of the century (Roheim, 2008), with the MSC ecolabel being the most commonly used. 1 A number of studies using revealed or stated preference data show a positive preference and willingness-to-pay (WTP) for seafood with an ecolabel that guarantees an environmentally sustainable production process (Wessells et al. , 1999.  Johnston et al. , 2001.  Jaffry et al. , 2004.  Johnston and Roheim, 2006.  Brécard et al. , 2009.  Salladarré et al. , 2010.  Uchida et al. , 2014a, 2014b.  Fonner and Sylvia, 2015.  Rickertsen et al. , 2017).  In addition, studies using hedonic price functions indicate a positive premium for the ecolabel using scanner or store observation data (Roheim et al. , 2011.  Sogn-Grundvåg and Young, 2013.  Sogn-Grundvåg et al. , 2013, 2014, Asche et al. , 2015a.  Bronnmann and Asche, 2016).  Hence, the ecolabels seem to be successful in segmenting the seafood market into a higher paying sustainably ﬁshed market segment and a lower priced segment with no guarantees with respect to environmental sustainability.  Initially, aquaculture was regarded as a production technology that could reduce over-ﬁshing by reducing demand for and thereby ﬁshing effort for wild species. 2 In the 1990s, Anderson and Bettancourt (1993), Gu and Anderson (1995) and Holland and Wessells (1998) reported evidence of consumer preferences for farmed ﬁsh.  However, as aquaculture production increased, more attention was given to the negative environmental effects of the production process, and consumer attitudes have shifted to a preference for wild ﬁsh (Salladarré et al. , 2010.  Roheim et al. , 2012.  Uchida et al. , 2014a).  While this in itself constitutes a challenge for farmed seafood, the fact that aquaculture and wild seafood within a species group are highly substitutable contributes further to make the MSC label a challenge for farmed seafood. 3 There have been some attempts to mitigate this challenge by labeling farmed seafood as organic or using best practices labeling (Asche et al. , 2015a.  Ankamah-Yeboah et al. , 2016). 4 However, these are at best half-way measures since they are only imperfectly addressing the sustainability concern.  The lack of a serious ecolabel for farmed seafood has become more apparent as aquaculture production has continued to grow. 5 Moreover, despite environmental challenges in parts of the industry, it is hard to argue that all aquaculture production is unsustainable (Bush et al. , 2013a).  In 2012, the ASC ecolabel was created in cooperation with the World Wildlife Fund (WWF), which was also the case for the MSC ecolabel. 6 The ASC ecolabel allows ﬁsh farmers to indicate that their product is sustainably produced with a credible label, and can remove the potential market advantage the MSC ecolabel gave wild ﬁsh if the main reason for the preference for wild ﬁsh is environmental concerns.  This paper investigates the preferences of German consumers for salmon, with a particular focus on the attributes farmed, wild, and eco-labeled. 7 However, factors such as demographics and product form are controlled for.  As recent hedonic price function studies have shown the type of retail outlet to be important (Asche et al. , 2015a.  Bronnmann and Asche, 2016), we will also control for retailer, even in an experimental setting.  The empirical analysis of this study is based on survey data from 485 respondents carried out in November 2015.  These data are used to estimate a mixed logit model that avoids the three main limitations of the standard multinomial logit model by allowing for random taste variation, unrestricted substitution pattern, and correlation in unobserved factors over time (Hensher et al. , 2015).  The estimated parameters are used to compute WTP for the attributes of the model.  While a number of studies focus on the ecolabeling of wild ﬁsh, to our knowledge the only two studies that consider ecolabels on farmed ﬁsh are Roheim et al.  (2012) and Uchida et al.  (2014a), who investigate, respectively, U. S.  and Japanese consumers' WTP for salmon. 8 However, in both cases the ecolabels are hypothetical and apply to both wild and farmed ﬁsh, rather than the separate labels for wild and farmed ﬁsh that appear in the market.  The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.  The next section describes the survey design.  The data are then presented in Section 3, followed by a description of the methods used.  Section 4 presents the results of the mixed logit model, as well as the estimated WTP for the various product attributes.  A summary is provided in Section 5.  2.  Background and Survey Design.  Globally, salmon is one of the most successful farmed ﬁsh species in terms of production growth, and is the farmed species with the second highest value after shrimp (Smith et al. , 2010.  Asche et al. , 2015b.  Kumar and Engle, 2016). 9 In Germany, salmon is one of the most popular species as measured by market share (FIZ, 2015), and is available both fresh and frozen.  Moreover, the market share of farmed and wild salmon is approximately 50% (Bronnmann and Asche, 2016).  MSC-labeled salmon has been available for some years, while ASC salmon has been available since 2014.  By the end of 2015, 1675 salmon products were available with the ASC label globally.  in Germany 130 certiﬁed salmon products were available.  At the same time there were 508 MSC certiﬁed salmon products available at the German market (MSC,The empirical analysis of this study is based on a survey conducted at three different retail stores in northern Germany (located in Kiel and Kaltenkirchen) during two weeks in November 2015 using a paperbased questionnaire.  The region of the survey is suited for analyzing consumers' preferences for ﬁsh because the majority of ﬁsh consumers in Germany are located in the northern states (FIZ, 2015).  Prior to the actual survey, the questionnaire and the choice experiment were developed and pre-tested using a ten-person focus-group discussion to ensure the comprehensibility of the questions and the choice sets.  Respondents were selected randomly from consumers shopping in the markets, and were asked for their willingness to participate in a study by the University of Kiel to investigate consumers' preferences regarding farmed and sustainable ﬁsh.  A total of 776 survey responses were collected.  485 questionnaires were ﬁlled out completely with no information missing, resulting in 63% useable observations.  The survey consists of a four parts.  In the ﬁrst section, the respondents choose their preferred salmon product without any prior information.  This avoids any priming effect, and is likely to provide the best representation of actual consumer perceptions (Burnham et al. , 2000).  The second section of the survey contains questions about some sociodemographic characteristics of the respondents.  The third section identiﬁes general seafood consumption habits, species purchased, beliefs and perceptions towards aquaculture and sustainable ﬁsh production, environmental concerns, and attention to seafood labeling.  In the last section, the respondents receive background information regarding the production methods of salmon and challenges with respect to sustainability in ﬁsheries and aquaculture in general, as well as the certiﬁcation criteria of the MSC and ASC ecolabels.  After providing this information, the respondents are provided with a second set of purchasing choices.  If the information inﬂuences the responses, it is an indication of the potential changes in consumer behavior that can be obtained if consumers can be better informed.  This can be important, as consumers in general are found to have a limited awareness of ecolabels and the issues they are to rectify (Grunert et al. , 2014).  The experimental design included four attributes.  Price, production process, sustainability certiﬁcation, and processing.  Table 1 shows the variation in the different attribute levels.  The attributes are chosen based on the previous literature (Jaffry et al. , 2004.  Johnston and Roheim, 2006.  Roheim et al. , 2012.  Davidson et al. , 2012.  Fernández-Polanco et al. , 2013.  Fonner and Sylvia, 2015) with the addition of the ASC label, which became available only recently, as well as the focus-group discussions.  Prices of salmon are determined based on an average current market price as of November 2015 in local supermarkets.  From this market price we speciﬁed plus/minus 10% and 25% for price levels above and below those of the respective observed prices.  The SPSS software package was used to generate the choice sets.  This yielded 24 choice sets out of all possible attribute combinations, representing a reduced orthogonal experimental design, but the MSC label was restricted to be associated only with wild ﬁsh and the ASC label with farmed ﬁsh.  The D-efﬁciency value10 is 94 (out of maximum 100), indicating a low degree of correlation among attributes in the design (Kuhfeld et al. , 1994).  Following Loureiro and Umberger (2007) the 24 choice sets are randomly allocated between four different questionnaires to mitigate any potential ordering impacts.  Each questionnaire contains six choice sets.  three of them are presented in the ﬁrst section and three of them in the last section of the questionnaire.  Thus, the consumer was faced with six choice situations during the questionnaire.  Each choice set presents two alternative salmon products of different price and levels of attributes (trade off).  A third alternative (neither of the two alternative product schemes) is provided to set the origin of the utility scale.  An example of a choice set is presented in Fig.  1.  In the sample, 367 respondents or 75. 7% of the sample are frequent salmon consumers, 153 (31. 5%) eat herring on a regular basis, and the third most eaten species are saithe and cod, respectively (128 (26. 4%).  123 (25. 4%)).  Most of the respondents eat seafood on a weekly basis.  90. 55% of respondents purchase seafood for home consumption, and the favorite retail outlet is the supermarket (45. 71%) followed by hypermarkets (37. 14%).  The survey respondents purchase both fresh ﬁllets and frozen ﬁllets.  Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for the variables used in the estimation.  Price and household size (HHsize) are the only continuous variables.  <Middle> Empirical Framework.  The model speciﬁcation draws upon Lancaster's argument that the attributes of goods determine the utility they provide (Lancaster, 1966), as well as random utility theory (McFadden, 1974).  Individuals are assumed to compare alternatives according to a utility function that is decomposed into a deterministic (V) and a stochastic (ε) part, and choose that alternative with the highest level of utility.  The utility U of alternative i obtained by respondent n in a choice situation t.  The deterministic component can be observed by the analyst and is determined by attributes of the object of choice and socio-economic characteristics of respondents, while the stochastic component consists of information that is not directly measurable.  As the overall utility of an alternative includes an unobservable and therefore probabilistic component, the individual's choice behavior is explained in terms of probabilities.  With J alternatives (j=1,2, …,J), the probability of alternative i being chosen over alternative j is given by.  By rearranging Eq.  Since ε is not observable, it is treated as a random variable on which distributional assumptions have to be made.  Different discrete choice models are obtained from different assumptions about the distribution of ε.  Basic choice models like the multinomial logit model (MNL) or the conditional logit model (CLM) impose important restrictions such as independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA) and homogeneous preferences among respondents.  To overcome these restrictive assumptions, mixed logit models have been introduced, allowing observed attribute coefﬁcients (β) to vary randomly among respondents, while the error (ε) is independent and identically distributed (Ben-Akiva et al. , 1997).  Hensher and Greene (2003) argue that IID is restrictive in that it implies unobserved inﬂuences not to be correlated across alternatives in a choice situation, and also across choice situations.  Once the parameter estimates are obtained, the WTP compensating variation welfare measure that conforms to demand theory can be derived for each attribute using the formula of Hanemann (1984) and Parsons and Kealy (1992) given by the following equation where V0 represents the utility of the initial state, V1 is the utility of the alternative state, and by gives the estimated marginal utility for price and is the coefﬁcient of the cost attribute.  Eq.  4 can be simpliﬁed to this, where bc is the coefﬁcient of any of the attributes.  These ratios are often known as implicit prices.  Choice experiments are therefore consistent with utility maximization and demand theory, at least when a status quo or opt-out alternative is included in the choice set.  4.  Empirical Results.  As noted above, a mixed logit model is estimated and is used to derive WTP for various salmon attributes.  Four models are estimated, two before and two after information were provided. 11 The random parameters are associated with the aquaculture variable (=1 if production method is farmed), frozen (=1 if the ﬁsh ﬁllet is frozen), ASC (=1 if the product carries the ASC label), and MSC (=1 if the product carries the MSC label).  The parameter distributions are assumed to be independent normal distributions.  The remaining coefﬁcients are ﬁxed.  The advantage of having a ﬁxed price variable is that the WTP for each nonprice attribute is simply the distribution of that attribute's coefﬁcient.  The ﬁrst model to be estimated is a simple model containing only the main effects, and where all consumer speciﬁc heterogeneity is assumed to be captured by the random coefﬁcients, where αC is the alternative speciﬁc constant capturing the average effect of all unobserved factors associated with purchasing salmon product on utility.  The alternative speciﬁc constant is the “to buy” or “choice” option.  Due to the fact that we use an unlabeled choice experiment and the product alternatives are described by their attributes, we include only one constant in the model.  The constant αC takes the value 0 if the respondent opts out and 1 if the respondents choose one product.  Furthermore, βprice is the price sensitivity parameter, Pricenit is the price of alternative i, and the term [unit+εnit] represents the deviation from the mean level utility, which captures the effects of the random parameters.  Secondly, an extended model containing demographic, socioeconomic, and retailer variables is estimated.  The socioeconomic characteristics are included in the model as interaction terms with the alternative speciﬁc constant to capture the effect on the likelihood of adoption.  The estimation results are reported in Table 3.  Since the estimated parameter coefﬁcients are not directly interpretable, marginal effects are also reported.  Such inﬁnitesimal changes are not appropriate for dummy variables, which are a main part of the variables entering the model.  Thus, for the dummy variables we follow Hole (2007) and ﬁrst calculate the probability at the mean of the sample.  Subsequently, a discrete change of the variable of interest is simulated, which leads to a change in the corresponding probability.  The difference between the probabilities represents the marginal effect of the variable.  In addition, the WTP of each variable is reported.  Wald tests were performed for the null hypothesis that the extended model can be reduced to the base model.  For the uniformed consumers, the χ2 test statistic is 68. 19 with p b 0. 001 for the corresponding Wald test.  For the informed consumers, the χ2 test statistic is 78. 03 with p b 0. 001.  Hence, in both models the additional variables contribute to the models' explanatory power, and the random parameters do not alone provide the best representation of consumer heterogeneity as suggested by Grebius et al.  (2013).  For all models, the price effect is negative and signiﬁcant at a 1% level, indicating that the probability of purchase decreases as the price increases.  The main effects are statistically signiﬁcant in all models except aquaculture in the main effect model of the uninformed respondents.  The negative aquaculture variable in all models indicates that consumers are less likely to purchase a salmon product that is farmed, which is in line with what is reported in the more recent literature (Salladarré et al. , 2010.  Roheim et al. , 2012.  Uchida et al. , 2014a).  Hence, the aquaculture attribute reduces the WTP for the product.  The negative values for aquacultured products are higher for the informed respondents.  The frozen attribute is negative in all models, indicating a preference for fresh salmon.  The ASC label signiﬁcantly increases the probability of purchase, and on average an uninformed consumer is willing to pay €3. 71 per 250 g more for ASC labeled salmon.  The MSC label also signiﬁcantly increases the probability of purchasing a product.  The average uninformed consumer is willing to pay €2. 74 per 250 g more for MSC-certiﬁed salmon.  After giving information about production practices and the certiﬁcation systems to the respondents, their WTP for MSC-labeled products increase to €4. 29 per 250 g, while the WTP for ASC-labeled salmon increases to €4. 60 per 250 g.  It is interesting to note that despite the increased WTP for the ASC label, the WTP for farmed salmon is so far reduced that the WTP for MSC-labeled wild salmon is now higher than for ASC-labeled farmed salmon. 12 Roheim et al.  (2012) and Uchida et al.  (2014a) do not distinguish between uninformed and informed consumers when they report WTP for their hypothetical labels.  Roheim et al.  (2012) report that an ecolabel goes some way to make up for the negative perception of farmed although not fully, and more so with a provided label than from a NGO. 13 Uchida et al.  (2014a) report that an ecolabel increases the WTP substantially more than the WTP for the attribute wild ﬁsh without an ecolabel in Japan, implying that the ecolabel more than makes up for the negative perception of the production mode for farmed.  However, as these authors used the same ecolabel for wild and farmed ﬁsh, their results do not allow an assessment of the impact of ecolabels on production mode.  The statistically signiﬁcant standard deviation parameters of the product attributes indicate the existence of unobservable preference heterogeneity among the survey sample.  This indicates the importance of the mixed logit model speciﬁcation to capture heterogeneity between consumers that is not captured by the demographic variables.  Moreover, the random distribution of the parameter indicates that there are consumers with a positive as well as a negative preference for the label, and some consumers who do not care. 