
Aquaculture is a rapidly growing industry that has become a major
supplier of ﬁsh and shellﬁsh to the global market (FAO, 2014).  Concern
about the environmental effects of aquaculture is also growing.  The production of shrimp and salmon, two of the most lucrative and widely
traded aquaculture products, is responsible for a range of environmental
impacts due to the off-site effects of disease transmission, waste discharge, escapees, the use of chemicals and drugs, and the consumption
of ﬁshmeal and ﬁsh oil (Naylor Name, 1998).  The most important of the
environmental externalities of salmon farming is the transmission of
sea lice to wild ﬁsh stocks (Asche Name, 2009.  Taranger Name, 2015. 
Lafferty Name, 2015). 
In this paper we focus on a particular disease externality of coastal
salmon farms— the effect of sea lice on wild ﬁsh stocks.  This effect has
been debated extensively.  Researchers agree that sea lice are one of
many factors that affect wild stock levels.  However, there is disagreement about the size of the effect.  Some argue that lice are not instrumental in wild stock population decline (Marty Name, 2010).  Others
claim that where salmon net-pens provide ideal conditions for sea
lice, they are the primary threat to vulnerable migrating wild juveniles
(Krkošek Name, 2006, 2007).  In both Norway and Canada, sea lice are argued to be a major threat to the sustainability of marine aquaculture and
the viability of wild ﬁsheries, and are subject to strict regulations. 
The generic problem in the management of wildlife disease externalities of aquaculture is the regulation of transmission risks due to contact between infected farmed stocks and susceptible wild stocks
(Conrad and Rondeau, 2015.  Fischer Name, 2015, 2016).  The mitigation
of disease risk requires reduction in either the infection rate of farmed
stocks or contact between farmed and wild stocks.  In the case of marine
salmon aquaculture, the infection rate of farmed ﬁsh may be reduced by
chemical controls.  Since farmed ﬁsh stocks have a reservoir-host effect
on disease transmission, this also affects disease transmission to wild
ﬁsh stocks. 
From a social perspective, salmon farmers should ideally take account of the costs incurred by wild capture ﬁsheries when deciding
how much in-farm disease control to apply.  Nor is the disease of wild
salmon the only off-site effect to consider.  It may, for instance, change
the structure and distribution of other species within the system
(Burge Name, 2014).  Since disease is an external cost of salmon production, however, it will not be considered in the absence of regulatory,
property-rights, or tax-based initiatives by a ﬁshery authority. 
This study focuses on the optimal management of sea lice externalities between salmon aquaculture and wild salmon ﬁsheries that run
in both directions.  Sea lice are native ectoparasite copepods, common
on wild adult salmon.  The salmon louse (L.  salmonis) has a free-living
phase and a parasitic phase in its approximately 2-month life cycle
(Frazer, 2009).  Once attached to salmon, lice feed on mucous, blood,
and skin which causes both morbidity and mortality of salmon
(Costello, 2006).  When wild stocks migrate to a fresh water environment in the fall for spawning, lice from wild stocks disperse into ﬁsh
farms located on the migration route of wild stocks and infest the
farmed ﬁsh.  If not treated in the farms, the lice grow rapidly and reinfest wild juveniles when they emigrate into marine environment in
the early summer.  Although the disease problem associated with ﬁsh
farms is widely recognized, there are few estimates of the ecological
and economic impacts on both farmed and wild ﬁsheries.  One estimate
is that sea lice may cost the salmon industry US$480 million a year or 6%
of product value (Costello, 2009).  Currently, salmon farms control lice
with in-food chemical such as emamectin benzoate (SLICE) with high
efﬁcacy to control all stages of sea lice (Stone Name, 2000), and with
cleaner ﬁsh such as wrasse or lumpﬁsh.  These controls have different
cost effectiveness (Liu and Bjelland, 2014), also sea lice may develop resistance to SLICE (McEwan Name, 2015). 
To analyze this problem we develop a bioeconomic model that incorporates epidemiological, ecological, and economic elements.  As in
prior studies of wildlife disease management that employ an optimal
control framework (Gramig Name, 2009.  Horan Name, 2010), we treat
the level of disease control as endogenous.  Speciﬁcally, we integrate
sea lice population dynamics in an economic model of salmon production to determine the optimal control policy—ﬁrst from the perspective
of salmon aquaculture producer, and then from the perspective of a
joint ﬁsheries manager.  By taking account of the complex relationship
between sea lice populations in farmed and wild ﬁsheries, we are able
to assess the economic impact of salmon aquaculture on the wild ﬁshery
due to sea lice transmission.  While our model is calibrated on the pink
salmon ﬁshery in Paciﬁc Canada, our approach can readily be applied
to the management of the disease effects of aquaculture on wild ﬁsheries more generally. 
The structure of the paper is as follows.  Section 2 describes various
components of sea lice-salmon interactions in aquaculture.  Section 3
presents a bioeconomic model of farmed and wild ﬁsheries.  The main
results and the outcome of numerical simulations are presented in
Section 4.  This is followed by sensitivity analysis provided in Section 5. 
Finally, Section 6 discusses the results and draws conclusions. 
<Middle> A Model of Sea Lice-salmon Interactions in Aquaculture. 
2. 1.  Sea Lice Dynamics. 
We consider a coastal area in which an Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar)
farm (or a coordinated aquaculture industry consisting of many farms)
is connected by the free-living stage of sea lice transmission with wild
pink salmon stocks when they migrate into or out of spawning rivers. 
The farm manager releases salmon smolts (Ff,0) into ﬁsh farms just before wild adults head home for spawning.  Fish farmers either employ
batch harvesting at ﬁxed intervals to target speciﬁc markets, or employ
graded harvesting during the whole grow-out season.  Aquaculture
salmon production has a production cycle between 1. 5 and 2. 5 years
(Asche Name, 2009).  In this study we assume that production involves
ﬁxed interval batch harvesting-all ﬁsh are harvested 24 months after
being released. 
We divide sea lice growth into a free-living copepodite phase and
an adult lice phase.  Sea lice cannot survive in a fresh water environment.  Due to the relatively brief spawning migration (August and
September) of wild pink salmon from marine environment to fresh
water environment, gravid lice from homecoming wild adult stocks
would infest farmed stocks by spreading copepodite produced by
gravid lice (Lw , t).  Copepodites have a probability of ρ to attach to
farmed (Ff , t) or wild (Fw , t) hosts if present in coastal waters.  They
then survive to adult lice stage with probability ψt depending on
environmental factors, such as salinity and water temperature
(Tucker Name, 2000).  Settlement success ψt is assumed to be periodically forced, and takes the form. 
This simple sinusoidal function generates a 12 month periodicity to
infections, t = 1, 2…12, and has a seasonal force impact coefﬁcient of
ε2 and a base settlement success of ε1. 
When migrating wild juveniles pass by ﬁsh farms close to wild migratory routes from May to July they are subject to lice infestation. 
Wild juveniles are vulnerable because of their small size, and also because that they are subject to the environmental stress caused by the
transition from fresh water to marine environment.  We assume that
the chemical treatment ut, if applied, kills both adult sea lice and
copepodites on farmed ﬁsh.  The mortality rate associated with chemical
treatment for copepodites and adult sea lice is denoted by k and z,
respectively. 
2. 2.  A Well-mixed Coastal Environment. 
The hydrodynamic environment is one of the main factors affecting
the dynamics of sea lice transmission (Adams Name, 2012).  Two different
environments are considered here.  First, we consider a coastal environment in which copepodites are well-mixed (Ashander Name, 2012), implying that copepodite density is the same across the whole area
including the farm system.  In what follows, subscript f denotes farmed
stock, subscript w denotes wild stock, and subscript t denotes time
(measured in months).  If Xt denotes total copepodite abundance in
the coastal area at time t, and Lf,t denotes lice abundance in the farm,
then a discrete model for sea lice dynamics in farm is this. 
The dynamics of copepodite and lice populations are described by
Eqs.  (2) and (3).  They are similar to a discrete-time version of the canonical Anderson-May host parasite model (Anderson and May,
1978).  Eq.  (2) describes the dynamics of copepodites in the coastal
area.  The ﬁrst term on the right hand side (RHS) is the number of
copepodites produced by lice on farmed Lf,t and gravid lice Lw,t which
is equal to zero when there are no adult wild stocks in the coastal
area.  Copepodite production is taken to be at the constant rate, λ. 
Fw,t denotes the abundance of wild juveniles at
the end of
month t.  The second term has three components.  The ﬁrst component,
Xt(1−ρ(Ff,t+Fw,t)), is total copepodite abundance after dispersal and
attachment to ﬁsh host.  Copepodites are assumed to attach to hosts at
the rate ρ.  The second component is the surviving proportion after natural mortality of ξ and the third component is copepodite mortality due
to chemical treatment, fc(ut−2,ut−1,ut), the control being included in
feed.  Copepodite transmission between farmed and wild ﬁsh only happens during the spawning migration of wild adults and the emigration
of juvenile wild stocks.  Because sea lice cannot survive in a fresh
water environment we assume that in this well-mixed system
copepodites do not attach to wild spawning adults.  However, wild juveniles will be infested when they migrate into the ocean. 
Eq.  (3) gives the total lice abundance in the farm at the beginning of
each time unit (month) as the sum of the newly mature adults and the
lice remaining from last period after natural mortality and the effects of
chemical control.  The ﬁrst term on the RHS of Eq.  (3) is the number of
copepodites attached to hosts that become adult, the survival rate
being ψt.  The second term on the RHS is the number of lice remaining
from last period.  There are four components in this term.  The ﬁrst component is the total lice number at the beginning of the period, the second component (1 − v) is the proportion surviving after natural
mortality v.  The third one is the proportional change in the lice due to
mortality between Ff,t+1 and Ff,t.  We assume that if 10% of ﬁsh are killed,
10% of adult lice will also be killed.  If all ﬁsh are harvested, then all lice
will be killed in the process.  The last component, fl(ut −2,ut− 1, ut), is
the lice kill function due to chemical treatment. 
The efﬁcacy of chemical treatment varies depending on sea location,
lice genetics, and water temperature (Stone Name, 1999).  Here we
assume that chemical treatment is effective for a three-month
period, during which it kills both lice and copepodites (Gustafson
Name, 2006).  Since the efﬁcacy of treatment decreases over time, the
chemical-induced mortality functions are assumed to take the
form fl(ut− 2, ut −1,ut) =(1 −kut)(1 −0. 8kut −1)(1 −0. 6kut −2) and
fc(ut−2,ut−1,ut)=(1−zut)(1−0. 8zut−1)(1−0. 6zut−2), respectively. 
As a ﬁrst approximation, we assume that ﬁsh killed by lice do not
have any economic value, but that infested live ﬁsh fetch the same
price as un-infested ﬁsh.  That is, the effect of sea lice is only evident
through mortality, not other sub-lethal effects.  In reality, sea lice can
also reduce ﬁsh growth and feed conversion rates (Costello, 2006. 
Mustafa Name, 2001)—though the literature provides little information
on these effects. 
The impact of sea lice on farmed salmon is modeled as this
where Ff,t denotes Atlantic salmon abundance in the farm at the end of
month t.  After harvest, farms are fallowed for a short time to kill existing
lice.  Farmers then release the same amount of juveniles Ff,0 into their
farms.  The grow-out rotation is not therefore affected by lice and is assumed to be constant.  df is the sea lice-induced mortality rate for farmed
Atlantic salmon,1 and Lf,t is adult sea lice abundance at the farm at time t. 
Wild salmon juveniles (Fw,t) are free of lice infestation in the river
environment but are subject to re-infestation from the ﬁsh farm when
migrating into marine environment from May to July.  The number of
lice at month t is the sum of new adults developed from copepodites
attached to hosts, and the remaining lice from last period.  The lice
(Lw,t+1) dynamics in a well-mixed system is modeled as this. 
Offshore lice dynamics are not modeled here.  Instead, the effect of
lice on adult wild ﬁsh stocks offshore is incorporated in a constant natural mortality rate. 
2. 3.  A Distance-dispersal Environment. 
We also consider a distance-dispersal environment where transmission is captured by modifying the model described previously.  Three
features of the resulting compartmental model are.  1) constant transmission rates (d1,d2) between farmed and wild ﬁsheries, with d1 indicating copepodite transmission from wild spawning stocks to farmed
salmon stocks and d2 indicating copepodite transmission from farm
stocks to wild juveniles.  2) unidirectional drift—copepodites that leave
the salmon farm do not return.  and 3) limited cross infection—lice produced by wild salmon mostly infect other wild salmon, and lice produced by farmed salmon mostly affect other farmed salmon. 
Copepodite dynamics in farm are given by this
where It= Aug,Sep is indicator function with a value of 1 during homeriver migrating period, August and September, and 0 at other months. 
Adult lice dynamics for the farm and wild ﬁshery dynamics are the
same as those described by Eqs.  (3) and (5).  By contrast, copepodite dynamics in the wild are given by this. 
2. 4.  Wild Pink Salmon Dynamics. 
To model wild salmon dynamics we consider one of the most
commonly infected wild salmon—Pink salmon (O.  gorbuscha). 
Pink salmon are the smallest salmon found in North America. 
They are also the least valued of commercially exploited salmon
species.  Wild spawning salmon home-migrate from August to September.  The wild juveniles remain in the river environment from
October until the following April.  They then move into in-shore
waters from May to July, before migrating to the ocean and remain
there from August until the next July.  Pink salmon have a two-year
life cycle, including an even and odd-numbered year run.  These
two runs are reproductively isolated.  The spatial separation between adult and juvenile salmon due to migration prevents louse
transfer between odd- and even-numbered year runs (Krkošek
Name, 2007). 
We assume that the odd-numbered run dominates, with an initial
escapement level of S0, as compared to 0. 5S0 for even-numbered
year runs.  Let Sn denote the escapement level of wild stocks in year
n.  This escapement level becomes spawning stock, which has a
concave-down fry production function following a Ricker relationship
F1 , n +1 =Sn exp (γ− Sn/b), where F1 , n+ 1 is the number of fry in the
next generation (n + 1), γ is the population growth rate.  b determines
the density dependent mortality rate, and is related to the carrying capacity of the system.  The breeding stock dies after spawning.  A natural
mortality rate m applies to juvenile wild salmon in fresh water, therefore the population of surviving wild juveniles before migrating into
the inshore area is (1−m)F1,n+1. 
When wild pink juveniles migrate into the inshore area from
May to July, they are subjected to lice infestation from ﬁsh farms. 
For every farmed salmon grow-out cycle, 24 months, there are 2
copepodite infestations from wild stocks, i. e. , in even and oddnumbered runs, and 2 lice infestations from farmed to wild
stocks.  The wild juvenile mortality rate induced by sea lice infestation is modeled using the Ricker equation (Krkošek Name, 2007. 
Marty Name, 2010) on a monthly time scale in accordance with
time scale of the farmed ﬁshery and lice dynamics. 