
Explaining the main determinants and improving the forecast accuracy of crude oil market volatility are crucial to market investors and
government decision makers.  However, forecasting oil volatility is an
intractable task, as the crude oil market is quite complex and has various
uncertain determinants, such as global oil supply and demand, OPEC
spare capacity levels, ﬁnancial crises, and national elections.  Some studies have claimed that oil price change relies heavily on oil demand and
supply, especially global demand (i. e. , Dées Name, 2007.  Kilian, 2009.  Mu
and Ye, 2011).  However, other studies have argued that a speculative
component plays a key role (Zhang, 2013.  Hamilton and Wu, 2014. 
Kilian and Murphy, 2014.  Juvenal and Petrella, 2015.  Gogolin and
Kearney, 2016). 
Liu Name (2016) disentangle the contributions of oil demand, supply,
and speculation in real oil prices, whereas Yin and Zhou (2016) identify
the role of speculation and economic fundamentals in driving oil price
volatility.  However, as in the seminal work of Baker Name (2013) on
measuring economic policy uncertainty (EPU), it is worth mentioning
that many studies have examined the effect of EPU on the stock market
and have considered EPU indices in forecasting stock market returns
(Pastor and Veronesi, 2012.  Antonakakis Name, 2013.  Kang and Ratti,
2013.  Tsai, 2017).  The literature about EPU's impact on the oil market
is growing in recent years (e. g. , Aloui Name, 2016.  Balcilar Name, 2016. 
Yin, 2016).  For example, Aloui Name (2016) hold that the movements
in uncertainty index can identify the supply-side, aggregate-demand,
and oil-speciﬁc demand shocks, that directly drive the oil price.  Thus,
an increase (decrease) in the uncertainty index probably negatively
(positively) affects the economy, which in turn reduces (increases)
the demand and supply of crude oil and then cause oil price volatility. 
Balcilar Name (2016) also emphasize that EPU can drive the oil price ﬂuctuations.  We conjecture that a high EPU can cause serious divergence in
the expectations of oil consumers, producers, and speculators simultaneously and thus affect the demand, supply, or speculation stock for
crude oil.  Therefore, EPU may comprehensively involves various information such as oil shocks, ﬁnancial crisis, and political events that greatly impact the oil market and cause oil price volatility.  However, it is not
clear whether EPU is the most informative factor in forecasting oil volatility, and which determinant is the most powerful remains to be
addressed. 
This study is speciﬁcally related to the literature on the determinants
of oil market return or volatility (e. g. , Dées Name, 2007.  Kilian, 2009.  Mu
and Ye, 2011.  Conrad Name, 2014.  Hamilton and Wu, 2014.  Kilian and
Murphy, 2014.  Gogolin and Kearney, 2016) and the predictability of
EPU indices in asset return or volatility (e. g. , Pastor and Veronesi,
2012.  Antonakakis Name, 2013.  Kang and Ratti, 2013.  Tsai, 2017).  We
address two questions.  First, is EPU helpful for forecasting crude oil
market volatility.  Second, which determinant is most informative and
helpful in forecasting spot oil volatility—oil demand, supply, speculation, or the novel EPU index.  To answer these questions, we consider
two newly released global EPU (GEPU) indices and six countryspeciﬁc EPU indices from major oil consumers and producers worldwide.  This allows us to investigate whether these new indices help in
forecasting oil volatility and to compare their predictabilities with
those of traditional determinants. 
Regarding the models for forecasting asset volatility, GARCH
and its extensions have been popularly used in empirical analyses
(e. g. , Bollerslev, 1987.  Glosten Name, 1993.  Cheong, 2009. 
Mohammadi and Su, 2010.  Nomikos and Andriosopoulos, 2012. 
Charles and Darné, 2014.  Eﬁmova and Serletis, 2014).  However, most
of these models are strictly limited to imputing data at the same frequency.  Ghysels Name (2004) introduce mixed data sampling (MIDAS)
regression models, which successfully address the data frequency problem.  To overcome the defect of GARCH-class models, Engle Name (2013)
incorporate the MIDAS technique with the GARCH model, forming the
GARCH-MIDAS model, which allows macroeconomic determinants to
be incorporated at different sampling frequencies.  Conrad Name (2014)
use the GARCH-MIDAS model to investigate the oil volatility with respect to the stance of the U. S.  macroeconomy but they focus on insample evidence.  Combination methods have also been argued to
achieve stable forecast ability (Stock and Watson, 2004).  They can be
categorized as constant combined models and time-varying combination methods.  Speciﬁcally, Raftery Name (2012) develop the dynamic
model averaging (DMA) technique, which Liu Name (2017) successfully
apply as a time-varying combination method to forecast volatilities of
the West Texas Intermediate (WTI) oil futures, accounting for both parameter and model uncertainty.  We construct 11 individual GARCHMIDAS models and three DMA model combinations with various
determinants. 
Although both Conrad Name (2014) and our study involve the determinants of oil price volatility.  However, our innovation is quite different
from theirs in several ways.  First, based on the controversy in crude oil
market, we aim to address the question which determinant is most informative and helpful in forecasting spot oil volatility, i. e. , oil demand,
supply, speculation, or the novel EPU indices.  Whereas, the main contribution of Conrad Name (2014) provide the ﬁrst evidence on the link between U. S.  economic activity and the daily oil-stock correlation.  They
examine whether the long-term oil and stock market volatility, as well
as oil-stock correlation respond to the same macroeconomic information, especially, the oil-stock correlation.  Second, due to the different
aims, Conrad Name (2014) consider the determinants that contain information on current and future U. S.  economic activity.  Unlike those determinants, we are the ﬁrst to integrate both the global economic policy
uncertainty (GEPU) indices and several national economic policy uncertainty (EPU) indices with traditional determinants, such as global oil demand, supply, and speculation.  Third, unlike Conrad Name (2014), this
study mainly concerns the models' out-of-sample performance. 
We make two contributions.  First, we are the ﬁrst to consider various
EPU indices, especially the GEPU indices and the country-speciﬁc EPU
indices from major oil consumers and exporters, and the traditional determinants in forecasting crude oil market volatility.  Aloui Name (2016)
suggest that EPU indices can identify three types of shock on oil prices
(i. e. , supply-side, aggregate, and oil-speciﬁc demand).  Furthermore,
we argue that EPU not only inﬂuences oil demand-supply fundamentals, but also changes market participants' sentiments, giving rise to
speculation activities, and thus may contain more information and
achieve better oil volatility forecasting accuracy than commonly used
determinants.  Our empirical study provides an overview of the EPU indices and traditional determinants in forecasting oil volatility. 
Second, we model daily oil volatility using a GARCH-MIDAS model
with different monthly determinants.  To provide the time-varying effects of the determinants, we also apply DMA combination methods,
allowing both a set of determinants and their coefﬁcients to change
over time.  Furthermore, the models' forecasting performance is evaluated using the robust advanced model conﬁdence set (MCS) test (Hansen
Name, 2011). 
We use monthly global oil demand, supply record, and speculation
data and two GEPU indices and six country-speciﬁc EPU indices to
model and forecast the daily volatility of WTI crude oil spot prices.  The
main empirical results indicate that EPU indices contain more useful information than oil demand-supply fundamentals or speculation indices
in determining the daily volatility of crude oil prices.  In particular, the
GEPU index and the U. S. ’s EPU index produce more accurate volatility
forecasts of WTI oil prices than other determinants.  Finally, no evidence
is found that DMA combination methods are superior to individualThe rest of this paper is structured as follows.  Section 2 presents a
brief literature review, which serves as a foundation for analyzing the
determinants of oil volatility.  Section 3 describes the GARCH-MIDAS
model and the DMA combination approach.  Section 4 discusses the
data.  Section 5 presents the empirical results.  Section 6 concludes the2.  Literature review. 
In this section, we revisit the literature on the subject.  Numerous
studies have examined the determinants of oil price or returns.  The predominant explanation for oil price change is that oil price relies on oil
demand and supply (Kilian, 2009.  Mu and Ye, 2011).  For example,
Kilian (2009) distinguishes oil demand and supply shocks in oil price
changes and claims that increases in oil price are mainly driven by demand.  Moreover, with the ﬁnancialization of crude oil, many papers
have recognized the role of speculation and have examined its effect
on oil prices (Kilian and Murphy, 2014.  Juvenal and Petrella, 2015. 
Gogolin and Kearney, 2016).  Liu Name (2016) disentangle the oil demand, supply, and speculation of real oil prices.  Their results show
that oil demand from the U. S.  and China plays a key role in oil price
changes after 2000, whereas speculation contributes much less to oil
price ﬂuctuations. 
In particular, since Baker Name (2013) constructed the EPU index to
measure EPU, many empirical studies have highlighted the importance
of EPU indices in forecasting asset return and volatility (Pastor and
Veronesi, 2012.  Antonakakis Name, 2013, 2014.  Kang and Ratti, 2013. 
Balcilar Name, 2016.  Tsai, 2017).  There are growing literature on EPU's
impact on the oil market, Antonakakis Name (2014) examine the relationship between EPU and oil prices and claim that EPU indices affect
oil prices.  Bekiros Name (2015) claim that EPU matters in predicting oil
price changes.  Recently, Aloui Name (2016) investigate the effect of uncertainty on crude oil returns.  Their results show that higher EPU indices
signiﬁcantly increase crude oil returns only during certain periods.  Yin
(2016) also illustrates the importance of policy uncertainty for both
oil spot and futures returns.  Speciﬁcally, Aloui Name (2016) provide an
accurate picture of the conditional dependence between oil and uncertainty.  They claim that increased uncertainty leads to increased oil
prices, as oil suppliers can stock up due to a precautionary motive. 
Thus, oil price ﬂuctuations can reﬂect either demand or supply shocks. 
In addition, Balcilar Name (2016) emphasize the role of EPU as a driver
of oil price ﬂuctuations.  These ﬁndings illustrate that EPU indices can
be good determinants in forecasting the oil volatility. 
GEPU indices are constructed and released monthly.  The GEPU index
is a GDP-weighted average of national EPU indices, accounting for two
thirds of the global GDP.  Currently, there are two versions of the GEPU
index—that with nominal GDP weights and that with purchasing
power parity (PPP) adjusted GDP weights.  Few studies have applied
the newly released GEPU index.  Speciﬁcally, oil is the main energy
source of the modern world, and oil price uncertainty is crucial for all
countries.  Furthermore, oil price ﬂuctuations are affected by the EPUs
of many countries, especially the countries of main oil consumers and
producers.  In this regard, the GEPU index is supposed to be a good determinant of oil price volatility. 
EPU indices reﬂect not only demand-supply fundamentals and economic activity, but also investors' sentiments.  Thus, EPU indices, especially the GEPU index, are supposed to be synthetic determinants of
oil price uncertainty.  Colombo (2013) ﬁnds that the EPU of the U. S. 
drives the EPUs of major European countries, Canada, and China, implying that a shock to the U. S.  EPU affects worldwide uncertainty.  Thus, the
U. S.  EPU may have a greater effect on the global oil market.  We include
two global indices and six national EPU indices from major oil exporters
and consumers worldwide.  This allows us to examine whether these
new indices help forecast oil volatility and to compare the predictabilities of these determinants. 
There are various theoretical approaches to modeling and forecasting oil market volatility.  Of the models based on low-frequency data,
the majority of empirical investigations of oil volatility that use daily
or monthly data have used GARCH-class models (Cheong, 2009. 
Mohammadi and Su, 2010.  Nomikos and Andriosopoulos, 2012. 
Charles and Darné, 2014.  Eﬁmova and Serletis, 2014).  Although
GARCH-class models and their extensions are widely used, most are
limited to data at the same frequency.  Interestingly, Ghysels Name
(2004) introduce MIDAS regression models.  MIDAS regression successfully addresses the problem of the explained and explanatory variables
being sampled at different frequencies, such as daily, weekly, and
monthly.  Ghysels Name (2006) construct MIDAS-AR and consider various MIDAS regressions to predict equity volatility.  In the MIDAS framework, Ghysels Name (2007) propose some extensions, such as nonlinear
MIDAS and multi-variable MIDAS.  Engle Name (2013) construct the
GARCH-MIDAS model by incorporating MIDAS with the commonly
used GARCH model.  The GARCH-MIDAS model has several advantages. 
For instance, it distinguishes long- and short-term volatility.  It also differentiates low-frequency volatility and macro fundamentals as longterm volatility, and provides a ﬂexible methodology.  Thus, it has been
applied in many recent forecasting practices (e. g. , Engle Name, 2013. 
Asgharian Name, 2013.  Conrad Name, 2014).  For example, Engle Name
(2013) use the GARCH-MIDAS model to measure the contribution of
macroeconomic variables to forecasting stock market volatility. 
Asgharian Name (2013) apply the GARCH-MIDAS model to examine
whether macroeconomic variables can help forecast stock return variance.  These empirical studies support that the GARCH-MIDAS model
signiﬁcantly improves forecasting accuracy and outperforms the traditional GARCH model.  Especially, using the GARCH-MIDAS framework,
Conrad Name (2014) analyze whether the long-term oil volatility is related to the U. S.  macroeconomy determinants such as industrial production (IP), national activity index (NAI), and so on.  In light of this, we
consider different monthly determinants and incorporate them into
GARCH-MIDAS to model and forecast daily spot oil volatility. 
Although many individual models, such as GARCH and GARCHMIDAS, have been applied in the economics and ﬁnance ﬁelds, Stock
and Watson (2004) point out that the predictabilities of individual
models are very unstable and change over time.  Hence, some studies
have discussed how to combine a set of forecasts to produce superior
composite forecasts (Liu and Maheu, 2008.  Santos and Ziegelmann,In particular, Raftery Name (2010) propose the DMA method, which
allows the model to vary with variables over time.  The important feature
of the DMA method is that it allows for both time-varying coefﬁcients
and a large state space model (i. e. , the set of oil volatility determinants
can change over time).  Consequently, DMA has been widely used in
forecasting in recent years (e. g. , Koop and Korobilis, 2012.  Naser,
2016.  Wang Name, 2016).  Liu Name (2017) apply the DMA method as a
time-varying combination method.  The DMA method dynamically combines the generated models by using two forgetting factors to estimate
both model parameters and model switching probabilities (i. e. , DMA
successfully avoids arbitrary choices made by model users).  However,
there is no consensus on whether combination methods are superior
to individual models due to the large estimation errors in the DMA
method.  Therefore, we include three DMA model combinations and
compare them to 11 individual GARCH-MIDAS models. 
To compare the models' performance, various loss functions are
used.  However, the loss functions cannot indicate which models are signiﬁcantly better than others.  Hansen (2005) solves this problem by proposing a superior predictive ability test.  Hansen Name (2011) propose a
more robust test known as the MCS test.  The MCS test does not need to
specify an obvious benchmark, which is very useful in applications and
thus is popularly used to compare forecasting models. 
Nevertheless, the research has not yet considered EPU indices in
forecasting oil price volatility, especially the newly constructed GEPU
indices.  No study has investigated the effects of oil demand-supply fundamentals or speculation with global and national EPU indices.  Moreover, few studies have analyzed which determinants are the main
causes of oil volatility.  We ﬁll these gaps by using both individual
GARCH-MIDAS models and the time-varying DMA combination method
under the evaluation framework of the MCS test. 
<Middle> Empirical methodology. 
3. 1.  GARCH-MIDAS model. 
To investigate the contribution of different monthly determinants
(i. e. , oil demand, supply, speculation, and EPU) on daily oil price volatility, we use a new GARCH-class model introduced by Engle and Rangel
(2008) and Engle Name (2013).  The GARCH-MIDAS model is based on
the MIDAS regression proposed by Ghysels Name (2006).  The main advantage of the GARCH-MIDAS model is that it allows for the incorporation of macroeconomic fundamentals at lower frequencies to forecast
daily asset volatility.  We illustrate the GARCH-MIDAS model as follows. 
Suppose that an unexpected return is expressed as follows,
where ri, t is the log return of WTI oil price on day i in month t and
Ei−1,t(ri,t) is the conditional mean of oil returns given the information
set Φi−1,t up to day i-1.  Following Sadorsky (2006) and Narayan and
Narayan (2007), we set Ei−1,t(ri,t)=μ, as a daily oil return has a very
small mean and its dynamics are dominated by variance.  The conditional
variance of the daily oil return is divided into two components.  a shortterm component deﬁned as gi,t and a long-term component deﬁned as
τt.  The short-term volatility component, gi,t, is assumed to be a simple
GARCH (1,1) process deﬁned as follows. 
The long-term component, τt, is expressed as follows,
where m is an intercept and θ is the slope of the weighted effects of
lagged low-frequency fundamentals Vt on the long-term volatility of
the oil return.  Furthermore, Vt is the growth rates of EPUs, oil demand,
supply, and speculation, which can take negative values.  Thus, as
Engle Name (2013) note, Eq.  (4) is usually presented in logarithmic form,
where the optimal lag orders of K can be decided by the minimum
Bayesian information criterion (BIC).  As suggested by Ghysels Name
(2006) and Engle Name (2013), the weighting scheme usually adopted in
Eq.  (4) is described by one- or two-parameter Beta polynomials. 
3. 2.  Forecasting combination.  dynamic model averaging approach. 
Studies have shown that constant coefﬁcient models have some
problems.  For example, the predictors' effects on the predicted variables
change over time (Ghysels Name, 2013.  Drachal, 2016.  Naser, 2016). 
Hence, a speciﬁc model with a ﬁxed set of predictors may not consistently perform well (Stock and Watson, 2004).  To overcome this drawback,
time-varying parameter (TVP) models, which allow the
parameters of explanatory variables to change over time, have emerged. 
In particular, Raftery Name (2010) propose the DMA approach, which allows both sets of predictors and their coefﬁcients to change over time. 
Consequently, the DMA approach has been popularly applied in macroeconomic forecasting due to its ﬂexibility (e. g. , Koop and Korobilis,
2011, 2012.  Naser, 2016.  Wang Name, 2016). 
Following Primiceri (2005) and Koop Name (2009), the ordinary TVP
model can be described as follows,
where yt is the dependent variable, xt-1 is a 1 × m vector of predictors, βt
is an m × 1 vector of coefﬁcients, and the innovation items are distributed as εt~i.  i.  d.  N(0,Vt) and ηt~i.  i.  d.  N(0,Wt).  This model can be estimated using the Kalman ﬁlter method. 
In the models deﬁned by Eqs.  (8) and (9), it is assumed that the predictors in xt-1 are ﬁxed throughout the sample period, which may lead to
over-parameterization problems and lower forecast accuracy.  Nevertheless, DMA is superior to the TVP model, as it allows both sets of predictors (forecasting models in a combination method) and their
coefﬁcients to change over time.  The DMA approach can be illustrated
as follow, where xt−1
and εt~i.  i.  d.  N(0,Vt
(k)).  If there are m predictors
in xt−1′, the total number of possible combinations of these predictors
is K = 2m.  Then, DMA can dynamically incorporate the uncertainty factors from the K models, 
where the probability of Model K is π(t| t − 1, k)= Pr(Lt =k| Yt −1).  The
equation Lt = K indicates that Model K is selected at time t and that
Yt−1={y1,…,yt−1}.  DMA obtains its forecast by taking the average of
all the K models in terms of their historical forecasting performance, denoted by π(t|t−1,k). 
However, the DMA approach has a computational burden.  Without
loss of forecast accuracy, Raftery Name (2010) simplify the DMA estimation using the Kalman ﬁlter method.  The initial assumptions are that
is independent and identically distributed, and that βt−1
 can be 
determined separately only if Lt−1=k.  In this set of assumptions, λ is
recommended as a forgetting factor, which plays an important role in
the calculation of βt−1
(k) , where observations j periods in the past gain
λj weight from the starting period.  λ can also be used to simplify the covariance matrix of βt−1
(k) .  This process is expressed as follows. 
denotes the covariance matrix of βt−1
where Σt∣t−1
timation is then calculated using the following updating equations. 
Another forgetting factor, α, is used in Eq.  (12).  If we use a transition
matrix of probability, we should consider K=2m model combinations
with m predictors at each point.  Once m exceeds 5, it is impracticable
to operate the Markov switching in the K × K matrix.  Thus, using forgetting factor α can greatly reduce the calculation time and error.  Based on
the forgetting factor, probability in the forecasting model is determined
as follows. 
The updating equation is deﬁned as follows,
where fℓ(yt| Yt − 1) denotes the predictive density of Model ℓ. 
Eqs.  (13)–(18) consist of all of the steps of the Kalman ﬁlter prediction
and the updating process. 
We apply the DMA approach as a time-varying combination method.  Instead of directly imputing the determinants in xt−1′, we use the
forecasts from individual models as predictors.  Thus, the DMA approach
can dynamically combine the models and be applied as a time-varying
combination method. 
3. 3.  Model evaluation.  model conﬁdence set test. 
To evaluate the performance of the GARCH-MIDAS models with different sets of low-frequency determinants, we use two popular loss
functions and the MCS test as our evaluation criteria.  These loss functions are the mean squared forecast error (MSFE) and the mean absolute forecast error (MAFE), which are deﬁned as follows,
where yt is the true daily oil volatility represented by the squared daily
returns on day t, whereas ^yt is the set of forecasts obtained from different models and M is the number of forecasts. 
As the loss functions cannot distinguish whether the loss differences
of these models are statistically signiﬁcant, we use an advanced test.  the
MCS test of Hansen Name (2011).  The MCS test has several advantages
over conventional tests (e. g. , Diebold and Mariano, 1995.  West, 1996. 
White, 2000.  Hansen and Lunde, 2005).  For example, it does not have
to specify a benchmark model, which is very useful in applications. 
Moreover, it allows for the possibility of more than one “best” model. 
The MCS test process is as follows.  Consider a set, M0, which contains
a ﬁnite number of models, indexed by m = 1, …, m0.  These objects are
evaluated over the sample t = 1, …, n in terms of loss function i.  We denote the loss associated with model u in period t as Lu,t.  The relative performance variables are deﬁned as duv,t ≡ Lu,t – Lv,t for all u, v∈M0.  The set
of superior models is then deﬁned as follows,
where E(di,uv,t) is the mathematical expectation of duv,t under the specific loss function i, such as MSFE or MAFE.  The MCS test is conducted
through a sequence of signiﬁcance tests in which the models that
prove to be signiﬁcantly inferior to other elements of M0 are eliminated. 
The null hypotheses that are being tested take the following form. 
The MCS procedure is based on an equivalence test, δM, and an elimination rule, eM.  The equivalence test, δM, is used to test hypothesis H0 for
any M ⊂ M0 and the elimination rule, eM, identiﬁes the model of M that is
to be removed from M on the condition that H0 is rejected.  After repeatingthese two tests, we obtain set ^M
1−α, which consists of the set of “surviving” models.  The larger the p-value of the MCS test, the higher the forecast
accuracy of the corresponding model.  Speciﬁcally, the signiﬁcance level α
is usually set to be no more than 0. 25 (e. g. , Wei Name, 2010.  Hansen Name,
2011.  Tian and Hamori (2015).  Wang Name, 2016.  Liu Name, 2017.  Pu
Name, 2016).  However, the main purpose of this paper is to determine
the most informative factor(s) controlling the long-term volatility of
crude oil price instead of judging all the signiﬁcant inﬂuential factors. 
Hence we set a higher signiﬁcance level α of 0. 5 in the empirical examination of this paper to guarantee that the “surviving” models are extraordinarily well performed. 
In addition, Hansen Name (2011) suggest using the range statistic
(TR) and the semi-quadratic statistic (TSQ) for model evaluation.  These
statistics are deﬁned as follows,
where di. uv ¼ 1
t¼1 di. uv. t.  If the p-values of TR and TSQ are larger than
0. 1, we conclude that the null hypothesis (Eq.  (22)) cannot be rejected. 
The asymptotic distributions of the statistics TR and TSQ are nonstandard, as they depend on nuisance parameters (under both the null
and alternative conditions).  However, these conditions pose no obstacle, as the distributions of these statistics are easily estimated using
bootstrap methods that implicitly solve the nuisance parameter problem.  In addition to TR and TSQ, we use four more statistics (i. e. , Tmax, TQ,
TF and TD) to reach more robust conclusions (Hansen Name, 2011). 
4.  Data. 
The data sample used in this study includes two parts.  one is the
daily WTI crude oil spot prices and the other is the monthly macrolevel determinants of oil price volatility.  The monthly dataset consists
of the global oil demand index, the oil supply record, the oil speculation
index, two GEPU indices, and six country-speciﬁc EPU indices. 
The global oil demand index is a measure of real global economic activity, constructed from the dry cargo shipping rate index developed by
Kilian and Park (2009).  This real activity index is a business cycle index
and a stationary construct that is designed to capture shifts in the global
use of industrial commodities.  The global oil supply record is represented
by global crude oil production, which is available in the Monthly Energy
Review of the Energy Information Administration (EIA).  Following the
methods of Hamilton (2009) and Kilian and Murphy (2014), we use the
ratio of OECD petroleum stocks over U. S.  petroleum stocks recorded by
the EIA to represent oil speculation. 
The two GEPU indices are GDP-weighted averages of national EPU
indices for 18 countries.  Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, France,
Germany, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Russia, South Korea, Spain,
Sweden, the U. K. , and the U. S.  There are two versions of the GEPU indices.  one is based on current-price GDP measures (denoted as
EPU_global_GDP) and the other is based on PPP-adjusted GDP (denoted
as EPU_global_PPP). 1 The six country-speciﬁc EPU indices are collected
from three major oil-demand countries (i. e. , the U. S. , China, and Japan)
and three major oil-supply countries (Russia, Canada, and the U. K. ).  Although the daily US EPU index is available, we employ monthly EPU indices to keep consistent with the frequency of other determinants for
further comparison. 
The data cover the period from January 1997 to April 2016. 2 All of
the data are transformed to logarithm growth rates (except for the global oil demand index) and divided by 100, as constructed by Kilian and
Park (2009).  For clarity, Fig.  1 presents the evolutions of WTI oil returns
and the growth rates of GEPU weighted on current-price GDP and of the
global oil demand index. 
Fig.  1 indicates that the WTI oil returns present clear volatility clustering throughout the whole data sample, especially during ﬁve market crisis periods.  the 1997–1998 Southeast Asian ﬁnancial crisis, the 2000–
2001 dotcom bubble burst, the 2008 subprime mortgage crisis, the
2010–2011 European debt crisis outbreak, and the stock market crash
in China from June 2015 to January 2016.  It is clear that the GEPU and
oil demand indices ﬂuctuate violently during these ﬁve crisis stages. 
However, global oil demand reacted to these crises differently.  it increased sharply during the subprime mortgage crisis and the European
debt crisis, but decreased rapidly during Southeast Asia's ﬁnancial crisis,
the dotcom bubble burst, and China's stock market crash, implying that
oil demand is mainly affected by real economic activities instead of ﬁnancial market turmoil.  The summary statistics of all of the daily and monthly time series are listed in Table 1. 
First, Table 1 shows that the sample mean of the WTI oil return is
quite small compared with its standard deviation, implying that we
may simply use a constant to model the conditional mean of daily oil
returns when investigating the volatility of crude oil prices (see
Sadorsky, 2006.  Narayan and Narayan, 2007.  Kang Name, 2009.  Wei
Name, 2010).  Second, of the two GEPU indices and six country-speciﬁc
EPU indices, Russia and the U. S. ’s EPUs have the largest and smallest
standard deviations, respectively, indicating that the EPU in Russia
changes more frequently and violently than in other countries, whereas
the EPU in the U. S.  is more stable than in other countries.  Third, the
standard deviation of the global oil demand index is much larger than
those of oil supply and speculation, implying that oil demand ﬂuctuates
more heavily than oil supply and speculation.  Lastly, the augmented
Dickey-Fuller unit root test supports the rejection of the null hypothesis
of a unit root signiﬁcantly, implying that all of the time series are
stationary and thus can be modeled directly withouttransformations. 
5.  Empirical results. 
5. 1.  In-sample estimation results. 
The in-sample estimation results of the GARCH-MIDAS models for
all of the determinants of oil volatility are listed in Table 2.  As discussed
in Section 3. 1, two kinds of Beta polynomial weight functions may be
used in the GARCH-MIDAS model estimations (see Eqs.  (6) and (7)). 
We ﬁnd that in most cases, the two parameters, ω1 and ω2, are not signiﬁcantly different from 0 if the weight function in Eq.  (7) is adopted
(see Asgharian Name, 2013.  Engle Name, 2013).  Thus, the oneparameter weight function in Eq.  (6) is used.  The lag orders of monthly
determinants in the GARCH-MIDAS models are chosen by the minimum
BIC.  Table 2 shows that almost all of the estimated parameters are significant except for several ω coefﬁcients in the weight function.  All of the β
parameters are close to 1 and signiﬁcant at the 1% level, indicating a
high degree of volatility persistence in the WTI oil prices. 
We are interested in the value of parameter θ in Eq.  (5), which indicates the effect of monthly determinants of the long-term volatility of
WTI oil prices.  The estimation results for parameter θ in Panel A of
Table 2 reveal that both the two GEPU indices and six country-speciﬁc
EPU indices have signiﬁcant positive effects on the long-term volatility
of oil prices.  This implies that a high EPU causes serious divergence in
the expectations of oil consumers, producers, and speculators simultaneously and thus affects the demand, supply, or speculation stock for
crude oil.  Speciﬁcally, GEPU weighted by current-price GDP, with a θ
value of 3. 045, has the largest average effect on the long-term volatility
of oil prices of all of the EPU indices.  In addition, EPUs from the U. S.  and
Japan make relatively important contributions to oil volatility, whereas
EPUs in the U. K. , Russia, and China are less informative in determining
oil volatility.  The estimation results for parameter θ in Panel B of
Table 2 indicate that oil production seems to have a larger effect on
long-term oil volatility than oil demand or speculation. 
Fig.  2 shows the estimated total daily volatility and long-term (secular) volatility of the six GARCH-MIDAS models.  The green dashed line
indicates the total daily volatility and the blue line indicates the secular
volatility determined by different macro-level variables.  The upper and
lower panels of Fig.  2 show the estimated results of different EPUs and
oil demand, supply, and speculation indices, respectively.  It is clear
that all six subﬁgures of Fig.  2 produce similar daily volatility estimates,
although quite different secular volatilities are indicated by different
monthly macro-level variables.  Fig.  2 suggests that different EPU indices, oil demand-supply fundamentals, and speculation contribute to
long-term oil volatility in different ways.  However, we focus on detecting which determinant is most helpful in forecasting the daily volatility
of WTI oil prices.  Thus, in the next step, we use the MCS test to
quantitatively compare the performance of these GARCH-MIDAS
models to different monthly EPU, oil demand, supply, and speculation
indices. 
5. 2.  Out-of-sample forecasting performance. 
To obtain robust model evaluation results, Tables 3-5 report the MCS
testing results of three out-of-sample forecasting horizons (i. e. , the last
250 days, 500 days, and 750 days of the total sample), ranging from approximately 1 to 3 years.  We use the rolling window method in our
forecasting procedure.  All of the data from January 1997 to April 2016
are classiﬁed into two subgroups.  the in-sample data for volatility
modeling and the out-of-sample data for model evaluation.  The
estimation period is then rolled forward by adding one new day and
dropping the most distant day.  This way, the sample size used to
estimate the models remains ﬁxed and the forecasts do not overlap. 
We re-estimate the parameters of these models to get the 1-dayahead volatility forecasts. 
As discussed in Section 3. 3, the larger the p-value of the MCS test,
the better forecasting accuracy the corresponding model achieves. 
However, there is no consensus on setting the threshold p-value alpha
in MCS tests.  Regarding volatility predictions in literature, the MCS
alpha has been set as different values.  For example, Tian and Hamori
(2015) set the p-value alpha to be 0. 1.  Whereas Pu Name (2016)
set the p-value alpha to be 0. 25.  In this paper, Tables 3-5 report the
p-values of the MCS tests for GARCH-MIDAS models with different
monthly determinants.  We can ﬁnd that there are many p-values larger
than 0. 25, suggesting that the determinants are signiﬁcant.  To clearly
distinguish the most informative factor(s) controlling the long-term
volatility of crude oil price, we set the threshold p-value to be 0. 5 in
Tables 3-5.  The numbers larger than 0. 5 are indicated in bold and
underlined, indicating that the corresponding models perform signiﬁcantly the best. Furthermore, a p-value of 1. 000 indicates a model that
performs the best out of all of the models. 
Tables 3-5 indicate that the EPU contains more useful information
than oil demand, production, or speculation in determining future
crude oil price volatility.  First, Table 3 indicates the results of the
250-day out-of-sample forecasting evaluation, where Panels A and B
report the testing results for 11 individual models and 3 DMA model
combinations, respectively.  With regard to the MSFE criterion, only
the individual model with GEPU weighted as the current-price GDP,
denoted as EPU_Global_GDP, can survive the MCS test with p-values
equal to 1. 000 for all six test statistics.  Furthermore, no DMA model
combinations survive under the MSFE loss function.  As far as the
MAFE criterion is concerned, only the two individual models with
EPU_Global_GDP and global oil production pass the MCS test under all
six test statistics.  Unfortunately, the DMA model combinations usually
prove to be superior to individual models in forecasting oil prices (see
Naser, 2016), but the three model combinations used in this study
(i. e. , combinations of all EPUs, oil fundamentals with speculation, and
all determinants) survive only under the MAFE criterion with TR and
TD test statistics. 
Second, Table 4 shows the 500-day MCS testing results for different
GARCH-MIDAS models.  When the MSFE criterion is considered, of the
fourteen competitors, the models with EPU_Global_GDP and U. S.  EPU
are the only two that pass the MCS test with all six test statistics.  Similar
to the results in Table 3, almost no model combinations survive the MCS
test.  With regard to the MAFE criterion, the testing results seem to be a
little more optimistic.  In addition to the two individual models with
EPU_Global_GDP and the U. S.  EPU, the individual model with global
oil production (oil supply) also survives.  Furthermore, the DMA model
combination with all EPUs (DMA_EPU) and the combination with oil
demand, supply, and speculation (DMA_Fund_Spe) provide satisfactory
volatility forecasting accuracy under all six test statistics. 
Finally, Table 5 presents the MCS testing results over a longer period
(i. e. , 750 days).  We ﬁnd that only the individual GARCH-MIDAS model
with the U. S. ’s EPU survives under all of the error criteria and test statistics.  The three DMA model combinations again lose forecasting accuracy
as revealed in Table 3. 
In conclusion, Tables 3-5 indicate that EPU contains more useful information than oil demand, production, or speculation in determining
the future volatility of crude oil prices.  This ﬁnding may reveal that
EPU can simultaneously change the expectations of oil demanders, producers, and speculators and thus synthetically affect the volatility of
crude oil prices.  Furthermore, of the different kinds of EPU, GEPU
weighted as current-price GDP and the U. S. ’s EPU indices are the most
powerful determinants predicting crude oil market volatility.  It is also
worth mentioning that Yuan Name (2008) prove that economic growth
in China has a strong inﬂuence on crude oil prices.  Liu Name (2016)
also reveal that Chinese and U. S.  demand shocks explain approximately
70% of the variations in oil prices over longer periods, but Chinese demand shocks to oil price variations are greater than U. S.  demand shocks. 
Tsai (2017) also ﬁnds that the EPU in China is the most inﬂuential contributor to the stock returns of 22 stock markets worldwide, and that
the effect of the EPU in the U. S.  is inferior to that in China.  However,
no evidence shows that China's EPU has greater explanatory power on
the volatility of the crude oil market than those of the U. S.  or other countries.  China is the second largest economy and also the second largest
crude oil consumer in the world.  Therefore, the real economic activities
in China have strong direct effects on oil prices.  Over the past decades,
China's top priority has been to maintain stable and rapid economic
growth.  it uses all of the possible ﬁscal and monetary policies to achieve
this goal.  Thus, the proactive ﬁscal policy, prudent monetary policy, and
political stability in China in recent years are less likely to cause high
crude oil price volatility.  In addition, we ﬁnd that GEPU weighted as
current-price GDP is more effective than the PPP-adjusted version in
forecasting oil volatility.  This implies that the crude oil market is more
sensitive to nominal economic indicators than to real ones.  Lastly, the
comparison between model combinations and individual models
shows that the combination forecasting method generally cannot
achieve stable forecasting accuracy and is inferior to individual models
in most cases. 