 This paper examines the relation between industry-wide and firm-specific information contained in earnings and the extent to which this information is reflected in stock prices.  Economic theory suggests that firm performance determined by industry fundamentals (e. g. , consumer taste, production technology, and regulatory environment) is relatively long-lasting.  On the other hand, performance that deviates from industry norms tends to dissipate more quickly because learning and imitation improve industry losers’ performance but erode industry winners’ competitive edge (e. g. , Mueller, 1977, 1986, 1990.  Waring, 1996).  To the extent that accounting earnings are a (noisy) measure of economic profits, we expect the industry-wide component of earnings to be more persistent than the firm-specific component.  Prior research suggests that investors tend to fixate on reported earnings, however, not fully recognizing differences in the persistence of its components (e. g. , Sloan, 1996).  As a result, we expect the market to underreact to the higher persistence of the industry-wide component of earnings.  Predicting greater persistence of the industry-wide component of earnings inherently assumes industry homogeneity and stationarity.  Firms in homogeneous industries face relatively similar economic forces, and thus industry-wide earnings should be more persistent than in heterogeneous industries.  Earnings components should also be more persistent in stable industries than in those disrupted by business shocks.  The effect of business shocks, however, should be smaller on industry-wide earnings than on firm-specific earnings if, as expected, industry-wide earnings are more stationary in general.  Investors that underestimate the persistence of industry-wide earnings are thus more likely to do so for homogeneous industries and in the presence of a large industry-wide business shock.  Our focus on economic fundamentals represents a departure from Sloan’s (1996) work on accruals and cash flows, which are components of earnings defined by accounting systems (Dechow, 1994.  Subramanyam, 1996).  He shows that even though the accrual component is less persistent than the cash flow component, stock prices act as if investors fail to fully appreciate this difference.  Thus, we also gauge the differential persistence and pricing of earnings components classified by both economic forces and accounting constructs. 