 1.  Introduction In recent decades, the phenomenon of global warming caused by greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions has become extremely serious, resulting in more frequent and intense extreme weather and natural disasters.  As well known, the carbon emissions from fossil fuel consumption are the nuclear source of the GHG emissions.  Therefore, mitigating carbon emissions has become a global assignment to realize low carbon sustainable development.  In response to climate change, many countries have reached basic agreements on mitigating carbon emissions.  The Paris Climate Agreement and the Kyoto Protocol show the world's determination to cope with climate change issue.  As the largest developing country and the largest carbon emitter, China enacted the energy intensity target policy and a series of binding policies during the 11th “Five-Year Plan” (FYP) (2006–2010) and achieved a success in energy saving and energy intensity reduction (Cao and Karplus, 2014.  Fujii et al. , 2016).  In 2009, China has ofﬁcially raised the carbon intensity constraint target that carbon emissions per GDP (i. e. , carbon intensity) would be reduced by 40%–45% in 2020 than the 2005 level.  Such a target has been considered in the mid-long term plans of the national economic and social development.  In 2011, China's 12th FYP explicitly proposed a sub-target of the CICP that carbon emissions per GDP would drop by 17% in than that in 2010.  This is the ﬁrst time for China to propose carbon intensity constraint target in the FYP.  Subsequently, the Chinese central government allocated the carbon intensity reduction task to each provincial region, and stipulated that such a task must be incorporated into the local economic and social development plans.  Thus, the carbon intensity reduction target must be reﬂected in the performance assessment of the local government.  To fulﬁl such a target, the Chinese central government and local governments have formulated a series of relevant supporting policies and measures, and have carried out a “lasting battle” strategy for energy saving and carbon reduction.  They have released a serious of documents to declare that the government should endeavor to expedite industrial structure adjustment, support energy conservation and the development of low carbon energy, increase carbon sinks, control non-energyrelated GHG emissions, and facilitate the substitution of high carbon productions.  China's industrial sector is not only a crucial engine of economic growth, but also responsible for the largest share of the country's energy consumption and carbon emissions.  The decline of carbon intensity in the industrial sector plays a decisive role in achieving the overall carbon intensity reduction target.  As a vital part of carbon reduction polices, a number of speciﬁc measures focused on carbon reduction in the industrial sector, mainly including 6 aspects as follows.  (1) In 2009, the Chinese government ofﬁcially introduced the Standard for Sector-integrate Eco-industrial Parks, standardizing the construction, management, and assessment of sector-integrate eco-industrial parks.  In the same year, for the enterprises in the eco-industrial parks, the speciﬁc requirements for promoting the development of low carbon economy were put forward.  (2) In 2010, the Chinese government published a list of enterprises in 18 industrial sub-sectors (especially energy-intensive industries), targeted at eliminating the backward production capacity.  (3) China conducted a national resource tax reform for oil and gas in 2011, shifting from a volume-based tax to an ad valorem tax with a tax rate of 5%–10% (Shi et al. , 2015).  The resource tax reform on coal, rare earths, tungsten, and molybdenum followed the reform of the oil and gas tax.  Compared with the volume-based resource tax system, the tax rate in proportion to the market price will increase the costs of resource use in the overheated market (Liu et al. , 2017), which is beneﬁcial for energy conservation and carbon reduction.  (4) The 12th FiveYear Plan for Energy Saving and Emission Reduction stipulated the direction of restructuring the key industries, and promoted mergers and acquisitions in eight major industries, such as automobiles, steel, and cement.  (5) The 12th Five-Year Plan for Energy Saving and Emission Reduction speciﬁed the targets and assignment of energy conservation for the energy-intensive industrial sectors.  (6) In 2011, the Chinese government issued a catalogue of industrial restructuring guidance to limit the expansion of some industries, such as coal, petrochemical and chemical industries.  The speciﬁc measures in the industrial sector contribute to industrial carbon reduction.  However, under the ongoing tightening pressure of carbon reduction, some provinces begin to implement some administrative mandatory measures like power rationing,1 attempting to achieve the energy-saving and emission-reduction targets in a shortterm by the way of limiting enterprises' production.  The central government also continues to give pressure to the key industries and enterprises, in order to realize the emission-reduction targets.  Obviously, whether or not the CICP can achieve the “double dividend” of carbon reduction and industrial growth is signiﬁcant for achieving China's low carbon sustainable development, because industrial sector is the biggest emitter, as well as the important engine of economic growth.  Moreover, in 2015, China submitted its intended nationally determined contribution (INDC) and released its pledge in GHG reduction.  This brings a new challenge for China to integrate climate change mitigation into other national priorities.  The investigation on the effects of the CICP can provide necessary decision-making reference for coordinating carbon reduction with economic development.  However, the implementation effect of China's CICP on such a “double dividend” goal is paid little attention to in previous studies.  The appropriate measure of sustainable growth is necessary for assessing whether or not the CICP is effective to coordinate industrial growth and carbon reduction.  The green production performancethe environmentally sensitive productivity growth encompassing undesirable output(s), is usually employed by the existing studies to reﬂect green accounting or sustainable development (Kumar, 2006.  Oh, 2010.  Chen and Golley, 2014).  Since improving the GPP means a better coordination state of industrial growth and carbon reduction, the investigation of the effects of the CICP on the industrial GPP can provide the competent evidence in whether such a policy is actually beneﬁcial to the sustainable development of a certain country.  Actually, although the gross industrial carbon emissions in China have been increasing, the industrial carbon intensity has been decreasing year by year during 2001–2013 (see Fig.  1).  In terms of a single indicator of industrial carbon intensity, China's CICP in recent years seemed to be successful, and the environmental policy aiming at the industrial sector is not as inefﬁcient as some studies mentioned (e. g.  Zheng et al. , 2015).  However, the decrease of carbon intensity is only a direct result of the implementation of the CICP, and the impact of such a policy on the industrial GPP is still covered.  Theoretically, from the perspective of microeconomics, the CICP affects the industrial GPP in two aspects.  On the one hand, as an environmental regulation policy, a reasonable CICP can promote energy saving and low carbon production by improving the allocation of input factors (Li et al. , 2013).  On the other hand, the carbon constraint target force the enterprises to increase innovation investment, ameliorate technological progress, and improve energy efﬁciency (Xuan and Zhou, 2011), in order to facilitate carbon reduction and productivity growth.  In this case, the industrial GPP can be enhanced even when industrial output scale remains unchanged.  Despite some theoretical arguments, the impact of China's CICP on the industrial GPP has not yet been empirically explored.  In an attempt to ﬁll such a gap, this paper employs the quasi difference-in-differences (quasi-DID) method to investigate the effect of the CICP on China's industrial GPP for the ﬁrst time.  The industrial GPP is estimated based on the framework of nonparametric data envelope analysis (DEA), which is widely used in the existing literature to assess the environmentally sensitive productivity growth.  The directional distance function (DDF) is an alternative approach to measuring the productivity growth considering the undesirable output.  The original DDF is regarded as an oriented and radial measure with some limitations (Fukuyama and Weber, 2009.  Zhang and Choi, 2014), and the infeasible problem of linear programming could distort the productivity growth level.  For the purpose of avoiding the biases caused by the radial and oriented DDF and the infeasible problem, this paper combines the global benchmark technology (Oh, 2010) and the non-radial and nonoriented DDF (NNDDF) (Zhou et al. , 2012) to measure the industrial GPP of China.  The remainder of this paper is organized as follows (see Fig.  2).  Section 2 provides an overview of the related literature.  Section 3 introduces the used data and methodology, including the estimation models of industrial GPP and the quasi-DID model for investigating the effect of the CICP on industrial GPP.  In Section 4, we report and discuss the estimation results of the industrial GPP and quasi-DID model.  Section 5 draws main conclusions and provides some policy implications.  2.  Literature review.  2. 1.  Measurement of the GPP.  Among the methodologies of measuring the GPP, i. e. , the environmentally sensitive productivity growth, the Malmquist-Luenberger productivity index (ML index), which is proposed by Chung et al.  (1997) and integrates the concepts of the Malmquist productivity index and DDF, has been widely applied in the previous studies (Färe et al. , 2001.  Yoruk and Zaim, 2005.  Kumar, 2006.  Zhou et al. , 2010.  Arabi et al. , 2014).  However, the ML index method encounters three shortcomings.  Firstly, since the ML index employs the contemporaneous benchmark technology, and thus faces a potential infeasible problem when calculating intertemporal DDF (Oh, 2010).  Secondly, the conventional DDF, the basis of the ML index, is a radial and oriented measure method that may overestimate the efﬁciency when there is some slacks (Fukuyama and Weber, 2009).  Meanwhile, if researcher focuses on the total factor productivity index, non-oriented DDF rather than outputoriented model is more appropriate (Zhang and Choi, 2014).  Thirdly, the ML index is not circular as it employs geometric mean to avoid choosing an arbitrary benchmark (Oh, 2010).  In view of such defects, some studies develop several novel methods.  Based on the global benchmark technology, the GML (global Malmquist-Luenberger) index is proposed by Oh (2010) in order to completely overcome the potential infeasible problem.  Since the intertemporal DDF is formulated based on a single technology frontier, i. e. , the global benchmark technology, there is no need to employ geometric mean to avoid choosing an arbitrary benchmark when calculating the total factor productivity growth.  This makes the GML index circular.  Because of such an advantage, the GML index method is applied by a lot of studies (e. g. , Azad and Ancev, 2014.  Fan et al. , 2015.  Zhang and Wang, 2015).  However, the GML index has the shortcomings of radial and oriented measure methods.  For remedying the bias of the radial and oriented measure methods, Fukuyama and Weber (2009) and Färe and Grosskopf (2010a, 2010b) developed the NNDDF, which was later extended by Chang and Hu (2010), Barros et al.  (2012), Zhou et al.  (2012), Zhang et al.  (2013), and Arabi et al.  (2014) to establish the efﬁciency measure model incorporating undesirable outputs.  Among such studies, Zhou et al.  (2012) made an important contribution by providing a formal deﬁnition and the mathematical properties of the NNDDF considering undesirable outputs.  To avoid the bias caused by the infeasible problem and taking into account the disadvantages and advantages of various efﬁciency measure methods based on the DEA framework, we incorporate the global benchmark technology (Oh, 2010) and the NNDDF (Zhou et al. , 2012) into a uniform measure model and adopt the Luenberger indicator which is more consistent with the characteristics of the NNDDF to evaluate the GPP of China's industrial sub-sectors.  2. 2.  DID method in the environmental policy assessment.  With regard to the method of assessing the impact of a certain policy, the difference-in-differences (DID) method is widely used in the existing literature (Gruber and Poterba, 1994.  Feldstein, 1995.  Eissa, 1995.  Cai et al. , 2016).  The DID usually divides the samples into the treatment group and the control group, and evaluates the effect of policy implementation by comparing the differences between the treatment group and the control group before and after the policy intervention.  Because most policy interventions regarded as natural experiments are exogenously given, the DID method can avoid an endogenous problem.  Some studies have applied the DID to explore the effects of various environmental policies.  Bao et al.  (2013) examined the actual effect of local environmental legislation by using the DID method and found that the environmental protection legislation per se in China could not signiﬁcantly inhibit the local pollutant emissions, and only in the provinces with strict law enforcement and serious pollution, the environmental protection legislation could play a signiﬁcant environmental improvement effect.  Li and Chen (2013) explored the effect of the revision of the Air Pollution Prevention Law in China and argued that such a policy intervention signiﬁcantly improved the total factor productivity of the sectors with intensive air pollution.  They asserted that the implementation of appropriate environmental regulation policy in China may achieve a “win-win” outcome of improving environmental quality and economic productivity.  Recently, Cai et al.  (2016) investigated regional unanticipated responses to the pollution reduction mandates imposed by China's central government in 2001 and concluded that the enforcement of pollution discharge fee collection is more lenient in most downstream counties within a province, and that private enterprises make more contributes to such a downstream effect than state-owned and foreign ones.  As mentioned above, although the CICP proposed in 2009 is a signiﬁcant measure of controlling carbon emissions in China, the existing related studies pay little attention to the effect of such a carbon regulation policy on the GPP.  Since the DID method is able to recognize the net impact of a policy intervention, it is conducted in this paper to examine the actual effect of the carbon intensity constraint policy.  However, the DID method needs to strictly set treatment group and the control group, and it is very difﬁcult for our research object to distinguish such groups because all the industrial subsectors are affected by such a carbon regulation policy.  Hence, we adopt a quasi-DID method to conduct our research.  To our knowledge, the quasi-DID method is applied by Nunn and Qian (2011) for the ﬁrst time, who estimated the contributions of potato production to population and urbanization.  The advantage of such a method is that the method does not need to strictly divide the treatment group and the control group and thus can investigate the impact of an exogenous policy.  The detailed description of such a method will be presented in Section 3. 2 of this paper.  <Middle> Methodology and data.  3. 1.  DEA model for estimating industrial GPP.  Suppose that there are K industrial sub-sectors and that each subsector generates M desirable outputs, y=(y1,…yM)∈ℜM +, and I undesirable outputs, b=(b1,…,bI)∈ℜI +, by using N inputs, x=(x1,…,xN)∈ℜNThe contemporaneous environmental production possibility set (PPS) or the contemporaneous environmental technology set of sub-sector k (k = 1, …, K) in period t (t = 1, …, T) can be expressed as this where zk t are intensity variables, which are weights assigned to subsectors in constructing the PPS.  The non-negativity constraints on zk allow the model to satisfy constant returns to scale (CRS).  The above PPS satisﬁes the basic axioms of the PPS containing undesirable outputs. 2 In the case of the variant returns to scale (VRS) environmental PPS, Kuosmanen (2005) introduced an abatement factor uk to hold the weak disposability property of the environmental PPS. 3 Following Kuosmanen (2005), the linear version of the contemporaneous environmental PPS exhibiting the VRS can be characterized as.  b)T denotes a normalized weight vector related to where w=(wn vector. β=(βnx,βmy,βib)T≥0 is a vector of scaling factors indicating indithe numbers of inputs and outputs.  g=(−gx,gy,−gb) is an directional vidual inefﬁciency measures for inputs and outputs.  the symbol diag means diagonal matrices.  The NNDDF seeks to measure maximum possible expansion in desirable outputs and reductions in inputs and unde!tðxt.  yt.  bt.  gtÞ based on the contemporary sirable outputs.  The NNDDF D PPS exhibiting the CRS can be gained through the following DEA-typeSimilarly, the NNDDF D vðxt.  yt.  bt.  gtÞ can be evaluated relative to t (xt).  To overcome the infeasible problem when calculating theintertemporal NNDDF, we incorporate the global benchmark technology (Oh, 2010) and the NNDDF (Zhou et al. , 2012) into the DEA model.  We deﬁne the NNDDF based on the global benchmark technology as.  where PG(x)=convex(P1∪P2∪…∪PT) is the global PPS, a convex envelope of all the contemporaneous PPSs.  Consisting of all the DMUs' inputs and outputs, the global PPS is unique under a certain assumption of returns to scale.  Therefore, the reference technology used to measure the efﬁciency of each sub-sector is uniform.  The NNDDF based on thec ðxt.  yt.  bt.  gtÞ, global PPS under the CRS assumption in period t, i. e. , D can be obtained by solving the following model.  Similarly, the NNDDF based on the global PPS under the VRS assumption can be solved through the following model.  Since this study focuses on the effect of the CICP on the GPP, we choose gross industrial output (Y) and carbon emissions (C) as desirable output and undesirable output, respectively, and the inputs include capital (K), labor force (L), and energy consumption (E).  Referring to Zhou et al.  (2012) and Zhang et al.  (2013), we set the directional vector as g = (−K, −L, −E, Y, −C) and the corresponding weight vector as (1/3, 1/3, 1/9, 1/9, 1/9, 1/9).  Thus, following the form of the Luenberger indicator, we can formulate the GPP between periods t and The variable GPP N 0 (GPP b 0) represents a melioration (regression) in the green total factor productivity, i. e. , the environmentally sensitive productivity.  Referring to Simar and Wilson (1998), Gilbert and Wilson (1998), and Grosskopf (2003), the GPP can be decomposed into pure efﬁciency change (PEC), scale efﬁciency change (SEC), pure technical change (PTC), and scale technical change (STC) as.  The variable PEC measures the catching-up effect of a sub-sector toward the contemporaneous technology frontier, and PEC N 0 (PEC b 0) indicates that the sub-sector is approaching (lagging behind) the contemporaneous frontier over two periods.  The variable SEC is the change of the distance between the boundaries of Pv(x) and Pc(x) relative to a sub-sector's position at t and t + 1, revealing the change in the scale efﬁciency of the sub-sector.  The variable SEC N 0 (SEC b 0) indicates that an increase (decrease) in the scale efﬁciency.  The variable PTC is a measure of changes in the technology gap between the contemporaneous technology frontier and the global technology frontier between periods t and t + 1, and TC N 0 (TC b 0) corresponds to the technical progress (technical regression).  The variable STC describes the changes in the shape of the technology between periods t and t + 1 in the hyperplane, reﬂecting the changes in returns to scale of the technology, and STC N 0 (STC b 0) indicates that the technology is moving toward (deviating from) the CRS.  Beneﬁting from the additive form of the Luenberger indicator and the NNDDF, it is possible to recognize the key drivers of improving the GPP from the perspectives of input and output factors.  Following the decomposition method proposed by Fujii et al.  (2014, 2015), we can decompose the GPP as follows.  where GPPx, GPPy, and GPPb measure the contribution effects of inputs, industrial output, and carbon emissions on the GPP, respectively.  GPPx N 0, GPPy N 0, and GPPb N 0 mean that the change of inputs, industrial output, and carbon emissions are beneﬁcial for optimizing the GPP, i. e. , the green total factor productivity growth, representing the inputsaving effect, output-growth effect, and carbon-reduction effect, respectively.  The increase in GPPs (s = x, y, b) may result from.  (i) input use (or output production) ameliorates the GPP.  (ii) the inefﬁciency of s becomes smaller relative to the others (Fujii et al. , 2014, 2015).  Since the inputs in this paper contain capital stock, labor force, and energy consumption, the inﬂuence of inputs can be further decomposed as follows.  E denote the inﬂuences of capital stock, where GPPx labor force, and energy consumption on the GPPx, respectively.  SimilarE N0 indicate that the changes of capital ly, GPPx stock, labor force, and energy consumption have the capital-saving effect, labor-saving effect, and energy-saving effect on the GPPx, respectively.  The three kinds of inputs affect the GPP by affecting the GPPx.  3. 2.  Quasi-DID model for investigating the impact of the CICP.  Following Nunn and Qian (2011), we use the quasi-DID method to investigate the impact of the CICP on the GPP.  The difference between this method and standard DID model is that we use a continuous treatment (i. e. , carbon intensity) to capture the relative impact of the CICP. 6 We establish the corresponding econometric model as follows.  where i and t denote the industrial sub-sector and the time in years, respectively.  the dependent variable GPP is the estimated GPP above.  CI is carbon intensity.  and It is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 in the period after 2008 (i. e. , 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013) to reﬂect the implementation of the CICP.  trend represents exogenous technological change (Chen and Golley, 2014) and is measured by natural logarithm of 1–13 (from 2001 to 2013).  CV denotes other control variables closely affecting the GPP.  α0–α3 are parameters to be estimated, and α1 captures the relative impact of the CICP on the industrial GPP of the treatment group compared with the control group.  εit is the error term.  Eq.  (11) also includes sector and year ﬁxed effects, labeled as fi and ft, respectively.  Based on the existing literature and China's actual situation, we choose the following factors as control variables (CV).  (1) R&D investment (rd).  The previous studies found that R&D investment could improve energy efﬁciency (Conrad, 2000), which may affect the GPP by energy saving and carbon emission reduction.  Referring to Fan et al.  (2015), rd is measured by the share of the internal expenditure of science and technology development projects in gross industrial output value.  (2) Learning by exporting (exp).  The existing literature argued that industrial enterprises could obtain advanced production technology and management experience through export trade to improve their production efﬁciency (Clerides et al. , 1998).  Therefore, the export activities should be an important factor affecting the GPP.  We use the share of industry export delivery value in sales value to measure it.  (3) Energy consumption structure (ecs).  Energy consumption structure can affect carbon emissions since different fossil fuels have different carbon emission coefﬁcients.  Hence, the adjustment of energy consumption structure plays a signiﬁcant role in the change of environmentally sensitive productivity (Shao et al. , 2011.  Fan et al. , 2015).  Considering China's coaldominated energy consumption structure and the highemitting and high-polluting characteristics of coal, we use the share of coal-type consumption in the total energy consumption to measure ecs.  (4) Technology spillover of foreign investment (fdi).  When foreign enterprises enter into the host country, they could generate the technology spillover effect to promote the production efﬁciency of domestic enterprises (Javorcik, 2004.  Jiang et al. , 2015).  Therefore, the technology spillover of foreign investment should be regarded as an important factor affecting the industrial GPP.  Based on the availability of data, we use the share of the sales value of foreign enterprises in the total sales value of each subsector to measure it.  Since Eq.  (15) is a static model, it implicitly assumes that the changes in the related factors will cause the instantaneous changes in the GPP, i. e. , there is no lagged effect of these factors on the GPP.  However, both industrial output and carbon emissions usually have the characteristic of path dependence, and the effects of most potential determinants on the GPP, such as R&D investment and energy consumption structure, are gradually or retardantly exerted rather than immediately.  Such factors result in a lagged effect on the GPP change, and the degree of such a lagged effect depends on the sensitivity of the GPP to its determinants (Fan et al. , 2015).  Hence, it is necessary to take into account such a lagged effect to obtain an accurate result.  Accordingly, we add the lag term of the GPP into Eq.  (15) to investigate whether there is the path dependence of the GPP.  Thus, the ﬁnal dynamic panel model is as follows.  Although Eq.  (16) could capture the lagged effect of the GPP change, the ﬁrst-order lagged dependent variable in its right side will cause the endogeneity problem resulting from the correlation between independent variable and error term.  To avoid the biased results, we utilize the two-step system generalized method of moments (SGMM) to estimate Eq.  (16).  The SGMM takes the lagged terms of dependent variable and other potentially endogenous variables in regression as instruments and thus can effectively control the endogeneity problem of the dynamic panel model.  Arellano-Bond (AB) test and Sargan test are conducted to ensure the validity of instruments and avoid the over-identiﬁcation problem.  Such estimation strategy has all of the advantages and potential pitfalls of the standard DID estimators (Nunn and Qian, 2011), and it is entitled as the quasi-DID method.  Such a method uses an interactive item of the continuous measure of the treatment variable (i. e. , carbon intensity in this paper) and policy dummy variable, to detect the effect of the policy on the dependent variable.  Thus, it does not need to artiﬁcially set the treatment group and the control group like the standard DID.  Hence, the quasi-DID method can get more objective evaluation of the policy implementation results.  3. 3.  Data.  Because of the alteration of the statistic scope, three sub-sectors, i. e. , the other mining industry, handicrafts and other manufacturing, and waste resources and waste materials recycling industry are excluded in our sample.  Thus, our sample consists of 36 industrial sub-sectors in China.  For convenience, the sub-sectors are labeled by Nos.  S1–S36 in turn (see Table A1).  The used input and output data are introduced as follows.  (1) Industrial output (Y).  Because the GPP can reﬂect the efﬁciencyinputs and the carbon emissions mainly come from fossil fuel consumption which is an intermediate input, we select the gross industrial output as the desirable output which contains the intermediate input rather than industrial added(2) Industrial carbon emissions (C).  According to the reference method proposed by IPCC (2006), carbon emissions are the product of ﬁnal energy consumption, the corresponding carbon content, low caloriﬁc value, molecular weight of carbon oxidation factor.  The use of special parameters of every country is encouraged by IPCC (2006).  Therefore, following previous works (Shao et al. , 2011.  Fan et al. , 2015), we adopt the priority principle to select the related parameters announced ofﬁcially in China as well as the second choice of the defaults provided by IPCC (2006) to assure the accuracy of the estimation results.  All 17 types of fossil fuels reported consecutively in the statistical yearbooks are taken into account, including raw coal, cleaned coal, other washed coal, coke, coke oven gas, other gas, other coking products, crude oil, gasoline, kerosene, diesel oil, fuel oil, liqueﬁed petroleum gas, reﬁnery gas, other petroleum products, and natural gas.  To our knowledge, this paper considers the most energy sources in the existing studies on China's industrial sector.  the perpetual inventory method to estimate the capital stock of sub-sectors as Kt=(1−δt)Kt−1+It, where Kt represents the capital stock at time t, and the initial stock is estimated by referring to Chen (2011).  It denotes annual physical capital investment, and the gross investment in ﬁxed asserts is chosen as its proxy.  δt is depreciation rate and calculated from the ratio of current depreciation and the original value of ﬁxed assets reported in statistical yearbook (Chen, 2011).  stock (K).  We adopt (3) Industrial(4) Industrial labor force (L).  Following the previous studies, we take the annual average employment of each sub-sector as a proxy of labor force input.  (5) Industrial energy consumption (E).  Energy consumption is measured by the total industrial energy consumption with the unit of tons of coal equivalent (tce).  We can obtain the input and output data above of industrial subsectors in China over 2000–2013 from China Industry Economy Statistical Yearbook, China Labor Statistical Yearbook, and China Energy Statistical Yearbook.  To ensure the comparability of data, we deﬂate all the raw data at current price to constant 2000 price. 8 Descriptive statistics and the correlation coefﬁcients of the independent variables are shown in Tables 1 and 2, respectively.  Since all the correlation coefﬁcients among independent variables are b0. 6, we can neglect the multicollinearity problem.  <Conclusion> Results and discussion.  4. 1.  Estimation results of GPP Based on the estimation method above, we calculate the GPP and its decomposition indicators (i. e. , PEC, SEC, PTC, and STC) of China's 36 industrial sub-sectors (see Fig.  3).  Furthermore, according to Eqs.  (13) and (14), the key drivers of the GPP can be recognized from the input and output perspectives.  As shown in Fig.  3, the PTC dominates the basic trend of the GPP with an average value of 0. 1643, indicating that the technical progress is determinant in promoting the GPP.  On average, the PEC and SEC are positive, revealing the improvement in the technical efﬁciency and scale efﬁciency, while the STC is negative, indicating that the technology is deviating from the CRS.  Figs.  4 and 5 present the contributions of inputs and outputs to the changes in the GPP.  As shown in Fig.  4, followed by carbon emissions (GPPb), industrial output (GPPy) has a prominent impact on the change of the GPP, while the inﬂuence of inputs (GPPx) is the weakest.  On average, the GPPy is equal to 0. 1636, accounting for 94. 47% of the ﬂuctuation of the GPP, indicating that the change of industrial output has an outputgrowth effect on the GPP and that industrial growth is the main contributor of a better GPP.  The average values of GPPb and GPPx are equal to 0. 0030 and 0. 0011, respectively, suggesting that the change of carbon emissions has a carbon-reduction effect and the change of inputs has an input-saving effect in general.  It is noteworthy that the GPP was satisﬁed at the beginning of the 21st century.  As the positive externalities of energy conservation and carbon reduction, the environmental policy plays a vital role in improving the GPP.  Actually, the environmental policy was efﬁcient during the late 20th and early 21st centuries in China.  From 1996 to 2005, the Chinese government shut down tens of thousands of enterprises with backward technology, high energy consumption, and high pollution, in order to decrease the industrial carbon emissions and other pollutant emissions (Chen, 2010).  Although the environmental policy was strict and effective, during this period, industrial growth rather than carbon reduction made the most crucial contribution to improving the GPP.  As shown in Fig.  4, the contribution of the industrial output presents an output-growth effect, and the GPP boosts with the increase in the GPPy.  Compared with the output-growth effect of industrial growth, the direct impacts of the environmental policy aiming at carbon reduction on the GPP are marginal.  The main reason why the contribution of industrial output is dominant is the improvement in industrial productivity.  On the one hand, the ﬁnancial crisis at the end of the 20th century accelerated the exit of low productive ﬁrms and optimized resource allocation, in order to speed up the restructuring process and technological progress of industrial sector and thus enhance industrial productivity with economic recovery.  On the other hand, although the carbon reduction caused by the environmental regulation policy did not directly result in the improvement of industrial productivity, this was not enough to validate that the environmental policy had a slight inﬂuence on meliorating the GPP.  As suggested by the Porter hypothesis, the incentives for technological innovation, efﬁciency improvement, and factor reallocation among ﬁrms resulting from more stringent environmental policy may lead to higher productivity (Porter, 1991.  Porter and van der Linde, 1995.  Albrizio et al. , 2017).  The implementation of the environmental regulation policy in China in the early 21st century facilitates eliminating backward technologies and optimizing factor allocation, so as to create the favorable foundation for further industrial development.  However, treating output growth as the single driver of improving the GPP seems not sustainable.  With the increase in the efﬁciency, the efﬁciency change caused by industrial output became smaller, resulting in a lower level of the GPP after 2005. 9 Beneﬁting from the carbon reduction policies, the contribution of carbon emissions has been positive since 2006, revealing a better carbon-reduction effect.  Besides, at the same time, the inputs had a greater inﬂuence on the GPP than before.  Although input saving and carbon reduction became more signiﬁcant in the amelioration of the GPP, compared with industrial output, the impacts of carbon emissions and inputs on the GPP were still unstable and unsubstantial.  According to Eq.  (14), the GPPx can be further decomposed into GPPx E are −0. 0007, L, and GPPx0. 0011, and 0. 0006, respectively, indicating that labor and energy inputs have the labor-saving and energy-saving effects, respectively, and that the utilization of capital is inefﬁcient, impeding the improvement in the GPP.  As shown in Fig.  5, the contributions of labor force were positive except for the year 2004 and 2005, while the contributions of capital were negative except for the year 2004, indicating that the inefﬁciency of labor force was decreasing and that the inefﬁciency of capital was increasing in most cases.  The contrary effects of labor and capital inputs on the GPP result from the substitution of advanced production equipment to labor force, as supposed by Fujii et al.  (2015), who also found a similar opposite trend of the contributions of labor and capital inputs.  The contribution of energy input was negative before 2005 and turned positive in 2006.  At the beginning of this century, China experienced the acceleration of heavy industrialization and land urbanization (Chen, 2015), causing a rapid increase of energy consumption in industrial sector.  The expansion of energy consumption had an adverse impact on the improvement in the GPP during 2000–2005.  With the energy saving policies successively executed after 2006, the annual growth rate of energy consumption decreased from 12. 97% (2000–2005) to 5. 00% (2006–2013), and thus energy use presented an energy-saving effect.  To reﬂect the heterogeneity of various sub-sectors, we further illustrate the annual average GPP and its decompositions (i. e. , GPPy, GPPb, and GPPx) of various sub-sectors in Fig.  6.  The values of all the subsectors' GPP are positive except S2 (extraction of petroleum and natural gas) and S11 (manufacture of textile wearing apparel, footwear and caps), indicating that the green total factor productivity of most subsectors were improved during 2001–2013.  S1 (mining and washing of coal), S3 (mining and processing of ferrous metal ores), S36 (production and supply of water), and S35 (production and supply of gas) perform best in the GPP, but the improvement of the GPP in such sub-sectors is due to the sharply expansion of their industrial output.  Since the new century, China entered into the stage of high-speed industrialization to impel the huge demands for energy, infrastructure, and raw materials to stimulate the rapid expansion of energy and raw materials industry.  During 2001–2013, the gross industrial output values of the four subsectors increased by the annual growth rates of 17. 74%, 31. 72%, 8. 97%, and 18. 69%, respectively.  In addition, it is noteworthy that the high annual average values of the GPP in these sub-sectors mainly result from their better performance at the early stage of our investigation period.  However, the GPP in these sub-sectors became worse and worse afterwards, suggesting that the deﬁciency of depending on industrial output growth to enhance the GPP gradually emerges.  Similarly, other sub-sectors also lack the persistent driving force to improve the GPP.  Only two sub-sectors, i. e. , S32 (manufacture of computers, communication and other electronic equipment) and S9 (manufacture of tobacco) have a relatively evident carbon-reduction effect, indicating that such sub-sectors perform better in carbon reduction.  There is no doubt that strengthening the carbon-reduction effect and input-saving effect is crucial to further improve the GPP.  4. 2.  Effect of the CICP.  The estimation results of Eq.  (16) are shown in Table 3.  In Model 1, we examine the impacts of the CICP (CI × I) on the GPP without control variables.  In Model 2, we introduce all control variables to re-examine the impacts.  AB tests show that the error terms of the two regressions are ﬁrst-order serial correlated at the 1% signiﬁcant level (see AR (1) test), but not second-order serial correlated (see AR (2) test).  Therefore, the basic assumption of the SGMM is satisﬁed.  The Sargan tests show that there is no over-identiﬁcation problem of instrumental variables in the two regressions, indicating that instrumental variables are valid and thus the estimation results in Table 3 are credible.  Next, we discuss the estimation coefﬁcient of each independent variable in turn in Table 3.  (1) Lagged effect of the GPP change.  As shown in Table 3, the coefﬁcients of the GPPt − 1 are signiﬁcantly positive, conﬁrming the obvious path dependence of the GPP, i. e. , the signiﬁcant lagged effect of the GPP change.  Such a ﬁnding is consistent with that of Chen and Golley (2014), who argued that historical information has strong explanatory power for the current levels of productivity growth.  (2) Effect of the CICP.  Because of the externality of carbon emissions, carbon regulation policy is of great importance in reducing carbon emissions and improving the GPP.  However, as shown in Table 3, the coefﬁcients of CI × I are signiﬁcantly negative, suggesting that the implementation of the CICP since 2009 exert a negative effect on the industrial GPP.  This ﬁnding is similar with some previous studies that also validate the inhibitory inﬂuence of the environmental policy on the productivity growth (Barbera and McConnell, 1990.  Dufour et al. , 1998).  A stringent environmental policy implies an additional burden for ﬁrms, inducing a shift of production resources from the traditionally “productive” use to pollution abatement (Albrizio et al. , 2017).  Meanwhile, compared to the market-based environmental policy, which are based on explicit price signals and generally considered to be more cost-effective (De Serres et al. , 2010), the administrative mandatory ones tend to focus on the production process rather than outcome and thus provide ﬁrms with less ﬂexibility in choosing either the suitable technology or the timing of adjustment (Albrizio et al. , 2017).  To fulﬁl the target of the CICP, most provinces in China adopt administrative measures to reduce carbon emissions.  With the characteristic of coerciveness, such measures induce the detrimental effects on productivity growth.  In addition, to accomplish the carbon reduction missions in the short-term, the enterprises may adjust the input and output levels and structures, which directly impact the GPP.  On the one hand, the implementation of the CICP may cause the decline in the growth rates of industrial output with a drop in carbon emissions.  There is no doubt that a lower growth rate of carbon emissions is in favor of improving the GPP, while the decline in the growth rate of industrial output can partly counteract such a positive effect of the CICP on the GPP because the decreases in industrial output and carbon emissions can abate and improve the GPP, respectively.  Thus, the CICP may have a negative net effect on the GPP due to the two different directions.  On the other hand, after the implementation of the CICP, the industrial enterprises need to reduce the growth rate of energy consumption.  However, because of the substitution among factor inputs (Kumar et al. , 2015), to maintain the output growth, the industrial enterprises may increase the inputs of other factors, especially capital (K) for its higher output elasticity in China (Shao et al. , 2016).  Statistical data show that although the growth rate of energy input began to decline after 2009, the growth rate of capital input presented a rising trend.  The average annual growth rate of capital input after 2009 is 0. 43% higher than that before 2009.  Suffering from the relatively low efﬁciency of investment in China, the output growth caused by increasing capital is relatively slow (Chen et al. , 2011).  According to the statistical data, we can ﬁnd that the average annual growth rate of output after 2009 decreases by 7. 65% compared with that before 2009.  Therefore, under the strong emission-reduction instruction from the Chinese government, the input structures of industrial enterprises tend to break away from the original optimal level, resulting in the decline in the GPP.  The carbon reduction measures of the Chinese government mainly aim at mitigating the growth of the demand for energy use, and even some local governments tend to shut down industrial enterprises with high emissions.  However, such measures are against the market mechanism.  (3) Trend.  The coefﬁcients of trend are signiﬁcantly negative in Table 3, indicating that the GPP presents an overall downward trend over time.  This is consistent with Fig.  2 and conﬁrms that the green total factor productivity growth considering carbon emissions in China decreases since the new century.  As we all know, China is at the stage of high-speed industrialization and urbanization in recent decade, which not only stimulates the economic growth, but also causes the huge demand for energy and the rapid expansion of carbon emissions.  In addition, although capital investment is a vital driver of China's economic growth, the capital utilization efﬁciency in China is relatively low (Chen et al. , 2011).  Since the GPP is closely related to carbon emissions and inputs factors as well as industrial output, theZ.  Yang et al.  / Energy Economics 68 (2017) 271–282 expansion of carbon emissions or the inefﬁcient utilization of inputs will offset the beneﬁcial impact of industrial growth.  (4) Control variables.  Among the four control variables, we ﬁnd that only the R&D investment (rd) and the technology spillover of foreign investment (fdi) have signiﬁcant effects on the GPP.  The coefﬁcient of rd is signiﬁcantly positive, implying that the increase of innovation input can effectively improve the GPP because as a key promotion factor of the GPP, technological progress is highly associated with innovation input (Bointner, 2014).  On the contrary, the technology spillover of foreign investment (fdi) has a negative effect on the GPP, which can be attributed to the “pollution heaven” effect (Javorcik and Wei, 2001).  In the process of global industrial transfer, the developed countries transfer high energy consumption and high emission industries to developing countries like China, to increase carbon emissions and undermine the energy saving and emission reduction of the host country.  The effects of learning by exporting (exp) and energy consumption structure (ecs) on the GPP are not statistically signiﬁcant.  The existing studies show that the productivity of export enterprises is higher because of the self-selection effect.  In other words, ﬁrms with high productivity will choose to export, while the learning effect is limited (Clerides et al. , 1998).  The coefﬁcient of ecs is not statistically signiﬁcant, indicating that the inﬂuence of energy mix on the GPP is not obvious.  There is no doubt that the coal-dominated energy consumption structure is an important reason for high carbon emissions in China.  Therefore, optimizing energy consumption structure can improve the GPP by reducing carbon emissions.  However, the optimization of energy mix also means that the cheaper coal with lower price is replaced by other more expensive fuels in production.  Thus, the increase of factor input costs in production can weaken the positive optimization effect of energy mix on the GPP.  In addition, the substitution of renewable energy for fossil fuels is important in de carbonizing and mitigating climate change (Kumar et al. , 2015).  However, the changes in the energy mix in China mainly result from the substitution among various kinds of traditional energy, and the utilization of low carbon energy is still limited (Fan et al. , 2015), causing that the adjustment of energy mix has a marginal effect on the4. 3.  Dynamic effect of the CICP.  Eq.  (16) examines the average effect of the CICP on the GPP after its implementation, but we are still unable to grasp whether or not this effect is delayed.  In this sub-section, we further decompose the average effect and investigate the dynamic effect of the CICP.  Referring to Nunn and Qian (2011), we can establish the following regression model to examine the dynamic effect of the CICP on theThe estimation results of Eq.  (17) are reported in Table 4.  Obviously, the temporal effect of the CICP started in 2009 was not signiﬁcant because the CICP was implemented at the end of 2009 and thus the production mode of industrial enterprises cannot be adjusted in time.  Since 2010, the policy's effect became signiﬁcant, and the CICP exerted a negative impact on the GPP during 2010–2013.  With respect to the inﬂuential degree, such a negative impact present a signiﬁcant intensifying trend with |α2009| b|α2010| b|α2011| b|α2012|≈|α2013|.  After the implementation of the CICP, the growth rate of energy consumption is forced to decline because of the execution of the carbon reduction target,10 while other inputs (such as capital) begin to grow to ensure economic growth, resulting in the change in factor structure.  Due to this additional burden caused by the stringent environmental policy (Albrizio et al. , 2017), the GPP falls.  The signiﬁcance and sign of other variables are consistent with those in Table 3, indicating that the results in Table 3 are robust.  Since the impact of the CICP turned to be signiﬁcant in 2010, such a short-term lag demonstrates the Chinese government has the strong determination of mitigating carbon emissions.  Such results also show that although the Chinese government has achieved some success in abating carbon intensity, such a surface success is at the expense of reducing the industrial GPP.  The reason lies in the fact that the Chinese government mainly relies on strong administrative measures rather than market mechanisms to mitigate carbon emissions.  The mandatory measures contribute to the temporary inhibition of the growth of carbon emissions, but also cause a negative impact on industrial output, curbing the promotion of the GPP.  Obviously, the task of carbon reduction is still very arduous in China in the future.  China should focus on the innovation and promotion of energy-saving and emissionreduction technologies to achieve a “double dividend” of carbon reduction and economic growth through market-based approaches.  The existing literature paid little attention to the effect of China's carbon intensity constraint policy (CICP) on the green production performance.  In this paper, based on the data of 36 industrial sub-sectors in China over 2000–2013, we estimate the industrial GPP by using a nonradial and non-oriented DEA measure method and investigate the impact of the CICP on the industrial GPP through a quasi-DID method. 