 Introduction Although not required, most large companies now issue reports on corporate social responsibility (CSR) performance. 1 This voluntary disclosure of CSR activities is likely driven at least in part by a desire to communicate CSR information to investors.  If CSR activities affect the company’s future earnings and cash ﬂows, investors will ﬁnd related disclosures useful for their valuation decisions.  However, it is possible that investors react to CSR disclosures for another reason as well.  If investors value the societal beneﬁts associated with CSR activities, they may respond positively to disclosures that the company has engaged in such activities independent of how they expect the activities to affect future earnings and cash ﬂows.  We conduct an experiment to test whether investors respond to managers’ disclosure of their CSR investment independent of the effect on the company’s future cash ﬂows.  In addition, we examine whether managers anticipate investors’ response when making their disclosure decisions.  Finally, we examine whether managers’ CSR investment decisions are driven only by investors’ expected response or also by their preferences for the societal beneﬁts associated with their CSR investments.  Understanding how investors’ respond to CSR disclosure is important because this can help explain managers’ voluntary CSR disclosure practices.  For example, knowing that investors value the societal beneﬁts of CSR activities would help explain why managers’ CSR disclosures tend to focus on such beneﬁts.  Also, knowing whether investors’ reaction to CSR disclosures goes beyond the expected effect of CSR activities on the company’s future cash ﬂows could help explain the rapid growth in Socially Responsible Investment (SRI) funds (Social Investment Forum Foundation, 2012).  More broadly, a more complete understanding of investors’ reaction to CSR disclosure can inform standard setters who are considering whether CSR disclosures should be required, what information should be disclosed, and whether such disclosures should be audited. 2 Finally, understanding why managers invest in CSR activities helps inform the ongoing debate regarding whether all CSR activities must be shareholder value maximizing (Friedman, 1970.  Karnani, 2010) or whether some such activities sacriﬁce proﬁts in the social interest (Benabou and Tirole, 2010.  Reinhart et al. , 2008.  Kolstad, 2007).  We examine a particular type of CSR activity, green investment to reduce carbon emissions, in an experimental market setting.  There are several critical features of our setting that allow us to isolate the effects necessary to answer our research questions.  First, in our experimental setting, the impact of a manager’s green investment is fully reﬂected in the company’s current earnings, and as such there can be no further impact on the company’s future cash ﬂows.  This ensures that any observed investor reaction to disclosure of the green investment is not based on investors’ expectations regarding how the investment will affect future earnings.  Second, we ensure that both investors and managers in our experiment know that the ﬁnancial cost to the company of a green investment always exceeds the ﬁnancial beneﬁt, i. e. , the investment is always unproﬁtable.  Thus, any green investment a manager makes always lowers shareholder value, and therefore any positive investor response to the disclosure of a green investment must reﬂect the investors’ desire to reward the manager for engaging in an activity that the investors value.  We ﬁnd that potential investors’ standardized bids for the company are higher when managers disclose their green investments than when they do not, providing evidence that investors value the societal beneﬁts associated with the investment.  We also provide some evidence that investors respond more positively when managers’ disclosures focus on the societal beneﬁts of their investment rather than on the cost to the company.  In addition, managers anticipate investors’ reaction and thus overwhelmingly disclose their investment and tend to focus their disclosure on the societal beneﬁts of the investment rather than on the cost to the company.  Finally, despite investors’ positive response to a disclosed green investment, both managers and current shareholders nevertheless bear a cost when the manager makes a green investment.  Thus, managers’ investment decisions must reﬂect the value they place on the associated societal beneﬁts in addition to any expected investor response.  Our ﬁndings contribute to the CSR literature in several ways.  First, our ﬁnding that investors’ positive response to disclosures of a green investment are based at least in part on the societal beneﬁts associated with the investments helps us better understand the rapid increase in SRI funds (Social Investment Forum Foundation, 2012).  Second, our results offer insights into how and why managers disclose their CSR activities to investors.  Third, our study helps inform standard setters who are considering possible CSR disclosure requirements.  Finally, our study demonstrates the advantages of using experiments to examine important CSR issues that are difﬁcult to study effectively using archival data.  In Sections 2 and 3 we provide background information and present our hypotheses.  We describe our experiment in Section 4 and report our results in Section 5.  The paper concludes with a discussion of our results and their implications in Section 6.  2.  Background.  The KPMG International Survey of CSR (2013) reports that 93 percent of the 250 largest global companies and 86 percent of the 100 largest US companies now engage in some type of voluntary CSR disclosure.  If CSR activities affect the company’s future earnings and cash ﬂows, disclosing such activities will be useful for investors’ valuation decisions.  There are several ways that CSR performance could affect a company’s future earnings.  For example, being more socially responsible could add customers, increase sales, or increase pricing power (Lev et al. , 2010), attract or motivate employees (Balakrisnan et al. , 2011, Bhattacharya et al. , 2008), lower the cost of equity capital (Dhaliwal et al. , 2011) or reduce the risk of governmental regulation (Paine, 2000).  Based on such arguments, researchers have often focused on establishing a positive association between CSR and measures of ﬁnancial performance.  Margolis et al.  (2009) conduct a meta-analysis of 251 such studies over the last 40 years and conclude that “the overall effect is positive but small…and the results for the 106 studies for the past decade are even smaller. ” Of the 251 studies, 59% reported a non-signiﬁcant result, 28% found a positive result, 2% a negative result, and the remaining 10% did not report sample size or signiﬁcance.  Although the prior research does not completely resolve whether companies’ CSR performance is associated with their future ﬁnancial performance, investors’ reactions to CSR disclosures are likely to be at least partially based on their expectations about the effect on ﬁnancial performance.  However, investors could also react to CSR disclosures because they value the societal beneﬁts associated with CSR activities.  Such a reaction would be difﬁcult to isolate using archival data because it occurs simultaneously with any reaction based on expectations of how CSR activities affect earnings.  We overcome this problem by using an experimental setting in which the impact of the CSR activity is fully incorporated into current earnings.  This ensures that any investor reaction is not due to expectations regarding the impact of CSR activities on future cash ﬂows.  3.  Development of hypotheses.  A positive response by investors to disclosed CSR activities could reﬂect their desire to reward company managers for taking an action they value.  The recent rapid growth in SRI funds is consistent with an expanding group of investors rewarding companies for being socially responsible. 3 Such behavior is consistent with the social norm of reciprocity, in which a kind act is reciprocated with a similarly kind act in return (Rabin, 1993).  Reciprocity has been documented in many settings including labor markets and other experimental games.  In labor market settings, prior studies show that in incomplete contract environments, employers often offer a “gift” of a wage greater than the market-clearing level and workers reciprocate with a “gift” of greater effort than the minimum enforceable amount (Akerlof, 1982.  Fehr et al. , 1993, 1997.  Hannan et al. , 2002.  Hannan, 2005.  Kuang and Moser, 2009, 2011). 4 Another widely studied experimental setting documenting reciprocity is the “trust game” (Berg et al. , 1995), in which a ﬁrst mover is given a sum of money and decides how much of it to give to an anonymous counterparty.  Any money given is increased by a multiplier, and then the counterparty decides how much of this new amount to give back to the ﬁrst mover and how much to keep for him/herself.  The ﬁrst mover in this setting typically transfers a signiﬁcant portion of their money to the counterparty, and the counterparty reciprocates this action by returning a signiﬁcant amount of the new multiplied amount to the ﬁrst mover.  Our experimental setting shares some features with the gift-exchange and trust games described above in that our managers are similar to the employers in the gift-exchange studies and to the ﬁrst movers in the trust game studies, while our investors are similar to the workers in the gift-exchange studies and the counterparty in the trust game studies.  However, our setting differs from the previous settings in important ways.  First, while the manager’s green investment in our study is similar to the employer’s gift and ﬁrst mover’s transfer in the previous studies, it differs in that, unlike in the previous studies, the manager’s green investment does not ﬁnancially beneﬁt the investors directly.  Therefore, in our setting any reciprocal motivation on the part of investors must operate through the value they place on the societal beneﬁts of the green investment rather than on any potential personal ﬁnancial gain.  Second, managers who make a green investment in our setting affect both their own wealth and the wealth of another current shareholder.  In the other settings, when employers (ﬁrst movers) offer a gift (transfer), they only reduce their own wealth.  Third, in prior studies, the employee (second mover) could directly reciprocate the employer’s (ﬁrst mover’s) behavior, but in our market setting, it is less clear that any individual investor can directly reciprocate the manager’s behavior because only the winning bidder can ultimatelyThe differences described above make reciprocation by investors less likely in our setting than in previous reciprocity studies.  Nevertheless, there are still reasons to expect that investors will react positively when managers disclose their green investment.  Martin (2009) found that investors in a market setting similar to ours were willing to bear part, but not all, of the cost of a green investment made by the sole owner of a company.  Elfenbein and McManus (2010) used data from eBay auctions to show that customers were more likely to buy, and pay higher prices for, items for which the seller had committed to donate a portion of the sales proceeds to charity than identical items for which the seller had not made such a commitment.  Again, the higher prices paid by customers reduced, but did not fully offset, the cost to the company of the charitable contribution.  Finally, Balakrishnan et al.  (2011) provide evidence that employer charitable giving can help motivate employee effort that beneﬁts the employer, but, again, many employers only recovered part of the cost of their charitable donations.  Thus, our ﬁrst hypothesis is.  Hypothesis 1(H1).  Holding the distribution of possible cash ﬂows constant, investors will respond more positively to disclosure of a green investment than to no report about green investing.  As hypothesized above, we expect investors who value the societal beneﬁts of green investments to reciprocate the manager’s behavior by paying higher prices when managers disclose that they made a green investment.  However, investor reaction is also expected to vary depending on how managers frame their green investment disclosure.  Different framing of equivalent information has been shown to inﬂuence individuals’ judgments in many different settings (see Levin et al. , 1998 for a review of the framing literature).  If investors’ reciprocal response reﬂects the value they place on the societal beneﬁts of a green investment, they are likely to respond more favorably to reports that focus on the societal beneﬁts of the investment rather than on the cost of the investment to the company.  Thus, our second hypothesis is.  Hypothesis 2 (H2).  Investors will react more positively to disclosures that focus on the societal beneﬁts of green investments than to disclosures that focus on the costs to the company of such investments.  Since disclosures of CSR activities are largely voluntary, managers can decide what, if anything, they wish to disclose about such activities.  Managers likely decide what to disclose based on their expectations regarding investors’ reaction.  However, in our experimental setting the impact of the green investment is fully incorporated into the company’s current earnings, and thus managers’ disclosure decisions must be based on expectations of investors’ response to non-economic information in the disclosure.  If investors respond as predicted in H1 and H2, managers would likely either anticipate or learn which forms of disclosure yield the most positive investor response.  Thus, our third and fourth hypotheses are.  Hypothesis 3 (H3).  Managers who make a green investment will more often disclose to investors that they have done so rather than make no report.  Hypothesis 4 (H4).  Managers’ disclosures of their green investment will more often focus on the societal beneﬁts of the investment than on the cost to the company.  Because in our setting any green investment is always unproﬁtable, the manager and the other current shareholder will always bear a cost when the manager makes a green investment unless investors reciprocate sufﬁciently to offset the full cost of the unproﬁtable investment.  If managers are repeatedly willing to bear a personal cost and to impose a cost on the other current shareholders, this suggests that their green investments do not reﬂect a naive belief that investors will fully compensate them for the cost of the investment.  Rather, managers’ green investments must reﬂect the personal value they place on the societal beneﬁts of such investments.  <Middle> Experiment.  4. 1.  Overview.  We conducted our experimental markets using z-tree software (Fischbacher, 2007) in a networked computer lab.  We recruited 90 volunteer participants from the lab participant pool of approximately 1,300 individuals.  Our participants were 55% male and averaged 21 years of age.  Three experimental sessions with 30 participants each were conducted.  Each session consisted of 20 independent periods and lasted approximately 90 minutes.  At the conclusion of each session, one of the 20 periods was randomly selected and participants were paid their $5 participation fee plus their earnings for the randomly selected period.  Participants’ earnings depended on the decisions that they and other participants made during the experiment (details provided below).  In each of the three sessions, participants were randomly assigned to one of three roles.  (1) a manager who was a shareholder in the company, (2) another current shareholder in the company, or (3) one of three potential investors in the company, and these roles were constant throughout the experiment.  We distinguish between “potential investors” and “current shareholders” in our setting and measure investor reaction based on the price set by the potential investors.  Although our other current shareholders do not play a role in setting the market price, we included them in our design to reﬂect the fact that, like our managers, they also bear a direct ﬁnancial cost when managers make an unproﬁtable green investment. 