
About $2 billion of petroleum are traded daily, making petroleum
the single largest item in the balance of payment and exchange between
countries (Tordo etal. , 2011).  Economies are susceptible to oil supply
and price volatility as a result of their strong dependence on oil-based
products (Cuñado and Pérez de Gracia, 2003.  Jiménez-Rodríguez and
Sánchez, 2005).  This is probably the reason for state interventions in
the industry, in the form of National Oil Companies (NOCs).  State ownership of oil companies started in 1914 when the British government acquired a controlling stake in the Anglo-Persian Oil Company, now
British Petroleum (BP), setting a precedent for the many state-owned
oil companies to follow in other countries (Wolf, 2009).  Since 1991,
countries that possess NOCs have held nearly 90% of global crude oil reserves (Eller etal. , 2011).  Various governments have seen the oil industry far important to be left in the hands of private International Oil
Companies (IOCs) as direct state control over its resources is a strong indicator of national sovereignty (Mommer, 2002).  State ownership in
this industry is at the heart of debates on state interventionism, asset
nationalization and deregulation policies in the oil industry.  This notwithstanding, to some researchers direct state intervention is seen as
a major cause of inefﬁciency in this industry (Kashani, 2005a, 2005b). 
The issue of state ownership versus private ownership of oil companies
has become the overarching theme of most efﬁciency-related studies in
the industry.  Indeed, Al-Obaidan and Scully (1992), Eller etal.  (2011),
Ike and Lee (2014), Wolf (2009), and Sueyoshi and Goto (2012) have
all provided empirical evidence on the differences in the efﬁciency of
state controlled oil companies and privately controlled ones. 
Although, these studies mostly favour private ownership, the debate
is not dwindling since high energy prices, asset nationalization policy
and economic success of some NOCs have re-ignited calls for more
state involvement (Wolf, 2009).  There is therefore the need to reconsider how state ﬁrms can be more productive, and stay relevant in this volatile industry, compared to their private counterparts.  Empirical
evidence show that one way ﬁrms (both private and state) can improve
efﬁciency is through multinational operations (Greene etal. , 2009.  Li,
2008).  A multinational ﬁrm is one that owns and operates income generating assets in more than one country.  A ﬁrm that operates in a single
country is a local ﬁrm.  Petroleum ﬁrms are among the largest multinationals internationally (Al-Obaidan and Scully, 1995).  Royal Dutch
Shell, Sinopec, China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC) and
Exxon Mobil are among the top six global ﬁrms on Fortune Magazine's
2016 global 500 company ranking (Fortune Magazine, 2017).  Even
some of the NOCs, who are usually expected to only operate in their
home countries, have multinational operations.  For example CNPC, a
company with 100% state ownership (Energy Intelligence, 2013), has
oil and gas operations in 29 countries around the world (CNPC, 2014). 
CNPC is an example of a state-owned multinational oil company
(MNOC).  For ﬁrms like Exxon Mobil, Chevron and Total, they are
privately-owned multinationals (MIOCs).  Indeed, from the theoretical
arguments of both the eclectic paradigm (Dunning, 1977) and portfolio
diversiﬁcation theory (Markowitz, 1952), multinational operations
bring some gains to a ﬁrm's operation in the form of efﬁciency
(Al-Obaidan and Scully, 1995). 
Though this view that multinational operation improves ﬁrm performance, is quite predominant in theory, more empirical testing of this
view in the petroleum industry is needed.  From the evidence gathered,
only Al-Obaidan and Scully (1995) have explored performance differences between multinationals and locals in efﬁciency assessment in
the oil industry.  However, their study does not consider efﬁciency
differences between state-owned multinational companies and
privately-owned multinational companies.  Their study also does not
consider whether going multinational can make a state ﬁrm more efﬁcient in its operations.  As more and more NOCs consider becoming multinational in their operations, it is important to examine whether such
international operation is offsetting the empirically documented inefﬁciencies from state control.  For foreign policy and economic purposes,
there is a growing presence of state-owned enterprises in global markets (Bass and Chakrabarty, 2014).  The policy of state-owned enterprises in the international context, even in the oil and gas industry,
stems from their desire to gain foreign resources to satisfy both shortterm and long term needs of the home country.  Though this internationalization policy of state ﬁrms is on a massive scale, it is important to note
that this is a relatively new phenomenon (Cuervo-Cazurra etal. , 2014)
which raises questions on its effectiveness in improving productivity. 
The contributions of this study are relevant to both literature and
policy.  It contributes to the existing body of knowledge on the efﬁciency
differences between state and privately-owned oil companies by introducing and testing the multinational dimension of the ownership
debate.  We provide empirical answers on whether multinationalism
or internationalization policies of state-owned oil companies provide a
viable opportunity for state oil companies to remain relevant in the international oil industry.  We do this by relying on Data Envelopment
Analysis (DEA), a nonparametric frontier approach, which is able to estimate efﬁciency of ﬁrms with very few assumptions and has a more
ﬂexible production structure (Bogetoft and Otto, 2011).  It can also handle multiple inputs and outputs and can decompose efﬁciency into several factors thereby tracking the sources of inefﬁciencies.  Bootstrapping
techniques by Simar and Wilson (1998, 1999, 2000), are also employed
to address the ﬂaws of the DEA technique, including outlying observations, its inability to adequately handle statistical noise and its general
deterministic nature. 