. 
All auditors (US and foreign) who audit US-listed companies are required to register with the Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board (PCAOB) and be subject to PCAOB inspections.  In this study, we focus on foreign auditors and consider 
whether audit quality for non -US-listed foreign public clients (non-US-listed clients) is higher following the initial PCAOB inspection. 
Our study addresses the issue of positive externality, i. e. , whether the PCAOB international inspection program 
improves audit quality for foreign auditors’ non-US-listed foreign clients even though investors in these particular foreign 
companies are not the intended beneﬁciaries of the foreign auditor inspection program
The impact of the PCAOB international inspection program on audit quality abroad is ambiguous.  Given the PCAOB’s 
reputation for actively looking for auditor misconduct and taking follow-up disciplinary actions against deﬁcient auditors 
( DeFond, 2010; Farrell and Shabad, 2005 ), the very act of registering with the PCAOB may exacerbate foreign auditors’ exposure to reputation loss and provide them with an ex ante incentive to strengthen their ﬁrm -level quality controls and 
increase audit quality.  To the extent that audit deﬁciencies are discovered during the initial inspection, the auditor may 
have an additional incentive to take appropriate remedial action and strengthen ﬁrm-level quality controls to avoid further 
embarrassment on subsequent inspections.  The improvements in the foreign auditor’s ﬁrm -level quality controls could increase audit quality for all of the ﬁrm’s foreign clients US-listed or otherwise.  Moreover, because the starting point for audit 
quality is potentially lower abroad than in the US ( Choi Name, 2008; Francis and Wang, 2008 ), the PCAOB inspection program 
could have a greater impact abroad than in the US.  
However, reasons exist to doubt the eﬃcacy of PCAOB inspections in improving audit quality.  Prior research ( DeFond, 
2010; Lennox and Pittman, 2010 ) indicates that PCAOB inspection reports are not useful for assessing audit quality because 
they merely list audit deﬁciencies and do not provide a summary opinion about the auditor’s quality.  Moreover, the effectiveness of the PCAOB’s international inspections may be limited by geographic distance from the US, potential language 
differences, or cultural barriers. 