 1.  Introduction  Competition for CEO talent has increased over the past few decades.  As described in Frydman and Jenter (2010) and  Murphy (2013) , ﬁrms now regularly hire outsiders as CEOs instead of internal candidates, competing with other ﬁrms or  poaching their CEOs, aided by compensation consultants and executive placement ﬁrms that create a market for CEOs and  make compensation packages easier to compare.   What effects does such competition for CEO talent have.  How does it affect the compensation contracts that ﬁrms and  CEOs sign, the incentive power of those contracts, and the value that ﬁrms and CEOs create.  The aim of this paper is  to analyze the effects of introducing competition in a setting with realistic informational frictions, in order to understand  how these frictions and the forces of competition jointly determine the outcome.  We show that the ascent of competition  increases the incentive power of CEO compensation contracts.  This mitigates ineﬃciencies from low-powered incentive contracts that arise when ﬁrms do not compete, but it also introduces new ineﬃciencies caused by excessively high-powered  incentive compensation.  Which setup generates larger ineﬃciencies depends on the informational frictions.   We incorporate the following informational frictions in our model.  Firms are uncertain whether a CEO has high or low  talent.  they cannot observe a CEO’s decisions.  a CEO can misreport her performance.  and the long-term ﬁrm value is a noisy  measure of how much value a CEO added.  We are particularly interested in the role of misreporting in our results.  We show  that if misreporting is not possible, then competition for talent does not cause any ineﬃciencies and thus always increases  the value that is created.  If misreporting is possible, however, the contracts that competing ﬁrms offer to CEO candidates  include excessively high-powered incentive compensation, leading to ineﬃciently high effort and aggressive misreporting,  thereby causing ineﬃciencies that can outweigh the ineﬃciencies that competition mitigates.   Note that many ﬁrms offer signiﬁcant incentive compensation to non-CEO top-level executives.  In industries in which  this is common and in which non-CEO executives are able to signiﬁcantly affect their ﬁrm’s true and reported performance,  our results extend to this set of executives.   The ineﬃciencies that arise under competition are different from those that arise without competition, because their  causes are different.  In the absence of competition, a ﬁrm maximizes its proﬁt by offering a contract with incentive compensation that is ineﬃciently low-powered at low performance levels (a contract with the well-known “no distortion at  the top” feature).  The ﬁrm’s goal is to offer low compensation to a high-talent CEO, without reducing her effort incentives.   By reducing the incentive power at low performance levels, the ﬁrm can make it unattractive for a high-talent CEO to act  as if she had low talent, exert low effort and generate poor performance.  But the ﬁrm’s proﬁt is reduced if the CEO has  low talent, because of the low-powered incentives at low performance levels (a low-talent CEO is expected to generate low  performance).  The ﬁrm trades off reduced compensation against lost proﬁts, a trade-off that depends on the informational  frictions.  In particular, the possibility of misreporting exacerbates the ineﬃciency.  But misreporting is not the driver of the  ineﬃciency.  The ﬁrm’s proﬁt-maximizing contract is ineﬃcient even if misreporting is impossible.   Under competition for talent, the rivalry between ﬁrms forces them to offer contracts under which each CEO’s expected  compensation equals the value she creates — a ﬁrm’s proﬁt must be zero in equilibrium, because if it was not, a rival ﬁrm  1 This rivalry complicates the contract  could design a slightly more generous contract and hire a CEO candidate instead.   design problem.  The contract must offer a high-talent CEO a large expected compensation, since having high talent makes  a CEO more productive.  but such high compensation should not induce a low-talent CEO to act as if she had high talent,  misreport aggressively, earn a large compensation and cause a loss to the ﬁrm.  Firms can prevent such mimicking behavior  by making strong use of performance pay.  A low-talent CEO beneﬁts less from higher performance pay, since she is less  productive, so acting as if she had high talent becomes less attractive.  However, achieving this requires an excessively highpowered incentive contract, leading to excessive effort and misreporting by a high-talent CEO, thereby causing eﬃciency  losses.   Competition for talent thus causes new ineﬃciencies that are very different from those arising in the absence of competition.  Excessive incentive power at high performance levels replaces ineﬃciently low incentive power at low performance  levels.  and ineﬃciencies caused by proﬁt maximization are replaced by ineﬃciencies that arise out of necessity, because  ﬁrms are unable to hire a CEO without them.   By comparing the contracts, decisions and payoffs in the two setups (without and with competition for CEO talent), we  can analyze the effects of introducing competition for talent.  For all talent levels and performance levels, we obtain the  following results.  First, expected CEO compensation increases, because the rivalry between ﬁrms leads to more generous  compensation packages.  Second, the incentive power (pay-performance sensitivity) increases, because competition eliminates a ﬁrm’s ability to offer ineﬃciently low-powered incentives at low performance levels while also requiring excessively  high-powered incentives at high performance levels.  Third, CEO effort increases, in response to the more powerful incentive  compensation.  Fourth, misreporting increases, also in response to the more powerful incentive compensation. 