
Destructive ﬁshing is considered to be one of the most important
problems in marine governance (Clark Name, 2005.  Sethi Name, 2005). 
According to the United Nations Environment Program, about 25% of
ﬁsheries worldwide are in jeopardy of collapse due to destructive ﬁshing (Shakouri Name, 2010).  The threat of destructive ﬁshing, such as
the use of poison, dynamite and illegal nets, is especially devastating
for inshore ﬁsheries in tropical and developing countries where small
communities are engaged in subsistence ﬁshing (Belton and Thilsted,
2014).  The collapse or even serious degradation of local ﬁsheries due
to the use of destructive ﬁshing gears has a very negative impact on
the material well-being of these communities.  As a result, there have
been frequent attempts to persuade ﬁshers who are using destructive
gears to change their behavior, and switch to more environmentallyfriendly ﬁshing gears (Samoilys Name, 2008).  In most cases this involves
policy measures, such as gear-exchange programs or monetary incentives for resource conservation (Verheij Name, 2004).  These policies are
motivated by the assumption that a major motivation for using destructive ﬁshing gear is impatience or short-sightedness (low discount factors) and the lack of availability of high capital stocks. 
This assumption is based on standard economic models of renewable resources, going back to Hotelling (1931), which frame natural resource extraction as an intertemporal optimization problem, where
discount factors1 indicate the value given to expected future consumption.  This implies that, higher discount factors meaning higher valuation
of expected future consumption, leads to lower rates of extraction and
vice versa.  Following Farzin (1984) we refer to this as the conservation
effect.  However Farzin (1984) offers a different point of view and argues
that, for high cost of extraction, the relationship between discount factors and resource extraction is opposite to the generally held one, meaning that higher discount factors result in higher extraction levels and
vice versa.  This is based on the view, that, patient ﬁshers are able to invest more in their extraction capabilities.  We refer to this as the disinvestment effect. 
We add to this discussion by applying the underlying logic of these
models to the speciﬁc context of the adoption of destructive ﬁshing
gears in small-scale artisanal ﬁsheries.  Our main objective is to distinguish between scenarios where the policies based on the conservation
effect are justiﬁed and the conditions under which they are not justiﬁed. 
Typical policies, like livelihood diversiﬁcation or temporal closures with
income compensation, may lead to undesirable effects in a situation
when the disinvestment effect dominates the conservation effect.  We
contribute to solving this conundrum, by providing a better understanding of ﬁsher's motivation to adopt destructive gears and its relationship to individual time preferences. 
This research question is motivated by empirical research in Zanzibar which suggests that patient ﬁshermen have higher extraction level
since they can invest more in their extraction capability (see Javaid Name, 2016).  This surprising ﬁnding triggered some interesting and unanswered questions.  Does the relationship between time preferences and
extraction behavior change depending on the circumstances.  What role
do external factors play in this decision-making. 