 1.  Introduction 1. 1.  The problem.  A popular product sold by energy companies to medium-to-large customers is one where an unspeciﬁed amount of power can be bought at a ﬁxed price during a certain time-interval.  We call this a ﬁxed price, unspeciﬁed consumption contract or simply a ﬁxed price agreement.  The business-to-business electricity market in Denmark in 2014 was 23. 1 TWh, about MEUR 800 million in monetary terms.  60% was sold as ﬁxed price agreements in some form.  Having entered into the ﬁxed price agreement, the energy company must asses and manage the risks associated with the obligations of the contract.  This is challenging for several reasons.  If the seller faced only the risk from price-ﬂuctuations, he could simply buy forward contracts to set up a full, perfect hedge.  However, with a criterion function that takes into account both (expected) gains and losses, this is expensive if forward-prices are typically above expected future spot-prices.  This so-called contango is the norm in Nordic power markets, as demonstrated by both Botterud et al.  (2002) and our analysis in Section 5. 1.  Another complicating factor is quantity risk.  If the consumer’s quantity choice were all-or-nothing, the contract would have payoff akin to call options.  Handling that would require modelling the price randomness of the electricity market which has several characteristics that are different from standard ﬁnancial markets such as stocks and exchange rates.  But the consumer has more ﬂexibility and because energy demand is created by physical use, her choice will not be all-or-nothing.  Demand will be positively correlated with the price as high demand drives up the price.  For the contract seller that creates what in other areas of ﬁnance would be known as wrong-way risk.  He will have to deliver a lot of energy for a ﬁxed price when buying it in the spot market is expensive.  In this paper, we will deal with these risks with a joint model of spot-price and consumption load.  1. 2.  Previous work, related literature.  The non-storability of electricity is a key complicating factor in energy markets.  It makes physical hedging inoperable and it causes highly volatile spot-markets with structural price jumps, see for instance Benth et al.  (2008).  As a consequence, the problem of joint quantity and price risk on electricity markets is commonly studied in the literature and it stresses the importance of incorporating price–quantity correlation into the models.  For an example, Bessembinder and Lemmon (2002) consider an equilibrium market model for which the correlation has a signiﬁcant impact on optimal hedging strategies in forward markets.  Their model has been extended by, for instance, Willems and Morbee (2010) who study the effect of including options onto the market.  From the retailer’s perspective with an exogenously given spot and forward market, Oum et al.  (2006) use utility maximisation to derive optimal hedge strategies that exploit the correlation to manage price–quantity risk in a single period setting.  As another example, Boroumand et al.  (2015) address the problem of price–quantity risk on an intra-day scale and demonstrate with a simulation approach that intra-day hedging outperforms daily and longer term portfolios.  We also take the retailer’s perspective and model the spot-price/consumption-load correlation with a bivariate model where both the spot and load have temporal dependency.  Based on that model, we set out to hedge the price–quantity risk of a ﬁxed price agreement with forward contracts.  In relation to our approach, Coulon et al.  (2013) develop an intricate three-factor model and consider hedging strategies based on options that are priced with closed form expressions.  In contrast, we do not consider the problem of pricing derivatives under our model, but concentrate on a operational hedging approach based on exogenously given market forward-price data.  1. 3.  Structure, contributions, and ﬁndings.  The rest of the paper is organised as follows.  In Section 2, we formulate a dynamic model for electricity spot-price and consumptionload — a two-dimensional Gaussian Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model with a seasonality component.  In Section 3, we analyse expected loss minimisation.  Looking speciﬁcally at static hedging strategies with forward contracts, a main contribution of the paper is the derivation of explicit formulas for optimal hedge portfolios based on three different loss functions.  the square, the exponential, and the “hockey stick”.  the two latter based on asymmetric risk measures appear new.  Section 4 is an empirical study of the hedging performance based on publicly available consumption, spot- and forward-prices from the Nordic region.  The empirical results demonstrate substantial beneﬁts for the derived asymmetric hedges over the common industry benchmark that uses a position in forward contracts equal to the expected load.  It should be noted that unlike many sources in the literature, the hedge experiments in this paper truly test outof-sample performance.  The hedge portfolio constructed at, say, time t uses only information about state-variables and model parameters that was truly available at time t.  Section 5 investigates the robustness of the results.  First, we test if forward-prices add information that can be easily exploited in the hedge constructions.  We ﬁnd this not to be the case.  Second, we consider a model extension with jumps (or spikes) in which we derive optimal hedges and implement these.  We ﬁnd little to no empirical improvement over the original hedge performance.  Section 6 concludes and describes directions for future research.  <Middle> The electricity price and consumption model.  Our approach will be to model jointly the electricity spot price and the consumption load with a continuous stochastic process.  Both the price and the load exhibit seasonal patterns – the time of the day, day of the week and climatological season naturally effect the spot price and consumption, see Benth et al. 