
Most liberalized electricity markets suffer from market power,
with high concentration indices, and are frequently subject to market investigations (see for example DG COMP, 2007).  Academics and
consultants alike struggle to model the exercise of this market power
and the implications of possible reforms, such as increasing interconnection (Newbery Name, 2004), moving to nodal pricing (Joskow
and Tirole, 2000), market coupling (Newbery Name, 2016), breaking
up larger companies such as EdF in France (INSEAD, 2004), introducing capacity auctions (Entriken and Wan, 2003; Genoese Name, 2012;
Hach Name, 2015; Hu and Hobbs, 2008) or by increasing the volumes
of renewables (Liski and Vehviläinen, 2015; Newbery, 2016).  The
main problem facing those wishing quantiﬁed results rather than
illustrative examples lies in the considerable diﬃculty of modeling
strategic behaviour in markets with various capacity and transmission constraints, in which the participants interact daily on auction
markets under conditions of great transparency. 
Electricity is possibly the best example of the textbook example
of a perfectly homogenous product that would seem to favour
intense price competition, but, as observed above, liberalized electricity markets are characterized by oligopoly and deviations from
competitive behaviour.  Moreover, generators have very complete
information about their own and rivals’ short-run cost functions,
which are determined by known technologies and observable fuel
prices.  Cournot models may be suitable for modeling potential
market power and prices for speciﬁc levels of demand (Moselle
Name, 2006) but electricity demand varies substantially hourly, daily
and seasonally.  In practice, and more extensively now that the
EU has almost completed market coupling at the day-ahead stage,
generating companies offer their supply as a function of offer prices
(often a step function, see Newbery Name, 2013) into EUPHEMIA,2 the
auction platform that determines day-ahead prices for the whole of
the market-coupled EU.  The natural way of modeling the outcomes
of that auction are to look for Supply Function Equilibria, but these
are notoriously hard to solve or even simulate (Day Name, 2002). 
Nevertheless, the central idea of a supply function is helpful, in
that it requires agents to form a view of the supplies offered by
other generators, which, when subtracted from total demand, gives
a perceived residual demand.  Each agent can then choose an optimal
supply response.  If all agents have well-deﬁned supply behaviour
it is in principle possible to ﬁnd a Nash equilibrium in which each
oligopolist maximizes its proﬁts given the behaviour of other market participants.  The agents may choose to offer ﬁxed quantities –
Cournot behaviour – or may choose to mark-up their offers on their
variable costs, and the relevant demand facing those with market
power may have competitive supplies subtracted from total demand. 
The central point of this paper is that while the residual demand
facing an agent depends on the choices of other agents, the
assumption that the market will settle at the Nash equilibrium of
these speciﬁc choices needs to be tested for robustness.  The equilibrium will not be robust if it is proﬁtable for an agent, knowing the
strategies of all other players, to choose a different strategy. 
This paper tests the robustness of various popular modeling
approaches for an electricity market with a small number of players. 
We study two particular forms of mark-up pricing: ﬁxed and proportional, where in the former, ﬁrms set a ﬁxed mark-up on their
marginal cost schedule and in the latter, ﬁrms choose a proportional
mark-up.  We analyze these two mark-up pricing models because
most studies (some of which are reviewed below) ﬁnd that where
electricity markets are concentrated, generators are selling at prices
above the competitive short-run marginal cost.  They have the attraction that the choice of a single parameter (the mark-up) considerably
simpliﬁes the modeling problem (Weidlich and Veit, 2008).  More
important, they are consistent with the forms of offers that are
allowed in most power exchanges and by EUPHEMIA.  We compare
the results with the standard Nash-Cournot model in which agents
just choose the quantity to supply to the market.  In auction markets like power pools and EUPHEMIA this would require producers
to offer a ﬁxed amount at some minimum price (e. g.  variable cost)
and then receive the price set by the interaction of total supply andWe note that for the case of linear marginal costs and linear
demand, the supply function equilibrium is a proportional mark-up
model (Klemperer and Meyer, 1986), but we are interested in a wider
set of cost and demand functions.  One of the main conclusions of this
paper is that the proportional mark-up model would seem to have
wider appeal in modeling market power than just in the linear case,
and in that sense it forms a useful simpliﬁcation of complex supply
function models that lends itself to modeling market power. 
We examine the robustness of both forms of mark-up pricing
and ask whether these models are robust against more sophisticated
(Stackelberg) strategies.  If so, they pass the ﬁrst test of plausibility, but if not, then modelers need to be aware of their fragility and
consider alternatives, which we discuss.  Throughout we assume a
market structure similar to electricity pools (e. g.  Green and Newbery,
1992) or the EUPHEMIA European platform, which is a last-price
auction in which offers from generators and bids from suppliers are
submitted and the market clearing price is determined (subject to
various constraints, such as transmission capacities).  We assume that
the daily interaction on the auction market or power exchange, combined with cost transparency, makes it plausible that agents know
or learn the supply behaviour of their rivals.  They are also assumed
to know how the market clearing price is set, bearing in mind that
different plants have different costs (different eﬃciencies, different
fuels) and demand varies hourly, by day of the week, and seasonally. 
We show that the two mark-up strategies considered are more
competitive than Nash-Cournot behaviour, with the Nash choice of
the optimal proportional mark-up on marginal costs yielding lower
prices and proﬁts than the Cournot oligopoly but higher prices
and proﬁts than the optimum ﬁxed mark-up on marginal costs.  In
deterministic cases, the mark-up equilibria are robust against Nash
deviations by single ﬁrms choosing quantities (or any other actions)
instead of mark-ups.  However, these mark-up equilibria are not
robust to more sophisticated single-ﬁrm Stackelberg deviations in
which the deviant maintains her output and the remaining players
adapt to that and ﬁnd the corresponding mark-up equilibrium output levels.  This would be achieved by the deviant repeatedly offering
the same supply into an auction market (like a pool or the EUPHEMIA
platform) and the remaining players then groping towards their most
proﬁtable response.  The deviant player makes higher proﬁts following this Stackelberg strategy.  If demand is stochastic, then a ﬁxed
quantity response (deterministic Cournot) is strictly inferior to either
mark-up equilibria.  In the case of linear marginal costs and linear
demand, the proportional mark-up equilibrium as a supply function
equilibrium is robust against any deviation, while a ﬁxed mark-up is
vulnerable to a proportional mark-up deviant. 
This paper makes a number of contributions to the literature on
electricity market modeling and oligopoly pricing.  It ﬁrst sets the
scene by ranking in order of proﬁtability three common market equilibrium models: the standard Cournot model (in which producers
offer a ﬁxed quantity into the auction platform and the price is set
by the demand side),3 and two price-setting models in which ﬁrms
set prices as mark-ups on their marginal costs.  This allows us to
test their robustness against various kinds of deviations by single
and multiple ﬁrms, ﬁrst on the assumption of certainty, and then
under uncertainty about demand levels.  If, as in most industrial commodity industries and particularly for electricity, marginal costs are
increasing, we ﬁnd that proportional mark-ups emerge as the more
attractive pricing model, which we relate to the literature on supply functions usually connected to electricity markets.  These ﬁndings
are relevant to the considerable literature on simulation modeling of such industries, widely used in investment analysis, policy
reform (e. g.  Green and Newbery, 1992, commenting on restructuring state-owned monopoly generation companies) and anti-trust
investigations. 
The paper is organized as follows.  In Section 2, we brieﬂy survey
different modeling approaches to oligopolistic electricity markets. 
In Section 3, we introduce our mark-up models and test their
robustness to Cournot deviations.  Section 4 tests our models against
Stackelberg deviations.  Section 5 concludes. 
<Middle> Modeling oligopolistic electricity markets. 
Electricity markets have the great advantage for the study of
market power in that high resolution price data (hourly or halfhourly) are available, together with aggregate demand and supply
in that period (and sometimes individual company’s supply, e. g. 
Sweeting, 2007).  Variable costs are also easy to simulate, and in
some markets are observable for each generation company (e. g.  in
the Single Electricity Market of the island of Ireland).  One standard test of market power is benchmark analysis using estimates of
the short-run marginal cost of production (given by fuel prices and
conversion eﬃciencies and aggregating across all marginal costs) to
2 1 Pan-European Hybrid Electricity Market Integration Algorithm: see https://
www. apxgroup. com/wp-_content/uploads/Euphemia-_Public-_Documentation. pdf. 
simulate a hypothetical competitive market.  Wolfram (1999) used
this approach and actual cost data to measure the price-cost markup for the duopoly price setters in the electricity market of England
and Wales, ﬁnding that they moderated their mark-ups in the light
of intense regulatory and competition authority scrutiny.  The same
approach of measuring mark-ups has been applied by Wolak Name
(2000), Borenstein Name (2002), Joskow and Kahn (2002), van Damme
(2005), and Bushnell Name (2008).  In contrast to Wolfram, Borenstein
Name (2002) found high price-cost margins in the high demand
summer months in California. 
The other standard approach is to postulate a model of market power and compare its predictions with market outcomes. 
Borenstein and Bushnell (1999) use historical data to simulate the
California electricity market as a static Cournot market with a competitive fringe, while Puller (2007) uses data to conclude that the
market is relatively consistent with a Cournot pricing game. 
A number of other authors use this standard I–O workhorse
of Cournot competition to examine electricity market power, but
in two-stage games, following the lead of Kreps and Scheinkman
(1983).  The ﬁrst stage is to choose capacity (and a number of electricity markets have periodic capacity auctions), while the second
stage is to choose supplies to offer into the spot market, constrained
by prior capacity choices.  Kreps and Scheinkman (1983) show that
even if the second stage is an intensely competitive price-setting
(Bertrand) game, introducing the prior capacity choice can support
Cournot outcomes.  Much depends on the contestability of the ﬁrst
stage capacity choice.  Teirila (forthcoming) examines the proposed
Irish capacity market in which there is potentially excess capacity and hence unlikely to be signiﬁcant entry, limiting the ﬁrst
stage to competition between incumbents, who must decide their
capacity auction bids after estimating their revenues in the subsequent Cournot spot market.  Teirila ﬁnds considerable potential
market power in the proposed capacity auction, implying that ways
to mitigate that market power may be necessary. 