
The auditor's report is the primary channel through which auditors communicate with financial statement users
information discovered during the auditing process.  Financial analysts and regulators have criticized the existing auditor's
reporting model as having little communicative value, and additional disclosures have been proposed to enhance the value
of the audit report (Church Name, 2008; PCAOB, 2013). 1 Under the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) requirement
and Generally Accepted Auditing Standards (GAAS), the auditor's reporting options are to issue either an unqualified opinion
or an unqualified opinion with explanatory language, commonly called a modified audit opinion (MAO). 2 This inclusion of
discretionary explanatory language, such as citing a lack of accounting consistency, emphasizing a material uncertainty, or
expressing a going concern (GC) opinion, is the only difference between a standard clean opinion and an MAO. 3 In fact, an
MAO is the sole way for auditors to communicate audit-specific information to outsiders. 4 There is still debate, however,
about the extent to which the auditor's report communicates relevant information to financial statement users (Church
Name, 2008; DeFond and Zhang, 2014).  In this study, we empirically investigate the relevance of MAOs in private debt
contracting. 
A large portion of the prior research that studied modified opinions focuses on the market reaction to the auditor's report
and provides evidence that equity investors react negatively to the issuance of a nonstandard opinion, especially to a GC
opinion (e. g.  Loudder Name, 1992; Fleak and Wilson, 1994; Menon and Williams, 2010).  We investigate the relevance of
auditor reporting from the perspective of debtholders for several reasons.  First, accounting information is often a direct
input in debt contracting; for example, debt covenants may rely on accounting numbers to monitor firm performance.  If an
MAO indicates low financial reporting quality, lenders will change the relative use of accounting-based covenants and
general covenants in loans issued after MAOs.  Second, debt contracts provide multi-dimensional information about
borrowers; loan contracts allow us to investigate the effects of audit opinions on both price and non-price costs of debt,
including loan covenants, loan size, loan maturity, and collateral requirements.  Finally, debtholders, whose payoffs are
concave in relation to firm value, demand a timely shift of control rights in order to discipline managers in the case of poor
firm performance (Dewatripont and Tirole, 1994; Ball Name, 2008).  This implies that debtholders should react to information
in MAOs for both pricing and monitoring purposes, because MAOs are likely to communicate negative news about clients’
financial reporting quality and credit worthiness.  Thus, examining lenders’ responses to MAOs can enhance our
understanding of the usefulness of auditor reporting. 
Lenders are likely to find the audit report relevant and useful in two ways.  First, through the audit opinion and associated
explanatory language, the auditor communicates information about the quality of financial reports for debt contracting
purposes.  The relevance of MAOs in debt contracting depends on the severity of the auditor's concern as expressed in the
explanatory language.  Second, MAOs communicate private information about clients’ credit risk to lenders that is not
available elsewhere.  Therefore, we expect the relevance of MAOs to lenders varies with the risks conveyed in the MAO. 
To analyze the relevance of MAOs in debt contracting, we first categorize audit opinions into clean and modified
opinions.  If an MAO indicates low financial reporting quality and potential credit risk, we predict that loans issued to firms
after an MAO will be associated with a higher cost of debt, reflected across different contract terms.  To examine the
incremental relevance of explanatory language, we classify MAOs into two general types, which we further partition into
four groups by their cause: Inconsistency opinions are caused by an Accounting Change or a Restatement; and Inadequacy
opinions are caused by Material Uncertainty or a GC Opinion. 5 MAOs issued because of an accounting Inconsistency alert
financial statement users about the incomparability of data contained in the financial statements.  MAOs issued for
Inadequacy reasons express auditors’ more serious concerns about the quality of the financial statements because of
unrecognized losses or risk.  Material uncertainty concerns are related to the resolution of future economically relevant
unknowns (e. g. , contingent liabilities, litigation risk, and business uncertainty), and GC opinions indicate that a key
assumption of the accounting model is violated (i. e. , that the firm will continue as a going concern for at least one year).  The
severity of the auditor's concern is greater in Inadequacy opinions than in Inconsistency opinions.  Among the four types of
MAOs, GC opinions require the most auditor judgment and, therefore, are likely to convey more of auditors’ private
information than other types of MAOs. 6
We find that loans initiated after MAOs have higher loan spreads (on average, 17 basis points higher) compared to loans
initiated after clean opinions, controlling for other determinants of the interest rate.  In addition, the effects of MAOs on loan
spreads vary significantly depending on the type of explanatory language.  The loan spread effect increases from 0 basis
points after an Accounting Change to 25, 49, and 107 basis points, on average, after Restatement, Material Uncertainty, and GC
Opinions, respectively.  These results support our prediction that interest rates increase after an MAO and that the effect
varies with the type of MAO. 
We also find that lenders decrease the use of financial covenants and increase the use of general covenants in loans
initiated after an MAO.  Specifically, lenders decrease the use of financial covenants by 3. 8% and increase the use of general
covenants (such as restrictions on dividend payouts or on the uses of borrowed funds) by 4. 2%, on average, after an MAO. 
Again, the relevance of an MAO depends on the type of modification.  We find that Inconsistency MAOs have a smaller, but
still significant, effect on the use of financial and general covenants than do Inadequacy MAOs.  Within Inadequacy MAOs,
Material Uncertainty opinions are associated with an average increase of 18. 2% in the use of general covenants but have no
effect on the use of financial covenants.  In contrast, GC opinions are associated with an average decrease of 9. 1% in the
number of included financial covenants and an average increase of 12. 3% in the number of included general covenants.  The
results from the debt covenant tests suggest that MAOs convey relevant information to lenders and that the use of the
financial reports in debt contracting varies with the type of concern expressed by the auditor in the MAO. 
We provide further evidence on the relevance of MAOs on other loan terms including loan size, the likelihood of
requiring collateral, and loan maturity.  Consistent with our predictions, we find that lenders reduce loan sizes and increase
the likelihood of requiring collateral following an MAO.  The results on loan maturity show a significant decrease in loan
maturities after a GC opinion, which is consistent with GC opinions communicating the auditor's information about the
client's credit risk to lenders.  The overall decrease in loan term favorability and the variation of the effects of MAOs suggest
that MAOs communicate information useful to lenders in negotiating debt contracts. 
Following our main empirical analysis, we perform two separate analyses on our sample of observations with GC
opinions.  First, following Menon and Williams (2010), we classify GC opinions as being related to firm performance,
financing concerns, or other issues and investigate the effects of each type of GC opinion on the loan contract terms
previously tested.  We find that each type of GC opinion has a unique effect on loan spread and other loan terms; this finding
reinforces the usefulness of information provided in the auditor's report. 
Second, we test whether GC opinions communicate private information about a client's credit risk that is not available
elsewhere.  We do so by matching firms with GC opinions to similar firms based on the determinants of receiving a GC
opinion using variables from prior studies (DeFond Name, 2002), but that received clean opinions in their audit reports.  If GC
opinions simply capture the probability of
financial distress or bankruptcy, as predicted by publically observable
information, they should have no incremental effect on loan contract terms in the matched-sample specifications.  We
find, however, that GC opinions continue to have a significant effect on all of the loans terms examined except financial
covenants.  Overall, these results are consistent with a GC opinion communicating the auditor’ private information regarding
the client's credit risk to lenders. 
It stands to reason that managers of firms preparing to secure financing are likely to be in contact with potential lenders
preceding a loan issuance, but we are unable to directly control for information that managers privately provide to lenders.  To
alleviate the concern that our empirical results regarding the association between MAOs and loan terms may pick up
unobservable public and private communication channels, we include a new indicator variable, Before_MAO, that takes a value
of 1 if a loan is issued in the 12 months preceding an MAO, and zero otherwise.  If the private information conveyed by the
auditor is actually preempted elsewhere (by managers communicating to lenders or other public information) before an MAO,
then we would expect a significant coefficient on this new variable.  In tests of each of the contract terms we investigate,
however, Before_MAO is insignificant, which provides further support that our results capture the effects of audit opinions. 
Our study makes several contributions to the existing literature.  First, our study investigates the usefulness of the audit
report to lenders in debt contracting by incorporating the auditor's explanatory language.  The empirical results provide
evidence that MAOs are informative to lenders in negotiating loan agreements, but more importantly, that the different types
of MAOs communicate different concerns to lenders about financial reporting quality and credit risk.  While prior studies show
that the voluntary use of auditing or the employment of Big N auditors is associated with a lower cost of debt (Fortin and
Pittman, 2007; Lennox and Pittman, 2011; Minnis, 2011), we provide evidence on the incremental value of audit reporting to
lenders.  For regulators, our empirical results may be useful in informing the current debate on regulatory initiatives to include
disclosures of “critical audit matters” in the audit report (PCAOB, 2013; DeFond and Zhang, 2014). 
Second, our study is related to the literature on the role of financial reporting quality in debt contracting.  Bharath Name
(2008) provided evidence that the quality of a borrower's accounting information can affect their access to the private
versus public debt market and the included loan terms.  Costello and Wittenberg-Moerman (2011) documented that lenders
alter debt contracts when a borrower reports an internal control weakness.  These studies, however, do not address the
specific role of the audit report within financial reporting.  Our study provides empirical evidence that audit opinions are
incrementally informative to lenders in the private debt market. 
Lastly, our empirical results on the usefulness of GC opinions in debt contracting contribute to the vast auditing literature
on GC opinions.  Prior studies report evidence that GC opinions are useful in predicting subsequent bankruptcies and are
associated with negative stock market reactions (Hopwood Name, 1989; Raghunandan and Rama, 1995; Chen and Church,
1996; Menon and Williams, 2010; Kaplan and Williams, 2013), but these studies examine the relevance of GC opinions
independent of other MAOs.  Our empirical results on the effect of GC opinions on various loan terms, relative to the effect of
other MAOs, shed light on the unique value of the auditor's information that is not available in the financial statements or
through other channels accessible to sophisticated lenders (Mutchler, 1985; Menon and Schwartz, 1987). 
In the next section we develop our hypotheses.  We describe the sample selection procedures and variables used in this
study in Section 3.  Section 4 presents the main empirical results, and Section 5 presents the results of additional analyses.  A
summary and conclusions are provided in Section 6. 
2.  Background and hypothesis development. 
As capital providers, lenders are interested in ensuring the timely repayment of the loan and interest that are claims on
the borrower's future cash flow and assets.  When contemplating a potential loan recipient, banks and other lenders analyze
the risk of default, estimate the market value and liquidation values of assets, and evaluate the management's character and
ability (Tirole, 2007).  If lenders decide to initiate a loan after the credit analysis, they negotiate the price and non-price
terms of the debt contract, which compensate them for risk and allow them to monitor the borrower's performance over the
life of the loan. 
Audited financial statements provide important information to lenders for evaluating the borrower's credit worthiness and
default risk (e. g. , Beaver, 1966; Altman, 1968; Ohlson, 1980), and auditors play an important role in this process. 7 The audit
report is the primary means by which the auditor communicates to users their degree of assurance that the financial
statements reflect the firm's economic activities.  To arrive at an opinion, the auditor amasses a large body of evidence and
offers insights into the estimates and assumptions underlying the financial reports prepared by managers.  The auditor uses
explanatory language in the audit report to communicate material concerns discovered during the auditing process that may
be relevant to users.  These include Inconsistency concerns, arising from an accounting change or restatement, and Inadequacy
concerns, relating to material uncertainty or an outright GC opinion.  The severity of the auditor's concern is reflected in the
content of explanatory language included in the report, which is useful to lenders when negotiating debt agreements. 
Since Inconsistency opinions refer to accounting changes or restatements that are usually disclosed in the notes of financial
reports, they may not be incrementally informative to lenders.  Auditors, however, have some discretion in whether to include
these items, rather than being required to include them in the audit report as a form of mechanical compliance with
accounting standards. 8 In addition, Inconsistency opinions may turn a lender's attention to the issue of incomparable
information in financial statements when contemplating a debt contract. 9 Prior work (Czerney Name, 2013) provides evidence
that explanatory language mentioning accounting changes and restatements is associated with a higher probability of
subsequent misstatements.  Graham Name (2008) find that earnings restatements are associated with increases in price and
non-price costs of debt, which is consistent with financial restatements leading to higher information uncertainty. 10 These
studies suggest that Inconsistency opinions may still affect the direct or indirect cost of debt. 
Another reason that audit opinions may be relevant in debt contracting is through auditors’ communication of private
information about a borrower's credit risk and financial health.  For lenders, Inadequacy opinions (especially GC opinions) are
particularly relevant because they convey an auditor's judgment about potential losses or default risks that might not be
reflected elsewhere in the financial report.  Therefore, the effect of MAOs related to Inadequacy opinions should be greater
than the effect of Inconsistency opinions.  With respect to GC opinions, prior studies find that these opinions are associated
with a higher probability of bankruptcy (Mutchler, 1985; Menon and Schwartz, 1987; Hopwood Name, 1989; Raghunandan
and Rama, 1995; Mutchler Name, 1997).  These findings are consistent with the effectiveness of SAS 59 which provides
guidance to auditors in evaluating a client's ability to continue as a going concern.  We predict that the effect of GC opinions
on price and non-price loan terms will be greater than the effects of the other MAO opinions. 11
If MAOs communicate relevant information about the quality of financial reports or about a client's credit risk, then
lenders should respond with higher interest rates to reflect borrowers’ greater credit risk and the additional costs of
monitoring using alternative mechanisms.  Furthermore, we predict that the effect on interest rates varies with the severity
of issues identified in the MAO.  This leads to our first empirical hypothesis, stated as follows:
H1.  Compared with loans issued in the year after a clean opinion, loans in the year after an MAO have higher loan spreads.  In
addition, the effect on spread is greater for GC opinions than for other MAO types. 
The monitoring of a borrower's behavior through debt covenants to mitigate agency conflicts between shareholders and
debtholders is an important part of debt contracting (Jensen and Meckling, 1976; Smith and Warner, 1979).  In the case of
covenant violation, control rights can be transferred quickly to lenders.  Accounting information and financial ratios are
widely used to monitor borrowers’ performance in debt covenants.  A pre-condition for using financial covenants is the
assurance that the accounting information reflects the borrower's actual performance. 
If accounting numbers are of questionable quality, lenders may use general covenants that do not rely on accounting
information.  General covenants often specify events that would require the borrower to pay down the balance of their loan,
whether dividends may be paid, or the allowed uses of borrowed funds.  If lenders view an MAO as decreasing the value of
including financial covenants, then they may compensate by increasing the number of general covenants.  Alternatively, if
financial and general covenants are independent in purpose, the optimal number (and type) of included general covenants
may already be included and no change will be observed. 
The implications of an MAO for debt covenants vary by the type of modified opinion.  If Inconsistency opinions are
indicators of a high likelihood of subsequent misstatements, then financial covenants become less effective as a monitoring
tool (Czerney Name, 2013).  Further, the effects of Inadequacy opinions on covenant choices should be stronger than the
effects of Inconsistency opinions, because Inadequacy MAOs convey an auditor's greater concern regarding potential losses or
default risk not reflected in financial statements.  In particular, GC opinions may indicate that a basic assumption of the
accounting model (i. e.  that the firm will persist as a going concern) is violated, undermining the usefulness of the financial
statements to lenders as an effective monitoring tool.  To protect their investments, lenders will identify alternative
measures for liquidation values of assets.  We expect the effect on the use of debt covenants in loan contracts to be strongest
for GC opinions. 
Stated in the alternative form, our second hypothesis is
H2.  Compared with loans issued in the year after a clean opinion, loans issued in the year after an MAO are associated with a
decrease in the number of financial covenants and/or an increase in the number of general covenants.  In addition, the effect of GC
opinions is stronger than those of other MAO types. 
To assess the total effect on the contract design of an MAO, it is important to consider the many different contract
provisions from which lenders can choose (Gigler Name, 2009).  Up to this point, we have considered only the use of spread
and covenants in contract design.  In reality, lenders also consider other loan terms to protect themselves.  We consider the
effects of an MAO on three additional contracting terms: loan size, the requirement of collateral, and the maturity of the
loan.  If lenders view an MAO as a disclosure event that communicates a negative signal about the borrower's financial
reporting quality and credit risk, we predict that lenders will be more likely to reduce loan size, require collateral, and
shorten the loan maturity after an MAO. 
As before, the relevant effects should vary for different types of MAOs.  Therefore, we expect that Inadequacy MAOs have a
greater effect on these loan terms than Inconsistency MAOs.  Economic theory on credit rationing (see, e. g. , Jaffee and Russell,
1976; Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981) proposes that loan size is not a linear function of the signaled default risk, because credit risk
may increase if the loan size can only finance riskier small projects.  As a result, rather than reducing the loan size, lenders
may simply deny the loan application after an MAO, especially after a GC opinion.  Similar to loan size, Diamond's (1991)
theory suggests that debt maturity is a non-monotonic function of a firm's default risk, with low risk firms obtaining both
short- and long-term debt, while high risk firms are forced to borrow at maturities shorter than they desire because of the
moral hazard of asset substitution.  Finally, we expect GC opinions to have a stronger effect than the other three types of
MAOs on the likelihood of a loan requiring collateral. 
Stated in the alternative form, we predict that
H3.  Compared with loans issued in the year after a clean opinion, loans issued in the year after an MAO are smaller in size, more
likely to require collateral, and shorter in maturity.  In addition, the effect of GC opinions is larger than those of other MAO types. 
<Middle> Research design and sample selection. 
3. 1.  Research design. 
To examine the relevance of audit opinions in debt contracting, we select those firms with at least one MAO in our
sample period so that we can isolate the effects attributable to MAOs.  We perform empirical tests of the effect of an MAO on
the contract terms of loans issued in the year after an MAO by estimating the following model,
where Loan Term is a variable representing the specific contracting terms of the loan agreement that we investigate
including: interest spread, number of financial covenants, number of general covenants, loan size, whether or not a loan
requiring collateral, and maturity length of a loan.  MAO is an indicator variable equal to one if the loan is initiated in the year
after the borrower receives an MAO, and zero otherwise.  To examine whether there is any lingering effect on contract terms
for loans initiated beyond the first year after an MAO, we include After_MAO to capture any continuing effect of an MAO after
a borrower receives a clean opinion.  After_MAO is an indicator variable equal to one if a firm currently has a clean opinion
but had an MAO in at least one of the previous three years, and zero otherwise.  We expect MAO to have a positive (β1) effect
on loan spread, use of general covenants, and likelihood of requiring collateral, but a negative (β1) effect on the use of
financial covenants, loan size, and maturity length.  To investigate the differential effects of different types of MAOs on debt
contracts, we replace the generic MAO with the types of MAOs. 
We first examine the relevance of MAOs for loan spreads after controlling for the other known determinants of interest rates. 
We control for firm size, because small firms have greater information asymmetry and higher default risk (Pittman and Fortin,
2004; Bharath Name, 2007).  We control for loan size, because larger loans are priced at lower interest rates (Booth, 1992; Beatty
Name, 2002).  We include a number of controls related to financial distress found in the prior literature: Z-score, market-to-book,
leverage, cash flow volatility, tangibility, and credit and term spreads (Graham Name, 2008).  We include a measure of abnormal
accruals which have been shown to affect interest rates (Bharath Name, 2008), as well as, a control for revolvers, because these loans
have a lower loan spread than term loans (Zhang, 2008).  Institutional loans, relative to bank loans, have a higher loan spread
because of the higher information symmetry with the borrower.  We control for the existence of performance pricing provisions,
because they reduce adverse selection and moral hazard costs for lenders (Asquith Name, 2005).  We also control for the number of
lenders in the loan.  A larger number of participants in the loan syndicate indicate a higher quality borrower and less information
asymmetry between syndicate participants.  Last, we control for other contracting devices available to lenders: loan maturity,
collateral, number of financial covenants, loan purpose, and year fixed effects. 12 To mitigate the influence of outliers, we winsorize
all continuous variables at the top and bottom 1% of their respective distributions.  We also adjust standard errors using two-way
firm and year clusters in all regressions. 
To test H2 we include a similar set of control variables in testing the effects of MAOs on the use of financial and general
covenants.  In these empirical models, we include loan interest rate as a control variable, because agency theory on debt
covenants predicts a negative relation between loan spread and the use of covenants (Jensen and Meckling, 1976; Smith and
Warner, 1979).  We select other control variables similar to those in prior studies on the determinants of covenants in debt
contracting (Beatty Name, 2002; Sufi, 2007; Graham Name, 2008; Costello and Wittenberg-Moerman, 2011).  In testing H3, we
follow a similar procedure to include control variables when we examine the effects of MAOs on loan size, likelihood of
requiring collateral, and loan maturity. 
3. 2.  Data sources and sample selection. 
We obtain data on MAOs in audit reports from COMPUSTAT (variable name AUOP) for the period from 1992 to 2009. 13
We match our MAO sample with public firms in the Dealscan database, which contains contractual terms such as interest
rate, size, collateral requirement, and covenants, of loans issued in the United States. 14 To be included in our sample, we
require borrowers to obtain a loan during the window just after an MAO (in either the year of MAO or within the three years
following the first clean opinion after an MAO) and outside of the MAO window (either before the MAO or more than three
years after the first clean opinion following an MAO).  This requirement is to ensure that our results are not attributable to
differences between MAO and non-MAO borrowers.  After eliminating observations with missing data needed in our
analyses, our final sample includes 8473 loans issued to 5377 borrowers during the 1992–2009 period. 15
To classify MAOs based on the stated reasons for modification, we read the explanatory paragraph section of the audit
report for each MAO identified above from the borrower's 10-K on EDGAR or LexisNexis.  Following Butler Name (2004), we
classify the reason for each MAO into one of two broad categories: Inconsistency and Inadequacy. 16 Inconsistency MAOs refer
to a lack of consistency according to GAAP accounting principles (AU Section 508), and we break down Inconsistency into
Accounting Change and Restatement depending on whether the auditor mentions accounting changes or restatements in the
explanatory paragraph. 17 Likewise, we decompose Inadequacy MAOs into two types: Material Uncertainty and GC Opinion. 
We classify an MAO as Material Uncertainty if the auditor mentions a business uncertainty, litigation risk, or contingent
liability in the audit report, and we classify an MAO as GC Opinion if the auditor mentions going concern, bankruptcy,
financing difficulty, or distress. 
4.  Empirical results. 
4. 1.  Audit opinions and loan spreads. 
Table 3 presents the effects of modified opinions on loan spreads.  We regress loan spread on MAO, After_MAO, and a set
of control variables.  Our first hypothesis predicts that if lenders view the auditor's MAO as a negative indicator of financial
reporting quality and/or of the borrower's credit risk, then loans issued after an MAO will have a higher interest rate than
loans issued after a clean audit opinion.  In addition, if an MAO has a lingering effect, even after the MAO has been removed,
then debt issued during the after-MAO period will have a higher spread as well.  In Column 1, the coefficient on MAO is
positive and statistically significant; loans initiated after an MAO have a spread over LIBOR 17. 31 basis points higher than
loans issued during a non-MAO period.  This represents an increase in the interest spread of 8. 6%. 18 In Column 2, we report a
significant incremental effect on loan spreads for Inadequacy modifications, 92. 14 basis points, but no effect for Inconsistency
modifications.  Column 3 reports that firms with GC Opinion, Material Uncertainty, and Restatement MAOs experience
significant increases in their loan spreads of 107. 13, 49. 37, and 25. 27 basis points, respectively.  The result that MAOs issued
because of an accounting change have no effect on the borrower's interest spread is consistent with these modifications
being less of a concern to lenders and resulting in no interest spread effect for borrowers.  In contrast, the significant
coefficients of the other three types of MAOs suggest that they raise the cost of loans to the borrower, increasing with the
severity of the MAO.  The incremental effect on spread of GC Opinion is significantly larger than any of the other three MAOs,
and it represents a 53. 4% increase relative to the non-MAO period. 19 These results support H1. 
Many of the included control variables are statistically significant.  Spreads are negatively associated with whether or not
the loan is a revolver, loan size, loan maturity, inclusion of a performance pricing provision, firm size, market-to-book,
borrower profitability, and Z-score.  Spreads are positively associated with whether or not the loan is institutional, whether
or not the borrower provides collateral, leverage, cash flow volatility, abnormal accruals, and credit spread.  After_MAO is
positive but not statistically significant across all specifications, providing no evidence that lenders continue to charge
higher interest rates to borrowers who recently received MAOs.  Generally, control variables are significant in the predicted
direction; one notable exception is the coefficient on maturity, which is negative and statistically significant.  It is opposite to
the predicted relation between loan maturity and interest rate for a given borrower.  However, the negative coefficient is
consistent with theory work which predicts that loans with long maturity are issued to firms with the lowest credit risk, and
that high credit risk firms can only borrow at short or medium maturity terms (Diamond, 1991).  This is because the increase
in interest spread in long maturities induces high risk borrowers to take on riskier projects despite their desire to secure
loans with long maturity.  As a result, we may observe a less positive or even negative coefficient on loan maturity in a
pooled sample of loans to borrowers with differential credit risk. 
4. 2.  Audit opinions and use of financial and general covenants. 
Table 4 presents the effects of MAOs on the use of financial and general covenants.  H2 states that lenders will be less
willing to rely on financial covenants in debt contracts after the quality of the financial statements is brought into question
by a modified opinion from an auditor.  The first column in Table 4 provides evidence that the number of financial covenants
included in a debt contract is lower in the MAO and after-MAO periods.  The coefficient on MAO is  0. 10 and statistically
significant, representing a decrease in the use of financial covenants by 3. 8%.  Column 2 shows a decrease in the use of
financial covenants after MAOs related to both Inadequacy ( 0. 17) and Inconsistency ( 0. 10).  Column 3 provides the results
for each type of MAO and shows that decreases in the use of financial covenants are driven by GC Opinion and Accounting
Change.  In contrast, the coefficients on Restatement and Material Uncertainty are not statistically significant.  The coefficient
on After_MAO is negative and significant across all three specifications, which indicates that lenders are reluctant to include
financial covenants for up to three years after a clean opinion is restored to the borrower.  This suggests a lingering effect of
MAOs on the use of financial covenants. 
H2 also predicts that lenders will increase the use of general covenants in loans after an MAO.  Column 4 of Table 4
provides evidence consistent with this hypothesis.  The coefficient on MAO is 0. 22 and statistically significant, and it
indicates an average increase in the use of general covenants of 4. 2%.  This finding provides evidence consistent with our
prediction that when lenders cannot rely on accounting numbers in debt contracts, they increase their use of the nonaccounting debt covenants.  In contrast to the use of financial covenants, the coefficient on After_MAO is insignificant. 
Column 5 shows that the use of general covenants increases after both Inadequacy and Inconsistency modifications, and
Column 6 provides evidence that the use of general covenants increases after all MAOs except those related to restatements. 
The largest effect (0. 95) relates to material uncertainty MAOs, those modifications in which the auditor mentions business
uncertainty, litigation risk, or contingent liability issues.  This result provides evidence that one way that lenders respond to a
potential loss/liability conveyed by an MAO is through the increased use of general covenants.  As in tests of H1, many of the
control variables are as predicted and statistically significant.  Overall, our empirical results regarding the effects of MAOs on
the use of financial and general covenants are consistent with H2. 
4. 3.  Audit opinions and use of additional loan terms. 
H3 predicts that lenders will include more stringent non-accounting loan terms after an MAO.  We investigate three nonaccounting mechanisms that lenders can include in debt contracts: loan size, requirement of collateral, and loan maturity
length, and we report the results in Table 5.  Columns 1–3 of Table 5 provide evidence that lenders decrease the loan sizes
offered to borrowers with all types of MAOs except those related to material uncertainties.  In addition, After_MAO is
significant across each loan size specification.  These results are consistent with lenders reacting to an MAO by reducing loan
sizes.  GC opinion has the largest effect on loan size based on the coefficient magnitude even though the difference between
the coefficient of GC Opinion and each of the other three is not significant.  This suggests that the loan-size component of the
loan contract is insensitive to the differential signals of MAOs on the borrower's default risk or financial reporting quality. 
This finding is consistent with those of the credit rationing literature (see e. g. , Jaffee and Russell, 1976; Stiglitz and Weiss,
1981), which indicate that lenders negotiate loan size reacting to signals of default risk in a non-linear fashion.  In addition,
our empirical results are biased against finding a differential effect of GC opinions from those of other MAOs, as loan
applications that were denied because of GC opinions are not represented. 
We also find that the likelihood of requiring collateral increases significantly after Inadequacy MAOs.  Column 6 indicates
that the probability of requiring collateral increases after GC opinions and material uncertainty MAOs and that this
increased probability lingers for up to three years after a clean opinion is issued.  The probability of requiring collateral
increases 15. 9% and 14. 4% when a firm receives an MAO related to a GC opinion and material uncertainty, respectively; these
two coefficients are not statistically different from each other.  It is not surprising that lenders are eager to require collateral
when firms receive an Inadequacy modification, because other monitoring mechanisms, such as covenants, are unlikely to
be effective when the firm's ability to continue as a going concern is in question or when there is serious uncertainty
regarding a borrower's prospects. 
Our last test of H3 investigates the loan maturity choices that lenders make at the contract initiation; we predict that
lenders will shorten loan maturity after an MAO.  Columns 7 and 8 indicate there is no effect on loan maturity after an MAO,
even when MAOs are broken down in to Inadequacy and Inconsistency modifications.  Column 9, however, indicates a
decrease in maturity length for firms with GC opinions but an increase in maturity length for those with material
uncertainty modifications.  Although it is not surprising that lenders prefer to decrease loan lengths after GC opinions, it is
less clear why an MAO related to a material uncertainty would lead to an increase in loan maturity.  This is consistent,
however, with borrowers negotiating other contract terms with lenders to secure longer term financing to manage their
liquidity risk in the face of future cash flow uncertainty (e. g. , ongoing litigation).  This explanation is consistent with the
unpredicted positive coefficient on leverage, indicating that borrowers with higher liquidity risk negotiate for longer
maturities.  We also observe that the coefficient on firm size is significant in the opposite direction than that predicted.  The
negative coefficient on firm size is consistent with Guedes and Opler (1996) who found that large firms borrow at both the
short end and long end of the maturity spectrum. 
5.  Additional analyses. 
5. 1.  The effect of different types of GC opinions on loan terms. 
A large body of auditing literature examines the information role of GC opinions in the equity market.  This is
understandable because the consequence of GC opinions is severe and GC opinions reveal information about a client's
financial health to the public.  In the main tests of our empirical analyses, we study the information content of GC opinions in
relation to other MAOs to provide evidence of both the broad value and the differential value of audit opinions in the context
of debt contracting.  We provide further evidence on the communicative value of auditors’ stated causes underlying GC
opinions. 
Menon and Williams (2010) used a large sample of GC audit reports and document significantly negative stock returns
when these GC opinions are disclosed.  This negative reaction is more severe when the audit report specifically mentions a
problem with obtaining financing.  We manually collect and categorize all the GC opinions contained in our sample,
following Menon and Williams (2010), and create three new variables: (1) GC_Performance if a GC opinion mentions poor
financial performance or operating problems (e. g. , loss of a major customer/supplier), (2) GC_Financing if a GC opinion
mentions financing problems and (3) GC_Other if a GC opinion mentions other issues (e. g. , litigation risk or regulatory
issues). 20 We investigate the effects of the different types of GC opinions on each of the price and non-price terms we have
previously tested and report the results in Table 6. 
Column 1 of Table 6 reports the separate effects of the three types of GC opinions on loan spreads.  The coefficients of
GC_Performance and GC_Financing are positive and significant with the coefficient of GC_Financing being larger in magnitude
(p-value¼0. 029 for the coefficient difference test).  This is consistent with Menon and Williams (2010) who reported that the
most negative stock price reactions are caused by disclosure of GC opinions that mention financing problems.  Column 2
provides evidence that the decrease in the use of financial covenants after a GC opinion reported in Table 4 is driven by
GC_Performance.  This result is intuitive; when financial performance is low, we would expect financial covenants to be the
least useful to lenders.  Column 3 reports a positive coefficient on GC_Financing, indicating that borrowers who receive GC
opinions that mention problems arranging financing have more general covenants.  A firm facing financing difficulties is
likely to be asked by the lender to restrict dividend payments, commit to not take on additional debt, pay off loans when
capital assets are sold, and agree to other common provisions found in general covenants. 
Column 4 of Table 6 provides evidence that loan sizes decrease when a firm is given a GC opinion related to performance
and financing.  Column 5 provides the breakdown of the effect of GC opinions on the likelihood of requiring collateral.  The
coefficient on GC_Financing is positive and significant.  It is not surprising that lenders would want collateral provided when
a firm is given a GC opinion that mentions difficulties in securing financing.  Finally, Column 6 provides evidence that the
reduction in loan maturities for borrowers with GC opinions is driven by GC_Other; no other GC opinion coefficient is
significant.  Overall, Table 6 provides evidence that different causes of GC opinions lead to different loan contract changes
and highlights the communicative value of the different reasons for GC opinions.  These results suggest that auditors’ reasons
for GC opinions in the explanatory paragraph are informative to lenders in designing efficient debt contracts, supplementing
limited empirical evidence on the value of what auditors say beyond the simple binary decision to issue a GC opinion. 
5. 2.  Information leakage before modified audit opinions are issued. 
A key inference drawn in this study is that auditors communicate unique information to lenders through the audit
opinion and additional explanatory language.  A limitation of our tests, however, is that we cannot perfectly identify whether
it is the unique value of MAOs or information accessible to lenders through private channels that drives our results.  Such
information might include private communication from top managers related to major company developments, such as an
update about ongoing litigation. 
To mitigate concerns that our results are capturing publically available information, we employ a variety of control
variables in each of our tests.  Managers of firms preparing to secure financing are likely to be in contact with potential
lenders preceding a loan issuance, however, and we are unable to directly control for information that managers privately
provide to lenders.  To address the concern that our results are driven by unobserved information transfers from managers to
lenders or by other publically available information leading up to an MAO, we construct a new indicator variable,
Before_MAO, which takes a value of 1 if a loan is issued in the 12 months preceding an MAO.  If the private information
conveyed by the auditor is preempted by managers communicating to lenders before an MAO or by other publically
available information, then we would expect a significant coefficient on this new variable in tests of the contract terms we
have previously examined. 
We add this new variable to our contract term specifications and present the results in Table 7.  Consistent with the audit
opinion, and not with private information leaked from other channels providing value to lenders, we find that Before_MAO is
insignificant in tests of each of the six contract terms we investigate. 