 1.  Introduction Since the many projects launched over the past decade to achieve increased market integration across day-ahead electricity markets in Europe, the day-ahead electricity price convergence between market areas has increased signiﬁcantly, adding to the complexity of modeling the joint behavior of day-ahead electricity prices.  The ﬁrst signiﬁcant step towards market integration in Europe was taken with the introduction of the Nord Pool market, which is the main platform for trading power in most Nordic and Baltic countries.  At Nord Pool, the bidding areas are price coupled, meaning that the transmission capacity is auctioned as an implicit part of the day-ahead auction of electrical energy.  This achieves - as opposed to the explicit auctioning, where the transmission capacity auction and the day-ahead auction of electrical energy are separate actions - the eﬃcient utilization of interconnectors and results in smaller price differences between the bidding areas.  Since Nord Pool’s creation in the mid 90’s, many countries have joined and Nord Pool today comprises Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.  For the sake of completion, we also mention that Nord Pool has taken sole ownership of the UK market as of 2014.  Although Nord Pool has a long-standing history of price coupling, such initiatives are more recent for other European countries.  In 2006, the so-called Tri-Lateral Market Coupling (TLC) project comprising France, Belgium and the Netherlands was initiated.  Later in 2010, the price coupling of Central West Europe (CWE) was achieved, integrating Germany, France, Austria, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg.  In 2014, a crucial milestone was reached with the price coupling of the North Western European (NWE) region, covering the CWE region, the UK, the Nordic and Baltic countries - and as of 2016, the price coupling region has grown to include 19 European countries.  Also, a new algorithm regarding how cross-border capacities are included in the day-ahead price calculation was introduced on 20 May 2015 in the CWE region, with the transition from the Available Transmission Capacity (ATC) methodology to the more eﬃcient Flow-Based (FB) methodology.  For the joint modeling of day-ahead electricity prices in two interconnected areas, price coupling has induced a fundamental change that cannot be ignored.  In the case of the CWE region for example, the transition from explicit to implicit auctioning of transmission capacity has meant that equal prices in two adjacent markets are very often observed now.  As already accentuated in the existing literature (see e. g.  Füss et al.  (2017)), this has generally resulted in the non-feasibility of previously proposed models.  For one, the pricing of spread options such as the ﬁnancial transmission rights cannot be achieved using spread option formulas á la Margrabe.  Also in risk management applications, the classical reduced-form models are no longer suitable for modeling the joint behavior of prices.  To exemplify some events and their inﬂuence on the day-ahead electricity prices, we plot in Fig. 