 1.  Introduction The literature on oil and commodity markets during the last decade has shown the importance to identify and understand the causes and consequences of commodity price shocks.  Some of the key insights (Kilian, 2008a) are that (i) most commodity prices are endogenous with respect to the global business cycle, and (ii) demand shocks cause delayed and sustained price movements while supply shocks have small and transitory effects.  Whereas disentangling the supply and demand components in a structural model is now common in the empirical literature to understand commodity price dynamics (especially for crude oil price), some important concerns are missing regarding the effect of second-order moments (especially the one related to uncertainty).  So far, the previous literature is indeed silent on the effects of macroeconomic uncertainty on the volatility of commodity prices.  This issue is nevertheless worthy of investigation since the impact of uncertainty on the global economy has been widely documented.  For instance, theories of investment under uncertainty explain why under irreversibility condition or ﬁxed costs, uncertainty over future returns reduces current investment, hiring, and consumption through an “option value to wait”. 1 The starting point is that at a micro level, uncertainty may diminish the willingness of ﬁrms to commit resources to irreversible investment and the readiness of consumers to spend or allocate their earning and wages.  It follows that micro-level uncertainty may be transmitted to the macro level because uncertainty about the return to investment at a micro level may create cyclical ﬂuctuations in aggregate investment at a macro level (see Bernanke, 1983). 2 The crucial point here is that there is no reason why such mechanism at both micro and macro levels should not be extended to commodity markets.  Indeed, at a micro level, commodity ﬁrms in several sectors (especially in oil industry) are confronted to high costs and should be impacted by uncertainty about returns to investment.  Similarly, at a macro level, as prices are related to global supply and demand conditions, uncertainty about macroeconomic aggregates should also affect commodity prices.  In the wake of the literature about the origins of commodity price movements, the aim of this paper is to investigate the impact of uncertainty on commodity price returns and volatility.  Regarding the previous literature, the bulk of the studies have looked at the reverse relationship and highlighted the signiﬁcance of uncertainty in oil prices in explaining economic ﬂuctuations and in exacerbating asymmetry in the oil price-economic activity nexus. 3 All of them suggest that oil price uncertainty impacts output, investment, and consumption in the U. S.  and G-7 countries in an asymmetric way.  While providing interesting results, these studies suffer from an important drawback since it is well known that the effect of uncertainty in the oil price—and commodity prices in general—on the macroeconomy should be small, by construction of the underlying economic models.  As argued by Kilian (2014), energy is indeed not necessarily a key component of the cash ﬂow of investment projects, making the effect of oil price uncertainty on output not plausible.  It follows that looking at the reverse transmission from macroeconomic uncertainty to the volatility of commodity prices is more relevant with regard to the modern view of the endogenous component of prices.  As stressed above, this question has not been widely addressed in the literature.  Some limited exceptions can, however, be mentioned.  First, regarding theoretical papers, (i) Pindyck (1980) discusses the implications of uncertainty associated with oil demand and reserves on the oil price behavior.  (ii) Litzenberger and Rabinowitz (1995) analyze backwardation behavior in oil futures contracts.  and (iii) Alquist and Kilian (2010) allow for endogenous convenience yield and endogenous inventories, and stress that it is uncertainty about the shortfall of supply relative to demand that matters.  Second, among empirical papers, one may refer to (i) Kilian (2009) and Kilian and Murphy (2014) who design as a precautionary demand shock a shock that reﬂects shifts in uncertainty and treat macroeconomic uncertainty as unobserved.  and (ii) Van Robays (2013) who investigates whether observed macroeconomic uncertainty changes the responsiveness of the oil price to shocks in oil demand and supply.  Our paper extends this literature on the relationship between macroeconomic uncertainty and commodity prices in several ways.  Speciﬁcally, we address this question by examining the inﬂuence of macroeconomic uncertainty on a large panel of commodity markets.  More precisely, we consider four groups of 19 raw materials (energy, precious metals, agriculture, and industry) to investigate whether the impact of macroeconomic uncertainty on commodity prices differs depending on the type of market.  In addition, with uncertainty evolving through time, we account for this feature by assessing its impact at various horizons—namely short-, medium-, and long-run horizons—to test whether its effect varies according to its maturity.  From a theoretical viewpoint, ﬂuctuations in uncertainty may indeed have different impacts through time on the economy (Bloom, 2014), with usually two negative channels in the short run (the real option and risk aversion/risk premium effects4) and two positive channels in the long run (the growth option and Oi-Hartman-Abel effects5). 6 Turning to methodological issues, our contribution is threefold.  First, we retain a nonlinear structural threshold vector autoregressive (TVAR) speciﬁcation that allows us to identify different uncertainty states, and we investigate whether the impact of uncertainty varies according to its level and variability.  Second, because macroeconomic uncertainty is unobservable, assessing its effect on commodity markets obviously requires us to ﬁnd an adequate proxy.  To this end, we rely on Jurado et al.  (2015) and consider a robust approach to measuring macroeconomic uncertainty.  The retained proxy uses a wide range of monthly macroeconomic and ﬁnancial indicators and is based on the underlying idea of a link between uncertainty and predictability.  In this sense, we go further than the previous literature—particularly compared with Van Robays’s (2013) paper, which is the closest to ours—which generally relies on dispersion measures such as conditional volatility (e. g.  conditional variance of world industrial production growth or of U. S.  GDP growth estimated from a GARCH(1,1) process) or the VXO index of Bloom (2009).  As we will see, an important drawback in using GARCH-type models to proxy uncertainty is that they are inherently backward-looking, whereas investors’ expectations tend to be forward-looking.  More generally, and thanks to a detailed robustness analysis, we show that the choice of the uncertainty measure is crucial to avoid erroneously attributing to uncertainty ﬂuctuations that are actually predictable.  Third, for the sake of completeness, we also investigate how macroeconomic uncertainty can generate uncertainty in commodity prices, looking at second-order moments transfer.  To this end, we construct a robust proxy of commodity market uncertainty based on macroeconomic uncertainty, and provide a historical decomposition that allows us to determine the contribution of macroeconomic uncertainty to commodity price uncertainty.  For the speciﬁc case of oil, we further disentangle supply and demand components of oil price uncertainty to assess their respective contribution during periods of uncertainty in the market.  The central message of the paper is that most of commodity price returns are affected by macroeconomic uncertainty, the effect being more important for commodities that are strongly related to the global business cycle (such as oil, agricultural, and industrial markets).  Then, in addition to traditional supply and demand shocks, macroeconomic uncertainty constitutes another key channel through which economic fundamentals may impact commodity prices.  Maturity seems to matter depending on the commodity type.  long-run uncertainty having more effect on agricultural and industrial cumulative price dynamics, while other markets being more sensitive to short-run impacts.  Furthermore, our new commodity price uncertainty indicator shows for most considered series a transfer from macroeconomic uncertainty to price uncertainty during the 2007–09 great recession period.  It further reveals that volatility and uncertainty in prices are disconnected.  It is especially the case for oil as we ﬁnd that most important shocks that occurred in the 1990s and the beginning of the 2000s that lead to price volatility do not generate systematic price uncertainty, meaning that most of these movements were predictable at this period and emphasizing the relevance of our uncertainty measure in linking uncertainty to predictability rather than to volatility.  The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 presents the uncertainty measure and discusses the corresponding theoretical framework.  Section 3 addresses methodological issues by presenting the TVAR speciﬁcation as well as our data.  Section 4 displays the results regarding the impact of macroeconomic uncertainty on commodity markets.  Section 5 is devoted to the link between macroeconomic uncertainty and the uncertainty of each commodity market, and disentangles the respective contribution of supply and demand shocks to oil price uncertainty.  Section 6 provides some robustness checks regarding the choice of both the macroeconomic uncertainty measure and our measure of price uncertainty.  Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper.  2.  Uncertainty measure.  2. 1.  Measuring macroeconomic uncertainty.  Measuring uncertainty and examining its impact on market dynamics is a challenging question for economists because no objective measure exists.  Although in a general sense uncertainty is deﬁned as the conditional volatility of an unforecastable disturbance,7 the empirical literature to date has usually relied on proxies.  The most common measures used are the implied or realized volatility of stock market returns, the cross-sectional dispersion of ﬁrm proﬁts, stock returns, or productivity, and the cross-sectional dispersion of survey-based forecasts.  However, their adequacy to correctly proxy uncertainty is questionable, and such measures are even misspeciﬁed with regard to the theoretical notion of uncertainty, as highlighted by Jurado et al.  (2015).  Indeed, stock market volatility, cross-sectional dispersion in stock returns and ﬁrm proﬁts can vary over time due to several factors—such as risk aversion, the leverage effect, and heterogeneity between ﬁrms—even if there is no signiﬁcant change in uncertainty.  In other words, ﬂuctuations that are actually predictable can be erroneously attributed to uncertainty, putting forward the importance of distinguishing between uncertainty in a series and its conditional volatility.  Speciﬁcally, properly measuring uncertainty requires to remove the forecastable component of the considered series before computing the conditional volatility.  In this sense, uncertainty in a series is not equivalent to the conditional volatility of the raw series.  Another important characteristic of Jurado et al. ’s (2015) approach is that macroeconomic uncertainty is deﬁned as the common variation in uncertainty across many series rather than uncertainty related to any single series.  This is in line with the uncertainty-based business cycle theories which implicitly assume a common variation in uncertainty across a large number of series.  Accordingly, to provide a consistent measure of macroeconomic uncertainty, we follow the deﬁnition of Jurado et al.  (2015) by linking uncertainty to predictability.  Speciﬁcally, the h-period-ahead uncertainty in the variable yjt ∈ Yt = is deﬁned as the conditional volatility Uy jt(h) of the purely unforecastable component of the future value of the series.  See Bloom (2009), Bloom et al.  (2010), Fernández-Villaverde et al.  (2011), Bloom et al.  (2012), Gilchrist et al.  (2014), andBaker et al.  (2015) among others.  where j = 1, .  .  .  , Ny, E(. | Jt) is the conditional expectation of the considered variable and Jt denotes the information set available at time t.  Uncertainty related to the variable yjt+h is therefore deﬁned as the expectation of the squared error forecast.  Aggregating over j individual uncertainty measures Uy jt(h) equally weighted by wj leads to the following expression of aggregate or macroeconomic uncertainty.  As discussed by Jurado et al.  (2015), the estimation of Eqs.  (1) and (2) requires three fundamental steps.  The ﬁrst step is to replace the conditional expectation E[yjt+h| Jt] in Eq.  (1) by a forecast in order to compute forecast errors.  It is a crucial step since the forecastable component should be then removed from the conditional volatility computation.  To do so, an as rich as possible predictive model based on factors from a large set of N predictors {Xit}, i = 1, .  .  .  , N, is considered, taking the following approximated form.  Xit = KF(cid. 3) where Ft is a rf × 1 vector of latent common factors, KF i is the vector of latent factor loadings, and eX it is a vector of idiosyncratic errors which allows for some cross-sectional correlations.  To account for time-varying omitted-information bias, Jurado et al.  (2015) further include estimated factors, as well as nonlinear functions of these factors in the forecasting model through a diffusion forecast index.  The second step consists of (i) deﬁning the h-step-ahead forecast error (cid. 14), and (ii) estimating the related conditional volatility, namely E .  To account for time-varying volatility in the errors of the predictor variables, E is recursively multistep-ahead computed for h > 1. 8 In the third, ﬁnal step, macroeconomic uncertainty Uy t (h) is constructed from the individual uncertainty measures Uy jt(h) through an equally-weighted average.  Using large datasets on economic activity, Jurado et al.  (2015) provide two types of uncertainty measures that are as free as possible from both the restrictions of theoretical models and/or dependencies on a handful of economic indicators.  The ﬁrst one is the “common macroeconomic uncertainty” based on the information contained in hundreds of primarily macroeconomic and ﬁnancial monthly indicators,9 and the second one is the “common microeconomic uncertainty” based on 155 quarterly ﬁrm-level observations on proﬁt growth normalized by sales. 10 In addition, with the proposed measures deﬁned for different values of h, they allow us to investigate uncertainty transmission in commodity markets for distinct maturities.  2. 2.  Endogenous and exogenous components of uncertainty.  One important issue when investigating the impact of macroeconomic uncertainty on commodity prices is to understand the intrinsic nature of uncertainty with respect to prices.  In other words, it is important to disentangle the endogenous and exogenous components of macroeconomic uncertainty (i. e. , whether macroeconomic uncertainty is demand-driven or supply-driven with respect to commodity prices).  Since 1974, the price of oil—as the price of other commodities—has become endogenous with respect to global macroeconomic conditions (see Alquist et al. , 2013).  Since then, the empirical literature has provided overwhelming evidence that commodity prices have been driven by global demand shocks. 11 As pointed out by Barsky and Kilian (2002), the 1973–74 episode of dramatic surge in the price of oil and industrial commodities is the most striking example where the price increase was explained for 25% by exogenous events and for 75% by shifts in the demand side.  With the predominant role of ﬂow demand on prices, another important channel of transmission is the role of expectations in the physical market (see among others, Kilian, 2009.  Alquist and Kilian, 2010.  andKilian, 2014).  The underlying idea is that anyone who expects the price to increase in the future will be prompted to store oil now for future use leading to a shock from the demand of oil inventories.  Kilian and Murphy (2014) demonstrate that shifts in expectations through oil inventories have played an important role during the oil price surge in 1979 and 1990, and the price collapse in 1986. 12 The aggregate speciﬁcation of our proxy has the particularity to be “global”, accounting for a lot of information regarding uncertainty in the supply and demand channels.  While it is quite diﬃcult in this framework to identify the proportion of unanticipated demand or supply, some reasonable assumptions about the effect of demand and supply shocks on prices may give us some insight about the mechanisms behind the relationship between macroeconomic uncertainty and commodity prices.  In our analysis, we follow the dominant view about the endogenous nature of commodity prices with respect to macroeconomic conditions, considering the aggregate demand channel as a primary source of price ﬂuctuations (see Mabro, 1998.  Barsky and Kilian, 2002, 2004 .  Kilian, 2008a.  and Hamilton, 2009).  In line with the previous literature, we therefore assume that exogenous events coming from the supply channel—such as cartel decisions, oil embargoes or the effects of political uncertainty from the Middle East—are secondary, being mainly an indirect consequence of the macroeconomic environment.  By construction, our approach accounts for both channels, the demand channel being a direct effect of macroeconomic aggregate and the supply channel an indirect effect of macroeconomic conditions on exogenous events.  In other words, our macroeconomic uncertainty proxy primarily reﬂects uncertainty about the demand side. 13 2. 3.  Backward-looking vs.  forward-looking uncertainty.  As previously discussed, it is quite diﬃcult to approximate uncertainty because it is not observable.  One important issue regarding usual proxies based on conditional volatility is that they are often backward-looking, whereas investors’ expectations tend to be forward-looking (Kilian and Vigfusson, 2011).  As an illustrative purpose, Fig.  1 provides a comparison between three uncertainty proxies.  Speciﬁcally, the green line is the conditional volatility estimated from a one-month GARCH(1,1) process for the U. S.  GDP growth,14 the blue line is the VXO stock market volatility index of Bloom (2009), and the red line is the common macroeconomic uncertainty proxy of Jurado et al.  (2015).  the gray bands corresponding to the NBER recession dates.  Looking at the recent ﬁnancial crisis, all proxies identify this episode as an important source of macroeconomic uncertainty since a peak occurred for each series around 2008.  However, some systematic differences regarding the identiﬁed macroeconomic uncertainty periods can be highlighted.  The measure based on the GARCH speciﬁcation starts to peak in January 2009, while the VXO index begins to peak in May 2008.  The implied volatility proxy is therefore more forward-looking than the one based on the conditional variance.  Meanwhile, the proxy developed by Jurado et al.  (2015) peaks in June 2007, pointing out that it is the most forward-looking measure.  Moreover, comparing periods of uncertainty for each proxy with NBER recession dates (December 2007–June 2009), we ﬁnd that both GARCH and VXO proxies are too backward-looking, while the macroeconomic uncertainty proxy we use peaks just few months before the starting date of the recession.  In other words, our retained measure of macroeconomic uncertainty that accounts for forwardlooking behavior of agents (whatever the maturity considered) is the most appropriate one, and other approaches usually erroneously attribute to uncertainty ﬂuctuations that are actually predictable.  Jurado et al.  (2015) have further documented that shocks to macroeconomic uncertainty lead to an increase in the VXO index, the reverse effect being not veriﬁed.  The concept of uncertainty is basically related to the perception of agents about potential future evolutions.  Together with the notion of time variability, it implies that different horizons lead to distinct perceptions of uncertainty, and thus disparate economic behaviors.  As shown by Jurado et al.  (2015), uncertainty is generally higher for medium- and long-run maturities (respectively 3 and 12 months) than for short-run horizons (1 month).  In addition, the relative importance of macroeconomic uncertainty in the total uncertainty (i. e. , uncertainty accounting for all series) grows as the forecast horizon increases.  Accounting for the maturity is thus of great importance to fully apprehend the impact of uncertainty on macroeconomic dynamics.  As shown by Jurado et al.  (2015), uncertainty shocks with shorter uncertainty horizons tend to be associated with a larger fraction of the forecast error variance in aggregates than those with longer uncertainty horizons.  In the context of commodity prices and especially oil prices, the discussion is of primary importance.  The ongoing debate in the literature about the effect of maturity has been mainly oriented toward the consequences of oil price uncertainty on economic activity.  Kilian and Vigfusson (2011) provide an interesting comparison between the long-run theoretical uncertainty measure of Bernanke (1983) and Pindyck (1991), and the empirical short-run uncertainty proxy of Elder and Serletis (2010).  According to the authors, the former deﬁnition is related to uncertainty at horizons relevant to investment decisions, while the latter is more appropriate to capture the reallocation effect of Hamilton (1988) since it measures the current real oil price volatility.  Clearly, the effect of oil price uncertainty on activity depends on the impact of the oil price on investment, but also on how companies face to uncertainty regarding their investment decision plans.  Indeed, depending on the sectors, the delay from the investment decision to the beginning of the production can differ, and short-run uncertainty can thus have no impact for long-run investment strategies.  All in all, accounting for the effect of maturity when investigating the impact of uncertainty is thus of crucial importance.  <Middle> Data and model speciﬁcation.  3. 1.  Data.  We consider a large dataset of 19 principal commodity markets, classiﬁed into four categories.  energy, precious metals, agriculture, and industry.  Related price series are monthly, starting in October 1978 for energy markets, February 1976 for precious metals markets, and February 1980 for agricultural and industrial markets.  The period ends in April 2015 for all groups of commodities.  All series are transformed into ﬁrst-logarithmic differences (i. e. , price returns),17 as described in Table 1 in Appendix A, which also provides data sources.  Turning to macroeconomic uncertainty measures for distinct maturities, we rely on data freely available on Ludvigson’s homepage. 18 As stressed above, these uncertainty indexes are based on the information contained in several macroeconomic and ﬁnancial series.  Speciﬁcally, two monthly datasets are considered.  The ﬁrst one gathers together 132 macroeconomic time series used in Ludvigson and Ng (2010) and extracted from the FRED-MD monthly database,19 including real output and income, employment and hours, real retail, manufacturing and trade sales, consumer spending, housing starts, inventories and inventory sales ratios, orders and unﬁlled orders, compensation and labor costs, capacity utilization measures, price indexes, bond and stock market indexes, and foreign exchange measures.  The second dataset consists of 147 time series of ﬁnancial indicators that measure the behavior of a broad crosssection of asset returns and some aggregate ﬁnancial indicators not contained in the ﬁrst, macroeconomic dataset.  This ﬁnancial dataset includes dividend-price and earning-price ratios, growth rates of aggregate dividends and prices, default and term spreads, yields on corporate bonds of different ratings grades, yields on Treasuries and yield spreads, and a broad cross-section of industry equity returns. 20 In constructing the factors (see Eq.  (3)), the raw data have been transformed to achieve stationarity.  Finally, it is worth mentioning that whereas both sets of data are used to estimate the forecasting factors, macroeconomic uncertainty is proxied using the 132 macroeconomic time series only.  Indeed, as explained by Jurado et al.  (2015), uncertainties in the 147 ﬁnancial indicators are not computed since the macroeconomic dataset already contains some ﬁnancial series, and the authors do not wish to over-represent the ﬁnancial sector in the aggregate uncertainty measure.  As shown by Jurado et al.  (2015), their measure of macroeconomic uncertainty exhibits a quantitatively important dynamic relationship with global economic activity, as well as with business cycles.  Indeed, common macroeconomic uncertainty shocks are much larger associated with a decline in real activity (production, hours worked and employment) than are shocks to stock market volatility.  In addition, macroeconomic uncertainty is evidenced to be (i) highly countercyclical, explaining a larger part of total uncertainty during recessions than in other periods, and (ii) strongly more persistent than usual uncertainty proxies.  Overall, according to Jurado et al.  (2015), important macroeconomic uncertainty shocks are strongly linked to changes in economic activity, and even more during recessions.  Finally, an appealing characteristic is that our retained uncertainty measures have the advantage of providing far fewer important uncertainty episodes than do popular proxies.  As an example, though Bloom (2009) identiﬁes 17 uncertainty periods based on stock market volatility, Jurado et al.  (2015) ﬁnd evidence of only three episodes of uncertainty over the 1959–2011 period.  the month surrounding the 1973–74 and 1981–82 recessions and the recent 2007–09 great recession.  This suggests that much variability in the stock market does not come from changes in genuine uncertainty across the broader economy.  in other words, much of the variation in traditional uncertainty proxies is not driven by uncertainty itself.  Such variability may come from other factors as changes in risk aversion, sentiments, leverages, etc.  As stressed above, this ﬁnding can be explained by the fact that (i) standard proxies tend to overestimate the weight of a single series in the evaluation of macroeconomic uncertainty, and (ii) popular uncertainty proxies based on volatility measures usually erroneously attribute to uncertainty ﬂuctuations that are actually forecastable.  Overall, our considered macroeconomic uncertainty proxy identiﬁes fewer uncertainty episodes than usual volatility-based measures, but when such periods occur, they display higher and more persistent correlation with real activity.  These developments highlight the relevance of considering predictability rather than volatility when assessing the uncertainty–macroeconomy relationship.  3. 2.  Structural threshold VAR model.  To analyze whether uncertainty affects commodity prices’ behavior depending on the level of uncertainty, we consider that uncertainty may be a nonlinear propagator of shocks across markets, captured by a structural threshold vector autoregressive model. 21 A threshold VAR model is a nonlinear multivariate system of equations that models nonlinearity additively and can be estimated by OLS.  In addition to providing an intuitive way to capture the nonlinear effects of uncertainty on markets, the TVAR model has the advantage of endogenously identifying different uncertainty states.  Indeed, according to this speciﬁcation, observations can be divided, for example, into two states delimited by a threshold reached by uncertainty, with estimated coeﬃcients that vary depending on the considered state (low- and high-uncertainty states).  In other words, the TVAR speciﬁcation allows uncertainty states to switch as a result of shocks to commodity markets.  For each of our four groups of commodity markets, we consider a structural TVAR model of the form.  where Yt is a vector of endogenous variables containing both the price returns of all commodities belonging to the considered group (energy, precious metals, industry, and agriculture) and the measure of macroeconomic uncertainty,22 A1 and A2 reﬂect the structural contemporaneous relationships in the two states, respectively, B1(L) and B2(L) are lag polynomial matrices, l1 and l2 are vectors of constants, and ut denotes the vector of orthogonalized error terms.  ct−d is the d-lagged threshold variable, which is a function of uncertainty (this hypothesis is discussed and tested below, as well as the choice of the optimal value of d).  It(ct−d ≥ c) is an indicator function that equals 1 when ct−d ≥ c and 0 otherwise, where c denotes the threshold uncertainty critical value that has to be endogenously estimated.  In other words, two states are identiﬁed.  the low-uncertainty state corresponding to a weak degree of uncertainty (It(. ) = 0) and the high-uncertainty state related to a high degree of uncertainty (It(. ) = 1).  As shown by Eq.  (4), the coeﬃcients of the TVAR model are allowed to change across states depending on the level of uncertainty.  An essential step in TVAR approach is to test for the existence of a threshold effect with respect to uncertainty.  However, the testing procedure is not straightforward because under the null hypothesis of no threshold effect, the threshold value is not known a priori and has to be estimated. 23 Here, the threshold is determined endogenously by a grid search over all possible values of the threshold variable where the grid is trimmed at a lower and upper bound to ensure a suﬃcient number of data points for the estimation procedure in each regime. 24 To test for a threshold effect, we rely on nonstandard inference and estimate the model by least squares for all possible threshold values.  Conditionally to each possible threshold, we generate three Wald-type statistics using Hansen’s (1996) simulation method to test the null hypothesis of no difference between states.  the maximum Wald statistic over all possible threshold values (sup-Wald), the average Wald statistic over all possible values (avgWald), and a function of the sum of exponential Wald statistics (exp-Wald).  Because the asymptotic distribution of Wald statistics is nonstandard, we use Hansen’s (1996) bootstrap procedure to simulate the related distribution and conduct inference.  The estimated threshold values are those that maximize the log-determinant of the variance-covariance matrix of residuals.  Once the TVAR speciﬁcation is estimated, another important concern consists in analyzing nonlinear impulse-response functions (IRFs).  In a nonlinear setup, impulse responses are more complicated than in standard linear VAR models because responses to a shock are history-dependent.  Indeed, in a linear framework impulse responses are computed under the assumption that shocks hit the series only at a particular point in time (i. e. , neither before, nor during the forecasting horizon).  Unlike the standard framework, in our case the reaction of the endogenous variable to a shock depends on the past history, the state of the economy and the size and the sign of all the shocks hitting the economy within the period of interest.  In order to average out the inﬂuences of shocks on the system, we compute generalized impulse-response functions (GIRFs, see Koop et al. , 1996).  By relying on data simulation depending on the regime of the system at the time of the shock hits the variables, this approach has the advantage to allow for regime-dependent responses, as well as to look at the effects of shocks of different sizes and directions.  A GIRF can be deﬁned by the following expression.  GIRFy (h, Yt−1, ut) = E [yt+h | Yt−1, ut] − E [yt+h | Yt−1]where Yt−1 is the information set at time t − 1 andu t is a particular realization of exogenous shocks.  The response of the variable y at horizon h is calculated by simulating the evolution of the model conditionally on the initial condition Yt−1 and a given realization of ut.  The general idea is to simulate the model for any possible starting point in the time horizon.  We do this by drawing vectors of shocks ut+j with j = 1, .  .  .  , k, and simulating the model conditionally on the initial condition and given realization.  We repeat the procedure for −ut+j in order to eliminate any asymmetry that may arise from sampling variation in the draws of ut+j.  The approach is repeated 500 times.  In order to generate IRFs conditionally to the location of the system with respect to the threshold variable, the simulations are repeated for several histories depending on the considered regime.  Finally, the response to shocks speciﬁc to a particular regime is the estimated conditional expectation based upon the average of the simulation results.  3. 3.  Endogeneity and strict exogeneity between macroeconomic and commodity prices.  As mentioned above, another complication when estimating TVAR models concerns the endogeneity issue.  Endogeneity may come from the fact that the threshold variable (our uncertainty measure) is allowed to endogenously respond to commodity price shocks.  One way to address this problem is to assume strict exogeneity between variables.  However, as discussed by Van Robays (2013) among others, assuming strict exogeneity between oil prices (and commodity prices in general) and macroeconomic uncertainty is not realistic because it is well known that a strong relationship exists between the oil market and economic activity.  Therefore, a common approach is to impose the threshold variable to switch across states with a delay.  This implies that we only evaluate commodity price shocks that occur within a certain state.  Another common assumption in the TVAR literature is to deﬁne the threshold variable as a moving average process that requires some persistence in the variation of the threshold variable before shocks cause the regime switching.  To fully address the issue of endogeneity, we combine these two approaches in the present paper by considering a three-period moving average of our one-period-lagged threshold variable. 26 4.  Uncertainty transmission across states.  We now use the TVAR approach to apprehend the impact of macroeconomic uncertainty on commodity prices.  We ﬁrst present threshold test results and related comments.  We then complement the analysis by conducting nonlinear IRF analysis under high- and low-uncertainty states to investigate whether the transmission of macroeconomic uncertainty shocks into commodity markets differs across states.  Finally, we assess the inﬂuence of the considered maturity.  4. 1.  Threshold test results.  Tables 2 to 5 in Appendix A report the three threshold test results for each group of commodity markets at different maturities together with the “percentage of high uncertainty” corresponding to the percentage of observations such that the threshold variable is above the estimated threshold critical value. 27 Our main results can be summarized as follows.  First, the null hypothesis is always rejected in favor of the presence of threshold effects for each group of markets and the maturity considered.  The TVAR speciﬁcation is thus appropriate because it accounts for varying effects of uncertainty depending on the degree of uncertainty.  Second, the estimated threshold values increase with the maturity, meaning that as h increases, the switching mechanism between low- and high-uncertainty states is delayed.  This ﬁnding reﬂects a different perception of the level of uncertainty as the horizon increases (Bloom, 2014) and is also consistent with Jurado et al. ’s (2015) conclusions, highlighting that the level of uncertainty tends to augment along with the maturity.  Third, turning to the percentage of high uncertainty, the results deserve some detailed comments.  Whatever the maturity considered, agricultural and industrial markets display the highest percentages, whereas energy and precious metals markets are characterized by similar lower values.  Moreover, high-uncertainty percentage values are quite stable, regardless of the considered maturity for the latter two markets.  Regarding precious metals, this result can be explained by their safe-haven role across all horizons during times of economic turmoil (Bredin et al. , 2014), making them an interesting tool to transfer short-run uncertainty to longer one.  Concerning energy markets, the limited substitution effects at relatively short-term horizons may explain the stability of the high-uncertainty percentage values.  Indeed, whereas consumers’ demand for energy may potentially slightly decrease following its corresponding price rise, this dynamics is weakened by limited substitution opportunities.  It may be more accentuated at longer horizons but two brakes will be at play.  First, such movement would take some time to be truly effective given the required important investments needed in the energy domain.  Second, the substitution effect is limited by the socalled rebound effect.  an improvement in energy eﬃciency leads to a decline in the cost of energy use, canceling the substitution effect.  Turning to agricultural markets, this sector is highly sensitive to the unexpected changes in economy (Baumeister and Kilian, 2014), explaining why the high-uncertainty percentage value is higher at the short-run, one-month maturity.  In the case of agricultural and energy markets, the role of storage could be emphasized.  Indeed, storage capacities are somewhat more ﬂexible on energy markets than on agricultural markets in the sense that a large part of agricultural products needs to be extracted at ﬁxed dates.  This may explain why highest percentages of uncertainty are observed for agricultural markets compared to energy ones.  Finally, the observation that the percentage of high uncertainty increases with the maturity in the case of industrial markets results from the sensitivity of this sector to structural factors that are more at play in the long run.  Indeed, to design proper R&D investment strategies, ﬁrms usually have to focus on longer horizons.  Fourth, the evolution of the percentage of high uncertainty according to the value of h also provides useful information regarding the sensitivity of commodity markets to the level and variability of uncertainty.  Indeed, as shown by Jurado et al.  (2015), the level of uncertainty increases with h, whereas its variability is a decreasing function of h because the forecast value tends to the unconditional mean as the forecast horizon tends to inﬁnity.  Consequently, the percentage of high uncertainty in agricultural markets seems to be more sensitive to the variability of uncertainty (short-run uncertainty), but for industrial markets, this percentage increases with h and seems to be more sensitive to the level (long-run uncertainty).  Fig.  1B in Appendix B presents these ﬁndings in a more dynamic way by showing the evolution of our macroeconomic uncertainty measure at one month over the whole period together with the corresponding threshold value.  For almost all markets, periods of high uncertainty coincide with episodes of heightened macroeconomic uncertainty, such as the 1981–82 and 2007–09 recessions.  In addition and as expected given our preceding arguments (see Section 3), we identify a few high-uncertainty episodes compared with studies that rely on standard volatility-type proxies, such as Bloom (2009) and Van Robays (2013).  4. 2.  Nonlinear impulse-response function analysis.  Figs.  1C to 4C in Appendix C depict the impact of macroeconomic uncertainty for h = 1 on each commodity price return series.  As shown, four lines are displayed, corresponding to positive and negative nonlinear IRFs under high- and low-uncertainty states following a two-standard-deviation macroeconomic uncertainty shock.  For almost all series and as expected, positive macroeconomic uncertainty shocks (i. e. ,increase in macroeconomic uncertainty) affect commodity price returns negatively on average, whereas negative shocks (i. e. , decrease in macroeconomic uncertainty) impact price returns positively on average.  This is a quite logical result, conﬁrming that Jurado et al. ’s (2015) macroeconomic uncertainty proxy is clearly countercyclical.  Moreover, the IRF analysis puts forward asymmetric behavior.  Indeed, the impact of macroeconomic uncertainty is generally stronger in high-uncertainty states compared with low-uncertainty states, with commodity price returns being more sensitive to events that lessen the predictability of macroeconomic variables.  These ﬁndings illustrate the interest of the TVAR speciﬁcation by showing that the impact of macroeconomic uncertainty on commodity markets depends on its intensity.  At a more detailed level, considering the cases of energy and precious metals, the responses of oil, gold, platinum, and silver markets are unequivocal because price returns strongly react to macroeconomic uncertainty shocks in high-uncertainty states (between 4% to 7% for oil, gold and platinum and approximately 10% for silver).  Moreover, though the responses to positive and negative shocks are quite persistent (eight months) and symmetric for oil and platinum, the responses of gold and, to a lesser extent, silver are more transient (approximately four months) and asymmetric.  The safe-haven role of gold and silver markets during periods of economic downturn could be one plausible explanation about the rapid overshooting reaction of both prices.  Recall that the proxy is countercyclical meaning that increases in uncertainty correspond to recessionary periods.  Therefore, for gold and silver prices two effects seem to be at play.  (i) macroeconomic uncertainty decreases the general price level since the economy is in recession, and (ii) after a certain delay, the safe-haven role of precious metals leads to rapid strong overshooting behaviors.  The main drivers of oil and platinum markets are sensitive to macroeconomic uncertainty shocks because they are strongly related to economic activity through industry purposes.  A different pattern is observed for the gas market, for which the response to macroeconomic uncertainty shocks is more important in low-uncertainty states.  The regional organization of this market may explain its relatively weak sensitivity to high macroeconomic uncertainty.  Turning to the industrial and agricultural sectors, all industrial markets but the zinc follow quite similar patterns signiﬁcantly reacting to uncertainty, as do agricultural markets with the exception of coffee—which is a highly volatile market—and, to a lesser extent, sugar and wheat.  4. 3.  Does maturity matter.  Examining the inﬂuence of maturity when investigating the impact of uncertainty on prices is of particular importance given the multiple channels and different effects at play at short-, medium-, and long-run horizons (see Bloom, 2014 for a review).  Understanding the maturity perception in assessing uncertainty is also of primary importance for commodity prices since maturity may capture different behaviors.  For instance, short- and medium-run uncertainty may capture a kind of reallocation effect (Hamilton, 1988) since such maturities focus on current behaviors, while a long-run perception of uncertainty may be more related to Bernanke’s (1983) framework because it corresponds to horizons relevant to purchase and investment decisions. 28 Our results in Section 4. 1 give us a ﬁrst insight about the static sensitivity of prices to maturity.  Turning now to the dynamic analysis, Fig.  1D in Appendix D reports the average (per group of markets) cumulative responses of prices to positive high uncertainty two-standard deviations shocks at maturity h.  As before, three values of h are considered—namely, 1, 3 and 12 months.  The results are consistent with those of Section 4. 1 revealing that maturity matters for some markets.  Though the percentage of high uncertainty is quite stable across maturity for energy and precious metals markets, the responses of both groups to a positive shock are quite similar giving more importance to the short-run effect.  While the impact of short-run uncertainty is clear for energy markets (in line with the close relationship that exists between energy and economic activity in the short run), the response of precious metals markets seems to be more sensitive to long-run uncertainty after a certain delay. 29 The speciﬁc behavior of precious metals markets may come from the well-known safe-haven property transferring uncertainty at 1 month to longer horizons (12 months).  For industrial markets the conclusion is more straightforward, uncertainty at longer maturity (h = 12) has a greater immediate impact on price returns, conﬁrming the high sensitivity of such markets to structural factors and the reactiveness of industrial ﬁrms to horizons relevant to long-run investments.  Regarding the agricultural sector, markets also appear to be more sensitive to long-run uncertainty, which is quite logical since agricultural ﬁrms may face longer horizons with respect to agricultural investment decisions.  On the whole, the important point regarding the impact on commodity prices is not only the percentage of high uncertainty but also how shocks are incorporated into the system and, in turn, their implications for economic behaviors.  5.  Does macroeconomic uncertainty generate commodity uncertainty.  To provide a complete description of the links between macroeconomic uncertainty and commodity markets, we go a step further and investigate how macroeconomic uncertainty can affect each commodity market uncertainty.  To this end, we must deﬁne an uncertainty measure for each market and then assess the transmission mechanism of macroeconomic uncertainty to each speciﬁc commodity market uncertainty.  5. 1.  Measuring commodity market uncertainty.  Let us ﬁrst consider the determination of the commodity market uncertainty proxy.  We rely on Eq.  (1) and proceed in two steps.  In a ﬁrst step, we use the previously estimated TVAR model to generate the h-period-ahead forecast of the considered price return series, accounting for the information about macroeconomic uncertainty. be the obtained forecast, where y is the considered commodity price return series, Jt the information set available at time t, andu u t the macroeconomic uncertainty shock at time t.  As seen, our forecast value accounts for information about macroeconomic uncertainty.  Given this forecast, we deﬁne in a second step the h-period-ahead forecast error as the difference between yt+h , the forecast that accounts for information aboutmacroeconomic uncertainty.  The underlying idea is that a way to understand the transmission mechanism of macroeconomic uncertainty to commodity markets is to assess how the forecast of our considered variable changes if we add information about macroeconomic uncertainty.  The commodity market uncertainty measure is then given by the volatility of this forecast error.  To account for the volatility-clustering phenomenon, which is a typical feature of commodity markets, we rely on time-varying volatility speciﬁcations and consider the moving average stochastic volatility model developed by Chan and Jeliazkov (2009) and Chan and Hsiao (2013) given by, where xt denotes the forecast error, i. e. , the difference between the forecast of y that does not account for information about macroeconomic uncertainty and the forecast that accounts for such information.  The error term vt is assumed to be serially dependent, following a MA(q) process of the form, where et ∼ N are independent of each other, e0 = e−1 =.  .  .  = e−q+1 =0, and the roots of the polynomial associated with the MA coeﬃcients x = (x1, .  .  .  , xq)(cid. 3) are assumed to be outside the unit circle.  ht is the log-volatility evolving as a stationary AR(1) process.  Following Chan and Hsiao (2013), under the moving average extension, the conditional variance of the series xt is given by.  This speciﬁcation allows us to capture two nonlinear channels of macroeconomic uncertainty.  (i) the one coming from the moving average of the q + 1 most recent variances eht + .  .  .  + eht−q, and (ii) the other from the AR(1) log-volatility stationary process given by Eq.  (8).  Given the challenge of estimating this kind of nonlinear model due to high-dimensional and nonstandard data—with the conditional density of the states being non-Gaussian—a Bayesian estimation using Markov chain Monte Carlo methods is hardly tractable.  We follow Chan and Hsiao (2013) and estimate the conditional variance of forecast errors by band-matrix algorithms instead of using conventional methods based on the Kalman ﬁlter. 31 5. 2.  Transmission of macroeconomic uncertainty to commodity market uncertainty.  Figs.  1E to 4E in Appendix E depict the evolution of uncertainty in commodity markets for 1 month (blue line), together with the evolution of corresponding prices (black line) and volatility (green line).  The horizontal bar corresponds to 1. 65 standard deviation above the mean of each commodity-related uncertainty series.  When uncertainty in commodity markets exceeds the horizontal bar, this refers to episodes of heightened uncertainty for the considered price return series.  When commodity price uncertainty coincides with the vertical gray bands, it indicates a potential transfer from macroeconomic to commodity market uncertainty (with both uncertainty episodes occurring in the same period). 32 Otherwise, uncertainty is attributable to the own characteristics of the considered raw materials market.  Consider ﬁrst the case of energy markets.  As shown in Fig.  1E (Appendix E), the sensitivity of oil price uncertainty to macroeconomic uncertainty differs depending on the retained period, highlighting that oil shocks do not all follow the same pattern.  For example, the period that just follows the invasion of Kuwait in 1990, the Afghan war in 2001, and the Iraq War in 2002–03 are episodes characterized by sharp spikes in oil prices.  The Iran-Iraq war in 1980 and the 1999 OPEC meeting are, in contrast, associated with small price movements.  As stressed by Barsky and Kilian (2004), a simplistic view should be that major war episodes cause price uncertainty to increase through a rise in precautionary demand for oil.  However, among all episodes of important ﬂuctuations in oil prices, only two seem to be accompanied by uncertainty. 33 (i) the 2007–09 recession, and (ii) the 1984–86 period.  During the 2007–09 recession, oil price uncertainty is indeed very sensitive to macroeconomic uncertainty, a result that is not surprising given the well-known relationship that exists between economic activity and the oil market. 34 This episode of high oil price uncertainty is accompanied by the biggest oil price spike in the postwar experience and results from various macroeconomic factors.  A common explanation lies in the global economic growth starting in 2003, as illustrated by the increase in real gross world product combined with the stagnant oil production from Saudi Arabia from 2005 to 2007. 35 Whatever the origin of price surges, this period of macroeconomic uncertainty is reﬂected in oil market uncertainty by an unprecedented oil price increase.  The 1984–86 period is also characterized by heightened oil price uncertainty, but it does not coincide with macroeconomic uncertainty.  This episode seems to be related to the conjunction of two events. 