
The world has known for over a century an important economic
development.  Industrial developments, the increase in the number of
vehicles and domestic equipments have led to a signiﬁcant increase in
energy demand.  Energy is an essential basis for social and economic
development.  States must ensure adequate supply of energy for their
citizens while ensuring the sustainability of that supply.  Energy supply
is a permanent challenge for our societies, especially as the need for
states continues to increase.  Overall, the SMCs are facing rapid population growth coupled with relatively low incomes, as well as an accelerated pace of urbanization, added to signiﬁcant needs of socio-economic
development.  This is reﬂected in a growing demand for energy services
and associated infrastructure.  Indeed, in all SMCs, energy demand is
constantly increasing.  To meet their energy needs, the SMCs use about
95% of fossil fuels.  If the trend observed has continued for 30 years,
energy consumption could increase by 65% between 2000 and 2025
and be 97% would be satisﬁed by fossil energies in 2025.  Such a scenario
will have many consequences, such as: increased energy dependency
and insecurity, high energy bills (importing countries), reduced export
proﬁts (exporting countries), vulnerability of the production and
distribution system, high local air pollution and as well as climate
change.  In the same context, the question of ﬁnancing goes far beyond
that of mobilizing the ﬁnancial resources of international cooperation. 
The ﬁnancial development can provide efﬁcient ﬁnancial service for
foreign banking markets, and improve the access of both foreign and
domestic ﬁrms to ﬁnancial goods and services (Dasgupta Name, 2001;
Barth Name, 2004; Lee and Chang, 2008).  According to Karanﬁl (2008)
and (2009), the causality between economic growth and energy consumption is not justiﬁed just by a simple bivariate model.  He suggested
adding one of the ﬁnancial variables such as domestic credit to private
sector, stock market capitalization or liquid liabilities into the model. 
He also argued that interest rate and exchange rate can affect the energy
consumption through energy prices.  Furthermore, Fung (2009) study
found that an efﬁcient ﬁnancial system creates more products, and
the inputs for these products increase the demand for energy.  Thus,
ﬁnancial development is a factor which should be taken into account
in energy consumption.  (See Fig.  1. )
Sadorsky (2011) pointed three effective channels of ﬁnancial
development over energy consumption.  First, there is a direct effect. 
When the ﬁnancial development improves, consumers can borrow
easier and cheaper in order to buy durable goods which consume a lot
of energy.  Secondly, improved ﬁnancial development helps businesses
to access to ﬁnancial capital easily and less costly.  Additionally, stock
market development can also affect businesses by providing them
with additional funding source.  These ones can let businesses expand
(business effect).  Thirdly, the wealth effect: increased stock market
activity usually affects the conﬁdence of consumers and businesses by
creating wealth effect.  Increased economic conﬁdence may expand
the economy and promote energy demand.  The relationship between
ﬁnancial development and energy consumption has been discussed in
recent previous studies (Mielnik and Goldemberg, 2002; Sadorsky,
2011; Islam Name, 2013; Shahbaza Name, 2016).  The econometric
approach of empirical studies often is based on a linear dynamic panel
model (Sadorsky, 2010; Ozturk and Al-Mulali, 2015; Shahbaz Name,
2017), autoregressive distributed lag (ARDL) bounds (Fuinhas and
Marques, 2012; Shahbaza Name, 2016; Bekhet Name, 2017), a
cointegration model (Islam Name, 2013; Mahalik Name, 2017), or Granger
causality (Dan and Lijun, 2009; Furuoka, 2015).  Energy is seen as the indispensable tool for sustainable development.  In these circumstances,
determining the causal link between energy consumption, ﬁnancial
development and economic growth is of particular importance to
researchers and decision-makers.  Indeed, it allows deducing the implications of adequate energy, economic and ﬁnancial policies to achieve
the objective of economic development.  To the best of our knowledge,
there has never been an attempt to investigate the short and long run
causality among economic growth, energy consumption and ﬁnancial
development for SMCs.  There are few studies available in the existing
literature investigating the causal relationship between economic
growth, energy consumption and ﬁnancial development (Alam Name,
2015; Mahalik Name, 2017; Bekhet Name, 2017).  According to the conclusion derived from these studies, the previous literature that focuses on
the cointegration and causal relationship between growth, energy and
ﬁnancial development is not conclusive to provide policy recommendation that can be applied across countries.  This paper therefore aims at
fulﬁlling this gap and contributing to empirical literature.  The purpose
of this study is to investigate the relationship between economic
growth, energy consumption and ﬁnancial development in the 6 SMCs
for the period 1995–2015 using multi-steps methodology: Stationary,
Co-integration tests, autoregressive distributed lag (hereafter ARDL)
and vector error correction model (hereafter VECM).  The ARDL bounds
testing approach investigates short run as well as long run parameter
instantaneously. 
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 provides a literature review on ﬁnancial development, energy consumption and
economic growth.  Section 3 describes empirical methodology for this
study.  Section 4 reveals empirical ﬁndings and discussion.  Section 5
concludes with a summary of the main ﬁndings and policy implications. 
2.  Literature review. 
In the past few years, the causal link between energy consumption
and economic growth has gained increasing attention in the recent
literature (Islam Name, 2013; Khan Name, 2014; Shahbaz and Lean,
2012; Shahbaz Name, 2013a, 2013b; Omri and Kahouli, 2014a, 2014b;
Mahalik Name, 2017; Bekhet Name, 2017).  The empirical ﬁndings of the
existing energy literature are not unambiguous due to the use of various
econometric approaches such as correlation analysis, simple regressions, bivariate causality, unit root tests, multivariate cointegration,
panel cointegration, VECM, ARDL, inter alia.  However, the empirical
studies that examine the relationship between ﬁnancial development,
energy consumption and economic growth in a systematic manner
still lack.  As Table 1 demonstrates, the ﬁndings of these studies are inconclusive.  These empirical studies show a range of conﬂicting results:
vary vastly in terms of signs, magnitudes and signiﬁcance.  Some
researchers have found a negative relationship and no causal relationship between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption (Mielnik
and Goldemberg, 2002; Dan and Lijun, 2009; Shahbaz Name, 2013a,
2013b), while others detected a positive and a bidirectional causality between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption (Sadorsky, 2011;
Al-Mulali and Sab, 2012a, 2012b; Islam Name, 2013; Khan Name, 2014;
Omri and Kahouli, 2014a, 2014b; Alam Name, 2015; Bekhet Name, 2017). 
To be more speciﬁc, Dan and Lijun (2009) apply Granger causality to
test the relationship between energy consumption and ﬁnancial development in China's Guangdong province.  They showed that ﬁnancial
development failed to increase energy consumption.  Furthermore,
Sadorsky (2010) detected a direct link between ﬁnancial development
and energy consumption by using the dynamic panel method in 22 developing countries for the period of 1990–2006.  His ﬁndings indicated
that there was a signiﬁcant positive relationship between ﬁnancial
development and energy consumption.  In addition, Sadorsky (2011)
examined the impact of ﬁnancial development on energy consumption
in a sample of 9 Central and Eastern European frontier economies.  The
empirical results, obtained from dynamic panel demand models, show
a positive and statistically signiﬁcant relationship between ﬁnancial
development and energy consumption.  In a similar way, Xu (2012)
investigated the nexus between ﬁnancial development and energy
consumption during the period 1999–2009 with a panel data set in 29
provinces of China, using system-GMM.  The results indicated a positive
as well as signiﬁcant relationship between ﬁnancial development and
energy consumption. 
In the same context, Shahbaz and Lean (2012) examined the relationship between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption in Tunisia
for the period of 1971–2008.  The researchers adopted the ARDL and the
Johansen cointegration method for their empirical analysis.  The ﬁndings
indicated that there was a long run cointegration relationship between
ﬁnancial development and energy consumption.  In addition, the two
variables had a bidirectional causal relationship.  By using panel data
method, Al-Mulali and Sab (2012a) examined the ﬁnance-energy
nexus in 30 Sub-Saharan African countries between 1980 and 2008, reported that there was bidirectional causality between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption.  Furthermore, Al-Mulali and Sab (2012b)
analyzed the ﬁnance-energy relationship in 19 countries for the period of
1980–2008.  They concluded that there was no causal relationship between the variables.  Focusing on Malaysia, Islam Name (2013) investigated the effects of ﬁnancial development on energy consumption between
1971 and 2009.  Their ﬁndings revealed mutually reinforcing bidirectional causality between the ﬁnancial development and the energy consumption.  Shahbaz Name (2013a) analyzed the ﬁnance-energy nexus in
China for the period of 1971–2011.  The ARDL bounds testing approach
to cointegration was applied to examine long run relationship among
the series while stationarity properties of the variables was tested by applying structural break test.  The results indicated that there was no causal relationship between the variables.  In a similar way, Shahbaz Name
(2013b) did not detect any causal relationship between the ﬁnancial development and the energy consumption in Indonesia over the period
from 1975 to 2011.  In further studies, Shahbaz Name (2013a) demonstrated that ﬁnancial development resulted in increased energy consumption
and conﬁrmed that energy use and ﬁnancial development have a positive impact on economic growth in China.  Islam Name (2013) examined
a long run relationship among consumption of energy, ﬁnancial development and economic growth for Malaysia over the 1971–2009 periods by
implementing the ARDL approach to cointegration; and tested the
direction of causality using the VECM.  The results suggest that energy
consumption is inﬂuenced by ﬁnancial development, both in the short
and the long run. 
In another study, Omri and Kahouli (2014a, 2014b) used the dynamic panel method to examine the ﬁnance-energy nexus in 65 countries
for the period of 1990–2011.  The researchers detected a positive relationship between the ﬁnancial development and the energy consumption.  More recently, Komal and Abbas (2015) explored the ﬁnancegrowth-energy nexus for Pakistan over the 1972–2012 periods, by
employing the system GMM estimation technique.  The study tried to
capture the impact of ﬁnancial development on energy consumption
through economic growth channel.  The study found positive and significant impact of ﬁnancial development on energy consumption through
the economic growth channel.  Indeed, Furuoka (2015) examined the relationships between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption in
Asia for the period of 1980–2012.  The ﬁndings of the panel cointegration
test indicated that there was a long run equilibrium relationship
between ﬁnance and energy consumption in the region.  Moreover, the
heterogeneous panel causality test detected an unidirectional causality
from energy consumption to ﬁnancial development but not vice versa. 
These results indicate that an expansion of energy usage could be a driving force behind ﬁnancial development in Asia.  Lending support to this
argument, Alam Name (2015) examined the relationship among energy
consumption and different ﬁnancial development indicators in the
panel of selected SAARC countries over a period of 1975–2011.  Panel
cointegration test suggested that the variables were cointegrated and
had a long-run relationship between them.  The ﬁxed effect model
shows that there is a signiﬁcant relationship among energy consumption, economic growth and ﬁnancial development.  In another study,
Mahalik Name (2017) investigated the relationship between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption for Saudi Arabia by using annual
data for the period 1971–2011.  The evidence of unidirectional causality
running from ﬁnancial development to energy demand is found.  By
contrast, Bekhet Name (2017) examined the relationships among CO2
emissions, ﬁnancial development, energy consumption, and economic
growth in GCC countries.  To test the long-term relationship among the
above variables, the study employed the ARDL bounds testing approach
for the period of 1980–2011.  The empirical results proved the existence
of a long-term equilibrium relationship among energy consumption and
ﬁnancial development in all Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries
except UAE. 
Generally, the literature review on the causality relationship
between economic growth, energy consumption and ﬁnancial development is based on Engle and Granger (1987), Johansen (1991) and
Johansen and Juselius (1990) cointegration techniques.  However,
using the same methods with the same variables has no more potential
of any original contribution, because it increases only the number of
conﬂicting results with varying time periods and we have serious
doubts about the economic, energy and ﬁnancial policies.  In the next
section, we use VECM and the ARDL model to avoid this problem. 
None of the studies, according to best of our knowledge, available for
SMCs used the VECM and the ARDL estimators for testing the energygrowth-ﬁnancial nexus. 
<Middle> Data and methodology. 
3. 1.  Data. 
The analysis covers the SMCs, which includes six countries: Algeria,
Egypt, Israel, Lebanon, Morocco and Tunisia.  The selection of the starting
period (1995–2015) was constrained by the availability of data.  The
main variables of the analysis are ﬁnancial development, real GDP per
capita and energy consumption per capita.  Data are taken from the
World Development Indicators database (World Development Indicators (WDI, 2016)).  GDP per capita is expressed in US dollars (constant
2010 US$) determined the economic growth, energy consumption
(EC) is expressed in kg of oil equivalent per capita, ﬁnancial development (FD) is explained by real domestic credit to private sector as
share of GDP.  I take the logarithm of these variables. 