
Private enforcement via shareholder litigation is important to investor protection and stock market development
(La Porta Name, 2006).  Prior literature suggests that cross-country variation in shareholder litigation threat affects the cost of
equity (Hail and Leuz, 2009; Khurana and Raman, 2004).  However, there is relatively scant evidence on how firm-level
mechanisms affect the disciplining role of shareholder litigation and therefore the cost of equity.  This research question is
important as the cost of equity is a summary measure of how investors perceive the risk and return tradeoff of investing in a
firm (Francis Name, 2004).  In addition, the cost of equity plays a key role in corporate financing and capital budgeting
decisions.  In this study, we examine how directors' and officers' liability insurance (D&O insurance) affects a firm’s cost ofD&O insurance is a policy purchased by a firm to cover defense cost and potential damage award when its directors and
officers (D&Os) are sued.  By effectively shielding D&Os from bearing personal financial liabilities, D&O insurance reduces the
disciplining effect of shareholder litigation (Baker and Griffith, 2010).  We hypothesize that D&O insurance increases a firm’s
cost of equity via two important channels.  First, as shareholder litigation encourages managers to increase transparency
(Ball, 2001), D&O insurance can result in poor financial reporting and disclosure quality, leading to a higher cost of equity
(Leuz and Wysocki, 2008).  Second, as D&O insurance limits the expected legal liabilities associated with bad outcomes of
D&O decisions, it encourages risk-taking (Baker and Griffith, 2010; Core, 1997).  To the extent that risk-taking results in a
higher exposure to market risks, the cost of equity is higher. 
Using a large manually collected dataset on D&O insurance from Canada, we find that D&O insurance coverage is
positively associated with the ex ante cost of equity implied in stock prices and analyst forecasts.  This association is robust to
firm fixed effects regression and alternative cost of equity measures.  It is also economically significant.  Based on our baseline
model, an increase in D&O insurance coverage by one standard deviation is associated with an increase in the cost of equity
of about 7% of the sample mean. 
The positive association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity can be driven by endogeneity as D&O insurance
purchase is a firm’s choice.  It can be the case that high risks lead to both high D&O insurance coverage and a high cost of
equity.  We conduct extensive tests to mitigate this concern.  First, we control for economic determinants of liability coverage
and corporate governance quality (Chen Name, 2011; Core, 1997, 2000).  We continue to find a positive association between
D&O insurance and the cost of equity.  Second, we conduct a lead-lag change analysis.  If it is risk, which is already known by
investors and manifested in the cost of equity, determines a firm’s decision to purchase D&O insurance, then a change in the
cost of equity should precede a change in D&O insurance.  In contrast, our hypothesis predicts that a change in the cost of
equity follows a change in D&O insurance coverage.  We find that a change in the cost of equity follows, but not precedes, a
change in D&O insurance coverage. 
Next, we examine the market reaction to the release of proxy circulars that contain D&O insurance information.  A shortterm market event study is less likely to suffer from the omitted correlated variable bias.  If investors charge a high cost of
equity for firms with a high level of D&O insurance coverage, then they would react negatively to the disclosure of an
increase in D&O insurance.  Our finding is consistent with this prediction. 
It is also possible that the D&O insurance purchase decision is based on D&Os' private information that is learnt by
investors subsequently (the risk anticipation argument). 1 If this is the case, we can still observe that a change in the cost of
equity follows, but not precedes, a change in D&O insurance coverage.  In addition, the disclosure of an increase in D&O
insurance can reveal D&Os' private information on an increase in risk and therefore lead to a negative market reaction. 
While the risk anticipation argument and our hypothesis are not mutually exclusive as a change in D&O insurance can reveal
both D&Os' private information and an expected change in D&Os' behavior, empirically distinguishing them is difficult as
D&Os' private information is not directly observable.  Nevertheless, we conduct several tests to address this concern.  First,
we control for an ex ante measure of litigation risk developed by Kim and Skinner (2012) and continue to find a positive
association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity.  Second, we test a cross-sectional prediction of the risk
anticipation argument.  If the association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity is driven by D&Os' private
information, then it should be more pronounced when D&Os have more private information.  Following Chen Name (2007),
we develop proxies for D&Os' private information based on earnings surprises and CEOs' insider trading activities.  We do
not find a more pronounced association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity for firms with D&Os having more
private information. 
Ideally, to clearly distinguish the risk anticipation argument from our hypothesis, one needs to identify a change in D&O
insurance not driven by D&Os' private information.  However, we are not aware of decent instrumental variables that are
capable of providing such identification.  As an alternative, we conduct a test of the effect of an exogenous reduction in D&Os'
personal legal liabilities on the cost of equity.  Nevada swiftly changed its corporate law in 2001 in order to attract more firm
incorporations.  Before the change, Nevada’s corporate law imposed similar fiduciary duties on D&Os as those under the
Delaware corporate law.  After the law change, D&Os are only liable if their behaviors involve both a breach of the duty of
loyalty and an intentional fraud (or a knowing violation of the law).  This implies that D&Os are no longer liable for a breach
of the duty of care (Barzuza, 2012).  We argue that this law change has a similar effect on reducing D&Os' personal legal
liabilities as an increase in D&O insurance coverage.  As the legislation process was very short, it is unlikely that firms could
anticipate the law change and quickly reincorporate into Nevada.  Thus, this change in D&Os' legal liabilities is exogenous. 
Using a difference-in-differences analysis, we find that the change in the cost of equity after this law change is
significantly higher for Nevada-incorporated firms than that for a sample of non-Nevada-incorporated firms matched on
industry, firm size, and the average cost of equity before the law change.  We observe a similar result when focusing on
Nevada-incorporated firms that mainly operate outside Nevada.  Thus, this result cannot be attributed to changes in
macroeconomic conditions in Nevada that coincided with the law change.  Taken together, although it is difficult to
completely rule out the risk anticipation argument, the positive association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity
does not appear to be entirely driven by D&Os' private information. 
Finally, we conduct several tests to better understand the channels through which D&O insurance increases the cost of
equity.  We find that D&O insurance is positively associated with the absolute value of performance-adjusted discretionary
accruals (Kothari Name, 2005), bid-ask spread, Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity measure, analysts' earnings forecast error, and the
dispersion of analysts' earnings forecasts.  This result is consistent with D&O insurance reducing financial reporting and
disclosure quality, increasing stock illiquidity and investors' estimation risk.  We also find that D&O insurance is positively
associated with the exposure to market risk, consistent with D&O insurance leading to more risk-taking. 
It is possible that firms purchase D&O insurance to optimally motivate D&Os to take more risks that benefit shareholders. 
If this is the case, D&O insurance can be positively associated with the cost of equity while at the same time be positively
associated with future operating performance.  We do not find a significantly positive association between D&O insurance
and future operating performance measured by industry-adjusted return on assets.  The association, if any, is negative.  These
results, combined with a negative market reaction to the announcement of an increase in D&O insurance, suggest that a
high risk associated with high D&O insurance coverage is more likely due to D&Os' reduced vigilance or diligence than due
to their optimal risk-taking activities which benefit shareholders. 2
We make two important contributions to the literature.  First, prior studies show that country-level variation in private
enforcement via shareholder litigation plays a pivotal role in determining a firm’s cost of equity (Hail and Leuz, 2009;
Khurana and Raman, 2004).  We show that even in common-law countries with stronger legal protection of investors, D&O
insurance, a firm-level mechanism that reduces the deterrence effect of private litigation, increases the cost of equity.  This
evidence suggests that investors factor D&O insurance information in their investment decisions.  Since D&O insurance is
widespread in North America and many other countries, our results have an important policy implication that supports
mandating the disclosure of D&O insurance (Baker and Griffith, 2010).  In addition, as D&O insurance weakens the
disciplining role of shareholder litigation, we add to the research linking corporate governance with a firm’s cost of equity
(Ashbaugh-Skaife Name, 2005; Chen Name, 2011). 
Second, we contribute to the research on the consequences of D&O insurance.  While prior studies have examined the
economic determinants of D&O insurance purchases and premium (Boyer, 2005; Chalmers Name, 2002; Core, 1997;
O’Sullivan, 1997; Zou Name, 2008 Gillan and Panasian, 2014; Boyer and Stern, 2015) and the effect of D&O insurance on
accounting restatements (Kim, 2006; Lin Name, 2013), reporting conservatism (Chung and Wynn, 2008), management
forecasts (Cao and Narayanamoorthy, 2011; Wynn, 2008), investment decisions (Lin Name, 2011) and loan financing (Lin Name, 2013), we document how D&O insurance affects the cost of equity.  Our evidence, together with these prior studies and
anecdotal criticisms (e. g. , of Warren Buffett), point to a cost of D&O insurance. 
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows.  Section 2 discusses background of D&O insurance and develops our hypothesis. 
Section 3 describes data and research design.  Section 4 presents main empirical results.  Section 5 conducts robustness tests
dealing with the potential endogeneity of D&O insurance.  Section 6 provides evidence on channels through which D&O
insurance affects the cost of equity.  Section 7 concludes. 
2. Institutional background and hypothesis development. 
2. 1.  Institutional background. 
Shareholders in Canada can sue firms and their D&Os for misrepresentations in securities issuance (primary market
liability suits) and in continuous disclosures that do not involve securities issuance (secondary market liability suits).  In
addition, shareholders can sue D&Os for a breach of fiduciary duties (derivative suits as the potential recovery goes to the
firm rather than to the plaintiff).  An important way to protect D&Os from bearing personal financial liabilities is to purchase
D&O insurance. 
D&O insurance is a policy protecting D&Os collectively against allegations of “wrongdoings”, including a breach of
fiduciary duties and violation of the securities law.  The policy is primarily intended to protect D&Os, but at the firm’s cost.  It
contains personal coverage (Category A coverage) and corporate indemnity coverage (Category B coverage) (Baker and
Griffith, 2010).  Category A coverage provides direct payment to D&Os when a firm is unable to indemnify them due to legal
reasons (in a shareholder derivative suit), financial distress, or when a firm chooses not to indemnify them.  Category B
coverage enables a firm to recoup the cost it incurs in indemnifying D&Os.  Neither Category A nor Category B coverage
protects a firm from legal liabilities when it is sued.  However, a firm can add entity coverage (Category C coverage) to cover
its own legal cost. 
We argue that D&O insurance influences D&Os' behaviors even though the federal Canada Business Corporation Act
(CBCA) allows a firm to indemnify D&Os' legal cost via its bylaws or charters.  First, D&Os believe that D&O insurance is
indispensable.  A survey carried out in 2007 finds that 87% of the 356 directors surveyed rank the availability of
comprehensive D&O insurance coverage as an important condition before agreeing to join a board despite the law’s
permission of corporate indemnification. 3
Second, the award of corporate indemnification has three restrictions: (1) D&Os acting in good faith, (2) firms remaining
solvent, and (3) covering only defense cost subject to court approval, but not settlement or damage award in derivative
suits. 4 While a firm seldom refuses to indemnify its D&Os and corporate defaults are rare, these restrictions nevertheless
create uncertainties to risk-averse D&Os.  In contrast, D&O insurance is less restrictive and has considerably narrower
exclusions that are typically deliberate frauds or illegal profits.  Moreover, the narrow exclusions of D&O insurance are rarely
applied.  The prevalent practice is that as long as defending D&Os do not confess dishonesty, D&O insurers pay the claim
(Baker and Griffith, 2010).  Therefore, compared with corporate indemnification, D&O insurance represents less restrictive
and more certain coverage.  This is why the possibility of corporate indemnification via by-laws does not reduce the demand
for D&O insurance. 
Our check of a random sample of corporate filings indicates that firms invariably allow corporate indemnification of
D&Os.  However, we find no quantitative disclosure on the extent of such indemnification.  Therefore, controlling for a binary
proxy for corporate indemnification in our analysis is not meaningful while controlling for a continuous proxy for
indemnification is not practical.  However, the presence of corporate indemnification is unlikely to materially alter our
inference on the effect of D&O insurance due to two reasons: (1) our result regarding the association between D&O
insurance and the cost of equity is robust to firm fixed effects estimation and a change regression model.  To the extent that
firms' indemnification policy is stable, the effect of the time-invariant element of corporate indemnification should be
captured by firm fixed effects.  (2) The time-variant element of corporate indemnification can be picked up by proxies for
firms' financial conditions such as size, leverage, credit rating and cash holdings (Chung and Wynn, 2008). 
<Middle> Hypothesis development. 
We argue that there are at least two channels through which D&O insurance increases the cost of equity.  First, D&O
insurance weakens the disciplining effect of shareholder litigation by decreasing D&Os' personal legal liabilities.  A reduction
in legal liabilities can lower the quality of financial reporting and disclosure, resulting in a poorer information environment. 
Second, a reduction in legal liabilities can lead to more risk-taking by D&Os. 
2. 2. 1.  D&O insurance, reporting/disclosure quality and the cost of equity
Litigation against D&Os for inadequate and untimely disclosures can encourage D&Os to improve transparency to reduce
potential legal liabilities (Ball, 2001; Healy and Palepu, 2001).  Timely and accurate disclosures reduce legal liabilities by
mitigating plaintiffs' allegation that D&Os hide the truth, thereby reducing the amount of damage award (Skinner, 1994,
1997).  Consistent with this notion, Khurana Name (2006) show that private litigation threat is positively associated with
earnings quality as measured by the predictability of earnings for future operating cash flows.  By reducing the expected
financial liabilities in a lawsuit, D&O insurance can lower D&Os' care and vigilance in financial reporting and disclosure,
resulting in errors, omissions, or even frauds (Baker and Griffith, 2010).  Prior studies find that firms with high D&O
insurance coverage report less conservative earnings (Chung and Wynn, 2008), provide fewer bad news management
forecasts (Wynn, 2008), and are more likely to have accounting restatements (Kim, 2006; Lin Name, 2013).  Thus, a high level
of D&O insurance coverage may result in deterioration in financial reporting and disclosure quality. 
Financial reporting and disclosure can affect the cost of equity through affecting stock liquidity and estimation risk (Leuz
and Wysocki, 2008).  Diamond and Verrecchia (1991) suggest that poor disclosure increases the cost of capital by
exacerbating information asymmetry among investors.  A stock becomes illiquid because uninformed investors (market
makers) reduce their trading volume and increase bid-ask spread in order to limit potential losses from trading with
informed investors.  Such illiquidity increases investors' trading cost.  In equilibrium, investors require compensation for
expected trading cost by increasing the required return.  Low quality disclosure thus leads to a high cost of capital. 
Lambert Name (2007) extend the literature on estimation risk (e. g. , Coles Name, 1995) and directly examine the effect of
accounting information on the cost of capital within a CAPM framework.  They show that the cost of equity increases with
the estimated covariance between its cash flow and the cash flow of all other firms in the market, and that this effect cannot
be diversified.  The estimated covariance of cash flows between two firms decreases with the precision of information about
any of the two firms' cash flows as information about one firm’s cash flow implicitly provides information about the other
firm's cash flow.  This information removes a source of common variation between the two firms’ cash flows and hence
reduces the estimated covariance of the cash flows.  Low quality disclosure increases the estimated covariance of cash flows
and consequently inflates the cost of equity. 
Consistent with these theories, Welker (1995) finds a negative association between a firm’s voluntary disclosure quality
and the bid-ask spread of its stock.  Lang and Lundholm (1996) show that better disclosure is associated with higher accuracy
and lower dispersion of analysts' earnings forecasts.  Others find that a lower cost of equity is associated with more
disclosures (Botosan, 1997) and higher quality financial reporting (Francis Name, 2004). 
Existing evidence also shows that a stronger shareholder litigation environment is associated with a lower cost of equity. 
Hail and Leuz (2009) report that listing in a US exchange reduces the cost of equity as cross-listing exposes foreign firms to
stronger shareholder litigation discipline.  Khurana and Raman (2004) document that Big-4 auditors help lower the cost of
equity in the US but not in Australia, Canada, and the UK, which have a similar economic structure but a less litigious
environment. 
In sum, D&O insurance coverage may lead to deterioration in financial reporting and disclosure quality that increases
information asymmetry and non-diversifiable estimation risk, leading to a higher cost of equity. 
2. 2. 2.  D&O insurance, risk-taking and the cost of equity
D&Os are risk-averse because they cannot fully diversify risks specific to their claims in a firm (Smith and Stulz, 1985) and
risks associated with their human capital (Amihud and Lev, 1981).  The possibility of bearing legal liabilities in shareholder
litigations against bad outcomes of their decisions can make D&Os even more risk-averse (Core, 1997).  Consistent with this
view, there is evidence that the Sarbanes-Oxley Act reduces corporate risk-taking as it increases legal liabilities of D&Os
(Bargeron Name, 2010).  D&O insurance effectively limits D&Os' legal liabilities in lawsuits against bad outcomes of their
business decisions.  Thus, with the protection offered by D&O insurance, D&Os are encouraged to invest in risky projects
otherwise passed up (Core, 1997; Baker and Griffith, 2010). 
Risk-taking induced by D&O insurance may or may not benefit shareholders.  On the one hand, D&O insurance can
encourage risk-taking activities based on prudent and informed decisions that are beneficial to shareholders (which we
examine later in the paper).  On the other hand, D&O insurance can provide D&Os incentives to breach the duty of care,
resulting in reduced vigilance, more recklessness or negligence in decision-making (Baker and Griffith, 2010).  According to
Eisenberg (1990), the duty of care requires D&Os to reasonably monitor the conduct of business, follow up on information
that should raise concerns, adopt a reasonable decision-making process and make informed decisions.  Breach of the duty of
care can result in a failure in identifying, gathering information on, and assessing risks in business decisions that expose
firms to risks harmful to shareholders (Bainbridge, 2009).  Consistent with this notion, Bradley and Schipnai (1989) find a
negative market reaction to the enactment of a Delaware legislation that permits firms to include in their articles of
incorporation a provision that eliminates or limits directors’ personal liabilities for a breach of the duty of care.  They also
find a negative market reaction when Delaware firms announce to adopt the provision limiting directors' legal liabilities. 
Regardless of the nature of risk-taking, a likely outcome of D&O insurance is that it encourages D&Os to take risks. 
Acharya and Bisin (2009) argue that D&Os prefer increasing firms' exposure to the market risk than to the idiosyncratic risk
as they can hedge the former by trading in financial markets on the market portfolio but cannot effectively hedge the latter. 
Thus, granting more risk-taking incentives (e. g. , D&O insurance) to D&Os can encourage them to increase a firm’s exposure
to the market risk, resulting in a higher cost of equity.  The above discussions lead to the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis.  The cost of equity increases in D&O insurance. 
We also note the possibility that the presence of D&O insurance can actually lower a firm’s cost of equity via reducing its
risk of financial distress. 5 Transferring liability risks to insurers who have a comparative advantage in managing liability
risks can be an efficient risk management strategy (Mayers and Smith, 1982).  Without D&O insurance coverage, a firm may
have to resort to corporate resources to indemnify its D&Os for defense cost, settlement or damage award when they are
sued.  In addition, in many shareholder suits, firms are also named as a defendant together with D&Os.  The absence of D&O
insurance (Category C) exposes a firm to a significant financial risk.  Therefore, D&O insurance can constitute an integral part
of a firm’s overall risk management strategy and help lower its default risk and thereby the cost of equity (Core, 1997; Hoyt
and Khang, 2000; Zou and Adams, 2008).  This possibility adds tension to our prediction and, if valid, makes it more difficult
for us to find a positive association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity. 
3.  Research design
3. 1.  Data and sample selection
We use a sample of Canadian firms listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange (TSE) as Canada requires the disclosure of D&O
insurance purchases.  We manually collect D&O insurance information from annual proxy circular filings in the System for
Electronic Document Analysis and Retrieval (SEDAR) database for TSE 300 firms for a 13-year period starting from 1996. 6
Available information about D&O insurance includes whether a firm has D&O insurance in a year and the associated
personal and corporate coverage limits.  Personal coverage and corporate indemnity coverage are typically equal.  If the proxy
circular for a firm-year is unavailable, we code the D&O insurance variable as missing. 
We match our D&O insurance data with COMPUSTAT North America.  We exclude financial institutions (SIC 6000-6999). 
We then merge the data with the I/B/E/S database to obtain analysts' earnings forecasts.  This sample selection procedure
results in about 2,000 firm-year observations used in our baseline regression.  Samples used in other analyses are the
intersections of the D&O insurance sample and other required variables. 
3. 2.  Cost of equity estimates
We estimate the ex ante cost of equity implied in stock prices and analysts' earnings forecasts.  Following Hail and Leuz
(2009), we use the average (RAVG) of the four cost of equity estimates by Claus and Thomas (2001) (RCT), Gebhardt Name
(2001) (RGLS), Ohlson and Juettner-Nauroth (2005) as implemented by Gode and Mohanram (2003) (ROJ), and the modified
PEG model by Easton (2004) (RMPEG) as the main proxy.  We also employ alternative estimates and results are robust. 
3. 3.  Model specification
We estimate the following regression to investigate the association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity,
where RAVG is the average of RGLS, RCT, ROJ and RMPEG.  DOICOV is the D&O insurance coverage ratio.  Following Chalmers Name
(2002) and Lin Name (2011), we define DOICOV as the amount of personal coverage scaled by the average market value of
equity of the year.  If a firm does not purchase D&O insurance, DOICOV is zero. 
We control for unlevered beta (UBETA), firm size (Ln MV), the book-to-market ratio (Ln BM), leverage (LEV), and the
forecast of long-term earnings growth (FLTG) as these variables are correlated with the cost of equity (Botosan Name, 2011). 
We also control for idiosyncratic risk (STD_RESRET) as idiosyncratic volatility should matter under incomplete information
(Merton, 1987).  We include Ln RET12, the price run-up over a 12-month period to control for analysts' sluggishness in
processing information (Nekrasov and Ogneva, 2011) and FBIAS, the forecast bias of forthcoming annual earnings, to control
for the effect of forecast optimism (Easton and Sommers, 2007).  We expect negative coefficients on Ln RET12 and FBIAS.  An
indicator for cross-listing in the US (XLIST) is included to control for the potential effect of differences in legal protection and
disclosure commitment between Canada and the US on the cost of equity.  Following Chung and Wynn (2008), we include a
firm’s cash holdings (CASH) to control for the capacity of corporate indemnification of D&Os' liabilities, though it is a crude
measure (Wynn, 2008). 
Firms with a high level of insolvency risk can have a high cost of equity and a high demand for D&O insurance.  The effect
of the insolvency risk is likely partially captured by leverage, prior stock return, cash, beta, and idiosyncratic risk.  To further
capture default risk, we control for a firm’s credit rating (RATING).  We convert letter S&P credit ratings into 22-point numeric
ratings with a larger number representing a higher credit rating.  MISS_RATING equals one if RATING is missing and zero
otherwise.  RATING is then set to zero if missing.  Finally, we control for year and Fama and French 30 industry fixed effects. 
Detailed variable definitions are provided in the notes to Table 2. 
4.  Empirical results
4. 1.  Summary statistics
Panel A, Table 1 presents summary statistics for key variables.  70. 9% of firm-year observations carry D&O insurance.  The
mean insurance coverage is 44. 748 million Canadian dollars.  The mean insurance coverage ratio (DOICOV) is 4. 5% and its
standard deviation is 7. 6%, suggesting significant variation in the coverage ratio across firms.  The mean of (RAVG–RF) is 7. 392%
and its standard deviation is 5. 356%.  Panel B compares summary statistics of (RAVG–RF) for low and high DOICOV groups
classified by the sample median of DOICOV.  The mean (RAVG–RF) for low coverage firms is 6. 854% and it is 7. 889% for high
coverage firms.  The difference is significant based on either a t-test (t¼  4. 473) or a Wilcoxon rank-sum test (z¼  4. 930),
lending preliminary support for our hypothesis. 
4. 2.  Regression analysis
Table 2 reports regression results.  Column (1) is based on an OLS regression, which serves as our baseline.  Standard
errors are adjusted for clustering at the firm level.  We find that D&O insurance is significantly positively associated with the
cost of equity (6. 931, t¼3. 755), supporting our hypothesis. 8 This effect is economically significant.  A one-standard-deviation
increase in DOICOV (0. 076) is associated with a 53-basis-point increase (6. 931  0. 076) in the cost of equity, about 7% of the
sample mean (7. 392%). 
Signs of control variables are consistent with theories and prior empirical findings.  The cost of equity is positively
associated with unlevered beta, idiosyncratic return volatility, book-to-market ratio, leverage and long-term growth rate,
and is negatively associated with firm size, price run-ups and analysts' forecast bias.  The cross-listing indicator, cash
holdings, and credit rating have insignificant coefficients.  To determine whether insolvency risk can spuriously cause the
positive association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity, we drop firm-years with a leverage ratio over the 90th
percentile of its distribution and continue to find a significantly positive coefficient on D&O insurance.  Further, when we
drop leverage from the model, RATING becomes negatively significant. 
We also examine whether the positive association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity is sensitive to model
specifications.  The Fama-MacBeth (1973) regression (Column (2)) and the firm fixed effects regression (Column (3)) show
that the association is not sensitive to model specifications.  Overall, we find a statistically and economically significant
positive association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity. 
Finally, we check whether our baseline results are robust to alternative measures of the cost of equity.  First, we use the
four individual cost of equity estimates (RGLS, RCT, ROJ, and RMPEG) that are used in constructing RAVG.  Second, we follow
Mohanram and Gode (2011) and estimate the cost of equity using analyst forecasts after removing predictable forecast
errors.  Finally, we follow Nekrasov and Ogneva (2011) and construct a measure of cost of equity estimated simultaneously
with the perpetual growth rate.  Results on DOICOV (untabulated) are qualitatively the same. 
5.  Endogeneity of D&O insurance coverage. 
As D&O insurance is a firm choice, findings in Table 2 can be driven by an endogeneity bias.  Specifically, it is possible that
some omitted correlated variables lead to both a high level of D&O insurance and a high cost of equity.  This concern is
partially addressed by the firm fixed effects regression to the extent that omitted variables are constant over time.  In this
section, we conduct additional analyses to mitigate this concern. 
5. 1.  Controlling for determinants of liability coverage and corporate governance quality
Prior studies (e. g. , Core, 1997, 2000; O’Sullivan, 1997) suggest that firms purchase D&O insurance at the request of outside
directors in the hiring process, as an integral component of a risk management strategy to deal with litigation risk, or due to
poor corporate governance.  These determinants of D&O insurance are potentially correlated with the cost of equity (e. g. ,
Ashbaugh-Skaife Name, 2005; Chen Name, 2011).  Thus, we examine whether our baseline results are robust to further
controlling for these determinants that are omitted from our baseline models. 
More specifically, we add the following control variables to Eq.  (1): the proportion of outside directors, research and
development scaled by sales, return on assets, an indicator for having M&As or divestitures in the previous year, an indicator
for reporting the existence of lawsuits in the previous year, board size, CEO-chairman duality, and equity ownership of
D&Os.  We also include operating cash flow scaled by assets, volatility of operating cash flow, and capital expenditure scaled
by assets as additional determinants of cash holdings.  Results are reported in Column (4) of Table 2.  While sample size is
reduced by about 25%, the coefficient on DOICOV is still positive and significant (t¼3. 053). 
5. 2.  Lead-lag change analysis
It is possible that riskier firms are more likely to have future lawsuits (Kim and Skinner, 2012) and thus are more likely to
purchase D&O insurance in the current period.  If the risk is known to investors, these firms should also have a higher cost of
equity in the current period.  When the cost of equity continues to be high in the next period, current D&O insurance can be
positively associated with the cost of equity in the next period.  If this is the case, then a change in the cost of equity should
precede a change in D&O insurance.  However, our hypothesis predicts that a change in the cost of equity follows a change in
D&O insurance.  We therefore investigate the association between a change in D&O insurance and a change in the lead or
lagged measures of the cost of equity. 
The change in D&O insurance in year t, ΔDOICOVi,t, is defined as the change in the amount of D&O insurance from year
t 1 to year t scaled by the average market value of equity of year t.  The change in the lead cost of equity, Δ(RAVG RF)i,tþ 1, is
the change in the cost of equity in year tþ1.  The change in the lagged cost of equity, Δ(RAVG RF)i,t 1, is the change in the
cost of equity in year t 1.  If a change in the cost of equity follows a change in D&O insurance, then the association between
ΔDOICOVi,t and Δ(RAVG–RF)i,tþ 1 should be positive.  If a change in the cost of equity precedes a change in D&O insurance, then
the association between ΔDOICOVi,t and Δ(RAVG–RF)i,t 1 should be positive. 
Table 3 reports results.  We find a significantly positive association between ΔDOICOVi,t and Δ(RAVG–RF)i,tþ 1 (Column (1)),
but the association between ΔDOICOVi,t and Δ(RAVG RF)i,t 1 is insignificant (Column (2)).  In Column (3), we lag the change in
the cost of equity by two years and the association remains insignificant.  These results suggest that a change in the cost of
equity follows a change in D&O insurance, rather than the other way around. 
5. 3.  Market reaction to disclosures of D&O insurance information. 
Next, we examine the market reaction to disclosures of D&O insurance information.  If investors charge a high cost of
equity for firms with high D&O insurance coverage, stock prices should react negatively when investors learn that firms
have increased their D&O insurance coverage.  A short-window event study is less likely to suffer from the omitted
correlated variable problem and thus can be used to corroborate our baseline findings. 
While the disclosure of D&O insurance information is compulsory in Canada, there is no regulation requiring firms to
make announcements upon their purchases of D&O insurance.  As a result, it is difficult to identify the exact date on which
D&O insurance information is revealed to the market.  Firms typically release D&O insurance information in proxy circulars
which disclose the arrangement of annual general meetings of shareholders after the end of fiscal years.  A random search
suggests that a proxy circular is the predominant public source from which investors learn about a firm’s D&O insurance. 
In most cases a proxy circular is mailed to shareholders on or right after the proxy circular date (hereafter referred to as
the proxy date, TP).  In very few cases the proxy circular is mailed within one week after the proxy date.  The proxy circular is
also filed with SEDAR, and the filing date is shown in SEDAR (hereafter referred to as the filing date, TF).  Our data show that
the median (mean) number of trading days between the proxy date and the filing date is 8 (9. 5).  While we are certain that
the D&O insurance information reaches the market by the filing date, we are less certain as to the exact date on which
shareholders receive the mailed proxy circular (before the filing date).  Following Brickley Name (1985), we use the period
[TP 2, TFþ2] as our event window. 9 We estimate the following regression to determine the market reaction to a change in
D&O insurance coverage, where CARi,t is the cumulative abnormal return over the window [TP 2, TFþ2] for fiscal year t.  Abnormal return is defined
as the prediction error of the market model estimated using daily stock returns over a one-year period ending 31 days
before the proxy date.  Other variables are as defined earlier. 
We manually collect proxy circular filing dates from the SEDAR system and obtain a sample of 4,309 firm-year
observations with non-missing filing dates.  We then download proxy circulars and identify proxy dates in proxy circular
letters to shareholders.  We lose 792 observations missing information on the change in D&O insurance coverage and drop
63 observations missing proxy dates and 22 observations for which filing dates in SEDAR are later than annual general
meeting dates.  Finally, we delete 308 observations missing variables used in the model.  This procedure results in a sample of
3,124 observations. 
It is important to note a limitation for the event study.  D&O insurance is often disclosed together with other items in a
proxy circular.  Typical examples include information on the election of directors, appointment of auditors, executive
compensation, etc.  These factors make it difficult to observe a clean market reaction around proxy circular releases.  Results
are reported in Table 4.  In Column (1), the coefficient on ΔDOICOV is significantly negative (t¼  2. 113), suggesting that the
market reacts negatively to an increase in D&O insurance.  This evidence is consistent with our hypothesis.  While it is
impossible to control for all confounding news, we make an explicit attempt to check whether results are robust to
removing confounding earnings announcements.  We remove 684 observations with missing earnings announcement dates
or those with earnings announcement dates falling during the period three trading days before the proxy date and three
trading days after the filing date (i. e. , [TP 3, TFþ3]).  Results in Column (2) are qualitatively similar. 10
5. 4.  Controlling for D&Os' anticipation of litigation risk
The results of the lead-lag analysis minimize the chance of public information on risk as an explanation of the positive
association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity.  However, another possibility is that D&Os can purchase
insurance based on their private information about future adverse changes in a firm’s risk that can lead to a higher litigation
risk.  When the market subsequently learns about D&Os' private information, the future cost of equity is higher.  If this is the
case, we can still observe that a change in the cost of equity follows, but not precedes, a change in D&O insurance.  In
addition, the market can react negatively to a disclosure of an increase in D&O insurance simply because the disclosure
reveals D&Os' private information about future litigation.  We refer to this as the risk anticipation argument.  This argument
and our hypothesis are not mutually exclusive as a change in D&O insurance can reveal D&Os' private information as well as
an expected change in D&Os' behavior.  We examine to what extent the risk anticipation argument can explain the positive
association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity. 
5. 4. 1.  Controlling for the expected litigation risk
First, we determine whether our results survive after controlling for a measure of expected litigation risk (LITRISK)
developed in Kim and Skinner (2012). 11 Results are reported in Panel A of Table 5.  The coefficient on LITRISK is positive and
significant (1. 557, t¼2. 464).  However, both the magnitude (6. 748) and the significance level (t¼3. 654) of the coefficient on
DOICOV are similar to those reported in our baseline regression (Column (1) of Table 2), suggesting that our results cannot be
completely driven by the expected litigation risk.  In Panel B, we estimate a change model further controlling for the change
in litigation risk.  The inference on ΔDOICOV is qualitatively the same. 
5. 4. 2.  D&Os' private information and the association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity. 
Second, we test a cross-sectional prediction of the risk anticipation argument.  According to this argument, the
association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity should be more pronounced when D&Os have more private
information.  However, testing this prediction is difficult as D&Os' private information is not directly observable.  Therefore,
we follow Chen Name (2007) and examine whether the association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity varies
with proxies for D&Os' private information. 
Our first set of proxies is based on earnings surprises, which can be justified for two reasons.  First, D&Os have access to
internal accounting records and know about earnings before it is publicly released to investors.  Second, securities class
action suits often result from bad outcomes (Kim and Skinner, 2012) and a large price drop driven by negative earnings
news is a common trigger for shareholder litigations (Skinner, 1994).  Field Name (2005) also argue that the risk of litigation is
heightened when a firm's earnings are substantially lower than investors' expectation.  Gande and Lewis (2009) find that US
firms with negative earnings surprises are more likely to be sued in class action suits. 
Specifically, for each quarterly earnings announcement made in the year during which the cost of equity is estimated, we
compute abnormal return over the five trading days [ 2, þ2] centered on the announcement date.  We measure earnings
surprise (SURPRISE) as the median of the absolute values of announcement period abnormal returns.  As a large negative
earnings surprise has a greater impact on litigation than a large positive earnings surprise, we also construct a proxy
(NEG_SURPRISE) that only considers negative earnings surprises.  Specifically, we set positive announcement period
abnormal returns to zero and define NEG_SURPRISE as the median of the revised absolute values of abnormal returns. 
Our second set of proxies for D&Os' private information is based on insiders' trading activities.  Prior studies (Seyhun,
1992) show that insider trading contains private information.  Although insiders with private information do not necessarily
trade, our premise is that on average, insiders with more private information trade more (Chen Name, 2007).  We define
CEO_TRADE as an indicator variable that equals one if a CEO conducts any open market purchase or sell during the fiscal year,
and zero otherwise.  We manually collect open market transactions for CEOs in our sample from the website of the System of
Electronic Disclosure by Insiders (SEDI).  As negative private information has a greater impact on litigation cost, we construct
another proxy (CEO_SELL) that incorporates the direction of insiders' trades.  CEO_SELL equals one if a CEO has a net sell
during a fiscal year (i. e. , total sell greater than total purchase) and zero otherwise. 
One disadvantage of relying on insider trading data from SEDI is that SEDI only provides information on insider trades
conducted after 2002.  Therefore, our tests are based on a much smaller sample.  To mitigate this problem, we also measure
net selling activities of CEOs by the decrease in their stock ownership using an indicator variable CEO_SELL2 that equals one
if a CEO's stock ownership in the firm decreases during the fiscal year, and zero otherwise.  CEO ownership is manually
collected from proxy circular filings.  A disadvantage of this proxy, however, is that it can contain larger measurement errors
as a change in ownership is affected by other factors such as restricted stock grants. 
We then define an indicator variable (HIGH) denoting firms with more D&O private information.  For SURPRISE
(NEG_SURPRISE), HIGH equals one if SURPRISE (NEG_SURPRISE) is above the sample median, and zero otherwise.  For
CEO_TRADE, CEO_SELL and CEO_SELL2, we set HIGH equal to the proxy.  We then augment the baseline model with an
interaction term between HIGH and DOICOV.  The risk anticipation argument predicts a positive coefficient on the
interaction term. 
Panel A of Table 6 shows level regression results.  Columns (1) to (5) use D&Os' private information measured by
SURPRISE, NEG_SURPRISE, CEO_TRADE, CEO_SELL, and CEO_SELL2, respectively.  In all regressions, we find a positive and
significant coefficient on DOICOV, suggesting that a positive association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity exists
in firms with a low level of D&Os' private information.  The coefficients on DOICOV  HIGH are statistically insignificant in all
regression. 12 Panel B of Table 6 reports change regression results.  Inference is qualitatively the same.  Specifically, coefficients
on ΔDOICOV are significantly positive except in Column (4).  Coefficients on ΔDOICOV  HIGH are insignificant in all
regressions. 
To summarize, our evidence suggests that the association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity does not vary
with proxies for private information.  Nevertheless, interpretation of the evidence hinges on the ability of these proxies to
capture D&Os' private information that affects D&O insurance purchases and the future cost of equity.  We acknowledge that
we cannot completely rule out the risk anticipation argument. 
5. 5.  Evidence from an exogenous law change lowering D&Os' legal liabilities
To further substantiate our hypothesis, we exploit an exogenous change in Nevada's Corporate Law in 2001 that reduced
D&Os' personal legal liabilities.  Nevada swiftly changed its corporate law in 2001 to attract more firm incorporations. 
Before the law change, Nevada's corporate law imposed similar default fiduciary duties on D&Os as those under the
Delaware corporate law.  After the law change, D&Os are only liable if their behaviors involve both a breach of the duty of
loyalty and an intentional fraud (or a knowing violation of law).  This implies that D&Os are no longer liable for a violation of
the duty of care, among others (Barzuza, 2012).  We argue that this law change has a similar effect on reducing D&Os'
personal legal liabilities as an increase in the D&O insurance coverage.  Importantly, the legislation process was short such
that firms are unlikely to anticipate the change and quickly reincorporate in Nevada before the law change (Donelson and
Yust, 2014). 13 Thus, the change (in D&Os' legal liabilities) is due to an exogenous change in law rather than a firm's choice or
D&Os' risk anticipation. 14
We conduct a difference-in-differences test to determine whether the change in the cost of equity of Nevada-incorporated firms
after the law change is greater than the change in the cost of equity of matched firms.  We start from a list of Nevada-incorporated
firms and verify whether they were incorporated in Nevada before the law change by manually checking each firm's 10-K filing
before the law change.  The sample period includes three years before (years 1998–2000) and three years after (years 2002–2004)
the law change.  Observations in year 0 (year 2001) are excluded.  The cost of equity is measured at the end of June each year.  The
control sample is constructed by choosing non-Nevada-incorporated firms from the same industries as the Nevada-incorporated
firms, with similar size (i. e. , size difference no more than 20% of the size of the Nevada firm), and with the closest average cost of
equity during the pre-change period.  The final sample consists of 30 pairs of firms (274 observations). 
Results are reported in Table 7.  Both Columns (1) and (2) show a positive coefficient on the interaction between POST (the
indicator for the period after the law change) and NV (the indicator for Nevada-incorporated firms).  According to Column
(2), the coefficient is 1. 352% (t¼2. 564), indicating that the change in the cost of equity for Nevada-incorporated firms after
the law change is 1. 352% greater than that for matched firms. 
It is possible that the above result is driven by a contemporaneous adverse change in economic conditions of Nevada.  To
address this concern, we repeat the test after excluding Nevada firms whose headquarters are located in Nevada and their
matched control firms.  This step reduces the sample to 22 pairs of firms (197 observations).  Inference based on results in
Columns (3) and (4) is qualitatively the same. 
Overall, results reported in Sections 5. 4 and 5. 5 suggest that the positive association between D&O insurance and the cost
of equity is unlikely to be due to risk anticipation alone. 
6.  Channels through which D&O insurance increases the cost of equity. 
In this section, we provide evidence on the reporting/disclosure quality and risk-taking channels that we formulate in
hypothesis development.  Specifically, we examine whether D&O insurance is associated with proxies for financial reporting
quality, stock liquidity, analysts' forecast properties and stock beta.  Such evidence can help shed light on the underlying
economic mechanisms through which D&O insurance affects the cost of equity. 
6. 1.  D&O insurance and the absolute value of discretionary accruals
As we have argued earlier, D&O insurance can increase the cost of equity through affecting a firm's financial reporting
and disclosure.  Prior studies find that D&O insurance reduces accounting conservatism (Chung and Wynn, 2008) and the
tendency to issue bad news management earnings forecasts (Wynn, 2008).  Prior studies also find D&O insurance increases
the incidence of accounting restatements (Kim, 2006; Lin Name, 2013).  While material accounting irregularities can lead to
lawsuits, many securities class actions involve less serious allegations (Kim and Skinner, 2012).  Therefore, we examine the
association between D&O insurance and discretionary accruals to determine whether D&O insurance is linked to less
egregious earnings management. 