 1.  Introduction  This paper examines whether and when the information environment of peer ﬁrms in  an industry affects the cost of capital for other ﬁrms in the industry.  We predict and ﬁnd  that the peer information environment is negatively associated with a ﬁrm’s cost of capital  when there is less publicly available ﬁrm-speciﬁc information and this negative association  shrinks as the amount of ﬁrm-speciﬁc information increases.  This paper provides evidence  that information about peer-ﬁrms has externalities on the cost of capital for related ﬁrms  and that these externalities are time-varying.   We examine whether the information environment of peer ﬁrms (henceforth, peer information) affects the cost of capital  for related ﬁrms in an industry and whether the importance of this effect depends on the amount of information available  directly from the related ﬁrm (henceforth, ﬁrm information).  Speciﬁcally, we hypothesize that peer information has a larger  economic effect on a ﬁrm’s cost of capital when ﬁrm information is scarce, and that these externalities reduce when the  amount of ﬁrm information increases and substitutes for peer information.  Recent research ﬁnds evidence that a ﬁrm’s disclosure has important economic consequences for its peers.  For example, a ﬁrm’s disclosure inﬂuences peer ﬁrms’ (i)  stock prices, (ii) stock liquidity, and (iii) investment decisions (e. g. , Foster, 1981.  Bushee and Leuz, 2005.  Badertscher et al. ,  2013 ).  We extend this literature by examining temporal changes in the importance of peer effects from when ﬁrms are  newly public with limited ﬁrm information to when ﬁrms have a longer history of public disclosure and relatively more  ﬁrm information.   Our hypothesis is based on the idea that ﬁrms in an industry are affected by similar economic forces (e. g. , common  demand/supply shocks).  Thus, peer disclosures have spillover effects that reduce information asymmetry between managers  and investors, as well as among investors, for all ﬁrms operating in that industry.  Such reductions in information asymmetry  can reduce ﬁnancing costs (in both debt and equity markets), as illustrated in corporate ﬁnance models with adverse selection ( Leland and Pyle, 1977.  Myers and Majluf, 1984.  Rock, 1986 ) and in asset pricing models with imperfect competition  ( Lambert et al. , 2012 ).   To the extent peer information affects information asymmetry and ﬁnancing costs, we predict that such externalities vary  over time as a function of the amount of ﬁrm information available to investors.  Our intuition is similar to that presented in  other streams of literature.  For example, models in the executive compensation literature (e. g. , Banker and Datar, 1989 ) show  that the weights placed on different performance evaluation signals are proportional to relative “signal-to-noise” ratios.  In  our setting, we expect investors to put less weight on peer information (the “noisy” signal) as more information becomes  2 Nevertheless, ex ante there are several reasons why ﬁrm discloavailable from the disclosing ﬁrm (the “precise” signal).   sures might not substitute for peer information.  For example, ﬁrm disclosures are often affected by managerial incentives to  manipulate them, which can make them noisy and potentially less reliable than peer information.  or peer disclosures could  complement (rather than substitute for) ﬁrm disclosures by providing richer context to interpret ﬁrm disclosures ( Section 2  expands on these arguments).   We test our hypothesis using private ﬁrms that raise public capital (debt or equity) for the ﬁrst time.  A principal beneﬁt  of our setting is that private ﬁrms are not subject to SEC reporting requirements until they raise public capital.  as a result,  there is (i) little publicly available ﬁrm information prior to the capital issuance and (ii) a large increase in the amount of  publicly available ﬁrm information in the years immediately following the capital issuance.  Thus, this setting is especially  powerful for studying the substitution between peer information and ﬁrm information as the amount of ﬁrm information  rapidly increases while the amount of peer information stays relatively constant.  In addition, the relative lack of ﬁrm information in the initial year of capital issuance makes it more likely that peer information has a ﬁrst-order effect on the cost  of capital.   Drawing from the theoretical models of disclosure externalities (e. g. , Dye, 1990.  Admati and Pﬂeiderer, 20 0 0 ), we construct our measure of peer information to capture.  (i) the relevance of peer ﬁrms’ disclosures to non-disclosing ﬁrms and  (ii) the aggregate amount of information available about peer ﬁrms.  We proxy for the relevance of peer information within  an industry using the degree of earnings synchronicity in the industry.  Our intuition is that ﬁrms in industries with greater  earnings synchronicity are more likely to be economically linked and therefore information about one ﬁrm’s future prospects  is more likely to convey information about peer ﬁrms’ prospects.  We proxy for the aggregate amount of industry information  available about peer ﬁrms using two proxies.  Our ﬁrst proxy is the percentage of public ﬁrms (relative to the total number  of ﬁrms, public plus private) operating in the industry ( Badertscher et al. , 2013 ).  Since publicly owned ﬁrms disclose both  mandatory and voluntary information to the public and are analyzed by information intermediaries, there is an extensive  amount of public information about these ﬁrms that is not available for private ﬁrms.  Therefore, the composition of public  and private ﬁrms in an industry affects the information environment in that industry.  Our second proxy for aggregate industry information is the analyst coverage for ﬁrms in the industry (measured as the average number of forecasts per ﬁrm).   Prior research ﬁnds that analysts not only supply information about ﬁrm prospects but also demand a greater quantity and  quality of information from the ﬁrms they cover (see Beyer et al. , 2010 for a review of the literature), thereby improving the  industry information environment. 