 1.  Introduction The essence of the gasoline subsidy policy problem is its inefﬁciency.  The policy leads to overconsumption of gasoline since a subsidy drives consumers to purchase a good at a price that is cheaper than the cost of producing it (Harvey and Gayer, 2013).  Overconsumption also leads to negative externalities such as emission of local pollutants, trafﬁc congestions and accidents (Davis, 2014).  In the case of Indonesia, the problem is further aggravated by the fact that the government only provides a subsidy for regular gasoline, the lowest grade gasoline.  Malaysia and Egypt implemented a similar policy that only deregulates the higher grade of gasoline (Kojima, 2013).  Indonesia started off in the 1960s with only the national oil company, Pertamina, allowed in the domestic gasoline market.  There was only one grade of gasoline, and it was subsidized in the form of underpricing as the price was signiﬁcantly lower than the world market price.  Gasoline was subsidized as a way to protect people from the effects of inﬂation (Beaton and Lonton, 2010).  In 2001, a new regulation was introduced by the government that opened up the domestic gasoline market to multinational oil companies but only for high-octane gasoline.  This was done to combat the 1997 Asian ﬁnancial crisis.  Regular gasoline was left subsidized.  Such a scheme violates Ramsey's tax rule that taxing rival commodities should leave the consumer's relative choices unaltered (Ramsey, 1927).  Different tax rates on commodities and factors introduce a distortion between the marginal rate of substitution and the marginal rate of transformation (Stiglitz and Dasgupta, 1971).  In addition, Ito and Sallee (2014) found that taxation based on different characteristics of automobiles caused distortions in that market.  Similarly, the Indonesian subsidy policy distorts both the regular and premium grade gasoline market.  Another issue is the unequal beneﬁt of the policy (del Granado et al. , 2012).  As consumers purchase more regular gasoline, the government's expenditure on the subsidy increases signiﬁcantly while income distribution is distorted as high-income consumers that purchase a higher amount of regular gasoline, receive more beneﬁt (Pradiptyo and Sahadewo, 2012).  An obvious exit strategy from such undesirable outcomes is to eliminate the subsidy.  However, the government is reluctant to take this option because of its anticipated impact on consumer's welfare and the political repercussions.  A lot of studies have been done to analyze the economic impact of phasing out a gasoline subsidy in Indonesia.  Adam and Lestari (2008) estimated that an increase in the price of oil correlates negatively with households' welfare.  Clements et al.  (2007) showed that removing the subsidy increases aggregate price levels and reduces real output, while Dartanto (2013) found that there will be an increase of poverty.  Arguably, these outcomes might agitate the people and cause a signiﬁcant drop in the government's popularity.  Furthermore, a well-known economist in Indonesia said that removing the gasoline subsidy is against the constitution of Indonesia (Gie, 2011).  Although since late 2014 the price of crude oil has dropped signiﬁcantly and saved billions ofgovernment's budget without any interference to the policy, the government remains cautious and had not fully deregulates the regular gasoline market.  The fuel subsidy took about 15% of overall government expenditure in 2014 as shown in Fig.  1.  It amounts to about 250 trillion rupiahs or around 20 billion USD (1 USD = Rp 12,000).  Based on Indonesia's annual state budget, N80% is for gasoline, diesel and kerosene with gasoline being the highest portion.  The government is aware of the large cost of the policy but it has remained hesitant to act because of the risk of being overthrown by the political opposition and strong public resistance.  Numerous times the government had tried to cut the subsidy but retreated when met with public protests (Quiano, 2012.  Cochrane, 2013).  In December 2014, the government announced that the gasoline subsidy will be removed from the state's budget starting in 2015 (Sari, 2014).  It was met with relatively manageable public protest because in the process, the price of regular gasoline was relatively unchanged.  However, the government did not fully deregulate the regular gasoline market since the price is still being set by the government and only Pertamina is given the license to sell.  Another alternative is to reduce the distortion in the regular gasoline market while leaving the subsidy intact.  Using Ramsey's rule, the government should aim to steer the consumer's choice back to a nonsubsidy pattern.  We show this can be achieved by decreasing the price of premium gasoline, which means that the government should also subsidize premium gasoline.  However, if the new subsidy on premium gasoline is at the same rate as the current subsidy on regular gasoline, the government's expenditure will increase signiﬁcantly.  Thus, the rate of the new subsidy has to be lower than the current subsidy but large enough to generate savings for the government.  We have not found other studies that consider the revenue or welfare effects of this somewhat counter intuitive policy.  Thus, the contribution of this paper is to analyze this unique policy with a smaller subsidy for premium gasoline that could potentially reduce gasoline subsidy expenditures without the political backlash.  Arguably, subsidy reform is difﬁcult to enact because of the effect on purchasing power of the people and the resulting political instability.  By implementing a different pricing policy for different grades of gasoline, the issue of inﬂation and political instability can be avoided.  In addition, there has yet to be any studies that focus on the inefﬁciency in the market for different grades of gasoline.  Policy makers should be aware of the issue of inefﬁciency resulted in the markets for substitutes.  The model developed in this paper can also be used in other countries that plan to improve either their gasoline subsidy or tax.  The chosen subsidy rate will depend on the elasticities of demand for gasoline.  We predict that the substitutability of gasolines with different grades is what drives the magnitude of the savings.  However, we have found no literature on the own and cross-price elasticity for regular and premium gasoline for Indonesia.  Nor were our attempts to obtain Indonesian data successful.  Therefore, we set up a simulation experiment with differential subsidies for premium gasoline by benchmarking to Indonesian data using the elasticities estimated by Akimaya (2017) for Mexico, to our knowledge the only existing study on the cross-price elasticity of gasoline by grade.  We assume that the market has a perfectly elastic supply and only consumer welfare is analyzed.  Various simulations using different values for cross-price elasticity are done to determine whether there are cross-price elasticities that generate savings.  Also, it has to be noted that the new subsidy will distort the premium gasoline market.  There will be a welfare effect in both the regular and premium gasoline market.  In the next section, the mathematical model to prove the existence of a potential reduction in gasoline subsidy expenditure is analyzed.  In Section 3, the data is presented followed in Section 4 by the calibration process of Rutherford's (2002), which uses a translog unit cost function to calibrate the derived demand functions.  The necessary parameters for calibration are then presented in Section 5.  The parameters such as prices and share expenditures are based on Indonesia's gasoline market, while the baseline elasticity values are based on the estimated results in Akimaya (2017).  Next, the simulations for government spending based on benchmark values of elasticities are discussed further in Section 6. 