 1.  Introduction Aedes albopictus is the most invasive mosquito in the world (Medlock et al. , 2012).  It is an aggressive biter, active all-day long (Caglioti et al. , 2013) and feeds on humans and a variety of other vertebrate hosts.  It is relatively long lived and lays its desiccation resistant eggs in natural and artiﬁcial containers (Charrel et al. , 2007.  Pardigon, 2009).  Originally of Asian origin, it is now widely distributed across Europe, Africa, the Americas and the Paciﬁc (Tsetsarkin et al. , 2007).  It has recently colonized the islands of the Torres Strait (Ritchie et al. , 2006) where a limited control program costs over AU$1 M per annum (Muzari, 2015).  Ae.  albopictus is a vector of more than 20 arboviruses, is recognised as a secondary vector of dengue (Bonizzoni et al. , 2014.  Gratz, 2004.  Lambrechts et al. , 2010) and is the major vector of many recent chikungunya virus (CHIKV) outbreaks including the La Reunion epidemic (200,000 cases and 203 deaths.  Renault et al. , 2007).  In that instance, a single point mutation within the CHIKV genome led to a dramatic increase in transmissibility by this mosquito.  Aedes albopictus, at least in a laboratory context, is also capable of transmitting four major Australian endemic arboviruses.  Murray Valley encephalitis virus (MVEV), West Nile virus Kunjin strain (KUNV), Ross River virus (RRV), and Barmah Forest virus (BFV) (Nicholson et al. , 2014c).  Ae.  albopictus now has a signiﬁcant urban presence around the globe (Caglioti et al. , 2013.  Medlock et al. , 2012.  Powers and Logue, 2007.  Rezza et al. , 2007.  Tsetsarkin et al. , 2007.  Weaver and Barrett, 2004) and, in some settings, feeds almost exclusively on humans (Ponlawat and Harrington, 2005).  In those instances, Ae.  albopictus can transmit viruses with a human reservoir (i. e.  dengue, chikungunya) very efﬁciently (Weaver and Barrett, 2004).  Ae.  albopictus is likely to assume an increasingly prominent role in the transmission of human arboviruses in the future.  Australia is made vulnerable to that threat by a busy transport and travel network that links it to regions where both Ae albopictus and the diseases it transmits are endemic.  Exotic mosquito incursions at Australia's ports are on the increase (van den Hurk et al. , 2016) as are the number of imported cases of viruses such as dengue (Huang et al. , 2016).  In 2016, Ae.  albopictus was responsible for a dengue outbreak on the island of Darnley (Erub) in the Australian Torres Strait.  This is the ﬁrst Ae albopictusmediated dengue outbreak in Australian history.  Models indicate that Ae.  albopictus could spread along the entire eastern seaboard of Australia (Benedict et al. , 2007.  Hales et al. , 2002.  Naish et al. , 2014.  Rochlin et al. , 2013.  Russell et al. , 2009), and we propose that Queensland is especially vulnerable to its establishment because of the plethora of suburban areas and parklands that currently harbor high densities of two native container breeding mosquitoes.  Ae.  aegypti and Ae.  notoscriptus.  These mosquitoes have similar ecologies to Ae.  albopictus (Ritchie et al. , 2001), and a number of papers discuss the overlap of their habitat (Nicholson et al. , 2014a) and the potential displacement of native species by the more aggressive Ae.  albopictus (van den Hurk et al. , 2016).  A recent household survey in Brisbane found that 26. 2% of all premises surveyed harbored Ae.  notoscriptus (Trewin et al. , 2013).  That suggests that an Ae.  albopictus invasion might result in universal urban coverage (Fig.  1).  Experiences in Europe and the USA suggest that Ae.  albopictus will become an extreme nuisance and increase the demand for mosquito control services.  It is likely to incur large economic and societal costs (Benedict et al. , 2007.  Caminade et al. , 2012.  Rochlin et al. , 2013).  The establishment of Ae.  albopictus in new areas with human populations unaccustomed to aggressive day biting mosquitoes can impact the use of outdoor recreational space (Halasa et al. , 2012.  Halasa et al. , 2014.  Manica et al. , 2016.  Worobey et al. , 2013).  Early detection and the timeliness of the emergency response are critical for containing or eliminating an incursion or limiting the scale and rate of establishment.  Economic analyses of early detection or long term control programs would give the councils and state government some estimate of the potential economic cost of an Ae.  albopictus invasion and the opportunity to assess the readiness of their control programs.  In Queensland, the surveillance and control of exotic mosquito incursions is a responsibility partly shared by the Department of Agriculture and Water Resources (port areas only) and the public health units that are attached to local, state-funded health services.  The bulk of the management of established nuisance or disease-vector species is, however, largely the responsibility of local councils.  The exception to this is the control program for Ae.  aegypti in those areas of tropical North Queensland that experience regular dengue outbreaks and that are at increased risk from other viruses such as chikungunya (CHIKV) and Zika.  That program is almost exclusively conducted by public health units, attached to local hospital and health services (Queensland Health,The most thorough economic analysis of Ae.  albopictus is from New Jersey, USA (Crans et al. , 1996).  Halasa et al.  (2012) estimated that New Jersey residents valued an enhanced mosquito control program at almost 4 times its actual cost and Shepard et al.  (2014) estimated that the area-wide integrated pest management of mosquitoes over a 13-week New Jersey summer facilitated an extra 43 h of yard and porch time by the local populace.  Each adult resident in that community valued those extra hours at US$355. 82 per annum.  Here, we have carried out a beneﬁt-cost analysis (BCA) with costs estimated from a Queensland consultation document.  the “Exotic mosquito incursion emergency response framework” (Appendix 1).  This document outlines the magnitude of resources that may be required to mount an elimination campaign against a limited Ae.  albopictus invasion in Brisbane.  In combination with a beneﬁts transfer (BT) estimate derived from the New Jersey work, we have used that framework to elicit the costs and beneﬁts of eliminating, or living with, this global invader.  <Middle> Methods.  2. 1.  Estimating Economic Beneﬁts of Ae.  albopictus-free Outdoor Recreational Activities.  We conduct an ex ante BCA which is the appropriate form of BCA when a policy is considered prior to being implemented.  Ex ante BCA informs government, industry and the wider community as to whether scarce resources should be allocated to a potential project or policy.  The analysis is undertaken from the perspective of the community in Queensland (i. e.  social BCA).  The beneﬁts and costs to the state government and the wider community and stakeholders in Queensland are assessed, and the counterfactual used is the ‘do nothing’ option.  We follow the BCA framework outlined in Boardman et al.  (2006).  For this BCA, we considered three scenarios.  1) an environment with no Ae.  albopictus, 2) a limited incursion of Ae.  albopictus that is met with an elimination response and 3) an incursion of Ae.  albopictus that, because of failure to eliminate, becomes established throughout Brisbane.  We stress that these scenarios are not part of current policy by state or local governments.  They simply represent potential scenarios under discussion by Queensland stakeholders with responsibilities and expertise in mosquito management.  An overall schematic illustrating the general cost categories can be found in Fig.  2.  We calculated the beneﬁts and costs of the following scenarios.  1) the beneﬁts of having no Ae.  albopictus in terms of the value of mosquito-free recreational activities, 2) the costs and beneﬁts of eliminating Ae.  albopictus and 3) the cost of establishment that result from i) additional complaints to councils about a mosquito nuisance and ii) the need to mount a public health (i. e.  vector control) response to imported cases of dengue, chikungunya or Zika).  We used the beneﬁt transfer (BT) methodology (Hanley et al. , 2009) to transfer values from New Jersey (Horwood et al. , 2013) surveys to Brisbane (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2013).  Halasa et al.  (2014) estimated New Jersey residents were willing to pay US$9. 48 ± $9. 48 per person per week for an additional recreational mosquito-free hour.  We used the same method used in Shepard et al.  (2014) and calculated annual beneﬁts by multiplying the weekly beneﬁt by 13 to represent a 13-week New Jersey summer.  To convert this to Brisbane dollars in 2016, we further estimated the per capita WTP in terms of dollar values from 2010 (when the survey was carried out).  We adjusted for inﬂation to obtain the beneﬁts in 2016 US$ using a cumulative inﬂation rate of 10. 4% between 2010 and 2016 (Coin News Media Group LLC, 2014).  We adjusted for differential GDP per capita between New Jersey and Queensland using per capita GDP for 2012 (nominal values) (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2013.  US Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2013).  We used a 1. 33 exchange rate (Australia dollar to US dollars), to report the beneﬁt values in 2016 Australian dollars (Converter, 2016).  Finally, we multiplied the result by 0. 50 to reﬂect a recent survey ﬁnding that 50% of Brisbane residents would be unwilling to pay any amount for additional Ae.  albopictus control (Mwebaze et al. , 2017).  2. 2.  Deﬁnitions of the Three Ae.  albopictus Control Scenarios.  2. 2. 1.  Scenario 1.  No Ae.  albopictus Present.  This is the baseline scenario.  No control is needed and residents avoid the costs of management or establishment.  2. 2. 2.  Scenario 2.  Elimination Response to an Isolated Detection.  This hypothetical elimination strategy (Appendix 1, “Mosquito Incursion Emergency Response Framework”) provides stakeholders with an estimate of the resources required to eliminate a local incursion of Ae.  albopictus. 