 1.  Introduction The most valuable component in South Africa's ﬁshing industry is its hake ﬁshery, which targets two species, the shallow-water (Merluccius capensis) and deep-water (M.  paradoxus) Cape hakes.  It accounts N50% of overall ﬁsheries value in the country (Butterworth and Rademeyer, 2005.  Powers et al. , 2010), with landed catch worth approximately ZAR (South African Rand) 2. 5 billion in 2008 (Petersen et al. , 2010), and is presently estimated at ±ZAR 5 billion (Durholtz, 2014, personal communication).  It also generates approximately 30,000 jobs (Rademeyer et al. , 2008a), and is estimated to comprise as much as half of all ﬁsh eaten in the country (Bacela et al. , 2003).  The largest sector of the hake ﬁshery is offshore demersal trawling, which lands 85% of the catch (Field et al. , 2013), and is an important contributor to the large post-1990 export market for South African hake (Crosoer et al. , 2006).  It is known that when ﬁsheries are managed for long-term sustainability and only the ecological context is considered, while human aspects are ignored, failure of management often results.  Therefore, the international literature generally acknowledges that ﬁsheries need to be managed with economic and social objectives in addition to ecological ones (Browman and Stergiou, 2005.  Folke et al. , 2007.  Garcia and Charles, 2008.  Pitcher and Lam, 2010).  A better understanding of the economic structure and function of the hake industry and its interaction and connection to the ecological system, will serve to inform management.  Successful actions related to sustainability are underpinned through the linkages of ecosystems to social and economic systems (Folke et al. , 2007).  Furthermore, a current scientiﬁc challenge is to ﬁnd coherence among the economic, social, ecological and institutional sectors of ﬁsheries through the utilization of all pertinent knowledge (Garcia and Charles, 2008).  As a step towards this, modelling provides a means to assist in understanding the dynamics of the economic system and identify potential links to the ecological system.  Modelling is an approach that can be used to test understanding, synthesize knowledge and make predictions.  Blackford et al.  (2010), and Starﬁeld and Jarre (2011) suggest that it is a useful means of conducting interdisciplinary research.  In the hake industry, several economic factors are known to have importance for the hake ﬁshing industry.  Exchange rate and market value of ﬁsh affect the ZAR price of hake, fuel price and catch per unit effort reﬂect the cost to companies to catch hake, and industrial organization affects company operations (see for example BCLME, 2004, 2006).  Many of these factors, such as fuel price (Sumaila et al. , 2008) and exchange rate (Asche, 2014) are known to be important internationally for ﬁsheries proﬁtability.  The interaction of these and other variables affect company behaviour, and proﬁts.  To understand the function of the South African offshore hake trawl industry, it is therefore valuable to produce a novel prototype model to examine the effect on and relative importance of these and other factors for the industry.  The aim of this study is to develop and describe an agent-based model that captures a variety of these important drivers for the industry (Fig.  1).  This model is designed within the framework of ultimately linking it to an ecosystem model of the Southern Benguela.  There is much complexity involved in the industrial structure of companies and company clusters in the offshore hake industry, as well as variability in the types of product that they sell and their ﬂeet compositions (Cooper et al. , 2014).  Given this complexity and the heterogeneity of ﬁshing vessels, companies and markets involved in the industry, agent-based modelling is particularly well suited for modelling it.  Agent-based models (ABMs) capture complex systems comprised of heterogeneous, autonomous entities, ‘agents’, that interact with each other and their modelled environment through behaviours governed by simple rules, and which give rise to the behaviour of the system as a whole (Macal and North, 2010).  ABMs allow the capturing of individual-level information, complexity, interdisciplinary and cross-scale perspectives, giving greater predictive and explanatory power (An et al. , 2005), particularly in the broader ecological-economic context within which the present model is developed.  Computational models like ABMs have the advantages of being able to deal with complex, stochastic systems, and of being able to model how the activities of elements at one scale have impacts on patterns observed at another scale (Levin et al. , 1997).  They allow the modelling of heterogeneous economic agents and therefore represent a new and alternate way of modelling and understanding economic systems (Deissenberg et al. , 2008).  This may be especially advantageous in modelling the economics of resource-extraction systems, such as ﬁsheries, where not only are the economic agents heterogeneous but where environmental heterogeneity also plays an important role (Nolan et al. , 2009).  Despite these advantages ABMs have not often been applied to economic aspects of ﬁsheries, and this represents a signiﬁcant area for development.  Previous applications in ﬁsheries have often centred around the topic of understanding ﬂeet dynamics and ﬁshing strategies (Bastardie et al. , 2010.  Boschetti and Brede, 2009.  Cabral et al. , 2010.  Little et al. , 2004.  Schafer, 2007.  Soulié and Thébaud, 2006.  Wilson et al. , 2007.  Yu et al. , 2009), where they have provided some useful insights into ﬂeet behaviour and the way that resources are used.  Little et al.  (2009), for example, has taken the ﬂeet effort allocation scenario a step further and examined how individual transferable quotas affect a multispecies, multi-sector ﬁshery in terms of ﬁshing ﬂeet behaviour, discarding, catch-levels, proﬁtability and so forth (Little et al. , 2009). 