 Introduction Stock liquidity is central to the efficient functioning of trade in the financial markets and is determined in part by information asymmetry among traders.  Since voluntary disclosure can affect information asymmetry among traders, theoretical research has shown that voluntary disclosure can affect stock liquidity (e. g. , Bushman and Indjejikian, 1995).  However, empirical tests of this mechanism must recognize that a manager's provision of disclosure is a product of many forces, all of which must be identified. 1 It has proved difficult to construct an empirical model of disclosure that incorporates all these forces (e. g. , Joos, 2000.  Leuz and Verrecchia, 2000).  Index funds, by contrast, trade primarily for nonstrategic reasons, and theory suggests that such nonstrategic traders unambiguously prefer higher disclosure relative to privately informed managers and strategic investors.  This implies that I can use index funds' disclosure preferences to construct an empirical model of voluntary disclosure that abstracts away from managers' strategic disclosure motives.  Accordingly, I use an index-fund setting to construct a recursive model of voluntary disclosure, index fund ownership, and stock liquidity, and demonstrate that voluntary disclosure increases stock liquidity.  The effect of index fund ownership on liquidity can arise from two mechanisms.  (1) index funds' unambiguous preference for additional disclosure, and (2) index fund ownership itself (e. g. , increased nonstrategic trading related to portfolio rebalancing).  Separating these two mechanisms is crucial for understanding the determinants of liquidity, but it cannot be done with simple OLS or regression discontinuity (RD) techniques.  For example, even if index funds elicit more disclosure from managers, instrumenting disclosure with index fund ownership does not solve the identification problem.  Any effect on liquidity related to common variation in disclosure and index fund ownership could be due to either increased disclosure or index fund ownership itself (the same is true for RD designs).  An appropriate empirical solution for separating these effects is to construct structural equations for disclosure and index fund ownership, and then to use recursive estimation to obtain each mechanism's liquidity effect (Greene, 2002, p.  397). 2 Constructing the recursive model requires that index fund ownership be properly identified.  To achieve this goal, I use an index-fund-inclusion setting.  An important feature of this setting is that changes in the index's constituent firms are made by the index's governing body (such as S&P), and are therefore exogenous to index funds themselves.  When a firm is added, index funds must take an ownership position in that firm, and this exogenous ownership position confers control rights.  When index funds acquire control rights through ownership, any link between an increase in voluntary disclosure due to this control and stock liquidity can be construed as causal.  By contrast, it is harder to make such claims for strategic investors (including managers) without explicitly modeling their endogenous preferences for disclosure, ownership, and liquidity.  The same goes for atomistic or retail traders, who can trade at will according to their disclosure preferences and are too small to influence managers' disclosure choices.  I use inclusion in the S&P 500 index as the key economic phenomenon to test whether disclosure affects stock liquidity.  At the time of a firm's index inclusion, the ownership level assumed by index funds is determined by their assets under management (AUM).  Since index fund AUM varies across time and index inclusions occur throughout time, the index-fund setting generates substantial variation in index fund ownership.  This setting has other benefits as well.  Since firm managers can neither influence index fund AUM nor control the timing of index inclusions, the index fund ownership stake is exogenous to the firm (see Section 3. 1).  From the index fund perspective, prior research suggests that variation in index fund ownership is not due to strategic stock selection (see Section 2).  In addition, S&P makes public their index-inclusion criteria, which I use to match each inclusion firm to a control firm (using propensity scores).  Exploiting each inclusion firm's behavior pre and post inclusion relative to the matched control firm results in a difference-in-differences (D-in-D) regression setting that eliminates any time-varying effects common to both firms and differences away any firm-fixed effects.  Importantly, the D-in-D design also controls for any “index-inclusion” effect common to all inclusion firms (for disclosure and liquidity).  I use a sample of 368 firms added to the S&P 500 index over the period of 1996–2010 (and 368 control firms).  In my sample, 78% of index inclusions occur due to a merger or an acquisition involving an existing index firm, which frees up a spot in the index.  Upon index inclusion, the ensuing index fund ownership level in my sample firms is economically meaningful, ranging from 3. 9% to 10. 2% of a firm's common shares outstanding.  In the first analysis, I regress several disclosure proxies on the change in index fund ownership resulting from index inclusion.  I find that for a one standard deviation increase in index fund ownership, management guidance disclosures increase by approximately 19. 35%, 8-K filings increase by 18. 99%, supplementary financial statement filings increase by 9. 49%, and press releases increase by 7. 51% (relative to control firms).  I also find that less entrenched managers provide more disclosure for the same amount of increase in index fund shareholdings.  These results suggest that index funds are more effective at eliciting disclosure when they have a larger stake in a firm.  Inclusion firms also experience an improvement in their information environment, as measured by a reduction in analyst forecast errors. 3 In the second analysis, I demonstrate that stock liquidity, as proxied for by bid-ask spreads and the Amihud (2002) illiquidity measure, increases for inclusion firms relative to control firms in a D-in-D manner when the inclusion firm gets a larger ownership stake from index funds.  However, recall that this increase in liquidity may be unrelated to the improved disclosure environment—it could occur simply because of index fund ownership by itself.  I use a recursive structural equation model to separate the disclosure effect and the index fund ownership effect on liquidity, and find that the disclosure effect is significant (see Section 4. 5).  This result implies that disclosure increases liquidity.  This study makes several contributions to the literature.  First, other studies relating disclosure to stock liquidity acknowledge identification challenges in modeling managers' strategic disclosure choices.  For example, Leuz and Verrecchia (2000) rely on the voluntary adoption of IFRS by German firms to represent a commitment to increased disclosure and find that voluntary adopters experience greater liquidity.  Shroff et al.  (2013) find that after the passage of the 2005 Securities Offering Reform, firms increased disclosure before seasoned equity offerings, which led to higher liquidity for these firms.  Balakrishnan et al.  (2014) find that increases in disclosure associated with reductions to analyst coverage lead to increased liquidity, but they do not explicitly model the increase in disclosure.  My study corroborates the prediction that disclosure increases liquidity, yet it abstracts away from any particular model of managers' strategic disclosure motives, which considerably simplifies the analysis.  I also highlight an important mechanism that gives rise to disclosure.  Second, through the use of index funds, I bypass an endogeneity concern that is specific to institutional holdings.  Prior studies such as Lang and Lundholm (1996) and Bushee and Noe (2000) show that disclosure is associated with institutional investor shareholdings.  These studies use these associations to argue that institutional investors are attracted to firms with certain disclosure practices, and that managers adopt disclosure practices to attract such investors.  However, these studies acknowledge that institutional investors may strategically invest and divest based on their unobservable investing strategy, which may ultimately affect their demand for disclosure.  Index funds, by contrast, have no such leeway in choosing their portfolio firms.  Instead, the funds appear to influence disclosure through ownership, an important consideration for future work on institutions and disclosure.  Third, my study differs in two important ways from that of Boone and White (2015), who argue (along lines similar to mine) that index funds prefer high disclosure because it decreases trading costs.  Boone and White (2015, Tables 3 and 5) show that firms moving from the Russell 1000 to the Russell 2000 index exhibit increased disclosure, increased liquidity, and higher institutional ownership.  They acknowledge that the liquidity effect could occur “via direct and indirect channels,” with the former related to index fund ownership and the latter related to disclosure.  But, unlike this study, theirs does not explicitly test for the two mechanisms and thus cannot address the economic question of whether disclosure and index fund ownership separately affect liquidity.  Another difference is that Boone and White (2015) measure institutional ownership at the “quasi-indexer” level.  Bushee and Noe (2000) find that this classification comprises not just index funds but also non-index funds that have strategic disclosure preferences.  By measuring index fund ownership directly from regulatory filings, I eliminate the possibility that institutions' strategic disclosure preferences drive my results. 4 Lastly, my focus on index funds complements the work of Brav et al.  (2008), who show that other large owners, such as hedge funds, exercise their ownership power by intervening in managers' business decisions.  Such intervention, which requires the investor to acquire new management skills, is not feasible on a large scale for index funds, which aim to hold a large basket of stocks in many industries at low cost.  Nonetheless, as this study shows, index funds do exploit their ownership power for other purposes.  In Section 2, I motivate the hypotheses.  Sections 3 and 4 describe the data and empirical results, and Section 5 concludes.  2.  Hypothesis development.  The index-fund industry is dominated by a few large funds with economies of scale in a highly competitive market (as of 2016, S&P's website notes that index fund holdings account for $2. 2 trillion of the $17. 7 trillion S&P 500 market capitalization, or 12. 4%).  Index funds maintain their competitive position by offering a significant cost advantage to owning a large index of stocks, and by keeping expense ratios and liquidity-related trading costs low (relative to managed funds).  According to my conversations with BlackRock independent trustees, the overwhelming majority of S&P 500 index-fund trade occurs in the open secondary markets, and a significant volume of such trade arises on a daily basis (the same is true for Fidelity and Vanguard).  Thus, the liquidity of the index fund and all of its associated vehicles depends on the liquidity of the underlying stocks.  To reduce their liquidity-related costs, index funds can improve liquidity in the underlying stocks by eliciting more disclosure from these firms.  High liquidity in these stocks lowers trading costs for clients, reduces absolute tracking error, preserves AUM, and increases the liquidity of derivative securities such as ETFs (see Appendix A).  More liquidity also ensures that ETF prices do not deviate from the underlying index or become highly exposed to the risk of adverse price movements in the underlying stocks (Madhavan, 2015). 5 Given prior evidence that neither retail nor mutual fund flows are strategic (e. g. , Carhart, 1997.  Fama and French, 2010.  Frazzini and Lamont, 2008), I assume that index fund clients purchase and redeem index fund shares for nonstrategic (e. g. , personal consumption) reasons.  That is, if a client has private information about a given firm, he may wish to trade in that firm directly, not through the index.  Consequently, index funds have an unambiguous preference for high disclosure, and I can use this characteristic to directly model their disclosure preferences. 6 In theory, when index funds join a firm due to its S&P 500 index inclusion, disclosure moves to a new second-best level equilibrium that incorporates index funds' disclosure preferences.  In practice, reaching this new equilibrium requires that managers learn index funds' disclosure preferences.  Accordingly, large index funds such as BlackRock, Fidelity, and Vanguard retain teams of analysts and investor relations personnel who can check disclosure levels across an industry by examining media and financial reports, management disclosures and guidance activities, and earnings conference calls.  These funds can then communicate their preference for more disclosure directly to companies through investor conferences, private meetings, and phone conversations.  Index funds also clearly state their preference for more disclosure on their websites and governance materials (see Appendix B), and managers can observe and learn from the reporting practices of their new index peers (e. g. , Dye and Sridhar, 1995).  Of course, managers may resist index funds' preference for greater disclosure.  To overcome this obstacle, index funds must rely on both hard and soft power.  Hard power arises from index funds' ownership stakes, which confer control rights such as proxy votes.  These funds appear willing to use such leverage.  Matvos and Ostrovsky (2010, Table 1) show that Vanguard's S&P 500 index fund withheld votes for management-proposed directors and proposals 17. 2% of the time from July 2003 to June 2004 (similar magnitudes were found for other index funds).  Given that many votes are decided by less than 5%, managers have a significant incentive to preserve the support of index funds (Appel et al. , 2016.  Gillian and Starks, 2000).  Disclosing according to the preferences of these funds is one way to maintain their support. 7 Soft power over management, by contrast, comes from a variety of sources, not least of which are informal negotiation settings.  In 2013, Glenn Booraem, the Controller of Vanguard's S&P 500 index fund, noted that “while our approach of quiet diplomacy has led some to conclude that our voice is silent on many debates, we believe that our effectiveness is maximized by taking our message directly to those companies where we believe changes are needed. ” Booraem noted further that Vanguard has “found through hundreds of direct discussions every year that we are frequently able to accomplish as much or more through dialogue as we are through voting.  Importantly, through engagement, we are able to put issues on the table for discussion that aren't on the proxy ballot” (Booraem, 2013).  Likewise, in 2015, Larry Fink, the CEO of BlackRock, called for “consistent and sustained” engagement by his firm (Fink, 2015).  These forms of private communication appear important not only to Vanguard and BlackRock.  Matvos and Ostrovsky (2010) find that in 2003, after the SEC passed a new rule requiring disclosure of proxy votes, many index fund sponsors wrote comment letters to the SEC in which they expressed concern about being denied private communication with companies whose management the funds had voted against.  Soft power also comes from managers' and directors' concerns about their reputation and credibility.  Index fund sponsors such as BlackRock and Vanguard, by virtue of their size, have considerable soft influence in the director market due to personal relationships and other connections (e. g. , Cohen et al. , 2008).  Information sharing between large shareholders may also drive managers to comply with index funds’ preferences.  For instance, if managers refuse to disclose more after meeting with an index fund sponsor, that sponsor could inform other large owners that management is uncooperative.  This, in turn, might cause these non-index fund owners to sell their stock or vote against management in the future.  Evidence of this type of information sharing—documented in Hong et al.  (2005) and the survey paper McCahery et al.  (2016)—suggests that such an outcome is indeed possible.  Proxy advisor firms such as ISS and Glass Lewis, who avow that their guidance arises solely from public information, and formal groups such as the Shareholder-Director Exchange further strengthen the collective influence of index funds.  Soft power thus appears to be quite salient in these settings.  Lastly, companies' disclosure motivations also depend on the general market for their shares.  index funds are important players in such markets.  For example, Nagel (2005) and Boehmer and Kelley (2009) argue that index fund ownership increases the supply of a company's stock available for short sales, which can induce traders to act more aggressively on unfavorable information (Boehmer and Wu, 2013).  Managers may want to counteract the price effect of such trade, and can do so through disclosure.  Indeed, as Chen et al.  (2015) and Li and Zhang (2015) find, the possibility of short selling is associated with longer 10-K disclosures and more favorable and unfavorable earnings forecasts.  I rely primarily on the index fund ownership stake to measure index funds' influence over management.  The previous considerations lead to my first hypothesis.  H1.  When firms are included in the S&P 500 index, they increase disclosure more when they are more heavily owned by index funds.  The empirical analysis takes the difference in the disclosure levels for the index-inclusion firms from pre to post inclusion.  However, this difference can vary across inclusions because, for example, of shifting disclosure practices in the inclusion firm's industry.  I therefore set as a baseline the change in disclosure of a comparable firm that was not included in the index.  This results in a difference-in-differences or D-in-D estimation.  The advantage of using D-in-D estimation is that it does not require an explicit model of disclosure and index fund ownership.  To the extent that other drivers of disclosure such as proprietary costs change in the same manner across the inclusion and control firms (e. g. , time-varying effects), or are constant (e. g. , firmfixed effects), the D-in-D approach eliminates these factors from the analysis (Bertrand et al. , 2004).  Of course, it could be that index inclusion itself affects disclosure.  I can isolate this effect from that of index fund ownership.  the inclusion effect is the intercept, and the index fund ownership effect is the coefficient on the index fund ownership stake.  Although index funds have power over managers, they still must exert costly effort to induce disclosure from managers, who may be reluctant to increase disclosure for several reasons.  First, managers may want to preserve their private information advantage, which they partially relinquish by increasing disclosure (e. g. , Bushman and Indjejikian, 1995).  Second, managers may gain private benefits from withholding disclosure, as when managerial compensation is linked to stock price (e. g. , Nagar, 1999.  Nagar et al. , 2003).  Third, managers may withhold disclosure if they believe unfavorable information will soon reverse itself (e. g. , Graham et al. , 2005).  Fourth, more disclosure may promote disclosure-related litigation (e. g. , Kothari et al. , 2009.  Skinner, 1994, 1997).  Fifth, more disclosure may induce further monitoring and scrutiny by a firm's board of directors or outside shareholders (e. g. , Adams and Ferreira, 2007).  As a result, index funds' demands for more disclosure could be hindered by the extent to which managers are less sensitive to such demands.  This is likely to occur when managers are entrenched.  In theory, entrenched managers have more power to resist shareholders' demands and preferences—regardless of their economic substance—and thus to maintain the status quo.  This idea has been validated by other studies in several empirical settings, including director demand for disclosure (e. g. , Armstrong et al. , 2014), managerial stock ownership (e. g. , Cheng et al. , 2004), blockholder governance (e. g. , Bharath et al. , 2013), executive compensation (e. g. , Core et al. , 1999), and more broadly using measures of firm value (e. g. , Bebchuk et al. , 2009.  Claessens et al. , 2002).  I therefore expect that entrenched management teams will be less responsive to index funds' demands for disclosure. 8 Accordingly, I predict.  H2.  The results for H1 are stronger for firms whose managers are less entrenched.  For H1 and H2, I assume that managers and other large investors, who have incentives to gather firm-specific information privately and then act on it either by intervention or by trading, systematically want less public disclosure than index funds do.  I also assume that retail and atomistic traders are too small to influence companies' disclosure choices—they must invest in firms whose disclosures already meet their preferred level.  I next test whether disclosure affects stock liquidity.  Conventional wisdom suggests that public disclosure substitutes for private information gathering, thereby making markets more liquid by reducing adverse selection that results from private information in trade in securities (e. g. , Diamond and Verrecchia, 1991.  Holmström and Tirole, 1993).  This wisdom notwithstanding, prior literature has also suggested the possibility that public disclosure actually complements—as opposed to substitutes for—private information gathering, thereby making markets less liquid by exacerbating adverse selection (e. g. , Kim and Verrecchia, 1994).  Yet a third possibility is that disclosure will have no effect on liquidity in markets populated by many investors because disclosure relates primarily to idiosyncratic features of a firm, although here as well others have suggested why this logic may not apply (e. g. , Taylor and Verrecchia, 2015).  I also test for a concurrent liquidity effect arising from index fund ownership itself.  Index fund ownership might increase the volume of uninformed loss-absorbing trade, which could serve to make markets more liquid.  Similarly, index fund ownership might increase the supply of a firm's lendable shares, thereby facilitating the exposure of any unfavorable private information through informed short selling (Boehmer and Wu, 2013.  Nagel, 2005).  Thus, I expect to find separate effects on stock liquidity due to disclosure and index fund ownership.  H3.  When firms are included in the S&P 500 index, their stock liquidity increases more when they are more heavily owned by index funds.  Both disclosure and index fund ownership contribute to this increase.  <Middle> Data.  3. 1.  Sample selection.  treatment and control firms.  I create my S&P 500 index-inclusion (treatment) sample by starting with all 433 first-time S&P 500 additions from 1996 to 2010.  This time period coincides with the availability of EDGAR filing data from the SEC.  Index deletions due to acquisitions or mergers of existing index firms lead to 78% of the new inclusions in my sample.  I follow Denis et al.  (2003) and eliminate 45 firms added to the index because they acquired or merged with an index firm.  I also require that each treatment firm be publicly traded for at least two years prior to index inclusion and remain in the index for at least two years after inclusion.  The two-year window gives the index funds time to establish relationships with managers and gives managers time to adjust their disclosures.  I use the [ 2 years, 0) window as the pre-inclusion period and the [0, þ2 years] window as the post-inclusion period, where 0 is the date the firm was added to the S&P 500 index. 9 Imposing this requirement eliminates 20 more inclusion firms.  Given the small number of eliminated firms, I assume that the survivorship or look-ahead bias is small.  The final sample comprises 368 S&P 500 index-inclusion firms.  The S&P 500 index has several advantages over other indices.  In terms of assets under management (AUM), it is the largest index in the world by a significant margin.  total S&P 500 AUM is $2. 2 trillion, far exceeding the combined AUM of the second and third largest indices, the Russell 1000 and 2000 ($155 billion as of 2016, according to Russell's website).  In addition, managers are unlikely to know whether or when their firm will be included in the S&P 500 (Chen et al. , 2004).  By contrast, Russell 1000/2000 index inclusions are determined once per year according to relative market capitalization.  This provides both a timing and a valuation target for managers seeking inclusion.  As a result, managers might strategically disclose in order to increase or decrease firm value, inducing a disclosure bias to inclusion events.  Further, because joining or exiting the Russell indices occurs only because of stock performance, a stock performance bias is inherent to firms at the index cutoff.  The Russell value-based cutoff also means that high index churn occurs at relatively low levels of market capitalization, often affecting the same firms (Mullins, 2015).  On the other hand, S&P 500 firms usually stay in the index for extended periods, which encourages index funds and managers to develop working relationships.  S&P can include only one firm to replace each firm that exits the index, and it selects the new firm using publicly available information.  I therefore pair each S&P 500 inclusion firm with a control firm using a propensity score specification motivated by S&P's index-inclusion criteria.  I create the pool of potential control firms by starting with all Compustat firmyear observations for U. S companies, including my 368 first-time inclusion treatment firms.  I eliminate observations for non-treatment firms that were not publicly traded during the entire [ 2 years, þ2 years] window around their year of observation in Compustat and all observations for my treatment firms outside of their [ 2 years, þ2 years] first-time inclusion period.  I then remove non-treatment firms that were either added to or dropped from the S&P 500 index at any point during the [ 2 years, þ2 years] period around their specific year of observation in Compustat.  These firms did not meet the first-time inclusion requirement or did not remain in the index for at least two years after inclusion.  This process yields a pool of 91,188 potential matches.  Using the pool of 91,188 potential matches and 368 inclusion treatment firms, I then estimate a logit model with the inclusion firm indicator as the dependent variable and firm observables as the independent variables (see Table 1).  Table 1 indicates that the propensity score model is reasonably accurate (with an adjusted McFadden's pseudo-R2 of 0. 308), reducing the likelihood of matching on correlated omitted variables.  I match each treatment firm with one control firm using nearest-neighbor matching by year, Fama-French 12 industry, and closest propensity score, without replacement.  The purpose of this matching procedure is to find a baseline control firm that is a reasonable substitute for the inclusion firm. 10 Table 2, Panel A compares descriptive statistics averaged over the [ 2 years, þ2 years] window for the treatment and control samples.  Treatment and matched control firms are similar on all dimensions except for market to book, analyst following, and log of firm age, underscoring the importance of including these covariates as controls in later tests.  The differences in market to book and analyst following are consistent with prior studies that find that firm value increases for firms added to the index and that analyst following increases with institutional holdings (e. g. , Morck and Yang, 2001.  O'Brien and Bhushan, 1990).  More importantly, disclosure levels for the treatment and control firms over the period of [ 2 years, 0) are not significantly different at the 10% level.  Market adjusted abnormal returns for the treatment and control firms in the two-year post periods are highly correlated (0. 87.  1% level), and their difference is statistically insignificant at the 10% level.  This indicates that inclusion firms do not outperform control firms, on average.  The covariate balance helps validate the selection of control firms.  3. 2.  Disclosure measures.  I measure disclosure using management earnings guidance and three categorizations of 8-K filings.  the total number of filings, the number of filings containing “financial statements and exhibits” or “results of operations and financial condition,” and the number of filings containing a press release.  I choose guidance and 8-Ks to measure disclosure because (Beyer et al. , 2010, Table 1) find that, on average, guidance disclosures and SEC filings (including 8-Ks) explain 16% and 4% of a firm's stock return variance, respectively.  Prior studies such as Lerman and Livnat (2009) also show that 8-Ks contribute to the price formation process.  I use the Thomson Company Issued Guidelines (CIG) database to identify management guidance and WRDS's SEC Analytics Suite to identify 8-K disclosures and their categorizations.  Each 8-K filing is matched to the inclusion and control firms using their CIK identifier and date.  For each firm's pre and post observation window, I aggregate the number of quarters in which managers provide guidance, and the total number of appropriate 8-K filings. 11 3. 3.  Measures of index fund shareholdings.  I assume that all index funds are homogeneous in their disclosure preferences and therefore I aggregate all S&P 500 index funds into one fund.  This procedure is common in the literature (e. g, Bushee and Noe, 2000).  I measure the percentage of a firm's shares outstanding held by index funds in the first quarter after index inclusion using the Thomson-Reuters Mutual Fund Database.  This ownership category includes index ETF stakes. 12 I obtain holdings data for non-index institutional investor ownership using the Thomson-Reuters 13F Database.  As in the case of index funds, I aggregate all nonindexers into one group and measure their ownership in a given firm in terms of the funds' ownership stake.  I verify that index fund ownership arises in the inclusion firms and not in the control firms, and find that this is indeed the case.  index fund ownership is zero for the control firms.  I also find that index fund ownership varies closely with index fund AUM, an expected outcome given that when index funds collectively have more AUM, they buy a greater percentage of each index firm's outstanding shares. 13 3. 4.  Stock liquidity and information environment measures.  I measure stock liquidity using the daily percentage quoted spread from TAQ and the Amihud (2002) return to dollar trading volume measure.  Goyenko et al.  (2009) find that the daily TAQ spread and the Amihud (2002) measure are the firstand second-best measures of stock liquidity, respectively.  For percentage spreads, I follow the interpolated time method of Holden and Jacobsen (2014), which adjusts for withdrawn, crossed, and locked quotes.  I also follow Chordia et al.  (2000) and remove trades out of sequence, trades recorded before or after the close, and trades with special settlement conditions.  I also follow Fang et al.  (2009) and eliminate observations when any of the following criteria are met.  quoted bid-ask spread is greater than $5, effective spread/quoted bid-ask spread is greater than 4. 0, and quoted bid-ask spread/transaction price is greater than 0. 4.  These conditions pertain mainly to thinly-traded stocks (not to the firms in my sample) and help to ensure data integrity.  Using all offers, I measure the daily average bid-ask spread as follows, where n is the total number of offers for firm i on day d, and for a given offer k on day d, Askidk is the ask price of firm i's stock, Bididk is the bid price of firm i's stock, and Midk is the mean of Askidk and Bididk.  I multiply this variable by 100 and compute separate spread values for the inclusion firm's pre-inclusion period of [ 2 years, 0) and post-inclusion period of [0, þ2 years] by taking the average SPREADid value over all trading days within each respective period (time 0 is the firm's index-inclusion date).  I also compute this measure for the control firm.  I create the bid-ask spread D-in-D variable in two steps.  (1) I subtract the inclusion firm's pre-inclusion average spread from its post-inclusion average spread, and (2) I subtract from (1) the control firm's post-inclusion average spread minus its pre-inclusion average spread (see Eq.  (4)).  This approach is similar to Bushee et al.  (2010).  I measure Amihud (2002) liquidity as follows, where RETid and DVOLUMEid are daily returns and daily dollar trading volume, respectively, for firm i on day d.  I compute separate Amihud illiquidity values for the inclusion firm's pre-inclusion period of [ 2 years, 0) and post-inclusion period of [0, þ2 years], where time 0 is the firm's index-inclusion date, by taking the average AMIHUDid value over all trading days within each respective observation period.  I also compute this measure for the control firm.  I follow the same two-step procedure used for spreads to create the Amihud illiquidity D-in-D variable.  Note that a decrease in this measure signifies higher liquidity.  My proxy for a firm's information environment is analyst earnings forecast errors, computed using the I/B/E/S detail file.  I create a daily mean analyst earnings forecast consensus file using quarterly EPS forecasts and take the mean consensus forecast two trading days before the earnings announcement date for the quarter being measured.  I follow prior studies such as Lys and Sohn (1990) and Hope (2003) and compute quarterly percentage analyst earnings forecast errors as follows, scaling by firm i's stock price at the end of the quarter q.  I compute separate analyst forecast error values for the inclusion firm's pre-inclusion period of [ 2 years, 0) and postinclusion period of [0, þ2 years], where time 0 is the firm's index-inclusion date, by taking the average AFEiq value for all quarters within the respective observation period.  I also compute this measure for the control firm.  I follow the same twostep procedure used for spreads and Amihud illiquidity to create the analyst forecast error D-in-D variable.  3. 5.  Control variables.  In the D-in-D analysis I consider time-varying covariates that may affect disclosure and liquidity.  I describe these covariates in detail in Appendix C.  4.  Empirical results.  4. 1.  Regressions.  My regressions use all variables in their D-in-D form.  For example, I compute and denote the D-in-D transformation for each disclosure proxy as follows.  Disclosure stands for the disclosure proxies, index F stands for the treatment firms, and index C stands for the control firms.  Index T is the time period, where =T 1 is the two-year post-inclusion period (relative to firm F's index-inclusion date).  I repeat this procedure for all variables.  The main disclosure regression with variables in their D-in-D form is as follows (I provide the liquidity regression in Section 4. 5. 1).  Disclosure stands for the disclosure proxies, Index% stands for index fund ownership as a percentage of shares outstanding, Other% stands for non-index institutional ownership as a percentage of shares outstanding, and Control stands for the control variables defined in Appendix C.  The assumptions are that firm-specific effects for the treatment firm and its control firm are fixed across time and that time-varying effects change in the same manner across time for the treatment firm and its control firm (this term can vary across the treatment-control pairs).  These effects are differenced out and are not displayed.  Eq.  (5) controls for an extensive set of endogeneity issues.  For example, consider the concern that S&P selects highdisclosing firms for the index.  It is reasonable to assume that this attribute is a firm-fixed effect that would be eliminated in the differencing procedure.  Additionally, consider the concern that managers use disclosure to get their firm included in the index.  To the extent that both the inclusion and control firms take similar actions to try to get in the index, the differencing procedure will control for this effect as well.  However, index inclusions are typically finalized within just five days of an index deletion and are highly unpredictable, which makes it unlikely that managers can gain a spot in the index by altering their disclosure practices (e. g. , Chen et al. , 2004).  It is also unlikely that managers can influence the timing of inclusions, since over 75% of inclusions are due to the acquisition of an existing index firm.  Nonetheless, any systematic “inclusion effects” will form the intercept terms in my D-in-D regressions.  Another concern is that firms, upon being included in the index, desire greater index fund ownership and use disclosure to obtain it.  But recall that the only way for managers to increase index fund ownership in their firm is to increase index fund AUM.  managers' disclosure efforts must therefore attract new index-fund inflows.  These new inflows would show up as a change in index fund ownership from the beginning to the end of the inclusion period for the treatment firms.  I address this concern in two ways.  (1) as my main regressor, I use the index fund ownership stake in the first quarter after index inclusion rather than the average index fund ownership stake over the entire post period, and (2) I check for, and do not find, a statistically significant on average change in index fund ownership from the beginning to the end of the post period for the inclusion firms (10% level).  These findings suggest that my results are not attributable to management influence over index fund AUM.  Another concern is that index inclusion could lead non-index institutional investors to invest in, and influence the disclosure decisions of, the newly-included firm.  Although I control for the change in non-index institutions, a correlated omitted variable bias could exist if this change is correlated with the error term and the change in index fund holdings in my regressions. 14 However, such a bias in the non-index fund estimate would not pose a problem to the index fund estimate if the non-index and index fund variables are uncorrelated, because the non-index ownership bias would not be transmitted to the uncorrelated index fund ownership variable (assuming no measurement error).  I therefore check for, but do not find, a statistically significant correlation between the index fund and non-index fund variables.  This finding suggests that my results cannot be attributed to changes in the holdings of non-index institutional investors.  Furthermore, if index fund flows reflect general beliefs about macroeconomic conditions, there would have to be a strong reason these beliefs pertain only to index firms and are associated with the timing of index-inclusion events.  Arbitrage considerations dictate that if such beliefs drive the dependent variables in my empirical tests, they would also impact the matched control firms and be eliminated in the differencing procedure.  In any case, I acknowledge that one weakness in my research design is that it does not eliminate any unobserved on average change to disclosure unique to inclusion firms that is correlated with index fund ownership and is not captured by the control-firm-time-varying effect or by any of the timevarying control variables.  However, if such an on average change is systematic across all index-inclusion firms or uncorrelated with index fund ownership, then this change will form the intercept or error terms in my regressions, respectively.  The possibility of having such a correlated latent factor is a limitation of all D-in-D research designs.  4. 2.  Univariate results.  Table 2, Panel B shows that the inclusion firms come from a variety of industries, which suggests that no specific sector is driving the results.  Table 2, Panel C tabulates descriptive univariate changes in the treatment firms compared to changes in the control firms.  Treatment firms experience an average increase of 6. 54% in index fund shareholdings (significant at the 1% level) compared to the control firm change of 0. 00%.  The entire increase in index fund ownership occurs in the quarter immediately after index inclusion and remains stable during the two-year-post-inclusion observation period. 15 I next assess whether the 6. 54% mean increase in index fund ownership has a meaningful economic interpretation and is large enough to give index funds control.  Appel et al.  (2016) show that “quasi-indexer” ownership changes of just 0. 5% to 3% can affect governance outcomes, and Crane et al.  (2016) show that such changes in ownership can also affect payout policy.  Cheng et al.  (2004) find that managers value the control conferred by state anti-takeover legislation at about 1% of the value of their firms.  In addition, the institutional features of my setting documented in Section 2, including comments from employees of Vanguard and BlackRock, help to further validate the index fund ownership measure.  These findings support the economic significance of the index fund ownership measure.  By contrast, the net change in the ownership of non-index shareholders for inclusion firms is weaker in magnitude, suggesting, at least from a net perspective, that these shareholders' demand for disclosure is unlikely to have changed.  This result also indicates that index funds likely buy out mostly atomistic traders, and it is consistent with the finding from Appel et al.  (2016) that inclusion in the Russell 2000 is unrelated to strategic-investor ownership.  Furthermore, non-index fund ownership is statistically uncorrelated to its corresponding increase in index fund ownership (10% level.  see correlations in Table 2, Panel D). 