 1.  Introduction Vehicles are a major source of pollution in most countries.  In Canada, for instance, light duty vehicles generated 82 million tonnes of greenhouse gases, approximately 12% of the country’s total emissions (Canada, 2015).  Vehicles also produce other pollutants that adversely affect human health and well-being.  These including nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, and particulate matter among others.  Pollution from cars and trucks is often viewed as the archetypal economic externality.  the costs associated with emissions accrue to society but are not fully borne privately by drivers.  Reducing transportation-related gasoline consumption has, unsurprisingly, become a focus of policy makers.  An expanding array of policies have targeted vehicular emissions in Canada (Antweiler and Gulati, 2013).  Several provinces have offered rebates for the purchase of fuel eﬃcient vehicles such as hybrid-electric or electric vehicles (Chandra, 2010).  Ontario and the federal government used a system of taxes and rebates based on fuel economy (Rivers et al. , 2017.  Sallee and Slemrod, 2012).  British Columbia, Alberta, Ontario, and Quebec apply a carbon price as a disincentive on the consumption of fossil fuels (Antweiler and Gulati, 2016.  Rivers et al. , 2015), and similar carbon prices are required across all provinces by 2018 under the Pan-Canadian Framework on Green Growth and Climate Change.  The federal government has provided a tax credit to encourage commuting by public transport rather than private vehicle (Rivers and Plumptre, 2016.  Chandler, 2014) and recently adopted new vehicle greenhouse gas intensity regulations requiring manufacturers to achieve speciﬁc targets for ﬂeet-wide emissions per kilometre. 1 The optimal stringency of each of these programs depends, at least to some degree, on the responsiveness of the fuel economy of vehicles to the price of gasoline.  Policy makers therefore require reliable estimates of key elasticities relating to the choice of and use of the vehicle stock in response to gasoline prices and other policies.  Yet, despite the breadth of attempts to address externalities from automobile usage, little is known about how gasoline prices actually inﬂuence consumer decision-making with respect to new vehicle fuel economy.  We estimate the elasticity of new vehicle fuel eﬃciency with respect to gasoline price by exploiting a rich dataset covering gasoline prices, vehicle registrations, vehicle fuel economy, and demographic variables at the neighborhood level in 42 Canadian cities from 2000 to 2010.  Our data and econometric models enable us to credibly control for unobserved time-varying and cross-sectional variables that may otherwise bias estimates of the elasticity.  Our main ﬁnding is that a 1% increase in gasoline prices leads to a 0. 08% improvement in the fuel economy of new vehicles.  This elasticity is slightly smaller (in absolute value) than previous estimates, suggesting that consumers may be less responsive to gasoline prices than previously thought.  Having established this main result, we proceed to show that the responsiveness to gasoline prices is greater in more urbanized regions compared to less urban regions.  In particular, we use four proxies for the level of urbanization in each of the neighborhoods in our data set.  (1) the distance to the urban core (more “urban” neighborhoods are closer to the urban core).  (2) the population density (more “urban” neighborhoods have higher population densities).  (3) the mode share of public transit (more “urban” neighborhoods have a higher mode share of commuting by public transit).  and (4) city population (more “urban” cities are larger).  We interact each of these proxies with the gasoline price variable in our main regression and ﬁnd stronger responses to increased gasoline prices in more “urban” areas, which are robust to our classiﬁcation of “urbanization”.  While we lack the data to explore the mechanisms behind this differential response, the ﬁnding that vehicle choice in more urban areas is more sensitive to gasoline prices than in peri-urban areas is novel and interesting on its own.  Finally, we demonstrate another important result, similar to one that has been found in a range of recent work.  consumers are more responsive to changes in excise taxes than to equivalent changes in gasoline prices due to other factors.  This larger responsiveness to changes in taxes has been noted in several papers focused on gasoline demand (Rivers et al. , 2015.  Li et al. , 2014.  Scott, 2015.  Lawley and Thivierge, 2018) and, more recently, in another Canadian study by Antweiler and Gulati (2016) on vehicle choices.  Our results suggest that consumers respond to a change in excise taxes by improving fuel eﬃciency four to ten times as much as to an equivalent change in tax-exclusive prices.  This has important implications for policy makers considering using excise taxes as a way to encourage more fuel eﬃcient vehicle choices.  The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 presents our conceptual framework and offers a review of similar studies.  Section 3 explains the data and empirical strategy.  The main results are presented in Section 4, while the heterogeneity of these estimates is investigated in Section 5.  Section 6 concludes.  2.  Conceptual framework.  Vehicle gasoline consumption can be decomposed as the product of three factors. 2 Denote the fuel eﬃciency of the on-road vehicle stock—i. e. , the number of litres required to travel a kilometre—with F.  Consumers consider the price of gasoline when selecting the fuel eﬃciency of vehicles, so F is a function of the price of gasoline, p.  The second factor is vehicle utilization, D—i. e. , the number of kilometres travelled per vehicle.  Conditional on the fuel consumption rating of the vehicle as well as the price for gasoline consumers choose the distance to drive.  Thus, this second factor, D, the intensity of vehicle use, is a function of both the price of gasoline, p, as well as fuel eﬃciency, F.  Finally, V(p) is the total number of vehicles in the ﬂeet, also a function of the price of gasoline.  Combining these three factors allows us to write a reduced-form expression for total gasoline consumption.  Taking the total derivative of this expression yields a decomposition for the short-run elasticity of gasoline demand with respect to price that is comprised of distinct moving parts.  the change in ﬂeet fuel economy with respect to gasoline price, the change in distance travelled with respect to gasoline price, the change in ﬂeet size with respect to gasoline price and the change in distance travelled with respect to ﬂeet fuel economy.  Referring to this elasticity as 4, weThere are four parameters in this expression.  First, g is the elasticity of vehicle fuel eﬃciency with respect to gasoline price, and V is the elasticity of aggregate vehicle stock with respect to gasoline prices.  These elasticities, respectively, show the percent change in the per vehicle gasoline demand and the percent change in the number of vehicles in the ﬂeet that result from a 1% increase in gasoline prices.  The next two components are D , the elasticities of distance driven with respect to fuel economy and gasoline price. 4 The product g(1 + h) describes the interaction between changes in ﬂeet fuel economy and distance travelled, with the term in brackets often referred to as the “rebound effect”.  Rebound effects arise from the feedback between vehicles’ fuel eﬃciency and the cost of driving – namely, increases in ﬂeet fuel economy may result in additional driving demand by reducing the private cost of driving (Borenstein, 2013.  Sorrell and Dimitropoulos, 2008.  Chan and Gillingham, 2015).  Each of these key elasticities helps to determine the overall change in gasoline consumption in response to a change in gasoline price or other similar policy.  Several studies exist that estimate l.  For example, Gillingham (2014), Gillingham et al.  (2015) and Greene et al.  (1999) estimate the elasticity of vehicle miles travelled with respect to gasoline price in the US, l.  The consensus value is approximately −0. 2.  Using aggregate data, Barla et al.  (2009) ﬁnd virtually identical estimates for Canada, while Moshiri and Kamil (2017) ﬁnd a value of −0. 12, or roughly half, using Canadian micro data.  This paper’s focuses is on estimating g, the elasticity of ﬂeet fuel economy with respect to gasoline price (since we do not observe actual driving behavior in the data for this paper, we have no way of estimating h or l).  There are a handful of estimates for g, although few in Canada.  Li et al.  (2009) use detailed US vehicle registration data from 1997 to 2005 to determine how changes in gasoline prices affect the fuel economy of vehicle sales.  They ﬁnd that a 1% increase in gasoline prices causes an improvement in ﬂeet fuel economy of 0. 2%.  Klier and Linn (2010) identify changes in US fuel economy from monthly vehicle sales.  They ﬁnd that a 1% change in gasoline price results in about a 0. 1% improvement in fuel economy.  Burke and Nishitateno (2013) use cross-sectional aggregate data from 43 countries to estimate the relationship between new vehicle fuel economy and gasoline price.  They ﬁnd an elasticity of about −0. 2. 5 It is not obvious how much policy-makers should trust many older estimates of g, however.  Often strong assumptions were needed to identify the effect of gasoline prices on fuel eﬃciency of new vehicle purchases (Klier and Linn, 2010).  In cross-sectional studies, such as West (2004), a maintained assumption is that there is no relationship between gasoline prices and unobserved consumer preferences, an assumption that is violated, for example, if consumers engaged in residential sorting based on gasoline prices or if unobserved consumer preferences are an important determinant of gasoline taxes (Hammar et al. , 2004).  Other studies based on country-, state-, or province-level panel data, such as Barla et al.  (2009), Burke and Nishitateno (2013), andSmall and Dender (2007), use the panel structure of the data to control for time-invariant unobservables.  While a signiﬁcant improvement on earlier cross-section analysis, the level of aggregation of these analysis prevent them from exploring geographic heterogeneity in responses.  Moreover, because they have fewer observations (because they are based on aggregate data), estimates are often less precise.  Klier and Linn (2010) and Li et al.  (2009) made signiﬁcant progress by using detailed micro-datasets to relax key identifying assumptions and to provide credible causal estimates of the elasticity of vehicle fuel economy with respect to gasoline price.  We build on this research in two ways.  First, we estimate the elasticity in a Canadian context.  Consumer behavior may differ between Canada and the US, especially as the structure of the two countries’ macroeconomies differs.  Second, we probe various forms of heterogeneity, especially related to the characteristics of urban centres, and different components of gasoline prices – i. e. , taxes versus market ﬂuctuations – inﬂuence consumer decisions.  With the exception of Antweiler and Gulati (2016), no previous study, to the best of our knowledge, has investigated these channels.  <Middle> Data and empirical strategy.  3. 1.  Dataset construction and summary statistics.  We aim to estimate the elasticity of new vehicle fuel economy with respect to the gasoline price.  Several data sources are combined for the analysis.  First, we obtain data on individual vehicle registrations. 6 This database covers the universe of passenger vehicles registered in all Canadian provinces from 2000 to 2010.  Vehicles are categorized by make (e. g. , Toyota), model (e. g. , Camry), series (e. g. , XLE), model year, engine size, number of engine cylinders, transmission type and fuel type.  A vehicle i is deﬁned as a unique combination of vehicle year, make, model, series, engine size, number of cylinders, and fuel type.  Thus, for example, a 2006 Toyota Camry LE 4-cylinder 2. 0 L gasoline car is considered a “vehicle” in the dataset, while a 2006 Toyota Camry XLE 4-cylinder 2. 4 L gasoline car is a distinct vehicle.  Registrations are recorded according to the forward sortation area (FSA) of the home address of the vehicle registrant. 7 Each observation corresponds to a unique combination of FSA-vehicle-year and reﬂects the number of registrations of each type of vehicle in each FSA in each year.  We focus on new vehicle purchases rather than the total stock of registered vehicles, so only retain new vehicles.  The vehicle registration data do not include vehicle-speciﬁc fuel economy, so we use information from Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) and the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to obtain vehicle-year fuel economy ratings.  Every year, both agencies issue information on the rated city and highway fuel consumption for virtually all new vehicles according to their characteristics (i. e. , make, model, model year, series, engine size, etc. ).  Regression-based imputation methods are applied to match fuel economy ratings to vehicles in the dataset.  For each fuel economy rating dataset (EPA and NRCan), vehicle fuel economy is imputed via two alternative models.  Model one predicts fuel economy based on main vehicle effects (e. g. , make, model, engine size), while model two predicts fuel economy using an expanded speciﬁcation including both main effects and the interactions between variables (e. g. , make, engine size, make × engine size).  These imputations are referred to as NRCan1, NRCan2, EPA1, and EPA2, depending on (a) the fuel consumption dataset and (b) the imputation model. 