
The literature on oil and commodity markets during the last
decade has shown the importance to identify and understand the
causes and consequences of commodity price shocks.  Some of the
key insights (Kilian, 2008a) are that (i) most commodity prices
are endogenous with respect to the global business cycle, and (ii)
demand shocks cause delayed and sustained price movements while
supply shocks have small and transitory effects.  Whereas disentangling the supply and demand components in a structural model is
now common in the empirical literature to understand commodity price dynamics (especially for crude oil price), some important
concerns are missing regarding the effect of second-order moments
(especially the one related to uncertainty). 
So far, the previous literature is indeed silent on the effects of
macroeconomic uncertainty on the volatility of commodity prices. 
This issue is nevertheless worthy of investigation since the impact
of uncertainty on the global economy has been widely documented. 
For instance, theories of investment under uncertainty explain
why under irreversibility condition or ﬁxed costs, uncertainty over
future returns reduces current investment, hiring, and consumption
through an “option value to wait”. 1 The starting point is that at a
micro level, uncertainty may diminish the willingness of ﬁrms to
commit resources to irreversible investment and the readiness of
consumers to spend or allocate their earning and wages.  It follows
that micro-level uncertainty may be transmitted to the macro level
because uncertainty about the return to investment at a micro level
may create cyclical ﬂuctuations in aggregate investment at a macro
level (see Bernanke, 1983). 2 The crucial point here is that there is
no reason why such mechanism at both micro and macro levels
should not be extended to commodity markets.  Indeed, at a micro
level, commodity ﬁrms in several sectors (especially in oil industry)
are confronted to high costs and should be impacted by uncertainty
about returns to investment.  Similarly, at a macro level, as prices are
related to global supply and demand conditions, uncertainty about
macroeconomic aggregates should also affect commodity prices. 
In the wake of the literature about the origins of commodity price
movements, the aim of this paper is to investigate the impact of
uncertainty on commodity price returns and volatility.  Regarding the
previous literature, the bulk of the studies have looked at the reverse
relationship and highlighted the signiﬁcance of uncertainty in oil
prices in explaining economic ﬂuctuations and in exacerbating asymmetry in the oil price-economic activity nexus. 3 All of them suggest
that oil price uncertainty impacts output, investment, and consumption in the U. S.  and G-7 countries in an asymmetric way.  While
providing interesting results, these studies suffer from an important
drawback since it is well known that the effect of uncertainty in
the oil price—and commodity prices in general—on the macroeconomy should be small, by construction of the underlying economic
models.  As argued by Kilian (2014), energy is indeed not necessarily a key component of the cash ﬂow of investment projects, making
the effect of oil price uncertainty on output not plausible.  It follows
that looking at the reverse transmission from macroeconomic uncertainty to the volatility of commodity prices is more relevant with
regard to the modern view of the endogenous component of prices. 
As stressed above, this question has not been widely addressed in
the literature.  Some limited exceptions can, however, be mentioned. 
First, regarding theoretical papers, (i) Pindyck (1980) discusses the
implications of uncertainty associated with oil demand and reserves
on the oil price behavior.  (ii) Litzenberger and Rabinowitz (1995)
analyze backwardation behavior in oil futures contracts.  and (iii)
Alquist and Kilian (2010) allow for endogenous convenience yield
and endogenous inventories, and stress that it is uncertainty about
the shortfall of supply relative to demand that matters.  Second,
among empirical papers, one may refer to (i) Kilian (2009) and Kilian
and Murphy (2014) who design as a precautionary demand shock
a shock that reﬂects shifts in uncertainty and treat macroeconomic
uncertainty as unobserved.  and (ii) Van Robays (2013) who investigates whether observed macroeconomic uncertainty changes the
responsiveness of the oil price to shocks in oil demand and supply. 
Our paper extends this literature on the relationship between
macroeconomic uncertainty and commodity prices in several ways. 
Speciﬁcally, we address this question by examining the inﬂuence of
macroeconomic uncertainty on a large panel of commodity markets. 
More precisely, we consider four groups of 19 raw materials (energy,
precious metals, agriculture, and industry) to investigate whether
the impact of macroeconomic uncertainty on commodity prices differs depending on the type of market.  In addition, with uncertainty
evolving through time, we account for this feature by assessing its
impact at various horizons—namely short-, medium-, and long-run
horizons—to test whether its effect varies according to its maturity. 
From a theoretical viewpoint, ﬂuctuations in uncertainty may indeed
have different impacts through time on the economy (Bloom, 2014),
with usually two negative channels in the short run (the real option
and risk aversion/risk premium effects4) and two positive channels
in the long run (the growth option and Oi-Hartman-Abel effects5). 6
Turning to methodological issues, our contribution is threefold.  First,
we retain a nonlinear structural threshold vector autoregressive
(TVAR) speciﬁcation that allows us to identify different uncertainty
states, and we investigate whether the impact of uncertainty varies
according to its level and variability.  Second, because macroeconomic uncertainty is unobservable, assessing its effect on commodity
markets obviously requires us to ﬁnd an adequate proxy.  To this
end, we rely on Jurado Name (2015) and consider a robust approach
to measuring macroeconomic uncertainty.  The retained proxy uses
a wide range of monthly macroeconomic and ﬁnancial indicators
and is based on the underlying idea of a link between uncertainty
and predictability.  In this sense, we go further than the previous
literature—particularly compared with Van Robays’s (2013) paper,
which is the closest to ours—which generally relies on dispersion
measures such as conditional volatility (e. g.  conditional variance of
world industrial production growth or of U. S.  GDP growth estimated
from a GARCH(1,1) process) or the VXO index of Bloom (2009).  As
we will see, an important drawback in using GARCH-type models
to proxy uncertainty is that they are inherently backward-looking,
whereas investors’ expectations tend to be forward-looking.  More
generally, and thanks to a detailed robustness analysis, we show that
the choice of the uncertainty measure is crucial to avoid erroneously
attributing to uncertainty ﬂuctuations that are actually predictable. 
Third, for the sake of completeness, we also investigate how macroeconomic uncertainty can generate uncertainty in commodity prices,
looking at second-order moments transfer.  To this end, we construct
a robust proxy of commodity market uncertainty based on macroeconomic uncertainty, and provide a historical decomposition that
allows us to determine the contribution of macroeconomic uncertainty to commodity price uncertainty.  For the speciﬁc case of oil,
we further disentangle supply and demand components of oil price
uncertainty to assess their respective contribution during periods of
uncertainty in the market. 
The central message of the paper is that most of commodity
price returns are affected by macroeconomic uncertainty, the effect
being more important for commodities that are strongly related
to the global business cycle (such as oil, agricultural, and industrial markets).  Then, in addition to traditional supply and demand
shocks, macroeconomic uncertainty constitutes another key channel
through which economic fundamentals may impact commodity
prices.  Maturity seems to matter depending on the commodity type. 
long-run uncertainty having more effect on agricultural and industrial cumulative price dynamics, while other markets being more
sensitive to short-run impacts.  Furthermore, our new commodity
price uncertainty indicator shows for most considered series a transfer from macroeconomic uncertainty to price uncertainty during
the 2007–09 great recession period.  It further reveals that volatility
and uncertainty in prices are disconnected.  It is especially the case
for oil as we ﬁnd that most important shocks that occurred in the
1990s and the beginning of the 2000s that lead to price volatility
do not generate systematic price uncertainty, meaning that most of
these movements were predictable at this period and emphasizing
the relevance of our uncertainty measure in linking uncertainty to
predictability rather than to volatility. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 presents
the uncertainty measure and discusses the corresponding theoretical
framework.  Section 3 addresses methodological issues by presenting
the TVAR speciﬁcation as well as our data.  Section 4 displays the
results regarding the impact of macroeconomic uncertainty on commodity markets.  Section 5 is devoted to the link between macroeconomic uncertainty and the uncertainty of each commodity market,
and disentangles the respective contribution of supply and demand
shocks to oil price uncertainty.  Section 6 provides some robustness
checks regarding the choice of both the macroeconomic uncertainty
measure and our measure of price uncertainty.  Finally, Section 7
concludes the paper. 
2.  Uncertainty measure. 
2. 1.  Measuring macroeconomic uncertainty. 
Measuring uncertainty and examining its impact on market
dynamics is a challenging question for economists because no
objective measure exists.  Although in a general sense uncertainty is deﬁned as the conditional volatility of an unforecastable
disturbance,7 the empirical literature to date has usually relied on
proxies.  The most common measures used are the implied or realized
volatility of stock market returns, the cross-sectional dispersion of
ﬁrm proﬁts, stock returns, or productivity, and the cross-sectional
dispersion of survey-based forecasts.  However, their adequacy to
correctly proxy uncertainty is questionable, and such measures are
even misspeciﬁed with regard to the theoretical notion of uncertainty, as highlighted by Jurado Name (2015).  Indeed, stock market
volatility, cross-sectional dispersion in stock returns and ﬁrm proﬁts
can vary over time due to several factors—such as risk aversion, the
leverage effect, and heterogeneity between ﬁrms—even if there is no
signiﬁcant change in uncertainty.  In other words, ﬂuctuations that
are actually predictable can be erroneously attributed to uncertainty,
putting forward the importance of distinguishing between uncertainty in a series and its conditional volatility.  Speciﬁcally, properly
measuring uncertainty requires to remove the forecastable component of the considered series before computing the conditional
volatility.  In this sense, uncertainty in a series is not equivalent to
the conditional volatility of the raw series.  Another important characteristic of Jurado Name’s (2015) approach is that macroeconomic
uncertainty is deﬁned as the common variation in uncertainty across
many series rather than uncertainty related to any single series.  This
is in line with the uncertainty-based business cycle theories which
implicitly assume a common variation in uncertainty across a large
number of series. 
Accordingly, to provide a consistent measure of macroeconomic
uncertainty, we follow the deﬁnition of Jurado Name (2015) by linking
uncertainty to predictability.  Speciﬁcally, the h-period-ahead uncertainty in the variable yjt ∈ Yt =
is deﬁned as the
conditional volatility Uy
jt(h) of the purely unforecastable component
of the future value of the series. 
See Bloom (2009), Bloom Name (2010), Fernández-Villaverde Name (2011), Bloom
Name (2012), Gilchrist Name (2014), andBaker Name (2015) among others. 
where j = 1, .  .  .  , Ny, E(. | Jt) is the conditional expectation of the considered variable and Jt denotes the information set available at time
t.  Uncertainty related to the variable yjt+h is therefore deﬁned as the
expectation of the squared error forecast.  Aggregating over j individual uncertainty measures Uy
jt(h) equally weighted by wj leads to the
following expression of aggregate or macroeconomic uncertainty. 
As discussed by Jurado Name (2015), the estimation of Eqs.  (1) and
(2) requires three fundamental steps.  The ﬁrst step is to replace the
conditional expectation E[yjt+h| Jt] in Eq.  (1) by a forecast in order
to compute forecast errors.  It is a crucial step since the forecastable
component should be then removed from the conditional volatility computation.  To do so, an as rich as possible predictive model
based on factors from a large set of N predictors {Xit}, i = 1, .  .  .  , N, is
considered, taking the following approximated form. 
Xit = KF(cid. 3)
where Ft is a rf × 1 vector of latent common factors, KF
i is the vector of latent factor loadings, and eX
it is a vector of idiosyncratic errors
which allows for some cross-sectional correlations.  To account for
time-varying omitted-information bias, Jurado Name (2015) further
include estimated factors, as well as nonlinear functions of these factors in the forecasting model through a diffusion forecast index.  The
second step consists of (i) deﬁning the h-step-ahead forecast error
(cid. 14), and (ii) estimating the related conditional volatility, namely E
.  To account for time-varying
volatility in the errors of the predictor variables, E
is recursively multistep-ahead computed for h > 1. 8 In the third,
ﬁnal step, macroeconomic uncertainty Uy
t (h) is constructed from the
individual uncertainty measures Uy
jt(h) through an equally-weighted
average. 
Using large datasets on economic activity, Jurado Name (2015)
provide two types of uncertainty measures that are as free as possible from both the restrictions of theoretical models and/or dependencies on a handful of economic indicators.  The ﬁrst one is the
“common macroeconomic uncertainty” based on the information
contained in hundreds of primarily macroeconomic and ﬁnancial
monthly indicators,9 and the second one is the “common microeconomic uncertainty” based on 155 quarterly ﬁrm-level observations
on proﬁt growth normalized by sales. 10 In addition, with the proposed measures deﬁned for different values of h, they allow us
to investigate uncertainty transmission in commodity markets for
distinct maturities. 
2. 2.  Endogenous and exogenous components of uncertainty. 
One important issue when investigating the impact of macroeconomic uncertainty on commodity prices is to understand the
intrinsic nature of uncertainty with respect to prices.  In other words,
it is important to disentangle the endogenous and exogenous components of macroeconomic uncertainty (i. e. , whether macroeconomic
uncertainty is demand-driven or supply-driven with respect to
commodity prices).  Since 1974, the price of oil—as the price of
other commodities—has become endogenous with respect to global
macroeconomic conditions (see Alquist Name, 2013).  Since then,
the empirical literature has provided overwhelming evidence that
commodity prices have been driven by global demand shocks. 11 As
pointed out by Barsky and Kilian (2002), the 1973–74 episode of dramatic surge in the price of oil and industrial commodities is the most
striking example where the price increase was explained for 25% by
exogenous events and for 75% by shifts in the demand side.  With the
predominant role of ﬂow demand on prices, another important channel of transmission is the role of expectations in the physical market
(see among others, Kilian, 2009.  Alquist and Kilian, 2010.  andKilian,
2014).  The underlying idea is that anyone who expects the price to
increase in the future will be prompted to store oil now for future
use leading to a shock from the demand of oil inventories.  Kilian and
Murphy (2014) demonstrate that shifts in expectations through oil
inventories have played an important role during the oil price surge
in 1979 and 1990, and the price collapse in 1986. 12
The aggregate speciﬁcation of our proxy has the particularity to
be “global”, accounting for a lot of information regarding uncertainty
in the supply and demand channels.  While it is quite diﬃcult in this
framework to identify the proportion of unanticipated demand or
supply, some reasonable assumptions about the effect of demand and
supply shocks on prices may give us some insight about the mechanisms behind the relationship between macroeconomic uncertainty
and commodity prices.  In our analysis, we follow the dominant view
about the endogenous nature of commodity prices with respect to
macroeconomic conditions, considering the aggregate demand channel as a primary source of price ﬂuctuations (see Mabro, 1998.  Barsky
and Kilian, 2002, 2004 .  Kilian, 2008a.  and Hamilton, 2009).  In line
with the previous literature, we therefore assume that exogenous
events coming from the supply channel—such as cartel decisions,
oil embargoes or the effects of political uncertainty from the Middle East—are secondary, being mainly an indirect consequence of
the macroeconomic environment.  By construction, our approach
accounts for both channels, the demand channel being a direct effect
of macroeconomic aggregate and the supply channel an indirect effect
of macroeconomic conditions on exogenous events.  In other words,
our macroeconomic uncertainty proxy primarily reﬂects uncertainty
about the demand side. 13
2. 3.  Backward-looking vs.  forward-looking uncertainty. 
As previously discussed, it is quite diﬃcult to approximate uncertainty because it is not observable.  One important issue regarding
usual proxies based on conditional volatility is that they are
often backward-looking, whereas investors’ expectations tend to be
forward-looking (Kilian and Vigfusson, 2011).  As an illustrative purpose, Fig.  1 provides a comparison between three uncertainty proxies. 
Speciﬁcally, the green line is the conditional volatility estimated from
a one-month GARCH(1,1) process for the U. S.  GDP growth,14 the blue
line is the VXO stock market volatility index of Bloom (2009), and the
red line is the common macroeconomic uncertainty proxy of Jurado
Name (2015).  the gray bands corresponding to the NBER recession
dates.  Looking at the recent ﬁnancial crisis, all proxies identify this
episode as an important source of macroeconomic uncertainty since
a peak occurred for each series around 2008.  However, some systematic differences regarding the identiﬁed macroeconomic uncertainty
periods can be highlighted.  The measure based on the GARCH speciﬁcation starts to peak in January 2009, while the VXO index begins
to peak in May 2008.  The implied volatility proxy is therefore more
forward-looking than the one based on the conditional variance. 
Meanwhile, the proxy developed by Jurado Name (2015) peaks in
June 2007, pointing out that it is the most forward-looking measure. 
Moreover, comparing periods of uncertainty for each proxy with
NBER recession dates (December 2007–June 2009), we ﬁnd that
both GARCH and VXO proxies are too backward-looking, while the
macroeconomic uncertainty proxy we use peaks just few months
before the starting date of the recession.  In other words, our retained
measure of macroeconomic uncertainty that accounts for forwardlooking behavior of agents (whatever the maturity considered) is
the most appropriate one, and other approaches usually erroneously
attribute to uncertainty ﬂuctuations that are actually predictable. 
Jurado Name (2015) have further documented that shocks to macroeconomic uncertainty lead to an increase in the VXO index, the reverse
effect being not veriﬁed. 
The concept of uncertainty is basically related to the perception of agents about potential future evolutions.  Together with the
notion of time variability, it implies that different horizons lead
to distinct perceptions of uncertainty, and thus disparate economic
behaviors.  As shown by Jurado Name (2015), uncertainty is generally higher for medium- and long-run maturities (respectively 3
and 12 months) than for short-run horizons (1 month).  In addition,
the relative importance of macroeconomic uncertainty in the total
uncertainty (i. e. , uncertainty accounting for all series) grows as the
forecast horizon increases.  Accounting for the maturity is thus of
great importance to fully apprehend the impact of uncertainty on
macroeconomic dynamics.  As shown by Jurado Name (2015), uncertainty shocks with shorter uncertainty horizons tend to be associated
with a larger fraction of the forecast error variance in aggregates than
those with longer uncertainty horizons. 
In the context of commodity prices and especially oil prices, the
discussion is of primary importance.  The ongoing debate in the literature about the effect of maturity has been mainly oriented toward
the consequences of oil price uncertainty on economic activity.  Kilian
and Vigfusson (2011) provide an interesting comparison between
the long-run theoretical uncertainty measure of Bernanke (1983)
and Pindyck (1991), and the empirical short-run uncertainty proxy
of Elder and Serletis (2010).  According to the authors, the former
deﬁnition is related to uncertainty at horizons relevant to investment
decisions, while the latter is more appropriate to capture the reallocation effect of Hamilton (1988) since it measures the current real oil
price volatility.  Clearly, the effect of oil price uncertainty on activity
depends on the impact of the oil price on investment, but also on how
companies face to uncertainty regarding their investment decision
plans.  Indeed, depending on the sectors, the delay from the investment decision to the beginning of the production can differ, and
short-run uncertainty can thus have no impact for long-run investment strategies.  All in all, accounting for the effect of maturity when
investigating the impact of uncertainty is thus of crucial importance. 
<Middle> Data and model speciﬁcation. 
3. 1.  Data. 
We consider a large dataset of 19 principal commodity markets,
classiﬁed into four categories.  energy, precious metals, agriculture,
and industry.  Related price series are monthly, starting in October
1978 for energy markets, February 1976 for precious metals markets, and February 1980 for agricultural and industrial markets.  The
period ends in April 2015 for all groups of commodities.  All series are
transformed into ﬁrst-logarithmic differences (i. e. , price returns),17
as described in Table 1 in Appendix A, which also provides data
sources. 
Turning to macroeconomic uncertainty measures for distinct
maturities, we rely on data freely available on Ludvigson’s
homepage. 18 As stressed above, these uncertainty indexes are based
on the information contained in several macroeconomic and ﬁnancial series.  Speciﬁcally, two monthly datasets are considered.  The
ﬁrst one gathers together 132 macroeconomic time series used in
Ludvigson and Ng (2010) and extracted from the FRED-MD monthly
database,19 including real output and income, employment and
hours, real retail, manufacturing and trade sales, consumer spending,
housing starts, inventories and inventory sales ratios, orders and
unﬁlled orders, compensation and labor costs, capacity utilization
measures, price indexes, bond and stock market indexes, and foreign
exchange measures.  The second dataset consists of 147 time series
of ﬁnancial indicators that measure the behavior of a broad crosssection of asset returns and some aggregate ﬁnancial indicators not
contained in the ﬁrst, macroeconomic dataset.  This ﬁnancial dataset
includes dividend-price and earning-price ratios, growth rates of
aggregate dividends and prices, default and term spreads, yields on
corporate bonds of different ratings grades, yields on Treasuries and
yield spreads, and a broad cross-section of industry equity returns. 20
In constructing the factors (see Eq.  (3)), the raw data have been transformed to achieve stationarity.  Finally, it is worth mentioning that
whereas both sets of data are used to estimate the forecasting factors,
macroeconomic uncertainty is proxied using the 132 macroeconomic time series only.  Indeed, as explained by Jurado Name (2015),
uncertainties in the 147 ﬁnancial indicators are not computed since
the macroeconomic dataset already contains some ﬁnancial series,
and the authors do not wish to over-represent the ﬁnancial sector in
the aggregate uncertainty measure. 
As shown by Jurado Name (2015), their measure of macroeconomic
uncertainty exhibits a quantitatively important dynamic relationship
with global economic activity, as well as with business cycles.  Indeed,
common macroeconomic uncertainty shocks are much larger associated with a decline in real activity (production, hours worked and
employment) than are shocks to stock market volatility.  In addition,
macroeconomic uncertainty is evidenced to be (i) highly countercyclical, explaining a larger part of total uncertainty during recessions than in other periods, and (ii) strongly more persistent than
usual uncertainty proxies.  Overall, according to Jurado Name (2015),
important macroeconomic uncertainty shocks are strongly linked to
changes in economic activity, and even more during recessions. 
Finally, an appealing characteristic is that our retained uncertainty measures have the advantage of providing far fewer important
uncertainty episodes than do popular proxies.  As an example, though
Bloom (2009) identiﬁes 17 uncertainty periods based on stock
market volatility, Jurado Name (2015) ﬁnd evidence of only three
episodes of uncertainty over the 1959–2011 period.  the month
surrounding the 1973–74 and 1981–82 recessions and the recent
2007–09 great recession.  This suggests that much variability in the
stock market does not come from changes in genuine uncertainty
across the broader economy.  in other words, much of the variation
in traditional uncertainty proxies is not driven by uncertainty itself. 
Such variability may come from other factors as changes in risk aversion, sentiments, leverages, etc.  As stressed above, this ﬁnding can be
explained by the fact that (i) standard proxies tend to overestimate
the weight of a single series in the evaluation of macroeconomic
uncertainty, and (ii) popular uncertainty proxies based on volatility
measures usually erroneously attribute to uncertainty ﬂuctuations
that are actually forecastable. 
Overall, our considered macroeconomic uncertainty proxy identiﬁes fewer uncertainty episodes than usual volatility-based measures,
but when such periods occur, they display higher and more persistent correlation with real activity.  These developments highlight the
relevance of considering predictability rather than volatility when
assessing the uncertainty–macroeconomy relationship. 
3. 2.  Structural threshold VAR model. 
To analyze whether uncertainty affects commodity prices’ behavior depending on the level of uncertainty, we consider that uncertainty may be a nonlinear propagator of shocks across markets,
captured by a structural threshold vector autoregressive model. 21 A
threshold VAR model is a nonlinear multivariate system of equations
that models nonlinearity additively and can be estimated by OLS. 
In addition to providing an intuitive way to capture the nonlinear effects of uncertainty on markets, the TVAR model has the
advantage of endogenously identifying different uncertainty states. 
Indeed, according to this speciﬁcation, observations can be divided,
for example, into two states delimited by a threshold reached by
uncertainty, with estimated coeﬃcients that vary depending on the
considered state (low- and high-uncertainty states).  In other words,
the TVAR speciﬁcation allows uncertainty states to switch as a result
of shocks to commodity markets. 
For each of our four groups of commodity markets, we consider a
structural TVAR model of the form. 
where Yt is a vector of endogenous variables containing both the
price returns of all commodities belonging to the considered group
(energy, precious metals, industry, and agriculture) and the measure of macroeconomic uncertainty,22 A1 and A2 reﬂect the structural
contemporaneous relationships in the two states, respectively, B1(L)
and B2(L) are lag polynomial matrices, l1 and l2 are vectors of constants, and ut denotes the vector of orthogonalized error terms.  ct−d
is the d-lagged threshold variable, which is a function of uncertainty
(this hypothesis is discussed and tested below, as well as the choice
of the optimal value of d).  It(ct−d ≥ c) is an indicator function that
equals 1 when ct−d ≥ c and 0 otherwise, where c denotes the
threshold uncertainty critical value that has to be endogenously estimated.  In other words, two states are identiﬁed.  the low-uncertainty
state corresponding to a weak degree of uncertainty (It(. ) = 0)
and the high-uncertainty state related to a high degree of uncertainty (It(. ) = 1).  As shown by Eq.  (4), the coeﬃcients of the TVAR
model are allowed to change across states depending on the level of
uncertainty. 
An essential step in TVAR approach is to test for the existence of
a threshold effect with respect to uncertainty.  However, the testing
procedure is not straightforward because under the null hypothesis of no threshold effect, the threshold value is not known a priori
and has to be estimated. 23 Here, the threshold is determined endogenously by a grid search over all possible values of the threshold
variable where the grid is trimmed at a lower and upper bound to
ensure a suﬃcient number of data points for the estimation procedure in each regime. 24 To test for a threshold effect, we rely on nonstandard inference and estimate the model by least squares for all
possible threshold values.  Conditionally to each possible threshold,
we generate three Wald-type statistics using Hansen’s (1996) simulation method to test the null hypothesis of no difference between
states.  the maximum Wald statistic over all possible threshold values
(sup-Wald), the average Wald statistic over all possible values (avgWald), and a function of the sum of exponential Wald statistics
(exp-Wald).  Because the asymptotic distribution of Wald statistics is
nonstandard, we use Hansen’s (1996) bootstrap procedure to simulate the related distribution and conduct inference.  The estimated
threshold values are those that maximize the log-determinant of the
variance-covariance matrix of residuals. 
Once the TVAR speciﬁcation is estimated, another important
concern consists in analyzing nonlinear impulse-response functions
(IRFs).  In a nonlinear setup, impulse responses are more complicated than in standard linear VAR models because responses to a
shock are history-dependent.  Indeed, in a linear framework impulse
responses are computed under the assumption that shocks hit the
series only at a particular point in time (i. e. , neither before, nor during
the forecasting horizon).  Unlike the standard framework, in our case
the reaction of the endogenous variable to a shock depends on the
past history, the state of the economy and the size and the sign of
all the shocks hitting the economy within the period of interest.  In
order to average out the inﬂuences of shocks on the system, we compute generalized impulse-response functions (GIRFs, see Koop Name,
1996).  By relying on data simulation depending on the regime of the
system at the time of the shock hits the variables, this approach has
the advantage to allow for regime-dependent responses, as well as
to look at the effects of shocks of different sizes and directions. 
A GIRF can be deﬁned by the following expression. 
GIRFy (h, Yt−1, ut) = E [yt+h | Yt−1, ut] − E [yt+h | Yt−1]where Yt−1 is the information set at time t − 1 andu t is a particular realization of exogenous shocks.  The response of the variable y at
horizon h is calculated by simulating the evolution of the model conditionally on the initial condition Yt−1 and a given realization of ut. 
The general idea is to simulate the model for any possible starting
point in the time horizon.  We do this by drawing vectors of shocks
ut+j with j = 1, .  .  .  , k, and simulating the model conditionally on the
initial condition and given realization.  We repeat the procedure for
−ut+j in order to eliminate any asymmetry that may arise from sampling variation in the draws of ut+j.  The approach is repeated 500
times.  In order to generate IRFs conditionally to the location of the
system with respect to the threshold variable, the simulations are
repeated for several histories depending on the considered regime. 
Finally, the response to shocks speciﬁc to a particular regime is the
estimated conditional expectation based upon the average of the
simulation results. 
3. 3.  Endogeneity and strict exogeneity between macroeconomic and
commodity prices. 
As mentioned above, another complication when estimating
TVAR models concerns the endogeneity issue.  Endogeneity may
come from the fact that the threshold variable (our uncertainty
measure) is allowed to endogenously respond to commodity price
shocks.  One way to address this problem is to assume strict
exogeneity between variables.  However, as discussed by Van Robays
(2013) among others, assuming strict exogeneity between oil prices
(and commodity prices in general) and macroeconomic uncertainty
is not realistic because it is well known that a strong relationship
exists between the oil market and economic activity.  Therefore, a
common approach is to impose the threshold variable to switch
across states with a delay.  This implies that we only evaluate commodity price shocks that occur within a certain state.  Another
common assumption in the TVAR literature is to deﬁne the threshold
variable as a moving average process that requires some persistence in the variation of the threshold variable before shocks cause
the regime switching.  To fully address the issue of endogeneity, we
combine these two approaches in the present paper by considering
a three-period moving average of our one-period-lagged threshold
variable. 26
4.  Uncertainty transmission across states. 
We now use the TVAR approach to apprehend the impact of
macroeconomic uncertainty on commodity prices.  We ﬁrst present
threshold test results and related comments.  We then complement
the analysis by conducting nonlinear IRF analysis under high- and
low-uncertainty states to investigate whether the transmission of
macroeconomic uncertainty shocks into commodity markets differs
across states.  Finally, we assess the inﬂuence of the considered
maturity. 
4. 1.  Threshold test results. 
Tables 2 to 5 in Appendix A report the three threshold test
results for each group of commodity markets at different maturities
together with the “percentage of high uncertainty” corresponding to
the percentage of observations such that the threshold variable is
above the estimated threshold critical value. 27 Our main results can
be summarized as follows. 
First, the null hypothesis is always rejected in favor of the
presence of threshold effects for each group of markets and the
maturity considered.  The TVAR speciﬁcation is thus appropriate
because it accounts for varying effects of uncertainty depending on
the degree of uncertainty.  Second, the estimated threshold values
increase with the maturity, meaning that as h increases, the switching mechanism between low- and high-uncertainty states is delayed. 
This ﬁnding reﬂects a different perception of the level of uncertainty as the horizon increases (Bloom, 2014) and is also consistent
with Jurado Name’s (2015) conclusions, highlighting that the level
of uncertainty tends to augment along with the maturity.  Third,
turning to the percentage of high uncertainty, the results deserve
some detailed comments.  Whatever the maturity considered, agricultural and industrial markets display the highest percentages,
whereas energy and precious metals markets are characterized by
similar lower values.  Moreover, high-uncertainty percentage values
are quite stable, regardless of the considered maturity for the latter
two markets.  Regarding precious metals, this result can be explained
by their safe-haven role across all horizons during times of economic turmoil (Bredin Name, 2014), making them an interesting tool
to transfer short-run uncertainty to longer one.  Concerning energy
markets, the limited substitution effects at relatively short-term
horizons may explain the stability of the high-uncertainty percentage values.  Indeed, whereas consumers’ demand for energy may
potentially slightly decrease following its corresponding price rise,
this dynamics is weakened by limited substitution opportunities.  It
may be more accentuated at longer horizons but two brakes will
be at play.  First, such movement would take some time to be truly
effective given the required important investments needed in the
energy domain.  Second, the substitution effect is limited by the socalled rebound effect.  an improvement in energy eﬃciency leads to
a decline in the cost of energy use, canceling the substitution effect. 
Turning to agricultural markets, this sector is highly sensitive to
the unexpected changes in economy (Baumeister and Kilian, 2014),
explaining why the high-uncertainty percentage value is higher at
the short-run, one-month maturity.  In the case of agricultural and
energy markets, the role of storage could be emphasized.  Indeed,
storage capacities are somewhat more ﬂexible on energy markets
than on agricultural markets in the sense that a large part of agricultural products needs to be extracted at ﬁxed dates.  This may explain
why highest percentages of uncertainty are observed for agricultural
markets compared to energy ones.  Finally, the observation that the
percentage of high uncertainty increases with the maturity in the
case of industrial markets results from the sensitivity of this sector
to structural factors that are more at play in the long run.  Indeed,
to design proper R&D investment strategies, ﬁrms usually have to
focus on longer horizons.  Fourth, the evolution of the percentage
of high uncertainty according to the value of h also provides useful information regarding the sensitivity of commodity markets to
the level and variability of uncertainty.  Indeed, as shown by Jurado
Name (2015), the level of uncertainty increases with h, whereas its
variability is a decreasing function of h because the forecast value
tends to the unconditional mean as the forecast horizon tends to
inﬁnity.  Consequently, the percentage of high uncertainty in agricultural markets seems to be more sensitive to the variability of
uncertainty (short-run uncertainty), but for industrial markets, this
percentage increases with h and seems to be more sensitive to the
level (long-run uncertainty). 
Fig.  1B in Appendix B presents these ﬁndings in a more dynamic
way by showing the evolution of our macroeconomic uncertainty
measure at one month over the whole period together with the corresponding threshold value.  For almost all markets, periods of high
uncertainty coincide with episodes of heightened macroeconomic
uncertainty, such as the 1981–82 and 2007–09 recessions.  In addition and as expected given our preceding arguments (see Section 3),
we identify a few high-uncertainty episodes compared with studies
that rely on standard volatility-type proxies, such as Bloom (2009)
and Van Robays (2013). 
4. 2.  Nonlinear impulse-response function analysis. 
Figs.  1C to 4C in Appendix C depict the impact of macroeconomic uncertainty for h = 1 on each commodity price return series. 
As shown, four lines are displayed, corresponding to positive and
negative nonlinear IRFs under high- and low-uncertainty states following a two-standard-deviation macroeconomic uncertainty shock. 
For almost all series and as expected, positive macroeconomic uncertainty shocks (i. e. ,increase in macroeconomic uncertainty) affect
commodity price returns negatively on average, whereas negative
shocks (i. e. , decrease in macroeconomic uncertainty) impact price
returns positively on average.  This is a quite logical result, conﬁrming that Jurado Name’s (2015) macroeconomic uncertainty proxy
is clearly countercyclical.  Moreover, the IRF analysis puts forward
asymmetric behavior.  Indeed, the impact of macroeconomic uncertainty is generally stronger in high-uncertainty states compared with
low-uncertainty states, with commodity price returns being more
sensitive to events that lessen the predictability of macroeconomic
variables.  These ﬁndings illustrate the interest of the TVAR speciﬁcation by showing that the impact of macroeconomic uncertainty on
commodity markets depends on its intensity. 
At a more detailed level, considering the cases of energy and precious metals, the responses of oil, gold, platinum, and silver markets
are unequivocal because price returns strongly react to macroeconomic uncertainty shocks in high-uncertainty states (between 4%
to 7% for oil, gold and platinum and approximately 10% for silver). 
Moreover, though the responses to positive and negative shocks are
quite persistent (eight months) and symmetric for oil and platinum,
the responses of gold and, to a lesser extent, silver are more transient (approximately four months) and asymmetric.  The safe-haven
role of gold and silver markets during periods of economic downturn could be one plausible explanation about the rapid overshooting
reaction of both prices.  Recall that the proxy is countercyclical meaning that increases in uncertainty correspond to recessionary periods. 
Therefore, for gold and silver prices two effects seem to be at play. 
(i) macroeconomic uncertainty decreases the general price level
since the economy is in recession, and (ii) after a certain delay,
the safe-haven role of precious metals leads to rapid strong overshooting behaviors.  The main drivers of oil and platinum markets
are sensitive to macroeconomic uncertainty shocks because they
are strongly related to economic activity through industry purposes. 
A different pattern is observed for the gas market, for which the
response to macroeconomic uncertainty shocks is more important in
low-uncertainty states.  The regional organization of this market may
explain its relatively weak sensitivity to high macroeconomic uncertainty.  Turning to the industrial and agricultural sectors, all industrial
markets but the zinc follow quite similar patterns signiﬁcantly reacting to uncertainty, as do agricultural markets with the exception of
coffee—which is a highly volatile market—and, to a lesser extent,
sugar and wheat. 
4. 3.  Does maturity matter. 
Examining the inﬂuence of maturity when investigating the
impact of uncertainty on prices is of particular importance given the
multiple channels and different effects at play at short-, medium-,
and long-run horizons (see Bloom, 2014 for a review).  Understanding
the maturity perception in assessing uncertainty is also of primary
importance for commodity prices since maturity may capture different behaviors.  For instance, short- and medium-run uncertainty
may capture a kind of reallocation effect (Hamilton, 1988) since such
maturities focus on current behaviors, while a long-run perception
of uncertainty may be more related to Bernanke’s (1983) framework
because it corresponds to horizons relevant to purchase and investment decisions. 28 Our results in Section 4. 1 give us a ﬁrst insight
about the static sensitivity of prices to maturity. 
Turning now to the dynamic analysis, Fig.  1D in Appendix D
reports the average (per group of markets) cumulative responses of
prices to positive high uncertainty two-standard deviations shocks
at maturity h.  As before, three values of h are considered—namely, 1,
3 and 12 months.  The results are consistent with those of Section 4. 1
revealing that maturity matters for some markets.  Though the percentage of high uncertainty is quite stable across maturity for energy
and precious metals markets, the responses of both groups to a positive shock are quite similar giving more importance to the short-run
effect.  While the impact of short-run uncertainty is clear for energy
markets (in line with the close relationship that exists between
energy and economic activity in the short run), the response of
precious metals markets seems to be more sensitive to long-run
uncertainty after a certain delay. 29 The speciﬁc behavior of precious
metals markets may come from the well-known safe-haven property
transferring uncertainty at 1 month to longer horizons (12 months). 
For industrial markets the conclusion is more straightforward, uncertainty at longer maturity (h = 12) has a greater immediate impact
on price returns, conﬁrming the high sensitivity of such markets to
structural factors and the reactiveness of industrial ﬁrms to horizons
relevant to long-run investments.  Regarding the agricultural sector,
markets also appear to be more sensitive to long-run uncertainty,
which is quite logical since agricultural ﬁrms may face longer horizons with respect to agricultural investment decisions.  On the whole,
the important point regarding the impact on commodity prices is
not only the percentage of high uncertainty but also how shocks
are incorporated into the system and, in turn, their implications for
economic behaviors. 
5.  Does macroeconomic uncertainty generate
commodity uncertainty. 
To provide a complete description of the links between macroeconomic uncertainty and commodity markets, we go a step further
and investigate how macroeconomic uncertainty can affect each
commodity market uncertainty.  To this end, we must deﬁne an
uncertainty measure for each market and then assess the transmission mechanism of macroeconomic uncertainty to each speciﬁc
commodity market uncertainty. 
5. 1.  Measuring commodity market uncertainty. 
Let us ﬁrst consider the determination of the commodity market
uncertainty proxy.  We rely on Eq.  (1) and proceed in two steps.  In a
ﬁrst step, we use the previously estimated TVAR model to generate
the h-period-ahead forecast of the considered price return series,
accounting for the information about macroeconomic uncertainty. be the obtained forecast, where y is the considered commodity price return series, Jt the information set available
at time t, andu u
t the macroeconomic uncertainty shock at time t.  As
seen, our forecast value accounts for information about macroeconomic uncertainty.  Given this forecast, we deﬁne in a second step
the h-period-ahead forecast error as the difference between yt+h
, the forecast that accounts for information aboutmacroeconomic uncertainty.  The underlying idea is that a way to
understand the transmission mechanism of macroeconomic uncertainty to commodity markets is to assess how the forecast of our
considered variable changes if we add information about macroeconomic uncertainty.  The commodity market uncertainty measure is
then given by the volatility of this forecast error. 
To account for the volatility-clustering phenomenon, which is
a typical feature of commodity markets, we rely on time-varying
volatility speciﬁcations and consider the moving average stochastic
volatility model developed by Chan and Jeliazkov (2009) and Chan
and Hsiao (2013) given by,
where xt denotes the forecast error, i. e. , the difference between the
forecast of y that does not account for information about macroeconomic uncertainty and the forecast that accounts for such information.  The error term vt is assumed to be serially dependent, following
a MA(q) process of the form,
where et ∼ N
are independent of each
other, e0 = e−1 =.  .  .  = e−q+1 =0, and the roots of the polynomial
associated with the MA coeﬃcients x = (x1, .  .  .  , xq)(cid. 3) are assumed
to be outside the unit circle.  ht is the log-volatility evolving as a stationary AR(1) process.  Following Chan and Hsiao (2013), under the
moving average extension, the conditional variance of the series xt is
given by. 
This speciﬁcation allows us to capture two nonlinear channels
of macroeconomic uncertainty.  (i) the one coming from the moving
average of the q + 1 most recent variances eht + .  .  .  + eht−q, and
(ii) the other from the AR(1) log-volatility stationary process given
by Eq.  (8). 
Given the challenge of estimating this kind of nonlinear model
due to high-dimensional and nonstandard data—with the conditional density of the states being non-Gaussian—a Bayesian estimation using Markov chain Monte Carlo methods is hardly tractable. 
We follow Chan and Hsiao (2013) and estimate the conditional variance of forecast errors by band-matrix algorithms instead of using
conventional methods based on the Kalman ﬁlter. 31
5. 2.  Transmission of macroeconomic uncertainty to commodity
market uncertainty. 
Figs.  1E to 4E in Appendix E depict the evolution of uncertainty
in commodity markets for 1 month (blue line), together with the
evolution of corresponding prices (black line) and volatility (green
line).  The horizontal bar corresponds to 1. 65 standard deviation
above the mean of each commodity-related uncertainty series.  When
uncertainty in commodity markets exceeds the horizontal bar, this
refers to episodes of heightened uncertainty for the considered price
return series.  When commodity price uncertainty coincides with the
vertical gray bands, it indicates a potential transfer from macroeconomic to commodity market uncertainty (with both uncertainty
episodes occurring in the same period). 32 Otherwise, uncertainty
is attributable to the own characteristics of the considered raw
materials market. 
Consider ﬁrst the case of energy markets.  As shown in Fig.  1E
(Appendix E), the sensitivity of oil price uncertainty to macroeconomic uncertainty differs depending on the retained period, highlighting that oil shocks do not all follow the same pattern.  For
example, the period that just follows the invasion of Kuwait in 1990,
the Afghan war in 2001, and the Iraq War in 2002–03 are episodes
characterized by sharp spikes in oil prices.  The Iran-Iraq war in 1980
and the 1999 OPEC meeting are, in contrast, associated with small
price movements.  As stressed by Barsky and Kilian (2004), a simplistic view should be that major war episodes cause price uncertainty
to increase through a rise in precautionary demand for oil.  However,
among all episodes of important ﬂuctuations in oil prices, only two
seem to be accompanied by uncertainty. 33 (i) the 2007–09 recession,
and (ii) the 1984–86 period.  During the 2007–09 recession, oil price
uncertainty is indeed very sensitive to macroeconomic uncertainty,
a result that is not surprising given the well-known relationship that
exists between economic activity and the oil market. 34 This episode
of high oil price uncertainty is accompanied by the biggest oil price
spike in the postwar experience and results from various macroeconomic factors.  A common explanation lies in the global economic
growth starting in 2003, as illustrated by the increase in real gross
world product combined with the stagnant oil production from Saudi
Arabia from 2005 to 2007. 35 Whatever the origin of price surges,
this period of macroeconomic uncertainty is reﬂected in oil market
uncertainty by an unprecedented oil price increase.  The 1984–86
period is also characterized by heightened oil price uncertainty, but
it does not coincide with macroeconomic uncertainty.  This episode
seems to be related to the conjunction of two events.  (i) the production shutdown in Saudi Arabia between 1981 and 1985, which
caused a strong price decrease. 36 and to a lesser extent (ii) the OPEC
collapse in 1986.  On the whole, our results are in line with the literature that has recently stressed the limited impact of exogenous
events on oil price ﬂuctuations.  Another interesting period is the one
from June 2014 up to now where the WTI crude oil price has fallen
from US$ 105. 8 to around US$ 40 per barrel.  Most of this decline
appeared between June 2014 and January 2015 where the price fell
by nearly 44% leading to severe economic stress on oil producers. 
Because sustained declines in the price of oil are rare events, many
observers and authors have conjectured that unexpected factors speciﬁc to the oil market have played an important role.  Arezki and Blanchard (2014), for example, attribute a large part of the steep decline
in the price of oil to a shift in expectations about the future path of
global oil production (especially from the Libyan and Iraqi oil production, and the OPEC November 2014 announcement).  Competing
with this view, Baumeister and Kilian (2016) suggest that more than
half of the observed decline was predictable and must reﬂect the
cumulative effect of earlier oil demand and supply shocks.  Looking at
our oil price uncertainty indicator reveals that, whatever the origin
of the oil price slump, most of the decline was predictable until the
end of our sample (April 2015) with no particular episode of uncertainty.  Turning to gas, the conclusion is somewhat different given the
well-known regional organization of the market which may exempt
the price from several international shocks.  Results indeed show that
macroeconomic uncertainty does not generate uncertainty in the
gas market.  In particular, we do not observe heightened movements
during the 2007–09 recession conﬁrming that the gas price should
be more inﬂuenced by microeconomic events related to industrial
considerations.  Some exceptions can be highlighted in 1996, 2001,
and 2005, where the gas market experienced short-lived periods of
price increase and strong volatility.  These events are however more
related to extreme climatic events (unusually cold weather in 1996
and the Katrina/Rita hurricanes in 2005) and do not lead to episodes
of extreme uncertainty (Kilian, 2010). 
As discussed by Jurado Name (2015) and conﬁrmed by
our previous analysis, macroeconomic uncertainty is strongly
countercyclical,37 roughly doubling in importance during recessions. 
Given the role of precious metals (especially gold and silver) as
safe havens and hedging instruments during ﬁnancial and macroeconomic turmoils, their prices are often countercyclical as well (see
Christie-David Name, 2000.  Roache and Rossi, 2009.  Creti Name, 2013)
and should increase in periods of macroeconomic uncertainty, at
least in the short run.  Regarding the 2007–09 recession, it seems
(Fig.  2E in Appendix E) that increases in gold and silver prices
were largely anticipated because the related uncertainty remained
relatively low.  In other words, macroeconomic uncertainty did not
spread to precious metals markets.  This ﬁnding conﬁrms the safeheaven role of gold and silver given that macroeconomic uncertainty
surrounding the global crisis pushed up their prices, but did not
induce uncertainty in their respective markets.  However, at the
beginning of the 1980s, the high-uncertainty period associated with
gold and silver prices coincided with the 1981–82 recession.  The
gold market, which is often used as a hedging instrument against
inﬂation pressures, experienced huge movements in 1980 due to the
continued stop-and-go monetary policy of the Fed raising its rate
to 20%, then lowering it to 8%, and augmenting it again to 20%. 38
Uncertainty in the gold price was further ampliﬁed in 1981, when
Reagan decided to establish a Gold Commission to reject the return
of the United States to the gold standard system, leading the Fed to
implement a contractionary policy that reduced inﬂation but favored
recession.  Other events likely to inﬂuence gold prices, such as the
bombing of the Twin Towers in September 2001 or the launch of
the Electronic Trading Funds (ETF’s) in the gold market in 2003,
do not lead to price uncertainty.  The silver price displays a similar
behavior as the gold price, but uncertainty appears to be ampliﬁed, particularly at the beginning of the 1980s.  Among the several
causes of silver price movements, various political events—including
the continuous U. S.  hostage crisis in Iran and the Soviet invasion
of Afghanistan—motivated an increasing demand for silver, keeping
the price at relatively high levels in 1980 and leading to high uncertainty in the silver market.  Another well-known episode affecting the
silver price evolution around this period is the Hunt Brothers’ story
from the 1970s to the end of the 1980s. 39 The worldwide 1981–82
recession strengthened this period of uncertainty.  The propagation
mechanism at play during this recessionary episode was intrinsically
linked to precious metals markets through inﬂation targeting and
the Fed interest rate policy, contrary to the recent ﬁnancial crisis. 
Unlike gold, which is mainly used in jewelry and as a store of value,
platinum is a crucial resource in industry — automotive industry,
for instance, represented approximately 60% of the total demand
for platinum in 2007 (Johnson Matthey Plc. , 2008).  Its price is thus
strongly related to economic activity, and episodes of high macroeconomic uncertainty tend to affect platinum price uncertainty, as it
was the case during the 2007–09 recession. 
As the oil price, most of industrial markets are strongly connected to global economic activity.  This important link is evidenced
by the transfer of uncertainty from the macroeconomic level to commodity prices, especially for copper, lead, nickel and tin prices (see
Fig.  3E in Appendix E).  For instance, because copper is primarily
employed for industrial purposes40 (such as massive construction
projects, infrastructure renewal, and telecommunication modiﬁcations), it is usually strongly related to global economic activity, and
its price is often used as an indicator of global development.  Therefore, the 2007–09 period of macroeconomic uncertainty is closely
related to copper price uncertainty, as shown in Fig.  3E.  Similar patterns are observed for the other industrial markets, which are also
strongly related to global economic conditions. 
The transfer of macroeconomic uncertainty to agricultural and
food prices uncertainty is of primary importance given the strong
economical, political and social implications for both developing
and developed countries.  The increase in agricultural commodity prices since the mid-2000s has attracted particular attention
among policymakers with regard to a global food shortage and
inﬂationary pressures. 41 Though a popular perception is that higher
agricultural and food prices have been associated in recent years—
especially during the 2007-09 period—with oil price surges, this
general statement has been recently contradicted by Baumeister and
Kilian (2014), who argue that agricultural and food price increases
should not be interpreted as the causal effect of higher oil prices, but
are rather the result of unexpected changes in demand associated
with shifts in global real economic activity.  Our ﬁndings (Fig.  4E in
Appendix E) conﬁrm this interpretation, especially for corn, soybeans
and wheat, for which price uncertainty occurs during the most striking episodes of macroeconomic uncertainty.  Unexpected shifts in
global economic activity would therefore be the main cause of uncertainty in agricultural prices during the 2007–09 recession.  Periods
for which agricultural price uncertainty is not related to macroeconomic uncertainty differ depending on the market.  For instance,
the most salient episode of coffee price uncertainty appears during
1994–97, when the price started a brief recovery after an intense
Brazilian frost episode in 1994, which reduced Brazil’s coffee exports. 
In 1989, the coffee price experienced a volatility spike after the end
of the coffee agreement, but this episode did not lead to uncertainty
because it was largely anticipated.  Another example is the cotton
market, which is characterized by a strong uncertainty episode that
occurred in 2011, with a huge unanticipated price increase that
could be explained by a constellation of events such as gradually
tightening stocks, an unexpected freeze in China’s cotton producing
areas, historic ﬂoods in Pakistan and a ban on exports from India. 
Overall, though the results are obviously somewhat heterogeneous across markets, the recent 2007–09 recession generated an
unprecedented episode of uncertainty in the price of numerous commodities, particularly oil, platinum, various agricultural commodities
and, especially, all industrial raw materials.  The main exception
concerns uncertainty related to gold and silver prices, a fact that
can be explained by their roles as safe havens and hedging instruments.  An additional result is that, as clearly shown by Figs.  1E to
4E in Appendix E, uncertainty episodes are not necessarily accompanied by high volatility in commodity prices.  This major ﬁnding
illustrates the interest of our retained measure of uncertainty, underlining that uncertainty is more related to predictability than to
volatility.  The relevance of the predictability-based approach could
be explained by some speciﬁc properties of the commodity markets. 
In particular, these markets are known to be characterized by a low
elastic demand together with a strong inertial supply, making any
unexpected adjustment diﬃcult and costly. 
5. 3.  Historical decomposition analysis. 
To assess the contribution of macroeconomic uncertainty to
commodity prices uncertainty, we perform a historical decomposition analysis of each commodity market uncertainty with respect
to macroeconomic uncertainty.  Based on the estimation of VAR
models,42 Fig.  1F in Appendix F reports the historical decomposition associated with oil and copper prices uncertainty. 43 Results in
Appendix F conﬁrm those of the previous section.  Indeed, looking
at the crude oil market, we ﬁnd a strong proportion of macroeconomic uncertainty in oil price uncertainty during the recent 2007–09
ﬁnancial crisis (around 35% of oil price uncertainty is explained by
macroeconomic uncertainty during this period).  Recalling that our
proxy of macroeconomic uncertainty is demand-driven, these conclusions are in line with the literature.  During the 1986–87 episode,
oil price uncertainty is not explained by macroeconomic uncertainty
and the proportion of macroeconomic uncertainty appears to be negative.  This suggests that other shocks not related to economic activity
have been at play during this period.  Turning to the copper price, we
also ﬁnd a transfer from macroeconomic uncertainty to price uncertainty, the share of macroeconomic uncertainty being around 12%
during the recent ﬁnancial turmoil.  Overall, these results show that
a signiﬁcant component of price uncertainty can be explained by
macroeconomic uncertainty.  A key ﬁnding is that the recent oil price
movements in 2005–08 associated with a rise in oil price uncertainty
appear to be mainly the consequence of macroeconomic uncertainty,
conﬁrming the endogeneity of the oil price with respect to economic
activity (i. e. , the demand-driven characteristic). 
5. 4.  Distinguishing between different types of shocks.  the special
case of oil. 
As stressed above, macroeconomic uncertainty contributes to a
large extent to price uncertainty.  This result is of primary importance, particularly for the oil market since it shows that oil price
uncertainty during the 2005–08 period can be partly explained by
macroeconomic uncertainty.  Besides, the oil price uncertainty indicator (see Fig.  1E in Appendix E) also reveals that the volatility of
the crude oil price can be sometimes disconnected to price uncertainty, some shocks leading to uncertainty and volatility while some
others not.  One reason could be the origin of price shocks that can
have different impacts on price uncertainty.  Speciﬁcally, four types
of shocks can be distinguished (see, e. g. , Kilian, 2009.  Baumeister and
Peersman, 2013).  (i) shocks to the ﬂow supply of oil, (ii) shocks to
the ﬂow demand for crude oil reﬂecting the state of the global business cycle, (iii) shocks to the speculative demand for oil stocks above
the ground, and (iv) other idiosyncratic oil demand shocks.  These
different shocks may also be reﬂected in the degree of oil price uncertainty movements.  Speciﬁcally, we aim here at investigating which
type of shock contributes the most to oil price uncertainty. 
As it is common in the literature, we proxy the ﬂow supply in
two ways.  by the data on Saudi Arabia crude oil production, and
by the global crude oil production — both series being from the
Energy Information Agency (EIA). 44 Our measure of ﬂuctuations in
global real activity is the dry cargo shipping rate index developed by
Kilian (2009).  Finally, turning to the speculative component of the
oil demand, we rely on data for the U. S.  crude oil inventories provided by the EIA. 45 Fig.  1G in Appendix G allows us to assess the
quantitative importance of each type of shock (supply, demand, and
speculation) on oil price uncertainty.  Results show that the contribution of each shock to price uncertainty varies depending on the
period, and that the nature of the shock matters in explaining oil
price uncertainty.  For instance, while Kilian (2009) identiﬁed the
invasion of Kuwait in 199046 and the Iraq War in 2002–03 47 as
episodes of surges in speculative demand for oil responsible for sharp
price increases, we ﬁnd that these events are not associated with
important oil price uncertainty.  More importantly, the contribution
of the speculative shocks appears to be very limited or even negative
compared to the contribution of ﬂow supply (around 17%) and ﬂow
demand (4%) shocks in 1990. 
Several events in the oil market history have appeared during
the 1986–87 period.  The two most important are the decision of
Saudi Arabia to shut down the crude oil production to prop up the
price of oil, and the OPEC collapse.  While the latter is known to have
limited impact on the crude oil price (Barsky and Kilian, 2004), the
former created a major positive shock to the ﬂow supply droving
down the price of oil.  As we have seen, this period has lead to an
important movement in oil price uncertainty.  Fig.  1G in Appendix
G shows that this event is mainly supply-driven.  around 18% of oil
price uncertainty is explained by the shut down of Saudi Arabia crude
oil production against less than 4% by the ﬂow demand. 
The most interesting episode over the last decades is obviously
the unprecedented price surge after 2003 and, in particular, in 2007–
08, which led to the most heightened period of oil price uncertainty. 
According to a popular view, this price increase was the consequence
of speculative behaviors on the market (i. e. , growing ﬁnancialization
of oil futures markets) and could not be explained by changes in economic fundamentals (see Fattouh Name, 2013, for a discussion) .  The
standard interpretation is that oil traders in spot markets buy crude
oil now and store it in anticipation of higher future oil prices.  On
the contrary, the recent literature supports the conclusion that the
surge in the oil price during this period was mainly caused by shifts
in the ﬂow demand driven by the global business cycle (see Kilian,
2009.  Kilian and Hicks, 2013).  Our ﬁndings corroborate this view that
oil price uncertainty has been primarily driven by global macroeconomic conditions.  Indeed, as shown in Fig.  1G, the contribution of
speculative demand to price uncertainty is very small (around 5%)
compared to the proportion of the ﬂow demand from the global
business cycle in 2008 (around 40%).  An alternative view regarding
speculation is that OPEC held back its production by using oil below
ground in anticipation of higher oil prices.  As discussed by Kilian and
Murphy (2014), this behavior would be classiﬁed as a negative oil
supply shock.  Our results provide no evidence that such negative oil
supply shocks have signiﬁcantly contributed to oil price uncertainty,
contrary to demand shocks. 
Finally, looking at Fig.  2G in Appendix G, which reports the
simultaneous contribution of each shock (ﬂow demand, ﬂow supply,
speculative demand, and macroeconomic uncertainty) to oil price
uncertainty, we ﬁnd that the 2007–08 period of heightened oil price
uncertainty is mainly the consequence of shocks coming from the
global business cycle and macroeconomic uncertainty. 
6. 