 1.  Introduction In recent decades, the phenomenon of global warming caused by greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions has become extremely serious, resulting in more frequent and intense extreme weather and natural disasters.  As well known, the carbon emissions from fossil fuel consumption are the nuclear source of the GHG emissions.  Therefore, mitigating carbon emissions has become a global assignment to realize low carbon sustainable development.  In response to climate change, many countries have reached basic agreements on mitigating carbon emissions.  The Paris Climate Agreement and the Kyoto Protocol show the world's determination to cope with climate change issue.  As the largest developing country and the largest carbon emitter, China enacted the energy intensity target policy and a series of binding policies during the 11th “Five-Year Plan” (FYP) (2006–2010) and achieved a success in energy saving and energy intensity reduction (Cao and Karplus, 2014.  Fujii et al. , 2016).  In 2009, China has ofﬁcially raised the carbon intensity constraint target that carbon emissions per GDP (i. e. , carbon intensity) would be reduced by 40%–45% in 2020 than the 2005 level.  Such a target has been considered in the mid-long term plans of the national economic and social development.  In 2011, China's 12th FYP explicitly proposed a sub-target of the CICP that carbon emissions per GDP would drop by 17% in than that in 2010.  This is the ﬁrst time for China to propose carbon intensity constraint target in the FYP.  Subsequently, the Chinese central government allocated the carbon intensity reduction task to each provincial region, and stipulated that such a task must be incorporated into the local economic and social development plans.  Thus, the carbon intensity reduction target must be reﬂected in the performance assessment of the local government.  To fulﬁl such a target, the Chinese central government and local governments have formulated a series of relevant supporting policies and measures, and have carried out a “lasting battle” strategy for energy saving and carbon reduction.  They have released a serious of documents to declare that the government should endeavor to expedite industrial structure adjustment, support energy conservation and the development of low carbon energy, increase carbon sinks, control non-energyrelated GHG emissions, and facilitate the substitution of high carbon productions.  China's industrial sector is not only a crucial engine of economic growth, but also responsible for the largest share of the country's energy consumption and carbon emissions.  The decline of carbon intensity in the industrial sector plays a decisive role in achieving the overall carbon intensity reduction target.  As a vital part of carbon reduction polices, a number of speciﬁc measures focused on carbon reduction in the industrial sector, mainly including 6 aspects as follows.  (1) In 2009, the Chinese government ofﬁcially introduced the Standard for Sector-integrate Eco-industrial Parks, standardizing the construction, management, and assessment of sector-integrate eco-industrial parks.  In the same year, for the enterprises in the eco-industrial parks, the speciﬁc requirements for promoting the development of low carbon economy were put forward.  (2) In 2010, the Chinese government published a list of enterprises in 18 industrial sub-sectors (especially energy-intensive industries), targeted at eliminating the backward production capacity.  (3) China conducted a national resource tax reform for oil and gas in 2011, shifting from a volume-based tax to an ad valorem tax with a tax rate of 5%–10% (Shi et al. , 2015).  The resource tax reform on coal, rare earths, tungsten, and molybdenum followed the reform of the oil and gas tax.  Compared with the volume-based resource tax system, the tax rate in proportion to the market price will increase the costs of resource use in the overheated market (Liu et al. , 2017), which is beneﬁcial for energy conservation and carbon reduction.  (4) The 12th FiveYear Plan for Energy Saving and Emission Reduction stipulated the direction of restructuring the key industries, and promoted mergers and acquisitions in eight major industries, such as automobiles, steel, and cement.  (5) The 12th Five-Year Plan for Energy Saving and Emission Reduction speciﬁed the targets and assignment of energy conservation for the energy-intensive industrial sectors.  (6) In 2011, the Chinese government issued a catalogue of industrial restructuring guidance to limit the expansion of some industries, such as coal, petrochemical and chemical industries.  The speciﬁc measures in the industrial sector contribute to industrial carbon reduction.  However, under the ongoing tightening pressure of carbon reduction, some provinces begin to implement some administrative mandatory measures like power rationing,1 attempting to achieve the energy-saving and emission-reduction targets in a shortterm by the way of limiting enterprises' production.  The central government also continues to give pressure to the key industries and enterprises, in order to realize the emission-reduction targets.  Obviously, whether or not the CICP can achieve the “double dividend” of carbon reduction and industrial growth is signiﬁcant for achieving China's low carbon sustainable development, because industrial sector is the biggest emitter, as well as the important engine of economic growth.  Moreover, in 2015, China submitted its intended nationally determined contribution (INDC) and released its pledge in GHG reduction.  This brings a new challenge for China to integrate climate change mitigation into other national priorities.  The investigation on the effects of the CICP can provide necessary decision-making reference for coordinating carbon reduction with economic development.  However, the implementation effect of China's CICP on such a “double dividend” goal is paid little attention to in previous studies.  The appropriate measure of sustainable growth is necessary for assessing whether or not the CICP is effective to coordinate industrial growth and carbon reduction.  The green production performancethe environmentally sensitive productivity growth encompassing undesirable output(s), is usually employed by the existing studies to reﬂect green accounting or sustainable development (Kumar, 2006.  Oh, 2010.  Chen and Golley, 2014).  Since improving the GPP means a better coordination state of industrial growth and carbon reduction, the investigation of the effects of the CICP on the industrial GPP can provide the competent evidence in whether such a policy is actually beneﬁcial to the sustainable development of a certain country.  Actually, although the gross industrial carbon emissions in China have been increasing, the industrial carbon intensity has been decreasing year by year during 2001–2013 (see Fig.  1).  In terms of a single indicator of industrial carbon intensity, China's CICP in recent years seemed to be successful, and the environmental policy aiming at the industrial sector is not as inefﬁcient as some studies mentioned (e. g.  Zheng et al. , 2015).  However, the decrease of carbon intensity is only a direct result of the implementation of the CICP, and the impact of such a policy on the industrial GPP is still covered.  Theoretically, from the perspective of microeconomics, the CICP affects the industrial GPP in two aspects.  On the one hand, as an environmental regulation policy, a reasonable CICP can promote energy saving and low carbon production by improving the allocation of input factors (Li et al. , 2013).  On the other hand, the carbon constraint target force the enterprises to increase innovation investment, ameliorate technological progress, and improve energy efﬁciency (Xuan and Zhou, 2011), in order to facilitate carbon reduction and productivity growth.  In this case, the industrial GPP can be enhanced even when industrial output scale remains unchanged.  Despite some theoretical arguments, the impact of China's CICP on the industrial GPP has not yet been empirically explored.  In an attempt to ﬁll such a gap, this paper employs the quasi difference-in-differences (quasi-DID) method to investigate the effect of the CICP on China's industrial GPP for the ﬁrst time.  The industrial GPP is estimated based on the framework of nonparametric data envelope analysis (DEA), which is widely used in the existing literature to assess the environmentally sensitive productivity growth.  The directional distance function (DDF) is an alternative approach to measuring the productivity growth considering the undesirable output.  The original DDF is regarded as an oriented and radial measure with some limitations (Fukuyama and Weber, 2009.  Zhang and Choi, 2014), and the infeasible problem of linear programming could distort the productivity growth level.  For the purpose of avoiding the biases caused by the radial and oriented DDF and the infeasible problem, this paper combines the global benchmark technology (Oh, 2010) and the non-radial and nonoriented DDF (NNDDF) (Zhou et al. , 2012) to measure the industrial GPP of China.  The remainder of this paper is organized as follows (see Fig.  2).  Section 2 provides an overview of the related literature.  Section 3 introduces the used data and methodology, including the estimation models of industrial GPP and the quasi-DID model for investigating the effect of the CICP on industrial GPP.  In Section 4, we report and discuss the estimation results of the industrial GPP and quasi-DID model.  Section 5 draws main conclusions and provides some policy implications.  2.  Literature review.  2. 1.  Measurement of the GPP.  Among the methodologies of measuring the GPP, i. e. , the environmentally sensitive productivity growth, the Malmquist-Luenberger productivity index (ML index), which is proposed by Chung et al.  (1997) and integrates the concepts of the Malmquist productivity index and DDF, has been widely applied in the previous studies (Färe et al. , 2001.  Yoruk and Zaim, 2005.  Kumar, 2006.  Zhou et al. , 2010.  Arabi et al. , 2014).  However, the ML index method encounters three shortcomings.  Firstly, since the ML index employs the contemporaneous benchmark technology, and thus faces a potential infeasible problem when calculating intertemporal DDF (Oh, 2010).  Secondly, the conventional DDF, the basis of the ML index, is a radial and oriented measure method that may overestimate the efﬁciency when there is some slacks (Fukuyama and Weber, 2009).  Meanwhile, if researcher focuses on the total factor productivity index, non-oriented DDF rather than outputoriented model is more appropriate (Zhang and Choi, 2014).  Thirdly, the ML index is not circular as it employs geometric mean to avoid choosing an arbitrary benchmark (Oh, 2010). 