
The essence of the gasoline subsidy policy problem is its inefﬁciency. 
The policy leads to overconsumption of gasoline since a subsidy drives
consumers to purchase a good at a price that is cheaper than the cost
of producing it (Harvey and Gayer, 2013).  Overconsumption also leads
to negative externalities such as emission of local pollutants, trafﬁc
congestions and accidents (Davis, 2014).  In the case of Indonesia, the
problem is further aggravated by the fact that the government only
provides a subsidy for regular gasoline, the lowest grade gasoline. 
Malaysia and Egypt implemented a similar policy that only deregulates
the higher grade of gasoline (Kojima, 2013).  Indonesia started off in the
1960s with only the national oil company, Pertamina, allowed in the
domestic gasoline market.  There was only one grade of gasoline, and it
was subsidized in the form of underpricing as the price was signiﬁcantly
lower than the world market price.  Gasoline was subsidized as a way to
protect people from the effects of inﬂation (Beaton and Lonton, 2010). 
In 2001, a new regulation was introduced by the government that
opened up the domestic gasoline market to multinational oil companies
but only for high-octane gasoline.  This was done to combat the 1997
Asian ﬁnancial crisis.  Regular gasoline was left subsidized.  Such a
scheme violates Ramsey's tax rule that taxing rival commodities should
leave the consumer's relative choices unaltered (Ramsey, 1927).  Different tax rates on commodities and factors introduce a distortion between
the marginal rate of substitution and the marginal rate of transformation (Stiglitz and Dasgupta, 1971).  In addition, Ito and Sallee (2014)
found that taxation based on different characteristics of automobiles
caused distortions in that market.  Similarly, the Indonesian subsidy
policy distorts both the regular and premium grade gasoline market. 
Another issue is the unequal beneﬁt of the policy (del Granado Name,
2012).  As consumers purchase more regular gasoline, the government's
expenditure on the subsidy increases signiﬁcantly while income
distribution is distorted as high-income consumers that purchase a
higher amount of regular gasoline, receive more beneﬁt (Pradiptyo
and Sahadewo, 2012). 
An obvious exit strategy from such undesirable outcomes is to
eliminate the subsidy.  However, the government is reluctant to take
this option because of its anticipated impact on consumer's welfare
and the political repercussions.  A lot of studies have been done to
analyze the economic impact of phasing out a gasoline subsidy in
Indonesia.  Adam and Lestari (2008) estimated that an increase in the
price of oil correlates negatively with households' welfare.  Clements
Name (2007) showed that removing the subsidy increases aggregate
price levels and reduces real output, while Dartanto (2013) found
that there will be an increase of poverty.  Arguably, these outcomes
might agitate the people and cause a signiﬁcant drop in the
government's popularity.  Furthermore, a well-known economist in
Indonesia said that removing the gasoline subsidy is against the constitution of Indonesia (Gie, 2011).  Although since late 2014 the price of
crude oil has dropped signiﬁcantly and saved billions ofgovernment's budget without any interference to the policy, the government remains cautious and had not fully deregulates the regular
gasoline market. 
The fuel subsidy took about 15% of overall government expenditure
in 2014 as shown in Fig. 