
Most liberalized electricity markets suffer from market power,
with high concentration indices, and are frequently subject to market investigations (see for example DG COMP, 2007).  Academics and
consultants alike struggle to model the exercise of this market power
and the implications of possible reforms, such as increasing interconnection (Newbery Name, 2004), moving to nodal pricing (Joskow
and Tirole, 2000), market coupling (Newbery Name, 2016), breaking
up larger companies such as EdF in France (INSEAD, 2004), introducing capacity auctions (Entriken and Wan, 2003; Genoese Name, 2012;
Hach Name, 2015; Hu and Hobbs, 2008) or by increasing the volumes
of renewables (Liski and Vehviläinen, 2015; Newbery, 2016).  The
main problem facing those wishing quantiﬁed results rather than
illustrative examples lies in the considerable diﬃculty of modeling
strategic behaviour in markets with various capacity and transmission constraints, in which the participants interact daily on auction
markets under conditions of great transparency. 
Electricity is possibly the best example of the textbook example
of a perfectly homogenous product that would seem to favour
intense price competition, but, as observed above, liberalized electricity markets are characterized by oligopoly and deviations from
competitive behaviour.  Moreover, generators have very complete
information about their own and rivals’ short-run cost functions,
which are determined by known technologies and observable fuel
prices.  Cournot models may be suitable for modeling potential
market power and prices for speciﬁc levels of demand (Moselle
Name, 2006) but electricity demand varies substantially hourly, daily
and seasonally.  In practice, and more extensively now that the
EU has almost completed market coupling at the day-ahead stage,
generating companies offer their supply as a function of offer prices
(often a step function, see Newbery Name, 2013) into EUPHEMIA,2 the
auction platform that determines day-ahead prices for the whole of
the market-coupled EU.  The natural way of modeling the outcomes
of that auction are to look for Supply Function Equilibria, but these
are notoriously hard to solve or even simulate (Day Name, 2002). 
Nevertheless, the central idea of a supply function is helpful, in
that it requires agents to form a view of the supplies offered by
other generators, which, when subtracted from total demand, gives
a perceived residual demand.  Each agent can then choose an optimal
supply response.  If all agents have well-deﬁned supply behaviour
it is in principle possible to ﬁnd a Nash equilibrium in which each
oligopolist maximizes its proﬁts given the behaviour of other market participants.  The agents may choose to offer ﬁxed quantities –
Cournot behaviour – or may choose to mark-up their offers on their
variable costs, and the relevant demand facing those with market
power may have competitive supplies subtracted from total demand. 
The central point of this paper is that while the residual demand
facing an agent depends on the choices of other agents, the
assumption that the market will settle at the Nash equilibrium of
these speciﬁc choices needs to be tested for robustness.  The equilibrium will not be robust if it is proﬁtable for an agent, knowing the
strategies of all other players, to choose a different strategy. 
This paper tests the robustness of various popular modeling
approaches for an electricity market with a small number of players. 
We study two particular forms of mark-up pricing: ﬁxed and proportional, where in the former, ﬁrms set a ﬁxed mark-up on their
marginal cost schedule and in the latter, ﬁrms choose a proportional
mark-up.  We analyze these two mark-up pricing models because
most studies (some of which are reviewed below) ﬁnd that where
electricity markets are concentrated, generators are selling at prices
above the competitive short-run marginal cost.  They have the attraction that the choice of a single parameter (the mark-up) considerably
simpliﬁes the modeling problem (Weidlich and Veit, 2008). 