 1.  Introduction The environment has attracted unprecedented attention from ecologists, researchers and policymakers in recent years.  While the objective of the diverse stakeholders is to maintain a high standard of living and reduce global poverty, which can be considered justiﬁable ends in their own right, an unrestricted exploitation of natural resources could also cause an irrevocable loss to the biosphere and hurt the world's long-term economic and social development objectives.  The catch lies in the fact that the environment cannot be sustained without sacriﬁcing at least some of the long-term growth and development objectives.  Consequently, to satisfy basic human needs, some damage to the environment is inevitable.  Attitudes towards the environment vary substantially, particularly among policymakers.  Even if the biosphere can be exploited in a variety of ways which lead to a range of consequences, many ecologists believe that the ecosystem could be managed in a way that it can adapt itself to continuously changing conditions (El Kholy et al. , 2012).  The environmental Kuznets curve (EKC), a theory of the relationship between economic development and environmental quality, hypothesizes that over time there will be a reduction in the level of emissions for most countries.  This reduction can take place possibly because well developed economies should develop and raise sufﬁcient revenues in the long-run to afford newer and cleaner technologies that can help abate pollution.  Environmental degradation sustains a heavy price in terms of health and life sacriﬁces.  According to recent estimates, outdoor pollution kills more than three million people in the world every year, while many more people suffer from a range of diseases (OECD, 2014).  The prospects of long-term development are also hurt by the degradation of the quality of natural resources.  Fisheries for example are damaged because of water pollution, and deforestation leads to erosion siltation, disrupts the hydrological cycle of major watersheds and reduces the productivity and returns of natural resources such as forests, agricultural lands and ﬁsheries translate (Dixon et al. , 2013).  The catch lies in the fact that the objectives of sustainable development are often inconsistent with the goals of maintaining the afﬂuent lifestyle of the developed world and reducing the poverty of the burgeoning masses in the developing world (See Daly, 1991.  Arrow et al. , 1995).  Economic growth is a precondition for effective poverty reduction initiatives (Bourguignon, 2004.  Suryahadi et al. , 2012.  Thorbecke, 2013), but the increased revenues resulting from higher growth are used to pursue overly redistributive policies (Bhagwati and Panagariya, 2014).  However, the existing development paradigm is unsustainable because it favors a level of prosperity, which invariably results in more consumption and greater pressure on natural resources (Aşıcı, 2013).  Sustainable economic growth depends on the availability of renewable energy sources, and the integrated development of such sources is essential for an environmentally friendly development of countries or regions.  One of the widely used sources of renewable energy in the United States is biomass which is any organic (decomposable) matter derived from plants or animals, and hence is available on a renewable basis.  Biomass includes wood and agricultural crops, herbaceous and woody energy crops and municipal organic wastes as well as manure.  This renewable energy source contains a complex mix of carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen and oxygen.  Unlike the conventional fossil fuels such as petroleum and coal, biomass is a source of renewable energy based on the carbon cycle.  Thus, in virtue of its abundant sources, biomass is likely to be a prevalent option for generating electricity in the future.  The study examines the short- and long-run relationship between carbon emissions and their determinants in the presence of structural breaks and determines whether biomass energy consumption improves environmental quality by reducing carbon pollutants.  It particularly seeks to discern whether the EKC hypothesis for economic growth and carbon exists in the presence of biomass consumption and trade openness.  Finally, it strives to examine the causality between biomass energy consumption, trade openness and carbon emissions.  To our knowledge, these multifaceted relationships of biomass energy consumption have not been addressed adequately in the existing literature.  This paper makes the following ﬁve-fold contributions to the existing literature.  (i) It uses biomass energy consumption as an indicator of renewable energy in an augmented carbon emissions function.  (ii) It investigates the quadratic and cubic association between economic growth and carbon emissions in the presence of biomass energy and trade variables.  (iii) It applies the single and double unknown structural break unit root test to estimate the unit root properties of the variables.  (iv) It uses the bounds testing approach to cointegration that accommodates structural breaks in the series to test whether cointegration exists or not.  (v) It checks the causality between the variables by applying the VECM Granger causality test in the presence of structural breaks in the series.  The results ﬁnd cointegration between carbon emissions and their determinants and highlight that biomass energy consumption improves environmental quality by lowering carbon emissions.  Moreover, the relationship between economic growth and carbon emissions is inverted U-shaped (i. e. , EKC exists) and N-shaped in the presence of biomass energy consumption and structural breaks.  Additionally, trade openness (exports, imports) is inversely linked with carbon emissions in the presence of biomass energy consumption.  The causality analysis demonstrates a feedback effect between biomass energy consumption and carbon emissions, while economic growth causes CO2 emissions.  The causal association between trade openness (exports, imports) and carbon emissions is bidirectional.  The remainder of study is organized as follows.  Section 2 surveys the literature on EKC, biomass energy consumption and trade openness.  Section 3 develops the empirical model and Section 4 presents the methodological framework.  Section 5 discusses the empirical results.  Section 6 provides the conclusion and policy implications.  2.  Biomass energy consumption and regulations in the U. S.  In comparison with the other sources of energy, biomass provides a distinctive advantage with respect to maintaining the environment since it is “carbon neutral”.  Although the combustion of biomass generates as much carbon dioxide as fossil fuels do, CO2 emissions released is removed when a new plant grows (Agbor et al. , 2014.  Al-Mulali et al. , 2016).  In other words, some CO2 emissions from one year's combustion of biomass are captured by future biomass crops through the process of photosynthesis.  In relation to its energy uses by industry, biomass energy can be used for heat or power generation or for combined heat and power generation as a direct substitute for fossil fuels.  In short, the biomass use is growing in signiﬁcance as an input to a number of major functions of industries, ranging from research into an application of material inputs to industrial processes through to an implementation of mass produced intermediate and ﬁnal products (Burritt and Schaltegger, 2012).  The potential beneﬁts of biomass include an increase in the values of agricultural products and a support for farmers and the agricultural sector in both developed and developing countries, a potential reduction in greenhouse gases emissions relative to the petroleum-based fuels and an improved energy security for countries that grow their own feed stocks.  Projected increases in biofuel trade are also considered as a potential driver of economic growth in the tropics and subtropics regions, which are likely to hold a comparative advantage in feedstock production due to high biomass productivity (Marshall, 2007).  Biomass energy is one of the earliest and most primary sources of energy to provide processing and heat for industrial facilities in the United States.  Historically, in this country it has come from three primary sources.  wood, waste, and alcohol fuels.  More recently, it has come from corn as well.  Each of these forms of biomass energy (wood energy, waste energy and biofuel) is used in the United States.  Collectively, they represent almost half of the total renewable energy production.  Most electricity generation from wood biomass occurs at lumber and paper mills and these facilities use wood waste to provide much of their own steam and electricity needs.  The adoption of biomass has been increasing over the years in the United States.  Biofuel production increased from 1382 ktoe in 1990 to 3000 ktoe in 2000, and further to 28,440 in 2013 (BP Statistical Review of World Energy, 2014).  Over the years, the U. S.  government has introduced several policies to improve the share of renewable energy in the total energy mix, including an increase in the use of biomass.  For instance, the Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) policy, which is a state regulation, calls on electric utilities to ensure that a speciﬁc percentage of all produced electricity should come from renewable resources.  The ﬁrst RPS was ratiﬁed in Iowa in 1983, under a slightly different name, but with the same basic construction.  The 1990s really sparked the adoption of RPS, as seven more U. S.  states enacted RPSs of similar varieties.  Currently there are 30 states, along with the District of Columbia, that have adopted some form of an RPS policy.  RPS allows for ample state ﬂexibility including a variation of different target goals and deadlines, market trading mechanisms and renewable energy types used to comply with the RPS policy.  This ﬂexibility makes this particular policy tool especially popular, as evident by the recent exponential increase in RPS adoption.  Even though the adoption of RPS is becoming rather common, this policy tool is still relatively new, with few scholarly attempts at ascertaining the results of its implementation (Eastin et al. , 2014).  The second policy is the renewable fuel standard (RFS) program, which is a national policy that requires a certain volume of renewable fuels to replace or reduce the quantity of petroleum-based transportation fuel, heating oil or jet fuel.  The Congress created this program as part of the Energy Policy Act in 2005 in an effort to reduce greenhouse gases emissions and expand the nation's renewable fuels sector, while reducing reliance on imported oil (Barros et al. , 2011).  The RFS program was expanded under the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007.  The RFS was conceived by policy makers as a tool to reduce the demand for transportation fuels derived from foreign oil by stimulating the production of domestic biofuels that could be mixed with or replace gasoline at a time when foreign imports and prices were at or near alltime highs.  The RFS, administered by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), mandates the annual minimum volumes of biofuels across four nested categories that must be incorporated into the nation's transportation fuel supply.  The biofuel categories include total renewable fuels, advanced renewable fuels, cellulosic biofuel, and biomassbased biodiesel.  It also requires electricity providers to acquire speciﬁc amounts of renewable energy generation over time which are prevalent within the United States (Barros et al. , 2011).  The government has also introduced several additional policies including the Production Tax Credit or PTC, which is a per-kilowatthour tax credit for electricity generated (through renewable energy sources including biomass) by qualiﬁed energy resources and is paid for by the U. S.  taxpayers.  These policies also include the Investment Tax Credit or ITC, which allows the tax credit to be taken based on the amount invested rather than electricity produced.  They also include the Modiﬁed Accelerated Cost Recovery System Depreciation Schedule or MACRS, which gives bonus depreciations and reduces taxes on large biomass projects (Zhou et al. , 2016).  3.  Literature review.  The issues of climate change and carbon dioxide emissions are at the forefront of policy debates in both developed and developing countries.  Correspondingly, there is now a vast literature on the determinants of emissions (including income and energy prices among others), with the majority of the studies utilizing the EKC hypothesis in the analyses, which has often yielded mixed and conﬂicting results.  The literature on EKC has expanded so much that even causality techniques are now used to infer the presence of the EKC (Soytas and Sari, 2007.  Dogan and Turkekul, 2016).  Due to the lack of available data, some studies have traditionally estimated the EKCs with cross-country panel data.  Given that the quality of such data is often questionable, the empirical results obtained may be a suspect.  Furthermore, since the common method of estimation with panel data assumes that all cross-sections adhere to the same EKC, it may be unreasonable to impose isomorphic EKCs if cross-sections vary in terms of resource endowments, infrastructure, etc.  (List and Gallet, 1999). 1 We classify the considered literature under three strands.  income and emissions.  energy consumption and income.  and energy consumption, income and carbon emissions.  3. 1.  Income and emissions.  This ﬁrst strand of the literature has considered income as the only determinant of emissions within the EKC framework in the United States.  For instance, Unruh and Moomaw (1998) utilize graphical analysis to examine the presence of EKC for 16 countries including the United States.  Using a data set for the period 1950–1990, these authors are able to provide evidence of the presence of EKC in the U. S.  Subsequently, List and Gallet (1999) analyze the presence of EKC in the 50 U. S.  states by using the ordinary least square (OLS) technique for the period 1929–1994.  They conﬁrm the presence of EKC in 18 states when income and income squared are entered as independent variables, with the mono nitrogen oxides serving as the indicator of emissions.  However, when income and income squared are entered as independent variables, and with sulfur dioxide serving as the indicator of emissions, those authors notice the presence of the N-shape for 103. 2.  Energy and income.  The papers on the causal relationship between energy consumption (or its various components) and real GDP constitute the bulk of the existing literature that uses the bivariate and multivariate approaches.  This strand is also the earliest part of the literature dating back to 1978.  We will focus on this aspect of the literature because it is believed that energy consumption and real income are associated with emissions.  The earliest papers have utilized the bivariate approach to consider the relation between energy consumption and economic growth but provided inconclusive empirical results for the US economy. 2 The earliest studies that also looked at the relationship from a multivariate perspective include Glasure and Lee (1995) which incorporated the ratio of wages and energy prices as control variables for the period 1973. M1–1984. M6.  Using the Engle and Granger (1987) method, their ﬁndings provide evidence that supports the neutrality hypothesis.  Similarly, Stern (2000) employs the Johansen (1988) and Johansen and Juselius (1990) to examine the relationship between energy use, capital, labour and real GDP for the period 1947–1994 and the empirical ﬁndings provide evidence supporting a unidirectional causality from energy use to economic growth.  Thoma (2004) analyzes the causality involving industrial production as well as total electricity usage and electricity usage in commercial, industrial, residential and other sectors for the period 1973M1–2000M1.  Using the Engle and Granger (1987) method and the Granger causality test, the authors' results support the existence of a unidirectional causality running from economic growth to electrical usage.  Soytas and Sari (2006) utilize the dataset of seven countries to explore the causal relationship between total energy consumption, energy consumption, capital stock, labour force and real GDP per capita during the period 1960–2004.  They use the Johansen and Juselius (1990) approach to show a unidirectional causality running from energy consumption to real GDP.  Narayan and Prasad (2008) investigate the causal relationship between electricity consumption and real GDP, using the Hacker and Hatemi-J (2006) causality test but ﬁnd no causality between the variables.  In a series of related papers, Bowden and Payne (2009) and Payne (2009a) use different indicators of energy consumption such as primary energy (and usage in various sectors), renewable and non-renewable energy consumption, and nuclear energy, respectively.  Their empirical ﬁndings provide evidence of no causality in the case of the total and transportation primary energy consumption, renewable and non-renewable energy consumption and nuclear energy.  There is a unidirectional causality running from industrial production to primary energy consumption and a bidirectional causality in the case of commercial and residential primary energy consumption.  Payne (2009b) supports the growth-hypothesis i. e.  energy consumption causes economic growth in the case of the U. S.  state of Illinois.  Wolde-Rufael and Menyah (2010) utilize the Toda and Yamamoto (1995) to examine the causality involving nuclear energy consumption and economic growth, while controlling for capital stock and labour in nine developed countries for the period 1971–2005.  Their results yield support for a bidirectional causality in the United States.  Lee and Chiu (2011) show no support for a causality between nuclear energy consumption and economic growth, but a support for the growth hypothesis in the case of oil consumption.  Gross (2012) uses total energy consumption, and energy consumption in the industrial, commercial and transportation sectors as indicators for energy consumption.  The results suggest no causality in the total energy consumption, the industrial sector and the commercial sector but a bidirectional causality in the transportation sector.  Tugcu et al.  (2012) provide mixed evidence of no causality and a bidirectional causality.  Kum et al.  (2012) consider the causal relationship between natural gas consumption and economic growth in the G-7 countries during the period 1970–2008.  By using the Hacker and Hatemi-J (2006) causality tests, their results reveal evidence of a bidirectional causality between natural gas consumption and economic growth.  Yildirim et al.  (2012) utilize the Hacker and Hatemi-J (2006) method to examine the causal relationship in various indicators of energy consumption, employment, investment and real GDP for the period 1949–2010.  The empirical ﬁndings reveal a unidirectional causality from energy consumption to economic growth in the case of the biomass-waste-derived energy consumption and no causality in the case of the total renewable energy consumption, geothermal energy consumption, hydro-electric energy consumption, biomass energy consumption and biomass-wood-derived energy consumption.  Tiwari (2014) provides similar evidence for coal consumption, natural gas consumption, primary energy consumption, total renewable energy consumption and total electricity consumption as indicators of energy consumption in the U. S.  The most comprehensive strand in the existing literature is the one that integrates energy consumption, income and emissions into the same model.  However, this strand has only gained popularity recently, with very few studies existing in this area.  Conventional studies have used the normal regression and also the causality analysis to infer the existence of EKC.  Soytas et al.  (2007) is one of the earliest studies to integrate energy consumption, income and emissions in one function for the U. S.  The authors utilize the Toda and Yamamoto (1995) method to explore the relationship between income, energy consumption, carbon emissions, labour and capital.  There is evidence of a causality ﬂowing from energy consumption to emissions but no causality between real GDP and emissions, and between energy consumption and real GDP.  Since no causality ﬂows from real GDP to emissions, the authors conclude that there is no EKC in the U. S.  Menyah and WoldeRufael (2010) analyze the causal relationship between CO2 emissions, renewable and nuclear energy consumption and real GDP and the results support the presence of a bidirectional causality between CO2 emissions and income.  Burnett et al.  (2013) utilize a dataset of the U. S.  for the period 1981Q1–2003Q4 to examine the relationship between carbon dioxide emissions, personal income and energy production.  Using the dynamic OLS of Stock and Watson (1993), the results show there is no presence of the EKC hypothesis.  In another recent study, Dogan and Turkekul (2016) examine the existence of EKC in the U. S.  for the period 1960–2010 in a multivariate framework that includes emissions per capita, energy consumption per capita, real output per capita, trade openness, urbanization and ﬁnancial development by employing the ARDL bounds testing approach of Pesaran et al.  (2001) and the Granger causality test.  Their results suggest a bidirectional causality between energy consumption and emissions and between income and emissions.  The coefﬁcient suggests that income decreases emissions but income square increases emissions.  None of the foregoing papers examines the EKC hypothesis in the presence of biomass energy consumption.  With the exception of Dogan and Turkekul (2016), none of the previous papers have utilized both the regression analysis and causality analysis.  Table 1 presents a summary of studies investigating association between economic growth and carbon emissions in the case of the U. S.  economy for the three strands of the existing literature.  3. 4.  Biomass energy and emissions.  Very few studies have investigated the association between biomass energy consumption and carbon emissions for Turkey and U. S.  economies, using trivariate and bivariate models accordingly.  For instance, Katircioglu (2015) employs the carbon emissions function by including biomass energy and fossil fuel consumption.  The empirical evidence indicates that the use of biomass energy is environment-friendly, but on the other hand fossil fuel consumption adds to carbon emissions.  Bilgili et al.  (2016) apply the wavelet coherence approach to investigate the impact of biomass energy consumption on CO2 emissions, and their empirical results show that biomass energy consumption improves environmental quality by lowering carbon emissions after 2005.  Using a trivariate model, Bilgili (2016) validates that biomass energy consumption reduces carbon emissions but fossil fuel consumption increases it.  We may note that the empirical ﬁndings of such studies are ambiguous due to the negligence of other potential variables such as economic growth and trade openness that are relevant in the analysis.  This study fulﬁls a gap in the literature by investigating the association between biomass energy consumption and carbon emissions and incorporating economic growth and trade openness as additional determinants of carbon emissions in a multivariate framework.  <Middle> Data and model construction.  The study covers the period 1960–2016 to investigate the presence of the environmental Kuznets curve in the presence of biomass energy consumption and trade openness for the U. S.  economy.  We have utilized the World Development Indicators (WDI, 2016) to collect data on real GDP (constant 2010 US$), exports (constant 2010 US$), imports (constant 2010 US$) and trade (export + imports). 3 The data on CO2 emissions (metric tons) is also collected from World Development Indicators (WDI, 2016).  Biomass energy consumption is collected from materialﬂows. net.  We have transformed all the variables into the logform after converting all the series into per capita unit following Ahmed et al.  (2016) and others.  Katircioglu (2015), Bilgili (2016) and Bilgili et al.  (2016) investigate the impact of biomass energy consumption on CO2 emissions.  Their analysis may provide misleading results because it does not incorporate the other relevant factors of CO2 emissions such as exports, imports and trade openness, along with energy consumption and economic growth.  We have incorporated biomass energy consumption, oil prices and trade openness into the carbon emissions function as potential determinants of CO2 emissions.  Trade openness affects carbon emissions via income, technique and composition effects (Ling et al. , 2015).  Oil prices may affect carbon emissions positively or negatively.  A rise in oil prices increases the demand for other fossil fuels and renewable energy giving rise to mixed results.  If the rise in oil price increases the demand for coal, carbon emissions will rise because coal generates more emissions than oil.  If the rise in oil prices increases demand for renewable energy, carbon emissions may fall because renewable energy inclusive of biomass generates less emissions than oil (Chai et al. , 2016).  As indicated, this study ﬁlls the gap in the existing energy literature by investigating the environmental Kuznets curve in the presence of biomass energy consumption, oil prices and trade openness for US economy.  The general functional form of the model is constructed as follows, where Ct stands for CO2 emissions per capita, Et for biomass energy consumption per capita, Yt for real GDP per capita, Yt for the square of real GDP per capita, Ot for oil prices, TRt for real trade per capita and TRt 2 for the square of real trade per capita.  The log-linear speciﬁcation is employed to examine the presence of the environmental Kuznets curve.  The empirical equation of the general carbon emissions function is formulated as follows.  We expect αE b0 if biomass energy consumption is environment friendly.  otherwise αE N0 which means that biomass consumption hurts the environment (Katircioglu, 2015.  Bilgili, 2016).  The relationship between economic growth and carbon emissions is viewed as an inverted-U shape if αY N0 and αY2 b0, but it will be seen as a U-shape if αY b0 and αY2 N0.  Moreover, the relationship between trade openness and carbon emission is U-shaped if αTR b0 and αTR2 N0.  otherwise it is inverted U-shaped. 5 We expect αO b0 if oil prices are inversely linked with carbon emissions, otherwise αO N0.  Cole et al.  (2006) claim that a quadratic speciﬁcation on the relationship between economic growth and carbon emissions provides ambiguous empirical results.  They argue that carbon emissions or environmental degradation may likely become zero or negative after a new threshold level of income per capita is reached. 6 This quadratic relationship between economic growth and environmental degradation is termed ‘symmetric’ by Sengupta (1996), which argues that after a threshold level of real income per capita, a rise or a fall in CO2 emissions remains the same.  Therefore, Moomaw and Unruh (1997) recommend to use the cubic speciﬁcation of the relationship between economic growth and carbon emissions.  The augmented EKC empirical equation is modeled as follows.  The association between economic growth and CO2 emissions is an N-shape if βY N0, βY2 b0, βY3 N0.  Moomaw and Unruh (1997) and Friedl and Getzner (2003) argue that after, a second threshold level of real income per capita, if CO2 emissions start to increase then a N-shaped relationship between economic growth and carbon emissions exists.  This reveals that an increase in carbon emissions would be temporary and may be due to factors other than growth contributing to a rise in CO2 emissions (Friedl and Getzner,5.  Methodological strategy.  5. 1.  ARDL bounds testing approach.  Although the applied economics literature provides many approaches to examining cointegration between energy variables, we prefer to use the autoregressive distributed lag or the ARDL model or the bounds testing approach to cointegration to avoid the criticism of using conventional cointegration tests that may have serious shortcomings.  It also captures short run and long run relationships.  This approach is also ﬂexible regarding the order of integration of the variables.  We may apply the bounds testing approach to cointegration if the variables are integrated of I(1) or I(0) or I(1)/I(0).  Pesaran and Shin (1999) also posit that this Monte Carlo approach is more efﬁcient than the conventional cointegration approaches.  This approach provides more consistent empirical results for small samples (Pesaran and Shin, 1999).  The ARDL bounds testing via simple linear transformations are used to reach the dynamic unrestricted error-correction model (UECM).  The UECM presents the short-run dynamics and long-run equilibrium path without affecting the longrun information.  The empirical equation of the ARDL bounds testing approach under the UECM framework is presented below.  The next step is to compute the F-statistic for comparison with the critical bounds generated by Pesaran et al.  (2001) in order to make decisions on the existence of cointegration.  The appropriate choice of the lag length also matters.  The F-statistic varies at various lag orders.  In doing so, we have used the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) due to its superior power properties.  The Wald-test is used to compute the ARDL-F statistics.  We test the null hypothesis i. e.  H0 of no cointegration for Eq.  (4) against the alternative hypothesis.  The test will favor the presence of cointegration between the variables if the computed ARDL-F statistic is more than the upper critical bound.  However, the decision would be no cointegration between the variables if the lower critical bound is greater than the calculated ARDL-F statistic and would be inconclusive if the computed ARDL-F statistic is between the lower and upper critical bounds.  We use the critical bounds generated by Narayan (2005) because the data sample is small (i. e. , 54 observations) and in this case the critical bounds tabulated by Pesaran et al.  (2001) are not suitable.  The stability of the estimated bounds testing approach is tested by applying CUSUM and CUSUMsq suggested by Brown et al. We apply the ARDL bounds testing approach in order to examine the presence of cointegration between the variables.  If the existence of cointegration between the variables is conﬁrmed, we then estimate the long-run impact of economic growth (Yt), biomass energy consumption (Et), oil prices (Ot) and trade openness (TRt) on carbon emissions (Ct) by following Eq.  (5).  where μt is the error term assumed of having normal distribution.  We apply a similar approach with various proxies of trade openness (exports, imports and trade) to examine the association between CO2 emissions, economic growth, biomass energy consumption, oil prices and trade openness for the U. S.  economy.  5. 2.  The VECM Granger causality approach.  We apply the vector error correction model (VECM) version of Granger causality to test the direction of the causal relationship after conﬁrming the long-run association between the variables.  The empirical equation of the VECM Granger causality is modeled as follows.  between the variables is judged through using the F-statistic for the ﬁrst differenced lagged independent variables.  where (1 −L) is the difference operator.  The lagged residual term i. e.  ECTt-1 is derived from the long-run relationship.  The error terms are shown by ε1t,ε2t,ε3t,ε4t,ε5t,ε6t,ε7t and ε8t.  The long-run causality is derived from the signiﬁcance value of the coefﬁcient for ECMt − 1 through using the t-test statistic.  The direction of the short-run causality 6.  Empirical results.  Table 2 presents the descriptive statistics and the historical correlation analysis.  We note that all the variables have normal distributions as conﬁrmed by the Jarque-Bera test.  In the correlation analysis, the presence of negative correlation is noted between biomass energy consumption and CO2 emissions, indicating that this renewable energy consumption lowers carbon missions due to the absorption of CO2 emissions by new tree growth.  On the other hand, a positive correlation exists between economic growth and CO2 emissions.  Further, oil prices and CO2 emissions are positively correlated.  The correlations of exports, imports and trade with CO2 emissions are also negative, again highlighting the importance of trade to the environment by providing better technologies to control pollution.  Biomass energy consumption as well as exports, imports and trade is positively correlated with economic growth, underlying the fact that biomass energy consumption is a normal good.  Exports, imports and trade are also positively correlated with biomass energy consumption.  A negative correlation exists for oil prices with economic growth, exports, imports and trade openness.  Finally, biomass energy consumption is positively correlated with oilIn order to examine the unit root properties of the variables, we have applied the Ng and Perron (2001) unit root test which provides efﬁcient empirical results for small samples such as in our case. 7 The empirical results indicate that all the series are non-stationary in the level by using the intercept and time trend but are stationary in the ﬁrst difference of the variables. 8 The Ng-Perron unit root test provides ambiguous empirical results due to their low explanatory power since this unit root test does not accommodate information about unknown structural break dates stemming from the series, which further weakens the stationarity hypothesis.  To resolve this issue, we employ the Clemente et al.  (1998) unit root test which contains information about single and double unknown structural breaks occurring in the series during the sample period.  Table 3 details the results of the CMR (Clemente-Montanes-Reyes) unit root test.  We note that the variables are non-stationary in the level in the presence of structural breaks.  The structural breaks are found in CO2 emissions, economic growth, biomass energy consumption, oil prices, trade openness, exports and imports for the years of 1978, 1981, 1974, 1971 and 1970, respectively.  These years are associated with major events in the economy and the oil market.  For example, 1973–1974 are the years of OPEC oil embargo, 1980 is a year of a major economic recession in the United States and follows the 1979 Iranian revolution.  The break point in 1978 for carbon emissions signiﬁes the implementation of Water Pollution Control Act Amendments (WPCAA, 1977) which is also commonly known as the Superfund Act in 1980 (SA, 1980).  This act helped in regulating public drinking water systems, toxic substances, pesticides, and ocean dumping.  and protected wildlife, wilderness, and wild and scenic rivers.  This series of new laws provided for conducting pollution research, and improving standard setting, contaminated site cleanup, monitoring, and enforcement.  We may conclude that the implementation of WPCAA not only affected energy but also environmental quality in 1978.  We note that all the variables are stationary in their ﬁrst difference form.  This indicates that all the series are integrated of I(1).  The robustness of stationarity properties of the variables is checked by applying the CMR (1998) test that accounts for information for double unknown structural breaks in the series.  The results displayed in Table 3 unveil that all the series have a unit root problem in the level but show stationary in the ﬁrst difference.  It is noted that all the variables have a unique order of integration. 9 After investigating the integrating order of the variables, the next step is to examine the presence of cointegration between carbon emissions and their determinants.  In doing so, we apply the bounds testing approach to examine cointegration between the variables.  The ARDL bounds testing approach is sensitive to the selection of lag order, and thus we rely on the AIC for selecting the appropriate lag order selection due to its superior power properties as suggested by Lütkepohl (2006).  The appropriate selection of the lag order helps in capturing the dynamic association between the variables (Lütkepohl, 2006).  The empirical results are shown in Table 4.  We ﬁnd that the computed ARDL-F statistic is greater than the upper critical bounds at the 1% and 5% signiﬁcance levels as we have found for carbon emissions, biomass energy consumption and exports serving as dependent variables.  This shows the existence of three cointegrating vectors, which validates the occurrence of cointegration between carbon emissions and this variable's determinants.  A similar outcome is noted as we use imports and trade standing as indicators of trade openness.  This conﬁrms that carbon emissions, economic growth, biomass energy consumption, oil prices and exports (imports, trade) of the US economy have a long-run relationship during the period 1960–2016.  We ﬁnd a unique level of integration for all variables, so we can move to apply the Johansen and Juselius (1990) maximum likelihood cointegration test in order to test for the robustness of cointegration results.  The results of Johansen cointegration test reported in Table 5 reveal that the null hypothesis of no cointegration is rejected because the trace statistic and maximum Eigen value show the presence of one cointegrating vector between the variables as we measure trade openness by exports, imports and trade, using squared and cubic functions of carbon emissions.  The presence of a cointegrating vector conﬁrms the existence of a long-run cointegration between the variables.  This ﬁnding underscores the robustness of the empirical results of a long-run cointegration association between the variables.  The presence of cointegration between the variables paves the way to examine the long-run and short-run dynamic relationships between the variables.  The long-run results reported in Table 6 show that biomass energy consumption has a negative impact on carbon emissions, which highlights that biomass energy is good for the environment.  For instance, we observe that a 1% increase in biomass energy consumption will decrease emissions by 0. 25–0. 31%.  This evidence is similar to that found by Bilgili et al.  (2016) and Bilgili (2016) for the US economy.  Oil prices are positively and signiﬁcantly linked with carbon emissions.  This ﬁnding implies that oil prices increase CO2 emissions.  A 1% rise in those prices leads carbon emissions to increase by 0. 03– 0. 04%.  This empirical evidence is consistent with the results of Chai et al.  (2016), which indicate that higher oil prices make ﬁrms use other fossil fuel substitutes such as dirty coal that increase carbon emissions.  The association between economic growth and carbon emissions has an inverted U-shape when exports, imports and trade are used as measures of trade openness.  We ﬁnd that a 1% increase in real GDP would increase carbon emissions by 15. 10%–16. 06%, using the three different measures of trade openness.  The negative sign of the squared term of real GDP in the carbon emissions function corroborates the delinking of carbon emissions at a higher level of real GDP, while again controlling for exports, imports and trade as measures of trade openness.  This is evidence for the existence of EKC in the United States.  This empirical evidence is similar to that of Unruh and Moomaw (1998) and Roach (2013) which underscores the presence of the EKC hypothesis for the US economy.  The relationship between trade openness (as measured by exports, imports and trade) and carbon emissions has a U-shape.  We note that exports (imports) have a negative and signiﬁcant impact on CO2 emissions, suggesting that international trade is good for the environment.  A 1% increase in exports (imports) would produce a 0. 17% (0. 09%) decrease in carbon emissions.  Moreover, total trade also decreases carbon emissions signiﬁcantly, where a 1% increase in trade would dampen emissions by 0. 13%.  The negative sign of the squared term of trade openness (exports, imports and trade) also corroborates the positive linking of carbon emissions with trade openness at a higher level of real trade, while controlling biomass energy consumption, oil prices and economic growth.  This ﬁnding is evidence of the existence of a U-shaped association between trade openness and carbon emission in the United States. 10 The dummy variable has a positive and signiﬁcant effect on carbon emissions.  This shows that the implementation of Water Pollution Control Act Amendments (WPCAA) could not improve environmental quality by lowering CO2 emissions in the US economy.  Following Moomaw and Unruh (1997) and later on, Friedl and Getzner (2003), we insert a cubic term of real GDP per capita to examine whether the relationship between economic growth and carbon emission is N-shape or inverted N-shape.  We ﬁnd that the linear, quadratic and cubic terms of real GDP per capita affect carbon emissions positively, negatively and positively.  This result shows the presence of an N-shaped relationship between economic growth and CO2 emissions.  It implies that an increase in carbon emissions would be a temporary outcome generated by factors contributing to CO2 emissions other than economic growth (Friedl and Getzner,Table 7 shows the short-run results.  These results reveal that biomass energy consumption is negatively but insigniﬁcantly linked to carbon emissions.  However, the association between economic growth and carbon emissions is signiﬁcant and is inverted-U shaped, which validates the existence of the EKC hypothesis.  Oil prices are negatively but insigniﬁcantly linked with carbon emissions.  The linkage between trade openness (measured by exports, imports and trade) and carbon emissions is inverted-U shaped but statistically insigniﬁcant.  The cubic relationship between economic growth and CO2 emissions is Nshaped but insigniﬁcant.  The impact of the dummy variable is positive and signiﬁcant.  This again indicates that implementation of Water Pollution Control Act Amendments (WPCAA) degrades environmental quality.  The sign of the ECMt−1 estimate is negative and statistically signiﬁcant for the long run at the 1% level.  The coefﬁcients of ECMt−1 are −0. 21, −0. 12 and −0. 17, responding to the use of exports, imports and trade as indicators of trade openness in the quadratic carbon emissions function, respectively.  Concerning the cubic carbon emissions function, the ECMt−1 coefﬁcients are −0. 30, −0. 13 and −0. 19 according to using trade openness variables of the US economy.  The statistical signiﬁcance of ECMt−1 corroborates the established long-run association between carbon emissions and their determinants.  It reveals that the short-run adjustments towards the long-run equilibrium path are corrected by 21. 26%, 12. 45% and 16. 67% for exports, imports and trade for the quadratic carbon emissions function, respectively.  For the cubic carbon emissions function, the short-run adjustments to the long-run equilibrium path are corrected by 30. 08%, 13. 44% and 19. 17% for exports, imports and trade models, respectively.  Furthermore, the diagnostic tests reveal the absence of serial correlation, ARCH and white heteroscedasticity effects in the short run model.  This well-characterization of the speciﬁcation(s) of the short-run(s) is conﬁrmed by the Ramsey reset test.  The normal distribution of the error term is also validated.  The CUSUM and CUSUMsq (except Figs.  2B, 6B and 10B) tests corroborate the stability of the short-run and long-run estimates (See Appendix-B).  The instability of CUSUMsq in Figs.  2B, 6B and 10B intends us to apply the Chow forecast test in order to test stability of estimates. 11 The results are reported in Tables 1B, 2B and 3B.  We ﬁnd that the F-statistic conﬁrms the stability of estimates.  This corroborates the stability of long-run and short-run estimates.  The causal relationship between the variables is tested by applying the VECM Granger causality.  The VECM supports a causality relationship both for the short-run and the long-run.  We have provided empirical results separately for the squared and the cubic carbon emissions functions. 12 In the long-run, we note that biomass energy consumption causes carbon emissions, while carbon emissions cause biomass energy consumption in the Granger sense (Tables 8 and 9).  The unidirectional causality running from economic growth to carbon emissions conﬁrms the presence of the EKC hypothesis in the United States.  This empirical ﬁnding is different from that of Soytas et al.  (2007) which posits a neutral effect between economic growth and carbon emissions.  On the other hand, Dogan and Turkekul (2016) validate the presence of a feedback effect between both variables.  Biomass energy consumption is Granger caused by economic growth.  The feedback effect exists between exports (imports) and carbon emissions.  The relationship between exports (imports) and biomass energy consumption is bidirectional.  Similarly, trade openness causes carbon emissions, while carbon emission causes trade openness in the Granger sense.  The feedback effect is noticed between biomass energy consumption and trade openness.  The results of the cubic model (the N-shaped) reported in Table 8 show a unidirectional causality running from economic growth and carbon emissions.  The relationship between oil prices and carbon emissions is bidirectional.  Oil prices cause biomass energy consumption and biomass energy consumption causes oil prices in the Granger sense.  The feedback effect exists between trade openness (measured by exports, imports and trade) and oil prices.  The unidirectional causality is also found running from economic growth to oil prices.  In the short run, a unidirectional causality running from economic growth and exports to carbon emission is found, while exports Granger cause biomass energy consumption, and the same narrative is true from the opposite side.  Economic growth is Granger caused by carbon emissions.  The feedback effect is noted between imports and carbon emissions.  Further, biomass energy consumption causes carbon emissions.  Similarly, carbon emissions are Granger caused by trade openness, and trade openness is Granger caused by carbon emissions.  The bidirectional causal relationship exists between trade openness and biomass energy consumption.  Moreover, economic growth Granger causes oil prices.  Table 7 reports the results of N-shape (cubic) model using exports, imports and trade as indicators of trade openness, and we ﬁnd that the results of the inverted-U (squared) model are almost similar.  This implies the robustness of the short-run causality results.  <Conclusion> Conclusion and policy implications.  This study has employed augmented squared and cubic carbon emissions functions to investigate the existence of the EKC hypothesis in the presence of biomass energy consumption, oil prices and trade openness over the period 1960–2016.  The integrating properties of the variables are investigated by applying the CMR unit root test which caters for single and double structural breaks.  The cointegration between carbon emissions and their determinants is examined by applying the bounds testing approach to cointegration while considering structural breaks in the series.  The VECM Granger causality test is also applied in order to test the existence of a dynamic causal relationship between the variables.  The bounds analysis conﬁrms the existence of cointegration between carbon emissions and their determinants including biomass energy consumption, oil prices and trade openness, while also accommodating structural breaks in the series.  Moreover, biomass energy consumption is negatively linked with carbon emissions, underscoring the importance of harnessing renewable energy to help combat carbon emissions emanating from fossil fuels.  The association between economic growth and CO2 emissions has an inverted-U shape, which attests to the presence of the EKC hypothesis in the quadratic carbon emissions hypothesis, and it is also N-shaped in the cubic carbon emissions hypothesis.  These results conﬁrm the ﬁndings reached by other studies in the literature, but our results are acquired in the presence of biomass energy consumption which is not a fossil fuel consumption in the carbon emissions functions.  Biomass consumption in the presence of other control factors is good to the environment.  The policy implication of this ﬁnding is that policy makers should introduce regulations that gradually include this renewable and clean source in the energy mix that is dominated by fossil fuels.  The relationship between trade openness (measured by exports, imports and trade) and carbon emissions is U-shaped, which reveals that carbon emissions are negatively linked with trade openness.  But after a threshold level of trade openness, trade raises CO2 emissions.  The policy implication of this result is that any regulations or legislations at the US or state level in this regard should make sure that going deeper into the globalization process in the longer run will not raise CO2 emissions.  Otherwise, tools of commercial policy should be invoked to ﬁne tune globalization in order to safeguard environmental quality.  The causality result shows the presence of a feedback effect between biomass energy consumption and carbon emissions.  The policy implication of this ﬁnding is that any policies or shocks that affect biomass consumption, whether in terms of conservation or augmentation, should take into account changes in CO2 emissions and vice versa.  Moreover, economic growth causes CO2 emissions in the Granger sense, and the unidirectional causality runs from exports (imports) and trade openness to biomass energy consumption and carbon emissions.  The policy implication is that shocks to economic growth or changes in the commercial policy have an impact on carbon emissions.  Finally, the feedback effect is present between oil prices and carbon emissions.  This result and its implications are well known in the existing literature.  The message from this research to policy makers is that our ﬁndings highlight the importance of biomass energy as a renewable energy source in reducing carbon emissions.  We should note that this source of energy is plentiful in the United States.  It has come from primary sources including wood, waste, alcohol fuels and corn and these sources generate wood energy, waste energy and biofuel in the country which collectively represents almost half of the total renewable energy production.  One great advantage of the combustion of biomass with respect to the environment is that it is “carbon neutral”.  Re-growing plants recapture or requester a quantity of CO2 emissions equivalent to the amount released to the atmosphere by burning biomass energy, and thus net carbon emissions are zero.  Based on those facts, policy makers should introduce legislations and set regulations that support the production and consumption of biomass energy but they should be aware of its relations with other economic variables.  It seems that this energy source is a better friend to the environment, which has been supported by subsidies and tax credits but it still consumes a considerable amount of fossil fuels in its production. 