
Studies have shown that gold extraction and processing can signiﬁcantly degrade natural environments (including soil and sediments,
water, and air quality) and, with that, human health and livelihoods
(Hilson, 2000.  Akpalu and Parks, 2007.  Obiri, 2007.  Leder Name, 2012. 
Saldarriaga-Isaza Name, 2013.  Ako Name, 2014.  Ansa-Asare Name, 2015). 
The pollution mainly occurs during gold extraction and processing,
which includes carbon-in-leach, heap leaching with cyanide, biological
oxidation and roasting (Hilson, 2002.  Leder Name, 2012).  However, the
existing laws in developing countries fail to effectively regulate the
gold mining industries leading to excessive environmental degradation
(Hilson, 2000). 
Thus, in gold-rich countries in Africa, gold miners, both large- and
small-scale, routinely discharge toxic chemicals such as mercury (typically used by small scale miners), cyanide and arsenic and their harmful
compounds into water bodies, exposing workers and residents to a
range of health risks including lower respiratory tract infections, cardiovascular diseases (Franchini and Mannucci, 2007, 2009, and Franchini
and Mannucci, 2012.  Mergler Name, 2007.  Banchirigah, 2008.  Obiri Name, 2010), skin infections, and cancerous infections (Amegbey and
Adimado, 2003.  Adei Name, 2011.  Obiri Name, 2010). 1 A recent review
of arsenic concentration in surface and underground water, for example, found mining as a major cause of high concentration of the hazardous substance in several African countries (Ahoulé Name, 2015).  Some of
the environmental and human damage can be irreversible (see e. g. ,
Naicker Name, 2003.  Stephens and Ahern, 2001). 
In Ghana, for example, several studies have documented heaped
waste materials at mining sites, which have resulted in the release of
toxic chemicals into the environment (see e. g. , Akabzaa Name, 2005. 
Essumang Name, 2007.  Yidana Name, 2007.  and Armah Name, 2010). 
The Council on Ethics of the Norwegian ‘Government Pension Fund
Global’ carried out a detailed survey on mining pollution at the oldest
gold mining town (Obuasi) and found evidence of severe environmental and health damage due to high level of concentration of arsenic, cyanide and heavy metals (e. g.  cadmium, manganese, lead and copper) in
water bodies (Leder Name, 2012).  An earlier study also cited eight cases
of cyanide spillage within a decade and a half (Amegbey and Adimado,
2003), which prompted the Ghana's Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) to remark that the nation is likely to experience water stress in
less than a decade (Banchirigah, 2008). 
In addition to water pollution, the use of heavy machinery in
extracting the ore, coupled with the surface mining techniques
commonly employed by miners in developing countries, generates substantial dust which can cause or exacerbate respiratory disorders
(Ayine, 2001.  ILO, 2005.  Kumah, 2006).  Yet, such damages are rarely internalized by the miners.  It has been argued that the strong desire to
earn foreign exchange from mineral extraction has weakened the resolve of resource-rich African states to pass, or enforce, mining-related
environmental regulations (McMahon, 2011).  In Ghana, although mining companies have generally improved their environmental reporting
in recent times, the ecosystem and health damage persist over the
long-term (Leder Name, 2012).  Moreover, the pollution generated by
small scale miners continues to escalate (Leder Name, 2012). 
Although a number of studies have been undertaken on the health
impact of gold extraction (see, e. g. , Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2013.  and
Currie Name, 2014), there is little research quantifying the welfare impact of mining externalities, especially in Africa.  To help ﬁll that gap,
this study presents a simple hedonic-type model that links private
healthcare costs (both preventive and curative) to exposure to gold
mining-related pollution, and empirically veriﬁes the model using
data from Ghana.  Our results support the hypothesis that, all else
being equal, healthcare expenditure is higher the closer the household
is to a tailing site or the mine. 
Furthermore, using anecdotal evidence about the relationship between
distance to the tailing site and concentration of nitrogen dioxide (NO2),
which is considered a surrogate for other toxic substances released during
mining activities (WHO, 2006), we are able to directly link pollution concentration to residents' willingness to accept (WTA) compensation due to
the mining pollution.  Other statistically signiﬁcant covariates of the
healthcare expenditure model include household income and age of the
household head, both of which positively impact the dependent variable. 
and subjective health status and the variable ‘health insurance paying a
greater portion of healthcare bills’, both of which had a negative impact. 
2. 