 Empirical research on conditional conservatism documents a piecewise linear relation between earnings and stock returns and often attributes this pattern to a more timely recognition of bad news than good news (e. g. , Basu, 1997).  However, we argue that a similar asymmetric relation can arise from a fundamentally different source—cost stickiness.  Cost stickiness refers to the asymmetric response of costs to sales increases versus decreases, which is a widely documented finding in the research on cost behavior (e. g. , Anderson et al. , 2003).  We show that cost stickiness can be mistaken for conditional conservatism in standard models, distorting inferences about both the average level of conservatism and the extent of cross-sectional variation in conservatism.  To reduce the likelihood of spurious inference, we develop new empirical tests that separate conservatism from the confounding effect of sticky costs.  Conditional conservatism implies that bad news (the usual proxy for which is negative stock returns) is recognized in earnings more quickly and more fully than good news (measured by positive returns).  Therefore, the contemporaneous association between earnings and stock returns should be stronger for negative returns than for positive returns (Basu, 1997).  Numerous studies find results consistent with this prediction and infer the presence of conditional conservatism (e. g. , Pope and Walker, 1999.  Ball et al. , 2000.  Watts, 2003b.  Ball et al. , 2013a).  The research on sticky costs documents an asymmetric behavior of costs and attributes it to operational decisions by managers who face adjustment costs, such as severance payments to dismissed workers and disposal costs for property, plant, and equipment (e. g. , Anderson et al. , 2003).  To avoid adjustment costs, managers retain some unused resources when sales fall.  By contrast, when sales rise, managers have to add sufficient resources to meet the demand.  Because of this operational asymmetry, costs are “sticky” on average—they rise more in response to sales increases than they fall for sales decreases.  The cost asymmetry implies that, on average, earnings respond more to sales decreases than to sales increases.  Because sales changes and concurrent stock returns are positively correlated, cost stickiness leads to an asymmetric relation between earnings and stock returns, which is stronger for negative returns than for positive returns.  Therefore, the standard estimates of asymmetric timeliness are likely biased upwards on average when sticky costs are prevalent.  Further, because cost stickiness varies systematically (e. g. , Weiss, 2010), it leads to variation in the bias, which is likely to distort inferences about the extent of cross-sectional variation in conservatism.  To control for this confounding effect, we incorporate cost stickiness in standard conservatism models.  We use data for publicly traded US firms from 1987 to 2007 to examine the confounding effect of cost stickiness in the Basu (1997), Ball et al.  (2013b), and Collins et al.  (2014) models. 1 Controlling for the asymmetric effect of sales changes reveals an average bias in conservatism estimates of more than 25%.  Further tests confirm that the confounding asymmetry for sales changes is consistent with manifestations of cost stickiness and is distinct from conservatism.  Thus, the upward bias in the standard conservatism measures arises because the measures mistake cost stickiness for conditional conservatism.  We also find that controlling for the variation in cost stickiness has a large impact on estimates of the variation in conservatism.  For example, the correlation between industry-level conservatism estimates (at the three-digit SIC level) with and without controls for cost stickiness is just 51. 3%, and the difference between the two estimates is statistically significant in 49% of the industries.  Thus, the use of standard models leads to mistaken inferences not only about the average degree of conservatism but also about how much conservatism varies cross-sectionally.  Cost stickiness also confounds inferences about the correlates of conservatism.  For example, we find that the standard estimates of the association between managerial stock ownership and conditional conservatism contain a large bias.  These estimates become statistically insignificant when we mitigate the bias.  Controlling for cost stickiness also significantly changes the estimated effects of the standard proxies of the demand for conservatism, such as size, leverage, and the book-to-market ratio.  Thus, recognizing the confounding effect of cost stickiness is essential to ensure accurate inferences in future research.  In Section 2, we develop our argument for the correlated omitted variable bias and formulate the hypotheses.  In Section 3, we describe the data and the estimation models.  Section 4 presents our main empirical results and the additional validation tests.  Section 5 further illustrates the confounding effect of cost stickiness.  Section 6 concludes.  2.  Hypothesis development.  We build on both the research on conservatism in financial accounting (e. g. , Basu, 1997.  Pope and Walker, 1999.  Ball et al. , 2000) and the research on sticky costs in cost accounting (e. g. , Anderson et al. , 2003.  Weiss, 2010.  Chen et al. , 2012).  Conservatism and sticky costs are fundamentally different phenomena.  conservatism is asymmetry in the information system that translates economic activity into accounting data, whereas cost stickiness is asymmetry in the economic activity itself.  Because the asymmetry in reported earnings can arise from either conservatism or cost stickiness, empirical models should account for both phenomena to ensure accurate inferences.  Financial accounting interprets conditional conservatism as the higher degree of verification of good news as gains than bad news as losses (Basu, 1997.  Watts, 2003a).  Conservatism implies that earnings incorporate bad news about future cash flows more quickly than good news.  Basu (1997) bases his primary measure of asymmetric timeliness on a regression of net income on stock returns with separate slopes for positive and negative returns (proxies for good and bad news, respectively).  He finds that the slope coefficient and the R2 are higher for negative returns than for positive returns, which is consistent with his predictions.  His model has been widely used to document the prevalence of conservatism, measured by average asymmetric timeliness, and to examine theories about the causes and correlates of conservatism, tested by analyzing systematic variation in asymmetric timeliness (see Watts (2003b) and Qiang (2007), for reviews).  The cost accounting literature (e. g. , Anderson et al. , 2003.  Weiss, 2010.  Banker et al. , 2013.  Banker and Byzalov, 2014) has identified another source of asymmetry in cost and earnings behavior.  These studies document that most of the major cost components are “sticky” in the sense that they rise more for sales increases than they fall for equivalent decreases.  Anderson et al.  (2003) explain that cost stickiness arises because of deliberate decisions by managers to adjust resources.  For many resources, managers face substantial adjustment costs, such as installation and disposal costs for equipment or hiring and firing costs for labor.  These adjustment costs lead to an asymmetry in managerial decisions.  When sales decrease, managers retain some slack resources to avoid incurring adjustment costs associated with cutting resources and future adjustment costs to restore resources when sales rebound.  Consequently, the fall in costs is less than proportional to the sales decrease.  In contrast, when sales increase sufficiently, managers have less discretion because they must add resources to accommodate the increased demand.  Therefore, on average, costs are more sensitive to sales increases than to sales decreases because of asymmetric resource adjustment.  Because costs enter earnings with a negative sign, the direction of asymmetry is reversed for earnings, i. e. , earnings are more sensitive to sales decreases than to sales increases when costs are sticky (Banker and Chen, 2006).  Changes in sales and concurrent stock returns are positively correlated (e. g. , Benston, 1967).  For example, the contemporaneous correlation between sales changes and stock returns in our sample is 0. 193 and is significant at the 1% level.  Thus, sales changes may constitute a correlated omitted variable in the standard conservatism models.  When costs are sticky, this omitted variable has an asymmetric effect on earnings, which is stronger for sales decreases than for sales increases.  Because sales changes correlate positively with stock returns, the association between earnings and stock returns should be stronger for negative returns than for positive returns even if conservatism is absent.  Therefore, the estimates of the piecewise linear relation between stock returns and earnings in standard models reflect not only asymmetric loss recognition but also the confounding asymmetric effect of cost stickiness.  Because both types of asymmetry act in the same direction, sticky costs could lead to an upward bias on average in the standard estimates of asymmetric timeliness. 2 Collins et al.  (2014) and Hsu et al.  (2012) document significant asymmetric timeliness for operating cash flow and recommend that researchers estimate conservatism using operating accruals rather than earnings.  However, this modification of the Basu model is unlikely to remove the confounding effect of sticky costs because cost stickiness affects operating accruals.  For example, because managers retain unused fixed assets when sales decrease and acquire additional fixed assets when sales increase beyond the available capacity, depreciation expense falls less for sales decreases than it rises for sales increases.  Because the retention of slack resources entails additional cash outflows, managers also need to increase their borrowing or slow down the repayment of loans.  These financing activities lead to an asymmetry in interest expense, including its non-cash component.  Additionally, when sales decrease sufficiently, managers remove some unused resources and incur the associated adjustment costs.  Some of these costs, such as severance payments to workers or environmental remediation costs following the closure of production facilities, can include cash payments in the following fiscal year that are reported as operating accruals.  Because cost stickiness has an asymmetric effect on accruals, it biases both earnings-based and accruals-based conservatism measures in standard models, distorting inferences about the average level of conservatism.  Hypothesis 1a.  Asymmetric timeliness estimates in standard conservatism models have an upward bias on average because these models do not control for cost stickiness.  Cost stickiness varies systematically (e. g. , Weiss, 2010).  The cost accounting literature has documented four primary drivers of this variation.  the size of the resource adjustment costs (Anderson et al. , 2003.  Banker et al. , 2013), managerial optimism and pessimism about future sales (Anderson et al. , 2003.  Banker et al. , 2014b), agency problems (Chen et al. , 2012), and behavioral issues (Chen et al. , 2013).  Further, variation in conservatism can influence cost stickiness.  Francis and Martin (2010), Ahmed and Duellman (2011), and Bushman et al.  (2011) show that conservatism improves investment efficiency either by curbing the inefficient overinvestment associated with managers' empire-building behavior or by mitigating the inefficient underinvestment caused by frictions in capital markets.  These investment patterns can affect cost stickiness.  Because the standard conservatism models do not control for the variation in cost stickiness, they are likely to mistake it for variation in conservatism.  In other words, the bias from Hypothesis 1a likely varies systematically across observations because of predictable differences in cost stickiness.  This confounding effect distorts inferences about the extent of variation in conservatism.  Hypothesis 1b.  Estimates of the variation in conservatism in standard models are distorted because these models do not control for the variation in cost stickiness.  The confounding variation from Hypothesis 1b can bias inferences in tests of theories about the causes or correlates of conservatism.  For example, cost stickiness likely varies with some of the standard proxies of the demand for conservatism.  The book-to-market ratio is higher for capital-intensive firms (e. g. , Novy-Marx, 2011).  Capital-intensive firms have larger resource-adjustment costs that increase cost stickiness (Anderson et al. , 2003).  This effect can lead to a positive association between the book-to-market ratio and cost stickiness.  Managers can adjust many resources, such as plant capacity, only in discrete increments.  This constraint impedes resource adjustment in small firms but is less important for large firms.  Therefore, large firms likely have lower resource-adjustment costs, which can lead to a negative relation between the firm's size and cost stickiness.  Interest expense increases with debt.  therefore, cost stickiness for interest expense is likely to be positively associated with leverage.  If a given explanatory variable is positively (negatively) associated with the variation in cost stickiness, such as the book-to-market ratio (size), then the standard estimate of its association with conservatism likely has a positive (negative) bias.  Therefore, the inferences about these standard correlates of demand for conservatism can have a context-specific bias that reflects the sign of each variable's association with cost stickiness.  <Middle> Data and estimation models.  3. 1.  Sample selection and descriptive statistics.  Our sample selection procedure is summarized in Panel A of Table 1.  We start with the Compustat/CRSP annual sample from 1987 to 2007. 3 We exclude financial firms (SIC codes 6000–6999) because cost stickiness can manifest itself differently given the distinct structure of the financial statements for such firms.  Our findings are robust to their inclusion.  Following Khan and Watts (2009), we discard firm-year observations with missing or invalid data for the regression variables and observations with a lagged stock price below $1.  We also exclude observations for which the annual change in sales exceeds 50% to eliminate large acquisitions that distort performance measures like earnings and operating accruals (Collins and Hribar, 2002), and use a symmetric negative threshold of 50% to exclude large divestitures. 4 All of the continuous regression variables are winsorized at the top and bottom 1%.  Our results are robust to not winsorizing returns.  The univariate sample statistics and the correlation matrix are presented in Panels B and C of Table 1.  Financial variables are scaled by the lagged market value of equity.  On average, earnings before extraordinary items and discontinued operations are equal to  0. 6% of the lagged market value (the median is 4. 7%).  Scaled earnings are negatively skewed (the mean is less than the median), which is consistent with the presence of conditional conservatism (Basu, 1995.  Ball et al. , 2000).  Following Ball et al.  (2013b), we market-adjust the stock returns using the CRSP value-weighted index including all distributions (the results are robust to using unadjusted returns).  The annual market-adjusted stock returns are 0. 7% on average (median  7. 0%).  The correlation between the stock returns (RET) and the concurrent scaled sales changes (ΔS/P) is 0. 193 and is significant at the 1% level.  This correlation suggests that sales changes might be an important correlated omitted variable in the earnings-returns relation.  The correlation between the negative portion of the stock returns (DR  RET) and the negative portion of the sales changes (DS  ΔS/P) is 0. 147 and is significant at the 1% level.  This correlation also suggests that the magnitude of sales decreases might be an important correlated omitted variable that affects the incremental slope for negative stock returns (i. e. , the asymmetric timeliness coefficient).  The correlations between these pairs of variables are much less than one, which indicates that there is sufficient independent variation to reliably separate the effect of sales changes from that of stock returns.  3. 2.  Empirical models.  We start with the Basu (1997) asymmetric timeliness model, where Et/Pt 1 represents the earnings in year t scaled by the market value of equity at the beginning of the fiscal year, RETt is the market-adjusted stock return for the 12-month period of fiscal year t, DRt is a dummy variable equal to one if RETt is negative and zero otherwise, and εt is an error term.  We omit the firm index for brevity.  The market-adjusted stock return, RET, is a proxy for news about future cash flows, and a negative return (DR¼1) indicates bad news.  The asymmetric timeliness coefficient on DR  RET captures the difference between the slopes for positive and negative returns.  Conservatism implies that this coefficient is positive because bad news (negative return) is reflected in earnings to a greater extent than good news (positive return).  In our full model, we add sticky costs, where DSt is a dummy variable that is equal to one if sales decreased from year t 1 to year t and zero otherwise, ΔSt/Pt 1 is the sales change from year t 1 to year t that is scaled by the market value of equity at the beginning of the fiscal year, and the remaining variables are as previously defined.  The variables DS, ΔS/P, and DS  ΔS/P capture sticky costs.  When costs are sticky, earnings fall to a greater extent for sales decreases than they rise for the equivalent sales increases, which implies that the coefficient on DS  ΔS/P is positive.  Hypothesis 1a predicts that controlling for the confounding effect of cost stickiness alleviates the upward bias in the conservatism estimates.  Therefore, the asymmetric timeliness coefficient on DR  RET in the full model (2) will be less than the coefficient in the Basu model (1).  We also estimate a model that includes cost stickiness but not conditional conservatism, where all of the variables are as defined previously.  This model is representative of the recent earnings behavior models in cost accounting (e. g. , Banker and Chen, 2006), which incorporate asymmetric cost behavior but do not account for conservatism.  We use this model as a benchmark to assess the relative explanatory power of conservatism versus sticky costs.  Ball et al.  (2013b) argue that the cross-sectional correlation between the expected components of earnings and stock returns can distort standard conservatism estimates.  They propose corrections for this potential bias, which we use in robustness checks.  Because our theoretical arguments in Hypotheses 1a and 1b are driven by a time-series correlation between the changes in sales and the concurrent stock returns, our predictions are robust to the inclusion of Ball et al. 's controls for cross-sectional correlation.  In additional robustness checks, we also examine earnings components as recommended by Collins et al.  (2014) and Hsu et al.  (2012).  We test Hypothesis 1b in two ways.  First, we use a cross-industry analysis that captures the combined effect of all of the observable and unobservable industry-level drivers of both conservatism and cost stickiness.  We estimate the Basu model (1) and the full model (2) for each industry to obtain estimates of cross-industry variation in asymmetric timeliness.  Hypothesis 1b predicts that after controlling for the variation in cost stickiness, the estimates of the variation in asymmetric timeliness should change.  Therefore, our full model should yield a different rank ordering and relative magnitudes of industry-level conservatism measures than the Basu model.  Second, we use the firm-year conservatism score of Khan and Watts (2009) that captures the predicted asymmetric timeliness conditional on the book-to-market ratio, leverage, and size.  These variables also likely lead to variation in cost stickiness (Section 2).  Therefore, we examine whether controlling for the association of these variables with cost stickiness changes the relative magnitudes and ranking of the firm-year conservatism scores.  4.  Estimation results.  Table 2 presents the pooled estimates for the Basu model, the sticky cost model, and our full model.  The sticky cost model has greater explanatory power than the Basu model (the adjusted R2s are 19. 0% and 12. 7%, respectively).  Column 1 shows a significant positive coefficient on DR  RET, which indicates conservatism, and column 2 shows a significant positive coefficient on DS  ΔS/P, which indicates cost stickiness.  For the full model in column 3, the adjusted R2 improves to 26. 8%.  Both the Basu model and the sticky cost model are rejected in favor of the full model (F¼180. 88 and F¼61. 47, respectively, df¼3).  All of the coefficients in the full model have the expected signs and indicate that significant conservatism (DR  RET) and significant cost stickiness (DS  ΔS/P) coexist.  The main parameter of interest is the asymmetric timeliness coefficient on DR  RET.  This coefficient in the Basu model is 0. 408.  When we control for cost stickiness, the asymmetric timeliness coefficient decreases to 0. 321, and the difference is significant at the 1% level (t¼7. 65).  Thus, consistent with Hypothesis 1a, the standard conservatism estimates suffer from a substantial upward bias of 27. 2% (¼[0. 408/0. 321] 1) on average, which arises because the Basu model does not control for the confounding effect of sticky costs. 5 Robustness checks are presented in Table 3.  In Panel A, we add firm fixed effects to control for the cross-sectional correlation between the expected components of earnings and returns following Ball et al.  (2013b).  Consistent with Hypothesis 1a, when we control for cost stickiness, the fixed-effect conservatism estimate decreases from 0. 183 in the Basu model to 0. 146 in the full model.  Thus, after including firm fixed effects as suggested by Ball et al. , the standard conservatism estimates continue to suffer from a large upward bias of 25. 4% (¼[0. 183/0. 146] 1), which is significant at the 1% level.  These results are also similar (untabulated) when we use an asymmetric time-series model to control for expected earnings, another correction proposed by Ball et al.  (2013b).  In Panel B, we estimate the models for operating accruals as suggested by Collins et al.  (2014) and Hsu et al.  (2012).  Consistent with Hypothesis 1a, the accruals-based conservatism estimates without controls for sticky costs are biased upwards considerably relative to the estimates in the full model, and the average bias is significant at the 1% level.  The results are robust to the addition of firm fixed effects (Ball et al. , 2013b) and/or control variables from the Jones (1991) and Dechow and Dichev (2002) accrual models (untabulated).  In all models in Tables 2 and 3, the variance inflation factor (VIF) for the asymmetric timeliness coefficient is less than 2. 5, which indicates that multicollinearity is not a major concern. 