
Stock market anomalies reﬂect inefﬁciencies in the way information
is disseminated in the market place and reﬂected in asset prices via
investors' trades.  Anomalies also provide the basis for active investment
strategies that aim to generate abnormal proﬁts.  One of the widely
examined anomalies that has been shown to persist in stock markets
is the momentum anomaly which relates to the relationship between
a stock's historical and subsequent performance (e. g.  Asness, 1994. 
Carhart, 1997.  Moskowitz and Grinblatt, 1999.  Jegadeesh and Titman,
1993, 2001).  An important implication of this anomaly is an investment
strategy called momentum investing that is based on buying past
winner stocks and selling past loser stocks.  Thus, apart from being a
matter of concern from an academic perspective, the presence of this
anomaly has signiﬁcant investment implications as well. 
In another popular strand of the literature, numerous studies have
explored the effect of oil market dynamics on stock return and volatility. 
Oil can affect stock market dynamics via a number of different channels. 
At the ﬁrm level, oil price can affect costs and growth expectations,
which then affect stock values.  At the consumer level, oil price can affect
consumer spending via its effect on their disposable income, thus affect
the demand for the products that drive ﬁrm-level revenues and growth
rates.  These arguments have in fact been supported in many studies that
show a signiﬁcant oil effect on stock returns and volatility. 1 None
of these studies, however, have explored whether oil price dynamics
also contribute to stock market anomalies that reﬂect informational
inefﬁciencies. 
From a behavioral perspective, one can argue that oil price ﬂuctuations can affect investor sentiment, which may be particularly signiﬁcant in high oil-sensitive economies.  Such an effect on investor
sentiment, in turn, may contribute to mispricing in the stock market
in the form of stock market anomalies.  In fact, in a recent study, Ding
Name (2017) show that oil price ﬂuctuations signiﬁcantly affect investor
sentiment in the Chinese stock market without relating their ﬁndings to
stock market anomalies.  Therefore, the main contribution of this study
is to provide a novel perspective to the oil-stock market nexus by examining the predictive ability of oil price dynamics over a well-studied and
yet unresolved stock market anomaly, i. e.  the momentum anomaly, that
has been shown to persist in ﬁnancial markets (e. g.  Avramov and
Chordia, 2006.  Liu and Zhang, 2008.  Liu Name, 2011.  Wang and Xu,
2015).  Clearly, this is not only a concern from a market efﬁciency point
of view, but can also present considerable abnormal proﬁt opportunities
for active managers. 
For our empirical study, we focus on China, the second largest oil
importer globally (after the U. S. ) with an economy that is heavily reliant
on oil imports to sustain its economic growth projections. 2 In addition
to China's signiﬁcant role in the world energy markets as a major
consumer, several features of the Chinese stock market provide fertile
ground to study the oil-stock market nexus from a market anomaly perspective.  First, the literature offers robust evidence of an oil price effect
on ﬁnancial markets in China (e. g.  Cong Name, 2008.  Nguyen and Bhatti,
2012.  Wen Name, 2012.  Zhu Name, 2016.  Broadstock Name, 2016, among
others).  Second, Demirer Name (2015b) recently show that the momentum anomaly is present in this emerging stock market and document a
signiﬁcant herding effect on the short-run performance of momentum
strategies.  Finally, recent evidence by Ding Name (2017) show that international crude oil price ﬂuctuations signiﬁcantly Granger cause Chinese
stock market investor sentiment such that a 1% ﬂuctuation in the price
of crude oil leads to a 3. 94% negative effect on stock market sentiment. 
Therefore, given the evidence in the literature, the Chinese stock market
offers an interesting setup to examine whether oil market dynamics
contribute to the momentum anomaly and allows us to extend the literature in a novel direction. 
Our ﬁndings show that oil return volatility has robust predictive
power over industry momentum payoffs in the Chinese stock market. 
The predictive power of oil volatility over momentum is irrespective
of whether the market is in a positive or negative state and is robust
even after controlling for stock market volatility as well as key macroeconomic variables including the short-term rate, default spread and
term spread.  In fact, our robustness checks suggest that oil return volatility absorbs the predictive ability of stock market volatility, implying
that uncertainty surrounding oil price movements contributes to this
anomaly more so than the stock market's own volatility does. 
Examining possible asymmetries in predictability patterns, we ﬁnd
that predictability comes primarily from winner industries. 