
We examine acquisition outcomes when the same auditor audits the financial statements of both a bidder and a target
firm prior to an acquisition.  We hypothesize that shared auditors facilitate the flow of information between bidders and
targets, and that the benefits of such mitigated information asymmetry accrue primarily to the acquiring firm. 
External auditors have unique access to senior executives, participate in audit committee meetings, and have access to
board meeting minutes and general information about a firm in the conduct of their audits.  This access to senior executives
combined with information gathered during an audit provides auditors with an opportunity to discuss strategic initiatives
with their clients including, among others, the acquisition or disposition of assets.  Communication about such initiatives
may be in the form of “soft talk”.  Because auditors contract with a variety of companies, auditors have the potential to
become information intermediaries between prospective targets and acquirers, whether intentional or otherwise.  As shared
auditors are incentivized to align with the interests of larger clients, we anticipate a potential bias in favor of acquisitive
clients over target clients.  Hence, bidders that share an audit firm with a potential target could have an information
advantage relative to others in the process of bidding, and we anticipate that this advantage will manifest itself in an
increased likelihood of submitting a bid for a target. 
The impact of shared auditors likely extends beyond the point of bidding and target selection.  If shared-auditor bidders
have an informational advantage relative to competing bidders, bidders with shared auditors can leverage this advantage
into a better bargaining position with the target.  As other bidders have less information, they have less incentive to bid, thus
reducing bid competition.  With lower bid competition, an acquirer with a shared auditor has the opportunity to negotiate a
more favorable price for the target firm, thus reducing premiums paid. 
The opportunity for a shared auditor to become an information intermediary is likely increased if an acquirer and target
contract with the same auditor office.  This is due to a higher likelihood of overlap of audit personnel on client engagement
teams and increased informal contact between audit teams of the target and acquirer, i. e. , “water cooler” talk among
auditors in the same practice office.  Therefore, we expect the shared auditor effect on deal outcomes to be more pronounced
if the bidder and acquirer contract with the same auditor practice office. 
We anticipate that shared auditors may favor acquisitive clients over targets for at least two reasons.  First, an auditor's
long-term incentives (even within an auditor's practice office) are more closely aligned with those of their acquisitive
clients.  Our intuition follows that applied to shared investment bank advisors who are more likely to favor acquiring firms
when representing both a target and an acquirer in the same deal (Agrawal Name, 2013).  As audit firms and their practice
offices have an incentive to foster and maintain ongoing relationships with larger, more acquisitive clients, we anticipate
shared information at the auditor office level will benefit acquirers more so than targets.  Second, with a shared auditor,
target auditors may be more forthcoming in the due diligence process, as target auditors may be more willing to disclose
information to co-workers rather than auditors from another audit firm, especially when the information is concentrated
within an auditor's practice.  We hence anticipate that bidders that share auditor offices with their targets will gain superior
acquisition-related information about their targets and experience lower bid competition for those targets.  Both effects
would yield favorable transaction outcomes for acquirers. 
As sharing confidential information about target clients with acquirer clients appears to be a violation of conflict of
interest rules, we expect that higher (lower) quality auditors would be less (more) likely to act as information intermediaries
in merger and acquisition deals.  Further, as the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX) strengthened auditor independence rules
and increased awareness of auditor independence concerns, we expect the shared-auditor effect on M&A deals to be
stronger prior to SOX. 
Using data on public transactions from 1985 to 2010, we examine the impact of shared auditors on the outcomes of all
acquisitions and the subset of acquisitions between targets and acquirers who are audited by Big-N audit firms.  We find that
over this period approximately 26% of all acquisitions among clients of Big-N audit firms have a shared auditor.  The
substantial percentage of deals with shared auditors suggests that auditors facilitate acquisitions among client firms.  We
also find that deals with shared auditors have fewer bidders relative to deals without, consistent with increased bargaining
power for acquirers with shared auditors. 
We further find that premiums paid by acquirers in shared-auditor deals are nearly 4. 2% lower than deals in which the
target and acquirer have different auditors.  This finding is economically significant as it represents a reduction of 9. 2% in the
average premium of 45. 8%, or an average discount of $36 million U. S.  dollars in the purchase price. 1 We also find that
average announcement day returns are 1. 80% lower for targets and 0. 70% higher for acquirers in deals with shared auditors. 
We find that this shared-auditor effect on premiums, target returns, and deal completion rates is driven by deals with
shared-auditor offices as the shared-auditor effect increases nearly twofold (as compared to magnitudes noted above) if the
target and the acquirer are audited by the same auditor practice office. 2 This result is consistent with our expectation as the
opportunity to transfer information in violation of conflict of interest rules is stronger within an auditor's practice office,
likely due to the higher probability of auditor personnel overlap and opportunity for “water cooler” talk.  These results are
robust to controls for geographic distance between the target and acquirer, for the involvement of shared directors or of
shared advisors, as well as for other control variables that prior studies have shown to influence acquisition outcomes (Uysal
Name, 2008; Agrawal Name, 2013; Cai and Sevilir, 2012).  These results are also robust to concerns of endogeneity arising from
the potential endogenous choice of an auditor by the target and acquirer. 
We next examine whether this shared-auditor effect is less pronounced for auditors that are anticipated to be of higher
quality.  We measure auditor quality with two proxies following prior literature (see DeFond and Zhang, 2014, for an
extensive review).  First, we start with the size of the target.  We expect auditors would be more likely to cater to larger target
clients in the transaction process relative to smaller target clients as prior research has shown that auditors provide lower
audit quality to smaller clients (Reynolds and Francis, 2000).  Correspondingly, we anticipate shared auditors will be less
likely to favor an acquirer of a large target relative to a small target as large target managers are more likely to take
prominent roles at the acquirer following the acquisition.  Therefore, we expect the shared auditor effect to be less
pronounced for acquisitions of larger targets.  Second, as prior literature suggests longer tenured auditors provide higher
quality audits (e. g.  Myers Name, 2003), we anticipate longer tenured auditors will be less likely to favor acquirers at the
expense of target shareholders. 
We find the shared-auditor effect on deal outcomes is concentrated in deals with smaller targets consistent with shared
auditors being less willing to cater to acquirers of larger targets.  We also find that longer tenured auditors appear less likely
to cater to acquirers at the expense of target shareholders.  Again, these results are robust to controls for geographic
proximity, the presence of shared directors, and the presence of shared advisors.  Lastly, we find that the shared-auditor
effect is stronger in the pre-SOX period relative to the post-SOX period.  However, subsequent to SOX, deals with shared
auditor's offices still reduce deal premiums and target announcement returns in the subsample of deals within the Big-N. 
We interpret these findings to suggest that the impact of shared auditors (offices) on transaction outcomes is reduced, but
not eliminated, with the passage of SOX. 
Our study makes three contributions.  First, we provide evidence that acquirers benefit from sharing an auditor's office
with a target, largely at the expense of target shareholders, and this result appears concentrated in acquisitions of smaller
target clients.  Therefore, our result suggests that auditors frequently violate their duty to put the interests of their clients
ahead of their own in what appears to be a failure to protect confidential client information within their practice offices. 3
Consequently, while shared auditors may aid in deal identification, target shareholders appear to be are harmed in such
deals.  Therefore, these results suggest necessary changes in audit firm policies to safeguard confidential client information
within practice offices.  Further, audit clients should be aware of the risk of information leakage within auditor's practice
offices. 
This study contributes to the literature by providing evidence consistent with violations of conflict of interest rules by
auditors that benefit one client at the expense of another.  Prior research and regulator concerns regarding auditor's conflicts
of interests focus on an auditor's independence from a client and the effect of an independence breach on the quality of that
client's audit.  In contrast, our study documents a novel conflict of interest as it relates to the auditor's client portfolio and
suggests auditors benefit acquisitive clients at the expense of target clients.  The effect on audit quality of such clients is
unexamined in our work and is left for future research. 4
Second, our results also add to prior studies that show that auditors impact their clients beyond the scope of the auditing
relationship (e. g.  Louis, 2005; Beatty, 1989).  While prior work has exclusively focused on the effect of audit firm size (i. e.  BigN vs.  non-Big-N) on client outcomes, our findings shed light on the effect of shared auditors (offices) within the group of
Big-N auditors and their impact on client M&A outcomes. 
Third, by providing evidence that shared auditor offices impact the acquisition process and deal outcomes, this study
contributes to prior literature on information asymmetry and the form of payment, the probability of receiving a bid, the
contractual provisions in merger agreements, and the price reactions to merger and acquisition announcements.  This study
also contributes to the literature on shared intermediaries and their role in reducing information asymmetry in the
acquisition process. 5 The identified shared-auditor practice office effect on acquisition outcomes is one potential mechanism
to partially explain the geographic proximity effect on acquisition outcomes found in prior studies (e. g.  Uysal Name, 2008). 
Our study complements a concurrent paper by Cai Name (2014) who also examine the effect of shared auditors on
acquisitions.  Our study examines an auditor's conflict of interest in shared auditor transactions, while that study examines
overall acquisition quality of shared auditor deals.  Cai Name (2014) suggest that shared auditors reduce uncertainty in the
deal process which results in higher quality acquisitions.  Our results suggest that this benefit of uncertainty reduction
accrues to the acquiring firm and that this benefit is driven by deals that involve shared auditor offices.  As a caveat, our
study examines all acquisitions with greater than 50% change in control, while Cai Name (2014) examine only acquisitions
with a 100% change in control.  Therefore, given the differences in sample criteria, caution should be taken in making direct
comparisons of the results of these two studies.  However both studies, while using differing sample selection criteria,
suggest that shared auditors impact target identification and audit client M&A outcomes which is outside the scope of an
auditor–client relationship. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 discusses prior literature and hypothesis development. 
Section 3 describes our data, including statistics on the probability of a shared-auditor bid.  Section 4 provides our empirical
results on the effect of shared auditors on acquisition outcomes.  Section 5 provides supplementary analysis of the effect of
SOX on the relation between shared auditors and acquisition outcomes.  Section 6 addresses selection concerns in the
multivariate analysis.  Section 7 concludes. 
2.  Prior literature and hypothesis development. 
2. 1.  Prior related literature. 
Prior research shows that auditors influence merger and acquisition activity, even though they are not specifically
contracted to advise on acquisition decisions, unlike investment banks or transaction attorneys.  Specifically, smaller auditors
appear to provide greater service and advice to their acquisitive clients, and this advice translates into higher acquirer
announcement date returns (Louis, 2005).  Also, Big-N auditors of targets are associated with a higher likelihood of a firm
being acquired, higher bidder announcement returns and premiums paid, and lower target announcement returns (Bugeja,
2011; Niemi Name, 2012; Xie Name, 2013).  For private targets, valuation multiples are higher if they are audited by a Big-4
auditor (De Franco Name, 2011). 
These prior studies consistently use auditor size (i. e. , the separation between Big-N and non-Big-N auditors) to examine
the effect of auditors on acquisition outcomes.  In contrast, in this paper we focus on a complementary characteristic of audit
firms – the case in which the audit firm has been separately contracted by both the target and acquirer for audit services –
and its effect on deal outcomes.  Importantly, such focus permits us to exploit the heterogeneity in auditor choice between
target and acquirer within the group of Big-N-only acquisitions, heterogeneity that has been previously unexamined in the
merger and acquisition setting. 
Another literature focuses on the impact of shared advisors in the acquisition process.  Agrawal Name (2013) show that
deal outcomes favor acquiring firms and disfavor target firms in transactions in which both parties contract with the same
investment advisor.  The authors suggest that a likely cause for the observed effects is that a shared advisor anticipates future
fees from the acquirer, but does not anticipate such future income from the target. 