 1.  Introduction At the 21st Conference of the Parties (COP) under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in Paris, the parties agreed on an ambitious target to limit the increase in global mean temperature to 1. 5–2. 0 °C.  Among other countries, Russia proposed a reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, and has submitted a pledge to the United Nations (UN), which proposes a 25–30% reduction in Russia's GHG emissions by 2030 compared to 1990 (Carbon Brief, 2015).  At present, Russia is one of the world's largest producers of GHG emissions.  Russia's share of global GHG emissions accounted for approximately 5% in 2012 (WRI, 2012).  In 2014, Russia's GHG emissions without land use, land-use change and forestry were nearly 30% below the 1990 level (UNFCCC, 2016).  This implies that Russia would need a stricter climate policy to prevent any increase in It is likely that Russia might not need any “standard” climate policy instrument, such as a carbon tax or an emission trading system, to achieve a substantial reduction in GHG emissions.  This is because, similar to many other economies, the Russian economy is distorted by preexisting subsidies imposed on domestic energy consumption.  For example, Russia imposes high export taxes on crude oil, oil products, and natural gas (Roskazna, 2015).  Furthermore, domestic gas prices are regulated in Russia, and they remain substantially lower than export netback prices (Gazprom, 2015).  Export taxes and the regulation of gas prices operate as implicit subsidies to domestic consumers.  Economic intuition suggests that the elimination of those pre-existing distortions will make the energy market as well as the whole economy more efﬁcient.  Moreover, it will contribute to a reduction in GHG emissions and stimulate investments in energy saving technologies.  As a large consumer and exporter of fossil fuels, the Russian economy will certainly be affected by domestic and foreign climate policies, while foreign economies might be affected by Russia's climate policy.  In the course of anticipated reductions in the international demand for fossil fuels, Russia would need to ﬁnd other revenue sources by developing a dynamic comparative advantage in the production of high valueadded, non-fossil fuel intensive commodities and services.  Recently, a few publications addressed the economy-wide effects of Russia's energy policy (e. g. , Heyndrickx et al. , 2012.  Orlov, 2015a, 2015b).  Hypothetical carbon taxation and prospects for a double dividend were analysed by Orlov and Grethe (2012), Orlov et al.  (2013), and Orlov and Grethe (2014).  However, these studies are hampered by several limitations.  First, they are based on single-country models, which are unable to depict the response of other economies and terms-of-trade effects.  Second, market inertias such as imperfect labour mobility and immobility of extant capital are not depicted.  Third, the studies do not show how the Russian economy might be affected when other countries implement stricter climate policies.  Fourth, the effects resulting from Russia's climate policy on other economies were not analysed.  Our study aims to shed light on these important political issues. 