
The important role of oil in the world economy has motivated the
research on the economic and ﬁnancial consequences caused by oil
price changes.  In his seminal study on oil price changes and the
macroeconomy, Hamilton (1983) ﬁnds that an oil price shock is a
contributing factor to US recession.  Since then, scholars have performed
much research on this issue (Jones Name, 2004.  Hamilton, 2008.  Herrera
Name, 2011.  Filis and Chatziantoniou, 2014.  Salisu Name, 2017, among
others).  Stock markets act as the barometer for anticipating economic
changes in economic activity (Fama, 1990).  Oil price is also likely to
play an important role in predicting stock prices by at least two channels
as follows.  On the one hand, since oil is an important input in the
production of many goods, oil price changes may affect future cash
ﬂows of enterprises.  As a result, higher oil prices may increase the
production cost of enterprises, dampening corporate proﬁts and thus
further depressing stock prices (Sadorsky, 1999.  Apergis and Miller,
2009).  On the other hand, oil price changes may impact the discount
rate.  Rising oil prices are often seen as indicative of inﬂationary
pressures.  Central banks typically address it by raising the interest rate
(Huang Name, 1996.  Miller and Ratti, 2009).  Since the link between
oil price changes and stock markets has important implications for
portfolio management strategies, this issue has attracted considerable
attention in recent studies (e. g. , Park and Ratti, 2008.  Naifar, 2016. 
Kayalar Name, 2017). 
Despite the increased interest in the oil-stock relationships, there are
relatively few papers that investigate the time-varying relationships
between them (e. g. , Chang Name, 2013.  Broadstock and Filis, 2014.  Joo
and Park, 2017).  This series of study reﬂects the importance of allowing
the relationships to be variable.  However, they do not systematically
isolate bearish and bullish markets.  Quantile regression is able to
describe the entire conditional distribution of the dependent variable
and can solve this problem effectively.  Applying this approach, Lee
and Zeng (2011) argue that the impacts of oil price shocks on real
stock returns vary with the stock performances (e. g. , bearish and bullish
markets).  Sim and Zhou (2015) also indicate that oil shocks affect US
stock returns depending on market circumstances by using the
quantile-on-quantile approach.  Moreover, the majority of the existing
studies investigate the oil-stock relationships in a linear framework. 
However, Mork (1989) and Mork Name (1994) conclude that oil price
increases have a negative effect on GDP, whereas oil price decreases
have not been found to have a positive impact on output or an impact
of the same degree.  Some related works explore the non-linear effects of
oil price changes on stock returns (Cong Name, 2008.  Park and Ratti,
2008.  Ramos and Veiga, 2013.  Tsai, 2015.  Reboredo and Ugolini, 2016). 
In a recent study, Kang and Ratti (2013) argue that the relationships
of oil-stock are not formed in isolation from economic policy uncertainty. 
This is because oil price shocks and economic policy uncertainty are
interrelated and jointly inﬂuence stock returns.  Relatively little attention, however, has been paid to the relationships between economic
policy uncertainty and the stock market.  Economic policy uncertainty
might have an impact on asset prices by many channels.  First, policy
uncertainty might delay or change important decisions taken by
ﬁrms and other economic agents, such as employment, investment,
consumption and saving decisions (Gulen and Ion, 2016).  Second,
policy uncertainty might increase spending on ﬁnancing and production by inﬂuencing supply and demand, as well as increasing disinvestment and economic contraction.  Third, economic policy might also
inﬂuence interest rate, inﬂation and expected risk premiums (Pástor
and Veronesi, 2013).  A growing number of studies provide evidence
that uncertainty affects ﬁnancial markets, such as equity portfolios
and stocks (Anderson Name, 2009.  Bekaert Name, 2009.  Pástor and
Veronesi, 2012.  Brogaard and Detzel, 2015.  Bekiros Name, 2016),
volatility and investment opportunities (Bloom Name, 2007.  Bloom,
2009), and energy and metals markets (Reboredo and Uddin, 2016). 
In particular, given the relationships between oil prices and economic
policy uncertainty, if one or both constructs are misrepresented in the
model, there is a substantial likelihood that the coefﬁcient of one
variable is contaminated by another variable (Arouri Name, 2014). 
At present, only a few, albeit important paper, have investigated the
effects of oil price changes on stock markets accounting for economic
policy uncertainty (Kang and Ratti, 2013, 2015.  Arouri Name, 2014. 
Kang Name, 2017).  The papers, however, neglect the distributional
heterogeneity of stock returns and do not take account into the nonlinear effects of oil price changes.  Reboredo and Ugolini (2016) argue
that stock prices reactions to oil price changes may be complex and
the reactions may be depending on whether a market is bullish or
bearish.  Moreover, Chang Name (2015) argue that the effects of
economic policy uncertainty may be different depending on whether
the stock markets are bullish or bearish phases.  Besides, the possible
effects of market turmoil or ﬁnancial crisis must be considered because
the relationships may change at the onset of the crisis.  The global
ﬁnancial crisis is believed to have signiﬁcant inﬂuence on oil prices as
well as other markets such as stock and exchange rate markets. 1 Chen
and Lv (2015) examine whether the relationships between the crude
oil market and the Chinese stock market are changed by a crisis and
conclude that the Chinese stock market exhibits stronger external
dependence with the oil market during the subprime crisis.  Luo and
Qin (2017) also explore the role of the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis in the
oil-stock nexus in China.  Ignoring crisis may render inappropriate or
inaccurate estimation. 
Additionally, we focus on China due to the rapid rise of emerging
markets and increasing importance of developing countries.  Developing
countries have not received sufﬁcient research attention compared
with developed ones.  Furthermore, oil consumption in China has
dramatically increased since its economic reforms are initiated in
1978.  According to the Energy Information Administration (EIA,
2014), China took the place of the US as the largest net importer of
crude oil and other liquids in September 2013.  Lu Name (2015) discuss
China's energy consumption structure in detail and present the trend
of the proﬁts of new energy companies in the Chinese stock market
over the period 2002 to 2010.  Additionally, the uncertainty in the oil
market or economic policy may cause greater effects on developing
countries due to the immature ﬁnancial policies and investors.  The
relationships between oil price changes and the stock market for
China have attracted scholars' attention (Cong Name, 2008.  Zhang and
Chen, 2011.  Broadstock Name, 2012.  Wang Name, 2013.  Fang and You,
2014.  Li Name, 2017.  Bouri Name, 2017).  As regards to the relationships
between economic policy uncertainty and stock returns in China, the
related studies include Arouri Name (2014), Kang and Ratti (2015), Li
Name (2016) and so on. 
To the best of our knowledge, no study has established the
relationships between oil price changes, economic policy uncertainty,
and stock returns in China accounting for distributional heterogeneity
in a panel quantile regression framework.  Thus, our contribution is
complementary to this research.  More speciﬁc, we add to the extant
literature from the following aspects.  (a) we examine the joint effects
of oil price changes and economic policy uncertainty on stock returns
in China, both before and after the global ﬁnancial crisis.  The theoretical
literature is aware of a possible joint effect of oil price changes and
economic policy uncertainty on stock returns, but few empirical studies
have analysed this issue satisfactorily. 