
Business risks stemming from a firm's business model and operating environment are important determinants of its cost of
equity capital (Modigliani and Miller, 1958).  One characteristic that regulators, researchers, and practitioners view as important in
assessing the risks inherent in a firm's current and future cash flows is the concentration of the firm's customer base.  For instance,
Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No.  131 (previously SFAS No.  14) requires firms to disclose information about
major customers because these customers represent “a significant concentration of risk. ” The SEC under Regulation S-K Item 101
also has similar disclosure requirements.  Further, anecdotal evidence suggests that firms explicitly recognize this risk. 4 While
approximately 45% of public firms report relying on at least one customer for a sizeable portion of revenues (Ellis Name, 2012),
there is surprisingly little empirical evidence on whether customer concentration risk affects firms’ financing costs.  In this study,
we aim to fill this gap by investigating the relation between the concentration of a supplier’s customer base and its cost of equity. 
Depending on a major customer for a large portion of sales can be risky for a supplier for two primary reasons. 5 First, a
supplier faces the risk of losing substantial future sales if a major customer becomes financially distressed or declares bankruptcy,
switches to a different supplier, or decides to develop products internally.  Consistent with this notion, Hertzel Name (2008) and
Kolay Name (2015) document negative supplier abnormal stock returns to the announcement that a major customer declares
bankruptcy. 6,7 Further, a customer's weak financial condition or actions could signal inherent problems about the supplier’s
viability to its remaining customers and lead to compounding losses in sales.  Second, a supplier faces the risk of losing
anticipated cash flows from being unable to collect outstanding receivables if the customer goes bankrupt. 8 This assertion is
consistent with the finding that suppliers offering customers more trade credit experience larger negative abnormal stock
returns around the announcement of a customer filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy (Jorion and Zhang, 2009; Kolay Name, 2015). 
While the above evidence suggests that a concentrated customer base can increase a supplier’s risk, whether this risk is
priced into a supplier’s cost of equity is unclear and thus an empirical question.  To test the relation between customer
concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity, we first create three measures that capture various dimensions of customer
concentration over the years 1981–2011.  Next, we follow prior research and measure a supplier’s cost of equity as the
average of several implied cost of equity estimates derived from analysts’ earnings forecasts (e. g. , Hail and Leuz, 2006; Li,
2010).  In our empirical tests, we control for omitted variables that can affect all suppliers in the same industry during any
given year and several characteristics known to impact a supplier’s cost of equity. 
Across all three measures of customer concentration, we find evidence that greater risk associated with a concentrated
customer base results in a higher cost of equity.  Our findings suggest that a supplier that depends on one or more major customers
for at least 10% of its annual revenues has a cost of equity that is 21. 2 basis points higher, which represents an additional annual cost
of $7. 99 million for the average supplier to finance with equity.  This effect is economically significant relative to our other control
variables, such as measures of information asymmetry.  For instance, the effect of depending on sales from a major customer on a
supplier’s cost of equity is equivalent to the effect of a 1. 5 standard deviation increase in analyst forecast dispersion. 
We also document a positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s systematic risk, as measured by
the supplier’s equity beta.  This finding is consistent with traditional asset pricing theories that suggest that customer
concentration risk would have to be related to systematic risk in order to be non-diversifiable and therefore priced into a
supplier’s cost of equity (e. g. , Lambert Name, 2007; Lintner, 1965; Sharpe, 1964).  Further, this result supports the conclusion
that the risk associated with having a concentrated customer base is in part non-diversifiable. 9
We also conduct several cross-sectional tests that exploit settings where the risk associated with having a concentrated
customer base is predictably larger.  If greater customer concentration increases a supplier's risk, then the positive relation
between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity should be especially strong when these relationships are
predictably riskier.  Specifically, this relation should be stronger when a supplier has a major customer that is more likely to
default or declare bankruptcy or a major customer that has fewer barriers to switching to a different supplier.  This relation
should also be more pronounced for a supplier that is more likely to have unpaid invoices if a major customer defaults and
for a supplier that lacks a diverse stream of revenues that can coinsure against the loss of a major customer.  We use several
measures to proxy for these situations and find evidence that is consistent with all four predictions. 
Our estimates of the effect of customer concentration on a supplier's cost of equity could suffer from an omitted variable
bias.  In particular, our control variables may insufficiently account for differences between suppliers that do and do not have
concentrated customer bases.  Thus, the estimated effect of customer concentration on a supplier's cost of equity could
be picking up nonlinear effects of our control variables.  We are also unable to observe the extent to which different
customer–supplier relationships are governed by implicit versus explicit contracts as well as the extent to which
managerial-specific relationships between customers and suppliers affect the risk of losing a major customer.  To help
alleviate these endogeneity concerns, we perform a propensity score matched sample analysis and implement an
instrumental variables approach.  The results from both analyses continue to show that a supplier with a more concentrated
customer base has a higher cost of equity, suggesting a causal link from customer concentration to a supplier's cost of equity. 
The focus of our paper is on the relation between a concentrated base of corporate customers and a supplier's cost of
equity.  Yet, a supplier can also be highly dependent on revenues from the U. S.  federal government.  Unlike corporate
customers, however, federal government customers are much less likely to default or declare bankruptcy, and government
purchases are typically regulated by longer-term procurement contracts (Goldman Name, 2013), which reduce the risk that
government customers will switch suppliers.  As such, a supplier that depends on the federal government for a large portion
of revenues gains operational efficiencies from selling to a major customer but does not bear many of the risks associated
with relying on a major corporate customer.  Consequently, we expect a negative relation between federal government
customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity.  We find that the cost of equity is 19. 