 1.  Introduction The world has known for over a century an important economic development.  Industrial developments, the increase in the number of vehicles and domestic equipments have led to a signiﬁcant increase in energy demand.  Energy is an essential basis for social and economic development.  States must ensure adequate supply of energy for their citizens while ensuring the sustainability of that supply.  Energy supply is a permanent challenge for our societies, especially as the need for states continues to increase.  Overall, the SMCs are facing rapid population growth coupled with relatively low incomes, as well as an accelerated pace of urbanization, added to signiﬁcant needs of socio-economic development.  This is reﬂected in a growing demand for energy services and associated infrastructure.  Indeed, in all SMCs, energy demand is constantly increasing.  To meet their energy needs, the SMCs use about 95% of fossil fuels.  If the trend observed has continued for 30 years, energy consumption could increase by 65% between 2000 and 2025 and be 97% would be satisﬁed by fossil energies in 2025.  Such a scenario will have many consequences, such as.  increased energy dependency and insecurity, high energy bills (importing countries), reduced export proﬁts (exporting countries), vulnerability of the production and distribution system, high local air pollution and as well as climate change.  In the same context, the question of ﬁnancing goes far beyond that of mobilizing the ﬁnancial resources of international cooperation.  The ﬁnancial development can provide efﬁcient ﬁnancial service for foreign banking markets, and improve the access of both foreign and domestic ﬁrms to ﬁnancial goods and services (Dasgupta et al. , 2001.  Barth et al. , 2004.  Lee and Chang, 2008).  According to Karanﬁl (2008) and (2009), the causality between economic growth and energy consumption is not justiﬁed just by a simple bivariate model.  He suggested adding one of the ﬁnancial variables such as domestic credit to private sector, stock market capitalization or liquid liabilities into the model.  He also argued that interest rate and exchange rate can affect the energy consumption through energy prices.  Furthermore, Fung (2009) study found that an efﬁcient ﬁnancial system creates more products, and the inputs for these products increase the demand for energy.  Thus, ﬁnancial development is a factor which should be taken into account in energy consumption.  (See Fig.  1. ) Sadorsky (2011) pointed three effective channels of ﬁnancial development over energy consumption.  First, there is a direct effect.  When the ﬁnancial development improves, consumers can borrow easier and cheaper in order to buy durable goods which consume a lot of energy.  Secondly, improved ﬁnancial development helps businesses to access to ﬁnancial capital easily and less costly.  Additionally, stock market development can also affect businesses by providing them with additional funding source.  These ones can let businesses expand (business effect).  Thirdly, the wealth effect.  increased stock market activity usually affects the conﬁdence of consumers and businesses by creating wealth effect.  Increased economic conﬁdence may expand the economy and promote energy demand.  The relationship between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption has been discussed in recent previous studies (Mielnik and Goldemberg, 2002.  Sadorsky, 2011.  Islam et al. , 2013.  Shahbaza et al. , 2016).  The econometric approach of empirical studies often is based on a linear dynamic panel model (Sadorsky, 2010.  Ozturk and Al-Mulali, 2015.  Shahbaz et al. , 2017), autoregressive distributed lag (ARDL) bounds (Fuinhas and Marques, 2012.  Shahbaza et al. , 2016.  Bekhet et al. , 2017), a cointegration model (Islam et al. , 2013.  Mahalik et al. , 2017), or Granger causality (Dan and Lijun, 2009.  Furuoka, 2015).  Energy is seen as the indispensable tool for sustainable development.  In these circumstances, determining the causal link between energy consumption, ﬁnancial development and economic growth is of particular importance to researchers and decision-makers.  Indeed, it allows deducing the implications of adequate energy, economic and ﬁnancial policies to achieve the objective of economic development.  To the best of our knowledge, there has never been an attempt to investigate the short and long run causality among economic growth, energy consumption and ﬁnancial development for SMCs.  There are few studies available in the existing literature investigating the causal relationship between economic growth, energy consumption and ﬁnancial development (Alam et al. , 2015.  Mahalik et al. , 2017.  Bekhet et al. , 2017).  According to the conclusion derived from these studies, the previous literature that focuses on the cointegration and causal relationship between growth, energy and ﬁnancial development is not conclusive to provide policy recommendation that can be applied across countries.  This paper therefore aims at fulﬁlling this gap and contributing to empirical literature.  The purpose of this study is to investigate the relationship between economic growth, energy consumption and ﬁnancial development in the 6 SMCs for the period 1995–2015 using multi-steps methodology.  Stationary, Co-integration tests, autoregressive distributed lag (hereafter ARDL) and vector error correction model (hereafter VECM).  The ARDL bounds testing approach investigates short run as well as long run parameter instantaneously.  The rest of the paper proceeds as follows.  Section 2 provides a literature review on ﬁnancial development, energy consumption and economic growth.  Section 3 describes empirical methodology for this study.  Section 4 reveals empirical ﬁndings and discussion.  Section 5 concludes with a summary of the main ﬁndings and policy implications.  2.  Literature review.  In the past few years, the causal link between energy consumption and economic growth has gained increasing attention in the recent literature (Islam et al. , 2013.  Khan et al. , 2014.  Shahbaz and Lean, 2012.  Shahbaz et al. , 2013a, 2013b.  Omri and Kahouli, 2014a, 2014b.  Mahalik et al. , 2017.  Bekhet et al. , 2017).  The empirical ﬁndings of the existing energy literature are not unambiguous due to the use of various econometric approaches such as correlation analysis, simple regressions, bivariate causality, unit root tests, multivariate cointegration, panel cointegration, VECM, ARDL, inter alia.  However, the empirical studies that examine the relationship between ﬁnancial development, energy consumption and economic growth in a systematic manner still lack.  As Table 1 demonstrates, the ﬁndings of these studies are inconclusive.  These empirical studies show a range of conﬂicting results.  vary vastly in terms of signs, magnitudes and signiﬁcance.  Some researchers have found a negative relationship and no causal relationship between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption (Mielnik and Goldemberg, 2002.  Dan and Lijun, 2009.  Shahbaz et al. , 2013a, 2013b), while others detected a positive and a bidirectional causality between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption (Sadorsky, 2011.  Al-Mulali and Sab, 2012a, 2012b.  Islam et al. , 2013.  Khan et al. , 2014.  Omri and Kahouli, 2014a, 2014b.  Alam et al. , 2015.  Bekhet et al. , 2017).  To be more speciﬁc, Dan and Lijun (2009) apply Granger causality to test the relationship between energy consumption and ﬁnancial development in China's Guangdong province.  They showed that ﬁnancial development failed to increase energy consumption.  Furthermore, Sadorsky (2010) detected a direct link between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption by using the dynamic panel method in 22 developing countries for the period of 1990–2006.  His ﬁndings indicated that there was a signiﬁcant positive relationship between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption.  In addition, Sadorsky (2011) examined the impact of ﬁnancial development on energy consumption in a sample of 9 Central and Eastern European frontier economies.  The empirical results, obtained from dynamic panel demand models, show a positive and statistically signiﬁcant relationship between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption.  In a similar way, Xu (2012) investigated the nexus between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption during the period 1999–2009 with a panel data set in 29 provinces of China, using system-GMM.  The results indicated a positive as well as signiﬁcant relationship between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption.  In the same context, Shahbaz and Lean (2012) examined the relationship between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption in Tunisia for the period of 1971–2008.  The researchers adopted the ARDL and the Johansen cointegration method for their empirical analysis.  The ﬁndings indicated that there was a long run cointegration relationship between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption.  In addition, the two variables had a bidirectional causal relationship.  By using panel data method, Al-Mulali and Sab (2012a) examined the ﬁnance-energy nexus in 30 Sub-Saharan African countries between 1980 and 2008, reported that there was bidirectional causality between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption.  Furthermore, Al-Mulali and Sab (2012b) analyzed the ﬁnance-energy relationship in 19 countries for the period of 1980–2008.  They concluded that there was no causal relationship between the variables.  Focusing on Malaysia, Islam et al.  (2013) investigated the effects of ﬁnancial development on energy consumption between 1971 and 2009.  Their ﬁndings revealed mutually reinforcing bidirectional causality between the ﬁnancial development and the energy consumption.  Shahbaz et al.  (2013a) analyzed the ﬁnance-energy nexus in China for the period of 1971–2011.  The ARDL bounds testing approach to cointegration was applied to examine long run relationship among the series while stationarity properties of the variables was tested by applying structural break test.  The results indicated that there was no causal relationship between the variables.  In a similar way, Shahbaz et al.  (2013b) did not detect any causal relationship between the ﬁnancial development and the energy consumption in Indonesia over the period from 1975 to 2011.  In further studies, Shahbaz et al.  (2013a) demonstrated that ﬁnancial development resulted in increased energy consumption and conﬁrmed that energy use and ﬁnancial development have a positive impact on economic growth in China.  Islam et al.  (2013) examined a long run relationship among consumption of energy, ﬁnancial development and economic growth for Malaysia over the 1971–2009 periods by implementing the ARDL approach to cointegration.  and tested the direction of causality using the VECM.  The results suggest that energy consumption is inﬂuenced by ﬁnancial development, both in the short and the long run.  In another study, Omri and Kahouli (2014a, 2014b) used the dynamic panel method to examine the ﬁnance-energy nexus in 65 countries for the period of 1990–2011.  The researchers detected a positive relationship between the ﬁnancial development and the energy consumption.  More recently, Komal and Abbas (2015) explored the ﬁnancegrowth-energy nexus for Pakistan over the 1972–2012 periods, by employing the system GMM estimation technique.  The study tried to capture the impact of ﬁnancial development on energy consumption through economic growth channel.  The study found positive and significant impact of ﬁnancial development on energy consumption through the economic growth channel.  Indeed, Furuoka (2015) examined the relationships between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption in Asia for the period of 1980–2012.  The ﬁndings of the panel cointegration test indicated that there was a long run equilibrium relationship between ﬁnance and energy consumption in the region.  Moreover, the heterogeneous panel causality test detected an unidirectional causality from energy consumption to ﬁnancial development but not vice versa.  These results indicate that an expansion of energy usage could be a driving force behind ﬁnancial development in Asia.  Lending support to this argument, Alam et al.  (2015) examined the relationship among energy consumption and different ﬁnancial development indicators in the panel of selected SAARC countries over a period of 1975–2011.  Panel cointegration test suggested that the variables were cointegrated and had a long-run relationship between them.  The ﬁxed effect model shows that there is a signiﬁcant relationship among energy consumption, economic growth and ﬁnancial development.  In another study, Mahalik et al.  (2017) investigated the relationship between ﬁnancial development and energy consumption for Saudi Arabia by using annual data for the period 1971–2011.  The evidence of unidirectional causality running from ﬁnancial development to energy demand is found.  By contrast, Bekhet et al.  (2017) examined the relationships among CO2 emissions, ﬁnancial development, energy consumption, and economic growth in GCC countries.  To test the long-term relationship among the above variables, the study employed the ARDL bounds testing approach for the period of 1980–2011.  The empirical results proved the existence of a long-term equilibrium relationship among energy consumption and ﬁnancial development in all Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries except UAE.  Generally, the literature review on the causality relationship between economic growth, energy consumption and ﬁnancial development is based on Engle and Granger (1987), Johansen (1991) and Johansen and Juselius (1990) cointegration techniques.  However, using the same methods with the same variables has no more potential of any original contribution, because it increases only the number of conﬂicting results with varying time periods and we have serious doubts about the economic, energy and ﬁnancial policies.  In the next section, we use VECM and the ARDL model to avoid this problem.  None of the studies, according to best of our knowledge, available for SMCs used the VECM and the ARDL estimators for testing the energygrowth-ﬁnancial nexus.  <Middle> Data and methodology.  3. 1.  Data.  The analysis covers the SMCs, which includes six countries.  Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Lebanon, Morocco and Tunisia.  The selection of the starting period (1995–2015) was constrained by the availability of data.  The main variables of the analysis are ﬁnancial development, real GDP per capita and energy consumption per capita.  Data are taken from the World Development Indicators database (World Development Indicators (WDI, 2016)).  GDP per capita is expressed in US dollars (constant 2010 US$) determined the economic growth, energy consumption (EC) is expressed in kg of oil equivalent per capita, ﬁnancial development (FD) is explained by real domestic credit to private sector as share of GDP.  I take the logarithm of these variables.  On the one hand, this transformation in logarithm facilitates the interpretation of the estimated coefﬁcients which are read as elasticities.  On the other hand it can control the heteroscedasticity problem.  Indeed, the logarithmic transformation makes it possible to solve or reduce the differences between the variables linked to the differences in their units of measure.  Indeed, there are several other variables that may affect this relationship.  In this study, we use some important control variables, like international trade (% of exports and imports of GDP), real per capita gross ﬁxed capital formation (constant 2010 US$) as a proxy of capital stock and urbanization (% of population).  Theoretically, capital and labor are used as potential inputs in the process of producing real economic output.  In turn these inputs are also helping producers of an economy to demand for EC and FD.  It is in the sense that the higher the capital use, the higher will be the economic growth, EC and FD.  This positive causal linkage between capital stock the three variables mainly happens due to the very nature of capital intensive.  Similarly, GDP, EC and FD are positively linked with evolution of urbanization in the economy.  It means that the greater degree of growing urban population need higher amounts of energy for their daily life and accelerate growth.  Likewise, the relationship between trade openness and economic growth is a long debated issue in the theoretical and empirical literature of economics (Omri and Kahouli, 2014a, 2014b.  Furuoka, 2015.  Kahouli and Omri, 2017).  However, the inconclusive results imply that the results of trade openness may not be generalized for SMCs.  Therefore, we include it in our regression for quantifying its impact on the case of SMCs.  Moreover, with the help of above theoretical set up, we have included these variables (e. g.  trade, capital stock and urbanization) in the analysis which contribute to GDP, EC and FD in SMCs and therefore it is expected to provide meaningful insights for policy implications at the aggregate level highlighted in the concluding sections of this study.  Variables used for estimation purpose with their measurement, deﬁnition, source, and expected sign are mentioned in Appendix 1.  The summary statistics (mean value and standard deviation) and the correlation matrix of GDP per capita, energy consumption per capita, ﬁnancial development, trade openness, capital and urbanization are presented in Appendix 1.  The mean GDP per capita ranges from 2447. 738 in Morocco to 28,211. 79 in Israel.  As for the per capita energy consumption, Morocco has the lowest energy usage (445. 91), whereas Israel has the highest (2898. 214).  Concerning ﬁnancial development, Algeria has the lowest ﬁnancial development, whereas Lebanon has the highest.  The correlation matrix is reported to check for multicollinearity among variables.  By looking at the results, the major observations that should be highlighted are as follows.  there is a signiﬁcant correlation between all variables at 5% level.  3. 2.  Methodology.  The study is concerned mainly with examining the short and long-run relationship between economic growth, EC and FD.  Following the work of Omri and Kahouli (2014a, 2014b), Begum et al.  (2015) and Ali et al.  (2017) we derived the empirical model based on the standard Cobb-Douglas production function having constant returns and the aggregate output function with time t, can be displayed as follows.  Where, Y represent GDP, EC denote energy consumption and e the error term.  α1,α2 and α3 are the output elasticities respectively with respect to domestic capital, labor force, and energy consumption.  In this paper we allow technology to be endogenously determined by ﬁnancial development and we integrated trade, capital and urbanization (proxy of labor) an augmented Cobb-Douglas production function (Omri and Kahouli, 2014a and b).  Financial development represents an important variable as correlates with the degree of capital ﬂows in ﬁnancial institutions, capital markets, and foreign direct investment (Chang, 2015).  Therefore, Where, θ is time-invariant constant.  Substituting Eq.  (2) into By taking log, the linearized production function can be given as follows.  Empirically, to examine the relation between economic growth, energy consumption and ﬁnancial development (three-way linkages), we specify the model following multiple equations, Eqs.  (5), (6) and (7) respectively.  Where, lnGDP is the logarithm of GDP per capita, lnEC is the logarithm of energy consumption energy per capita and lnFDis the logarithm of ﬁnancial development.  lnTrade lnK and lnURB are the logarithm of trade, capital stock and urbanization, respectively.  In this study, multi-steps methodology will be used to test this relationship based essentially on ARDL bounds testing approach (Pesaran and Shin, 1999. 