
China’s excess air pollution is widely known.  In 2014, for example,
annual ﬁne particulate (PM2. 5) levels in 31 Chinese major cities (4
province-level cities and 27 provincial capitals) were 23-124 μg/m3,
with a mean of 65 μg/m3, exceeding the World Health Organization
(WHO) guideline level of 10 μg/m3 by a factor of N6 (Nam,
forthcoming).  As demonstrated by a substantial body of the epidemiological literature, conventional air pollutants, such as PM2. 5, increase
health risks substantially (Dockery Name, 1989, 1992.  Dockery and
Pope, 1994).  Given its excessiveness, air pollution in China has posed
enormous and imminent threats to the public health of urban residents. 
Many impact studies motivated to increase public awareness of the
threats have used such epidemiological evidence to estimate pollution-induced socioeconomic burdens.  A conventional approach ﬁrst keeps
track of the morbidity and mortality cases that occur due to exposure
to excess pollution, applying concentration-response functions, drawn
from the epidemiological literature, to given pollution levels.  Each case
is then valuated in monetary terms, using market or surveyed data for
each health endpoint.  A substantial number of China-focused studies
have adopted this approach, and their estimated pollution-health costs
range from 3. 5 to 5. 9% of China’s historic gross domestic product (GDP)
(see Section 4. 2). 
One potential problem in the literature is a lack of dynamic thinking
in economic valuation.  Many available estimates for China are based on a
static application of the conventional approach mentioned above, considering only a single point in time.  However, the effects of pollutioncaused damage may remain in an economy for a long time (Nam Name,
2010).  Labor loss in one period, for example, reduces incomes and savings, which will then lead to less investment and growth in the future. 
Also, increased demand for medical services can hardly be met without
drawing resources from other sectors, distorting cross-industry resource
allocation.  Distorted resource allocation due to an external shock
(i. e. , pollution) can reduce economy-wide efﬁciency over time, in a cumulative manner.  Neglecting such dynamic dimensions can lead to substantial underestimation. 
Other areas for improvement include a ﬁner unit of analysis and the
adoption of local epidemiological evidence.  Due to the lack of data, a dynamic impact analysis of China’s pollution is often conducted at the national level.  Given the substantial subnational heterogeneity in terms of
air quality or socioeconomic conditions, however, the disadvantage of
treating China as a single entity is substantial.  In addition, many studies
simply apply Western epidemiological evidence to China’s context, although a huge gap in background air quality may lead to different
exposure-response relationships between the two regions.  Accordingly,
it seems important to incorporate local epidemiological evidence, away
from direct application of Western estimates. 
In this study, we ﬁll the gap in the literature through application of a
dynamic assessment tool, following in the footstep of Matus Name (2012). 
The method developed in this study is distinct from others in that it can
capture cumulative dimensions of the pollution-health effects, which are
often overlooked in the literature, with subnational details.  We also focus
on PM2. 5, instead of PM10, given its closer relevance to human health, and
incorporate local epidemiological evidence to improve the accuracy of
our estimates. 
2.  Literature Review. 
A substantial body of literature has so far estimated pollution-health
effects in China’s context.  Among the pioneering studies on China is a
1997 study by the World Bank (World Bank, 1997).  This study estimates
that in 1995 the socioeconomic burden associated with PM10 pollution
was as large as 4. 6% of China’s historic GDP, even when its cumulative
dimension is ignored.  A follow-up World Bank study (World Bank and
SEPA, 2007) concludes that a comparable economic loss from PM10 pollution in 2003 was around 3. 8% of GDP, conﬁrming its earlier ﬁnding
and reﬂecting an improving air-quality trend in China.  In terms of method, these two studies take a static approach in impact estimation and a
contingent valuation method (CVM) in valuation of statistical life.  Many
other studies apply a similar static method, taking human capital (HC)
or cost of illness (COI) approaches, as well as a CVM (e. g. , Cai, 2009. 
Greenpeace and Peking University School of Public Health, 2015.  Kan
Name, 2004.  Mu and Zhang, 2013.  Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development, 2014.  Xie Name, 2016.  Gao Name,
2015.  Zeng Name, 2015.  Huang Name, 2012.  Hammitt and Zhou, 2006. 
Zhou Name, 2014.  Xu Name, 2015, 2016).  In general, those estimates
based on HC or COI methods tend to be smaller than CVM-based estimates, due to their restrictive focus on economic damage (Viscusi
Name, 2005). 
A key problem of the studies adopting a static approach is that they
tend to neglect cumulative dimensions of economic damage (Matus
Name, 2012).  Pollution-caused wage loss in one period, for example,
means a reduced pool of capital inputs available for growth in the following periods, and such effects remain in an economy for a long time
(Nam Name, 2010).  Also, increased exposure to pollution drives up the
demand for healthcare services, requiring an economy to allocate
more of the available intermediate or factor inputs toward the
healthcare sector at the expense of other sectors’ output (Matus Name,
2008). 