 1.  Introduction The rising anthropogenic CO2 emissions have led to irreversible global climate change, which has had widespread impacts on human and natural systems (IPCC 2014).  To mitigate the severe effects caused, international agreements on reducing emissions have been established, and regional/national policies have been implemented to cut emissions.  Tracking countries' emission performances and quantifying the driving forces of emissions are of great interest to policymakers since the two issues are important to evaluating effectiveness of policy measures.  In the literature, one of the analytical tools that have been applied to assess energy and emission performances is decomposition analysis.  Decomposition analysis, consisting mainly of index decomposition analysis (IDA) and structural decomposition analysis (SDA), is an accounting approach that distributes a change in an energy or emissionrelated aggregate to predeﬁned factors.  The decomposition results obtained offer insights on the driving forces behind the change, based on which policymakers can assess the effectiveness of relevant policy measures.  From an energy systems analysis viewpoint, IDA usually measures the effects of total activity level, activity structure and activity intensity on an aggregate.  SDA, which is built upon the input-output (I-O) model and deals with the overall economic system, can quantify the impacts of both the production-side and consumption-side factors on an aggregate.  IDA and SDA differ in methodological foundation, study scope, factors used in decomposition and policy implications derived (Su and Ang 2012.  Wang et al.  2017a).  A main advantage of SDA over IDA is that SDA can analyze demand-side effects and the impact of trade.  This study focuses on the SDA technique.  In SDA studies, the aggregate decomposed can be a quantity indicator, e. g.  total national energy consumption or emissions, or an intensity indicator, e. g.  the ratio of national emissions to GDP.  In the literature, both forms of indicators have been used to characterize energy or emission performance (Su and Ang 2012.  Wang et al.  2017a).  They have been used to assess performances with different focuses.  The intensity indicator, which is independent of the economic output size, has an efﬁciency connotation.  A foundation of SDA is I-O models.  I-O models can be classiﬁed as single-region I-O (SRIO) models and multi-region I-O (MRIO) models, based on which single-region SDA and multi-region SDA can be conducted respectively.  A difference between SRIO and MRIO models is that the latter capture the economic linkage between the regions studied in terms of trade and interregional feedback effects (Su and Ang 2011).  Arising from the difference between quantity and intensity indicators and that between single and multi-region I-O models, SDA modelling can be classiﬁed into four types.  They are the SR quantity approach (type I), SR intensity approach (type II), MR quantity approach (type III), and MR intensity approach (type IV).  Most existing studies belong to type I, i. e.  dealing with changes of a single country's energy use or emissions.  These studies pinpoint causes behind energy or emission changes in an economy.  The methodological and application issues have been extensively studied (Su and Ang 2012.  Wang et al.  2017a).  Type II studies are not as common but the number is growing.  For example, Fan and Xia (2012), Zeng et al.  (2014) and Zhang and Lahr (2014) study changes in China's energy intensity, and Zhang (2009), Xia et al.  (2015) and Su and Ang (2017) examine China's emission intensity changes.  The structural decomposition of a quantity indicator and that of an intensity indicator are fairly different (Su and Ang 2015).  Wang et al.  (2017b) resolve some methodological issues in multiplicative SDA of an intensity indicator in the single-region context.  Type III studies examine changes in regional or global energy use or emissions.  A growing number of studies with a focus on the energy/ emissions embodied in trade (EET) have been reported.  See, for example, Arto and Dietzenbacher (2014), Malik et al.  (2016), de Vries and Ferrarini (2017) and Jiang and Guan (2016) which study changes in global emissions, Lan et al.  (2016) which examine changes in global energy footprint, Brizga et al.  (2014), Su and Thomson (2016), and Duan and Jiang (2017) which investigate energy and emission changes of a country or region, Xu and Dietzenbacher (2014) which investigate changes in emissions embodied in global trade.  The surge in multiregion quantity studies is due to the availability of MRIO databases, e. g.  the World Input-Output Database (Timmer et al.  2015), Eora (Lenzen et al.  2013) and GTAP (Narayanan and Walmsley 2008).  With regard to type IV, to the best of our knowledge, no SDA study has so far been reported.  A reason is the complexity of modelling intensity indicators using multi-region I-O models.  Decomposing an intensity indicator in the multi-region context using SDA, however, is becoming increasingly relevant and potentially useful.  Intensity indicators have been widely used as a measure of energy or emission performance.  Countries such as China, India, Mexico and Singapore use the emission intensity indicator to deﬁne climate targets in the intended nationally determined contributions (INDCs) under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).  Based on INDCs submissions, countries setting targets using the emission intensity indicator cover nearly 40% of the global emissions in 2014. 