 1.  Introduction  Investors, preparers, regulators, and standard setters have expressed concern that corporate disclosure has become longer,  more redundant, less readable, less speciﬁc, and more boilerplate over time ( Li, 2008.  KPMG, 2011.  SEC, 2013 ).  In 2013, the  SEC began a comprehensive review of regulation with the intent of identifying excessive, unduly complex, and redundant  disclosure ( SEC, 2013 ).  Similarly, the FASB has an ongoing agenda project, the Disclosure Framework, evaluating the effectiveness of textual disclosure ( FASB, 2012 ).  A variety of explanations have been offered for why disclosure might be changing  over time including increases in litigation concerns, business complexity, globalization, regulation, and new mandatory disclosures ( KPMG, 2011.  SEC, 2013.  Monga and Chasan, 2015 ).  In this paper we quantify a variety of 10-K disclosure attributes  and provide initial descriptive evidence on trends in these attributes over time.   While there is a substantial academic literature on trends in the characteristics of quantitative accounting data (particuthe magnitude, economic determinants, speciﬁc content, and attributes of trends  larly earnings and book value) over time,  in textual disclosure have received less attention.  At least in part, this likely reﬂects the challenge in assessing the content  of 10-K textual disclosure and in categorizing and quantifying disclosure for a large number of lengthy, complex documents,  especially given that disclosure of a given topic often appears in multiple sections of the 10-K and any given passage often  combines multiple topics.   In many ways, the issues in assessing 10-K content are similar to those faced in other literatures.  For example, researchers  in journalism have been interested in trends in coverage of the New York Times ( Blei, 2012 ), those in literature in understanding topical trends in poetry ( Rhody, 2012 ), in politics understanding trends in Senate discourse ( Grimmer, 2010 ), in  history understanding historical trends using the content of State Department cables ( Chaney et al. , 2015 ), and in science  understanding topical trends in journals such as Science ( Blei and Lafferty, 2007 ).  In all of these domains, the challenge is  in analyzing trends in corpuses far too large for humans to manually review and to summarize them in a way that is easily  interpretable.   Following that literature, we use a natural language processing technique, Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), to understand the changing content of 10-Ks.  3 LDA is a Bayesian computational linguistic technique that identifies the latent topics in a corpus of documents.  4 It is well suited to understanding the text of the 10-K because it permits analysis of the topical content of a large group of lengthy documents over time in an objective and replicable matter and relies on a very limited set of assumptions that are likely to be met in 10-K disclosure.  Further, it is specifically designed to infer proportions of content for documents which contain multiple topics, even if the topics are entangled, which is important given that 10-Ks comprise a large number of interspersed topics.  5 It permits the proportion of the 10-K related to each topic to vary across documents so it is well-suited to examining topical trends in textual disclosure.  As a result, we can deconstruct the 10-K by topic irrespective of whether topics appear in, for example, the footnotes, risk factors, or Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A).  We can then assess trends in the discussion of topics over time and relate them to changes in specific disclosure requirements (e. g. , new FASB standards, SEC requirements, and regulatory events such as SOX) and other events (e. g. , changes in litigation risk, mergers and acquisitions, etc. ).  Additionally, once the topic model is trained, it permits us to identify paragraphs by topic, so that we can track where  speciﬁc topics occur within the 10-K.  This allows us to identify the extent to which, for example, FASB requirements (e. g. ,  footnotes) create redundancy with SEC requirements (e. g. , risk factors and MD&A) by highlighting which topics tend to  be redundant within the 10-K as well as across time and across ﬁrms.  Similarly, by accumulating text within a topic, we  can identify the topical sources of textual attributes that prior literature suggests may be important such as boilerplate,  redundancy, stickiness, and lack of speciﬁcity.   In our empirical analysis, we examine the text of 10-Ks for 10,452 ﬁrms and 75,991 ﬁrm-years over the period 1996  to 2013.  We begin by documenting trends in textual characteristics that have been identiﬁed by prior research as potentially affecting the informativeness of disclosure, including length ( Loughran and McDonald, 2014 ), readability ( Miller, 2010 ),  boilerplate ( Lang and Stice-Lawrence, 2015 ), redundancy ( Cazier and Pfeiffer, 2015b ), speciﬁcity ( Hope et al. , 2016 ), stickiness  ( Brown  and  Tucker,  2011 ),  and  the  relative  prevalence  of  informative  numbers  in  the  text  or  “hard” information  ( Blankespoor, 2016 ).   We document clear and consistent trends across all measures.  Median text length doubled from 23,0 0 0 words in 1996 to  nearly 50,0 0 0 in 2013, while redundancy, boilerplate, and stickiness increased nearly monotonically and readability, speciﬁcity, and the relative mix of hard information showed clear decreases.  Given these trends, we next investigate their topical  sources.   Prior literature (e. g. , Cazier and Pfeiffer, 2015b ) suggests that variables such as size, industry-composition, complexity,  one-time events, litigation, and SEC oversight affect textual attributes such as length and readability in the cross section.   Consistent with assertions by commentators such as Monga and Chasan (2015) , it could be the case that those factors also  change in the time series in ways that explain trends in textual attributes.  We examine textual attributes after controlling  for a wide variety of company-level variables suggested by the prior literature and for a constant sample of ﬁrms, but similar  patterns persist.  While those variables are signiﬁcant cross-sectional determinants of textual attributes, including them in a  regression framework does not explain the trend in disclosure characteristics over time.   Given that readily observable ﬁrm-level attributes do not explain the trends we observe, we use LDA to examine the  topical content and characteristics of the additional disclosure.  Our analysis suggests that the corpus of 10-Ks comprises 150  topics, which we aggregate into 13 broader categories for ease of discussion.  The four categories which account for the bulk  of 10-K length are Performance.  Compliance with speciﬁc accounting and disclosure standards.  Industry-Speciﬁc disclosure.   and Employee-Related disclosure.  However, only disclosure related to Compliance with speciﬁc accounting and disclosure  standards increased substantially over time.  Within this category, three topics explain the vast majority of the increase.  fair  value and impairment disclosure, discussion of internal controls, and risk factor disclosure.   To ensure that we have accurately identiﬁed the content of these three topics, we demonstrate that they are associated  as expected with underlying economic attributes (special items, internal control weaknesses, and return variability).  Then,  we examine patterns in disclosure around the events that should have increased disclosure of these topics (implementation  of SFAS 157, Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX), and Item 1A).  We document sharp increases in the length of these three topics in the  years in which their associated standards were implemented, consistent with the LDA topics effectively capturing disclosure  in response to standards.  Disclosure associated with these topics is not limited to a single section of the annual report but  Similarly, the pattern in disclosure length for these three topics largely explains  extends across all of the major sections.   the increase in disclosure length for the 10-K as a whole.   In our third set of analyses, we link topical disclosure at the paragraph level, in particular that relating to the three major  increasing topics, to other textual attributes of the 10-K.  We demonstrate that fair value/impairment, risk factor, and internal  control disclosure tend to have relatively high levels of redundancy, stickiness, and boilerplate, and low levels of readability,  speciﬁcity, and hard information.  Further analyses indicate that the increasing prevalence of these three topics contributed  signiﬁcantly to the overall increases in redundancy, stickiness, and boilerplate, and the decreases in readability, speciﬁcity,  and the mix of hard information.   Finally, we examine cross-sectional variation in fair value, internal control, and risk factor disclosures.  We document  consistent patterns of increased length associated with these topics for disparate subsamples of ﬁrms suggesting that ﬁrms  signiﬁcantly increased disclosure length even when the additional disclosure may not have been as relevant.  Further, we  ﬁnd that ﬁrms for which the requirements were potentially less relevant often responded by providing disclosure that was  particularly high in boilerplate, redundancy, complexity, and stickiness, and lacking in hard information, although less so for  fair values where ﬁrms appear to have exercised more ﬂexibility to tailor disclosure based on materiality.   Overall, our evidence identiﬁes clear trends in textual attributes and suggests that a substantial portion can be explained  by disclosure in response to recent regulatory changes.  While the fact that disclosure associated with new requirements  increased over time is not in and of itself surprising, our results provide several potential contributions.  First, we believe it is  important to quantify the extent to which attributes of 10-K textual disclosure have, in fact, changed over time and attempt  to distinguish among various explanations.  While the three primary disclosure topics that we identify are logical candidates  to explain the increase in 10-K disclosure length over time, it is noteworthy that they explain such a large proportion of the  overall increase in length, as well as in other attributes such as complexity, redundancy, boilerplate, stickiness and lack of  speciﬁcity.  In contrast, economic factors from the prior literature (e. g. , litigation risk, business complexity, and globalization)  and the wide variety of other new requirements that were enacted during the sample period have limited ability to explain  the disclosure trends that we document.   Second, we develop and demonstrate the value of natural language processing techniques such as LDA in understanding  trends in the underlying content of textual disclosure.  To our knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst research to focus directly on  trends in 10-K content over time, and we believe that LDA has the potential to be a powerful tool for understanding trends  in the content of ﬁnancial text because it provides an approach for evaluating topical coverage for large samples of lengthy  documents on a consistent and objective basis over time.  While summary quantitative measures such as length, redundancy,  and readability are useful in providing aggregate characterizations of the accessibility and informativeness of documents,  it is important to develop techniques that permit insight into the underlying content of disclosure in order to make these  attributes interpretable.  LDA permits the researcher to identify speciﬁc disclosure topics, highlight trends, isolate causes, and  evaluate potential economic outcomes.  Beyond 10-Ks, LDA has the potential to provide insight into trends in the content of  other disclosures such as press releases, SEC speeches, conference calls, and articles in the business press.   Third, we use LDA to link speciﬁc topics to textual characteristics of annual reports that have been studied in prior  research, providing a mechanism to assess their topical content, and provide systematic evidence across a number of dimensions on the trends in these characteristics.  This is especially important given that prior literature focuses on textual  outcomes at an aggregate level and generally does not incorporate the fact that discussions of different topics will have different textual attributes.  LDA provides the opportunity to reinterpret the existing literature on outcomes of these attributes  factoring in the actual content of the discussion to which they relate.   This research is subject to important caveats.  First, topics from LDA (much like factors in factor analysis) require interpretation by the researcher.  As discussed in the research design section, we follow the prior computational linguistics literature  in identifying the appropriate number of topics.  In addition, we review the word lists and read representative paragraphs  for each topic to ensure the content matches the label and investigate the timing of changes in major topics around regulatory changes to ensure they behave as expected.  As a result, we are conﬁdent that our interpretations are reasonable and  consistent with the behavior of the topics in our corpus.   Second, our results are descriptive and do not allow us to draw normative conclusions.   We focus on a set of textual attributes that academic research, regulators, and investors suggest may be important attributes of disclosure.  However, we  acknowledge the limitations of these textual measures to capture meaningful aspects of disclosure in the speciﬁc context of  10-Ks, especially for sophisticated ﬁnancial statement users.  Closely related, while the textual attributes we consider have  been linked to various aspects of informativeness in prior research using aggregate 10-K text, it is possible that those results  do not apply to speciﬁc topics we consider.   2.  Background and related research.  As noted above, ﬁnancial reporting research has traditionally focused on quantitative data, particularly summary statistics such as net income and shareholders’ equity, reﬂecting in large part the relative ease of assessing associations between  quantitative data, coupled with an inherent assumption of unlimited information-processing capacity on the part of investors (see, for example, the papers cited in Footnote 1).  More recently, researchers have begun to explore determinants  of textual attributes of the 10-K.  While prior studies focus on cross-sectional determinants of textual characteristics, our   results suggest that those factors have limited ability to explain trends in reporting over time.   In  our  analysis  we  focus  on  a  broad  set  of  textual  attributes.   length,  readability,  redundancy,  boilerplate,  speciﬁcity,  stickiness, and the number of numbers in the text relative to the number of words (which we refer to as the relative mix of  hard and soft information).  We examine multiple characteristics because no single attribute can conceptually or empirically  capture all aspects of disclosure that are relevant to ﬁnancial statement users.  We are guided by attributes that have been  studied in the prior academic literature.  We acknowledge that the interpretation of these textual attributes is limited by the  fact that we do not directly measure the usefulness of the actual disclosure content, that different users (e. g. , sophisticated  and unsophisticated investors) may be affected by the same attributes differently, and that different types of information  may lend themselves to disclosure with different attributes (e. g. , some topics may lend themselves to disclosure which is  more redundant, boilerplate, or expressed in longer sentences).  To our knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst academic paper to focus  on identifying the magnitude, content, and causes of time trends in textual disclosure, although these trends have received  substantial attention by practitioners.   First, prior literature in academia and practice has discussed effects of less readable and lengthy disclosure, sometimes  referred to as disclosure “overload” ( KPMG, 2011 ).  Similar to the incomplete revelation hypothesis in Bloomﬁeld (2002) in  which statistics that are costly to extract are not fully incorporated into price, these attributes have been shown to decrease  information impounded at the time of the ﬁling and increase subsequent price drift ( Lee, 2012.  You and Zhang, 2009 ).   Similarly, redundancy of disclosure within a document, re-use of the same ﬁrm’s disclosure from a prior period (disclosure “stickiness”), and generic and standardized disclosure (often referred to as “boilerplate”) are all discussed by the FASB  in its invitation to comment on the disclosure framework project ( FASB, 2012 ), and the SEC has urged ﬁrms to evaluate  boilerplate disclosure and indicated that redundancies between FASB and SEC disclosure requirements will be a focus going  forward ( Higgins, 2014.  SEC, 1998, 2013 ).  Cazier and Pfeiffer (2015b) show that redundant disclosure leads to less eﬃcient  price discovery, while Brown and Tucker (2011) ﬁnd that MD&As that are updated less over time (“sticky” disclosures) have  muted stock price responses.  Lang and Stice-Lawrence (2015) empirically link the use of boilerplate to decreased liquidity,  analyst following, and institutional ownership for an international sample.   Lastly,  we  examine  the  speciﬁcity  of  disclosure  and  the  relative  amount  of  hard  information.   Regulators  have  expressed concern that textual disclosure has become increasingly vague and less likely to be supported by quantitative data  ( SEC, 1998 ).  To capture this, we calculate speciﬁcity as how often the text refers to speciﬁc people, places, organizations,  times, or numbers.  Hope et al.  (2016) show that more speciﬁc risk disclosures lead to greater market reactions and better  risk assessments by analysts.  To measure the extent to which narrative disclosure is supported by quantitative data (the relative mix of hard and soft information), we measure the number of informative numbers in the 10-K (i. e. , excluding dates and  section numbers) relative to the total number of words.  This gives a sense of the quantitative density of disclosure, because  text that contains numbers is more veriﬁable and precise than general descriptions of topics.  Blankespoor (2016) documents  an increase in quantitative disclosure after the introduction of XBRL, consistent with ﬁrms providing more quantitative data  when users’ processing costs decrease.   We use LDA to identify notable changes in disclosure content over our period and the extent to which changes in topical  content inﬂuence trends in each of these disclosure attributes.  As noted earlier, LDA has been used in many other literatures.  however, it has only recently been used in accounting and ﬁnance.  For example, Huang et al.  (2016) employ LDA to  examine differences between the topics discussed in conference calls and analyst reports, Hoberg and Lewis (2017) use LDA  to examine the content of a ﬁrm’s MD&A in years surrounding fraud, and Ball et al.  (2015) use LDA to identify topics within  MD&A.  While the prior literature conﬁrms that LDA has the potential to organize textual disclosure for numerical analysis,  it has not, to our knowledge, been applied to understanding trends in 10-K disclosure or to identifying the topical sources  of constructs such as length, readability, redundancy, speciﬁcity, boilerplate, stickiness, or the mix of hard information.   <Middle> Data.  We generate a database of text using SEC 10-K ﬁlings spanning the years 1996 to 2013.   Control variables in our reported  analyses are obtained from CRSP and Compustat.  Following Loughran and McDonald (2014) we remove ﬁrms with negative  market-to-book ratios.  The intersection of our data constraints results in a sample of 10,452 ﬁrms and 75,991 ﬁrm-years.   Deﬁnitions for all of our variables are included in the Appendix .   Table 1 provides descriptive sample statistics.  The median ﬁrm included 37,370 words in their annual report.  Based on  the Fog index, reading and comprehending the median annual report requires approximately 21. 21 years of formal education.   The median annual report has 2276 words (6% of the 10-K for the median ﬁrm) in sentences that are repeated verbatim  throughout the annual report, 10,882 words (29%) in sentences containing boilerplate phrases, and 22,500 words (67%) in  12 Median levels of Speciﬁcity and HardInfoMix of 50. 75 and 17. 93 indicate that the  sentences containing “sticky” phrases.   median 10-K includes about 51 and 18 speciﬁc terms and informative numbers, respectively, for every 10 0 0 words of text.   Lastly, approximately 77% of the sample ﬁrms are audited by a Big “N” auditor, and 31% report a loss.   Fig.  1 provides initial evidence on trends in reporting over our sample period, including length, readability, redundancy,  boilerplate, stickiness, speciﬁcity, and the mix of hard information.  Perhaps most prominent and relevant for our purposes  is the increase in length depicted in Fig.  1 Panel A and the near monotonicity of this increase.  While there is some evidence  of larger increases around SOX in the early 20 0 0s and the ﬁnancial crisis, especially for ﬁrms in the 75th percentile, the  increase for the median ﬁrm has been remarkably continuous.  The number of words for the median ﬁrm increased from  about 23,0 0 0 in 1996 to almost 50,0 0 0 in 2013.   In terms of other attributes, the pattern for redundant words in Fig.  1 Panel B is similarly conspicuous, with the median  13 Fig.  1 Panels C and D suggest  ﬁrm increasing from 800 words in redundant sentences in 1996 to almost 3300 in 2013.   similar upward trends in the amount of boilerplate and stickiness, with both tripling over time, indicating an increasing  tendency for ﬁrms to repeat disclosure from year to year and to use generic disclosure.  On the other hand, readability  for the median ﬁrm decreased monotonically over the twelve years since 20 0 0, following an increase between 1998 and  14 Results in Panels E and F also suggest clear  20 0 0 that was likely a result of the SEC’s plain English requirements in 1998.   decreases in other attributes of informative disclosure, with speciﬁcity and the relative mix of hard information exhibiting  nearly monotonic decreases over the period.   The preceding analysis is descriptive, but it provides strong initial evidence that trends in textual disclosure have been  systematic and that attributes which prior research suggests have the potential to reduce the informativeness of disclosure  have increased, while those which prior research suggests may enhance informativeness have decreased.  Further, the consistency in trends among the attributes suggests the possibility that the same underlying factors may be driving the series.   In the next section, we examine the extent to which determinants previously used to explain cross-sectional variation in  textual attributes explain the trends that we observe.   4.  Why have textual attributes changed over time.   There are several potential explanations for the changes in 10-K characteristics over time.  First, they might reﬂect a  change in sample composition if, for example, more ﬁrms with intangible assets (and potentially lengthier and more complex corresponding disclosure) began trading publicly during the sample period.   However, untabulated analysis indicates  that all seven of our attributes continue to trend very similarly for a constant sample. 