 1.  Introduction Since the many projects launched over the past decade to achieve increased market integration across day-ahead electricity markets in Europe, the day-ahead electricity price convergence between market areas has increased signiﬁcantly, adding to the complexity of modeling the joint behavior of day-ahead electricity prices.  The ﬁrst signiﬁcant step towards market integration in Europe was taken with the introduction of the Nord Pool market, which is the main platform for trading power in most Nordic and Baltic countries.  At Nord Pool, the bidding areas are price coupled, meaning that the transmission capacity is auctioned as an implicit part of the day-ahead auction of electrical energy.  This achieves - as opposed to the explicit auctioning, where the transmission capacity auction and the day-ahead auction of electrical energy are separate actions - the eﬃcient utilization of interconnectors and results in smaller price differences between the bidding areas.  Since Nord Pool’s creation in the mid 90’s, many countries have joined and Nord Pool today comprises Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.  For the sake of completion, we also mention that Nord Pool has taken sole ownership of the UK market as of 2014.  Although Nord Pool has a long-standing history of price coupling, such initiatives are more recent for other European countries.  In 2006, the so-called Tri-Lateral Market Coupling (TLC) project comprising France, Belgium and the Netherlands was initiated.  Later in 2010, the price coupling of Central West Europe (CWE) was achieved, integrating Germany, France, Austria, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg.  In 2014, a crucial milestone was reached with the price coupling of the North Western European (NWE) region, covering the CWE region, the UK, the Nordic and Baltic countries - and as of 2016, the price coupling region has grown to include 19 European countries.  Also, a new algorithm regarding how cross-border capacities are included in the day-ahead price calculation was introduced on 20 May 2015 in the CWE region, with the transition from the Available Transmission Capacity (ATC) methodology to the more eﬃcient Flow-Based (FB) methodology.  For the joint modeling of day-ahead electricity prices in two interconnected areas, price coupling has induced a fundamental change that cannot be ignored.  In the case of the CWE region for example, the transition from explicit to implicit auctioning of transmission capacity has meant that equal prices in two adjacent markets are very often observed now.  As already accentuated in the existing literature (see e. g.  Füss et al.  (2017)), this has generally resulted in the non-feasibility of previously proposed models.  For one, the pricing of spread options such as the ﬁnancial transmission rights cannot be achieved using spread option formulas á la Margrabe.  Also in risk management applications, the classical reduced-form models are no longer suitable for modeling the joint behavior of prices.  To exemplify some events and their inﬂuence on the day-ahead electricity prices, we plot in Fig.  1 the evolution of the German– French price spread at hour 8, for the period 1 January 2009 to 25 September 2016.  According to Fig.  1, the most visible change in the spread dynamics was caused by the price coupling of Germany and France in 2010, leading to a large amount of exact price convergence in the following period.  In this paper, we propose a regime-switching AR–GARCH copula model for the joint behavior of pairs of day-ahead prices in coupled electricity markets, inspired by ideas from Haldrup and Nielsen (2006) and Haldrup et al.  (2010).  The regime-switching part is essential for distinguishing the case of identical prices from the case of non-identical prices.  The AR–GARCH functions as a ﬁlter to remove the serial dependence in the conditional means and conditional variances.  The use of copula models facilitates the analysis in the sense that marginal models for day-ahead prices are treated separately from the dependence structure.  Furthermore, copulas allow for the easy transition to more realistic distributional assumptions for the residuals, and also allow for the inclusion of a more detailed description of the dependence structure when the prices do not coincide.  Our empirical study concentrates on four coupled markets.  Germany–France, Germany–Netherlands, Netherlands–Belgium and Germany–Western Denmark.  The proposed model has a wide range of applications in the context of derivatives pricing, hedging and risk management.  Here, we consider two applications.  The pricing of ﬁnancial transmission rights, and the out-of-sample forecasting of tail quantiles.  In both applications, we study how the results are impacted by the choice of marginal distributions and the choice of copula.  Furthermore in the forecasting exercise, we demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed modeling framework by comparing the forecast performance of copula-based models against a simple alternative that is not copula-based.  The existing literature on bivariate or multivariate models for day-ahead prices in coupled electricity markets is scarce.  Due to the aforementioned increasing complexity in the joint price dynamics, some authors employ fundamental models, with examples being Kiesel and Kustermann (2016) and Füss et al.  (2017).  Kiesel and Kustermann (2016) propose a fundamental model in the spirit of Carmona et al.  (2013), and derive closed-form pricing formulas for futures and plain vanilla options under market coupling.  Moreover, they provide an empirical application using data from the German and French markets.  In Füss et al.  (2017), the authors also employ a fundamental model, and consider the pricing of futures and transmission rights under different allocation schemes.  Aside from providing closed-form pricing formulas, sensitivity analyses are also carried out.  However appealing fundamental models are when it comes to their adaptability to changes in the market structure - which indeed happen quite often - they can be extremely data-heavy and thus both theoretically and empirically challenging, as also acknowledged by Kiesel and Kustermann (2016).  In the empirical analysis of Kiesel and Kustermann (2016) regarding Germany–France, the data input amounts to many different time series.  Day-ahead electricity price data, coal, gas and oil data to obtain a proxy for the marginal fuel, residual expected demand data for both countries (which is in turn obtained by subtracting renewable electricity generation from the expected demand), and also data on installed transmission capacities.  Our proposed model on the other hand, which belongs to the class of reduced-form models, is not nearly as data intensive, while still being able to comply with the institutional framework.  Examples on applications of time series models in the context of price coupled electricity markets are Haldrup and Nielsen (2006), where a regime-switching multiplicative SARFIMA model is proposed for the modeling of price spreads in the Nord Pool area, and Haldrup et al.  (2010), where a vector autoregressive model with long memory and regime switches is proposed and applied again to Nord Pool data.  In the context of copula models and their applications in energy markets, copulas have been gaining more interest recently.  Some examples are Börger et al.  (2009), who use copulas in the context of cross-commodity risk management, Benth and Kettler (2011), who employ copulas to model the spark spread, Avdulaj and Barunikl (2015), who use dynamic copulas to investigate oil-stock diversiﬁcation, and Grothe and Schnieders (2011) and Elberg and Hagspiel (2015), who consider copulas in the context of wind power in Germany.  The remaining of this paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 describes the data that our analysis is based on.  Section 3 introduces the regime-switching AR–GARCH copula model.  In Section 4 the proposed model is ﬁtted to the data.  Sections 5 and 6 present two empirical applications of the model.  Section 7 concludes.  <Middle> Data.  Our empirical study relies on day-ahead electricity price data from four price coupled markets.  Germany–France (DE–FR), Germany–Netherlands (DE–NL), Netherlands–Belgium (NL–BE), and Germany–Western Denmark (DE–DK1).  After careful considerations, we choose to ﬁx the sample window to the period 1 May 2011 to 20 May 2015.  Since areas of CWE are mostly represented in our analysis, and we wish to analyze the period following price coupling, a natural starting point for the sample is 10 November 2010, which marks the ﬁrst day of price coupling in the CWE region1.  Shortly after however, the Fukushima nuclear disaster followed, leading to a sudden change in German policy, with the closure of nuclear power plants and the signiﬁcant focus on the development of renewable generation sources.  To exclude the immediate perturbation caused by the Fukushima accident, we thus let the start of our sample be 1 May 2011.  Regarding the end point, we choose the date marking the switch to the FB methodology.  According to EPEX (2015), the FB coupling algorithm allows for more sophisticated grid modeling to optimize the ﬂows on interconnectors in comparison to the ATC methodology.  Effects of the change regarding how ﬂows are included in the calculation of day-ahead prices are not evident from just looking at time series plots of the data.  However, we do suspect some implications on the joint price dynamics, and let the sample end at this date as a result.  We will get back to this issue later in the paper.  Having ﬁxed the sample window to the period 1 May 2011–20 May 2015, we avoid the most signiﬁcant structural changes in the institutional framework for the pairs belonging to the CWE region.  Careful attention is however needed in the case of the DE–DK1 pair, where price coupling was ﬁrst introduced on 4 February 2014.  Before then, Western Denmark was volume coupled to Germany, using explicit auctioning.  This is not necessarily as worrying as the case of price coupling in the CWE region, since exact price convergence between Germany and Western Denmark was achieved frequently also before their price coupling.  Nevertheless, we shall treat the pair DE–DK1 with special consideration before applying the same modeling framework to all pairs of prices.  Although the pair DE–DK1 complicates our analysis somewhat, its inclusion is motivated by having one of Nord Pool’s bidding areas represented in our analysis, and also by having a pair where the in-feed of renewable energy is very signiﬁcant in both markets.  We consider hourly price data separately for each hour of the day – so for all four pairs, we will have 24 hourly time series, consisting of 1481 observations each.  Fig.  2 shows time series plots of the four pairs of spreads at four different hours of the day, and Table 1 provides summary statistics in order to get a better sense of the data.  To avoid distortions, few extreme prices have been truncated.  Speciﬁcally, prices below −50 EUR/MWh were set to −50, and prices above 150 EUR/MWh were set to 150. 2 The spreads show a rather different behavior across pairs and also across the hours of the day.  For DE–FR, we observe a changing seasonal pattern during (or near) off-peak.  During summer off-peak, Germany usually imports electricity from France due to low renewables generation in Germany (less wind during summer periods, and very little solar during off-peak) and excess nuclear production in France due to the lower demand.  During winter peak and off-peak, France usually imports from Germany due to increased demand and higher production in Germany caused by increased renewables generation.  In the case of the DE–NL pair, the German price is almost always below the Dutch price, signaling Netherlands to be a signiﬁcant importer of German power.  This relation can be explained by the electricity generation mix in the Netherlands, which relies heavily on more expensive natural gas.  For NL–BE we see that the Dutch price is more often observed to be above the Belgian price, which again is due to the more expensive generation sources in the Netherlands compared to Belgium. 