
We investigate whether firms' recurring measurements of the fair values of recognized financial instruments (hereafter
“fair value measurements”) exhibit conditional conservatism when the instruments do not trade in liquid markets, thereby
enabling them to exercise discretion over the measurements. 1 Absent such discretion, fair value measurements should be
unbiased, i. e. , symmetrically incorporate unrealized gains and unrealized losses.  Policymakers and academics often make
statements or research design choices that suggest fair value measurements generally are unbiased, ignoring biases introduced by discretion.  For example, SEC (2008) states that the “objective of SFAS No.  157 and of existing fair value standards
is to provide transparent unbiased information about fair value. ” Shaffer (2011) describes fair value measurement as “an
anchor for”…“an asset/liability approach… [in which] valuations must be objective and neutral.  This requirement overrides
the constraint of conservatism, which historically assumed a downward bias for asset valuations. ” (Emphasis added in both
quotes. ) Empirical research examining fair value measurements' predictive power and their value-, returns-, and risk-relevance often sums fair values or fair value gains and losses, which is appropriate only if the summed items are measured
comparably (e. g. , are unbiased or have the same proportional bias). 2
Ostensibly in contrast to the view that fair values are unbiased, some influential observers claim that fair value measurements for instruments that do not trade in liquid markets represent optimistic or noisy “mark-to-myth” (Buffett, 2003)
or “mark-to-make-believe” (Weil, 2007) valuations that are discounted by investors.  Empirical research provides evidence
supporting these claims (Kolev, 2009; Song Name, 2010; Goh Name, 2009).  To mitigate such discounting, we expect firms to
take steps to increase the perceived reliability of these measurements.  The step we examine is suggested by the extensive
literature that documents the contracting and other benefits of conditional conservatism (e. g. , Basu, 1997; Watts, 2003). 
Roychowdhury (2010) emphasizes the critical role of explicit and implicit governance mechanisms, which increase the
strength and persistence of firms' incentives to report conditionally conservatively, to obtain these benefits.  Although firms
make reporting decisions each period, when these incentives are sufficiently strong and persistent, they effectively constitute a “credible commitment” to conditional conservatism (e. g. , Zhang, 2008). 
We identify the extent of firms' discretion over fair value measurements using disclosures provided under Statement of
Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) 157, Fair Value Measurements (FASB, 2006).  This standard requires firms to disclose,
for each major category of asset and liability, the fair value measurement amounts that are based on active market prices for
the items being measured (Level 1 inputs), other observable information (Level 2 inputs), or unobservable information
(Level 3 inputs). 3 These three input levels differ in their observability and individual completeness as measures of fair value,
and thus in the extent of discipline they provide over firms' fair value measurements.  Level 1 inputs are both observable and
individually complete measures of fair value, and thus provide a very high level of discipline over fair value measurements. 
Level 2 inputs are observable but individually incomplete measures of fair value, requiring either adjustments to observed
market prices for the illiquidity or dissimilarity of the items being fair valued or model-based calculations involving other
inputs to determine fair values.  Level 3 inputs are both unobservable and individually incomplete measures of fair value.  We
refer to Level 2 or 3 inputs or fair value measurements based on these inputs as “lower-level”. 
We predict that firms mitigate investors' discounting of lower-level fair value measurements by reporting the measurements conditionally conservatively, i. e. , by recognizing unrealized losses in a timelier fashion than unrealized gains.  We
further predict that firms report more conditionally conservative fair value measurements when the measurements are
evaluated by more knowledgeable investors, verified by more independent third parties, and disclosed more fully in financial reports, governance mechanisms that increase the strength and persistence of firms' incentives to report conditionally conservatively.  Lastly, we predict that firms that narrowly meet or beat earnings targets, an earnings management
incentive that typically conflicts with conditional conservatism, report less conditionally conservative fair value measurements. 
To test these predictions, we measure conditional conservatism using two expanded versions of Basu's (1997) approach. 