 Introduction Private enforcement via shareholder litigation is important to investor protection and stock market development (La Porta et al. , 2006).  Prior literature suggests that cross-country variation in shareholder litigation threat affects the cost of equity (Hail and Leuz, 2009.  Khurana and Raman, 2004).  However, there is relatively scant evidence on how firm-level mechanisms affect the disciplining role of shareholder litigation and therefore the cost of equity.  This research question is important as the cost of equity is a summary measure of how investors perceive the risk and return tradeoff of investing in a firm (Francis et al. , 2004).  In addition, the cost of equity plays a key role in corporate financing and capital budgeting decisions.  In this study, we examine how directors' and officers' liability insurance (D&O insurance) affects a firm’s cost ofD&O insurance is a policy purchased by a firm to cover defense cost and potential damage award when its directors and officers (D&Os) are sued.  By effectively shielding D&Os from bearing personal financial liabilities, D&O insurance reduces the disciplining effect of shareholder litigation (Baker and Griffith, 2010).  We hypothesize that D&O insurance increases a firm’s cost of equity via two important channels.  First, as shareholder litigation encourages managers to increase transparency (Ball, 2001), D&O insurance can result in poor financial reporting and disclosure quality, leading to a higher cost of equity (Leuz and Wysocki, 2008).  Second, as D&O insurance limits the expected legal liabilities associated with bad outcomes of D&O decisions, it encourages risk-taking (Baker and Griffith, 2010.  Core, 1997).  To the extent that risk-taking results in a higher exposure to market risks, the cost of equity is higher.  Using a large manually collected dataset on D&O insurance from Canada, we find that D&O insurance coverage is positively associated with the ex ante cost of equity implied in stock prices and analyst forecasts.  This association is robust to firm fixed effects regression and alternative cost of equity measures.  It is also economically significant.  Based on our baseline model, an increase in D&O insurance coverage by one standard deviation is associated with an increase in the cost of equity of about 7% of the sample mean.  The positive association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity can be driven by endogeneity as D&O insurance purchase is a firm’s choice.  It can be the case that high risks lead to both high D&O insurance coverage and a high cost of equity.  We conduct extensive tests to mitigate this concern.  First, we control for economic determinants of liability coverage and corporate governance quality (Chen et al. , 2011.  Core, 1997, 2000).  We continue to find a positive association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity.  Second, we conduct a lead-lag change analysis.  If it is risk, which is already known by investors and manifested in the cost of equity, determines a firm’s decision to purchase D&O insurance, then a change in the cost of equity should precede a change in D&O insurance.  In contrast, our hypothesis predicts that a change in the cost of equity follows a change in D&O insurance coverage.  We find that a change in the cost of equity follows, but not precedes, a change in D&O insurance coverage.  Next, we examine the market reaction to the release of proxy circulars that contain D&O insurance information.  A shortterm market event study is less likely to suffer from the omitted correlated variable bias.  If investors charge a high cost of equity for firms with a high level of D&O insurance coverage, then they would react negatively to the disclosure of an increase in D&O insurance.  Our finding is consistent with this prediction.  It is also possible that the D&O insurance purchase decision is based on D&Os' private information that is learnt by investors subsequently (the risk anticipation argument). 1 If this is the case, we can still observe that a change in the cost of equity follows, but not precedes, a change in D&O insurance coverage.  In addition, the disclosure of an increase in D&O insurance can reveal D&Os' private information on an increase in risk and therefore lead to a negative market reaction.  While the risk anticipation argument and our hypothesis are not mutually exclusive as a change in D&O insurance can reveal both D&Os' private information and an expected change in D&Os' behavior, empirically distinguishing them is difficult as D&Os' private information is not directly observable.  Nevertheless, we conduct several tests to address this concern.  First, we control for an ex ante measure of litigation risk developed by Kim and Skinner (2012) and continue to find a positive association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity.  Second, we test a cross-sectional prediction of the risk anticipation argument.  If the association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity is driven by D&Os' private information, then it should be more pronounced when D&Os have more private information.  Following Chen et al.  (2007), we develop proxies for D&Os' private information based on earnings surprises and CEOs' insider trading activities.  We do not find a more pronounced association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity for firms with D&Os having more private information.  Ideally, to clearly distinguish the risk anticipation argument from our hypothesis, one needs to identify a change in D&O insurance not driven by D&Os' private information.  However, we are not aware of decent instrumental variables that are capable of providing such identification.  As an alternative, we conduct a test of the effect of an exogenous reduction in D&Os' personal legal liabilities on the cost of equity.  Nevada swiftly changed its corporate law in 2001 in order to attract more firm incorporations.  Before the change, Nevada’s corporate law imposed similar fiduciary duties on D&Os as those under the Delaware corporate law.  After the law change, D&Os are only liable if their behaviors involve both a breach of the duty of loyalty and an intentional fraud (or a knowing violation of the law).  This implies that D&Os are no longer liable for a breach of the duty of care (Barzuza, 2012).  We argue that this law change has a similar effect on reducing D&Os' personal legal liabilities as an increase in D&O insurance coverage.  As the legislation process was very short, it is unlikely that firms could anticipate the law change and quickly reincorporate into Nevada.  Thus, this change in D&Os' legal liabilities is exogenous.  Using a difference-in-differences analysis, we find that the change in the cost of equity after this law change is significantly higher for Nevada-incorporated firms than that for a sample of non-Nevada-incorporated firms matched on industry, firm size, and the average cost of equity before the law change.  We observe a similar result when focusing on Nevada-incorporated firms that mainly operate outside Nevada.  Thus, this result cannot be attributed to changes in macroeconomic conditions in Nevada that coincided with the law change.  Taken together, although it is difficult to completely rule out the risk anticipation argument, the positive association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity does not appear to be entirely driven by D&Os' private information.  Finally, we conduct several tests to better understand the channels through which D&O insurance increases the cost of equity.  We find that D&O insurance is positively associated with the absolute value of performance-adjusted discretionary accruals (Kothari et al. , 2005), bid-ask spread, Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity measure, analysts' earnings forecast error, and the dispersion of analysts' earnings forecasts.  This result is consistent with D&O insurance reducing financial reporting and disclosure quality, increasing stock illiquidity and investors' estimation risk.  We also find that D&O insurance is positively associated with the exposure to market risk, consistent with D&O insurance leading to more risk-taking.  It is possible that firms purchase D&O insurance to optimally motivate D&Os to take more risks that benefit shareholders.  If this is the case, D&O insurance can be positively associated with the cost of equity while at the same time be positively associated with future operating performance.  We do not find a significantly positive association between D&O insurance and future operating performance measured by industry-adjusted return on assets.  The association, if any, is negative.  These results, combined with a negative market reaction to the announcement of an increase in D&O insurance, suggest that a high risk associated with high D&O insurance coverage is more likely due to D&Os' reduced vigilance or diligence than due to their optimal risk-taking activities which benefit shareholders. 2 We make two important contributions to the literature.  First, prior studies show that country-level variation in private enforcement via shareholder litigation plays a pivotal role in determining a firm’s cost of equity (Hail and Leuz, 2009.  Khurana and Raman, 2004).  We show that even in common-law countries with stronger legal protection of investors, D&O insurance, a firm-level mechanism that reduces the deterrence effect of private litigation, increases the cost of equity.  This evidence suggests that investors factor D&O insurance information in their investment decisions.  Since D&O insurance is widespread in North America and many other countries, our results have an important policy implication that supports mandating the disclosure of D&O insurance (Baker and Griffith, 2010).  In addition, as D&O insurance weakens the disciplining role of shareholder litigation, we add to the research linking corporate governance with a firm’s cost of equity (Ashbaugh-Skaife et al. , 2005.  Chen et al. , 2011).  Second, we contribute to the research on the consequences of D&O insurance.  While prior studies have examined the economic determinants of D&O insurance purchases and premium (Boyer, 2005.  Chalmers et al. , 2002.  Core, 1997.  O’Sullivan, 1997.  Zou et al. , 2008 Gillan and Panasian, 2014.  Boyer and Stern, 2015) and the effect of D&O insurance on accounting restatements (Kim, 2006.  Lin et al. , 2013), reporting conservatism (Chung and Wynn, 2008), management forecasts (Cao and Narayanamoorthy, 2011.  Wynn, 2008), investment decisions (Lin et al. , 2011) and loan financing (Lin et al. , 2013), we document how D&O insurance affects the cost of equity.  Our evidence, together with these prior studies and anecdotal criticisms (e. g. , of Warren Buffett), point to a cost of D&O insurance.  The rest of the paper proceeds as follows.  Section 2 discusses background of D&O insurance and develops our hypothesis.  Section 3 describes data and research design.  Section 4 presents main empirical results.  Section 5 conducts robustness tests dealing with the potential endogeneity of D&O insurance.  Section 6 provides evidence on channels through which D&O insurance affects the cost of equity.  Section 7 concludes.  2. Institutional background and hypothesis development.  2. 1.  Institutional background.  Shareholders in Canada can sue firms and their D&Os for misrepresentations in securities issuance (primary market liability suits) and in continuous disclosures that do not involve securities issuance (secondary market liability suits).  In addition, shareholders can sue D&Os for a breach of fiduciary duties (derivative suits as the potential recovery goes to the firm rather than to the plaintiff).  An important way to protect D&Os from bearing personal financial liabilities is to purchase D&O insurance.  D&O insurance is a policy protecting D&Os collectively against allegations of “wrongdoings”, including a breach of fiduciary duties and violation of the securities law.  The policy is primarily intended to protect D&Os, but at the firm’s cost.  It contains personal coverage (Category A coverage) and corporate indemnity coverage (Category B coverage) (Baker and Griffith, 2010).  Category A coverage provides direct payment to D&Os when a firm is unable to indemnify them due to legal reasons (in a shareholder derivative suit), financial distress, or when a firm chooses not to indemnify them.  Category B coverage enables a firm to recoup the cost it incurs in indemnifying D&Os.  Neither Category A nor Category B coverage protects a firm from legal liabilities when it is sued.  However, a firm can add entity coverage (Category C coverage) to cover its own legal cost.  We argue that D&O insurance influences D&Os' behaviors even though the federal Canada Business Corporation Act (CBCA) allows a firm to indemnify D&Os' legal cost via its bylaws or charters.  First, D&Os believe that D&O insurance is indispensable.  A survey carried out in 2007 finds that 87% of the 356 directors surveyed rank the availability of comprehensive D&O insurance coverage as an important condition before agreeing to join a board despite the law’s permission of corporate indemnification. 3 Second, the award of corporate indemnification has three restrictions.  (1) D&Os acting in good faith, (2) firms remaining solvent, and (3) covering only defense cost subject to court approval, but not settlement or damage award in derivative suits. 4 While a firm seldom refuses to indemnify its D&Os and corporate defaults are rare, these restrictions nevertheless create uncertainties to risk-averse D&Os.  In contrast, D&O insurance is less restrictive and has considerably narrower exclusions that are typically deliberate frauds or illegal profits.  Moreover, the narrow exclusions of D&O insurance are rarely applied.  The prevalent practice is that as long as defending D&Os do not confess dishonesty, D&O insurers pay the claim (Baker and Griffith, 2010).  Therefore, compared with corporate indemnification, D&O insurance represents less restrictive and more certain coverage.  This is why the possibility of corporate indemnification via by-laws does not reduce the demand for D&O insurance.  Our check of a random sample of corporate filings indicates that firms invariably allow corporate indemnification of D&Os.  However, we find no quantitative disclosure on the extent of such indemnification.  Therefore, controlling for a binary proxy for corporate indemnification in our analysis is not meaningful while controlling for a continuous proxy for indemnification is not practical.  However, the presence of corporate indemnification is unlikely to materially alter our inference on the effect of D&O insurance due to two reasons.  (1) our result regarding the association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity is robust to firm fixed effects estimation and a change regression model.  To the extent that firms' indemnification policy is stable, the effect of the time-invariant element of corporate indemnification should be captured by firm fixed effects.  (2) The time-variant element of corporate indemnification can be picked up by proxies for firms' financial conditions such as size, leverage, credit rating and cash holdings (Chung and Wynn, 2008).  <Middle> Hypothesis development.  We argue that there are at least two channels through which D&O insurance increases the cost of equity.  First, D&O insurance weakens the disciplining effect of shareholder litigation by decreasing D&Os' personal legal liabilities.  A reduction in legal liabilities can lower the quality of financial reporting and disclosure, resulting in a poorer information environment.  Second, a reduction in legal liabilities can lead to more risk-taking by D&Os.  2. 2. 1.  D&O insurance, reporting/disclosure quality and the cost of equity Litigation against D&Os for inadequate and untimely disclosures can encourage D&Os to improve transparency to reduce potential legal liabilities (Ball, 2001.  Healy and Palepu, 2001).  Timely and accurate disclosures reduce legal liabilities by mitigating plaintiffs' allegation that D&Os hide the truth, thereby reducing the amount of damage award (Skinner, 1994, 1997).  Consistent with this notion, Khurana et al.  (2006) show that private litigation threat is positively associated with earnings quality as measured by the predictability of earnings for future operating cash flows.  By reducing the expected financial liabilities in a lawsuit, D&O insurance can lower D&Os' care and vigilance in financial reporting and disclosure, resulting in errors, omissions, or even frauds (Baker and Griffith, 2010).  Prior studies find that firms with high D&O insurance coverage report less conservative earnings (Chung and Wynn, 2008), provide fewer bad news management forecasts (Wynn, 2008), and are more likely to have accounting restatements (Kim, 2006.  Lin et al. , 2013).  Thus, a high level of D&O insurance coverage may result in deterioration in financial reporting and disclosure quality.  Financial reporting and disclosure can affect the cost of equity through affecting stock liquidity and estimation risk (Leuz and Wysocki, 2008).  Diamond and Verrecchia (1991) suggest that poor disclosure increases the cost of capital by exacerbating information asymmetry among investors.  A stock becomes illiquid because uninformed investors (market makers) reduce their trading volume and increase bid-ask spread in order to limit potential losses from trading with informed investors.  Such illiquidity increases investors' trading cost.  In equilibrium, investors require compensation for expected trading cost by increasing the required return.  Low quality disclosure thus leads to a high cost of capital.  Lambert et al.  (2007) extend the literature on estimation risk (e. g. , Coles et al. , 1995) and directly examine the effect of accounting information on the cost of capital within a CAPM framework.  They show that the cost of equity increases with the estimated covariance between its cash flow and the cash flow of all other firms in the market, and that this effect cannot be diversified.  The estimated covariance of cash flows between two firms decreases with the precision of information about any of the two firms' cash flows as information about one firm’s cash flow implicitly provides information about the other firm's cash flow.  This information removes a source of common variation between the two firms’ cash flows and hence reduces the estimated covariance of the cash flows.  Low quality disclosure increases the estimated covariance of cash flows and consequently inflates the cost of equity.  Consistent with these theories, Welker (1995) finds a negative association between a firm’s voluntary disclosure quality and the bid-ask spread of its stock.  Lang and Lundholm (1996) show that better disclosure is associated with higher accuracy and lower dispersion of analysts' earnings forecasts.  Others find that a lower cost of equity is associated with more disclosures (Botosan, 1997) and higher quality financial reporting (Francis et al. , 2004).  Existing evidence also shows that a stronger shareholder litigation environment is associated with a lower cost of equity.  Hail and Leuz (2009) report that listing in a US exchange reduces the cost of equity as cross-listing exposes foreign firms to stronger shareholder litigation discipline.  Khurana and Raman (2004) document that Big-4 auditors help lower the cost of equity in the US but not in Australia, Canada, and the UK, which have a similar economic structure but a less litigious environment.  In sum, D&O insurance coverage may lead to deterioration in financial reporting and disclosure quality that increases information asymmetry and non-diversifiable estimation risk, leading to a higher cost of equity.  2. 2. 2.  D&O insurance, risk-taking and the cost of equity D&Os are risk-averse because they cannot fully diversify risks specific to their claims in a firm (Smith and Stulz, 1985) and risks associated with their human capital (Amihud and Lev, 1981).  The possibility of bearing legal liabilities in shareholder litigations against bad outcomes of their decisions can make D&Os even more risk-averse (Core, 1997).  Consistent with this view, there is evidence that the Sarbanes-Oxley Act reduces corporate risk-taking as it increases legal liabilities of D&Os (Bargeron et al. , 2010).  D&O insurance effectively limits D&Os' legal liabilities in lawsuits against bad outcomes of their business decisions.  Thus, with the protection offered by D&O insurance, D&Os are encouraged to invest in risky projects otherwise passed up (Core, 1997.  Baker and Griffith, 2010).  Risk-taking induced by D&O insurance may or may not benefit shareholders.  On the one hand, D&O insurance can encourage risk-taking activities based on prudent and informed decisions that are beneficial to shareholders (which we examine later in the paper).  On the other hand, D&O insurance can provide D&Os incentives to breach the duty of care, resulting in reduced vigilance, more recklessness or negligence in decision-making (Baker and Griffith, 2010).  According to Eisenberg (1990), the duty of care requires D&Os to reasonably monitor the conduct of business, follow up on information that should raise concerns, adopt a reasonable decision-making process and make informed decisions.  Breach of the duty of care can result in a failure in identifying, gathering information on, and assessing risks in business decisions that expose firms to risks harmful to shareholders (Bainbridge, 2009).  Consistent with this notion, Bradley and Schipnai (1989) find a negative market reaction to the enactment of a Delaware legislation that permits firms to include in their articles of incorporation a provision that eliminates or limits directors’ personal liabilities for a breach of the duty of care.  They also find a negative market reaction when Delaware firms announce to adopt the provision limiting directors' legal liabilities.  Regardless of the nature of risk-taking, a likely outcome of D&O insurance is that it encourages D&Os to take risks.  Acharya and Bisin (2009) argue that D&Os prefer increasing firms' exposure to the market risk than to the idiosyncratic risk as they can hedge the former by trading in financial markets on the market portfolio but cannot effectively hedge the latter.  Thus, granting more risk-taking incentives (e. g. , D&O insurance) to D&Os can encourage them to increase a firm’s exposure to the market risk, resulting in a higher cost of equity.  The above discussions lead to the following hypothesis.  Hypothesis.  The cost of equity increases in D&O insurance.  We also note the possibility that the presence of D&O insurance can actually lower a firm’s cost of equity via reducing its risk of financial distress. 5 Transferring liability risks to insurers who have a comparative advantage in managing liability risks can be an efficient risk management strategy (Mayers and Smith, 1982).  Without D&O insurance coverage, a firm may have to resort to corporate resources to indemnify its D&Os for defense cost, settlement or damage award when they are sued.  In addition, in many shareholder suits, firms are also named as a defendant together with D&Os. 