
Many countries subsidise the production and consumption of fossil
fuels.  Most subsidies are given downstream, to reduce the cost of consuming fossil fuels (Coady Name, 2016).  While these subsidies beneﬁt
fuel consumers, at least in the short run, they also have a number of
negative effects (IEA, 2014).  First, they contribute to ﬁscal imbalances
and thus crowd out other government spending.  Second, subsidies
stimulate excessive fossil fuel consumption contributing to increased
emissions of harmful pollution such as CO2.  Finally, in the long run
low oil prices encourage the development of energy-intensive industries and discourage development of renewable technologies.  Despite
the negative effects, it has proven difﬁcult to remove fossil fuel subsidies.  In many countries fossil fuel subsidies were originally introduced
to improve consumer welfare, and proposals to remove such subsidies
could result in citizen protests.  We ﬁnd, however, that the biggest
subsidisers may increase their welfare by removing their oil subsidies. 
The reason is that subsidy removal allows these countries to shift oil
from the domestic market to the international market where prices
are higher. 
The biggest fossil fuel subsidisers are also major producers and exporters of oil and gas.  In fact, the heaviest fossil fuel subsidisers are the
OPEC countries, mostly located in the Middle-East and North-Africa
(MENA) region.  Public spending on subsidies – estimated as the gap between international and domestic prices – is, on average, much higher
in the oil exporting MENA region than in other countries.  In particular,
there are extensive subsidies in the transport sector.  According to
IMF (2014), subsidies to gasoline and diesel in the MENA countries
amounted to almost 4% of the regional GDP in 2012.  Oil products used
in the transport sector are also subsidised to a certain degree in other
Non-OECD countries. 
Price control is often a key element in fossil fuel subsidies.  However,
subsidies can also include cash transfers directly to consumers, as well
as tax exemptions and rebates.  Assessing the magnitude of fossil fuels
subsidies in all its forms is a task challenged by poor data quality, limited
data availability and lack of data comparability (Ellis, 2010).  Like many
other studies, we use the price-gap method, calculating the combined
effect of reducing the wedge between domestic and international
(reference) prices (Koplow, 2009).  The reference price on goods that
are traded on the international market, like oil, is usually the international
or border price adjusted for market exchange rates, transport and
distributional costs, and country speciﬁc taxes and tariffs.  As we focus on
price-gap subsidies in the transport sector, we can apply a consistent and
uniform dataset as in GIZ (2014) (formerly GTZ), which lists the retail
prices of diesel and gasoline in 174 countries, and assess the effects of
subsidy reforms. 1
The oil price fall in late 2014 has presented countries with a unique
opportunity to phase out fossil fuel consumption subsidies, since the
wedge between the global and domestic regulated prices has been reduced.  As a result, consumers would be less hurt by subsidy removal,
at least in the short run. 