 1.  Introduction There is no general consensus among policy makers, development practitioners and academicians on how to disseminate goods that have both private and public beneﬁts if the markets fail to generate a substantial penetration of the product (Bensch and Peters, 2012).  One example which this paper has focused is clean and energy efﬁcient technologies such as the improved cookstoves (ICS).  Improved stoves are stoves that are designed to improve energy efﬁciency, remove smoke from the ☆ We gratefully thank the editor, associate editor and anonymous referees for their helpful comments and suggestions on the preliminary draft of this paper, according to which the content was improved.  We would also like to thank Gunther Bensch, Abebe Damte, Mark Jeuland, Subhrendu Pattanayak, Peter Jörg and participants at the ﬁrst SETI workshop at Duke University, Duke, USA, participants at the tenth Environment for Development Initiative annual meeting at Pucon, Chile, and seminar participants at the EDRI seminar series for the useful comments on earlier versions of the paper.  Financial support from the Norwegian Embassy at Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (Sida) through the Environmental Economics Unit at the University of Gothenburg, Sweden is gratefully acknowledged.  All errors and omissions remain the sole responsibility of the authors.  indoor living space, or lessen the drudgery of cooking duties (Köhlin et al. , 2011).  Energy efﬁcient technologies are technologies or appliances that reduce the amount of energy required to provide products and services.  Despite the health, economic and climate beneﬁt of improved cookstoves, demand for them is surprisingly low in the rural areas of many less-developed countries.  Most nongovernmental organizations that are involved in the dissemination of improved stoves reject the option of distributing them for free (Martin et al. , 2011), while others argued that if liquidity and credit constrained people have high valuation for an item, it is more likely that these people will use goods/items that are distributed with subsidy.  Screening and sunk cost effects are two concepts that are related to peoples' valuation of a product, the price they pay, and usage of the product.  The screening effect is observed when households with a higher willingness to pay are also more likely to use the product, while the sunk cost effect occurs when people who paid a higher price for an item are more likely to use it, i. e. , if an investment has already been made, people are more likely to use it because they don't want to appear wasteful.  In this paper, using a randomized experiment in rural Ethiopia, we studied whether price incentives (sunk cost and screening effects) matter for the waiting time to start using the improved stove.  The study is based on free distribution of improved stoves to 150 households in six villages and 150 households from six other villages that paid a positive price.  Among households that paid a positive price, their willingness to pay (WTP), or valuation of the stove, was tested using the Becker-DeGroot-Marschak bidding method (Becker et al. , 1964).  When we compare those who received the stove for free with those who paid for it, we ﬁnd no evidence of a sunk cost effect.  However, the screening or valuation effect, measured as WTP, is signiﬁcant.  The previous empirical evidences on these effects are inconsistent.  Arkes and Blumer (1985) tested whether higher prices (higher sunk cost) lead to higher usage of a product or a theater ticket.  The authors found that those who paid the regular price for the ticket used the tickets more often than those with a discounted price.  Similarly, Moon (2001) ﬁnd that the higher the sunk costs, the greater the willingness of the decision maker to invest further.  Though the above empirical evidence is in other contexts, they suggest positive relationship between price paid andAshraf et al.  (2010) do not ﬁnd an evidence of a sunk cost effect in Zambia in the use of a water puriﬁcation product but they ﬁnd an evidence for the screening effect.  Bensch and Peters (2012), studying a free distribution of improved cookstoves in Senegal found a high rate of usage of the technology.  Beyene et al.  (2015) also found a high rate of usage of the freely distributed improved stove in rural Ethiopia.  Tarozzi et al.  (2014) tested existence of a sunk cost effect in using malaria bed nets, compared those that are freely distribution and those with a positive price.  They ﬁnd that those who received the nets for free use it even more intensively than those who paid a positive price.  Cohen and Dupas (2010) also studying malaria bed nets do not ﬁnd a difference in adoption behavior between households who a paid price and those who got it for free.  These ﬁndings weigh against the concept of sunk cost effect and also against the belief of non-government organizations that usage intensity increases if people pay a positive price.  This is not the ﬁrst paper to test the sunk cost and screening effects on the use of products.  However, the existing empirical results are inconsistent.  Further, to the best knowledge, this is the ﬁrst paper to test both sunk cost and screening effects on the timing of use of an energy efﬁcient technology that has environmental, climate and welfare beneﬁts.  In relation to energy efﬁcient technologies, papers which are very close to this paper are Bensch and Peters (2012) and Beyene et al.  (2015).  Bensch and Peters (2012) considers only the effect of free distribution and Beyene et al.  (2015) do not also consider the screening effect.  The rest of paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 introduces the experimental design and procedure.  In section three, we provide empirical strategy of our study.  Sections 4 and 5 present the data.  Descriptive statistics and econometric results, respectively.  Finally, the last section concludes.  <Middle> Experimental setting and design.  2. 1.  Experiment setting.  The experiment was conducted in the southern Tigrai region of Ethiopia.  The region contains “Dega”, “Weynadega” and “Kola” agroecological zones. 1 These are the major agro-ecological conditions of the country.  In some areas in these zones, households have relatively high fuelwood access while other have low access.  In the areas with low access to fuel wood, households have to travel on average around 30 km to collect fuel wood, but only 6 km in areas with relatively high fuel wood access. 2 This climate and forest setting is suitable for the stove purchase experiment because the demand for stoves may vary depending on the weather and access to fuel wood.  A total of 300 households were randomly selected to participate in a stove purchase experiment from six villages that represent the different weather and forest conditions (here after called as purchase villages).  Another 300 households were also selected from six other villages for a free distribution of stoves (here after called free distribution villages).  The type of improved stove used in this experiment is called the “mirt” stove.  This is an energy efﬁcient stove that is used for baking Injera, a pancake like thin bread that is the Ethiopian staple food.  The stove is also designed to cook soup, boil water, make coffee, etc.  while baking Injera without the use of additional fuel.  The stove purchase experiment was conducted using BeckerDeGroot-Marschak (BDM) bidding method.  We choose a BDM bidding method to generate an incentive compatible data (truthful and accurate) data on willingness to pay (WTP), which can be used to study the screening and sunck cost effects of prices.  The mechanism of the BDM works as follows.  Subjects state their individual maximum WTP to buy the item and this bid placed in a closed envelope.  Those whose WTP is greater than or equal to a random price will buy the item and pay the random price (not their WTP) and those whose WTP is less than the random price will not buy the item and pay zero.  Thus, bidding one's true maximum willingness to pay is a dominant strategy to maximize expected utility (Becker et al. , 1964).  The BDM method has been used in other contexts such as new brand name meat, mosquito nets, etc.  (e. g. , Lusk et al. , 2001.  Feldkamp et al. , 2005.  Hoffmann, 2009).  Although the Vickrey auction method also can be used to generate an incentive-compatible WTP, the design of the Vickrey auction method is not suitable for the case when multiple buyers can successfully bid to buy the item.  This is because, in a Vickrey auction, each subject simultaneously submits a bid to purchase a good and the agent who submits the highest bid wins the auction and pays an amount equal to the second-highest bid among the bidders.  The other bidders do not receive the item.  they pay zero (Vickrey, 1961).  A take-it-or-leave-it pricing mechanism may also be used to test the screening and sunk cost effects of the prices of improved stoves.  however, that approach, would not generate WTP data, and it is difﬁcult to test the screening effect without WTP data.  In these experiment villages, subjects were randomly invited to participate in the experiment individually (husband or wife) and jointly (i. e.  both husband and wife) (see Fig. -1 of Appendix A).  We informed these subjects that they were randomly selected to come to the farmers' training center on a speciﬁed date for two to 4h of compensated physical work (weeding) and two more hours participating in a similar study.  All those randomly selected were willing to come and participated in the physical work and experiment study.  The physical work was introduced to make farmers buy the improved stove using income earned from this work.  Conducting an experiment with real labor income ensures that households in the study area had income available so that they could follow through on a purchase decision.  This is important because almost all households in the study area depend on earned income, mainly agricultural income.  thus, the study created realistic conditions.  Further, subjects may treat windfall income and earned income differently in the decision to buy the stove.  This is in line with the theory of mental accounting which stipulates that consumers tend to arrange expenditures into separate mental accounts and how the money is spent depends on how it is acquired (Hoffmann, 2009).  Proponents of the theory of mental accounting argue that income earned in exchange for labor is treated differently than windfall income.  As discussed in Christiaensen and Pan (2012), there is a notion in many societies around the world (including the study area) that money that is earned more easily is spent more easily, as exempliﬁed by the expression ‘Easy come, easy go’, an expression which ﬁnds its counterpart across the world's languages, including ‘Bekelalu Yemta Bekalau Yehedal’ in Amharic, a main language of Ethiopia.  As evidence of this notion, they found that farmers in China and Tanzania tend to spend earned income on necessities, while windfall income is spent on alcohol and other luxury items.  Further, Thaler (1990) and Clingingsmith (2015) documented that subjects share less from an earned dollar than from a windfall dollar.  Earned income and windfall income can thus be considered different mental accounts.  Before the invited subjects of our stove experiment arrived at the place of the experiment, the subjects did not know anything about the stove purchase and purpose of the experiment.  This was done to avoid information spread, pre-experiment spousal inﬂuence and self-selection in attending the experiment.  2. 2.  The purchase experiment design and procedures.  The stove purchase experiment was conducted in three steps.  First, based on prior random assignment as individual or couples, individual subjects were instructed to work the weeding activity for 4 h and couples were instructed to work for 2 h. 3 They were also informed that, at the end of the study, remuneration would be paid in proportion to the time invested.  A husband or wife who participated alone would get ETB 150 and a couple would get only ETB150.  We also told them that it was not possible to choose only one of the two activities (either weeding or participating in the experiment).  No payment would be given if they did not participate in both activities.  Fortunately, no subject rejected participating in both activities nor asked to participate in only one of the activities.  After the weeding was complete, we provided information about the mirt stove (see Appendix B for the details of experiment procedures).  Then, we asked the subjects to make the purchase decision based on the BDM random price mechanism.  The mechanism works as follows.  Participants were asked to bid a price for an improved stove by stating their maximum willingness to pay.  Subjects were given a color copy of currency notes representing actual currency and an envelope in which to place the amount they were willing to pay to buy the stove.  We explained that, at the end, all subjects would be gathered in one place and a random price would be selected from a bucket containing the following prices.  30, 45, 60, 75, 90,105, 120, 135 and 150.  These prices were unknown to the participants. 4 Those who bid at or above the randomly drawn price would purchase the item and those who bid below the price would not purchase the stove.  Under this procedure, it would be in the best interest of the participants to bid according to their actual valuation of the improved stove.  We explained to participants that, if they stated an amount higher than the maximum they actually want to pay, they would be forced to pay it if that price was randomly chosen.  On the other hand, if they bid a price below their actual willingness to pay and a lower price was drawn, they would not be allowed to buy, even if they wanted to buy it at this randomly drawn price.  To avoid the effect of the experimenter, one experimenter explained the mechanism of the BDM for each group in all villages.  A subject participating in the stove purchase experiment might ask the need of stating his/her/their maximum WTP instead of just asking him/her to pay a price.  Before the subjects could raise such questions, we gave an explanation using the following statements.  “You might wonder why we ask you to give a bid for the stove instead of just asking you to pay a price.  Well, this research tries to establish how valuable such improved stoves are to you.  We would therefore ask you to think carefully about the most you would be willing to pay for the stove. ” [(See Appendix B for the details of the script of the experiment. )] Before they started the actual bidding for the improved stove, we did a practice experiment using a pencil.  We took two different pencils of different quality.  One is an improvement over the other.  The standard pencil is made with wooden material, standard lead and a standard eraser, while the improved one is made of plastic material, high quality lead and a quality eraser.  The improved one is better in terms of strength of the lead during use and cleanliness of the paper after using the eraser.  In the experiment, all were familiar with the standard pencil, but did not know about the other pencil.  We asked them the maximum price they were willing to pay for the improved pencil.  This practice experiment was done in each group.  To make the bids for the stove as conﬁdential as possible, subjects were placed as far apart as possible.  we instructed subjects to keep their bids conﬁdential.  and we directed them not to talk to each other or ask questions in public, from the beginning to the end.  If they had questions, we asked them to raise their hands and the experimenter would give answers privately.  At the end, all groups were called back to one place and a subject among them would pick a price from a bucket containing the stated prices.  3.  Empirical strategy.  We conducted a follow up survey of improved stove installation ﬁfteen months after delivery.  The length of waiting time to start using the improved stove is measured by the number of months a household has waited to get started using the stove since the household got the stove.  Its value ranges from 0 to 15 where zero means immediate use and 15 means they have delayed starting to use it until the last month (i. e. , they have started using the stove in last month).  One might suggest OLS to estimate the effect of distribution type, price incentives and WTP on the length of waiting time to start using the improved stove because the length of waiting time is a continuous dependent variable.  However, the maximum value of the dependent variable may be limited by the monitoring month.  This is because households were informed a month in advance that a survey team would come to each household for stove monitoring and conduct interview.  About 22% of the households installed the stove during the last month and the remainder installed earlier.  Therefore, following Wooldridge (2010, 785–790), we set the following censored model for length of waiting time.  where εi is the error term, Xi is a vector of regressors, β is a vector of ∗ is a latent length of waiting time to start parameters and waiting timei using the improved stove which is observed for values less than the upper bound, set by the survey time period (τ =15) and censored otherwise.  The observed waiting time is deﬁned by the following measurement equations.  Assuming waiting time is normally distributed with mean Xiβ and variance σ 2, we can use the maximum likelihood estimation method using the following log likelihood function for a censored normal regression model.  One can use the STATA command Tobit with ul(15) option to estimate the correlates ofwaiting time.  Our interest is in estimating the causal relationship between the explanatory variables-distribution types, e. g. , free versus paid and WTP and length of waiting time to start using the improved stoves.  Below we show that our experiment design ensures that the effects of our explanatory variables are causal.  In what follows, by making our explanatory variables of interest explicit in the latent waiting time models, we provide descriptions of the variables of interest and discuss the mechanism of causation.  In ∗ denotes the wife's5 latent waiting time and Eq.  (4), waiting timei distribution_type is the experimental variable which indicates whether the stoves where distributed for free or purchased for a price.  It takes a value one if the household paid money for the stove and zero if the stove was received for free.  Xi is a vector of other characteristics speciﬁc to the wife (such as her education), household level socio-economic characteristics (such as wealth), and location dummies.  and εi is the error term in the equation.  Villages were randomly assigned to the purchase and free distribution experiments.  First, six villages were randomly selected using stratiﬁed simple random sampling for the purchase experiment. 6 In order to randomly select villages for the free distribution, we purposively excluded villages that are adjacent or very close to the purchase villages on the list. 7 In each of these villages' types, households were randomly selected using systemic sampling methods.  Because the assignment of villages into purchase or free distribution is random, the assignment of households into these two groups is also random.  Households within the same village have the same treatment status.  The effect of the distribution type on the length of use is causal because the “distribution type” (assignment into these two groups) is exogenous to the households.  The variable “distribution type” measures whether people who paid for the stove are more likely to start using the stove earlier, i.  whether people were more likely to start using it as soon as possible because an investment had already been made and they didn't want to feel or appear wasteful.  In other words, this variable measures the effect of sunk cost.  In other words, this variable measures the effect of sunk cost.  One of the objectives of this paper is to test whether households with a higher willingness to pay are also more likely to start using the product sooner, i. e. , the screening effect hypothesis.  In order to test this hypothesis, we need to include WTP as an explanatory variable in the model.  Willingness to pay data is obtained from subjects' participation in the BDM experiment.  Hence, this hypothesis is tested for subjects who participate in the bidding experiment and got the improved cookstove from that experiment.  Eq.  (5) below is set up to test this hypothesis.  Unlike the previous models, the main explanatory variable, in Eq.  (5), WTP may not be exogenous, i. e. , subjects' WTP may be correlated with their unobserved characteristics such as risk and uncertainty.  Subjects who are uncertain about the beneﬁts of the improved stove may state lower WTP and if they got a stove through the BDM's random price, they may not start using it quickly.  If this is the case, the standard Tobit regression will result in inconsistent estimates.  Hence to get consistent estimates, we use an instrumental Tobit regression method.  We use the dummy variable ‘individual decision’ as an instrument.  This variable takes a value of one if the purchase decision is made individually by one suppose and zero for a joint decision.  For an instrument to be valid, it must be exogenous and relevant.  Below we discuss how this instrument can satisfy these two conditions.  Subjects were randomly assigned into an individual or joint purchase decision.  Individual means either the husband or wife was randomly assigned to make the purchase decision alone (thus eliciting an individual WTP).  Joint means that a couple was randomly assigned to make the decision jointly (thus eliciting a joint WTP).  Because subjects were not allowed to choose whether to make the decision individually or jointly, this instrumental variable is exogenous.  A test of the randomization is conducted by running a probit regression of the decision type on socioeconomic characteristics of the subjects.  Table 3 shows that there is no signiﬁcant difference between subjects who made the decision the individually and jointly, which implicitly conﬁrms that the instrument is exogenous.  The decision type (individual vs joint) will not affect use of the improved stove directly and will only affect the stove use indirectly through WTP.  Hence the instrument is relevant.  4.  Data, survey instrument and descriptive statistics.  4. 1.  Data, and survey instrument.  A baseline and follow-up survey was conducted in 12 villages (kushets) in the region that represents these major weather and forest conditions. 8 We randomly selected 50 households from each village using a list of households obtained from each village's administrator.  In villages with free distribution of stoves, 25 households from each village are treatments (i. e. , those who received the free stove) and the remaining 25 are controls. 9 However, in the villages where we conducted the stove purchase experiment, all 50 subjects from each village participated in the experiment.  The bidding experiment results in 146 households with improved stove and the remaining with no improved stove.  We conducted a baseline survey two weeks before the stove purchase experiment and free distribution of the improved stoves.  In the survey, households were asked about their socio-economic characteristics, fuel use, cooking practices, awareness about adverse consequences of cooking with traditional stoves, awareness about improved cookstove, household decision-making power, etc.  A year and half after the baseline survey, a follow-up survey was also conducted for all households participated in the baseline survey. 10 Most of the survey questions in the follow up survey were same as the base line survey except that we add questions that capture stove use in the follow up.  4. 2.  Descriptive statistics.  Table 1 provides summary statistics of individual and household level characteristics of wives obtained from the baseline survey conducted in the BDM and free distribution villages.  Starting with the BDM villages, as can be seen from Table 1, wives on average are 44. 5 years old, are the main fuel collector in the household (76%).  24% of them participate in off-farm work, and are on average have only one years of schooling.  29% and 23% of wives participating in political activities and off-farm work, respectively.  On average, households in the BDM villages have 3. 0 timad (0. 76 ha) of land, about 40 thousand Ethiopian Birr ($2122) of wealth in assets, and a household size of 5. 7 people.  From Table 1, we can see that 49% of households do not have a separate kitchen for cooking and 48% of them do not have windows in the place where they cook and live.  This means a large proportion of households in these villages, in particular household members who are responsible for cooking, may be subject to the health impacts of indoor air pollution.  As can be seen from Table 1, households in the free distribution villages have similar characteristics to households in BDM villages with respect to age, education, off-farm work, hours spent in fuelwood collection, household size, land size, wealth, etc.  We want to test whether there exist any difference in the socioeconomic characteristics of households in the free distribution and BDM (purchase) villages.  If any signiﬁcance difference exists between these two groups in some or all of the explanatory variables, the solution is to include these variables in the main regression models.  Table 2 depicts probit results of the difference in the socio-economic characteristics of households in the free distribution and BDM (purchase) villages.  From this result we can see that households in these two villages are different in wife's fuel collection time, wife's education level, wife's participation in off-farm income activities, households' number of livestock, household size, and household land size.  Because of these signiﬁcance differences in these two villages, our main regressions include these and other covariates.  We used the follow-up survey data to assess to what extent the stoves, both those purchased through the BDM experiment and those distributed freely, have been in use by households.  Fig.  1 shows the percentage of households and the number of months the stoves were delayed in use by households who purchased the stoves through the BDM experiment.  The stoves were delivered in October 2013 and the survey for use was conducted in January–February 2015.  From Fig.  1, we can see that around 50% of the households have started using the stove for at within 10 months or less, and about 15% delayed use until the survey month.  From this ﬁgure, we can also see that around 12% have used the stove for immediately.  Likewise, in the villages with free distribution, from Fig.  2 we can see that around 54% of households have started using the stove for within 10 months or less, and about 9% delayed use until the survey month.  Among the households that received free distribution of stoves, around 36% have started using the stove within three months of stove delivery, and around 5% started to use it in the month of delivery.  In both villages, we observe that a large proportion of households have started using the stove for within 10 months or less.  5.  Econometric results.  Estimates of the OLS and Tobit models for the effects of distributional types (free vs purchased) and WTP on the length of use of an improved cookstove are presented in Tables 3–4.  The results in Table 3 are an OLS results while Table 4 results are Tobit results.  A result, not shown in these Tables is that about 20% of the observations have the upper bound value which can be used as a statistical justiﬁcation to use the Tobit model.  Because the estimated coefﬁcients of the Tobit regression model with upper limits can be interpreted as if they were OLS coefﬁcients (Wooldridge, 2010), all estimated coefﬁcients of variables are also marginal effect estimates.  In Table 3, we presented results of two OLS models and results of three Tobit models in Table 4.  Model-1 of both tables refers to an inclusion of a dummy variable “distribution type” which takes a value of one if the household purchases the stove and zero if it gets it for free.  This model is used to test the sunk cost effect hypothesis.  In Model-2, we estimate the screening effect by including households WTP as a main explanatory variable in a standard Tobit model.  In Model-3, we use the IV-Tobit method to estimate the effect of WTP on use.  Comparing the Ordinary Least Square and Tobit estimates of the distributional types (free vs purchased), and WTP variables in Tables 3 and 4, we observe that Tobit estimates of WTP variable are higher by about 200% in absolute value than the estimates of the Ordinary least square.  Likewise, the Tobit estimate of distributional types is also higher in absolute value by 33% than the OLS estimates.  The log likelihood ratio (LR) chi-square (2) test statistics presented in Table 4 indicate the ﬁtness of the Tobit model with the data and the relevance of the chosen explanatory variables in explaining the model.  Because the Tobit model corrects for any boundness in the data, we refer to the results from this estimator in our discussion below.  Starting our analysis with the results shown in Model-1 of Table 4, we can see that there is no statistical signiﬁcance difference in the length of waiting to start using the improved cookstove between those who get the improved cookstove for free and those who paid money for it.  This result contradicts with opinion of most nongovernmental organizations that are involved in the dissemination of improved stoves which reject the option of distributing ICS for free (Martin et al. , 2011).  Our result is consistent with previous ﬁndings in Senegal and Ethiopia.  Bensch and Peters (2012) using a free distribution of improved cookstoves in Senegal found a high rate of usage of the technology.  Beyene et al.  (2015) also found a high rate of usage of the freely distributed improved stove in rural Ethiopia.  In other areas, Ashraf et al.  (2010) also do not ﬁnd also a difference in use of a water puriﬁcation product between those that purchased the product and those that get the product for free.  Cohen and Dupas (2010), studying malaria bed nets do not ﬁnd a difference in adoption behavior between households who paid a price and those who got them for free.  Using similar data as in the current project Hassen (2015) did not also ﬁnd a difference in the use of improved stoves among wives with different levels of bargaining power regardless of the way they received the stove(i. e.  for free or purchase).  In that study, the insigniﬁcance of the bargaining power estimate in both the village types means that if wives get an improved stove.  they are more likely to use it regardless of difference in their decision making power.  This result coincides with the ﬁnding of this paper.  Regardless of the way the improved stoves are distributed, wives will use the improved stoves.  The economic beneﬁt of improved stove, i. e. , the reduction in fuel consumption, may be pushing households in both groups of villages to use the improved stoves.  In the experiment, we explained to the households that the stove has health and economic beneﬁt (reduce fuel consumption by half).  A household who is faced with fuel scarcity may have very high motivation to start using the improved stove.  Households in the study area travel up to 15 km to collect fuelwood.  The health beneﬁt may also be the motive for some or all the households in these village types. 