. 
All auditors (US and foreign) who audit US-listed companies are required to register with the Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board (PCAOB) and be subject to PCAOB inspections.  In this study, we focus on foreign auditors and consider 
whether audit quality for non -US-listed foreign public clients (non-US-listed clients) is higher following the initial PCAOB inspection. 
Our study addresses the issue of positive externality, i. e. , whether the PCAOB international inspection program 
improves audit quality for foreign auditors’ non-US-listed foreign clients even though investors in these particular foreign 
companies are not the intended beneﬁciaries of the foreign auditor inspection program
The impact of the PCAOB international inspection program on audit quality abroad is ambiguous.  Given the PCAOB’s 
reputation for actively looking for auditor misconduct and taking follow-up disciplinary actions against deﬁcient auditors 
( DeFond, 2010; Farrell and Shabad, 2005 ), the very act of registering with the PCAOB may exacerbate foreign auditors’ exposure to reputation loss and provide them with an ex ante incentive to strengthen their ﬁrm -level quality controls and 
increase audit quality.  To the extent that audit deﬁciencies are discovered during the initial inspection, the auditor may 
have an additional incentive to take appropriate remedial action and strengthen ﬁrm-level quality controls to avoid further 
embarrassment on subsequent inspections.  The improvements in the foreign auditor’s ﬁrm -level quality controls could increase audit quality for all of the ﬁrm’s foreign clients US-listed or otherwise.  Moreover, because the starting point for audit 
quality is potentially lower abroad than in the US ( Choi Name, 2008; Francis and Wang, 2008 ), the PCAOB inspection program 
could have a greater impact abroad than in the US.  
However, reasons exist to doubt the eﬃcacy of PCAOB inspections in improving audit quality.  Prior research ( DeFond, 
2010; Lennox and Pittman, 2010 ) indicates that PCAOB inspection reports are not useful for assessing audit quality because 
they merely list audit deﬁciencies and do not provide a summary opinion about the auditor’s quality.  Moreover, the effectiveness of the PCAOB’s international inspections may be limited by geographic distance from the US, potential language 
differences, or cultural barriers.  Finally, foreign auditors may follow an asymmetric approach to their US-listed and nonUS-listed clients.  Given that the PCAOB is primarily interested in protecting investors in US-listed companies (selecting only 
US-listed client engagements for inspection) and the fact that auditor litigation exposure is lower for non-US-listed clients 
than for US-listed clients, foreign auditors may be less incentivized to improve audit quality for their non-US-listed clients.  
Foreign auditors may override their ﬁrm-level quality controls and utilize less effective audit programs or assemble less 
qualiﬁed audit teams for their non-US-listed clients (which may be less costly).  To the extent that foreign auditors follow 
an asymmetric approach in servicing their US-listed and non-US-listed clients, any PCAOB inspection-related improvements 
in ﬁrm-level quality controls may not necessarily beneﬁt their non-US-listed audit clients.  For all these reasons, the overall 
effectiveness of the PCAOB international inspection program in improving audit quality for foreign auditors’ non-US-listed 
clients is far from obvious and remains an open empirical question.  
Because the quality of ﬁnancial reporting is a joint outcome of manager and auditor decision making, audit quality is 
best viewed as a continuum with higher audit quality providing greater assurance of ﬁnancial reporting quality ( DeFond and 
Zhang, 2014 ).  Still, beyond the notion that better audit quality leads to better ﬁnancial reporting quality, little or no consensus emerges in the extant literature as to how best to measure audit quality.  Hence, given that all audit quality proxies have 
their limitations, we use multiple ﬁnancial reporting quality measures (such as discretionary accruals, the propensity to just 
meet or beat earnings expectations, and accruals quality) that capture different dimensions of the audit quality construct.  
In addition, we employ a measure of auditor independence: the likelihood of the auditor issuing a modiﬁed opinion for 
non-US-listed clients as a proxy for audit quality.  For non-US-listed clients, this metric is similar to the propensity to issue 
a going-concern opinion for US-listed clients, and it is generally viewed as a measure of the auditor’s ability to withstand 
client pressure to issue a clean audit opinion ( DeFond Name, 2002; Chen Name, 2010; Fung Name, 2016 ).  
Our study covers a 13-year period (2002–2014) and includes a total of 61,612 non-US-listed client-year observations with 
PCAOB-registered foreign auditors from 55 non-US countries.  Our sample includes observations from countries that allow 
as well as those that prohibit PCAOB inspections.  In our difference-in-differences (DID) research design, we control for the 
threat of PCAOB inspections based not only on whether the observation is from a country that allows (or prohibits) PCAOB 
inspections (consistent with Lamoreaux (2016) ) but also on a model that captures the likelihood of the client-year observa3 Our ﬁndings suggest that initial inspections have an incremental 
tion being audited by a PCAOB-inspected foreign auditor.  
effect on the audit quality of the foreign auditor over and above the effect of the threat of such inspections.  These ﬁndings 
are of particular interest because some countries (such as China) continue to disallow PCAOB inspections.  Our ﬁndings are 
consistent with those of Aobdia and Shroff (2017) who suggest that PCAOB oversight of non-U. S.  auditors with US-listed 
clients increases the perceived assurance value of their audits and is reﬂected in an increase in their market share in their 
home countries.  
All of our results continue to hold when we re-estimate our tests using a matched sample based on the propensity score 
of a non-US-listed foreign client having a PCAOB-inspected foreign auditor.  Further, we examine whether the strength of 
the positive relation between PCAOB inspections and audit quality metrics for foreign auditors’ non-US-listed clients (the 
externality effect) varies cross-sectionally over a number of factors.  The ﬁndings from our cross-sectional analyses suggest 
that, controlling for the threat of inspections, the impact of the initial inspection is stronger when the likelihood of a foreign 
auditor being inspected by the PCAOB is lower, in countries without a substantive increase in ﬁnancial reporting enforcement, in countries with lower liability standards for accountants, for earlier (versus later) initial inspections, and for foreign 
auditors aﬃliated with one of the six global audit ﬁrm networks (GNs).  Consistent with the notion that PCAOB inspectors 
share their ﬁndings and suggestions for improvement with the auditor at the time of the inspection itself without having 
the auditor wait for the formal inspection report ( Aobdia, 2016 ), in additional analyses we ﬁnd that the improvement in 
audit quality for foreign auditors’ non-US-listed clients is observable in the year the initial inspection report is issued and 
that the improvement has persistence beyond the ﬁrst year.  
Our paper contributes to the literature in several ways.  First, our study, to our knowledge, is the ﬁrst to examine whether 
the PCAOB’s international inspection program (which is intended to improve audit quality for foreign auditors’ US-listed 
clients) has a positive externality effect, i. e. , also improves audit quality for foreign auditors’ non-US-listed clients.  
Our study complements studies by Lamoreaux (2016) and Krishnan Name (2017) who examine the direct audit quality effect of 
PCAOB inspections, i. e. , focus on foreign auditors’ US-listed clients.  We contribute by documenting a positive externality in 
that non-US listed audit clients beneﬁt from their audit ﬁrms’ PCAOB inspections.  
Second, we contribute to the literature on auditor incentives and reputation concerns outside the US.  With respect to 
incentives, prior research (e. g. , Lennox, 1999 ; Khurana and Raman, 2004 ) suggests that litigation exposure, not reputation 
protection, is a driver of audit quality outside the US.  Along the same lines, Francis and Wang (2008) propose that audit 
quality abroad is a function of investor protection.  The stronger the country-level legal institutions, the higher the auditor 
incentive to provide a quality audit.  However, Weber Name (2008) and Skinner and Srinivasan (2012) argue that reputation 
loss imposes actual costs on an auditor (in the form of lost market share) in Germany and Japan, respectively, and thereby 
incentivizes audit quality even in countries with little or no legal exposure.  Pertinent to reputation concerns, the PCAOB’s 
international inspections have the potential for embarrassing the foreign auditor through adverse publicity by disclosing 
engagement-level audit deﬁciencies and for not remediating ﬁrm-level quality control deﬁciencies on a timely basis.  Our 
ﬁndings are consistent with the notion that auditor reputation matters outside the US in that the initial PCAOB inspection has an incremental salutary effect on the foreign auditor’s audit quality over and above the effect of the threat of an 
inspection itself.  
Finally,  our  study  contributes  to  the  inquiry  of  the  eﬃcacy  of  the  PCAOB  international  inspection  program  in  improving  audit  quality.   As  noted  by  Carcello  et  al.   (2010) ,  US-listed  companies  audited  by  foreign  auditors  account  for 
more  than  $650  billion  in  US  market  capitalization.   Further,  foreign  auditors  play  a  substantial  role  in  the  audit  of  US 
domestic  companies  by  auditing  foreign  subsidiaries  that  are  material  to  the  consolidated  ﬁnancial  statements  of  US 
multinationals.   For  these  reasons,  the  PCAOB  views  inspections  of  foreign  auditors  as  a  priority  and  devotes  substantial  resources  to  its  international  inspections  program.   Still,  the  board  faces  a  diﬃcult  challenge  in  this  area  because 
a  number  of  countries  (such  as  China)  have  barred  PCAOB  inspections  within  their  borders  (on  national  sovereignty 
grounds),  thereby  increasing  the  risk  of  substandard  audit  quality  for  investors  in  US-listed  companies.   We  document 
that  the  PCAOB  international  inspection  program  generates  a  positive  externality,  as  it  not  only  improves  audit  quality  for  foreign  auditors’  US-listed  clients  (as  shown  in  concurrent  studies  by  Lamoreaux  (2016 )  and  Krishnan  et  al.  
(2017 )),  but  also  for  their  non-US-listed  clients,  thereby  improving  investor  protection  from  substandard  audits  for  US 
investors and foreign investors in non-US-listed foreign public companies.  These ﬁndings potentially allow foreign countries  and  regulators  to  better  assess  the  desirability  (in  terms  of  the  favorable  audit  quality  impact  for  their  own 
domestic  investors  in  non-US-listed  public  companies)  of  allowing  the  PCAOB  to  conduct  inspections  in  their  home 
countries.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 provides background information and develops our hypotheses.  Section 3 presents the research methodology and data description.  A discussion of empirical results follows in 
Section 4 .  Section 5 provides concluding remarks.  
2.  Background and hypothesis development. 
2. 1.  Background. 
The PCAOB was established by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX; PL 107-204) with the objective of improving audit 
quality for companies listed in US public securities markets.  To achieve this objective, the board is vested with broad powers 
to oversee and discipline auditors (US and foreign) of US-listed companies and to conduct mandatory inspections of these 
auditors as a new channel for improving audit quality.  Inspections for US auditors began in 2004.  Inspections for foreign 
auditors commenced the following year, on a staggered basis, as the PCAOB sought to build its international inspection staff
and obtain the necessary permission from foreign governments to conduct inspections of foreign auditors in their home 
countries.  Also, while large auditors (those with more than 100 US-listed public company clients) are subject to annual 
inspections, small auditors are inspected triennially.  Overwhelmingly, foreign auditors, including those aﬃliated with the six 
global audit ﬁrm networks, are small auditors.  
Prior research on the eﬃcacy of PCAOB domestic inspections in improving audit quality for US auditors indicates that 
the  threat  of  inspections  drove  nearly  half  of  the  small  US  audit  ﬁrms  out  of  the  market  for  public  company  audits 
and  thereby  increased  average  audit  quality  for  small  auditors  ( DeFond  and  Lennox  2011 ).   Other  studies  ( Abbott  et  al. , 
2013; Gunny and Zhang, 2013; Gramling Name, 2011 ) show that audit quality (as measured by clients’ lower discretionary 
accruals  and  auditors’  increased  propensity  to  issue  going-concern  opinions)  improved  for  small  US  auditors  following 
inspections.  
With respect to large US auditors, some limited evidence exists that PCAOB inspections improve audit quality.  Carcello 
Name (2011b) report that, for a sample of US-listed clients audited by Big 4 ﬁrms, the initial PCAOB inspections were associated with an improvement in audit quality as measured by a decline in abnormal accruals.  By contrast, Boone Name 
(2015) indicate that each of the Big 4 auditors in the US have received inspection reports identifying audit deﬁciencies 
every year since the beginning of inspections in 2004, but that these large ﬁrms have been largely blasé about adverse 
inspection reports because the PCAOB ﬁndings are based on “second-guessing” by “government bureaucrats” ( Norris, 2011a, 
6 Further, although the PCAOB’s censure of Deloitte in December 2007 (the ﬁrst-ever PCAOB censure of a Big 4 
2011b, 2011c ).  
ﬁrm for not remediating ﬁrm-level quality control deﬁciencies on a timely basis) inﬂicted losses on the auditor in the form 
of increased risk of client loss and lower audit fees, Boone Name (2015) report that Deloitte’s audit quality was not different 
from that of other Big 4 ﬁrms during a three-year window either before or after the PCAOB censure.  More recently, Gipper 
Name (2016) examine increases in short-window earnings response coeﬃcients (ERCs) around earnings announcements for 
US-listed domestic clients following PCAOB inspections of their US auditors and report signiﬁcant ﬁndings for both Big 4 
and non–Big 4 auditors.  Finally, regarding the eﬃcacy of PCAOB domestic inspections, we are not aware of any studies on 
US auditors with non-US-listed foreign public clients or of any studies pertaining to PCAOB inspections of US auditors with 
non-US-listed clients.  
With respect to the eﬃcacy of PCAOB international inspections in improving audit quality for foreign auditors’ US-listed 
clients (the direct effect of the inspections), two studies address this issue.  Lamoreaux (2016) suggests that the threat of 
PCAOB inspections (as proxied by whether or not the foreign auditor is located in a country that allows PCAOB inspections) 
is associated with improved audit outcomes, such as an increased propensity on the part of the foreign auditor to issue 
going-concern opinions for US-listed clients.  By contrast, Krishnan Name (2017) investigate the effect of the initial inspection 
of foreign auditors and report a decrease in abnormal accruals as well as an increase in the value relevance of accounting 
numbers for their US-listed clients.  In examining the audit quality impact of the initial inspection, they do not control for the 
threat of a PCAOB inspection preceding the inspection.  Separately (and possibly as a means of putting pressure on countries, 
such as China, that disallow PCAOB inspections), the Board in 2010 disclosed the names of US-listed companies with foreign 
auditors located in countries that do not allow PCAOB inspections.  Carcello Name (2011a) ﬁnd that the stock market reacted 
adversely to these disclosures, that is, investors reacted negatively to the news that the PCAOB is not allowed to inspect the 
foreign auditors of US-listed clients in their home countries.  Our study controls for the threat of a PCAOB inspection and 
examines the incremental audit quality impact of the initial PCAOB inspection for foreign auditors’ non-US-listed clients, i. e. , 
we examine the externality effect associated with the PCAOB international inspection program.  
2. 2.  Hypothesis development. 
The PCAOB  utilizes a risk-based (instead of a random or representative) sample approach to identify US-listed audit 
engagements to review and is known to be actively looking for auditor misconduct.  Also, during inspections, the PCAOB 
evaluates the  design and  effectiveness of  the  auditor’s  ﬁrm- level quality  control  systems  ( Center  for  Audit  Quality  CAQ, 
2012 ; Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, 2012 ).  The underlying motivation for assessing the effectiveness of the 
auditor’s ﬁrm-level quality controls is to increase audit quality for all of the auditor’s US-listed audit clients, not just the 
sample of  US-listed  clients  (engagements) selected  for  review.   In  the  case  of  the  PCAOB’s  international inspections,  the 
improvements in the foreign auditor’s ﬁrm - level quality controls could beneﬁt not only its US-listed clients but also its non US-listed clients.  Further, the PCAOB can issue inspection reports that publicly disclose engagement-level deﬁciencies, albeit 
without identifying the client involved, and censure the auditor (i. e. , impose ﬁnes or bar the auditor from continuing to audit 
US-listed clients) for ﬁrm-level quality control weaknesses that are not remediated on a timely basis (typically within 12 
months) to the satisfaction of the board ( Center for Audit Quality CAQ, 2012 ; Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, 
2012 ).  
The public disclosure of audit deﬁciencies and possible censure by the PCAOB could embarrass the audit ﬁrm and damage 
its reputation.  Prior research ( Boone Name, 2015; Klein and Leﬄer, 1981; Schmalensee, 1978; Shapiro, 1982; Smallwood and 
Conlisk, 1979; Von Weizsacker, 1980 ) suggests that such reputational harm can inﬂict economic losses on the auditor by 
triggering  a  decline  in  the  demand  for  the  ﬁrm’s  services  or  by  lowering  its  selling  price  and  that  the  threat  of  these 
economic losses incentivizes the ﬁrm to maintain its service quality.  Consistent with this argument, recent studies ( Weber 
Name, 2008; Skinner and Srinivasan, 2012 ) ﬁnd that auditor reputation matters outside the US, too.  Reputational harm can 
result in loss of audit clients and market share.  Further, other research ( Choi Name, 2008; Francis and Wang, 2008 ) shows 
that audit quality is lower outside the US due to extant lower levels of auditor litigation exposure and investor protection 
abroad.  Because PCAOB standards require the auditor to have strong ﬁrm-level quality control systems and the inspections 
essentially represent a new channel for identifying auditor misconduct, it is reasonable (consistent with DeFond (2010) ) to 
expect the threat of PCAOB inspections to provide PCAOB-registered foreign auditors (at least in countries that allow PCAOB 
inspections) with an ex ante incentive to improve audit quality.  To the extent that the initial inspection identiﬁes deﬁciencies 
in the auditor’s ﬁrm-level quality control systems, the inspection may be expected to be associated with higher audit quality.  
For these reasons, our expectation is for both the threat and the initial PCAOB inspection to be associated with an increase 
in audit quality.  
However, several considerations could mitigate or negate the effect of PCAOB inspections (threatened or actual) on audit quality for foreign auditors.  First, as noted by Palmrose (2006) , PCAOB inspections appear to trade off independence 
for expertise.  Although PCAOB inspectors are independent of the profession, they may lack cutting-edge audit knowledge 
because they cannot be practicing certiﬁed public accountants.  Others (e. g. , Glover Name, 2009 ; Lennox and Pittman, 2010 ) 
have expressed concerns about the quality and expertise of the inspection staff, the effectiveness of the feedback system, 
the timeliness of the inspection reports, and the usefulness of the information in the inspection reports.  Second, the audit 
deﬁciencies revealed in PCAOB inspection reports may reﬂect no more than differences in professional judgment between 
the inspector and the auditor about what constitutes appropriate evidence and documentation, i. e. , mere second-guessing 
of auditor judgment ( Church and Shefchik, 2012; Peecher and Solomon, 2014 ).  In other words, to the extent that PCAOB 
inspectors are narrowly focused on documentation and substantiation (compliance with PCAOB rules and standards) instead 
of providing a holistic assessment of audit quality, the inspections may not be associated with an observable increase in the 
ﬁrm’s audit outcomes (quality).  Also, the effectiveness of the PCAOB’s international inspections (threatened or actual) may 
be limited by geographic distance from the US as well as potential language and cultural differences.  Prior research (e. g. , 
Ayers Name, 2011 ; Malloy, 2005 ) shows that geographic distance can diminish the availability of soft (but important) information obtained through informal local information channels potentially imposing a signiﬁcant information disadvantage on 
the visiting PCAOB inspecting team.  
PCAOB-registered foreign auditors also have non-US-listed public companies from their home countries as their audit 
clients.  The improvements in the ﬁrm-level quality controls of these foreign auditors (following the threat of or an actual 
PCAOB inspection) could also be reﬂected in higher audit quality for these non-US-listed clients.  However, this positive 
externality is contingent on the incentives of the foreign auditor.  A foreign auditor could improve ﬁrm-level quality controls 
and follow a symmetric approach to both its US-listed and its non-US-listed clients.  It could utilize the same audit programs, 
follow standardized audit processes and assemble audit teams of the same caliber from a common pool of staff auditors and 
partners for both sets of clients.  Alternatively, a foreign auditor could follow an asymmetric approach.  Given that the PCAOB 
is primarily focused on US-listed clients (selects only US-listed client engagements for inspection) and the fact that auditor 
litigation exposure is lower for non-US-listed clients, the foreign auditor could override quality controls and utilize less 
effective audit programs and assemble less qualiﬁed audit teams for its non-US-listed clients.  Hence, the improved audit 
quality beneﬁt for the foreign auditor’s non-US-listed clients remains an important, albeit unanswered, empirical question.  
We state Hypothesis H1 , in the null form: 
H1.  Controlling for the threat of PCAOB inspections, there is no change in audit quality for foreign auditors’ non-US-listed foreign 
clients following the initial PCAOB inspection of the foreign auditor.  
<Middle> Methodology and data. 
3. 1.  Research design. 
To test our hypothesis, we employ a number of audit quality proxies used in prior literature.  
Because auditor effort s contribute to clients’ ﬁnancial reporting quality ( Gul Name, 2009 ), we use three audit quality proxies that relate to clients’ 
ﬁnancial reporting quality: abnormal accruals AB_ACC ( Kothari Name, 2005; Gul Name, 2009 ), accrual quality AQ ( Francis Name, 
2005; Srinidhi and Gul, 2007 ), and probability of just meeting or beating earnings benchmarks Prob.  (MEET) ( Burgstahler 
and Dichev, 1997; Frankel Name, 2002 ).  Given that the initial PCAOB international inspections were staggered over time, any 
improvement in clients’ ﬁnancial reporting quality following the initial inspection may reasonably be linked to the inspection 
itself and not to a confounding event.  Our fourth audit quality proxy is the auditor’s propensity to issue a modiﬁed audit 
opinion Prob.  (OPINION) , which is viewed as a more direct measure of audit quality because it represents an outcome over 
which the auditor has greater control ( DeFond and Zhang, 2014 ). 