 1.  Introduction Legislation in an increasing number of countries imposes that unavoidable biodiversity losses resulting from infrastructure development (road, railway line, new buildings etc.  …), be compensated by the creation of equivalent biodiversity gains, the so-called Biodiversity Offsets (BO).  McKenney and Kiesecker (2010) indeed review a set of offset policy frameworks—US wetlands mitigation, US conservation banking, Australian offset policies in New South Wales, Victoria, and Western Australia, and Brazilian industrial and forest offsets.  In the French context, BO requirements have been mainly fulﬁlled so far through the acquisition of agricultural or degraded land by developers, followed by their ecological restoration.  However, this solution faces land availability constraints and can be very costly in terms of initial investments.  Also it is not well accepted by farmers who consider it as an additional source of competition on the land market, driving prices up.  An alternative solution, based on the payment for environmental services principle, is emerging in France.  Developers ﬁnance agri-environmental biodiversity offset schemes (henceforth ABOS) in which they offer contracts to farmers settled in the area where the offset must be supplied (Calvet et al. , 2017).  Enrolled farmers accept to adopt farm management, land use and farming practices for a given period (5 years usually) in return for a payment, in order to create “equivalent” favorable habitats for species affected by development.  Of course, without farmers' participation, the ABOS option cannot be successful.  In practice, ABOS are very similar to existing Agri-Environmental Schemes (AES) ﬁnanced by the European Union to implement measures of biodiversity conservation on farmland.  Indeed, it is often the case that the type of habitat that must be created to offset biodiversity losses are also habitats that the European Union seeks to preserve in protected areas.  Thus, technical requirements, in terms of prescribed farming practices and land management, are often identical for ABOS contracts and AES contracts when proposed in the same farming area.  However ABOS and AES contracts, although similar in their technical requirements and overall design, differ systematically in speciﬁc features which do not change monetary cost-beneﬁt ratio for farmers but may have an impact on their subjective perceptions of the contracts and therefore on their willingness to participate.  First, contract purposes are presented in a very different way.  ABOS are presented to farmers as contracts aiming at compensating biodiversity damages generated by a development project, while AES are advertised as contracts aiming at the conservation or the improvement of biodiversity in response to societal demand.  As a direct consequence of this ﬁrst feature, farmers are aware that ABOS are offered and funded by the private sector while AES are traditionally designed and ﬁnanced by the public sector, usually at national or European levels.  The objective of this article is to determine whether these differences, all other things considered equal, have an impact on farmers' participation in agri-environmental contracts for biodiversity offsets.  Standard economic theory predicts that if the same payment is offered in ABOS and AES, then farmers should be indifferent between the two types of contracts.  Indeed since technical prescriptions are identical, expected compliance costs are the same.  However, insights from behavioural economics and previous empirical ﬁndings on farmers' motivations when joining agri-environmental schemes indicate that the contract framing may change farmers' willingness to accept.  It is well known that farmers' participation in AES is inﬂuenced by several behavioural factors such as the attitude towards the environment (Vanslembrouck et al. , 2002a.  Delvaux et al. , 1999) or social norms (Le Coent et al. , 2016).  Contract framing may therefore trigger these behavioural factors and inﬂuence farmers' participation.  A program ﬁnanced by public money and presented as a contribution to environmental improvement or conservation can be perceived differently from a program ﬁnanced by a “polluter” compelled by law to create environmental services in order to compensate the damages he has created elsewhere.  Since offsetting programmes are growing rapidly throughout the world (Masden et al. , 2011) including in France (Regnery et al. , 2013), it is crucial for public authorities to anticipate whether ABOS is a relevant mechanism to help developers to fulﬁll their legal obligation in terms of offset volumes.  Developers also need to measure the acceptability of such mechanism, i. e.  the impact of the speciﬁc features of ABOS on farmers' willingness to participate and on the payment they will request to join the scheme and provide adequate offsets.  Finally, it should be underlined that ABOS and AES aiming at biodiversity conservation are likely to be activated in the same protected areas.  There is therefore a risk of competition between these two types of contracts.  If ABOS are preferred by farmers, this may lead to their reduced participation in conservation AES, leading to a substitution of conservation efforts by compensation efforts, and possibly entailing reduced additionality.  Understanding the relative preference of farmers for the characteristics of these two contracts will therefore also help to estimate this risk.  Literature on biodiversity offsets has primarily focused on issues related to the calculation of biodiversity equivalence and uncertainties (Quétier et al. , 2014.  Bull et al. , 2013).  Economic contributions are more recent and concern the evaluation of offset efﬁciency for various program designs (McKenney and Kiesecker, 2010).  There is also some literature on social acceptance of offsetting.  Bougherara et al.  (2013) compare consumers' willingness to pay for products whose induced pollution is either abated by the producing ﬁrm itself or compensated by offset purchases.  Burton et al.  (2016) analyze the social acceptance at the community level of the attributes of a biodiversity offset programme.  Our contribution does not deal with the acceptance of biodiversity offsets by the general public but rather with the acceptance of biodiversity offset contracts by the potential adopters of these contracts.  the farmers.  Using a choice experiment method, we compare farmers' relative preferences for compensation contracts (ABOS) as compared to classic conservation contracts (AES).  The survey was conducted in the South-East of France, in a region where a vast biodiversity offset program has been carried out since 2011 following the construction of an 80 km railway bypass for a high-speed train (more speciﬁcally in the Gard department, between Nimes and Montpellier). 