 1.  Introduction Explaining the main determinants and improving the forecast accuracy of crude oil market volatility are crucial to market investors and government decision makers.  However, forecasting oil volatility is an intractable task, as the crude oil market is quite complex and has various uncertain determinants, such as global oil supply and demand, OPEC spare capacity levels, ﬁnancial crises, and national elections.  Some studies have claimed that oil price change relies heavily on oil demand and supply, especially global demand (i. e. , Dées et al. , 2007.  Kilian, 2009.  Mu and Ye, 2011).  However, other studies have argued that a speculative component plays a key role (Zhang, 2013.  Hamilton and Wu, 2014.  Kilian and Murphy, 2014.  Juvenal and Petrella, 2015.  Gogolin and Kearney, 2016).  Liu et al.  (2016) disentangle the contributions of oil demand, supply, and speculation in real oil prices, whereas Yin and Zhou (2016) identify the role of speculation and economic fundamentals in driving oil price volatility.  However, as in the seminal work of Baker et al.  (2013) on measuring economic policy uncertainty (EPU), it is worth mentioning that many studies have examined the effect of EPU on the stock market and have considered EPU indices in forecasting stock market returns (Pastor and Veronesi, 2012.  Antonakakis et al. , 2013.  Kang and Ratti, 2013.  Tsai, 2017).  The literature about EPU's impact on the oil market is growing in recent years (e. g. , Aloui et al. , 2016.  Balcilar et al. , 2016.  Yin, 2016).  For example, Aloui et al.  (2016) hold that the movements in uncertainty index can identify the supply-side, aggregate-demand, and oil-speciﬁc demand shocks, that directly drive the oil price.  Thus, an increase (decrease) in the uncertainty index probably negatively (positively) affects the economy, which in turn reduces (increases) the demand and supply of crude oil and then cause oil price volatility.  Balcilar et al.  (2016) also emphasize that EPU can drive the oil price ﬂuctuations.  We conjecture that a high EPU can cause serious divergence in the expectations of oil consumers, producers, and speculators simultaneously and thus affect the demand, supply, or speculation stock for crude oil.  Therefore, EPU may comprehensively involves various information such as oil shocks, ﬁnancial crisis, and political events that greatly impact the oil market and cause oil price volatility.  However, it is not clear whether EPU is the most informative factor in forecasting oil volatility, and which determinant is the most powerful remains to be addressed.  This study is speciﬁcally related to the literature on the determinants of oil market return or volatility (e. 