 In South Africa, the hake ﬁshing industry is an important contributor to income in coastal communities, generating some 30,000 jobs (Rademeyer et al. , 2008).  It is also the country's most valuable ﬁshery (Butterworth and Rademeyer, 2005.  Petersen et al. , 2010), generating an estimated 5 billion South African Rand (ZAR) per year at present.  The costs, revenues and proﬁts in this industry are much the same as those incurred by ﬁsheries internationally, such as fuel and market price for ﬁsh (e. g.  the target species Merluccius capensis and M.  paradoxus).  It is, however, a highly consolidated and vertically integrated industry with heterogeneous business models and a high level of complexity (Cooper et al. , 2014).  This makes the relative importance and complex interactions and trade-offs among different drivers like fuel price and environmental variability for the industry and its proﬁts hard to estimate at a glance.  It is known that economic, ecological and social dimensions must be appropriately considered to ensure successful management for the sustainability of ﬁsheries (Folke et al. , 2007.  Garcia and Charles, 2008.  Pitcher and Lam, 2010).  Effective policies for the sustainability of human (social and economic) and natural systems are underpinned by untangling the complexities of these systems, such as emergent properties and reciprocal effects (Liu et al. , 2007).  To be able to meaningfully incorporate ecological and human dimensions into management through appropriate objectives with measurable outcomes or indicators for South Africa's hake ﬁshery, it is necessary to ﬁrst have insight into the functioning of the industry and how its proﬁts are affected by changes in some of its major drivers.  Proﬁtability is a signiﬁcant incentive for commercial ﬁshing companies (Sumaila et al. , 2008).  A modelling approach can provide insight into this type of complex system and its structure, function and dynamics (Liu et al. ,2007), particularly in a situation such as South Africa's where publically available economic data on the ﬁsheries is scarce.  Scenario testing provides further understanding of how changes in external drivers affect the industry's structure, function or dynamics.  Achieving insight into the South African offshore demersal hake trawl ﬁshery was the impetus behind the building of HakeSim, an agent-based model (ABM) of the ﬁshery (Cooper, 2015.  Cooper and Jarre, 2017).  HakeSim captures the complex industry structure, complete with heterogeneous company, vessel and market agents, as well as important factors that affect the industry's proﬁtability such as fuel price, total allowable catch, environmental variability (through a proxy), domestic and international market price and demand for hake.  Fuel price is one factor that majorly affects running costs and therefore proﬁtability of the offshore hake trawl industry.  It can account as much as 60% of running costs for ﬁshing companies (Sumaila et al. , 2008).  It is well known as a core issue affecting ﬁsheries economics and dynamics worldwide and, for example, has been identiﬁed as particularly signiﬁcant for the proﬁtability of wetﬁsh trawlers that land fresh ﬁsh in neighbouring Namibia (BCLME, 2006.  Gasalla et al. , 2010.  Sumaila et al. , 2008).  Even where it accounts a lower percentage (10 or 25%), such as in other trawl industries, it can hinder ﬁsheries in the case of a price increase (Sumaila et al. , 2008).  Arnason (2007) point out that increased fuel prices from 2004 meant signiﬁcant increases in cost and reductions in proﬁt, which could push companies already not making a proﬁt into exiting the ﬁshery.  Anecdotally, the South African industry complained of critical interactions between fuel price and catch per unit effort (CPUE) during high fuel price periods and that it was difﬁcult to sustain proﬁts at these times.  Previous modelling scenario analysis with HakeSim demonstrated that prices above ZAR 18. 783 per litre, prices that could occur with a large fuel price increase or removal of fuel subsidies, caused all modelled companies to make a loss and lower fuel prices than this could cause companies to make an unacceptably low return on investment to continue operations (Cooper and Jarre, 2017).  Should such an increase occur in future, in light of a deteriorating currency (ZAR), a global fuel price rise or a decrease in fuel subsidy, it is possible that industry could offset losses by increasing revenue streams.  It is unknown to what extent this is possible or how different companies might cope with these kinds of challenges.  To be able to assess this it is useful to consider different types of costs and revenues for companies and the variation between these variables at an individual company or vessel level.  Additionally, there may be other variable costs to the industry such as labour or storage costs, and ﬁxed costs such as repairs and maintenance or insurance (Whitmarsh et al. , 2000).  On the other hand, since it is an export-dominated ﬁshery (Crosoer et al. , 2006), market demand and international price (in Euros or US dollars) for hake, as well as the foreign exchange rate for the ZAR are important determinants of income to local companies.  Indeed, exchange rate is known to be an important factor for ﬁsheries and countries that export ﬁsh worldwide (Asche, 2014).  The changes to and interactions among these and other variables that affect costs and revenue determine short-term gross proﬁts.  They also determine economic proﬁts over the long term together with depreciation and opportunity costs (Whitmarsh et al. , 2000).  Understanding how proﬁts of different types of companies might be affected is signiﬁcant since changes to proﬁt not only affect companies and their employees, but are also of social and environmental signiﬁcance, for example on government decisions for public support or subsidies (Arnason, 2007).  It is not just the overall proﬁt that is important to companies, but also variance in proﬁt, which is a form of risk.  Since companies in the South African offshore hake trawl industry differ in their rightsholdings, the composition and numbers of vessels that they own, the products that they sell and their core business structure (Cooper et al. , 2014), they might make different trade-offs between proﬁt and risk.  They can also be quite differently affected by increased risk due to (environmental) variability in catches.  This type of individual level variability and the collective, emergent properties at a ﬁsheries system level that result from the interactions of these individual companies, vessels and markets are not captured in traditional economic models, but can be captured with an ABM.  Furthermore, the overall ﬂeet size and composition of the entire hake trawl industry has changed signiﬁcantly through time (Cooper et al. , 2014), and this presumably reﬂects trade-offs between proﬁt (i. e.  vessel costs balanced against revenue under different catch and market conditions) and deviation in proﬁts.  Understanding how proﬁt risk trade-offs affect ﬂeet structure help to inform management and policies regarding what vessels companies can operate and how they operate them.  For example, in Namibia government apportionment restrictions enforce a certain composition of wetﬁsh to freezer trawlers (Kirchner and Leiman, 2014), whereas the South African government has allowed companies to allocate their catch between vessels as they see ﬁt.  The objectives of the present paper are to use HakeSim to 1) examine trade-offs and interactions among industry drivers, such as fuel price and environmental variability, for example to understand whether losses due to high fuel price or low catches could somehow be offset and 2) examine the trade-offs in risk (variation in proﬁt) and proﬁt that companies experience for different company sizes and structures, and different ﬂeet compositions and sizes in the South African context.  it will provide insight into their different business strategies and how these might fare under different levels of uncertainty.  As an ABM HakeSim incorporates individual variability and interactions and how these result in observable patterns (emergent properties) at the ﬁsheries system level, as well as qualitative data, it will provide a novel way of examining these interactions and trade-offs in the absence of extensive quantitative economic data.  It will also provide insights into why consolidation in the industry continues to happen despite governments attempts to divide up quota, as discussed in (Cooper et al. , 2014), an important point in light of upcoming long term rights allocations.  <Middle> Methods.  To test a variety of scenarios for the offshore demersal hake trawl industry of South Africa, the model HakeSim was used, as described in Cooper and Jarre (2017).  The core features of its design are summarised here for convenience.  It is an ABM of the industry that captures the individual variability of and interactions among companies, ﬁshing vessels and the domestic and international markets (‘clients’), which are modelled as agents.  There are three types of ﬁshing vessel agents, four types of company agents that represent the four types of consolidated business entities described in Cooper et al.  (2014), and eleven client agents (see submodels in Fig.  1).  Client agents represent the South African domestic market for hake as well as the major export markets for hake that import on average 500 t or more of hake per annum from South Africa (Spain, Italy, Portugal, United Kingdom, Australia, France, Germany, the United States of America and the Netherlands) plus one agent that represents the collective South African hake imports of all countries that import on average less than 500 t per annum.  As shown in Fig.  1, ﬁshing vessels are activated as appropriate by the companies that own them to catch and land hake as fresh or frozen ﬁsh.  The company's objective is to catch all of its monthly quota using the minimum number of vessels and also to apportion catch between fresh and frozen vessels depending on international demand.  As such, each company ﬁrst determines whether there is an international market demand for fresh or frozen ﬁsh and then appropriately activates fresh, freezer or both types of vessels.  Each company activates sufﬁcient vessels from its own ﬂeet to capture the monthly proportion of the company's quota (which is equal to the right multiplied by the total allowable catch averaged across months).  Type and quantity of landings are therefore emergent.  Type of landings (fresh versus frozen) are therefore determined by international market demand.  The quantity of landings is determined by TAC, CPUE, an environmental variability proxy (which operates to a prescribed extent on variability of the CPUE) and the capacity of vessels available to each company.  The model therefore assumes that TAC is reﬂective of hake population levels, which is not an unreasonable assumption in the South African context where TAC is calculated annually on the basis of an extensive stock assessment modelling and review process (Field et al. , 2013).  Unlike in many international contexts, the South African hake TAC is typically the amount recommended on the basis of the stock assessment models.  Moreover, as TAC is the operational variable that limits catches by vessels, in the context of questions asked of industry proﬁtability, drivers and proﬁt-risk trade-offs, it was more relevant to use than population models, at least for this prototype version of the model.  Landed ﬁsh is then processed by companies to end-product that is ﬁnally sold on to clients in this model.  The assumption is that all ﬁsh is processed according to the individual company's fresh and frozen ﬁsh processing efﬁciency coefﬁcients, giving a ﬁnal per-company volume of processed product.  Clients have as their objective to satisfy their demand for fresh and frozen processed ﬁsh, and will buy from as many companies as necessary to achieve this.  Final sales volumes and revenue per company are emergent, as are ﬁnal product volumes bought and money spent by clients.  Joint product is not included in the model.  In all procedures, hake is separated into fresh and frozen ﬁsh, including landings, processing in companies, values and sales to clients.  Modelled companies generate revenue from the sales of hake made to different clients, as an emergent property.  Modelled clients purchase in foreign currency (Euros) and the ZAR revenue equivalent is based on the foreign exchange rate.  Modelled companies also accrue variable and non-variable costs.  these include maintenance costs, stafﬁng and the running of active vessels.  Costs are also an emergent property, as are ﬁnal proﬁts.  Model companies calculate short-term, gross proﬁts (ZAR) as the balance between total revenue and total costs.  The full details of these procedures, their associated equations and how their values for a standard run were calculated may be found in (Cooper and Jarre, 2017).  HakeSim was implemented in Netlogo 5. 0. 1 and successfully subjected to thorough testing, including assumption analyses, thorough sensitivity analyses and independent implementation and testing of submodels (Cooper and Jarre, 2017).  During model testing, and also for the scenarios that follow, 100 replicate runs were made in HakeSim using the BehaviorSpace tool built into Netlogo 5. 0. 1.  output values were recorded at every time-step.  3.  Scenario Analysis.  3. 1.  Interactions Among Industry Drivers.  Fuel prices beyond ZAR18. 783 per litre of diesel can rapidly drive companies to make a loss and ultimately to exit the South African offshore hake ﬁshery (Cooper and Jarre, 2017), resulting in job losses in vulnerable coastal communities.  A fuel price above this level is a possibility given that global fuel prices are likely to increase in future as fossil fuel resources dwindle.  In general, fuel price is known to be a core issue in ﬁshery economics and dynamics and to interact with other variables including those that affect fuel consumption (e. g.  nature of target species or weather) and the value of landings, to affect costs and proﬁts (Cheilari et al. , 2013.  Gasalla et al. , 2010.  Sumaila et al. , 2008).  It will be useful to understand how fuel price interacts with other key drivers to determine proﬁtability in the industry and how losses resulting from fuel price increases could be offset.  Scenarios that examine interactions of high (ZAR18. 783 per litre) and low (ZAR1. 574 per litre, the minimum price per litre from the 2000–2012 diesel time series.  Cooper and Jarre, 2017) fuel prices with CPUE, environmental stochasticity, exchange rate and market price were examined (Tables 1–4).  As was expected, there were clear interactions between CPUE and fuel price in determining company costs and hence proﬁtability (Table 1.  Fig.  2a).  Irrespective of fuel price, all companies made a proﬁt when CPUE was high and a loss when it was low.  The higher the fuel price, the greater the loss.  CPUE had a greater overall effect on whether companies remained proﬁtable or not, due to the fact that CPUE has a twofold effect in the model.  Firstly, it inﬂuences the catch cost per tonne the lower the CPUE the greater the effort and the more fuel used.  Secondly, it inﬂuences the maximum catching ability of modelled vessels – if CPUE is low, with all vessels active it may still be difﬁcult for companies to catch their entire quota, meaning reduced volumes of ﬁsh for sale and hence proﬁts.  This suggests, given a raised fuel price, companies may seek to increase CPUE to offset losses.  This is commonly observed elsewhere.  fuel price increases have often resulted in changes to ﬁshing behaviour in an attempt to reduce effort, improve gear and increase energy efﬁciency, all of which serve to increase CPUE (Abernethy et al. , 2010.  Cheilari et al. , 2013.  Parente et al. , 2008).  Such changes to behaviour can have consequences, such as concentrating ﬁshing effort in certain areas, generally closer to port (Cheilari et al. , 2013), and could ultimately compromise long term resource sustainability.  If it is difﬁcult to easily increase CPUE further under a higher fuel price, ﬁshers might also reduce effort, as a strategy for cost savings, which in turn would mean lower overall catches and economic hardship for ﬁshers (Abernethy et al. , 2010).  Because South African companies wish to demonstrate their ability to catch their allocated quota to ensure reallocation of rights and to continue to meet client demands, they may often continue to ﬁsh irrespective of raised fuel prices and lowered CPUE and take a short-term loss, so long as they maintained proﬁts over a longer term.  It is likely companies would not be able to survive long term losses due to sustained low CPUE, particularly if it were coupled with a high fuel price.  On top of the interaction between fuel price and CPUE there is another component to the certainty of catching ﬁsh which is captured in the model through the variable ‘stochasticity of catching ﬁsh’ (SF). 1 This variable allows some uncertainty in the catching of ﬁsh (i. e.  the ‘environment’) to be added, since it dictates how stochastic the CPUE is for each ﬁshing trip.  It essentially creates a speciﬁed level of random variance in catches in an attempt to incorporate a proxy for environmental uncertainty into the model.  Scenarios of average and high SF in situations where fuel price is low and high were explored (Table 2).  Low SF scenarios were not considered, since they were considered uninformative as in reality there is always some variability in catches.  Fuel price determined proﬁtability irrespective of SF (Fig.  2b), indicating modelled fuel price was a more important determinant of cost and hence proﬁt levels.  Nevertheless, increasing SF increased costs, reducing proﬁts.  As such, uncertainty reduces proﬁts in favourable conditions, and could under certain unfavourable conditions be the nail in the cofﬁn that pushes companies to make unbearable losses.  Local fuel price and exchange rate are usually linked.  when the ZAR devalues, fuel price increases, since oil is priced in US dollars.  At the same time, since hake is an export market, a higher ZAR value equivalent is obtained for the same Euro price of exported ﬁsh.  Thus changes in exchange rate have multiple and complex effects on company proﬁts. 