
Corporate directors have access to material non-public information, which makes them a potential information source for
professional traders.  Directors are, of course, required to keep sensitive material private: Delaware law recognizes a director's
duty of conﬁdentiality, and corporations have comprehensive policies in place to prevent leaks.  Investors, too, face regulatory
scrutiny and reputational costs if they use inside information in traceable manners, and these safeguards seem to be effective
in some institutional settings (Grifﬁn Name, 2012).  However, sensitive information can travel through education networks from
senior corporate ofﬁcers to mutual fund managers and sell-side analysts (Cohen Name, 2008, 2010).  This raises an important
question: to what extent do director networks transmit information that sophisticated traders are able to exploit. 
We investigate whether the breadth of directors' professional connections systematically affects the likelihood of
information leakage to sophisticated traders.  Well-connected directors interact with scores of people, and unguarded
conversations can easily reveal sensitive facts.  In addition, Larcker Name (2013) show that ﬁrms beneﬁt from more connected
boards because board connections are a conduit of information exchange.  Yet an important competitive advantage of
connected directors stems from their ability to provide insights that would otherwise be inaccessible to less connected
colleagues.  Fulﬁlling this role might require some deliberate sharing of sensitive material.  Sophisticated traders, who gather,
analyze and interpret data from multiple sources, have a comparative advantage when piecing together information about
ﬁrms with highly connected directors.  We therefore study possible information transmission from corporate directors to
sophisticated traders by examining the relation between board connectedness and the informativeness of trades made by
short sellers, option traders, and institutional investors. 
Our results indicate that these investor groups are indeed more informed when trading stocks of companies with more
connected boards.  We measure informed trading as the monthly level of short interest, the ratio of monthly option volume
to stock volume, and weekly order imbalances of institutional traders.  From BoardEx, we obtain the number of ﬁrst-degree
connections for each director, which includes links through educational institutions attended, current and previous employers,
military service and civic institutions.  To ensure that our measure of board connectedness is not driven by factors that
have been documented to affect the ﬁrm's information environment, we ﬁrst aggregate the connections of all board members
and then orthogonalize them with respect to ﬁrm size, board size, ﬁrm age, the number of analysts and institutional
ownership.  We examine portfolios sorted by board connectedness and each of the three measures of informed trading
and ﬁnd that the annualized return difference between the highest and lowest quintile of informed trading in highly connected boards is signiﬁcantly more pronounced compared to the same return difference in ﬁrms with less connected boards. 
The economic magnitude ranges from 4% for option volume and 5. 4% for short interest, to 7. 2% for institutional order
imbalance. 
Next, we examine whether the trades of sophisticated investors predict changes in ﬁrm fundamentals.  Our results indicate
that a higher fraction of negative earnings news is embedded in prices of highly connected ﬁrms ahead of the announcement,
and that sophisticated traders better anticipate earning surprises in ﬁrms with highly connected boards.  Indeed, their trades
predict ﬁrm-speciﬁc news content more broadly, as our analysis of Thompson Reuters' public news data shows.  Changes in
board connectedness are also positively associated with changes in measures of adverse selection costs, such as the probability
of informed trading (PIN), bid–ask spreads and the price impact measure of Amihud (2002).  In a series of robustness checks
we establish that neither family ownership, corporate governance quality, nor asset tangibility, drive our ﬁndings. 
Our study contributes to several strands of the literature.  First, we add novel insights to recent studies examining the
role of director networks in ﬁnancial markets.  Among directors these networks contribute to higher ﬁrm performance
(Larcker Name, 2013), the dissemination of CEO compensation practices (Wong Name, 2015), stock option backdating (Bizjak
Name, 2009), and earnings management (Chiu Name, 2012).  Board members and their social networks inﬂuence which
companies become targets in change-of-control transactions (Stuart and Yim, 2010).  Directors of Finnish ﬁrms earn sizable
abnormal returns by trading stocks where they have information advantages through their board connections (Berkman Name, 2014).  We build on these insights by documenting that board connections in general affect the external corporate
information environment, increase the potential for informed trading, and facilitate the dissemination of information into
stock prices.  While prior research suggests that analysts, media outlets and managers have incentives to convey positive
news (McNichols and O'Brien, 1997; Kothari Name, 2009), we show that negative news, in particular, ﬂows through director
networks. 
Second, we contribute to research into the information sources of sophisticated traders.  Short sellers predict the outcome
of earnings surprises (Christophe Name, 2004), detect ﬁnancial misconduct (Karpoff and Lou, 2010), and uncover hidden bad
news in high levels of accruals (Hirshleifer Name, 2011).  Short sellers excel in processing publicly available news (Engelberg
Name, 2012) and receive tips ahead of analyst downgrades (Christophe Name, 2010).  Option trades (Pan and Poteshman, 2006;
Johnson and So, 2012) and institutional trades (Grifﬁn Name, 2003; Campbell Name, 2009; Puckett and Yan, 2011) also predict
future stock prices.  Our ﬁndings suggest that more connected directors contribute, directly or inadvertently, to the information set of short sellers, option traders, and institutional investors.  More generally, we advance an emergent literature
that examines how a ﬁrm's organizational structure affects its information environment.  Anderson Name (2012) report that
family ownership increases informed trading.  We complement their ﬁndings by directly linking the governance structure of
the ﬁrm to sophisticated trading in the ﬁrm's stock. 
<Middle> Identiﬁcation strategy and hypotheses development. 
How does material non-public information ﬂow from corporate insiders to sophisticated investors.  What organizational
characteristics restrain or exacerbate the magnitude of information transmission.  How does this affect trading and security
prices.  These questions, while essential to understand, are difﬁcult to answer.  Insiders can be found on every level of the
corporate hierarchy, the sophistication of traders is not readily apparent, both groups have incentives to keep their conversations about privileged information secret, and traders frequently disguise trades that could trigger regulatory attention. 
In light of these challenges, we develop a novel identiﬁcation strategy that focuses on the possible information transmission
between two important groups of people: we investigate whether patterns in trading behavior and securities prices suggest
that privileged information ﬂows from corporate directors to sophisticated traders. 
By focusing on the board of directors, we study a group of clearly identiﬁable corporate insiders with privileged information about their ﬁrms.  Unfettered access to material, non-public information is necessary to monitor and advise management, the social networks of directors are observable, and recent studies suggest that these networks are important
conduits of information exchange.  We argue that sophisticated traders can obtain privileged information from directors and
trade proﬁtably on that information before it becomes available to the broader market.  If information is channeled towards
sophisticated traders, their proﬁtability will be high.  In contrast, if connected directors disseminate sensitive information
broadly, prices will quickly incorporate it, leaving smaller proﬁt opportunities for sophisticated traders.  As possible transmission channels we consider inadvertent information leakage, deliberate sharing of sensitive information, and “mosaic”
information gathering.  We discuss each channel in turn. 
The risk of inadvertent information leakage increases with the size of the network of people who are privy to material
non-public information. 1 Steele (1989) formalizes this idea, and models the likelihood of disclosing a secret as proportional
to the square of the number of people who know the secret.  More connections increase the difﬁculty of guarding against the
unintended disclosure of private information.  We therefore expect that inadvertent information leakage will be more
pronounced for companies with more connected boards. 
Directors also face incentives to share sensitive information deliberately.  After all, an important competitive advantage of
broadly connected directors stems from their ability to obtain and share insights that would otherwise be inaccessible to
less connected colleagues.  Molm (2003) suggests that reciprocal information sharing increases the status and inﬂuence of an
individual within a network.  Fisman Name (2012) remark that “board membership more broadly creates a context for a kind
of reciprocal attraction and friendship among a fraternity of individuals. 