 Introduction We investigate whether firms' recurring measurements of the fair values of recognized financial instruments (hereafter “fair value measurements”) exhibit conditional conservatism when the instruments do not trade in liquid markets, thereby enabling them to exercise discretion over the measurements. 1 Absent such discretion, fair value measurements should be unbiased, i. e. , symmetrically incorporate unrealized gains and unrealized losses.  Policymakers and academics often make statements or research design choices that suggest fair value measurements generally are unbiased, ignoring biases introduced by discretion.  For example, SEC (2008) states that the “objective of SFAS No.  157 and of existing fair value standards is to provide transparent unbiased information about fair value. ” Shaffer (2011) describes fair value measurement as “an anchor for”…“an asset/liability approach… [in which] valuations must be objective and neutral.  This requirement overrides the constraint of conservatism, which historically assumed a downward bias for asset valuations. ” (Emphasis added in both quotes. ) Empirical research examining fair value measurements' predictive power and their value-, returns-, and risk-relevance often sums fair values or fair value gains and losses, which is appropriate only if the summed items are measured comparably (e. g. , are unbiased or have the same proportional bias). 2 Ostensibly in contrast to the view that fair values are unbiased, some influential observers claim that fair value measurements for instruments that do not trade in liquid markets represent optimistic or noisy “mark-to-myth” (Buffett, 2003) or “mark-to-make-believe” (Weil, 2007) valuations that are discounted by investors.  Empirical research provides evidence supporting these claims (Kolev, 2009.  Song et al. , 2010.  Goh et al. , 2009).  To mitigate such discounting, we expect firms to take steps to increase the perceived reliability of these measurements.  The step we examine is suggested by the extensive literature that documents the contracting and other benefits of conditional conservatism (e. g. , Basu, 1997.  Watts, 2003).  Roychowdhury (2010) emphasizes the critical role of explicit and implicit governance mechanisms, which increase the strength and persistence of firms' incentives to report conditionally conservatively, to obtain these benefits.  Although firms make reporting decisions each period, when these incentives are sufficiently strong and persistent, they effectively constitute a “credible commitment” to conditional conservatism (e. g. , Zhang, 2008).  We identify the extent of firms' discretion over fair value measurements using disclosures provided under Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) 157, Fair Value Measurements (FASB, 2006).  This standard requires firms to disclose, for each major category of asset and liability, the fair value measurement amounts that are based on active market prices for the items being measured (Level 1 inputs), other observable information (Level 2 inputs), or unobservable information (Level 3 inputs). 3 These three input levels differ in their observability and individual completeness as measures of fair value, and thus in the extent of discipline they provide over firms' fair value measurements. 