
Renewable energy sources are increasingly used in order to curb
CO2 emissions and mitigate climate change.  In particular, solar photovoltaic systems are being deployed at an exponential rate (see e. g. ,
IEA, 2016).  However, this technology has the drawback of generating electricity when residential demand is relatively low.  In fact, solar
radiation is maximal around noon, when many homes are empty. 
Conversely, households’ electricity usage peaks in the evening, when
solar radiation is nil.  This mismatch constitutes a potential obstacle to the diffusion of electricity produced from solar sources, even
if it can be mitigated in different ways.  Grid expansions would help
in transporting electricity for remote consumption.  Storage capacities would allow delayed consumption.  Demand-response measures
may be implemented so that electricity is used when and where it is
produced. 
While the ﬁrst two solutions are supply-side measures requiring high installation costs (Beaudin Name, 2010) and involving losses
(Denholm and Hand, 2011), demand-side management might prove
relatively inexpensive and easy to implement.  An additional advantage of demand-side interventions is that they can be implemented
rapidly, while deployment of new technologies on a large scale can
only be achieved in the long run (Dietz Name, 2009).  It has also been
argued that different solutions like storage and demand management should be considered as complementing each other for grid
balancing (Elliott, 2016). 
Mitigating imbalances between electricity production and usage
is a particularly serious issue in remote areas.  In fact, when large
amounts of solar energy are produced in isolated regions at times of
low demand, providers may ﬁnd the technical installations necessary
to accommodate excess supply too expensive and could prefer to
literally destroy the electricity produced. 1 This dismal anecdote
illustrates how supply-side measures might fail when it comes to
integrating electricity from renewable sources in the grid.  In such
situations, demand-side management becomes crucial. 
Even if this paper focuses on the misalignment of solar energy
production and electricity consumption, its scope extends to the
general issue of the increasing importance of renewable technologies.  Because the new renewable energy sources (sun and wind) are
intermittent by nature, relying more on these will imply managing
demand more actively in order to minimize the cost of using the
electricity produced. 
In this paper, using a randomized control trial, we investigate
whether and by how much households shift intraday electricity
usage when provided with incentives to do so.  More precisely, the
objective of our intervention is to encourage households to increase
their share of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  (when
most solar radiation takes place), while discouraging any voluntary increase in overall consumption. 2 The ﬁrst treatment consists
of information feedback sent monthly via paper mail.  Households
included in this group obtain details about their own consumption,
its pattern within the day, and similar information about households
of comparable size.  The second treatment is a contest in which the
best performers (i. e. , those who achieve the strongest shift in electricity usage while keeping total usage at reasonable levels) receive
cash prizes determined by their position in the ranking. 
Using a difference-in-differences approach, our results suggest
that both treatments induce a reaction, but the type of reaction
depends on the treatment.  Households exposed to information feedback globally decrease electricity usage regardless of the hours of the
day, but they do not shift consumption toward the indicated hours. 
Conversely, households exposed to ﬁnancial incentives display a signiﬁcant shift toward the solar energy production hours.  They achieve
an increase in their proportion of electricity used between 11 a. m. 
and 3 p. m.  by about 1 percentage point, which is not negligible
considering this proportion is around 20% on average. 
The remainder of the paper unfolds as follows.  Section 2 discusses how our contribution ﬁts into the recent literature.  Section 3
presents our experimental design.  Section 4 describes our dataset
and provides a descriptive analysis of the impacts of our intervention.  Section 5 explains our econometric strategy and reports our
empirical results.  Section 6 discusses the policy implications and
concludes. 
2.  Literature review. 
Our paper is located at the intersection of two distinct bodies
of literature.  The ﬁrst is composed of technical contributions that
examine the feasibility of integration of large amounts of variable
renewable energy sources (sun and wind) into the energy system
(see the review by Kondziella and Bruckner, 2016).  This branch of
the literature focuses on engineering solutions and essentially analyzes supply-side measures, whereby the issue is to render electricity
distribution amenable through grid expansion and/or storage, and it
makes assumptions to simulate consumers’ behavior.  For instance,
Denholm and Margolis (2007) evaluate scenarios where up to an
arbitrary 10% of demand can be shifted to absorb excess photovoltaic
generation, and Steinke Name (2013) simply keep demand constant. 
In our study, we tackle a similar problem but look at it from an
opposite perspective, that is, focusing on demand management. 
We obtain exact consumption data and observe actual households’
reaction, but we make simplifying assumptions concerning the
supply of renewable energy. 
Among the technical studies, Pina Name (2012) stand out as they
analyze the impact of demand-side management strategies in an
electricity mix characterized by high shares of renewable energy. 
Their results are nevertheless based on simulations, both for the
installation of new generation capacity and for electricity usage. 
For example, they assume that because washing machines, dryers,
and dishwashers can be easily programmed, these devices will be
scheduled to operate when renewable electricity generation is high. 
In some of their scenarios, around 40% of these activities are thus
shifted.  The assumption that households (and other consumers) will
actually change their habits is crucial, but far from obvious.  In the
present paper, we are testing this assumption by investigating if
and how real households do actually shift load when faced with
incentives to do so. 
The second relevant branch of the literature is composed of
economic studies dealing with the effects of feedback on household
electricity demand.  As documented in several literature reviews
(Buchanan Name, 2015.  Faruqui Name, 2010.  Vine Name, 2013) and
meta-analyses (Delmas Name, 2013.  Ehrhardt-Martinez Name, 2010),
this research ﬁeld is growing fast. 3 In these contributions, the usual
objective is to induce electricity conservation.  Instead, our goal here
is to induce load shifting across hours of the day without requiring
any decrease (but still prevent increases) in total electricity usage. 
As such, the present study is among the ﬁrst economic contributions
targeting load shifting, and the main novelty of our intervention is
that we intend to attract electricity usage toward some speciﬁc (sunlight) hours instead of trying to push it away from some speciﬁc
(peak) hours.  In that sense, our intervention is opposed to the usual
paradigm of peak shaving and in fact seeks to create a consumption
peak that coincides with the peak of solar energy production. 
Other remarkable features of our contribution are the duration of
the experiment and the response rate of the pre-experiment survey. 
Our experiment was conducted over an exceptionally long period
of 18 months.  three months of pre-treatment observation, twelve
months of treatment, and three further months of observation after
the treatment was terminated.  By comparison, 60% of the studies considered in the meta-analysis by Delmas Name (2013) lasted
three months or less.  Most studies moreover discontinue observation once the treatment is terminated, so that the availability of
a post-treatment observation period is also an exceptional feature. 
Furthermore, our pre-experiment survey reached a response rate of
about 16%, a considerable ﬁgure when compared to other studies. 4
In Ito Name (2015) and Degen Name (2013), the response rates are
about 1. 7% and 8. 7%, respectively.  Jessoe and Rapson (2014) sent
60,000 e-mails but use only 437 households in their analysis (0. 7%). 
A high response rate tends to minimize the self-selection problems
that might plague this type of experiment.  Finally, our experiment
fulﬁlls all conditions to qualify as a “high-quality study” according
to Delmas Name (2013).  dedicated control group, weather controls,
demographic and household controls, and randomization. 
<Middle> Experimental design. 
Our ﬁeld experiment was conducted on households living in
Cernier, a village of around 2000 inhabitants located in the canton
of Neuchâtel (Switzerland).  In 2012, in the frame of a pilot study,
the electricity provider Groupe e started to equip households with
smart meters recording electricity usage in 15-min intervals.  In April
2013, we contacted 387 households already equipped or eligible to
be equipped with smart meters, and invited them to ﬁll an online
survey. 5 The invitation letter remained intentionally vague about the
objective of the study, in order not to inﬂuence the households that
would later be assigned to the control group.  It was simply stated
that a “scientiﬁc study about electricity consumption” was undertaken to “investigate the ﬂexibility of electricity consumption, in
order to adapt it to the production of electricity from renewable
sources (in particular photovoltaic production). ” To foster participation, a lottery awarding CHF 200 in cash was organized among
respondents, and a reminder letter was sent one month after the
initial invitation letter. 
For households of the control group, these two letters constitute
the only direct interaction with the project.  A time lag of more than
six months therefore took place between the information received by
these households and the outset of the intervention in January 2014,
and it appears very unlikely that their behavior could be affected by
our letters.  Also, while we cannot formally exclude spillovers from
households in the treatment groups to those in the control group,
we argue that such effects are very unlikely to be strong, considering that the objective of the intervention is not straightforward.  If
anything, potential spillovers would moreover tend to minimize the
observed impact of our intervention, so that the treatment effects
we obtain are possibly downward biased and can be considered as a
lower bound of the true effects. 
By mid-December 2013, 131 households had completed the
online survey.  Among them, households facing a time-of-use tariff or already involved in other experiments were discarded, which
left 65 households eligible to participate in our experiment. 7,8 The
observation period lasted from October 2013 to March 2015, and
treatments were administered from January to December 2014. 
October–December 2013 thus constitute the pre-treatment period,
while January–March 2015 constitute the post-treatment observation period. 
In order to guarantee the internal validity of our study, the 65
eligible households have been randomly assigned to one control
and two treatment groups of equal size using a stratiﬁcation procedure.  The goal of the procedure was to create groups as similar as
possible with respect to the following selected characteristics.  preexperiment electricity usage per household member, dwelling size,
and highest education level achieved by a member of the household. 
Two households ﬁlled the online survey after the stratiﬁcation
had been conducted but before the intervention started, and they
have been included in the control group. 