 1.  Introduction In order to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+), policies could either attempt to reduce the proﬁtability of agriculture, e. g.  by removing agricultural subsidies, or offer positive incentives such as payment for environmental services (PES) that aim to put a price on forest externalities (Angelsen, 2010.  Palmer, 2011).  The latter have come to dominate both project and nascent jurisdictional-scale REDD+ strategies (see e. g.  Mahanty et al. , 2013.  Sills et al. , 2014).  Acre State in Brazil, the setting for our paper, is currently at the forefront of efforts to institutionalize jurisdictional-scale REDD+.  At an estimated cost of US$260 million, the State government's objective is to reduce deforestation by 80% by 2020, thus conserving 5. 5 million ha of forest in order to prevent the release of 62. 5 Mt of CO2 emissions (Herbert, 2010).  To this end, Acre has established a ‘PES-like’ scheme known as the Incentive System for Environmental Services (SISA) framework.  Its objective is to internalize values associated with forest carbon, as well as biodiversity and hydrological services, by incentivizing landowners to conserve forest on their landholdings.  In this paper, we model a hypothetical SISA payment in order to address two related questions.  First, given the extent of uncertainty in land-use returns from forest conversion, what is the minimum level of payment that Acre's government should pay to landowners to ensure forest conservation with a 90% probability.  Reﬂecting the common practice of Latin American incentive payment schemes, our payment is held constant over time.  The ‘90% probability’ is illustrative of a setting in which there is a relatively strong commitment on the part of the policymaker to enforce conservation contracts and hence, keep land in forest.  That said, should alternative land uses become more proﬁtable, e. g.  due to rising commodity prices, it may not be possible to prevent contract breach altogether thus reﬂecting imperfect enforcement of conservation contracts (e. g.  Engel and Palmer, 2008.  MacKenzie et al. , 2012.  Jayachandran, 2013).  Our model is applied to municipality-scale, publicly-available data, which allows us to estimate the uncertain returns of an ‘average’ landowner within each municipality, one faced with the decision of whether to keep land in forest or convert it to an alternative land use.  For each of Acre's municipalities, we estimate the uncertain returns for three alternative land uses.  cattle, corn, and coffee.  These three land uses are among the most popular ones adopted in Acre and have relatively good data availability.  We then identify the minimum per hectare cost to the policymaker of conserving forest in each of Acre's 22 municipalities before ranking the municipalities according to ascending payment levels, i. e.  moving from the municipalities with the lowest opportunity costs to those with the highest ones.  The second question we ask is whether and (if so) how this ranking of municipalities changes when we consider their carbon stocks.  Finally, our estimates of policy costs are combined with carbon stock data to give a novel measure of municipality-scale environmental cost-effectiveness.  the minimum relative cost, in terms of the forgone proﬁts from alternative land uses under uncertainty, per tonne of carbon.  In studies that evaluate the cost-effectiveness and efﬁciency of PES, two key assumptions are typically made.  First, it is often assumed that future returns from forest conversion are known with certainty (e. g.  Ferraro and Simpson, 2002.  Börner et al. , 2010.  Groom and Palmer, 2010.  Palmer and Silber, 2012.  Curran et al. , 2016).  Yet, up-front investments combined with greater uncertainty in agricultural returns create incentives to delay the decision to convert forest to an alternative use (Schatzki, 2003).  This implies that a lower level of incentive would be required to prevent forest conversion.  In general, a failure to consider uncertainty in future agricultural returns results in estimates of the opportunity costs of forest conservation that are biased upwards.  The consequence is that payment levels would be set higher than necessary in order to incentivize forest conservation.  Second, it is also commonly assumed that the environmental beneﬁts from conserving forest are homogenous across space.  However, it has become increasingly clear that this assumption is erroneous.  For example, Saatchi et al.  (2011) demonstrate wide variation in forest carbon stocks, even at the local scale, e. g.  within municipalities.  A failure to consider heterogeneity in forests and their corresponding eco-system services can thus lead to under- or over-estimates of beneﬁts from conservation (see Vincent, 2016).  In Acre, funds for SISA remain dependent on public sources of funding despite a Memorandum of Understanding signed in 2010 with the US State of California to provide REDD+ credits.  There is currently little scope for the use of carbon markets and offsetting to augment Acre's conservation budget.  Given this limited budget, the basic idea behind our analysis is to identify municipalities in Acre where it might be possible to conserve a lot of carbon at relatively low cost.  Our paper contributes to Acre's ongoing efforts to design an efﬁcient and effective set of forest conservation institutions, particularly with respect to jurisdictional REDD+, which are described in Section 2.  We do so by adapting the model of uncertain land-use returns by Engel et al.  (2015), in Section 3.  First, we adapt their model so that it is more consistent with most Latin American PES schemes, namely by changing the incentive from a variable to a ﬁxed, area-based payment and by creating a shorter payments period (ﬁve years instead of 30).  Second, in examining three different land uses and with 22 different starting points, i. e.  one for each municipality in Acre, we move away from their focus on a single alternative land use and a single starting point for estimating policy costs.  We exploit spatial heterogeneity in land-use returns and model these returns over time using publicly available data, which are described in Section 4.  Since similar data are increasingly available for other tropical countries, in addition to other Brazilian States, our model can easily be applied to other settings and land uses.  Further, we exploit the spatial variation in forest carbon stocks across the State and by comparing these with the relative land use returns, provide an economic rationale for the targeting of REDD+ payments.  Building upon Engel et al.  (2015), our analysis therefore not only estimates the spatial variation in the cost of keeping forests standing but also integrates these costs with forest carbon stock data in order to derive a measure of cost-effectiveness across municipalities.  In sum, our model offers a novel and straightforward way of allocating scarce conservation resources and while our focus is on forest climate beneﬁts, it can easily be expanded to accommodate other ecosystem services and biodiversity.  Presented in Section 5 and discussed in Section 6, our results suggest that although pasture and cattle ranching is not particularly proﬁtable, it is the land use which results in the highest (relative) returns to landowners under uncertainty, in 19 out of 22 municipalities.  With relatively low conversion costs and little volatility in its returns process, pasture determines the minimum payment level in these areas.  Upon ranking municipalities by payment level and by carbon stock, we ﬁnd that cheaper municipalities tend not to have higher stocks.  However, this type of ranking masks wide differences among municipalities.  Our empirical exercise demonstrates evidence of substantial, economicallymeaningful and policy-relevant variation among municipalities.  On the basis of cost per tonne of carbon, we identify 13 municipalities in which it might be possible to obtain a substantially larger ‘carbon bang’ for one's ‘buck’ in contrast to the other nine municipalities.  2.  Background to Acre State, BRAZIL.  Acre in western Brazil has become a world leader in reducing deforestation while growing its economy (Schwartzman, 2015).  The State is home to around 750,000 people.  Almost half live in the capital, Rio Branco, while the remainder resides among its 22 municipalities.  Since the election of The Acre Workers Party and their allies The Popular Front in 1998, the State government has followed the vision of legendary rubber tapper and environmental activist Chico Mendes towards a sustainable development pathway for the State.  About 14. 3 million ha (143,000 km2) of intact, richly diverse forest, approximately 87% of its total area, is found within State borders.  Primary forest makes up over 85% of forest cover.  The majority of this forest is covered by some form of protection, whether indigenous territory, parks or reserves.  Deforestation has fallen over recent years, from an average annual deforestation rate of 60,200 ha (602 km2) per year between 1996 and 2005, to 49,600 ha (496 km2) per year between 2001 and 2010.  Acre State set itself two main deforestation goals, to reduce levels by 60% of the 1990–2005 average by 2012, and by 80% by 2020.  Total emissions for the State were estimated at 22. 7 Mt CO2e in 2010, of which 97% came from deforestation and land degradation.  The reduction in deforestation rates has meant that Acre has managed to move forward in issuing veriﬁed emission reduction credits to the tune of 11. 5 Mt CO2e through the Markit registry (Forest Trends, 2015). 