1.  Introduction The dependence of smallholder farmers on forest resources for their sustenance and livelihoods is a major driver of deforestation and degradation of forest resources in tropical countries (Amare et al. , 2012.  FAO, 2007).  African nations lead the global list of countries with the highest deforestation rates (Naoto, 2006).  Forest degradation in Ethiopia is primarily being caused by human activities (Reusing, 1998.  Teketay et al. , 2010) and has led to considerable habitat fragmentation (Wilcove et al. , 1986), a decreasing population (Laurance et al. , 2006) and extinction of indigenous plant and animal species (Wright and Muller-Landau, 2006), as well as a decline in provision of soil protection, water conservation and favourable microclimate services (Aerts et al. , 2011).  Forest degradation is most pronounced in the highlands of the Amhara region, where natural forests and sacred groves have continuously been overexploited during past decades.  The deforestation has led to high runoff resulting in degraded landscapes, decreasing crop and livestock productivity, sedimentation of water bodies, increased food insecurity and increasingly high loss of the resource base and the attached ecosystem services (Amare et al. , 2016.  Bongers et al. , 2006.  Aerts et al. , 2016).  Zege peninsula, which is located in the Amhara Regional State, is one of the remnants of dry Afromontane forest patches in Ethiopia.  This forest has considerable religious, economic and ecological importance as it attracts local and international pilgrims, serves as a source of livelihood for local communities, and is rich in biodiversity (Alelign et al. , 2007.  Teklehaymanot and Giday, 2007).  However, recent studies have shown that unsustainable wood extraction and marketing of wood products by local populations have increased (Teklehaymanot and Giday, 2007.  Alelign et al. , 2011) thereby contributing to the degradation of the forest ecosystem and the nearby Lake Tana (Amare et al. , 2012.  Amare et al. , 2017).  This, in turn, has led to reduced livelihood options, economic and habitat losses, threatened biodiversity, undermined the valuable services provided by biological diversity and increased the risk of climate change.  In order to reverse this trend, innovative approaches are required that integrate environmental conservation objectives and livelihood improvements for the local communities (Alelign et al. , 2011).  A more detailed understanding of the link between forests and local livelihoods enables the promotion of more sustainable management practices while maintaining acceptable levels of utilization (Shaanker et al. , 2004.  Lepetu and Oladele, 2009).  Hence, investigating the dependence of local communities on their forest resources is vital to devise appropriate forest management and conservation strategies.  There is no shortage of studies that investigate how socio-economic household characteristics and local institutions affect deforestation, forest degradation and conservation (e. g. , Adhikari et al. , 2004.  Faham et al. , 2008.  Bembridge and Tarlton, 1990.  Lepetu and Oladele, 2009.  Lockwood et al. , 2010.  Manyatsi and Hlophe, 2010.  Amare et al. , 2016.  Mowo et al. , 2016).  However, these studies are highly speciﬁc to location and context (Kaimowitz and Angelsen, 1998.  Clark et al. , 2008).  Therefore, little consensus exists with regard to which drivers inﬂuence deforestation and forest degradation on a generalized and abstract level (Vadez et al. , 2005.  Indarto and Mutaqin, 2016).  Local case studies (e. g. , Adhikari et al. , 2004.  McElwee, 2008.  Inoni, 2009.  Lepetu and Oladele, 2009) are thus considered to provide reliable and useful accounts of these processes and their causes and dynamics (Kaimowitz and Angelsen, 1998).  Hence, in order to determine the extent of deforestation and forest degradation at the Zege peninsula and to identify the factors inducing these processes, a detailed local-level study is needed.  Such a study could also serve as an initial step toward formulating policies conducive for an equitable and sustainable management of forest resources (Lepetu and Oladele, 2009).  The following socio-demographic variables have been reported in the literature as being correlated with household wood extraction.  education (e. g. , Ricardo et al. , 1998.  Baba et al. , 2015) or years of schooling of the household head (Inoni, 2009), age of the household head, dependency ratio (Rahut et al. , 2016), male gender (Eneji et al. , 2015) and household size (Inoni, 2009.  Knight and Rosa, 2012).  Lack of employment opportunities (Manyatsi and Hlophe, 2010.  Usman et al. , 2016) was positively while income from paid wages, total land size and income from farming (Bwalya, 2013) were negatively correlated with income from forest products (McElwee, 2008).  Extension services (Adugna, 2008), remittances and credit (Berhanu, 2003) enabled engagement of famers in more remunerable activities and reduced wood extraction.  Dysfunctional local institutions increased the likelihood of deforestation (Lockwood et al. , 2010.  Mowo et al. , 2016).  However, the set of variables included in these analyses varied, and the direction and strength of these relationships have not always been consistent in the literature.  Moreover, most of these studies fail to differentiate conceptually distinct mechanisms and motivations of smallholder-driven deforestation and forest degradation.  With the current study we, therefore, aim to undertake a comprehensive empirical assessment of the factors driving deforestation and forest degradation by smallholders at the Zege peninsula.  The objectives of this study are (i) to explore the economic dependence of rural populations in the study area on wood products and their contribution to household cash income.  (ii) to identify the primary motivations of smallholders to extract forest products.  and (iii) to assess the effectiveness of local forest management traditions.  We have used wood extraction by smallholders as a proximate measure for deforestation and forest degradation.  Compared to traditional land use and forest inventory-based attempts to operationalize deforestation and forest degradation, this approach has the advantage of directly linking these processes to livelihood activities and household-level indicators of well-being (Indarto and Mutaqin, 2016).  Furthermore, we have used the term wood rather than fuel wood in our study since wood biomass is used for various purposes in addition to household energy in the study area.  This paper is novel with regard to the following aspects.  (i) we provide a detailed account of a speciﬁc forest management tradition in the study area that, as to the best of our knowledge, has not been presented yet elsewhere.  (ii) we apply the Heckman two-steps econometric model to analyse the drivers of wood extraction and to reveal the smallholders' motivations to exploit their forest resources.  and (iii) we propose to include livelihood options as a modiﬁer variable when assessing the relationship between education and gender on smallholder wood extraction.  2.  Conceptual Framework.  While large-scale commercial deforestation has become a major driving force of forest destruction in the Amazon and Indonesia since the 1980s, smallholders remain the primary agents of forest degradation and deforestation in most parts of South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa to date (Rudel et al. , 2009).  Agricultural expansion and wood extraction are among the main direct or proximate causes of smallholder-driven deforestation, and a variety of economic, political, historical, institutional, cultural, demographic and technological factors have been identiﬁed as its underlying causes of these processes (Chakravarty et al. , 2012.  Geist and Lambin, 2001).  Despite numerous studies on smallholder-driven deforestation and forest degradation, the conceptual understanding of their motivations to exploit their forest resources remains relatively vague.  The point of departure for our study is the empirical observation that smallholder farmers utilize and, at times, overexploit the forest driven by two fundamentally opposing motivations (cf.  Shackleton and Shackleton, 2007.  Wunder et al. , 2014), viz.  (1) the reliance on forest products as a safety net in absence of other sufﬁcient livelihood options, in times of food scarcity or income shortage (we label this motivation “wood extraction for need”).  and (2) the extraction of forest products to maximize household income when proﬁtable market opportunities for forest products exist despite the availability of sufﬁcient alternative, non-forest livelihood options (we label this motivation “wood extraction for greed”).  This conceptual distinction is supported by the observation that often speciﬁc socioeconomic strata are engaged in and linked to these opposing forms of forest utilization.  while the safety net function of forests and extraction of subsistence products is particularly important for the very poor and vulnerable parts of the rural population, forest use for cash income generation is more pronounced among better-off households and their absolute incomes from forest products are often larger (Angelsen et al. , 2014).  Yet, in practice this distinction is less neat, as forest exploitation by the vulnerable and the better-off rural households may occur in parallel, and many rural households in fact exploit forests for subsistence and income generation at the same time.  However, each of these two mechanisms of forest exploitation requires a particular and distinct set of responses to be redressed.  Separating these concepts analytically may, therefore, add to an improved understanding of the factors contributing to deforestation and forest degradation in a particular case, thereby facilitating the formulation of effective location-speciﬁc policy responses.  We use the Heckman two-steps model to investigate smallholder forest exploitation at the Zege peninsula.  The ﬁrst model equation identiﬁes the socio-economic determinants of the households' involvement in wood extraction.  We conceptualize this step to assess the overall dependency of villagers from the forest resources and to reveal incidences of need and greed based wood extraction, if present.  The second model equation uncovers the factors that determine the amount of annual household wood extraction from the forest, which we conceptualize to separate need from greed based forest exploitation.  <Middle> Materials and Methods.  3. 1.  The Study Area.  The study was conducted at Zege peninsula (°40′ to 11°43′N and 37°19′ to 37°21′E), located at the southern shores of Lake Tana (Alelign et al. , 2011).  The main land use type on the peninsula was coffee forest (1060 ha), with non-coffee forest land uses covering only 12. 5 ha.  The peninsula harbours seven old Ethiopian orthodox monasteries.  The average monthly temperature ranged from 11 °C to 27 °C, while the mean annual rainfall was 1659 mm with a bimodal distribution (Amare et al. , 2012).  The ofﬁcial population on the peninsula was 5143 people living in1285 households (ibid. ).  The remnant natural forests located at the peninsula have traditionally been considered as a sacred place and, therefore, have remained relatively unaffected by human exploitation in the past.  These forests have great conservation and biodiversity value, serve as sanctuaries for endangered plant and animal species and are indicator sites of the original ecological landscape (Teklehaymanot and Giday, 2007).  Alelign et al.  (2007) found 113 woody plant species of which 56% were trees, 33%shrubs and 11% lianas.  Most of the forest area has traditionally been used by local populations for cultivation of coffee.  It is believed that the monks who ﬁrst inhabited the peninsula provided coffee as the only income source for the local community and excommunicated ploughing, livestock production and wood extraction for the sake of protecting the spirituality of the peninsula (Amare et al. , 2012).  The production of non-timber forest products (NTFPs) has been the main customary source of livelihood at the peninsula for generations.  As customary owners of the forest, the community members harvested coffee, fruits (mango, lemon, papaya, banana, etc. ), and Rhamunus prinoides planted inside the natural forest.  Farming activities did not constitute a livelihood activity in the study area.  Since around the 1970s, wood extraction has increasingly been practiced by the community to supplement their livelihoods in the aftermath of two heavy storms that devastated the forest and led to a decline in NTFP production (Amare et al. , 2012).  Alelign et al.  (2007) found 341 coppiced or dead stumps/stems per ha and concluded that the forest was heavily exploited for wood extraction.  They also found very few mature trees in the forest and suggested that this would jeopardize the future regeneration of the forest as a whole.  Since around 2007, sheep fattening has been promoted by governmental extension agents as a resilience strategy in light of declining livelihoods, ignoring the religious ban of livestock on the peninsula.  Currently, the community in Zege is legally allowed to extract NTFPs and wood from the forest.  Apart from the religious ban of farming and livestock production there exist customary by-laws regulating felling of mature trees from the forest.  According to these by-laws, households are required to obtain upfront permission from the local forest enforcement committee, which consists of the kebele administrator, the Development Agent and three elected individuals from the community.  To obtain permission, households interested to cut trees must present a convincing reason, such as house construction or income needs.  Felling must be limited to mature and dying trees that do not re-grow.  There was no limitation on the amount of wood extraction, neither at the level of the entire community nor for individual households.  3. 2.  Sampling and Data Collection.  Zege peninsula was purposively selected for this study due to the available natural forest patch and current pressures on the forest resources caused by wood extraction.  A multi-stage sampling procedure was used to select sample households.  Simple random sampling and proportion-to-population-size methods were employed to select the respondents from two kebeles (Ura and Yiganda).  For the household survey, 120 respondents were selected representing 9. 3% of the total population.  The semi-structured survey questionnaire was modiﬁed after pretesting and administered to respondents in their local language.  Information was collected on (a) socio-demographic household characteristics, e. g. , sex, age, family size and assets owned.  (b) livelihoods, e. g. , income sources, involvement in coffee production and other livelihood activities, household wellbeing and risk.  (c) wood extraction, e. g. , amounts harvested and preferred tree products.  (d) support services available, e. g. , credit and extension.  (e) forest management conditions, e. g. , by-laws and their effectiveness and the respondents' opinions on forest management.  and (f) major problems, e. g. , diseases and market access.  Checklists used for Focus Group Discussions (FGDs) and key informant interviews contained general information on the forest-based livelihood activities and management interventions and were designed to elicit a range and depth of information on the overall conditions of the peninsula.  Also, non-participant observation was used to triangulate information obtained from interviews and discussions during the two months of ﬁeld research at the peninsula from January to March 2010.  The researchers observed the daily interactions within the community, as well as activities related to management, utilization and marketing of forest resources.  Due to the absence of recorded data an estimation procedure was used in combination with physical measurements to determine the actual annual household-level wood extraction.  During the FGDs it became clear that people could estimate the amount of wood extracted in reed boatloads very easily and with reasonable accuracy.  We determined the average weight of one load (Ogunkunle and Oladele, 2004) by weighing 12 randomly collected sun-dried loads piled at the farmers' backyards using a 50 kg spring balance.  The weight of wood loads intended for consumption and sale did not differ as conﬁrmed by 94. 17% of the households and observation.  The average weight of a regularly used wood load was 0. 34 tons.  Survey respondents were asked dichotomous choice questions of ‘yes’ or ‘no’ for wood extraction from the forest for various purposes including consumption, providing as gift to relatives and marketing.  Ultimately, the respondents were asked to estimate the approximate number of boat loads of wood extracted for each of these purposes during the previous year.  3. 3.  Data Analysis.  Content analysis, descriptive statistics and econometric modelling were used to analyse the data.  Paired t-test was used to establish significance levels for difference of means for continuous and categorical independent variables and participation in wood marketing, measured as a dichotomous response of ‘wood market participant’ and ‘non-participant’, respectively (McElwee, 2008.  Rahut et al. , 2016).  The analysis was organized on the concept that wood extraction occurs for two main reasons.  i. e. , consumption and marketing.  There is some non-random segment of the community engaged in wood extraction for marketing as a source of income.  Hence, a sample selection econometric model was used to analyse the factors that affect the households' participation in wood extraction and marketing using the Limdep7 NLogit software.  A non-random sample occurs since the sample is comprised of households who either extract wood for sale or do not extract for sale in addition to extraction for consumption.  To correct for the sample selection bias, the ﬁrst stage of Heckman analysis (Probit model) estimates the expected value of the error term that is included as additional variable in the second stage of the analysis (Hoffmann and Kassouf, 2005).  The model helps to reﬂect an individual's self-selection (Heckman, 1979.  Cameron and Trivedi, 2005) and avoids bias that could arise from the treatment of different groups having particular characteristics for making decision choices (Dettmann and Dimitri, 2009.  Maddala, 1983.  Rahut et al. , 2016).  The ﬁtness of the Heckman model was conﬁrmed from a signiﬁcant rho value (selection bias) obtained from the ﬁrst selection equation (Cameron and Trivedi, 2005.  Bärnighausen et al. , 2011).  Variance inﬂation factor (for continuous variables) and contingency coefﬁcient tests (for discrete variables) showed absence of multicollinearity among the independent variables used in the model (O'Brien, 2007).  Also, to avoid inﬂation of standard errors due to multicollinearity between the correction term and the included regressors, income from coffee was used in the Probit model but excluded from the regression equation.  <Conclusion> Results and Discussion.  4. 1.  Socioeconomic Characteristics of the Respondents.  The number of households who were involved in wood marketing as a source of income was signiﬁcantly greater than the number of nonparticipants.  There were signiﬁcant differences between both categories of households with regard to average age, average income from sheep fattening, land size, annual income from coffee, income from ﬁshing, amount of household wood consumption, total wood extracted, amount of remittance received and number of temporal out-migrant family members (Table 1).  Wood market non-participants were signiﬁcantly older, had higher numbers of out-migrant family members, owned larger land and gained signiﬁcantly higher income from coffee, livestock, ﬁshing and remittance.  Also, the non-participants consumed signiﬁcantly higher volumes of wood.  These ﬁndings suggest that primarily vulnerable and disadvantaged households were involved in wood extraction, which already points toward “wood extraction for need” being the predominant mechanism of smallholder-based forest exploitation in the study area.  Households that participated in wood marketing were signiﬁcantly better educated and harvested signiﬁcantly larger volumes of wood than the non-participants.  Generally, the households of Zege were severely constrained in their agricultural livelihood options as they lacked access to and ownership rights in land outside the forest area.  This made them entirely dependent on food purchases for their sustenance and their livelihoods very vulnerable and risky.  4. 2.  Household Annual Wood Harvest.  Wood extraction was conceived as the total annual amount of wood (sun-dried) harvested from live trees by a household for consumption, marketing or a gift to relatives.  On average, the total average annual wood extraction for consumption amounted to 0. 32 tons/capita, which is lower than household wood extraction (1. 14–1. 36 tons/capita) elsewhere in Africa (Bembridge and Tarlton, 1990).  However, compared to these reports we may have underestimated household wood consumption due to the fact that we did not include leaf and dry branch biomass in our estimates.  Total annual wood extraction in the study area amounted to 3969. 