 1.  Introduction Aedes albopictus is the most invasive mosquito in the world (Medlock et al. , 2012).  It is an aggressive biter, active all-day long (Caglioti et al. , 2013) and feeds on humans and a variety of other vertebrate hosts.  It is relatively long lived and lays its desiccation resistant eggs in natural and artiﬁcial containers (Charrel et al. , 2007.  Pardigon, 2009).  Originally of Asian origin, it is now widely distributed across Europe, Africa, the Americas and the Paciﬁc (Tsetsarkin et al. , 2007).  It has recently colonized the islands of the Torres Strait (Ritchie et al. , 2006) where a limited control program costs over AU$1 M per annum (Muzari, 2015).  Ae.  albopictus is a vector of more than 20 arboviruses, is recognised as a secondary vector of dengue (Bonizzoni et al. , 2014.  Gratz, 2004.  Lambrechts et al. , 2010) and is the major vector of many recent chikungunya virus (CHIKV) outbreaks including the La Reunion epidemic (200,000 cases and 203 deaths.  Renault et al. , 2007).  In that instance, a single point mutation within the CHIKV genome led to a dramatic increase in transmissibility by this mosquito.  Aedes albopictus, at least in a laboratory context, is also capable of transmitting four major Australian endemic arboviruses.  Murray Valley encephalitis virus (MVEV), West Nile virus Kunjin strain (KUNV), Ross River virus (RRV), and Barmah Forest virus (BFV) (Nicholson et al. , 2014c).  Ae.  albopictus now has a signiﬁcant urban presence around the globe (Caglioti et al. , 2013.  Medlock et al. , 2012.  Powers and Logue, 2007.  Rezza et al. , 2007.  Tsetsarkin et al. , 2007.  Weaver and Barrett, 2004) and, in some settings, feeds almost exclusively on humans (Ponlawat and Harrington, 2005).  In those instances, Ae.  albopictus can transmit viruses with a human reservoir (i. e.  dengue, chikungunya) very efﬁciently (Weaver and Barrett, 2004).  Ae.  albopictus is likely to assume an increasingly prominent role in the transmission of human arboviruses in the future.  Australia is made vulnerable to that threat by a busy transport and travel network that links it to regions where both Ae albopictus and the diseases it transmits are endemic.  Exotic mosquito incursions at Australia's ports are on the increase (van den Hurk et al. , 2016) as are the number of imported cases of viruses such as dengue (Huang et al. , 2016).  In 2016, Ae.  albopictus was responsible for a dengue outbreak on the island of Darnley (Erub) in the Australian Torres Strait.  This is the ﬁrst Ae albopictusmediated dengue outbreak in Australian history.  Models indicate that Ae.  albopictus could spread along the entire eastern seaboard of Australia (Benedict et al. , 2007.  Hales et al. , 2002.  Naish et al. , 2014.  Rochlin et al. , 2013.  Russell et al. , 2009), and we propose that Queensland is especially vulnerable to its establishment because of the plethora of suburban areas and parklands that currently harbor high densities of two native container breeding mosquitoes.  Ae.  aegypti and Ae.  notoscriptus.  These mosquitoes have similar ecologies to Ae.  albopictus (Ritchie et al. , 2001), and a number of papers discuss the overlap of their habitat (Nicholson et al. , 2014a) and the potential displacement of native species by the more aggressive Ae.  albopictus (van den Hurk et al. , 2016).  A recent household survey in Brisbane found that 26. 2% of all premises surveyed harbored Ae.  notoscriptus (Trewin et al. , 2013).  That suggests that an Ae.  albopictus invasion might result in universal urban coverage (Fig.  1).  Experiences in Europe and the USA suggest that Ae.  albopictus will become an extreme nuisance and increase the demand for mosquito control services.  It is likely to incur large economic and societal costs (Benedict et al. , 2007.  Caminade et al. , 2012.  Rochlin et al. , 2013).  The establishment of Ae.  albopictus in new areas with human populations unaccustomed to aggressive day biting mosquitoes can impact the use of outdoor recreational space (Halasa et al. , 2012.  Halasa et al. , 2014.  Manica et al. , 2016.  Worobey et al. , 2013).  Early detection and the timeliness of the emergency response are critical for containing or eliminating an incursion or limiting the scale and rate of establishment.  Economic analyses of early detection or long term control programs would give the councils and state government some estimate of the potential economic cost of an Ae.  albopictus invasion and the opportunity to assess the readiness of their control programs.  In Queensland, the surveillance and control of exotic mosquito incursions is a responsibility partly shared by the Department of Agriculture and Water Resources (port areas only) and the public health units that are attached to local, state-funded health services.  The bulk of the management of established nuisance or disease-vector species is, however, largely the responsibility of local councils.  The exception to this is the control program for Ae.  aegypti in those areas of tropical North Queensland that experience regular dengue outbreaks and that are at increased risk from other viruses such as chikungunya (CHIKV) and Zika.  That program is almost exclusively conducted by public health units, attached to local hospital and health services (Queensland Health,The most thorough economic analysis of Ae.  albopictus is from New Jersey, USA (Crans et al. , 1996).  Halasa et al.  (2012) estimated that New Jersey residents valued an enhanced mosquito control program at almost 4 times its actual cost and Shepard et al.  (2014) estimated that the area-wide integrated pest management of mosquitoes over a 13-week New Jersey summer facilitated an extra 43 h of yard and porch time by the local populace.  Each adult resident in that community valued those extra hours at US$355. 82 per annum.  Here, we have carried out a beneﬁt-cost analysis (BCA) with costs estimated from a Queensland consultation document.  the “Exotic mosquito incursion emergency response framework” (Appendix 1).  This document outlines the magnitude of resources that may be required to mount an elimination campaign against a limited Ae.  albopictus invasion in Brisbane.  In combination with a beneﬁts transfer (BT) estimate derived from the New Jersey work, we have used that framework to elicit the costs and beneﬁts of eliminating, or living with, this global invader.  <Middle> Methods.  2. 1.  Estimating Economic Beneﬁts of Ae.  albopictus-free Outdoor Recreational Activities.  We conduct an ex ante BCA which is the appropriate form of BCA when a policy is considered prior to being implemented.  Ex ante BCA informs government, industry and the wider community as to whether scarce resources should be allocated to a potential project or policy.  The analysis is undertaken from the perspective of the community in Queensland (i. e.  social BCA).  The beneﬁts and costs to the state government and the wider community and stakeholders in Queensland are assessed, and the counterfactual used is the ‘do nothing’ option.  We follow the BCA framework outlined in Boardman et al.  (2006).  For this BCA, we considered three scenarios.  1) an environment with no Ae.  albopictus, 2) a limited incursion of Ae.  albopictus that is met with an elimination response and 3) an incursion of Ae.  albopictus that, because of failure to eliminate, becomes established throughout Brisbane.  We stress that these scenarios are not part of current policy by state or local governments.  They simply represent potential scenarios under discussion by Queensland stakeholders with responsibilities and expertise in mosquito management.  An overall schematic illustrating the general cost categories can be found in Fig.  2.  We calculated the beneﬁts and costs of the following scenarios.  1) the beneﬁts of having no Ae.  albopictus in terms of the value of mosquito-free recreational activities, 2) the costs and beneﬁts of eliminating Ae.  albopictus and 3) the cost of establishment that result from i) additional complaints to councils about a mosquito nuisance and ii) the need to mount a public health (i. e.  vector control) response to imported cases of dengue, chikungunya or Zika).  We used the beneﬁt transfer (BT) methodology (Hanley et al. , 2009) to transfer values from New Jersey (Horwood et al. , 2013) surveys to Brisbane (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2013).  Halasa et al.  (2014) estimated New Jersey residents were willing to pay US$9. 48 ± $9. 48 per person per week for an additional recreational mosquito-free hour.  We used the same method used in Shepard et al.  (2014) and calculated annual beneﬁts by multiplying the weekly beneﬁt by 13 to represent a 13-week New Jersey summer.  To convert this to Brisbane dollars in 2016, we further estimated the per capita WTP in terms of dollar values from 2010 (when the survey was carried out).  We adjusted for inﬂation to obtain the beneﬁts in 2016 US$ using a cumulative inﬂation rate of 10. 4% between 2010 and 2016 (Coin News Media Group LLC, 2014).  We adjusted for differential GDP per capita between New Jersey and Queensland using per capita GDP for 2012 (nominal values) (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2013.  US Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2013).  We used a 1. 33 exchange rate (Australia dollar to US dollars), to report the beneﬁt values in 2016 Australian dollars (Converter, 2016).  Finally, we multiplied the result by 0. 50 to reﬂect a recent survey ﬁnding that 50% of Brisbane residents would be unwilling to pay any amount for additional Ae.  albopictus control (Mwebaze et al. , 2017).  2. 2.  Deﬁnitions of the Three Ae.  albopictus Control Scenarios.  2. 2. 1.  Scenario 1.  No Ae.  albopictus Present.  This is the baseline scenario.  No control is needed and residents avoid the costs of management or establishment.  2. 2. 2.  Scenario 2.  Elimination Response to an Isolated Detection.  This hypothetical elimination strategy (Appendix 1, “Mosquito Incursion Emergency Response Framework”) provides stakeholders with an estimate of the resources required to eliminate a local incursion of Ae.  albopictus.  This kind of document is critical to drafting inter-agency plans that deﬁne roles, logistics and methodology.  The proposed response is based on the discovery of one or more premises within a single urban block that are harbouring one or more exotic larvae, pupae, or adults.  An eradication zone (EZ) (Rezza et al. , 2007) with a radius of 500 m is created around those premises, consisting of the detection block, an inner ring and an outer ring (Appendix 1).  Source reduction and comprehensive insecticidal treatments are implemented within the EZ (Appendix 1).  This involves the destruction of the aquatic habitat (e. g.  destroying, discarding or upturning containers that may collect water), the application of residual adulticides to all containers that cannot be treated in this way, the application of larvicides to sites such as roof gutters, rainwater tanks and subterranean sites, and the mass deployment of lethal ovitraps.  Areas within the detection block and inner ring that are likely to harbor adult resting mosquitoes (e. g.  shades walls and leaf litter, fences and low lying dense vegetation) will also be sprayed with residual adulticides (Muzari et al. , 2014).  We conservatively estimate that all premises in the EZ will require harborage treatment.  We have costed a scenario where harbourage treatment is subcontracted to private pest control companies at an estimated cost of A$250 per yard (G.  Cochrane, personal communication).  The response also requires a signiﬁcant amount of surveillance within and beyond the borders of the eradication zone to deﬁne the limits of the incursion and enable the adjustment of the EZ if appropriate.  We assume that post-intervention surveillance will continue 12 weeks after the last detection to verify the elimination.  Surveillance tools, for example BioGents sentinel® (Williams et al. , 2006) or gravid Aedes traps (GATs) (Eiras et al. , 2014.  Johnson et al. , 2016) would be deployed in this effort and are fully costed.  The control and surveillance responses would be conducted in partnership between the health department and local government, as outlined under the Queensland Dengue Management Plan 2015–2020 (Queensland Health, 2015).  The eradication strategy assigns stafﬁng to reﬂect various activities and, in its current form, requires 33 staff (Table 1).  The costing includes half of the surveillance and control teams being sourced from North Queensland (e. g.  Cairns, Townsville etc. ) where vector control staff routine control for Ae.  aegypti, in order to mitigate the lack of experience staff in Brisbane may have managing container-breeding mosquitoes.  For these staff, ﬂights, accommodation and per diem are included as part of the costs (Appendix 3).  Surveillance and control activities will continue as long as Ae.  albopictus continues to be detected.  The elimination strategy for the block includes a repeat inspection for mosquitoes and a ﬁnal treatment after the last detection.  To incorporate uncertainty in our cost estimations, three infestation levels were chosen to generate “low”, “central” and “high” cost estimates (Table 2) based on the number of premises in an eradication zone (Appendix 1).  We assume a local incursion as opposed to a widespread establishment.  The “low” and “high” estimates were the minimum and maximum estimated number of premises, respectively, while the “central” estimate was the mean value.  Based on a conservative estimate that one 3-person vector control team can treat 12 premises in one working day, we estimate that four 3-person teams will treat 240 premises per working week.  In any case, treatments of blocks or limited areas need to be completed within no more than 6 weeks as that is the expected residual life of the adulticides applied to containers and harbourage areas.  2. 2. 3.  Scenario 3.  Establishment of Ae.  albopictus with Increased Nuisance Complaints and Vector-borne Disease Risk.  2. 2. 3. 1.  Increased Nuisance Complaints.  Brisbane City council has a stateof-the-art larviciding operation for control of the saltmarsh and freshwater mosquitoes that commonly plague Brisbane residents (Dale et al. , 2008).  It does not, however, routinely manage mosquitoes around private residences, where container breeding mosquitoes such as Ae.  albopictus will be most abundant (Unlu et al. , 2013).  The current strategy is to respond to complaints about domestic mosquito nuisance with information about mosquito biology and advice on personal protection.  In some cases, adult traps are set at the premises to determine the mosquito species involved.  The spatial and temporal focus of this limited response is driven by telephone complaints made to the local council by homeowners approximately 90% are dealt with by telephone and the mosquitoes in question are most commonly identiﬁed as saltmarsh (e. g.  Ae.  vigilax) or freshwater (e. g.  Culex annulirostris) mosquitoes hatching and dispersing after high tides or rain.  Where the source of mosquitoes is not clear, a council ofﬁcer visits the residence to identify the nuisance mosquitoes and advise the homeowner.  In a few cases, adulticiding (i. e.  harbourage spraying) is carried out, usually in high proﬁle locations (e. g.  retirement homes) (Mike Muller, Brisbane City Council, personal communication).  As in other parts of the world, the establishment of Ae.  albopictus in Brisbane will lead to an increased number of complaints and increased council activity in response.  To estimate the potential costs of these events, we estimated the time and resources an ofﬁcer spends on the phone and carrying out trapping activities and engagement with residents.  In the absence of historical data for complaints to Brisbane City Council, we used annual numbers of complaints to Gold Coast City Council as a proxy (D.  Allaway, unpublished) from 1996 to 2012 (Appendix 2) to estimate the number of additional complaints due to Ae.  albopictus.  Using those numbers of cases as a proxy, we chose 115 (minimum number of complaints), 332 (median number), and 1162 (maximum number) as the low, center and high estimates, respectively.  2. 2. 3. 2.  Public Health Response.  In Queensland, it is public health practice to implement a vector control response wherever there is a risk of mosquito-borne disease transmission.  Currently, there is no competent vector for dengue, chikungunya or Zika in the greater Brisbane area.  Therefore, no response to imported cases is required.  Fig.  3 shows that there are currently around 60 imported cases of dengue and chikungunya to Brisbane, reﬂecting the same steady increase in viraemic imports that has occurred across Australia in recent years.  the result of an expanding global travel network and the ongoing arbovirus epidemics in Asia, the Paciﬁc and the Americas (Huang et al. , 2016).  If Ae.  albopictus becomes established in mainland Australia, imported dengue, chikungunya or Zika cases will trigger a vector control response as recommended in the Dengue and Chikungunya Management Plans (Queensland Health, 2014.  Queensland Health, 2015).  Zones of at least 150 m around the case house will be treated as per Scenario 2.  Similar responses will be required around other addresses visited by the viraemic case while infectious and where there is potential exposure to mosquitoes.  In general, an average of 3 contact addresses will be treated.  Based on the information in Fig.  2, we assume that between 7 and 77 cases per year will require vector control due to the widespread presence of Ae.  albopictus (derived from cases per 100,000 and the Brisbane population for any given year).  We estimate that team of 3 vector control ofﬁcers will require 1 week to treat all of the properties at risk from an imported case (J.  Davis, personal communication), and have assumed personnel costs for 4 teams (12 ofﬁcers) based on this rate.  One notable difference from the existing dengue response in Cairns (Ritchie et al. , 2002) that the indoor residual spraying required for control of Ae.  aegypti is replaced by harbourage spraying in order to target the largely outdoor-resting habits of Ae.  albopictus (Muzari et al. , 2017.  Muzari,2. 3.  Estimated Cost of Ae.  albopictus Control Scenarios.  We estimated the cost of the three Ae.  albopictus scenarios in Brisbane following a similar method as Shepard et al.  (2014) carried out in New Jersey.  The cost of these strategies consisted of three general categories of expenditure.  personnel, recurrent costs, and capital costs.  We used a “mosquito control costing tool” to calculated expenses for each control scenario (see Appendix 3 for example of mosquito elimination cost calculations).  Personnel costs reﬂect salaries and employee fringe beneﬁts paid by the institution (employer contributions to health insurance, superannuation, etc. ) for full- and part-time employees or hourly wages and beneﬁts paid to seasonal or contracted workers recruited to implement the strategy.  We multiplied the gross salary by the percentage of effort that each person devoted to the control effort.  Additional personnel costs were added according to each strategy's need (transport, accommodation, and mandated per diems).  The costing includes half of the surveillance and control teams being sourced from North Queensland (e. g.  Cairns, Townsville, etc. ), where vector control staff routinely control for Ae.  aegypti, in order to mitigate the lack of experience staff in Brisbane may have managing container-breeding mosquitoes.  For these staff, ﬂights, accommodation and per diem costs are included as part of the personnel costs.  Recurrent costs included insecticides (larvicides and adulticides), sub-contracts to pest control companies, vehicle rental, protective clothing and accessories, and laboratory materials.  “Capital costs” refers to equipment with a useful life of more than 1 year. 