1.  Introduction  The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) oversight process involves a range of activities, from advice and monitoring to enforcement actions.  Enforcement actions have been studied in the prior literature to understand both their determinants and consequences.  A ﬁrm’s political connections (PC) in particular are hypothesized from capture theory (e. g. , Stigler,  1971 ) to bias downward the likelihood of enforcement actions and the magnitude of penalties, as politicians can interfere  2 Empirical  with SEC investigations, use budget allocations to control the SEC, or affect SEC oﬃcials’ careers ( Weingast, 1984 ).   evidence suggestive of SEC capture by politically connected ﬁrms is reported in Correia (2014) and Yu and Yu (2011) , who  ﬁnd a negative relation between ﬁrm PC and enforcement actions (which are pursued by the SEC’s Division of Enforcement  or DOE).   Interpreting the results in the prior literature as evidence of lax SEC oversight of PC ﬁrms is complicated by the fact that  SEC oversight involves more than enforcement actions.  In particular, the agency also routinely reviews ﬁrms’ SEC ﬁlings to  monitor and enhance ﬁrms’ compliance with disclosure and accounting regulation ( SEC, (2015b )).  SEC questions and concerns in the course of these reviews are communicated to ﬁrms through comment letters (CLs) that require response and  remediation.  In this paper, we examine the relation between ﬁrm PC and the likelihood of receiving CLs to shed fuller light  on the relation between corporate political connectedness and SEC oversight.   The CL review process is conducted by the SEC’s Division of Corporation Finance (DCF).  The volume of CLs is large, as  between 20% and 40% of U. S.  listed ﬁrms have received a CL in each year between 2005 and 2012.  In contrast, enforcement  actions are relatively infrequent.  CLs are issued on a variety of topics (e. g. , revenue recognition, goodwill impairment) depending on the nature of the SEC concern generated by its review.  The initial CL might request clariﬁcation and disclosure  of further information that leads to a sequence of “rounds” of communication between the SEC and the ﬁrm.  The CL process  concludes when the DCF is satisﬁed with compliance and issues a “no further comment” letter, or when the DCF refers the  matter to the SEC’s DOE.  CLs therefore are an important part of SEC oversight.  In this light, a number of recent studies have  investigated the determinants and consequences of CLs (e. g. , Cassell et al. , 2013.  Bozanic et al. , 2015.  Johnston and Petacchi  2014.  Dechow et al. , 2016 ).  These studies have not, however, examined the relation between ﬁrm PC and the likelihood of  receiving CLs.   SOX Section 408, paragraph (b), identiﬁes some ﬁrm characteristics (“factors”) for the SEC to consider in its CL reviews.   This guidance concludes by stating that “any other factors that the Commission may consider relevant” can also be used in  determining which ﬁrms are reviewed, suggesting that the SEC is given some discretion.  If ﬁrms’ political connections are  one such discretionary factor, then we expect a signiﬁcant relation between ﬁrm PC and CL review likelihood.  Moreover, if  the SEC is captured as suggested in the prior literature, and such capture is manifested through lax oversight, we expect  this relation to be negative.   On the other hand, there are reasons to expect a positive relation between these variables.  For example, the SEC’s CL  review process may not be captured (and, in fact, prior claims of SEC capture, which are based on small samples of ﬁrms  facing enforcement actions, may be overstated).  If so, and if ﬁrm PC is a distinct risk factor for ﬁnancial-reporting issues, we  would expect a positive relation between ﬁrm PC and CL reviews.   To investigate the relation between ﬁrm PC and CL reviews we obtain all comment letters from the Audit Analytics  database for 2005–2012 and retain those related to ﬁrms’ 10-K ﬁlings.  PC ﬁrms are identiﬁed through contemporaneous  contributions to Political Action Committees (PAC) or alternatively through their lobbying expenditures.  Results indicate that  PC ﬁrms are more likely to receive a CL after controlling for a host of CL determinants identiﬁed in the prior literature.  The  controls include accounting quality and complexity proxies, such as accounting restatements, internal control weaknesses,  the length and linguistic complexity of ﬁnancial statements, and the number of SEC ﬁlings made by each ﬁrm during the  year.  Our results on PC contrast with prior ﬁndings of a negative association between PC and SEC enforcement actions and  suggest SEC capture by PC ﬁrms is not indicated in the CL review process.  We return to a discussion of this primary ﬁnding  shortly.   We conduct a range of tests that collectively are intended to mitigate endogeneity concerns and examine the robustness  of  the  primary  result.   First,  we  estimate  the  tests  in  a  propensity-score-matched  sample  wherein  PC  and  non-PC  ﬁrms  are matched by year, the speciﬁc SEC oﬃce conducting the review, and all covariates in the regression model ( Ho et al. ,  2007 ).  Results indicate PC ﬁrms are more likely to receive a CL.  for instance, we ﬁnd that while ﬁrms making political  contributions have a 38. 5% probability of receiving a CL, matched non-contributing ﬁrms have a probability of 33. 7%, a  statistically signiﬁcant difference that also appears to be economically substantive.   Second, we conduct cross-sectional tests exploiting variation in the targets of ﬁrms’ political activities.  Speciﬁcally, we  examine the relation between CL and ﬁrms that have either lobbied the SEC directly or are top contributors to legislators  serving on SEC oversight committees.  We ﬁnd that such ﬁrms are signiﬁcantly more likely to receive CL reviews, providing  further support to the primary result.   Third, to further mitigate more general endogeneity concerns we use an instrumental-variables (IV) approach.  As in prior  research (e. g. , Blackburne, 2014.  Correia, 2014 ), our instruments for a ﬁrm’s PAC and lobbying expenditures are, respectively,  the sum of PAC and lobbying expenditures made by other ﬁrms in the same 4-digit SIC industry and the same size decile.   These industry-size peer contributions are likely to be associated with the political contributions of a given ﬁrm due to peer  effects driving political activity (e. g. , Grier et al. , 1994.  Kim, 2008 ), but they are less likely to directly drive the likelihood  of that ﬁrm receiving a comment letter.  IV results are consistent with our main ﬁndings.  We additionally use a new IV.   state-level voter turnout.  State turnout rates capture the state population’s political engagement and are therefore likely to  be associated with the political contributions of a given ﬁrm (the ﬁrm is more likely to be politically engaged), but turnout  rates are less likely to drive the likelihood of that ﬁrm receiving a comment letter.  The results using this IV are consistent  with the main ﬁndings.   The ﬁnal set of tests examines the substantive characteristics of CL reviews of PC versus non-PC ﬁrms.  We examine  four characteristics, the ﬁrst three of which are from prior literature ( Cassell et al. , 2013 ).  (i) the number of core and noncore earnings topics in the CL.  (ii) the number of days between the initial receipt of a CL and the receipt of a “no further  comment” letter.  (iii) the number of communication rounds between the SEC and ﬁrms.  and (iv) the involvement of an  SEC supervisor in a ﬁrm’s comment-letter review.  We ﬁnd that PC ﬁrms receive more substantive reviews along all these  dimensions, indicating that the SEC’s CL reviews of PC ﬁrms are not perfunctory.   We offer some potential explanations for our primary ﬁnding of a positive association between ﬁrm PC and SEC CL  reviews in comparison to the prior ﬁnding of a negative relation between ﬁrm PC and enforcement.  First, it is possible that  both the DOE and DCF are captured and coordinate such that the DCF proactively “works with” PC ﬁrms in the CL stage  to actively remediate issues and preempt escalation to the enforcement stage.  However, this explanation faces two major  hurdles.  (i) it requires a more elaborate coordination between different divisions of the SEC than is reported (anecdotally)  3 and (ii) it does not explain why PC ﬁrms that have ostensibly captured the SEC could  by current and former SEC oﬃcials.   not simply hire former SEC oﬃcials to vet their ﬁnancial statements prior to submission, thereby lowering the likelihood of  being subject to a publicly visible CL review process.  We therefore do not view this as a likely explanation.   Another potential explanation is that only the DOE, which pursues enforcement actions, but not the DCF, which conducts  the CL reviews, is politically captured.  For instance, the politically appointed Commissioners vote in a closed meeting on the  DOE staff’s enforcement recommendation, but Commissioners do not directly inﬂuence the issuance of a comment letter by  the DCF.  However, this argument of targeted capture of the DOE does not in itself explain a positive relation (as opposed  to no relation) between PC and the likelihood and substantive characteristics of CL as we document.  Thus, this explanation  alone cannot account for our results.   A related explanation is that the SEC DCF actively targets PC ﬁrms in the CL review stage.  This account does not require  an anti-political vendetta on part of the SEC’s DCF.  it may simply be that political connectedness is a useful heuristic for  issues the DCF seeks to address at the CL stage.  Our identiﬁcation tests allay concerns that ﬁrm PC proxies for known and  latent ﬁnancial-reporting risk characteristics.  the tests suggest that the DCF may view ﬁrm PC as a distinct risk indicator.   If true, then the remediation of issues at the CL stage can explain in part the lower likelihood of subsequent enforcement  action against PC ﬁrms documented in the prior literature.  This explanation, which is inconsistent with the SEC capture  hypothesis, appears most likely to us.   A fourth possibility is that the PC measures used in the literature to establish a negative association between ﬁrm political connectedness and SEC enforcement are noisy or biased representations of ﬁrms’ true political connections.  In particular,  the fraud-prone ﬁrms that are more likely to receive SEC scrutiny at the enforcement stage may underreport their political  contributions (e. g. , to diffuse media scrutiny), yielding the negative result in the prior literature.  Since all ﬁrms, not just  fraud-prone ﬁrms, are subject to SEC scrutiny at the CL stage, the concern about underreporting of political contributions is  less likely to apply in our sample.  Put differently, if fraud-prone ﬁrms underreport PC, our sample is less biased than those  used in prior tests, and the true relation between ﬁrm PC and SEC oversight (even at the enforcement stage) is positive,  inconsistent with SEC capture.  While we do not necessarily view this data issue as the most likely explanation for results in  the prior literature, exploring this concern about the prior literature’s measures of PC is an opportunity for future research.   Our ﬁndings give new impetus for such research.   The simple conclusion we draw from our results is that it is diﬃcult to infer that SEC oversight of PC ﬁrms is captured or  lax as is suggested in prior literature.  Rather, our results suggest a more nuanced relation between PC and SEC oversight in  that SEC capture, if it exists, may be less blatant or pronounced than previously thought.  The maintained assumption here,  as in the prior literature, is that some SEC oﬃcials are at least nominally aware of ﬁrms’ political connectedness.  Anecdotal  descriptions of the DCF’s review process are supportive of this idea.  senior SEC oﬃcials, who are more likely to be politically  astute, allocate and oversee staff reviews of ﬁrms.  Moreover, our ﬁnding that more senior SEC oﬃcials are involved in CL  reviews of PC ﬁrms is consistent with this notion.   This paper contributes to the accounting literature on regulation and the political process by presenting a fuller picture of  the role of ﬁrm political connections in SEC oversight.  We also contribute to the growing literature on CL determinants and  consequences (e. g. , Cassell et al. , 2013.  Bozanic et al. , 2015.  Johnston and Petacchi, 2014.  Dechow et al. , 2016 ).  By focusing on  how ﬁrm PC affects the likelihood of receiving CLs, we extend the economic analysis of CL activity into the political domain.   The political behavior of regulators is an important but understudied area in accounting (e. g. , Kothari et al. , 2010 ).  Finally,  our paper is one of the few studies in regulation that provides evidence inconsistent with regulatory capture – although  empirical work on capture is limited, the evidence is largely supportive of capture (see, e. g. , Dal Bó’s, 2006 , review).   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows.  Section 2 describes the institutional background to the SEC’s CL process and  develops our hypotheses.  Section 3 describes the sample and primary research design and presents descriptive statistics.   Section 4 presents the main empirical results.  Section 5 presents results of tests on the substantive characteristics of SEC CL  reviews.  Section 6 concludes.   2.  Background.  2. 1.  The SEC’s comment-letter review process.  The SEC is composed of several divisions, including the Division of Enforcement (DOE) and the Division of Corporation  Finance (DCF).  The former handles investigations of possible violations of federal securities laws, including violations of  requirements for U. S.  listed companies to provide ﬁnancial reports in accordance with U. S.  GAAP.  The latter provides interpretive assistance to listed companies with regards to SEC rules, which includes reviewing ﬁrm ﬁnancial reporting in real  time to monitor and enhance compliance ( SEC, 2015b ).  The goal of the review is the protection of investors and is described  by the DCF as a “dialogue with a company about its disclosures” ( SEC, 2015b ).   Section 408 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX) requires the DCF to review U. S.  listed-ﬁrm ﬁlings at least once  every three years.  This review is done by one of twelve oﬃces at the DCF, each led by an assistant director, where the  4 The assistant directors are overseen by associate directors, and the deputy director and  oﬃces are organized by industry.   director of the DCF oversee the entire ﬁling review process.  Similar to the Internal Revenue Service’s audit formula, the DCF  does not discuss the speciﬁcs of when and why certain ﬁrms are reviewed.  Section 408 of SOX speciﬁes criteria that the  5  The DCF reviews vary in scope  DCF should consider in selecting ﬁrms to review (which we describe in a later section).   by the number of topics covered and the seniority of SEC staff involved ( GAO, 2013 ).  Some reviews focus on just one topic,  e. g. , ﬁnancial-statement presentation.  Other reviews can cover dozens of topics, including substantive accounting issues like  revenue recognition and asset impairment policies.  Similarly, some reviews appear to be largely conducted by junior-level  staff of the rank of staff accountant, while other reviews appear to also involve senior staff of the rank of branch chief or  assistant director.   If questions arise during a ﬁnancial-reporting review, the DCF issues a comment letter to the reporting ﬁrm.  The comment letter is an expression of concern by the SEC and an opportunity for the ﬁrm to respond to SEC questions about the  ﬁrm’s reporting practices.  This comment letter process, once initiated, varies considerably by duration to resolution and the  number of intermediate rounds of formal questions and answers between the DCF and the ﬁrm.   The outcomes of the comment letter process also vary considerably.  The process can result in no action by the ﬁrm if  all of the SEC’s questions are satisfactorily resolved.  It may also result in the ﬁrm ﬁling an amendment to clarify its prior  ﬁnancial reports or agreeing to adjust future ﬁlings in response to a resolution with the SEC over ﬁnancial reporting concerns  ( SEC, 2015b ).  In cases where the SEC’s concerns are signiﬁcant and substantively unresolved by the ﬁrm’s responses, the  comment letter process can end with the ﬁrm making a restatement of past ﬁnancial reports.  In a few cases, the comment  letter process may conclude with the DCF recommending the case to the DOE for enforcement action.  These referred cases  usually involve suspected willful violation of securities laws by the ﬁrms concerned.  To effect coordination between the DCF  and the DOE, the SEC has in place a special department known as the Oﬃce of Enforcement Liaison ( OIG, 2008 ).  Finally, DCF  makes its comment letters and company responses to those comment letters publicly available on the SEC’s EDGAR system.   Fig.  1 shows the timeline of a 10-K comment-letter review for a ﬁrm with a ﬁscal-year ending on December 31, using the  review of American International Group, Inc. ’s (AIG) Form 10-K for the ﬁscal year ended December 31, 2013 as an example.   In particular, AIG ﬁled its 10-K on February 20, 2014 and received the ﬁrst comment letter from DCF on April 29, 2014.  AIG  sent a response to the SEC on May 13, 2014, i. e. , within ten business days, and received the “no further comment” letter  from DCF on June 4, 2014.  The correspondence between the SEC and AIG was published on EDGAR on July 2, 2014, i. e. , no  earlier than 20 business days after the completion of its review.   2. 2.  Regulatory capture.  The regulatory capture hypothesis (e. g. , Stigler, 1971 ) predicts that political connections help ﬁrms extract rents from  public agents like politicians and regulators.  In the context of the SEC speciﬁcally, the capture hypothesis suggests that  politically connected ﬁrms have allies in Congress and the executive administration who can intercede with the SEC on  their behalf if needed.  Congress determines the SEC’s budget and oversees its operations, while the president of the United  States, with the advice and consent of the Senate, appoints SEC commissioners and names the SEC chairman ( SEC, 2015a ).   As such, pursuing enforcement actions against politically connected ﬁrms could be costly to SEC commissioners and staff if  such actions antagonize the SEC’s overseers.  Correia (2014) reports that ﬁrms’ political connections mitigate the likelihood  and degree of SEC enforcement actions in that PC ﬁrms are less likely to receive Accounting and Auditing Enforcement  Releases and receive lower penalties if prosecuted.  Yu and Yu (2011) also report that ﬁrms’ political connections inﬂuence  the likelihood and degree of SEC enforcement decisions.   The possibility of regulatory capture is moderated by the idea that Congress and the president likely balance specialinterest favors with voter support (also see Heese, 2015 ).  If politicians and regulators go too far in terms of providing specialinterest favors (e. g. , sparing politically connected ﬁrms from enforcement actions even after egregious accounting violations  or, at least, doing so too often), then these public agents are likely to face voter backlash (the “political cost hypothesis” of Watts and Zimmerman, 1978 ).  For instance, after the failure of Enron, senior politicians in both parties faced criticisms  over their close connections to that ﬁrm, particularly over concerns that these relationships might have enabled more lax  regulatory oversight. 