
Explaining the main determinants and improving the forecast accuracy of crude oil market volatility are crucial to market investors and
government decision makers.  However, forecasting oil volatility is an
intractable task, as the crude oil market is quite complex and has various
uncertain determinants, such as global oil supply and demand, OPEC
spare capacity levels, ﬁnancial crises, and national elections.  Some studies have claimed that oil price change relies heavily on oil demand and
supply, especially global demand (i. e. , Dées Name, 2007.  Kilian, 2009.  Mu
and Ye, 2011).  However, other studies have argued that a speculative
component plays a key role (Zhang, 2013.  Hamilton and Wu, 2014. 
Kilian and Murphy, 2014.  Juvenal and Petrella, 2015.  Gogolin and
Kearney, 2016). 
Liu Name (2016) disentangle the contributions of oil demand, supply,
and speculation in real oil prices, whereas Yin and Zhou (2016) identify
the role of speculation and economic fundamentals in driving oil price
volatility.  However, as in the seminal work of Baker Name (2013) on
measuring economic policy uncertainty (EPU), it is worth mentioning
that many studies have examined the effect of EPU on the stock market
and have considered EPU indices in forecasting stock market returns
(Pastor and Veronesi, 2012.  Antonakakis Name, 2013.  Kang and Ratti,
2013.  Tsai, 2017).  The literature about EPU's impact on the oil market
is growing in recent years (e. g. , Aloui Name, 2016.  Balcilar Name, 2016. 
Yin, 2016).  For example, Aloui Name (2016) hold that the movements
in uncertainty index can identify the supply-side, aggregate-demand,
and oil-speciﬁc demand shocks, that directly drive the oil price.  Thus,
an increase (decrease) in the uncertainty index probably negatively
(positively) affects the economy, which in turn reduces (increases)
the demand and supply of crude oil and then cause oil price volatility. 
Balcilar Name (2016) also emphasize that EPU can drive the oil price ﬂuctuations.  We conjecture that a high EPU can cause serious divergence in
the expectations of oil consumers, producers, and speculators simultaneously and thus affect the demand, supply, or speculation stock for
crude oil.  Therefore, EPU may comprehensively involves various information such as oil shocks, ﬁnancial crisis, and political events that greatly impact the oil market and cause oil price volatility.  However, it is not
clear whether EPU is the most informative factor in forecasting oil volatility, and which determinant is the most powerful remains to be
addressed. 
This study is speciﬁcally related to the literature on the determinants
of oil market return or volatility (e. g. , Dées Name, 2007.  Kilian, 2009.  Mu
and Ye, 2011.  Conrad Name, 2014.  Hamilton and Wu, 2014.  Kilian and
Murphy, 2014.  Gogolin and Kearney, 2016) and the predictability of
EPU indices in asset return or volatility (e. g. , Pastor and Veronesi,
2012.  Antonakakis Name, 2013.  Kang and Ratti, 2013.  Tsai, 2017).  We
address two questions.  First, is EPU helpful for forecasting crude oil
market volatility.  Second, which determinant is most informative and
helpful in forecasting spot oil volatility—oil demand, supply, speculation, or the novel EPU index.  To answer these questions, we consider
two newly released global EPU (GEPU) indices and six countryspeciﬁc EPU indices from major oil consumers and producers worldwide.  This allows us to investigate whether these new indices help in
forecasting oil volatility and to compare their predictabilities with
those of traditional determinants. 
Regarding the models for forecasting asset volatility, GARCH
and its extensions have been popularly used in empirical analyses
(e. g. , Bollerslev, 1987.  Glosten Name, 1993.  Cheong, 2009. 
Mohammadi and Su, 2010.  Nomikos and Andriosopoulos, 2012. 
Charles and Darné, 2014.  Eﬁmova and Serletis, 2014).  However, most
of these models are strictly limited to imputing data at the same frequency.  Ghysels Name (2004) introduce mixed data sampling (MIDAS)
regression models, which successfully address the data frequency problem.  To overcome the defect of GARCH-class models, Engle Name (2013)
incorporate the MIDAS technique with the GARCH model, forming the
GARCH-MIDAS model, which allows macroeconomic determinants to
be incorporated at different sampling frequencies.  Conrad Name (2014)
use the GARCH-MIDAS model to investigate the oil volatility with respect to the stance of the U. S.  macroeconomy but they focus on insample evidence.  Combination methods have also been argued to
achieve stable forecast ability (Stock and Watson, 2004).  They can be
categorized as constant combined models and time-varying combination methods.  Speciﬁcally, Raftery Name (2012) develop the dynamic
model averaging (DMA) technique, which Liu Name (2017) successfully
apply as a time-varying combination method to forecast volatilities of
the West Texas Intermediate (WTI) oil futures, accounting for both parameter and model uncertainty.  We construct 11 individual GARCHMIDAS models and three DMA model combinations with various
determinants. 
Although both Conrad Name (2014) and our study involve the determinants of oil price volatility.  However, our innovation is quite different
from theirs in several ways.  First, based on the controversy in crude oil
market, we aim to address the question which determinant is most informative and helpful in forecasting spot oil volatility, i. e. , oil demand,
supply, speculation, or the novel EPU indices.  Whereas, the main contribution of Conrad Name (2014) provide the ﬁrst evidence on the link between U. S.  economic activity and the daily oil-stock correlation.  They
examine whether the long-term oil and stock market volatility, as well
as oil-stock correlation respond to the same macroeconomic information, especially, the oil-stock correlation.  Second, due to the different
aims, Conrad Name (2014) consider the determinants that contain information on current and future U. S.  economic activity.  Unlike those determinants, we are the ﬁrst to integrate both the global economic policy
uncertainty (GEPU) indices and several national economic policy uncertainty (EPU) indices with traditional determinants, such as global oil demand, supply, and speculation.  Third, unlike Conrad Name (2014), this
study mainly concerns the models' out-of-sample performance. 
We make two contributions.  First, we are the ﬁrst to consider various
EPU indices, especially the GEPU indices and the country-speciﬁc EPU
indices from major oil consumers and exporters, and the traditional determinants in forecasting crude oil market volatility.  Aloui Name (2016)
suggest that EPU indices can identify three types of shock on oil prices
(i. e. , supply-side, aggregate, and oil-speciﬁc demand).  Furthermore,
we argue that EPU not only inﬂuences oil demand-supply fundamentals, but also changes market participants' sentiments, giving rise to
speculation activities, and thus may contain more information and
achieve better oil volatility forecasting accuracy than commonly used
determinants.  Our empirical study provides an overview of the EPU indices and traditional determinants in forecasting oil volatility. 
Second, we model daily oil volatility using a GARCH-MIDAS model
with different monthly determinants.  To provide the time-varying effects of the determinants, we also apply DMA combination methods,
allowing both a set of determinants and their coefﬁcients to change
over time.  Furthermore, the models' forecasting performance is evaluated using the robust advanced model conﬁdence set (MCS) test (Hansen
Name, 2011). 
We use monthly global oil demand, supply record, and speculation
data and two GEPU indices and six country-speciﬁc EPU indices to
model and forecast the daily volatility of WTI crude oil spot prices.  The
main empirical results indicate that EPU indices contain more useful information than oil demand-supply fundamentals or speculation indices
in determining the daily volatility of crude oil prices.  In particular, the
GEPU index and the U. S. ’s EPU index produce more accurate volatility
forecasts of WTI oil prices than other determinants.  Finally, no evidence
is found that DMA combination methods are superior to individualThe rest of this paper is structured as follows.  Section 2 presents a
brief literature review, which serves as a foundation for analyzing the
determinants of oil volatility.  Section 3 describes the GARCH-MIDAS
model and the DMA combination approach.  Section 4 discusses the
data.  Section 5 presents the empirical results.  Section 6 concludes the2.  Literature review. 
In this section, we revisit the literature on the subject.  Numerous
studies have examined the determinants of oil price or returns.  The predominant explanation for oil price change is that oil price relies on oil
demand and supply (Kilian, 2009.  Mu and Ye, 2011).  For example,
Kilian (2009) distinguishes oil demand and supply shocks in oil price
changes and claims that increases in oil price are mainly driven by demand.  Moreover, with the ﬁnancialization of crude oil, many papers
have recognized the role of speculation and have examined its effect
on oil prices (Kilian and Murphy, 2014.  Juvenal and Petrella, 2015. 
Gogolin and Kearney, 2016).  Liu Name (2016) disentangle the oil demand, supply, and speculation of real oil prices.  Their results show
that oil demand from the U. S.  and China plays a key role in oil price
changes after 2000, whereas speculation contributes much less to oil
price ﬂuctuations. 
In particular, since Baker Name (2013) constructed the EPU index to
measure EPU, many empirical studies have highlighted the importance
of EPU indices in forecasting asset return and volatility (Pastor and
Veronesi, 2012.  Antonakakis Name, 2013, 2014.  Kang and Ratti, 2013. 
Balcilar Name, 2016.  Tsai, 2017).  There are growing literature on EPU's
impact on the oil market, Antonakakis Name (2014) examine the relationship between EPU and oil prices and claim that EPU indices affect
oil prices.  Bekiros Name (2015) claim that EPU matters in predicting oil
price changes.  Recently, Aloui Name (2016) investigate the effect of uncertainty on crude oil returns.  Their results show that higher EPU indices
signiﬁcantly increase crude oil returns only during certain periods.  Yin
(2016) also illustrates the importance of policy uncertainty for both
oil spot and futures returns.  Speciﬁcally, Aloui Name (2016) provide an
accurate picture of the conditional dependence between oil and uncertainty.  They claim that increased uncertainty leads to increased oil
prices, as oil suppliers can stock up due to a precautionary motive. 
Thus, oil price ﬂuctuations can reﬂect either demand or supply shocks. 
In addition, Balcilar Name (2016) emphasize the role of EPU as a driver
of oil price ﬂuctuations.  These ﬁndings illustrate that EPU indices can
be good determinants in forecasting the oil volatility. 
GEPU indices are constructed and released monthly.  The GEPU index
is a GDP-weighted average of national EPU indices, accounting for two
thirds of the global GDP.  Currently, there are two versions of the GEPU
index—that with nominal GDP weights and that with purchasing
power parity (PPP) adjusted GDP weights.  Few studies have applied
the newly released GEPU index.  Speciﬁcally, oil is the main energy
source of the modern world, and oil price uncertainty is crucial for all
countries.  Furthermore, oil price ﬂuctuations are affected by the EPUs
of many countries, especially the countries of main oil consumers and
producers. 