 1.  Introduction Aedes albopictus is the most invasive mosquito in the world (Medlock et al. , 2012).  It is an aggressive biter, active all-day long (Caglioti et al. , 2013) and feeds on humans and a variety of other vertebrate hosts.  It is relatively long lived and lays its desiccation resistant eggs in natural and artiﬁcial containers (Charrel et al. , 2007.  Pardigon, 2009).  Originally of Asian origin, it is now widely distributed across Europe, Africa, the Americas and the Paciﬁc (Tsetsarkin et al. , 2007).  It has recently colonized the islands of the Torres Strait (Ritchie et al. , 2006) where a limited control program costs over AU$1 M per annum (Muzari, 2015).  Ae.  albopictus is a vector of more than 20 arboviruses, is recognised as a secondary vector of dengue (Bonizzoni et al. , 2014.  Gratz, 2004.  Lambrechts et al. , 2010) and is the major vector of many recent chikungunya virus (CHIKV) outbreaks including the La Reunion epidemic (200,000 cases and 203 deaths.  Renault et al. , 2007).  In that instance, a single point mutation within the CHIKV genome led to a dramatic increase in transmissibility by this mosquito.  Aedes albopictus, at least in a laboratory context, is also capable of transmitting four major Australian endemic arboviruses.  Murray Valley encephalitis virus (MVEV), West Nile virus Kunjin strain (KUNV), Ross River virus (RRV), and Barmah Forest virus (BFV) (Nicholson et al. , 2014c).  Ae.  albopictus now has a signiﬁcant urban presence around the globe (Caglioti et al. , 2013.  Medlock et al. , 2012.  Powers and Logue, 2007.  Rezza et al. , 2007.  Tsetsarkin et al. , 2007.  Weaver and Barrett, 2004) and, in some settings, feeds almost exclusively on humans (Ponlawat and Harrington, 2005).  In those instances, Ae.  albopictus can transmit viruses with a human reservoir (i. e.  dengue, chikungunya) very efﬁciently (Weaver and Barrett, 2004).  Ae.  albopictus is likely to assume an increasingly prominent role in the transmission of human arboviruses in the future.  Australia is made vulnerable to that threat by a busy transport and travel network that links it to regions where both Ae albopictus and the diseases it transmits are endemic.  Exotic mosquito incursions at Australia's ports are on the increase (van den Hurk et al. , 2016) as are the number of imported cases of viruses such as dengue (Huang et al. , 2016).  In 2016, Ae.  albopictus was responsible for a dengue outbreak on the island of Darnley (Erub) in the Australian Torres Strait.  This is the ﬁrst Ae albopictusmediated dengue outbreak in Australian history.  Models indicate that Ae.  albopictus could spread along the entire eastern seaboard of Australia (Benedict et al. , 2007.  Hales et al. , 2002.  Naish et al. , 2014.  Rochlin et al. , 2013.  Russell et al. , 2009), and we propose that Queensland is especially vulnerable to its establishment because of the plethora of suburban areas and parklands that currently harbor high densities of two native container breeding mosquitoes.  Ae.  aegypti and Ae.  notoscriptus.  These mosquitoes have similar ecologies to Ae.  albopictus (Ritchie et al. , 2001), and a number of papers discuss the overlap of their habitat (Nicholson et al. , 2014a) and the potential displacement of native species by the more aggressive Ae.  albopictus (van den Hurk et al. , 2016).  A recent household survey in Brisbane found that 26. 2% of all premises surveyed harbored Ae.  notoscriptus (Trewin et al. , 2013).  That suggests that an Ae.  albopictus invasion might result in universal urban coverage (Fig.  1).  Experiences in Europe and the USA suggest that Ae.  albopictus will become an extreme nuisance and increase the demand for mosquito control services.  It is likely to incur large economic and societal costs (Benedict et al. , 2007.  Caminade et al. , 2012.  Rochlin et al. , 2013).  The establishment of Ae.  albopictus in new areas with human populations unaccustomed to aggressive day biting mosquitoes can impact the use of outdoor recreational space (Halasa et al. , 2012.  Halasa et al. , 2014.  Manica et al. , 2016.  Worobey et al. , 2013).  Early detection and the timeliness of the emergency response are critical for containing or eliminating an incursion or limiting the scale and rate of establishment.  Economic analyses of early detection or long term control programs would give the councils and state government some estimate of the potential economic cost of an Ae.  albopictus invasion and the opportunity to assess the readiness of their control programs.  In Queensland, the surveillance and control of exotic mosquito incursions is a responsibility partly shared by the Department of Agriculture and Water Resources (port areas only) and the public health units that are attached to local, state-funded health services.  The bulk of the management of established nuisance or disease-vector species is, however, largely the responsibility of local councils.  The exception to this is the control program for Ae.  aegypti in those areas of tropical North Queensland that experience regular dengue outbreaks and that are at increased risk from other viruses such as chikungunya (CHIKV) and Zika.  That program is almost exclusively conducted by public health units, attached to local hospital and health services (Queensland Health,The most thorough economic analysis of Ae.  albopictus is from New Jersey, USA (Crans et al. , 1996).  Halasa et al.  (2012) estimated that New Jersey residents valued an enhanced mosquito control program at almost 4 times its actual cost and Shepard et al.  (2014) estimated that the area-wide integrated pest management of mosquitoes over a 13-week New Jersey summer facilitated an extra 43 h of yard and porch time by the local populace.  Each adult resident in that community valued those extra hours at US$355. 82 per annum.  Here, we have carried out a beneﬁt-cost analysis (BCA) with costs estimated from a Queensland consultation document.  the “Exotic mosquito incursion emergency response framework” (Appendix 1).  This document outlines the magnitude of resources that may be required to mount an elimination campaign against a limited Ae.  albopictus invasion in Brisbane.  In combination with a beneﬁts transfer (BT) estimate derived from the New Jersey work, we have used that framework to elicit the costs and beneﬁts of eliminating, or living with, this global invader.  <Middle> Methods.  2. 1.  Estimating Economic Beneﬁts of Ae.  albopictus-free Outdoor Recreational Activities.  We conduct an ex ante BCA which is the appropriate form of BCA when a policy is considered prior to being implemented.  Ex ante BCA informs government, industry and the wider community as to whether scarce resources should be allocated to a potential project or policy.  The analysis is undertaken from the perspective of the community in Queensland (i. e.  social BCA).  The beneﬁts and costs to the state government and the wider community and stakeholders in Queensland are assessed, and the counterfactual used is the ‘do nothing’ option.  We follow the BCA framework outlined in Boardman et al.  (2006).  For this BCA, we considered three scenarios.  1) an environment with no Ae.  albopictus, 2) a limited incursion of Ae.  albopictus that is met with an elimination response and 3) an incursion of Ae.  albopictus that, because of failure to eliminate, becomes established throughout Brisbane.  We stress that these scenarios are not part of current policy by state or local governments.  They simply represent potential scenarios under discussion by Queensland stakeholders with responsibilities and expertise in mosquito management.  An overall schematic illustrating the general cost categories can be found in Fig.  2.  We calculated the beneﬁts and costs of the following scenarios.  1) the beneﬁts of having no Ae.  albopictus in terms of the value of mosquito-free recreational activities, 2) the costs and beneﬁts of eliminating Ae.  albopictus and 3) the cost of establishment that result from i) additional complaints to councils about a mosquito nuisance and ii) the need to mount a public health (i. e.  vector control) response to imported cases of dengue, chikungunya or Zika).  We used the beneﬁt transfer (BT) methodology (Hanley et al. , 2009) to transfer values from New Jersey (Horwood et al. , 2013) surveys to Brisbane (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2013).  Halasa et al.  (2014) estimated New Jersey residents were willing to pay US$9. 48 ± $9. 48 per person per week for an additional recreational mosquito-free hour.  We used the same method used in Shepard et al.  (2014) and calculated annual beneﬁts by multiplying the weekly beneﬁt by 13 to represent a 13-week New Jersey summer.  To convert this to Brisbane dollars in 2016, we further estimated the per capita WTP in terms of dollar values from 2010 (when the survey was carried out).  We adjusted for inﬂation to obtain the beneﬁts in 2016 US$ using a cumulative inﬂation rate of 10. 4% between 2010 and 2016 (Coin News Media Group LLC, 2014).  We adjusted for differential GDP per capita between New Jersey and Queensland using per capita GDP for 2012 (nominal values) (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2013.  US Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2013).  We used a 1. 33 exchange rate (Australia dollar to US dollars), to report the beneﬁt values in 2016 Australian dollars (Converter, 2016).  Finally, we multiplied the result by 0. 50 to reﬂect a recent survey ﬁnding that 50% of Brisbane residents would be unwilling to pay any amount for additional Ae.  albopictus control (Mwebaze et al. , 2017).  2. 2.  Deﬁnitions of the Three Ae.  albopictus Control Scenarios.  2. 2. 1.  Scenario 1.  No Ae.  albopictus Present.  This is the baseline scenario.  No control is needed and residents avoid the costs of management or establishment.  2. 2. 2.  Scenario 2.  Elimination Response to an Isolated Detection.  This hypothetical elimination strategy (Appendix 1, “Mosquito Incursion Emergency Response Framework”) provides stakeholders with an estimate of the resources required to eliminate a local incursion of Ae.  albopictus.  This kind of document is critical to drafting inter-agency plans that deﬁne roles, logistics and methodology.  The proposed response is based on the discovery of one or more premises within a single urban block that are harbouring one or more exotic larvae, pupae, or adults.  An eradication zone (EZ) (Rezza et al. , 2007) with a radius of 500 m is created around those premises, consisting of the detection block, an inner ring and an outer ring (Appendix 1).  Source reduction and comprehensive insecticidal treatments are implemented within the EZ (Appendix 1).  This involves the destruction of the aquatic habitat (e. g.  destroying, discarding or upturning containers that may collect water), the application of residual adulticides to all containers that cannot be treated in this way, the application of larvicides to sites such as roof gutters, rainwater tanks and subterranean sites, and the mass deployment of lethal ovitraps.  Areas within the detection block and inner ring that are likely to harbor adult resting mosquitoes (e. g.  shades walls and leaf litter, fences and low lying dense vegetation) will also be sprayed with residual adulticides (Muzari et al. , 2014).  We conservatively estimate that all premises in the EZ will require harborage treatment.  We have costed a scenario where harbourage treatment is subcontracted to private pest control companies at an estimated cost of A$250 per yard (G.  Cochrane, personal communication).  The response also requires a signiﬁcant amount of surveillance within and beyond the borders of the eradication zone to deﬁne the limits of the incursion and enable the adjustment of the EZ if appropriate.  We assume that post-intervention surveillance will continue 12 weeks after the last detection to verify the elimination.  Surveillance tools, for example BioGents sentinel® (Williams et al. , 2006) or gravid Aedes traps (GATs) (Eiras et al. , 2014.  Johnson et al. , 2016) would be deployed in this effort and are fully costed.  The control and surveillance responses would be conducted in partnership between the health department and local government, as outlined under the Queensland Dengue Management Plan 2015–2020 (Queensland Health, 2015).  The eradication strategy assigns stafﬁng to reﬂect various activities and, in its current form, requires 33 staff (Table 1).  The costing includes half of the surveillance and control teams being sourced from North Queensland (e. g.  Cairns, Townsville etc. ) where vector control staff routine control for Ae.  aegypti, in order to mitigate the lack of experience staff in Brisbane may have managing container-breeding mosquitoes.  For these staff, ﬂights, accommodation and per diem are included as part of the costs (Appendix 3).  Surveillance and control activities will continue as long as Ae.  albopictus continues to be detected.  The elimination strategy for the block includes a repeat inspection for mosquitoes and a ﬁnal treatment after the last detection.  To incorporate uncertainty in our cost estimations, three infestation levels were chosen to generate “low”, “central” and “high” cost estimates (Table 2) based on the number of premises in an eradication zone (Appendix 1).  We assume a local incursion as opposed to a widespread establishment.  The “low” and “high” estimates were the minimum and maximum estimated number of premises, respectively, while the “central” estimate was the mean value.  Based on a conservative estimate that one 3-person vector control team can treat 12 premises in one working day, we estimate that four 3-person teams will treat 240 premises per working week.  In any case, treatments of blocks or limited areas need to be completed within no more than 6 weeks as that is the expected residual life of the adulticides applied to containers and harbourage areas.  2. 2. 3.  Scenario 3.  Establishment of Ae.  albopictus with Increased Nuisance Complaints and Vector-borne Disease Risk.  2. 2. 3. 1.  Increased Nuisance Complaints.  Brisbane City council has a stateof-the-art larviciding operation for control of the saltmarsh and freshwater mosquitoes that commonly plague Brisbane residents (Dale et al. , 2008).  It does not, however, routinely manage mosquitoes around private residences, where container breeding mosquitoes such as Ae.  albopictus will be most abundant (Unlu et al. , 2013).  The current strategy is to respond to complaints about domestic mosquito nuisance with information about mosquito biology and advice on personal protection.  In some cases, adult traps are set at the premises to determine the mosquito species involved.  The spatial and temporal focus of this limited response is driven by telephone complaints made to the local council by homeowners approximately 90% are dealt with by telephone and the mosquitoes in question are most commonly identiﬁed as saltmarsh (e. g.  Ae.  vigilax) or freshwater (e. g.  Culex annulirostris) mosquitoes hatching and dispersing after high tides or rain.  Where the source of mosquitoes is not clear, a council ofﬁcer visits the residence to identify the nuisance mosquitoes and advise the homeowner.  In a few cases, adulticiding (i. e.  harbourage spraying) is carried out, usually in high proﬁle locations (e. g.  retirement homes) (Mike Muller, Brisbane City Council, personal communication).  As in other parts of the world, the establishment of Ae.  albopictus in Brisbane will lead to an increased number of complaints and increased council activity in response.  To estimate the potential costs of these events, we estimated the time and resources an ofﬁcer spends on the phone and carrying out trapping activities and engagement with residents.  In the absence of historical data for complaints to Brisbane City Council, we used annual numbers of complaints to Gold Coast City Council as a proxy (D.  Allaway, unpublished) from 1996 to 2012 (Appendix 2) to estimate the number of additional complaints due to Ae.  albopictus.  Using those numbers of cases as a proxy, we chose 115 (minimum number of complaints), 332 (median number), and 1162 (maximum number) as the low, center and high estimates, respectively.  2. 2. 3. 2.  Public Health Response.  In Queensland, it is public health practice to implement a vector control response wherever there is a risk of mosquito-borne disease transmission.  Currently, there is no competent vector for dengue, chikungunya or Zika in the greater Brisbane area.  Therefore, no response to imported cases is required.  Fig.  3 shows that there are currently around 60 imported cases of dengue and chikungunya to Brisbane, reﬂecting the same steady increase in viraemic imports that has occurred across Australia in recent years.  the result of an expanding global travel network and the ongoing arbovirus epidemics in Asia, the Paciﬁc and the Americas (Huang et al. , 2016).  If Ae.  albopictus becomes established in mainland Australia, imported dengue, chikungunya or Zika cases will trigger a vector control response as recommended in the Dengue and Chikungunya Management Plans (Queensland Health, 2014.  Queensland Health, 2015).  Zones of at least 150 m around the case house will be treated as per Scenario 2.  Similar responses will be required around other addresses visited by the viraemic case while infectious and where there is potential exposure to mosquitoes.  In general, an average of 3 contact addresses will be treated.  Based on the information in Fig.  2, we assume that between 7 and 77 cases per year will require vector control due to the widespread presence of Ae.  albopictus (derived from cases per 100,000 and the Brisbane population for any given year).  We estimate that team of 3 vector control ofﬁcers will require 1 week to treat all of the properties at risk from an imported case (J.  Davis, personal communication), and have assumed personnel costs for 4 teams (12 ofﬁcers) based on this rate.  One notable difference from the existing dengue response in Cairns (Ritchie et al. , 2002) that the indoor residual spraying required for control of Ae.  aegypti is replaced by harbourage spraying in order to target the largely outdoor-resting habits of Ae.  albopictus (Muzari et al. , 2017.  Muzari,2. 3.  Estimated Cost of Ae.  albopictus Control Scenarios.  We estimated the cost of the three Ae.  albopictus scenarios in Brisbane following a similar method as Shepard et al.  (2014) carried out in New Jersey.  The cost of these strategies consisted of three general categories of expenditure.  personnel, recurrent costs, and capital costs.  We used a “mosquito control costing tool” to calculated expenses for each control scenario (see Appendix 3 for example of mosquito elimination cost calculations).  Personnel costs reﬂect salaries and employee fringe beneﬁts paid by the institution (employer contributions to health insurance, superannuation, etc. ) for full- and part-time employees or hourly wages and beneﬁts paid to seasonal or contracted workers recruited to implement the strategy.  We multiplied the gross salary by the percentage of effort that each person devoted to the control effort.  Additional personnel costs were added according to each strategy's need (transport, accommodation, and mandated per diems).  The costing includes half of the surveillance and control teams being sourced from North Queensland (e. g.  Cairns, Townsville, etc. ), where vector control staff routinely control for Ae.  aegypti, in order to mitigate the lack of experience staff in Brisbane may have managing container-breeding mosquitoes.  For these staff, ﬂights, accommodation and per diem costs are included as part of the personnel costs.  Recurrent costs included insecticides (larvicides and adulticides), sub-contracts to pest control companies, vehicle rental, protective clothing and accessories, and laboratory materials.  “Capital costs” refers to equipment with a useful life of more than 1 year.  We estimated the annual economic cost for each item and amortized the cost according to its useful life.  We estimated the item's usage share by the Ae.  albopictus control strategy and multiplied the amortized cost by that percentage.  Total capital costs for all items were derived.  The useful life of any one item was obtained from the Australia's Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Services (Internal Revenue Services, 2013).  Under our hypothetical Ae.  albopictus elimination framework, 100% of the usage will be for the Ae.  albopictus program.  2. 3. 1.  Assumptions and Exclusions.  We do not consider the costs of detections of Ae.  albopictus at air and seaports.  These are the responsibility of Australian Government Department of Agriculture and Water Resources (DAWR) quarantine and biosecurity effort, and those costs are outside the boundary of the present BCA.  Our estimates of the resources required to meet the recommendations of our strategy are based upon expert consultation with resource managers and mosquito control researchers.  The strategy has also been reviewed and commented on by the Aedes albopictus Eradication Programme Technical Advisory Group (TAG) which is made up of individuals with signiﬁcant operational experience of mosquito control and eradication and which is responsible for oversight of Australia's Ae.  albopictus quarantine program in the Torres Strait (which aims to limit Ae.  albopictus numbers in the main transport hubs of the Torres Strait and minimize the risks of mainland incursions from that source (van den Hurk et al. , 2016.  Muzari et al. , 2017)).  It is our contention that any reduction in the numbers of personnel dedicated to these strategies would lengthen the time needed to complete the eradication response, compromise the likelihood of containment and increase the chances of disease transmission.  The analysis excludes the costs of implementing any incident management framework or the costs of community engagement, media, data management (software or personnel), ofﬁce administration, training (with the exception of pest management licenses in public health sustained response plan), fuel, site hire, contractor hire (beyond pest control operators used in eradication responses) or diagnostics (e. g.  molecular taxonomy for identiﬁcation of Ae.  albopictus).  Costs of maintaining essential capital resources (e. g.  tools and equipment) in the absence of an Ae.  albopictus control campaign were not considered.  Any beneﬁts accruing from the recovery of outdoor recreational time that might result from the public health response are not considered.  This analysis includes the cost of 3 months of post-intervention surveillance and assumes no additional Ae.  albopictus are detected.  It is expected that after a successful intervention, at least one year of surveys would necessarily be carried out to conﬁrm that the area remained free of Ae.  albopictus (Appendix 1).  This analysis did not include the costs of that long-term surveillance.  We based our calculations off of previous beneﬁt and costs estimates of Ae.  albopictus that assume a 13 week New Jersey summer (Shepard et al. , 2014).  Since Brisbane is warmer than New Jersey, it is expected that Ae.  albopictus will be active for a longer period.  2. 4.  Beneﬁt-cost Analysis.  Fig.  3.  Imported cases of Ae.  albopictus-transmitted viruses (dengue, chikungunya and Zika) per 100,000 in Brisbane, Queensland, Australia, from 1996 to 2014.  Data provided by Notiﬁable Conditions Systems (NOCS), Queensland Department of Health.  For the BCA, we divided the cost of each strategy by the population of Brisbane to get a per capita estimate (Queensland Treasury and Trade, 2013).  To estimate the beneﬁt cost ratio (BCR) we divided the per capita beneﬁt by the per capita cost.  To estimate the net beneﬁt per capita we subtract the beneﬁt per capita from the cost per capita.  2. 4. 1.  Sensitivity Analysis.  Risk and uncertainty are always associated with predictions about future beneﬁts and costs and should be incorporated in the BCA (Campbell and Brown, 2003).  As the BCA is being undertaken in advance of a potential invasion that is yet to occur (i. e.  ex ante BCA), our numerical estimates of the key variables used in our analysis are not known with certainty.  In acknowledgment of this, a sensitivity analysis and Monte Carlo simulation were conducted to test the robustness of the results for changes in major variables.  We performed a Monte Carlo simulation by using probability distributions to describe and identify the most inﬂuential variables of the 88 variables used to calculate our forecast (BCR).  We speciﬁed a triangular probability distribution for most of the key variables in the model such as the estimate of the WTP in New Jersey and the proportion of the Brisbane population that would be willing to contribute to mosquito control (Table 3).  Using Crystal Ball software, a Monte Carlo simulation was run, whereby the forecast beneﬁts and BCR of the proposed program were recalculated 10,000 times, each time using a different, randomly chosen set of values for the input variables (see Appendix 3 spreadsheet.  all variables contributing to cost model are highlighted in green).  3.  Results.  3. 1.  Estimation of Beneﬁts.  For an example of calculations, in this case for the central estimate (Table 2), see Appendix 3.  After taking the initial estimate of US$9. 48 (Halasa et al. , 2014) multiplying by the GDP adjustment (New Jersey 2012 to Brisbane 2012) of 0. 84, multiplying by the cumulative inﬂation rate (2010 to 2016) of 10. 4% and multiplying by the currency exchange rate ($US to $AU, 29 August 2016) of 1. 32557, the result was a per capita WTP per week of AU$136. 06.  After adjusting by 50% of Brisbane residents unwilling to pay for additional mosquito control (Mwebaze et al. , 2017) and multiplying by a 13 week New Jersey summer, the result is AU$75. 81 per person per year.  3. 2.  Scenario 1.  No Ae.  albopictus Present.  The per capita beneﬁt associated with additional time enjoying outdoor activities (e. g.  yard and porch activities) without mosquitoes was estimated at AU$75. 81 (Table 4) after accounting for an estimated 50% of Brisbane residents unwilling to pay for additional mosquito control (Mwebaze et al. , 2017).  In the absence of Ae.  albopictus, this beneﬁt is present with no additional cost.  3. 3.  Scenario 2.  Elimination Response to an Isolated Detection.  The most likely cost of an Ae.  albopictus eradication strategy following a single detection outside an international port of entry was estimated at AU$1,233,244 (Table 5).  The main assumptions used are as follows.  The detection event is conﬁned to one urban block, the intervention is successful without the need to repeat treatment, operations are implemented according to protocol (Appendix 1) and the exercise ends after two further months of surveillance and control.  No further detections result.  See Appendix 3 for a sample worksheet showing the calculation of cost estimates.  The allocation of cost differs slightly by the estimated size of the initial infestation.  For a minimal infestation (low estimate), personnel costs are expected to comprise 69% of the cost, and recurrent costs (larvicides, subcontract for barrier spraying, dry ice for light traps) would take up approximately 29%.  In the central and high estimates, however, the recurrent costs take up an increasingly larger fraction of the total (Table 5).  The most likely per capita cost of this strategy was AU$1. 07 for Brisbane resulting in a BCR of 50–78 (Table 3).  For each AU$1 spent on the Ae.  albopictus eradication strategy, Brisbane residents gained additional outdoor recreational time worth over AU$49 (the range calculated by uncertainty analysis can be found in Appendix 4).  The Monte Carlo analysis indicates that four variables contribute to variance in the BCR.  per capita WTP of New Jersey residents (50. 2%), willingness to pay estimates of Brisbane households (44. 3%), the Brisbane population (2. 4%) and the per capita GDP in Queensland (2. 2%) (Fig.  4).  3. 4.  Scenario 3.  Establishment of Ae.  albopictus with Increased Nuisance Complaints and Vector-borne Disease Risk.  In this scenario, Ae.  albopictus is established in Brisbane without possibility of eradication, so the beneﬁt of an environment free of Ae.  albopictus is lost.  3. 4. 1.  Response to Additional Nuisance Complaints from Ae.  albopictus.  The cost associated with responses to complaints is estimated to range from $17,382–$59,785 per year depending on the number of additional complaints (Table 6).  3. 4. 2.  Response to Disease Risk.  Control measures will be as described in 2. 2. 3. 2.  See Appendix 5 for a sample worksheet for calculation of cost estimates.  The purpose of this intervention is to prevent local transmission and outbreaks of arboviral diseases transmitted by Ae.  albopictus.  Using the imported case data in Fig.  3, we estimated costs based on the minimum, median and maximum numbers of cases recorded during that period (33, 74 and 137, respectively.  Table 7).  The calculation of the potential beneﬁts of this intervention (i. e.  impact on earnings, health services, hospital admissions etc. ) is beyond the scope of this analysis.  In summary, the total annual costs of an Ae.  albopictus establishment in Brisbane would be AU$0. 54–AU$1. 30 per capita, with an additional loss of the beneﬁts associated with an environment free of Ae.  albopictus (AU$75. 81 per capita.  see section 3. 1).  In comparison, the costs of a successful elimination effort would cost AU$0. 97–AU$1. 51 and the value of an Ae.  albopictus free environment would be preserved (Table 8).  <Conclusion> Discussion.  Current predictive models suggest that Ae.  albopictus could establish in all population centres in Australia (Nicholson et al. , 2014b).  In urban environments it exploits aquatic habitats typical of those used by native container breeding mosquitoes (Li et al. , 2014.  Nicholson et al. , 2014a).  In Southeast Queensland, the commonest of these is Ae.  notoscriptus which, in a recent greater Brisbane survey of households, had an almost universal distribution (Heersink et al. , 2015).  It is reasonable to assume that Ae.  albopictus would utilize these same ecological niches as Ae.  notoscriptus and that it would occupy an almost identical distribution.  Evidence suggests the presence of Ae.  notoscriptus would not be a competitive obstacle to Ae.  albopictus (Nicholson et al. , 2014a), resulting in the establishment of a mosquito that is anthropophilic, pestiferous and a potential vector of over 20 arboviruses including dengue, chikungunya and Zika (Benedict et al. , 2007).  Moreover, wherever it has established outside of its native Asian range, it has caused considerable disruption to outdoor recreational activities (Halasa et al. , 2014.  Unlu et al. , 2013).  This is particularly pertinent in Australian cities like Brisbane whose climate and culture encourages the populace to socialize and exercise outdoors (Pettigrew, 2002).  The beneﬁts that would accrue from eliminating Ae.  albopictus, preserving the value of a recreational environment free of this mosquito and averting the costs of a post-establishment nuisance and public health response are considerable under the assumptions of our analysis.  Every dollar spent on a successful elimination campaign results in at least AU$50 in beneﬁt.  That beneﬁt is ongoing, year on year, as a result of protecting Brisbane's outdoor recreational space.  Our analysis is based on the assumption that the eradication framework is effective and that if such a strategy were not implemented, the mosquito would spread throughout Brisbane.  These assumptions are not unreasonable – our elimination response is aimed at a very limited incursion that could be extinguished by a well-resourced mosquito control and surveillance campaign.  We have not costed the long-term commitment to surveillance that would be required after such an incursion and our response assumes that a citywide surveillance network is already in place (if it were not, the incursion would not be discovered in the ﬁrst place).  This is a key point – without surveillance, Ae.  albopictus will enter Brisbane unchallenged.  By the time it is discovered, it will be widespread and impossible to tackle.  The value of an Ae.  albopictus-free environment will be lost.  Eradication may not be successful in the estimated timeframe—for example, the Ae.  aegypti eradication programs in the Northern Territory of Australia took two years and 5 rounds of control before declared successful (Kurucz and Pettit, 2014.  Whelan et al. , 2009).  Supposing that costs of elimination were 10 times higher than estimated and there were two “high estimate” Ae.  albopictus incursions in the summer, then the beneﬁts of scenario 2 would be just one twentieth (i. e.  1/10 × 1/2) of the amounts projected here.  Even so, the BCR would still be favourable.  2. 5 to 1 instead of 50 to 1.  Early intervention is clearly comparatively inexpensive in comparison with the costs of incursion.  Further, the yearly beneﬁt was based on a 13 week New Jersey summer.  The Brisbane summer is longer, so the beneﬁts would be expected to extend further throughout the year.  The costs of intervention are largely similar to those associated with the eradication of an ecologically similar species, Ae.  aegypti, from locations in Australia's Northern Territory.  Our elimination framework considers that the infestation ranges between 500 and 150 households.  In the Northern Territory in 2004, 91 out of 1137 (approximately 8%) properties surveyed in Tennant Creek were positive for Ae.  aegypti (Whelan et al. , 2005).  On Groote Eylandt, 45 out of 445 (approximately 10. 1%) properties were found to be positive for Ae.  aegypti (Kulback and Whelan, 2007).  Both infestations took roughly two years to eliminate (Nguyen et al. , 2009.  Whelan et al. , 2012) at a cost of approximately 1. 3 M AUD for Tennant Creek (P.  Whelan, unpublished data), and approximately AU$750,000 for Groote Eylandt (Whelan et al. , 2009).  Tennant Creek was reinfested again in 2012, with the initial survey ﬁnding 146 out of 1070 (1. 4%) properties positive for Ae.  aegypti (Whelan et al. , 2012), though no additional detections were made since 2013 (Kurucz and Pettit, 2014).  This demonstrates that by the time an infestation is discovered, it may have become widespread.  In the case of Ae.  albopictus in Brisbane, that would result in a considerably larger eradication zone and more properties needing to be surveyed and treated.  Since 68% of the estimated cost is for personnel, increasing the time taken to carry out the eradication will increase the cost substantially.  Establishment in Brisbane has an estimated cost of AU$0. 52AU$1. 25 per capita per annum for the public health response that would be triggered by the appearance of a mosquito vector associated with dengue, chikungunya and Zika transmission.  This may be an underestimate as we assume that the responses are successful and do not result in further cases (triggering further responses and costs).  These costs are relatively modest as they only cover the expense of a response.  In reality, regular imports might require a permanent team.  For example, the permanent, public-health afﬁliated, vector control team based in Cairns, North Queensland (the Dengue Action Response Team or DART.  (Ritchie et al. , 2002)) costs approximately AU$5 per capita per year (Devine and Muzari, 2013).  During the 2009 dengue epidemic in Cairns, there were 931 conﬁrmed cases and one death.  Each case cost Queensland Health approximately US$3547, and the outbreak cost more than US$3 M (Vazquez-Prokopec et al. , 2010).  The DART also carries out the Ae.  albopictus control program in the Torres Strait (van den Hurk et al. , 2016).  Approximately 750 properties and their surrounds, on Horn and Thursday Islands are targeted.  Adult mosquito resting habitats (mostly leaf litter under dense stands of vegetation around and between houses) are treated with a residual insecticide applied by backpack mist-blowers and a tractor-mounted sprayer, as well as treating all potential breeding sites in all yards and gardens by either destroying the container, placing it under cover or treating it with insecticides (synthetic pyrethroid spray or methoprene pellets).  This is a demonstrably successful approach (van den Hurk et al. , 2016 Muzari et al. , 2017), and the one on which our elimination framework for Brisbane is based.  It should be noted that the existing Torres Strait strategy keeps Ae.  albopictus numbers to close to the limits of detection but has not resulted in elimination.  By the time Ae.  albopictus was discovered in the Torres Strait it was already well established and resisted any attempt at elimination.  There is no permanent vector control team in the Torres Strait and the control effort consists of regular well-resourced visits by the DART.  The current response by local Queensland councils to complaints by individual householders about nuisance biting is minimal.  The mosquitoes that trigger these complaints are almost always saltmarsh and freshwater mosquitoes, dispersing in large numbers after tidal or rainfall events.  These mosquitoes are largely active for brief periods during the evenings, although their sheer numbers can present a considerable biting nuisance.  These species are the main target of local government control programs in south east Queensland – and the control effort focuses on their coastal, rural and peri-urban breeding habitats.  These mosquitoes cannot be effectively controlled by domestic interventions.  As a result of this, complaints by individual householders are usually ﬁelded by telephone calls that simply offer advice on personal protection and house screening, thus the estimated nuisance cost due to additional service requests due to Ae.  albopictus increases by AU$17,382 to AU$59,785 per year.  As an illustration, in 2013–2014 most householder complaints to the Brisbane City Council came from regions near coastal saltmarsh areas (Fig.  4), where Ae.  vigilax is the primary nuisance mosquito.  The suburbs with the highest number of complaints (levels 7–10, see Fig.  5) represent approximately 5% of the Brisbane population.  If Ae albopictus were to establish as an urban container-breeder in Brisbane, all areas will be at risk of feeling the impacts of this new aggressive biter, and the public demand for an intervention may well increase.  This is a day-biting mosquito, commonly biting outdoors.  It can assume very high densities in some areas and dramatically impact on people's use of outdoor spaces (Carrieri et al. , 2008.  Tsuda and Kim, 2012).  In coastal Florida, a region similar to Southeast Queensland in terms of climate and recreational activity, saltmarsh mosquitoes also used to be the commonest cause of complaints.  However, following its establishment in 1986 (O'Meara et al. , 1993), various mosquito control managers in that state now estimate that Ae.  albopictus is the origin of 12–50% of all nuisance complaints (Fig.  6).  If Ae.  albopictus were to become established in an area like Brisbane which currently has no competent dengue, chikungunya or Zika vector, it would demand a public health response to imported viraemias.  At its simplest this might cost AU$604,301–AU$1,444,453 per annum (Table 7).  A successful surveillance and elimination plan not only prevents additional pressure on local governments to respond to nuisance mosquito, but also protects the population from a dangerous public health risk and an increasing investment in mitigative vector control capacity.  Most importantly it preserves the recreational value of our outdoor habitat, with implications for our well-being and our health.  One study has even suggested that an Ae.  albopictus invasion can disrupt outdoor activity to the extent that it may play a role in encouraging childhood obesity (Worobey et al. , 2013).  An effective elimination strategy also helps rationalize and protect our existing efforts to keep mainland Australia free of Ae.  albopictus. 