 1.  Introduction Being “green” has become much easier for households with the evolution of technology, such as electric vehicles (EVs) and solar photovoltaic (PV) panels.  These technologies allow consumers to maintain a traditional lifestyle while also reducing their environmental impact by reducing fossil-fuel consumption either on the electricity grid or from internal combustion vehicles.  Governments recognize the environmental beneﬁts of these technologies and thus have implemented myriad policies to spur their deployment.  However, the question remains as to what degree these technologies improve environmental outcomes as they depend on multiple complex factors including the time- and location-speciﬁc emission characteristics of the electricity generation displaced by solar PV or consumed by EVs.  For example, an EV's environmental impact will depend on when and where the customer charges it.  Similarly, the environmental impact of a household's solar PV system will vary depending on the type of generation from the electricity grid that is displaced.  The temporal and spatial variation of these technologies' environmental impacts means that households can inﬂuence the magnitude of environmental beneﬁts by engaging in certain behaviors associated with these technologies.  Utilizing household energy consumption and generation data from the Mueller residential neighborhood in Austin, TX and hourly generation data for the Texas electricity grid, we analyze how household solar PV and EV utilization patterns impact the CO2 emissions and water consumption associated with consuming electricity from the grid.  We then explore how the use of these technologies can be adjusted to maximize environmental beneﬁts and whether these optimizing actions are indeed being taken.  Though several papers have investigated the environmental and electric system impacts of EVs (see Hadley and Tsvetkova, 2009.  Doucette and McCulloch, 2011.  Holland et al. , 2016.  Huo et al. , 2015.  Rangaraju et al. , 2015) or solar PV (Spiegel et al. , 2000.  Connors et al. , 2004.  Sivaraman and Keoleian, 2010.  Zhai et al. , 2012), our paper's detailed, hourly household level dataset on energy consumption, PV generation, and EV charging ﬁlls several gaps in the literature.  First, it allows us to identify hourly environmental impacts from actual charging patterns and identify whether households are charging during environmentally friendly times of day.  Second, we are able to estimate the magnitude and existence of a solar rebound effect, and whether this rebound effect varies with EV ownership.  Third, we can identify whether households are making environmentally optimal decisions with respect to these technologies.  Though many engineering papers have been written on how to maximize solar capture through panel tilt and orientation (see for example Li and Lam, 2007.  Zhao et al. , 2010.  Lave and Kleissl, 2011.  Hong et al. , 2014), to the best of our knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst paper to estimate the environmental impact of solar panel orientation based on the marginal emissions proﬁle of the system.  Our use of a marginal (rather than average) emissions analysis also allows us to more accurately measure the environmental impact of the timing of charging and distributed generation.  Thus, our detailed dataset and carefully constructed emissions analysis contributes a robust and disaggregated analysis to the growing literature on the environmental impacts of green technologies.  2.  Environmental impacts of electricity.  2. 1.  Emissions and water consumption of electricity generation.  Generating electricity causes many types of environmental impacts.  In the United States, electricity is predominantly generated through the combustion of fossil fuels (EIA, 2016a).  Fossil fuel ﬁred electricity generators emit many local air pollutants, such as NOx, SO2, and particulate matter, causing air quality effects in adjacent areas.  These generators are also a signiﬁcant source of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.  Nationally, electricity generation is responsible for almost 40% of annual US CO2 emissions (EIA, 2016b).  Fossil fuel based electricity generation is also a water intensive process.  In 2015 over 1 trillion gallons of water were consumed for cooling during the production of electricity in the United States (EIA, 2015).  Fig.  1 shows how many gallons of water are used in Texas for each MWh of electricity generated by generation source.  renewables only utilize a negligible amount of water in producing electricity.  Generally, power plants withdraw water from a nearby surface source (e. g.  river, lake, or coastal water).  Most of the water is returned to the body of water.  however, some may evaporate or otherwise not be returned to its original source.  This water is considered to be consumed.  Thus, the water impacts of electricity generation can be measured by both the withdrawal and consumption of water.  These two water impacts are very different, and each type of generator may withdraw and consume a different amount of water.  For example, natural gas combustion turbine generators do not require water for cooling, whereas natural gas or coal steam turbine generators must use large amounts of water to condense steam and thus have greater water withdrawal and consumption levels.  Withdrawing large quantities of water is problematic for two reasons.  it displaces water for other uses, such as drinking, and the water that is returned to nature may be heated, causing local concerns in terms of water quality.  However, for purposes of this article, we reduce the scope of our analysis to the amount of water consumed, rather than withdrawn. 1 It is also important to note that most generators do not pay for using this water, due to its extraction from a body of water rather than using piped water.  Thus, there exists a negative externality associated with water extraction and consumption for electricity generation that is currently unpriced.  2. 2.  The time- and location-varying environmental impacts of grid electricity consumption.  While the environmental impacts of electricity generation are fairly straightforward in terms of emissions and water consumption, the environmental impacts attributable to electricity consumption are more complex particularly when electricity is consumed from an electric grid with multiple generators.  An electric grid must be coordinated by a balancing authority (e. g.  independent system operator or regional transmission operator) to match electric supply and demand in real time.  To keep generation costs low, the balancing authority will generally dispatch the generators with the lowest marginal cost ﬁrst.  As demand increases, more expensive generators are dispatched with the most expensive generators called upon at times of maximum peak demand.  Additionally, when non-dispatchable generation like solar or wind ﬂuctuate, various dispatchable generators such as coal and natural gas power plants must increase or decrease generation, accordingly.  For these reasons, the environmental impact of grid electricity consumption at any point in time is a function of the generator that responds to the change in electricity demand at that point in time (i. e. , the marginal generator).  Any change in demand will change the environmental impact at the marginal generator's rate of emissions and water consumption.  this is referred to as the marginal emission and consumption rate.  These rates can ﬂuctuate as different generators with different emission characteristics operate on the margin.  Often, data on marginal emission rates are unavailable for particular areas or time periods, and studies will utilize daily or yearly average emission rates to estimate emission impacts of different grid usage patterns.  The use of average emission rates, however, may bias emission impact estimates, as not all generators in a system will respond proportionally to a change in demand.  In fact, many studies have found instances of over- or under-estimation of emission impacts when average emission rates are used (Novan, 2011.  Kafﬁne et al. , 2013.  Jacobson and High, 2010).  Speciﬁcally, in the ERCOT region, Holland et al.  (2016) ﬁnd that CO2 emissions are overestimated by 19% when using an average rather than a marginal emissions methodology.  Marginal generators are almost always dispatchable generators—ones that can be ramped up or down in response to a change in demand.  Renewable generation such as wind or solar almost never act on the margin as they cannot be ramped up and can only under certain occasions be curtailed. 2 Instead, if these renewables increase simultaneously with demand, other dispatchable resources can be curtailed.  Kafﬁne et al.  (2013) ﬁnd that the intermittency of wind generation leads to an increased use of natural gas during high demand times, and a cycling of coal during low demand times (when natural gas generation is less This paper focuses on Austin Energy's grid in Texas, whose independent system operator (ISO), the Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT), manages the ﬂow of electricity and the wholesale market.  Natural gas and coal have dominated the ERCOT generation mix from 2013 to 2015, with the share of natural gas increasing over the years and displacing some coal generation (see ERCOT 2013, 2014, 2015).  Wind comprises about 11% of total generation in each year, but it generates much more during the night than during the day.  Fig.  2 plots the average hourly wind generation and load over the course of 2014 in the ERCOT region.  As can be seen in the ﬁgure, wind provides approximately 14% of the average load during the evening, but only about 7% in the middle of the day.  Because wind is clean and does not consume or withdraw water, it is a great generation source in terms of environmental impact.  However, it is important to keep in mind that any action that increases load during times of high wind generation (i. e. , night) will not affect the amount of wind that is generated (though it could reduce the amount of wind curtailment during moments of very high wind generation, particularly in places that are located outside of the transmission constraint, near the wind generators, or on the Western side of TX4).  Instead, it will require an increase in the generation of a dispatchable resource, such as natural gas or coal.  Ensuring that these dispatchable generators are as clean as possible will help reduce environmental impacts from any actions that increase the demand for centralized electricity generation (such as electric vehicle charging).  This also speaks to the importance of relying on marginal rather than average analyses.  By relying only on average analyses, a larger percentage of wind will appear to make EVs more beneﬁcial for emissions reductions.  however, if charging occurs when coal is on the margin, the environmental beneﬁt of this charging pattern is signiﬁcantly decreased if not totally negated.  Our usage of a marginal analysis therefore will better represent the environmental impacts of charging EVs at different times of day.  <Middle> Data.  3. 1.  Pecan Street Inc.  Our primary dataset contains 141 households in Austin's Mueller neighborhood for the three-year period spanning October 1, 2012 to September 30, 2015.  These data include demographic information (income, education, household composition).  property information (such as number of bedrooms, existence of programmable thermostats and other appliances, etc. ).  solar PV array information (array size, tilt, azimuth, orientation).  EV information (type, existence of charger at work).  and hourly grid electricity consumption, solar PV generation, and EV charging.  The dataset was obtained from Pecan Street Inc. , an organization based in Austin, Texas that conducts research to support innovation in water and energy management.  For over 200 homes in Austin's Mueller neighborhood, Pecan Street has installed technology that allows for the precise measurement of load consumption and energy generation data.  These technologies include dual-socketed utility-grade meters in the home and highresolution data monitoring equipment that collects circuit-level energy consumption data and energy generation data for rooftop PV systems at one-second to one-minute intervals (our analysis relies on aggregated hourly intervals of these data).  These meters record total electricity consumption within the household,5 as well as circuit-level electricity consumption and/or generation data for appliances, electric vehicles, and solar PV arrays.  The beneﬁt of these data is that they are recorded from actual customers, rather than from approximations or averages, thereby differentiating our paper from the existing literature on the environmental implications of solar generation and EV usage.  Within our dataset, 135 households own PV systems (see Appendix A for data trimming discussion).  Hourly generation data (in kWh) are recorded for over 95% of hourly intervals, where missing data result from data aggregation malfunctions and/or errors.  PV generation can vary with the amount of cloud cover and maintenance—which would not show up in simulated estimates of solar production such as the PVWatts calculator or EnergyPLAN models (as used in Connors et al. , 20046.  Zhai et al. , 2012).  Spiegel et al.  (2000) also use observed data of various projects installed throughout the US.  however, our model beneﬁts from having all panels of a similar age and installed in the same neighborhood, thus minimizing variation across weather patterns that may affect solar production.  Furthermore, because we utilize household consumption data rather than average regional consumption data (such as in Sivaraman and Keoleian, 2010), we are able to test for the existence of a solar rebound effect.  With the Pecan Street data, we can also explore the implications of a panel's orientation on environmental impacts.  Figs.  3 and 4 show how the panel's orientation affects its generation capacity in summer and winter respectively.  facing the panel west provides more generation later in the day, whereas a south-facing panel maximizes generation around 1 pm.  Notably, facing the panel south produces more generation during the winter than facing the panel west (see Section 5. 3. 1 for a deeper description of generation differences across panel orientation).  Within our dataset, 46 households have EVs that are primarily charged at home.  A subset of the EVs in our sample is plug-in hybrid vehicles (Chevy Volts), which use both gasoline and electricity.  Pecan Street has recorded details on how many trips the EV took, how many miles were driven, and on how many trips the Chevy Volts utilized gasoline.  This further differentiates our paper from the existing literature.  For example, Weiller (2011) utilized vehicle trip data from the National Household Transportation Survey (NHTS).  Though NHTS updated their data in 2009, the survey lacks data for EVs because few were in use during the time period, forcing Weiller to extrapolate information from gasolinefueled vehicle trips.  Other papers are required to make assumptions about vehicle miles traveled (Holland et al. , 2016) or avoid looking at miles travelled altogether (Huo et al. , 2015).  We use this subset of vehicles in the dataset to calculate the number of miles driven on gasoline, and vehicle usage is extrapolated to the remainder of the vehicles in the dataset.  For all households in our sample with EVs, we also know when they were charged, while most papers do not and instead utilize simulations (Sioshansi et al. , 2010.  Rangaraju et al. , 2015), estimate the differences in emissions based on hour of the day (Hadley and Tsvetkova, 2009.  Holland et al. , 2016), or simply do not look at how the emissions vary over the course of the day (Doucette and McCulloch, 2011.  Huo et al. , 2015).  Our household level data allow us to view the actual charging patterns of EV owners, rather than having to rely on simulations or representative descriptions of charging patterns.  In addition – similar to our PV analyses – availability of data for total household electricity consumption and grid electricity consumption enable us to ﬁnd that an income effect for EV ownership does not exist.  Furthermore, given that many of the households owning EVs also have PV, we are able to estimate whether the solar rebound effect is affected by EV ownership.  Some summary statistics can be found in Table 1.  3. 2.  Electric grid data.  Beyond Pecan Street's data, we estimate marginal CO2 emission and water consumption factors using data from the EPA's Air Market Program Database (AMPD). 7 Hourly load (MW) and CO2 emissions (short tons) data were retrieved for all generating units located in the ERCOT footprint within Texas for all hours in the study period.  Generator type (combined cycle, combustion turbine, and several variations of steam turbines), primary fuel type (coal or natural gas), and locational information was also retrieved for all generators. 8 The resulting dataset contains approximately 315 generating units representing 100 generating facilities. 9 Natural gas plants comprise the majority of these generators (87%) and contribute 51% of total GHG emissions in the region.  3. 3.  Other sources.  We also utilize data from two other sources.  First, data from US EIA (2011) and Argonne National Laboratory (2012) help derive the factor we use for converting gasoline usage to corresponding water consumption, as detailed in Appendix B.  Second, we utilize historical daily weather data and cloud coverage from Austin, TX for estimating the solar rebound equation in Section 4. 1.  These data come from Weather Underground (2016).  4.  Methodology.  We estimate the environmental impact (in terms of CO2 emissions and water consumption10) of household solar PV and EV adoption utilizing household demographic and hourly electricity consumption and generation data.  For PV, these beneﬁts come from avoiding grid electricity consumption.  For EVs, we estimate the net beneﬁts resulting from an increase in grid electricity consumption and a reduction in gasoline consumption.  For both PV and EVs, we account for the impact of PV and EV ownership on energy consumption and the time-varying emission and water consumption intensity of displaced grid electricity generation.  We estimate the hourly impact on grid CO2 emissions and water consumption caused by solar PV generation and EV charging by multiplying the household's hourly PV generation or EV charging by the grid's hourly marginal emission and water consumption factor, where t refs each hour over our sample period and i refs each household.  GridEmissionsi,t and GridWateri,t representhousehold's hourly amount of grid emissions and grid water either consumed from the EV charging or avoided from the PV Generation.  ElectricityUsei,t refers to the amount of electricity either consumed by the EV or generated by the PV in each hour.  and the Marginal Factors are the marginal emissions rates estimated in Section 4. 2.  For estimating the net environmental impact of EV usage, we also estimate the avoided emissions and water consumption resulting from the corresponding reduction of gasoline consumption.  The remainder of Section 4 describes the methodology for accounting for PV and EV ownership on electricity consumption, and calculating marginal CO2 emission and water consumption rates as well as avoided CO2 emissions and water consumption from reductions in gasoline consumption.  4. 1.  Solar rebound effect.  Eqs.  (1) and (2) assume that each kWh produced by the PV system displaces one kWh of grid electricity.  However, this assumption may not hold given the household's behavioral response to having a PV system and an EV.  Given that solar PV reduces the household's monthly utility bills, households might increase their total electricity consumption after installing solar PV such that one kWh of PV generation offsets less than one kWh of grid electricity.  This phenomenon has been referred to as the “solar rebound” effect, analogous to the effect observed with respect to energy efﬁciency (Morakinyo et al. , 2016) and improvements in vehicle fuel economy (Linn, 2016).  However, there has been little empirical research conducted on the rebound effect to date with respect to rooftop solar ownership and usage.  Paetz et al.  (2011) ﬁnd anecdotal evidence that customers increase consumption during moments of lots of sunshine, as they consider the electricity to be free, and Haas (1994) describes the theoretical basis for this shifting of consumption to midday times.  However, neither of these papers fully test this theory due to lack of sufﬁcient data.  Due to our highly disaggregated household demographic and energy data, we are able to estimate the existence and magnitude of a solar rebound effect by conducting the following random effects regression model where grid_electricityi,t is the total amount of grid electricity consumed by household i at time t.  generationi,t is the amount of PV generated by household i at time t.  EVi is an indicator variable for a household that has an electric vehicle that is regularly charged.  Xi is a vector of controls, including daily maximum temperature, household size, and home square footage11.  and εi,t is an i. i. d.  error term.  This regression allows us to test whether there is a one-to-one relationship between PV generation and grid consumption.  If there is no rebound effect, then we expect γ1 to equal −1, signifying that one kWh of solar PV generation perfectly offsets one kWh of grid electricity consumption.  Furthermore, we can test to see if there is an income effect associated with EV ownership.  An income effect would occur if having an electric vehicle causes the household to consume less (more) electricity for other non-charging purposes due to the tightening (loosening) of the budget constraint.  A tightening would occur if the need to charge the EV increases the electricity bill, essentially restricting the budget.  alternatively, a loosening would occur if the avoided gasoline payments shifts the budget constraint out.  Finally, the EV and generation interaction term allows us to test whether the solar rebound effect varies with EV ownership.  In order for us to be able to include the presence of an electric vehicle in our rebound regression, we are unable to include household ﬁxed effects in our primary regression.  Thus, we conduct some robustness checks, including a ﬁxed effect regression in order to test out the direct solar rebound effect.  The results of the regressions are presented in Table 2.  Consistent across all three regressions, we identify a rebound effect associated with solar generation of approximately 9% (the coefﬁcient on solar generation is statistically signiﬁcantly different from −1, with a p-val of 0).  Here we assume that the rebound effect occurs uniformly across all hours. 12 Interestingly, having an electric vehicle increases that effect by 1. 5%.  Thus, electric vehicle owners will have a slightly larger increase in grid consumption – as the household avoids having to purchase expensive gasoline, the household budget constraint is shifted out (even after accounting for charging costs), allowing for an increase in grid consumption.  However, the coefﬁcient on EV ownership, though statistically signiﬁcant, is not statistically different from the average EV consumption.  Thus, we do not ﬁnd an income effect related only to EV ownership.  rather, that effect comes through the interaction with solar.  Essentially, households that both own an EV and generate will increase their total consumption by 1. 5% (based on our preferred speciﬁcation) during hours when generation is greater than zero.  This amount is smaller under the standard OLS regression (column 3), but the results are qualitatively similar.  However, the coefficient on EV ownership, though statistically significant, is not statistically different from the average EV consumption.  Thus, we do not find an income effect related only to EV ownership.  rather, that effect comes through the interaction with solar.  Essentially, households that both own an EV and generate will increase their total consumption by 1. 5% (based on our preferred specification) during hours when generation is greater than zero.  This amount is smaller under the standard OLS regression (column 3), but the results are qualitatively similar.  Though we find evidence that a rebound effect exists for households that generate their own electricity, its magnitude is small.  Compared to most rebound effect estimates for other technologies (such as energy efficient appliances and vehicles), this rebound effect is on the lower end of the spectrum.  Gillingham et al.  (2016) find that most estimates for the rebound effect associated with appliances and vehicles are between 5 and 25%.  Hence, the direct environmental benefits of PV and EVs still remain quite large, evenwhen accounting for the rebound effect.  To account for the solar rebound effect,we adjust Eqs.  (1) and (2) by the calculated solar rebound factors, thereby shifting up or down hourly consumption by 8. 5 or 10% depending on whether the household owns an EV (thus, we assume that the rebound effect occurs uniformly across all hours).  We can then calculate the monthly and yearly avoided emissions and water consumption (See Section 5 for results).  Finally, we calculate the average avoided carbon emissions and water usage for a 1 kWPV array as well as for the average PV array in our sample, 5. 61 kW.  4. 2.  Time-varying grid CO2 emissions and water consumption intensity.  4. 2. 1.  Average marginal CO2 emission rates.  There are a number of methods in the literature for estimating marginal emission rates, ranging from complex system dispatch models to simpler merit ordering methods.  Dispatch models use a variety of inputs to simulate actual generator dispatch patterns.  These models may incorporate fuel prices, transmission constraints, and other factors to produce granular estimates of marginal emission rates.  Merit ordering uses historical or cost data to determine dispatch order.  Thismethod orders the generation units based on capacity factors or marginal costs and assumes units are dispatched first if they have higher capacity factors or lowermarginal costs.  finally, it identifies themarginal generator needed to fulfill demand based on this order.  Other approaches use linear regression of historical generation and emission data to estimate marginal emission rates (see for example Hawkes, 2010.  Siler-Evans et al. , 2012.  Zivin et al. , 2014).  Both Hawkes (2010) and Siler-Evans et al.  (2012) regress generator emissions data onto load data to estimate marginal emission rates for Great Britain and the eight regions of the North American Electric Reliability Corporation, respectively.  We adapt Hawks and Siler-Evans et al. 's methodology by regressing the hourly change in grid generator load onto the hourly change in CO2 emissions for generators using hourly generator load and CO2 emission data.  Siler-Evans et al.  regress the aggregate hourly change in load onto emissions for all generators within the region of interest.  we instead regress the sum of the absolute value of each individual generator's hourly change in load and emissions.  Our method accounts for generators that may be on the margin within a given hour but exhibit opposite changes in load due to intra-hour load changes and/or transmission constraints.  Utilizing aggregate hourly data without accounting for individual generator trends could erroneously exclude the inﬂuence of certain generators in the estimation of the average marginal emission rate during certain hours.  Similar to Hawks and Siler-Evans et al. , we also restrict the generators to those located within ERCOT.  Though this ignores electricity imports and exports from outside ERCOT, the amount of imported and exported electricity in ERCOT is very low (in 2015, net imports and exports averaged 0. 1% of total daily electricity consumption.  see ERCOT, 2015).  The ﬁrst difference of the grid generator load and CO2 emission vectors (i. e.  xt−xt−1 for t=2…n) is determined for each generator to create vectors of n−1 observations of the change in hourly generator load and CO2 emissions.  The absolute value of these differences are then summed by each hour to produce vectors for change in hourly generator load (Δloadt) and change in hourly emissions (Δemissionst) for all hours.  We regress the vector of hourly change in grid generator load onto the vector of hourly change in emissions to estimate average marginal emission rates. 13 The generalized speciﬁcation is shown in Eq.  (4).  To derive average marginal emissions rates for each hour of household data, we disaggregate the data into tranches according to total hourly grid generator load.  We sum grid generator load for each hour and segment observations into twenty quantile bins. 14 We then apply the linear regression model to each quantile bin to estimate an average marginal emission rate for each bin.  Finally, to derive hourly average marginal emission rates to apply to Eqs.  (1) and (2), we assign an average marginal emissions rate to each hour of our household dataset based on the grid generator load quantile bin of the given hour (β1,bin[t]).  Fig.  5 shows the estimated average marginal emissions rates by quantile bin for Fiscal Year 2014.  The marginal carbon intensity of the grid generally declines as total hourly grid generator load increases.  This is likely due to the marginal generator switching from coal-ﬁred generators to natural gas-ﬁred generators as more generators are dispatched to fulﬁll increasing demand.  Fig.  6 shows how average marginal emission rates vary across the hours of the day in summer and winter.  As load grows during the summer mid-day, more natural gas is on the margin, leading to lower marginal emissions rates during those hours relative to winter mid-day.  Thus, given the current grid composition, summer marginal emissions are highest during the evening hours of low demand.  Because the marginal emission rates are derived from data that excludes non-fossil fuel ﬁred generators and generators less than 25 MW regardless of fuel type, the model assumes that a fossil fuel ﬁred generator greater than 25 MW is operating on the margin at all times.  This is generally true as non-dispatchable generators like solar and wind do not respond to changing demand, and other non-fossil fuel generators such as hydroelectric and nuclear generators generally operate as base load generation due to very low marginal costs.  Additionally, deriving and assigning average marginal emission rates based on total hourly grid generator load quantile bins is utilized because the relative position in the generator dispatch order at any given time—as represented by the quantile bins—will more directly determine the marginal emission rate than other parameters such as overall system demand, time of day, or season.  While the observed marginal emission rates generally decline with increasing load, the analysis may not reﬂect an increase in marginal emission rates during the small number of hours of the highest demand when particularly inefﬁcient and dirty natural gas plants are dispatched to fulﬁll load.  Because the methodology is regression-based, it measures average marginal emissions for a relatively large block of hours (approximately 438 h per quantile bin).  Thus, it would not adequately capture the fact that during “critical peak” hours (i. e. , a number of small hours throughout the year where demand spikes very rapidly, such as in heat waves), very dirty and inefﬁcient natural gas plants may be dispatched to provide for this spike in demand.  Fig.  7 plots the average CO2 rates for generators depending on how many hours they operated during the study period.  As demonstrated in the ﬁgure below, generators that run only a few hours per year produce greater CO2 emissions. 15 However, due to the limited hours that these dirty generators run, the emissions associated with these plants will have only a small impact on the average marginal emissions rate calculated for the top 95% centile bin of demand.  thus, we ﬁnd that on average, high demand hours are associated with lower marginal emission rates.  4. 2. 2.  Average marginal water consumption rates.  To estimate average marginal water consumption rates, we derive weighted water consumption rates based on the proportion of various generator types operating on the margin in each hour.  We ﬁrst estimate the proportion of coal steam turbines, natural gas steam turbines, natural gas combustion turbines, and natural gas combined cycle power plants operating on the margin using a similar methodology as employed to estimate average marginal CO2 emission rates.  To do so, we calculate the change in total hourly grid generator load by generator type (Δloadg,t), where g represents generator type and t represents hour.  By generator type, we then regress the vector of hourly change in each combination's load onto the vector of total hourly change in load.  The generalized speciﬁcation is shown in Eq.  (5).  The coefficient θg,1 is interpreted as the average proportion of generator type g operating on the margin for the given set of data.  Similar to how we estimated average marginal CO2 emission rates, we apply the linear regression model to each grid generator load quantile bin to estimate an average generator type marginal proportion for each hour.  Finally, we assign average marginal proportions (θg, 1, bin[t]) for each generator type to each hour based on the quantile bin of the given hour of the given ﬁscal year.  Using water consumption rates reported by Scanlon et al.  (2013), we derive average marginal water consumption rates for each hour weighted by the average marginal generator type proportions.  Scanlon et al.  provide water consumption and withdrawal at a more detailed level than our data provide including water consumption rates by power plant cooling system (pond or tower).  However, our data do not specify cooling system type.  Thus, we calculate weighted average consumption and withdrawal for the overall technology type (coal, natural gas combined cycle, natural gas combustion turbine, and natural gas steam turbine) weighted by the 2011 net generation for that source in TX as shown in Table 3.  Importantly, natural gas combustion turbines consume no water, and therefore do not appear in the table below.  Given the numbers in Table 3, we calculate the marginal water consumption weighted by the generator technology was producing in that particular hour where t refers to the hour of the day, g refers to the generator type, Θt is the marginal water consumption at time t, WAWCg refers to the Weighted Average Water Consumption from the last column in Table 3, and θg,1,bin[t] refers to the marginal proportions as described earlier. 