 1.  Introduction The world has known for over a century an important economic development.  Industrial developments, the increase in the number of vehicles and domestic equipments have led to a signiﬁcant increase in energy demand.  Energy is an essential basis for social and economic development.  States must ensure adequate supply of energy for their citizens while ensuring the sustainability of that supply.  Energy supply is a permanent challenge for our societies, especially as the need for states continues to increase.  Overall, the SMCs are facing rapid population growth coupled with relatively low incomes, as well as an accelerated pace of urbanization, added to signiﬁcant needs of socio-economic development.  This is reﬂected in a growing demand for energy services and associated infrastructure.  Indeed, in all SMCs, energy demand is constantly increasing.  To meet their energy needs, the SMCs use about 95% of fossil fuels.  If the trend observed has continued for 30 years, energy consumption could increase by 65% between 2000 and 2025 and be 97% would be satisﬁed by fossil energies in 2025.  Such a scenario will have many consequences, such as.  increased energy dependency and insecurity, high energy bills (importing countries), reduced export proﬁts (exporting countries), vulnerability of the production and distribution system, high local air pollution and as well as climate change.  In the same context, the question of ﬁnancing goes far beyond that of mobilizing the ﬁnancial resources of international cooperation.  The ﬁnancial development can provide efﬁcient ﬁnancial service for foreign banking markets, and improve the access of both foreign and domestic ﬁrms to ﬁnancial goods and services (Dasgupta et al. , 2001.  Barth et al. , 2004.  Lee and Chang, 2008).  According to Karanﬁl (2008) and (2009), the causality between economic growth and energy consumption is not justiﬁed just by a simple bivariate model.  He suggested adding one of the ﬁnancial variables such as domestic credit to private sector, stock market capitalization or liquid liabilities into the model.  He also argued that interest rate and exchange rate can affect the energy consumption through energy prices.  Furthermore, Fung (2009) study found that an efﬁcient ﬁnancial system creates more products, and the inputs for these products increase the demand for energy.  Thus, ﬁnancial development is a factor which should be taken into account in energy consumption.  (See Fig.  1. ) Sadorsky (2011) pointed three effective channels of ﬁnancial development over energy consumption.  First, there is a direct effect.  When the ﬁnancial development improves, consumers can borrow easier and cheaper in order to buy durable goods which consume a lot of energy.  Secondly, improved ﬁnancial development helps businesses to access to ﬁnancial capital easily and less costly. 