
Crude oil is widely considered to be one of the most important
commodities affecting global economic growth.  Estimates indicate
that the oil and gas drilling sector makes up about three percent of
global GDP, and imports of petroleum products account for about
forty percent of U. S.  trade deﬁcits. 1 Movements in crude prices have
been shown to signiﬁcantly impact the world economy at various
levels, from family budgets to corporate earnings and to the national
economy (cf.  Eika and Magnussen, 2000.  Kilian, 2009).  According
to IMF, a 10% increase in oil prices results in a 0. 2% drop in global
GDP.  Therefore, when oil prices reached a record high $145/bbl in
2008, and then began to drop sharply beginning 2014 and reaching a
low $29/bbl in early 2016, this resulted in signiﬁcant revenue shortfalls and economic stress on many energy exporting nations such
as Russia and Saudi Arabia.  On the other hand, the availability of
cheaper oil has been hailed as a potent economic stimulus to many
net oil importer countries such as China and India, while keeping
inﬂation under check. 
Given the central role of oil in the economy there is a great deal of
attention in the literature in forecasting crude prices.  According to a
recent Wall Street Journal article, “forecasting is always an inexact art,
particularly for oil, a global industry with wildly uneven data. . . it is a
crucial one, underpinning companies’ decisions about when to drill
and how much to hedge” and importantly, “market watchers get this
so wrong. ”
One of the most watched oil price forecast is from the US
Energy Information Administration (EIA), which formally constructs
monthly and quarterly forecasts of the price of crude oil at horizons up to two years. 3 Although EIA’s short-term forecasts help
inform corporate investment and guide resource deployment decisions, their forecasts are hard to replicate and sometimes not very
accurate.  The diﬃculty for replication is due to the lack of available detail information about the forecasting methodology.  There are
many examples of forecasting inaccuracy.  For instance, EIA reported
a price projection of about $28/bbl in 2010, yet the actual average
price for oil traded on the New York Mercantile Exchange in 2010
was $79. 61/bbl.  Ironically, right before the sharp fall of oil prices in
the middle of 2014, EIA raised its 2014 forecast on WTI crude-oil
prices to nearly $96/bbl. 4 In a letter defending the veracity of EIA
reports, Howard Gruenspecht, deputy administrator of the EIA, commented that, “EIA does not characterize any of its long run projection
scenarios as a forecast. ”5
Futures-based forecasts provide a market-based expectation of
oil prices.  Although in principle the futures market should be a good
predictor of future spot prices, this is not supported by empirical
evidence.  Alquist and Kilian (2010) document that oil futures prices
tend to be less accurate in the mean-squared prediction error sense
than a simple no-change forecast (which posit that oil prices will be
the same tomorrow as they are today). 
Various econometric approaches have been proposed to forecast oil prices.  For example, in an attempt to improve forecasting
performance, Pindyck (1999) adds a mean reversion term to a deterministic linear trend model.  Radchenko (2005) applies a shifting
trend model with an autoregressive process in error terms instead of
the white noise process.  Still others apply ARIMA models to forecast
the monthly WTI crude oil prices.  However, such forecasting methods have not been particularly successful when compared with the
naive no-change forecast (see Hamilton, 2009.  Alquist and Kilian,
2010.  Alquist Name, 2013).  Overall, conclusions from prior studies
suggest that changes in oil prices are inherently unpredictable and
diﬃcult to model, and as a result the current price of oil may be the
best available forecast of future prices. 
Given the challenges faced by past forecasting approaches it
would be important to understand why oil prices are so hard to
predict.  The literature provides interesting insights (cf.  Hamilton,
2009).  Crude oil prices are driven by a large set of dynamic and
multi-dimensional factors including physical markets factors, ﬁnancial markets factors and trading factors that are themselves often
hard to predict, and may also have counteracting effects.  Perfect foresight is also hindered due to unexpected demand shifts in the global
economy, supply disruptions, changes in oil production and inventory demand, geopolitical events, among other factors.  These types
of events create uncertainty about future supply or demand, which
can lead to higher volatility in prices.  Of course, accidental events
such as reﬁnery outages or pipeline problems adds to the unpredictability.  Therefore, in accounting for the history of past oil supply
and demand shocks emanating from various events, market participants are always assessing the possibility of future events and their
potential impact on prices.  In addition to the size and duration of a
potential disruption, agents also consider the current stock levels and
the ability of producers to offset a potential supply/demand shock. 
Furthermore, the forward-looking behavior of speculators and the
quantiﬁcation of speculative oil demand shocks can, at times, invalidate standard econometric models if speculators respond to information not available to the econometrician attempting to disentangle
demand and supply shocks based on historical data (Kilian and Lee,
2014).  Confounding this challenge, it is also diﬃcult to relate changes
in real oil prices to macroeconomic outcomes due to the presence of
reverse causality from macro aggregates to oil prices (see Barsky and
Kilian, 2002.  Kilian, 2009.  Chatrath Name, 2016). 
These challenges not withstanding, forecasting efforts have not
entirely been in vain.  Researchers report success by expanding the
range of explanatory factors and integrating them into their models. 
Dees Name (2007) model oil prices as a function of oil inventories and demand, OPEC production, producer quotas and production
capacity.  Ewing and Thompson (2007) focus on the relationship
between macroeconomic variables and crude oil prices, and ﬁnd
oil prices to be procyclical - i. e. , leading consumer prices but lagging industrial production activities.  Kaufmann Name (2008) study
the potential effect of reﬁnery utilization rate on crude oil prices
and show that lower reﬁnery rates correspond with higher crude
oil prices.  In adding to this mix, the role of speculation and forward
looking behavior in crude oil prices has been carefully examined by
various authors.  Sari Name (2011) use the VIX index as a proxy for
global risk and ﬁnd that oil prices are inﬂuenced by related commodities.  Coleman (2012) ﬁnds positive relationships between crude
oil prices and proxies for speculative and terrorist activities while
controlling for fundamental and market parameters.  More recently,
Miao Name (forthcoming) report how crude oil inventory announcements impact oil futures and options prices.  There is also some
evidence that forecasting models based on economic fundamentals
work better at shorter horizons (up to 3 months).  whereas, models
based on the crack spread work better at longer horizons (between
12 and 24 months).  Baumeister and Kilian (2015) present a combination approach with six different models that marginally improves the
forecasting performance in comparison to the no-change forecast. 
This paper contributes to the literature by using a relatively
new methodology that optimally selects among various factors that
underlie crude oil price movements.  In aiding our investigation, we
consider a wide range of potential explanatory factors that are popularly associated with oil prices.  Our analysis employs weekly data,
and for expository purposes classiﬁes variables along six broad factor
dimensions.  supply, demand, ﬁnancial market, commodities market,
speculative, and political factors. 