
Although not required, most large companies now issue reports on corporate social responsibility (CSR) performance. 1
This voluntary disclosure of CSR activities is likely driven at least in part by a desire to communicate CSR information to
investors.  If CSR activities affect the company’s future earnings and cash ﬂows, investors will ﬁnd related disclosures useful
for their valuation decisions.  However, it is possible that investors react to CSR disclosures for another reason as well.  If
investors value the societal beneﬁts associated with CSR activities, they may respond positively to disclosures that the
company has engaged in such activities independent of how they expect the activities to affect future earnings and cash
ﬂows.  We conduct an experiment to test whether investors respond to managers’ disclosure of their CSR investment
independent of the effect on the company’s future cash ﬂows.  In addition, we examine whether managers anticipate
investors’ response when making their disclosure decisions.  Finally, we examine whether managers’ CSR investment
decisions are driven only by investors’ expected response or also by their preferences for the societal beneﬁts associated
with their CSR investments. 
Understanding how investors’ respond to CSR disclosure is important because this can help explain managers’ voluntary
CSR disclosure practices.  For example, knowing that investors value the societal beneﬁts of CSR activities would help explain
why managers’ CSR disclosures tend to focus on such beneﬁts.  Also, knowing whether investors’ reaction to CSR disclosures
goes beyond the expected effect of CSR activities on the company’s future cash ﬂows could help explain the rapid growth in
Socially Responsible Investment (SRI) funds (Social Investment Forum Foundation, 2012).  More broadly, a more complete
understanding of investors’ reaction to CSR disclosure can inform standard setters who are considering whether CSR disclosures should be required, what information should be disclosed, and whether such disclosures should be audited. 2
Finally, understanding why managers invest in CSR activities helps inform the ongoing debate regarding whether all CSR
activities must be shareholder value maximizing (Friedman, 1970; Karnani, 2010) or whether some such activities sacriﬁce
proﬁts in the social interest (Benabou and Tirole, 2010; Reinhart Name, 2008; Kolstad, 2007). 
We examine a particular type of CSR activity, green investment to reduce carbon emissions, in an experimental market
setting.  There are several critical features of our setting that allow us to isolate the effects necessary to answer our research
questions. 