
Within the 1997 United Nations Watercourses Convention it is stated
that riparian states “may, where necessary, consider” harmonizing their
existing agreements with the principles of the convention, thus leaving
the decision whether or not to reevaluate past agreements essentially
up to riparian states (UN, 2014.  Article 3).  Yet, scholars have emphasized
that reevaluation of past agreements is rather a necessity due to pressing
economic and development needs, as well as new international agendas
(Wegerich and Olsson, 2010.  Brooks Name, 2013.  Salman, 2014.  Wouters,
2014).  Similarly, calls for reevaluation of water-sharing agreements have
been voiced in connection with growing environmental concerns and
climate change (Sanchez and Roberts, 2014.  World Economic Forum,
2015).  While there are large-scale studies on how treaties could be designed for coping best with new challenges and what mechanisms are
utilized within agreements to address changes (e. g. , Fischhendler,
2004.  Stefano Name, 2010.  Drieschova Name, 2011.  De Bruyne and
Fischhendler, 2013), there have been only a few studies systematically
showing changes in agreements due to paths taken (Pak Name, 2014. 
Soliev Name, 2015).  Adapting from the conﬂict and cooperation
continuum approach on international basins (Yoffe Name, 2003.  Zeitoun
and Mirumachi, 2008.  Sadoff and Grey, 2005), in this article contrasting
degrees of change in formal and de facto riparian water allocation are
systematically analyzed within multiple transboundary sub-basins in
the Ferghana Valley of Central Asia.  The purpose of the analysis is to identify key sources of path dependency determining various degrees of resistance to reallocation and understand how long-term dynamics
between (a) drivers of pressure and (b) sources of path dependency
can lead to various outcomes in riparian water allocation. 
Therefore, the focus is not on one agreement, but on the history of
agreements in three case studies selected using the “most similar” comparative method (Lijphart, 1971.  George and Bennett, 2005).  There is no
longitudinal comparative study with an in-depth qualitative analysis
such as this to be found in the current literature.  as Cox (2016.  230) explains, “obtaining high-quality longitudinal data relevant to the study of
human-environment interactions is frequently prohibitively expensive. ” The Ferghana Valley, shared by Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan, presents an opportunity to apply such an approach, as it has a long
history of changing water agreements on a large number of small
transboundary tributaries with recent research documenting data of
great detail and depth (e. g. , Abdullaev Name, 2009.  Abdullaev and
Rakhmatullaev, 2016.  Pak Name, 2014.  Pak and Wegerich, 2014. 
Platonov Name, 2014.  SIC ICWC, 2011.  Soliev Name, 2015.  Stucker Name,
2012.  Wegerich Name, 2015.  Wegerich Name, 2016).  The early
agreements on these transboundary basins go back to the 1940s.  Although historically these small tributaries were in the same country,
the Soviet Union, due to the differences in institutional conditions related to individual tributaries, each of them has its own history of watersharing agreements.  We were particularly interested in cases where
sources of path dependency provided strong, moderate, and weak resistance to reallocate over a long period of time to understand how, under
conditions with similar pressure, established institutional arrangements
can resist reform in various ways.  To understand the differences in these
established institutional arrangements and their corresponding effects,
dynamics in allocation decisions, protocols of meetings where watersharing agreements were reached, historical correspondence, reports
on implementation, wider government documents such as laws,
decrees, and basin management schemes, as well as broader literature
reﬂecting the nature of riparian relationship in the Ferghana Valley
and Central Asia (e. g. , Bichsel, 2011.  Bucknall Name, 2003.  Djanibekov
Name, 2016.  Dukhovny and de Shutter, 2011.  FAO, 2013.  Libert Name,
2008.  O'Hara, 2000.  Sehring, 2009) were iteratively studied using an
in-depth qualitative content analysis veriﬁed with information from
key informants in the province water management departments. 
The article continues with the theoretical framework explaining the
concept and different degrees of path dependency in riparian water allocation.  Then materials and methods are presented, followed by results of
analysis and then discussion of how sources of path dependency can lead
to various outcomes.  Finally, discussion is extended to a broader signiﬁcance of the study results for the scholarship on transboundary water
management from an institutional perspective, before drawing main
conclusions in the ﬁnal section. 
2.  Path Dependency in Riparian Water Allocation. 
Path dependency has been emerging as an important concept
explaining the possibility of and the ways that a change can take place
in allocation institutions (Heinmiller, 2009.  Theesfeld and MacKinnon,
2014).  North (1990, 1994) has argued that while continuously changing
circumstances will put pressure on existing institutions and require
adoption of new solutions, historically formed path dependency in
these institutions will resist or limit the scope of changes.  More generally,
in economic literature, path dependency is explained by increasing
returns from staying on the taken path (Arthur, 1994) where sources
such as (i) high setup (and sunk) costs, (ii) learning effects, (iii) coordination effects, and (iv) adaptive expectations provide the existing institutions with so-called “positive feedback” (see for example Weber de
Morais Name, 2015 for a summary).  In addition, there are sources of
non-increasing returns that in certain combinations with signiﬁcant
ﬁxed (sunk) costs might be sufﬁcient to create path dependency or
lock-in (Arrow, 2000.  Marshall, 2005).  Among these, Kay (2005)
highlighted (i) vested interests of existing actors, (ii) network effects
from administrative capacities, and (iii) existence of formal and informal
contracts with individuals. 
Later, North (2003) reiterated that to be able to understand how a
change takes place in a complex environment and therefore to be able
to bring about successful development reforms, economists need to go
well beyond application of neoclassical concepts such as prices and markets and recognize that our choices are at all times path dependent at
least to some degree.  Within this study, path dependency is explored
as a concept that is seen as especially helpful to understand the often–
complex cross-disciplinary problems of transboundary water management.  The concept can powerfully address both the adaptability aspect
of transboundary water management, which is crucial for sustainable
management of natural resources in large-scale socio-ecological systems,
as well as the stability aspect, which is particularly important from the
perspective of sustaining constructive international relations.  Sjöstedt
(2015.  2) states that “[p]ath dependence is often used to conceptualize
stability rather than change and gives an underlying logic to why particular paths can be extraordinarily difﬁcult to reverse. ” However, he goes
on to emphasize that “the concept is in fact dynamic rather than static
in character” (Sjöstedt, 2015.  2).  Further, as Cox (2016.  215) summarizes, in contrast to classical economic perspectives “[t]he perspective
of path dependence is likely to value adaptability more than efﬁciency
as a primary policy goal, or at least to value them in equal measure. ”
Yet, this highly cross-disciplinary concept is far from its theoretical saturation and, as Cox (2016.  230) concedes, further research is needed to
understand “what institutional conditions encourage lock-in or adaptability. ” In particular, he (ibid. ) stresses the need for “more data, speciﬁcally longitudinal and panel data to document patterns over time. ” The
three-fold theoretical question of the present study is therefore.  (1)
How to strike an appropriate balance between stability and adaptability
or “between permanence and change,” as Pahl-Wostl (2009.  358) puts
it.  (2) What are the institutional conditions affecting such a balance. 
(3) What can we learn from a longitudinal study in transboundary
water management. 
Until recently, the broader literature on the continuous need for
water reallocation in river basins has largely lacked a longitudinal perspective.  For example, Ohlsson and Turton (1999), and similarly Molle
(2003), argued that growing pressure on water resources would lead
to corresponding adaptation—pushing toward ﬁrst, “more water”, then
“more use per drop” and ﬁnally, “more value per drop”—resulting in similar patterns or trajectories of development in river basins.  While their
studies focused on forecasting continuously increasing water stress on
the one hand and explaining how societies should adapt in order to
cope with the scarcity on the other hand, possible resistance resulting
from existing institutional arrangements in response to new reforms
has remained unexplored.  Likewise, in a more recent work, Molle Name
(2010.  575) explain “how to best share scarce water supplies” from
state, user, or market perspectives.  They stress the increasing economic
importance of reallocations.  However, the question of what a reallocation could mean for existing actors and allocation institutions is not covered.  Molle and Berkhoff (2009.  6) show in the reallocation of water
resources from agriculture to cities that “cities select options that go
along the ‘path of least resistance’, whereby economic, social and political
costs are considered in conjunction. ”
In addition to water stress, the nature of the established relationship
between riparian states is one of the most commonly identiﬁed factors
when it comes to transboundary water allocation (e. g. , Fischhendler,
2004.  Zeitoun and Warner, 2006.  Mirumachi and Alan, 2007).  Trust,
power asymmetry, and riparian position, as well as issue linkages are
among the determinants shaping the relationship between riparian
parties in a transboundary setting.  Nevertheless, to this day, there is
hardly any study speciﬁcally focusing on the impact of path dependency
on the dynamics in transboundary water allocations in a systematic way,
with scholars who applied the concept to water reforms being focused
mostly on federal level transboundary cases or path dependencies within
one national jurisdiction (e. g. , Heinmiller, 2009.  Libecap, 2011.  Marshall,
2005, 2013.  McCann, 2013.  Theesfeld and MacKinnon, 2014.  Garrick,
2015.  Cox, 2016.  Marshall and Alexandra, 2016).  Findings of these studies generally support the argument that reforms are increasingly difﬁcult
with the presence of established allocation institutions.  In this respect, a
brief overview by Hensengerth Name (2012.  27) challenges the often–
replicated contrasting assumption of Wolf (2004) that “… in river basins
with a history of cooperation and institutions to build on, cooperation in
new areas can be achieved more easily than in basins where no institutions exist, since existing mechanisms can be used to exchange information and build mutual conﬁdence, which reduces transaction costs. ”
Instead, Hensengerth Name (2012) point to a number of cases where conﬂicts emerged despite established cooperation. 
The question is then whether it is possible to distinguish among different degrees of path dependency to explain this varying effect of
established institutions more holistically.  Theesfeld and MacKinnon
(2014) suggest that there is a continuum from no or little change to fundamental or rapid change.  Studying transformations in water allocation
in the US West, they argue that path dependence can result in
incremental changes, where small changes occur without threatening
the survival of the entire system.  Within incremental changes,
Theesfeld and MacKinnon (2014.  110) stressed the importance of
distinguishing between “successful,” which accommodate new needs,
and inadequate (“too little too late”) changes, which ultimately allow accumulated “pressure of unmet needs to push the system over threshold
and collapse. ” It is in line with what North (1990) described as adaptive
efﬁciency.  incremental change might or might not be efﬁcient in terms of
responding to new challenges (see also Marshall, 2005).  To sharpen the
focus further, it is proposed here to distinguish among three continua. 