 Introduction Corporate takeovers have lon g been considered a governance mechanism that can help reduce management entrenchment and improve productive efficiency of management (e. g. , Grossman and Hart, 1980.  Fama, 1980.  Jensen and Ruback, 1983.  Scharfstein, 1988, Jensen, 1993). 1 Consequently, firms that have antitakeover provisions (henceforth ATPs) in place are often considered to be relatively inefficient.  Consistent with the perceived inefficiency of ATPs, a stream of research finds that high ATP firms have lower accounting performance, lower Tobin's Q, and lower reinvestment rates, relative to low ATP firms (e. g. , Gompers, Ishii and Metrick, 2003.  Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2003.  Bebchuk and Cohen, 2005.  Bebchuk, Cohen and Ferrell, 2009.  Cohen and Wang, 2013).  However, despite negative portrayals in much of the archival research and popular opinion, ATPs remain prevalent among the S&P 500 companies, with about 60% of these firms having staggered boards and poison pills in place.  These provisions are also common in the charters of initial public offerings (Daines, 2001.  Daines and Klausner, 2001).  If ATPs unambiguously lead to inefficiencies, the question arises as to why market forces have not eliminated their use over time.  In this paper we attempt to address this disconnect by exploring the potential role of ATPs in long-term value creation.  We identify a set of firms focused on long-term growth (innovative firms) that are most likely to benefit from ATPs and use an exogenous event to isolate the benefit. 2 We suggest that while the threat of corporate takeovers can curb managerial inefficiencies, it can also create incentives for myopic behavior by managers.  Fear of takeover and the associated employment risk may cause managers to take actions that are focused on maximizing short-term price rather than long-term value.  Jensen (2005) states that “when numbers are manipulated to tell the market what they want to hear … and when real operating decisions that would maximize value are compromised to meet market expectations, real long-term value is being destroyed. ”.  Stein (1988) argues that ATPs can help managers pursue long-term goals more effectively by insulating them from short-term market pressures.  The reasoning is that capital market pressures, including the threat of takeovers and the associated employment risk, can cause management to behave myopically, shun projects that may carry a higher risk of early failures, and focus on maximizing short-term price (Holmstrom, 1989).  Manso (2011) proposes a similar argument for managerial protection as a means of encouraging innovation.  Rather than taking a one-size-fits-all view of ATPs and estimating their average effect on all firms, we explore a setting where such provisions can be beneficial to investors. 3 We use a number of alternative designs to explore the effect of anti-takeover protection on innovative and non-innovative firms.  Our primary research design is to explore the effects of a state law change in Delaware that significantly increased the takeover costs of firms incorporated there.  Bebchuk and Cohen (2005), Low (2009), and Atanassov (2013) discuss how the implementation of state law change in Delaware in 1995 made it easier for firms to use certain takeover defenses such as poison pills to block hostile takeovers.  We examine the effect of this exogenous event on a firm's Tobin's Q.  Using a difference-in-difference approach, we examine the effect of the regime change on innovative firms incorporated in Delaware and compare it to the effect on other firms.  We find that after the change in state law, Delaware-based innovative firms enjoyed a significant improvement in their Tobin's Q compared to both Delaware-based non-innovative firms and non-Delaware-based innovative firms.  Given that the state law change was particularly relevant to firms with poison pills and staggered boards in place, we explore whether its effect is stronger for firms with above-average protection.  Using data obtained from the Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC), we partition the sample into protected and unprotected firms using three alternative measures of takeover protection.  presence or absence of poison pills (PPILL), presence or absence of staggered boards (SB) and above/below median value of the entrenchment index (EINDEX) proposed by Bebchuk et al.  (2009). 4 Using these three measures, we compare the effects of the Delaware law change for protected and innovative (PI) firms relative to the other groups.  We find that Delaware-based PI firms experience a statistically and economically significant improvement in their Tobin's Q subsequent to the state law change.  This improvement is greater than those experienced by all other Delawarebased firms, including the unprotected and innovative (UPI) firms and the protected and non-innovative (PNI) firms.  We perform additional analyses using an event study design around the dates on which the court rulings were announced.  The first date is January 11, 1995 when the Supreme Court of Delaware allowed Unitrin Inc.  to use both a poison pill and share repurchases to fend off a hostile takeover bid from American General Corp.  The second is December 4 1995, when the U. S.  District Court for the District of Delaware denied Moore Corp.  Ltd. ’s motion against the use of poison pills as an antitakeover mechanism by Wallace Computer Services Inc.  Using these two dates as our focal points, we examine 2-day and 4-day cumulative abnormal returns subsequent to the ruling dates for PI and UPI firms.  The results show that PI firms experience greater cumulative abnormal returns subsequent to the rulings than UPI firms do, and these results are statistically significant for PPILL- and EINDEX-based measures of protection.  In order to rule out the alternative explanation that PI firms outperform UPI firms in general and not just on the state law change dates, we bootstrap the empirical distribution of the difference between cumulative abnormal returns of PI and UPI firms around other dates.  Our results do not support the alternative hypothesis.  Overall, the results of our tests based on the state law change events are consistent with the idea that takeover protection can benefit a set of firms, and that markets seem to understand this benefit.  Therefore, while some firm managers can certainly use takeover protection to reap private benefits, others can use the protection to maximize long-term goals of shareholders more effectively.  We conduct additional analyses to compare Tobin's Q of PI and UPI firms in a cross-sectional setting.  Prior to this comparison, however, we employ a propensity score matching sample methodology to pair PI firms with UPI firms based on firm characteristics.  This helps to reduce the likelihood that the results of a cross-sectional analysis are driven by other omitted factors.  We find that PI firms’ Tobin's Q exceeds that of the UPI firms by an economically and statistically significant level.  This finding further supports our primary finding that ATPs can be beneficial to firms with a long-term focus.  Our results so far provide evidence that PI firms outperform UPI firms.  We attempt to identify empirical evidence on a possible mechanism for this.  Stein (1988) suggests that protected firms would be less susceptible to short-term market pressures, so we explore whether PI firms are less likely than UPI firms to engage in harmful real earnings management when faced with the pressure to meet or beat analyst forecasts.  Using an aggregate measure of real earnings management along the lines of Roychoudhury (2006) and Cohen et al.  (2015), we find that PI firms are less likely than UPI firms to engage in value-destroying activities, such as cutting investment in R&D and advertising expenditures, or boosting profit through overproduction, in order to meet or narrowly beat analysts’ earnings expectations.  Our paper contributes to the existing research in several important ways.  First, we provide empirical evidence that some firms use takeover protection to enhance performance and that stock market participants understand this benefit and price these firms accordingly.  This is in contrast to much of the earlier research that explores the average effects of ATPs on all firms and documents a negative association between ATPs and firm performance.  The finding that ATPs are beneficial for a group of innovative firms helps explain the persistence of these provisions and provides an explanation for the puzzling finding that many IPO firms, including ones backed by venture capitalists, either have ATPs in place at the time of the IPO or institute them soon thereafter. 5 Second, while much of the prior work linking ATPs to firm performance uses either a crosssectional research design or examines an endogenous event (such as management's decision to de-stagger the board), we use the exogenous event of state law change in Delaware to examine how firm performance is affected by innovation and pre-existing ATPs.  This setting allows us to address many of the endogeneity concerns that plague the other studies and provides us with a richer setting to tease out the effect of takeover protection. 