
Private enforcement via shareholder litigation is important to investor protection and stock market development
(La Porta Name, 2006).  Prior literature suggests that cross-country variation in shareholder litigation threat affects the cost of
equity (Hail and Leuz, 2009; Khurana and Raman, 2004).  However, there is relatively scant evidence on how firm-level
mechanisms affect the disciplining role of shareholder litigation and therefore the cost of equity.  This research question is
important as the cost of equity is a summary measure of how investors perceive the risk and return tradeoff of investing in a
firm (Francis Name, 2004).  In addition, the cost of equity plays a key role in corporate financing and capital budgeting
decisions.  In this study, we examine how directors' and officers' liability insurance (D&O insurance) affects a firm’s cost ofD&O insurance is a policy purchased by a firm to cover defense cost and potential damage award when its directors and
officers (D&Os) are sued.  By effectively shielding D&Os from bearing personal financial liabilities, D&O insurance reduces the
disciplining effect of shareholder litigation (Baker and Griffith, 2010).  We hypothesize that D&O insurance increases a firm’s
cost of equity via two important channels.  First, as shareholder litigation encourages managers to increase transparency
(Ball, 2001), D&O insurance can result in poor financial reporting and disclosure quality, leading to a higher cost of equity
(Leuz and Wysocki, 2008).  Second, as D&O insurance limits the expected legal liabilities associated with bad outcomes of
D&O decisions, it encourages risk-taking (Baker and Griffith, 2010; Core, 1997).  To the extent that risk-taking results in a
higher exposure to market risks, the cost of equity is higher. 
Using a large manually collected dataset on D&O insurance from Canada, we find that D&O insurance coverage is
positively associated with the ex ante cost of equity implied in stock prices and analyst forecasts.  This association is robust to
firm fixed effects regression and alternative cost of equity measures.  It is also economically significant.  Based on our baseline
model, an increase in D&O insurance coverage by one standard deviation is associated with an increase in the cost of equity
of about 7% of the sample mean. 
The positive association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity can be driven by endogeneity as D&O insurance
purchase is a firm’s choice.  It can be the case that high risks lead to both high D&O insurance coverage and a high cost of
equity.  We conduct extensive tests to mitigate this concern.  First, we control for economic determinants of liability coverage
and corporate governance quality (Chen Name, 2011; Core, 1997, 2000).  We continue to find a positive association between
D&O insurance and the cost of equity.  Second, we conduct a lead-lag change analysis.  If it is risk, which is already known by
investors and manifested in the cost of equity, determines a firm’s decision to purchase D&O insurance, then a change in the
cost of equity should precede a change in D&O insurance.  In contrast, our hypothesis predicts that a change in the cost of
equity follows a change in D&O insurance coverage.  We find that a change in the cost of equity follows, but not precedes, a
change in D&O insurance coverage. 
Next, we examine the market reaction to the release of proxy circulars that contain D&O insurance information.  A shortterm market event study is less likely to suffer from the omitted correlated variable bias.  If investors charge a high cost of
equity for firms with a high level of D&O insurance coverage, then they would react negatively to the disclosure of an
increase in D&O insurance.  Our finding is consistent with this prediction. 
It is also possible that the D&O insurance purchase decision is based on D&Os' private information that is learnt by
investors subsequently (the risk anticipation argument). 1 If this is the case, we can still observe that a change in the cost of
equity follows, but not precedes, a change in D&O insurance coverage.  In addition, the disclosure of an increase in D&O
insurance can reveal D&Os' private information on an increase in risk and therefore lead to a negative market reaction. 
While the risk anticipation argument and our hypothesis are not mutually exclusive as a change in D&O insurance can reveal
both D&Os' private information and an expected change in D&Os' behavior, empirically distinguishing them is difficult as
D&Os' private information is not directly observable.  Nevertheless, we conduct several tests to address this concern.  First,
we control for an ex ante measure of litigation risk developed by Kim and Skinner (2012) and continue to find a positive
association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity.  Second, we test a cross-sectional prediction of the risk
anticipation argument.  If the association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity is driven by D&Os' private
information, then it should be more pronounced when D&Os have more private information.  Following Chen Name (2007),
we develop proxies for D&Os' private information based on earnings surprises and CEOs' insider trading activities.  We do
not find a more pronounced association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity for firms with D&Os having more
private information. 
Ideally, to clearly distinguish the risk anticipation argument from our hypothesis, one needs to identify a change in D&O
insurance not driven by D&Os' private information.  However, we are not aware of decent instrumental variables that are
capable of providing such identification.  As an alternative, we conduct a test of the effect of an exogenous reduction in D&Os'
personal legal liabilities on the cost of equity.  Nevada swiftly changed its corporate law in 2001 in order to attract more firm
incorporations.  Before the change, Nevada’s corporate law imposed similar fiduciary duties on D&Os as those under the
Delaware corporate law.  After the law change, D&Os are only liable if their behaviors involve both a breach of the duty of
loyalty and an intentional fraud (or a knowing violation of the law).  This implies that D&Os are no longer liable for a breach
of the duty of care (Barzuza, 2012).  We argue that this law change has a similar effect on reducing D&Os' personal legal
liabilities as an increase in D&O insurance coverage.  As the legislation process was very short, it is unlikely that firms could
anticipate the law change and quickly reincorporate into Nevada.  Thus, this change in D&Os' legal liabilities is exogenous. 
Using a difference-in-differences analysis, we find that the change in the cost of equity after this law change is
significantly higher for Nevada-incorporated firms than that for a sample of non-Nevada-incorporated firms matched on
industry, firm size, and the average cost of equity before the law change.  We observe a similar result when focusing on
Nevada-incorporated firms that mainly operate outside Nevada.  Thus, this result cannot be attributed to changes in
macroeconomic conditions in Nevada that coincided with the law change.  Taken together, although it is difficult to
completely rule out the risk anticipation argument, the positive association between D&O insurance and the cost of equity
does not appear to be entirely driven by D&Os' private information. 
Finally, we conduct several tests to better understand the channels through which D&O insurance increases the cost of
equity.  We find that D&O insurance is positively associated with the absolute value of performance-adjusted discretionary
accruals (Kothari Name, 2005), bid-ask spread, Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity measure, analysts' earnings forecast error, and the
dispersion of analysts' earnings forecasts.  This result is consistent with D&O insurance reducing financial reporting and
disclosure quality, increasing stock illiquidity and investors' estimation risk.  We also find that D&O insurance is positively
associated with the exposure to market risk, consistent with D&O insurance leading to more risk-taking. 
It is possible that firms purchase D&O insurance to optimally motivate D&Os to take more risks that benefit shareholders. 
If this is the case, D&O insurance can be positively associated with the cost of equity while at the same time be positively
associated with future operating performance.  We do not find a significantly positive association between D&O insurance
and future operating performance measured by industry-adjusted return on assets.  The association, if any, is negative.  These
results, combined with a negative market reaction to the announcement of an increase in D&O insurance, suggest that a
high risk associated with high D&O insurance coverage is more likely due to D&Os' reduced vigilance or diligence than due
to their optimal risk-taking activities which benefit shareholders. 2
We make two important contributions to the literature.  First, prior studies show that country-level variation in private
enforcement via shareholder litigation plays a pivotal role in determining a firm’s cost of equity (Hail and Leuz, 2009;
Khurana and Raman, 2004).  We show that even in common-law countries with stronger legal protection of investors, D&O
insurance, a firm-level mechanism that reduces the deterrence effect of private litigation, increases the cost of equity.  This
evidence suggests that investors factor D&O insurance information in their investment decisions.  Since D&O insurance is
widespread in North America and many other countries, our results have an important policy implication that supports
mandating the disclosure of D&O insurance (Baker and Griffith, 2010).  In addition, as D&O insurance weakens the
disciplining role of shareholder litigation, we add to the research linking corporate governance with a firm’s cost of equity
(Ashbaugh-Skaife Name, 2005; Chen Name, 2011). 
Second, we contribute to the research on the consequences of D&O insurance.  While prior studies have examined the
economic determinants of D&O insurance purchases and premium (Boyer, 2005; Chalmers Name, 2002; Core, 1997;
O’Sullivan, 1997; Zou Name, 2008 Gillan and Panasian, 2014; Boyer and Stern, 2015) and the effect of D&O insurance on
accounting restatements (Kim, 2006; Lin Name, 2013), reporting conservatism (Chung and Wynn, 2008), management
forecasts (Cao and Narayanamoorthy, 2011; Wynn, 2008), investment decisions (Lin Name, 2011) and loan financing (Lin Name, 2013), we document how D&O insurance affects the cost of equity.  Our evidence, together with these prior studies and
anecdotal criticisms (e. g. , of Warren Buffett), point to a cost of D&O insurance. 
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows.  Section 2 discusses background of D&O insurance and develops our hypothesis. 
Section 3 describes data and research design.  Section 4 presents main empirical results.  Section 5 conducts robustness tests
dealing with the potential endogeneity of D&O insurance.  Section 6 provides evidence on channels through which D&O
insurance affects the cost of equity.  Section 7 concludes. 
2. Institutional background and hypothesis development. 
2. 1.  Institutional background. 
Shareholders in Canada can sue firms and their D&Os for misrepresentations in securities issuance (primary market
liability suits) and in continuous disclosures that do not involve securities issuance (secondary market liability suits).  In
addition, shareholders can sue D&Os for a breach of fiduciary duties (derivative suits as the potential recovery goes to the
firm rather than to the plaintiff).  An important way to protect D&Os from bearing personal financial liabilities is to purchase
D&O insurance. 
D&O insurance is a policy protecting D&Os collectively against allegations of “wrongdoings”, including a breach of
fiduciary duties and violation of the securities law.  The policy is primarily intended to protect D&Os, but at the firm’s cost.  It
contains personal coverage (Category A coverage) and corporate indemnity coverage (Category B coverage) (Baker and
Griffith, 2010).  Category A coverage provides direct payment to D&Os when a firm is unable to indemnify them due to legal
reasons (in a shareholder derivative suit), financial distress, or when a firm chooses not to indemnify them.  Category B
coverage enables a firm to recoup the cost it incurs in indemnifying D&Os.  Neither Category A nor Category B coverage
protects a firm from legal liabilities when it is sued.  However, a firm can add entity coverage (Category C coverage) to cover
its own legal cost. 
We argue that D&O insurance influences D&Os' behaviors even though the federal Canada Business Corporation Act
(CBCA) allows a firm to indemnify D&Os' legal cost via its bylaws or charters.  First, D&Os believe that D&O insurance is
indispensable.  A survey carried out in 2007 finds that 87% of the 356 directors surveyed rank the availability of
comprehensive D&O insurance coverage as an important condition before agreeing to join a board despite the law’s
permission of corporate indemnification. 3
Second, the award of corporate indemnification has three restrictions: (1) D&Os acting in good faith, (2) firms remaining
solvent, and (3) covering only defense cost subject to court approval, but not settlement or damage award in derivative
suits. 4 While a firm seldom refuses to indemnify its D&Os and corporate defaults are rare, these restrictions nevertheless
create uncertainties to risk-averse D&Os.  In contrast, D&O insurance is less restrictive and has considerably narrower
exclusions that are typically deliberate frauds or illegal profits.  Moreover, the narrow exclusions of D&O insurance are rarely
applied.  The prevalent practice is that as long as defending D&Os do not confess dishonesty, D&O insurers pay the claim
(Baker and Griffith, 2010).  Therefore, compared with corporate indemnification, D&O insurance represents less restrictive
and more certain coverage.  This is why the possibility of corporate indemnification via by-laws does not reduce the demand
for D&O insurance. 
Our check of a random sample of corporate filings indicates that firms invariably allow corporate indemnification of
D&Os.  However, we find no quantitative disclosure on the extent of such indemnification.  Therefore, controlling for a binary
proxy for corporate indemnification in our analysis is not meaningful while controlling for a continuous proxy for
indemnification is not practical.  However, the presence of corporate indemnification is unlikely to materially alter our
inference on the effect of D&O insurance due to two reasons: (1) our result regarding the association between D&O
insurance and the cost of equity is robust to firm fixed effects estimation and a change regression model.  To the extent that
firms' indemnification policy is stable, the effect of the time-invariant element of corporate indemnification should be
captured by firm fixed effects.  (2) The time-variant element of corporate indemnification can be picked up by proxies for
firms' financial conditions such as size, leverage, credit rating and cash holdings (Chung and Wynn, 2008). 