1.  Introduction Within the 1997 United Nations Watercourses Convention it is stated that riparian states “may, where necessary, consider” harmonizing their existing agreements with the principles of the convention, thus leaving the decision whether or not to reevaluate past agreements essentially up to riparian states (UN, 2014.  Article 3).  Yet, scholars have emphasized that reevaluation of past agreements is rather a necessity due to pressing economic and development needs, as well as new international agendas (Wegerich and Olsson, 2010.  Brooks et al. , 2013.  Salman, 2014.  Wouters, 2014).  Similarly, calls for reevaluation of water-sharing agreements have been voiced in connection with growing environmental concerns and climate change (Sanchez and Roberts, 2014.  World Economic Forum, 2015).  While there are large-scale studies on how treaties could be designed for coping best with new challenges and what mechanisms are utilized within agreements to address changes (e. g. , Fischhendler, 2004.  Stefano et al. , 2010.  Drieschova et al. , 2011.  De Bruyne and Fischhendler, 2013), there have been only a few studies systematically showing changes in agreements due to paths taken (Pak et al. , 2014.  Soliev et al. , 2015).  Adapting from the conﬂict and cooperation continuum approach on international basins (Yoffe et al. , 2003.  Zeitoun and Mirumachi, 2008.  Sadoff and Grey, 2005), in this article contrasting degrees of change in formal and de facto riparian water allocation are systematically analyzed within multiple transboundary sub-basins in the Ferghana Valley of Central Asia.  The purpose of the analysis is to identify key sources of path dependency determining various degrees of resistance to reallocation and understand how long-term dynamics between (a) drivers of pressure and (b) sources of path dependency can lead to various outcomes in riparian water allocation.  Therefore, the focus is not on one agreement, but on the history of agreements in three case studies selected using the “most similar” comparative method (Lijphart, 1971.  George and Bennett, 2005).  There is no longitudinal comparative study with an in-depth qualitative analysis such as this to be found in the current literature.  as Cox (2016.  230) explains, “obtaining high-quality longitudinal data relevant to the study of human-environment interactions is frequently prohibitively expensive. ” The Ferghana Valley, shared by Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan, presents an opportunity to apply such an approach, as it has a long history of changing water agreements on a large number of small transboundary tributaries with recent research documenting data of great detail and depth (e. g. , Abdullaev et al. , 2009.  Abdullaev and Rakhmatullaev, 2016.  Pak et al. , 2014.  Pak and Wegerich, 2014.  Platonov et al. , 2014.  SIC ICWC, 2011.  Soliev et al. , 2015.  Stucker et al. , 2012.  Wegerich et al. , 2015.  Wegerich et al. , 2016).  The early agreements on these transboundary basins go back to the 1940s.  Although historically these small tributaries were in the same country, the Soviet Union, due to the differences in institutional conditions related to individual tributaries, each of them has its own history of watersharing agreements.  We were particularly interested in cases where sources of path dependency provided strong, moderate, and weak resistance to reallocate over a long period of time to understand how, under conditions with similar pressure, established institutional arrangements can resist reform in various ways.  To understand the differences in these established institutional arrangements and their corresponding effects, dynamics in allocation decisions, protocols of meetings where watersharing agreements were reached, historical correspondence, reports on implementation, wider government documents such as laws, decrees, and basin management schemes, as well as broader literature reﬂecting the nature of riparian relationship in the Ferghana Valley and Central Asia (e. g. , Bichsel, 2011.  Bucknall et al. , 2003.  Djanibekov et al. , 2016.  Dukhovny and de Shutter, 2011.  FAO, 2013.  Libert et al. , 2008.  O'Hara, 2000.  Sehring, 2009) were iteratively studied using an in-depth qualitative content analysis veriﬁed with information from key informants in the province water management departments.  The article continues with the theoretical framework explaining the concept and different degrees of path dependency in riparian water allocation.  Then materials and methods are presented, followed by results of analysis and then discussion of how sources of path dependency can lead to various outcomes.  Finally, discussion is extended to a broader signiﬁcance of the study results for the scholarship on transboundary water management from an institutional perspective, before drawing main conclusions in the ﬁnal section.  2.  Path Dependency in Riparian Water Allocation.  Path dependency has been emerging as an important concept explaining the possibility of and the ways that a change can take place in allocation institutions (Heinmiller, 2009.  Theesfeld and MacKinnon, 2014).  North (1990, 1994) has argued that while continuously changing circumstances will put pressure on existing institutions and require adoption of new solutions, historically formed path dependency in these institutions will resist or limit the scope of changes.  More generally, in economic literature, path dependency is explained by increasing returns from staying on the taken path (Arthur, 1994) where sources such as (i) high setup (and sunk) costs, (ii) learning effects, (iii) coordination effects, and (iv) adaptive expectations provide the existing institutions with so-called “positive feedback” (see for example Weber de Morais et al. , 2015 for a summary).  In addition, there are sources of non-increasing returns that in certain combinations with signiﬁcant ﬁxed (sunk) costs might be sufﬁcient to create path dependency or lock-in (Arrow, 2000.  Marshall, 2005).  Among these, Kay (2005) highlighted (i) vested interests of existing actors, (ii) network effects from administrative capacities, and (iii) existence of formal and informal contracts with individuals.  Later, North (2003) reiterated that to be able to understand how a change takes place in a complex environment and therefore to be able to bring about successful development reforms, economists need to go well beyond application of neoclassical concepts such as prices and markets and recognize that our choices are at all times path dependent at least to some degree.  Within this study, path dependency is explored as a concept that is seen as especially helpful to understand the often– complex cross-disciplinary problems of transboundary water management.  The concept can powerfully address both the adaptability aspect of transboundary water management, which is crucial for sustainable management of natural resources in large-scale socio-ecological systems, as well as the stability aspect, which is particularly important from the perspective of sustaining constructive international relations.  Sjöstedt (2015.  2) states that “[p]ath dependence is often used to conceptualize stability rather than change and gives an underlying logic to why particular paths can be extraordinarily difﬁcult to reverse. ” However, he goes on to emphasize that “the concept is in fact dynamic rather than static in character” (Sjöstedt, 2015.  2).  Further, as Cox (2016.  215) summarizes, in contrast to classical economic perspectives “[t]he perspective of path dependence is likely to value adaptability more than efﬁciency as a primary policy goal, or at least to value them in equal measure. ” Yet, this highly cross-disciplinary concept is far from its theoretical saturation and, as Cox (2016.  230) concedes, further research is needed to understand “what institutional conditions encourage lock-in or adaptability. ” In particular, he (ibid. ) stresses the need for “more data, speciﬁcally longitudinal and panel data to document patterns over time. ” The three-fold theoretical question of the present study is therefore.  (1) How to strike an appropriate balance between stability and adaptability or “between permanence and change,” as Pahl-Wostl (2009.  358) puts it.  (2) What are the institutional conditions affecting such a balance.  (3) What can we learn from a longitudinal study in transboundary water management.  Until recently, the broader literature on the continuous need for water reallocation in river basins has largely lacked a longitudinal perspective.  For example, Ohlsson and Turton (1999), and similarly Molle (2003), argued that growing pressure on water resources would lead to corresponding adaptation—pushing toward ﬁrst, “more water”, then “more use per drop” and ﬁnally, “more value per drop”—resulting in similar patterns or trajectories of development in river basins.  While their studies focused on forecasting continuously increasing water stress on the one hand and explaining how societies should adapt in order to cope with the scarcity on the other hand, possible resistance resulting from existing institutional arrangements in response to new reforms has remained unexplored.  Likewise, in a more recent work, Molle et al.  (2010.  575) explain “how to best share scarce water supplies” from state, user, or market perspectives.  They stress the increasing economic importance of reallocations.  However, the question of what a reallocation could mean for existing actors and allocation institutions is not covered.  Molle and Berkhoff (2009.  6) show in the reallocation of water resources from agriculture to cities that “cities select options that go along the ‘path of least resistance’, whereby economic, social and political costs are considered in conjunction. ” In addition to water stress, the nature of the established relationship between riparian states is one of the most commonly identiﬁed factors when it comes to transboundary water allocation (e. g. , Fischhendler, 2004.  Zeitoun and Warner, 2006.  Mirumachi and Alan, 2007).  Trust, power asymmetry, and riparian position, as well as issue linkages are among the determinants shaping the relationship between riparian parties in a transboundary setting.  Nevertheless, to this day, there is hardly any study speciﬁcally focusing on the impact of path dependency on the dynamics in transboundary water allocations in a systematic way, with scholars who applied the concept to water reforms being focused mostly on federal level transboundary cases or path dependencies within one national jurisdiction (e. g. , Heinmiller, 2009.  Libecap, 2011.  Marshall, 2005, 2013.  McCann, 2013.  Theesfeld and MacKinnon, 2014.  Garrick, 2015.  Cox, 2016.  Marshall and Alexandra, 2016).  Findings of these studies generally support the argument that reforms are increasingly difﬁcult with the presence of established allocation institutions.  In this respect, a brief overview by Hensengerth et al.  (2012.  27) challenges the often– replicated contrasting assumption of Wolf (2004) that “… in river basins with a history of cooperation and institutions to build on, cooperation in new areas can be achieved more easily than in basins where no institutions exist, since existing mechanisms can be used to exchange information and build mutual conﬁdence, which reduces transaction costs. ” Instead, Hensengerth et al.  (2012) point to a number of cases where conﬂicts emerged despite established cooperation.  The question is then whether it is possible to distinguish among different degrees of path dependency to explain this varying effect of established institutions more holistically.  Theesfeld and MacKinnon (2014) suggest that there is a continuum from no or little change to fundamental or rapid change.  Studying transformations in water allocation in the US West, they argue that path dependence can result in incremental changes, where small changes occur without threatening the survival of the entire system.  Within incremental changes, Theesfeld and MacKinnon (2014.  110) stressed the importance of distinguishing between “successful,” which accommodate new needs, and inadequate (“too little too late”) changes, which ultimately allow accumulated “pressure of unmet needs to push the system over threshold and collapse. ” It is in line with what North (1990) described as adaptive efﬁciency.  incremental change might or might not be efﬁcient in terms of responding to new challenges (see also Marshall, 2005).  To sharpen the focus further, it is proposed here to distinguish among three continua.  (1) continuum in drivers of pressure, from weak to strong.  (2) continuum of path dependency, from weak to strong resistance.  and (3) continuum consisting of varying degrees of change as a result of collision between the drivers of pressure and sources of path dependency.  For the purposes of this research, which is interested in sources of path dependency, the possibility of investigating two, ideally three cases (to allow triangulation), where drivers of pressure could be realistically assumed as constant across these cases, would present an opportunity to understand intricacies within complex characteristics of path dependencies and their impact on possible outcomes.  Given that, we also keep in mind that both strong resistance to change over a long period with corresponding no or little change in outcome, as well as moderate resistance leading to multiple incremental changes, might equally result in a fundamental transformation of the system in the long run (Theesfeld and MacKinnon, 2014).  At the same time, weak resistance can be seen as a third comparative possibility, which, in the presence of sufﬁciently strong drivers of pressure, can result in a more immediate fundamental change.  Hence, the logical model of the present research can be illustrated as presented in Fig.  1.  Finally, it should be acknowledged that any outcome of a reform can contribute to creation of a new or reinforcement of an existing path dependency (Cox, 2016.  see also Thelen, 1999.  Mahoney, 2000.  Pierson, 2000).  Obviously, there is often a discrepancy between formal and informal/ de facto water-sharing arrangements.  In a complex resource and institutional environment, it is reasonable to expect some discrepancy between an agreement and its implementation.  Among others, Luhmann (1995), and speciﬁcally from an institutional perspective, North (2003), have stressed that social systems operate with imperfect information at all times due to limited cognitive abilities, differences in perceptions and complexity of the environment.  Pak et al.  (2014) show how lack of data to determine annual or decadal ﬂows, inaccurate data due to negligence of maintenance, or lack of control on water abstraction can result in deviations of implementation from formal sharing agreements of varying intensities (see also SIC ICWC, 2011).  The article intends to extend this framework by analyzing the long-term changes in water allocation.  In categorization of the presented cases, although the history of the formal agreements is studied in depth, particular attention is paid to the de facto outcomes of the implementation of these plans.  <Middle> Materials and Methods.  3. 1.  Study Area.  The Ferghana Valley is situated in the upstream Syr Darya Basin (Fig.  2).  While the central part of the valley covers the territories of Andijan, Ferghana, and Namangan provinces of Uzbekistan, the surrounding mountainous slopes are mostly part of Batken, Jalalabad, and Osh provinces of Kyrgyzstan and Sogd province of Tajikistan.  The Naryn, with an average annual discharge of 13. 8 km3, and the Karadarya (3. 9 km3) originate in the mountains of Kyrgyzstan and converge in Uzbekistan, forming the main stem of the Syr Darya (37 km3).  The two main tributaries are regulated by the Toktogul (14 km3 of storage capacity) and Andijan (1. 75 km3) reservoirs.  at the exit from the valley the Syr Darya is regulated by the Kayrakkum (2. 6 km3) reservoir.  There are also more than 20 smaller transboundary tributaries (STTs) with combined average annual ﬂow of 7. 8 km3.  These STTs feed the Naryn, Karadarya, and Syr Darya, as well as the canals constructed across the valley (Soliev et al. , 2015).  3. 2.  Data.  The data represent interactions among the riparian states on national, provincial, and district levels signed or prepared to manage the shared land and water resources and other related matters reﬂected in 24 documents covering the period between 1946 and 2012 (detailed in Appendix A).  Such documents include minutes of the meetings where allocation decisions were made (Protocols), agreements, and correspondence between government organizations, as well as reports and internal notes on implementation of agreed decisions.  In addition, data with main characteristics of transboundary infrastructure (Soliev et al. , 2015) and information on wider relevant developments were derived from earlier studies (World Bank, 2004.  UNEP, 2004.  SIC ICWC, 2011).  3. 3.  Methods.  A most similar comparative approach has been used to select the cases (Lijphart, 1971.  George and Bennett, 2005).  Here, the three cases with a common political and socio-economic background, which over a long period of time have shared very similar drivers of pressure to reallocate and had very similar technological development trajectories, are comparatively analyzed to understand why, despite these similarities, each case experienced a different degree of resistance to reallocation, categorized here as strong, moderate, and weak resistance to reallocation in the long run.  The case studies are based on an in-depth qualitative analysis of the documents described in Section 3. 2.  First, the documents are analyzed to establish the chronology of formal changes in allocations and drivers of pressure leading to these decisions.  Second, informal/de facto changes are identiﬁed through analysis of documents related to implementation of water sharing agreements.  Third, each case study (see Appendix A) is examined against the set of explanatory variables reviewed in Section 2.  the reasons for the systematic appearance of resistance to change, as well as discrepancies between formal and de facto changes in allocations, are analyzed.  As a result of the three-step analysis, key sources of path dependency applicable to riparian water allocation are suggested and discussed.  It should be noted that the wealth of local knowledge that the team of authors possesses and their access to further local experts were crucial in verifying ﬁndings of the research derived from the documents, especially in relation to older documents that were created under the Soviets, in times when documents might have been intended to obscure either the process or the result involved in these water allocation agreements.  Thus, as the reliance on the documents alone would present a challenge, in parallel to clarifying the nuances with the experienced key informants, the authors were exceptionally cautious in their reﬂexive iterations, “visiting and revisiting the data and connecting them with emerging insights, progressively leading to reﬁned focus and understandings” (Srivastava and Hopwood, 2009.  77).  In one of the cases, as will be shown, a comparative analysis of satellite images proved to be useful to verify long-term developments.  <Conclusion> Results and Discussion.  The comparative summary of the three case studies (consisting of ﬁve different river basins) highlighting established principal similarities, differences, and corresponding outcomes is presented in Table 1.  All rivers in the Ferghana Valley largely share a broader history and have similar techno-ecological basin development trajectories.  Historically, water allocation rules in the valley developed through complex multilevel decision processes (Soliev et al. , 2015.  Pak and Wegerich, 2014.  Pak et al. , 2014).  The pre-independence ideology, when the three riparian states were part of the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) as Kyrgyz SSR, Tajik SSR, and Uzbek SSR respectively, was to develop lands to their maximum level and create a system of interconnected water infrastructure.  ﬁrst, to regulate the available ﬂow.  second, to be able to transfer water among different sources and reach different parts of the valley.  Despite being part of one country, already starting in the 1950s the republics gained increased autonomy, directly negotiating projects with one another.  In the 1970s, the central government in Moscow actively encouraged competition and direct dispute resolution between the republics.  in the 1980s it became acceptable if the republics ofﬁcially challenged the decision of the central government.  and in 1992 the new independent states agreed to adhere to the arrangements existing at the time, thus transferring the legitimacy of allocation agreements, as well as unresolved issues related to them, directly to the new period (Soliev et al. , 2015).  Therefore, although often seen as a single complex system, a more detailed look at individual rivers shows their different pathways of continuous allocation adjustments at different points in time.  The ﬁrst case study, the Maylisai River, shows strong resistance to reallocate in de facto arrangements, despite fundamental changes in formal allocation agreements.  The second case study bundles the Sokh, Isfayramsai, and Shakhimardansai rivers, and displays relatively moderate resistance, leading to incremental changes in both formal and de facto arrangements.  The third case study, the Isfara River, shows weak resistance to continuous reallocations, as well as a fundamental change in de facto riparian allocation that followed formal incremental changes.  The three sources of path dependency and their varying degrees of strength explaining the differences across the three case studies were identiﬁed as (i) vested interests, (ii) infrastructure control, and (iii) network effects.  The article continues with discussion of the ﬁndings from the three case studies in more detail (see the detailed description of changes in allocations in Appendix A).  Table 2 provides a more in-depth synthesis of how formal and de facto changes in riparian water allocation were triggered and implemented.  Please note, to refer to a speciﬁc detail from Table 2 in our discussion, we use the following acronyms in parenthesis (T2.  CS2-C5), where, in this example, T2 stands for Table 2, CS2 for Case Study 2, and C5 for Column 5.  First, we reﬂect on the longitudinal aspect of the study.  This is followed by subsections with individual discussion on drivers of pressure (Section 4. 1) and sources of path dependency (Section 4. 2), as well as on interplay among these drivers of pressure and sources of path dependency (Section 4. 3).  The ﬁnal subsection discusses broader implications of the ﬁndings (Section 4. 4).  For the precision of analysis, it is important to distinguish short- and long-term outcomes (T2.  C9 and C10).  the ﬁrst is seen in comparison of the changes within a case study and the other is among the case studies from a broader longitudinal perspective.  On the one hand, each case has had its own little-to-fundamental changes.  The gradual ﬁlling of the Tortgul reservoir and corresponding increases in the Kyrgyz share on the Isfara River (T2.  CS3-C9.  Appendix A.  CS3) might be seen as incremental changes in the short-term, but the mutual exclusion of riparian states altogether (Uzbekistan from the Isfara and Tajikistan from the BFC) can be seen as a fundamental change in the long run.  In contrast, while the change to 50/50 sharing in the Sokh, Isfayramsai, and Shakhimardansai through an oral agreement in 2001 (T2.  CS2-C9.  Appendix A.  CS3) might be seen as a fundamental change in the short-term, in the long run it can be viewed as part of incremental changes, as the de facto sharing did not change as fundamentally over time (Appendix A.  Fig.  A2).  As expected, in relation to the time horizon taken in the analysis, it can be seen that a series of incremental changes over a long period of time can cumulate in very signiﬁcant changes in institutions (Theesfeld and MacKinnon, 2014).  Thus, the degree of change at one place might look different if one were to consider the effectiveness of implementation and a longer time perspective.  On the other hand, comparing the cumulative outcomes from the three case studies allows deliberating on sources of path dependency leading to the different long-term outcomes.  The institutional analysis shows that the longer the history of relations on a river or bundle of rivers was, the larger the “baggage” (sources of path dependency) became, in terms of both number of issues and pentup pressure from certain individual issues.  The scope and nature of each subsequent change was clearly affected by the accumulated issues.  This highlights the importance of longitudinal studies to better understand the changes.  The ﬁndings support the argument that a long-term relationship between riparian states, even if cooperative, does not necessarily mean that reallocation in such basins will be easier.  a change in such settings, in fact, might prove more complicated.  For example, for downstream Uzbekistan, improving the infrastructure, such as in the case of the reconstruction of the BFC in the Isfara case (Appendix A.  CS3) or increased ﬂow regulation through a number of reservoirs in the Isfayramsai and Shakhimardansai case (Appendix A.  CS2) resulted in fact in continuous pressure from upstream Kyrgyzstan beyond previously agreed allocations.  Such continuous pressure obviously creates strong disincentives to improve internal use or report any gains, as it would entail new demands to reconsider allocations.  However, we have also observed that on-demand informal communication channels (telephone calls or so called telegrams—instant message services) through which lower level province and district level ofﬁcials contacted their neighbors were sometimes useful to prevent situations from getting “worse”, especially in cases of emergencies such as ﬂoods or droughts.  Nevertheless, provinces reported that these communication channels became increasingly ineffective with the basin closure, that is, after all water resources were allocated for use (the late 1970s).  4. 1.  Drivers of Pressure Leading to a New Allocation.  As noted, the rivers in the Ferghana Valley generally share similarity in terms of drivers of pressure to reallocate.  Most of the pressure to get “more water” resulted from the continuous plans to expand and maintain irrigated areas, with all of the selected basins set as priority areas for such expansion since the early 1970s (Wegerich et al. , 2016).  These plans were implemented primarily by integrating new infrastructure, such as canal and pump-stations (Appendix A.  CS1), as well as reservoirs (Appendix A.  CS2 and CS3).  To gain more water, riparian republics also attempted to optimize allocations across different sources, as in the case of the 1980 Protocol, where all small transboundary tributaries in the Ferghana Valley were considered in conjunction (T2.  C3).  Finally, the pressure to reallocate was similarly intensiﬁed after the closure of the river basins, as a riparian state with less developed irrigated areas—Kyrgyzstan—increasingly requested greater shares (Soliev et al. , 2015).  This is in line with what earlier studies have suggested and generally could be seen as states pursuing their development plans (Ohlsson and Turton, 1999.  Molle, 2003.  Molle et al. , 2010).  An interesting ﬁnding is that a need for “more water” intensiﬁed the pressure when an agreement was not implemented timely.  It can be seen how delays in measurement and amendment of irrigated areas in the Maylisai (Appendix A.  CS1) and delays in approval and implementation of the LSKR Canal and Sokh reservoir resulted in sharp unilateral changes by Kyrgyzstan later on (Appendix A.  CS2).  However, looking at the drivers of pressure alone still does not fully reveal the different patterns in the long-term changes.  Two further drivers of pressure to reallocate water that have been observed are ﬁnancial shocks and climatic changes.  The collapse of the Soviet Union created signiﬁcant ﬁnancial difﬁculties for all riparian states.  As Moscow stopped ﬁnancing the republics, now they were on their own with massive and already aging infrastructure, requiring more investments in operation and maintenance.  The states had to restore economic and social stability and water became even more crucial for the national economies than before.  Upstream Kyrgyzstan started using the Toktogul to produce more hydropower (Appendix A.  CS3), downstream could not fully fulﬁll its commitments to complete construction of the Sokh reservoir (Appendix A.  CS2-3) and started to look for solutions to meet its demands internally.  At the same time, the riparian provinces had to adjust their shares as a result of weather extremes, as in the example of the Sokh, Isfayramsai, and Shakhimardansai in 2001 through an oral agreement (T2.  CS2-C9.  Appendix A.  CS2).  However, it was not possible to establish whether this was a one-time or continuous adjustment, although the data provided in the province reports indicate that the de facto allocation was not affected signiﬁcantly, especially in the Sokh.  Similar to the ﬁndings of Marshall and Alexandra (2016), both ﬁnancial and climatic shocks could be described as crises that tested the existing system and led to increased pressure across all three cases.  4. 2.  Sources of Path Dependency and Resistance to Change.  The key sources of path dependency observed within the case studies (Tables 1 and 2 and Appendix A) are hereby grouped and explained as follows.  (i) Vested interests.  institutionalization of water as a source of (economic) beneﬁts creates opportunistic incentives.  a riparian party with established entitlement resists reallocation affecting its share or beneﬁts negatively.  In the analyzed cases, vested interests were found to be institutionalized within the proportional allocation principle.  this overarching principle connected the area of land included in the agricultural production plan to the water entitlements.  In contrast to the existing literature (e. g. , Kay, 2005.  Heinmiller, 2009.  Cox, 2016.  Marshall and Alexandra, 2016), vested interests here are not directly of established individual actors.  rather, they are more systemic.  The more land a riparian party could include in the scheme, the more water could be claimed to irrigate these lands.  One could question the legitimacy of these claims and why they were so persistent after independence despite new national socioeconomic as well as ecological priorities in the water sector.  Changing priorities could provide good reasons to readjust or make new claims.  Yet, similar to what was found for post-socialist states elsewhere, in the ﬁrst decade of transformation the focus was on land restitution and privatization processes, while reforms in the agricultural water sector were rather a mere by-product of these processes (Theesfeld, 2008).  Thus, in the absence of new clear strategic decisions, especially on the province level, it appears to have been easier to stick to the old proportional allocation argument for a while.  The most notable example from the case studies is the clause in the 1966 Maylisai agreement (T2.  CS1C3.  Appendix A.  CS1) calling for a clariﬁcation of the irrigated area within the basin, which led to long-standing disagreements.  A clariﬁcation was clearly hindered by vested interests, since it could have implied a reduction of the water share.  Generally, vested interests were present at all times (in the other two cases, the riparian parties had vested interests in greater shares at all times, too) and hence can be seen as the main source of path dependency.  however, this very universal presence of vested interests does not help understand the differences in paths.  (ii) Infrastructure control.  infrastructure built for implementing allocation decisions creates a long-lasting control over water.  control over infrastructure enables its holder(s) to implement unilateral decisions.  The cases demonstrated that the control over infrastructure was crucial for the negotiations of an allocation path.  It shows that large infrastructure costs cannot be fully seen as sunk costs (as for example in Heinmiller, 2009.  Marshall and Alexandra, 2016).  The control that comes with the water infrastructure, especially in a transboundary setting, indeed has a signiﬁcant value for decision making over time.  In the Maylisai (Appendix A.  CS1), when Andijan province had control, it could implement its plans even when contested by its riparian province.  With the loss of control over the infrastructure due to difﬁculties in border crossing, Jalalabad province, the upstream riparian province, gained increased control and started implementing its own plan.  The unilateral withdrawals by Kyrgyzstan in the Sokh (irrigation networks in the Burgandy massif) (Appendix A.  CS2) and Isfara (Tortgul reservoir) (Appendix A.  CS3) also exemplify how control over infrastructure triggered de facto changes.  Overall, infrastructure appears to provide the means to materialize vested interests.  (iii) Network effects.  physical and institutional complexity of the system within and across jurisdictions makes it difﬁcult to undertake partial reforms without undertaking reforms of the entire sociotechno-ecological network.  (a) multiple governance levels of administrative responsibilities, (b) physical interdependence of infrastructure, and (c) issue linkages within agreements make up the network effects.  Further, (d) lack of information and knowledge intensify them.  The analysis showed how the continuously increasing physical (infrastructure) and institutional (protocols and decisions with references to one another) complexity created room for justiﬁcation of unilateral plans.  Further, decisions were often made on one level, while actors on lower levels, responsible for implementation, did not see the big picture and lost track of earlier connections over time.  This is in line with earlier explanations of network effects (e. g. , Heinmiller, 2009.  Cox, 2016) and broadens this category of path dependency sources by singling out its sub-categories.  In the Maylisai case, while there was a clear agreement at the beginning, interpretation of the sharing principle was increasingly contested by the actors involved later (whether intentionally or due to loss of knowledge) (Appendix A.  CS1).  The increased use of the Maylisai River by Andijan province in the 1980s, as claimed by the Kyrgyz side, was implicitly justiﬁed as a response to reduced inﬂows on other rivers (Akburasai, Aravansai) (Appendix A.  CS1).  The history of the Burgandy massif demonstrates how details of the earlier agreements on expansion in the Burgandy linked to the Toktogul and Andijan reservoirs in the 1960s were partially lost by the 1980s (Appendix A.  CS2).  The increased unilateral withdrawals in the Sokh (Appendix A.  CS2) and Isfara (Appendix A.  CS3) by Batken province were explicitly justiﬁed with the non-completion of the LSKR Canal.  In 1989, the signiﬁcant increase in the Kyrgyz share from the Sokh (greater than what was previously agreed) did not prevent them from continuing their claims on the LSKR Canal and Sokh reservoir (Appendix A.  CS2).  Indeed, the room for manipulation becomes greater in the absence or obsolescence of metering and monitoring infrastructure able to provide all riparian parties with neutral and instant ﬂow of data, as well as possible loss of nuances due to changes in staff.  4. 3.  Interplay among Drivers of Pressure and Sources of Path Dependency Determining the Degree of Change.  Overall, while control over infrastructure provides the means to materialize the vested interests, network effects provide the room to justify unilateral decisions should a riparian party deviate from an agreement.  Based on the conducted research, how interplay among the sources of path dependency can affect the forthcoming degree of change in reallocation is illustrated in Fig.  3.  Institutional change, exempliﬁed here as new formal allocation agreements, can encompass both (i) ﬂexibility, which enables adaptation to upcoming challenges and (ii) path dependency, which limits ﬂexibility.  A balance between these two can determine whether and how fast an institution can adapt to possible changes or fails to do so and collapses (Theesfeld and MacKinnon, 2014).  The discrepancy between formal and de facto agreements is partly due to the fact that the formal changes might call for more than the actors are in a position to give, based on their actual circumstances, resulting in path dependency and only allowing an incremental change.  A parallel could be drawn with a number of multilateral environmental agreements.  countries might join them under pressure from the international community and commit themselves to goals that are sometimes (rightly) ambitious.  however, compliance might prove difﬁcult due to countries’ internal constraints, resulting in varying degrees of discrepancy in fulﬁllment of those commitments.  One cannot exclude the possibility where such behavior might be deliberate, that is, part of a strategy (to gain advantages of being a party or avoid disadvantages of not being a party, or consolidate power, etc. ).  Three de facto outcomes have been distinguished.  no or little, incremental, and fundamental change as a result of a reform.  The analysis shows that a fundamental change might occur because of both no or little change due to strong resistance over long time leading to unresolved pent-up pressure (Maylisai case) and a number of incremental changes (Isfara case, partly Sokh, Isfayramsai, and Shakhimardansai case) due to moderate or weak resistance.  However, the obvious difference is whether such a fundamental change is a shock to the system or a planned and better controllable transition.  Thus, an incremental de facto change in water allocation that is in line with incremental formal changes might be more sustainable in the long run.  In particular, the effect of issue linkages should be highlighted.  Although issue linkages, such as those established with land and energy sectors or across different river basins, helped at the negotiation phase and served as an enforcement mechanism during implementation (reverse riparian positions).  separation of previously linked issues facilitated reallocations.  Though the implication was (partially) revoked previous commitments.  In the Maylisai, the long-standing contested interpretations were a result of the strong network effects due to the complexity of new infrastructure and issue linkages with other sources.  Separation from the Karadarya helped to change allocations in the Isfayramsai and Shakhimardansai.  Further, the upgrade of Batken district to a province level effectively delinked commitments of Osh province in the cases of Sokh, Isfayramsai, and Shakhimardansai, as well as in the case of the Isfara.  The latter demonstrates how riparian parties would prefer parting ways, if it were possible technically.  Finally, although the outcomes with fundamental change within each case study manifested themselves differently (exclusion of riparian parties in the Isfara.  50/50 sharing in the Sokh, Isfayramsai, and Shakhimardansai.  acceptance of 82/18 by Uzbekistan in the Maylisai), their timing points to how ﬁnancial and climatic shocks intensiﬁed the vested interests.  The independence and consequences thereof (loss of technical control over water, land reforms, budget cuts, administrative reforms, competing sectors for state support) and increased variability due to climatic changes, for example the drought in 2001, appear to have been the ﬁnal trigger for the outburst of pent-up pressure (Fig.  3).  4. 4.  Broader Implications.  Vested Interests, Infrastructure Control, and Network Effects.  Assuming vested interests present as they were in our cases, infrastructure upstream and being in unilateral control of the infrastructure appears to be a general risk for stability in relationship of riparian parties with “baggage,” where an upstream riparian party has development needs/ambitions related to shared water resources (Wegerich and Olsson, 2010).  This phenomenon can be proven also in other parts of the world, such as in the recent advances in the construction of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam in the Nile that made Egypt negotiate with Ethiopia (Tawﬁk, 2015).  The accumulated pressure from longstanding disagreements with no or little change resulted in a fundamental change.  Looking further broadly, the lack of ultimate overarching authority in a transboundary setting—the distinguishing feature of transboundary water management—makes dialogue and whether one can convince the other riparian party (parties) as well as the international community increasingly important for how much resistance intended reforms will face.  “Soft power of persuasion” described by Zeitoun et al.  (2011.  159) comes into play.  However, while persuasion implies that there is a side to be persuaded, network effects simply provide unilateral justiﬁcation, meaning without the need to persuade the counterpart.  Persuasion implies that action follows explanation.  the danger in case of network effects is that it is the opposite.  explanation follows action.  Then, the question of whether upstream honors an agreement or not increasingly becomes a matter of justiﬁcation, amplifying the uncertainty for downstream with each infrastructure project upstream.  Therefore, it might be understandable that countries downstream are often opposed to upstream large-scale infrastructure and generally prefer smaller incremental changes.  At the same time, for incremental changes to be effective or to achieve adaptive efﬁciency (North, 1990.  Marshall, 2005.  Garrick, 2015), it is important that a reform has minimal network effects, preventing unpredictable discrepancy between an agreement and its implementation.  The ﬁndings on the network effects are also interesting in the light of recent literature, with classic economic objectives aiming at achieving a positive sum and increasingly viewing issue linkages and beneﬁt sharing as tools for enhancing cooperation (e. g. , Sadoff and Grey, 2002.  Sadoff and Grey, 2005.  Phillips et al. , 2006.  Pham Do et al. , 2012).  While considering more options indeed increases the chances of reaching a new agreement, increased complexity affects implementation of agreements, both by reducing controllability of individual issues (see also Zeitoun et al.  (2016) for importance of analysis ﬁtting the state of knowledge processed) and by creating linkages where a side with a more favorable position could take advantage on other linked issues (Soliev et al. , 2015).  Similarly, the ﬁndings on network effects expand the hydro-hegemony framework (Zeitoun and Warner, 2006).  sequencing of arguments might sufﬁce in combination with a favorable riparian position and exploitation potential for exercising hegemony, which makes power as such (e. g. , military, economic) much less relevant.  Finally, it is quite illuminating how sufﬁciently strong network effects, where riparian parties are in need of development but do not have technical capacities to fully monitor water ﬂow, can create paths inherently unfavorable to trust.  Even when a riparian party receives less water due to natural variability, the accumulated “baggage” in relationship can easily push this riparian party toward defensive strategies.  This riparian party will have to compensate its “loss” from other sources or in other ways altogether (through arrangements in other sectors) due to pressing development needs, since efﬁcient negotiation is highly unlikely.  That, in turn, will most likely have reciprocal consequences, leading to an endless domino effect.  Hence, it appears that establishing full technical control of runoff—transparent measuring infrastructure allowing instant ﬂow of data for all sides and continuity of highly professional staff—should be of highest priority and the starting point in cases with a rich history of relationship and aging infrastructure.  In our particular cases, improving stability rather than adaptability in the riparian relations should be of higher priority for sustainability of the system (Sjöstedt, 2015. 