
The Nordic electricity market was liberalized in the late 90’s to
increase competition and create incentive to invest in new generation capacity and modernize existing production.  At the same time,
the liberalization reduced the barriers on import and export between
countries, allowing for more eﬃcient use of many power production
technologies. 
Currently, the Nordic market covers the countries in the Nordic
and Baltic regions, i. e.  Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Estonia,
Latvia and Lithuania. 
It is divided into 17 bidding areas with individual area prices based on local supply and demand.  Furthermore, an overall market price for electricity, referred to as the system
price, is determined for contractual purposes.  This price is based
on aggregated supply and demand and disregards transmission constraints between bidding areas.  In contrast, the bidding areas are
established to avoid congestion in the system.  The area price and the
local load are, therefore, highly correlated.  It is important to account
for this market design in the derivation of hedging strategies. 
In this paper we study the hedging problem of a Nordic
distribution company that has agreed to deliver electricity to customers at a ﬁxed price.  The company has to buy electricity in the
spot market, but knows neither the future electricity demand of the
customers nor the future market price of electricity.  As trades in the
spot market are settled at the area price, the distributor is thereby
exposed to both volume risk and area price risk.  To mitigate risk,
the company can lock in part of its proﬁt by buying ﬁnancial contracts on electricity, in advance and at a ﬁxed price.  In the Nordic
electricity market, however, ﬁnancial contracts are settled against
the system price and not the area price.  With signiﬁcant differences
between the system price and the area price, especially for periods with high load, this introduces considerable basis risk.  Basis risk
may be managed using forward contracts on the price difference. 
Nevertheless, only monthly contracts are available.  As a result, the
distribution company cannot completely eliminate risk from ﬁxed
price agreements.  In spite of this, in 2010 more than 50% of contracts
for electricity were based on ﬁxed price agreements in the Nordic
market and in EU 60% of contracts were ﬁxed price agreements. 