1.  Introduction  We provide evidence on the effects of bank mergers and acquisitions (M&As) in the U. S.  on borrowers’ voluntary disclosure of ﬁrm-speciﬁc information to public ﬁnancial markets.  The past three decades have witnessed waves of consolidations  through M&As in the U. S.  banking industry.  This trend has signiﬁcantly reduced the number of banking institutions, and a  few large banks now hold the bulk of assets.  Researchers argue that the consolidation has fundamentally altered the nature  of banks as ﬁnancial intermediaries, both directly by affecting how banks monitor and ﬁnance borrowers (e. g. , changing the  type and nature of products and services banks offer), and indirectly by affecting borrowers’ demand for products and services from alternative (public) ﬁnancial markets.  Evidence on how bank mergers affect borrowers’ disclosure adds to our  understanding of their consequences, and contributes to the growing literature that seeks to understand how ﬁrms’ incentive to produce and disseminate public information is affected by various institutional mechanisms in a country’s ﬁnancial  markets (e. g. , Ball et al. , 20 0 0.  Leuz et al. , 2003.  Bushman et al. , 2004 ).  Furthermore, to the extent that public information  is a key determinant of the development of stock markets, such evidence can shed light on the interaction between public  stock markets and bank markets ( Allen and Gale, 20 0 0.  Levine, 2005 ).   We posit that bank mergers affect borrowers’ incentive to disclose information publicly by affecting the monitoring and  ﬁnancing services provided by banks.  Prior work, however, has not reached consensus on the speciﬁc nature and degree  of the monitoring and ﬁnancing effects of bank mergers, especially for publicly listed borrowers.  Therefore, whether bank  mergers can cause economically meaningful public information spillover through increased disclosure by borrowers is ex  ante unclear and ultimately an empirical question.   On the monitoring side, mergers can change borrowers’ disclosure incentives by changing the nature and extent of bank  monitoring.  Traditional banking literature emphasizes the unique role played by banks because of their ability to produce  soft, private information about their borrowers.  This ability allows banks to serve as delegated monitors for public capital  providers who ﬁnd it diﬃcult to monitor ﬁrms for which much of the information is soft (e. g. , Diamond, 1984, 1991.  Fama,  1985 ).  Following bank mergers, borrowers’ incentive to disclose may increase or decrease depending on how mergers affect  bank monitoring.  On one hand, mergers can alter the nature of bank monitoring from being more soft information based to  being more hard information based, as mergers create more complex and hierarchical organizations that are less effective  at collecting and processing soft information but may be more eﬃcient at processing hard information (e. g. , Stein, 2002.   Berger et al. , 2005 ).  This can lead to increased public disclosure by borrowers for two reasons.  First, merged banks themselves may rely more on hard information that can be eﬃciently collected through public disclosures ( Gormley et al. , 2012 ).   Second, to the extent that banks’ comparative advantage in monitoring primarily emanates from their ability to process soft  information, public capital providers may rely less on bank monitoring after mergers and instead demand additional public  disclosure to facilitate their own monitoring efforts.  On the other hand, to the extent that mergers discipline banks plagued  by agency problems, monitoring effort may increase at banks that did not suﬃciently monitor their borrowers prior to the  mergers.  This may increase the willingness of public capital providers to delegate the monitoring role to banks, reducing  the public capital providers’ demand for public disclosure.   On the ﬁnancing side, borrowers’ disclosure can change if mergers affect their access to bank credit.  Bank mergers are  often motivated by eﬃciency gain considerations, and banks take actions and make changes in their operations to realize  these gains.  While these changes may beneﬁt the merging banks, they are not necessarily welfare improving to all borrowers  ( Karceski et al. , 2005.  Berger et al. , 1999.  DeYoung et al. , 2009 ).  Some borrowers may be adversely affected by these changes  and might experience reduced credit availability.  For example, the merged entity may re-balance and re-optimize their portfolios to achieve better risk management.  When merged banks have signiﬁcant geographic overlap, they may reduce loans  to some existing borrowers to reduce their exposure to the local area ( Amore et al. , 2013 ).  Or, following the disciplinary  acquisition of a poorly run bank, the merged entity may cut lending to borrowers who were beneﬁtting from ineﬃciently  priced cheap loans from the acquired bank.  Reduced credit availability might prompt these borrowers to increase public  disclosure to improve their access to alternative ﬁnancing sources ( Diamond and Verrecchia, 1991.  Baiman and Verrecchia,  1996 ).  At the same time, these changes may also beneﬁt some borrowers whose disclosure may decrease or remain unchanged.  Therefore, whether bank mergers can cause any meaningful public information spillover via the ﬁnancing channel  is also an empirical question.  Our analysis is based on a comprehensive sample of nearly 13,0 0 0 syndicated loan contracts where the lead lenders  are commercial banks or bank holding companies and the borrowers are publicly traded companies in the U. S. 