
Environmentally extended input-output analysis has been widely
used to estimate production- and consumption-based emissions in
many countries (Peters, 2008.  Hertwich and Peters, 2009.  IPCC, 2014),
and in Japan a national emission inventory has been provided to the
public every ﬁve years (NIES, 2016).  A major advantage of using environmental energy input-output analysis is that product supply-chain
networks can be easily modelled and environmentally and ecologically
important sectors and paths can be identiﬁed from the network
(Lenzen, 2003.  Lenzen Name, 2012.  Wood and Lenzen, 2009.  Oshita,
2012).  Clustering analysis has also been applied to environmental
energy input-output analysis in order to ﬁnd environmentally important
industry groups (i. e. , industry clusters) that induce higher CO2 emissions
along their supply-chains (Kagawa Name, 2013a, 2013b, 2015). 
It is important to note that the environmentally critical sectors,
transactions, paths, and clusters identiﬁed by input-output analysis
play important roles in reducing consumption-based emissions through
the entire economy.  A supply-chain path is composed of transactions
between two sectors.  An environmentally critical sector as identiﬁed
by key sector analysis (Rasmussen, 1956.  Hirschman, 1958.  Hazari,
1970.  Lenzen, 2003) is considered to be a sector that contributes to
emitting larger environmental emissions (e. g. , CO2 emissions) in the
economy through not only purchasing emission- and energy-intensive
products from other upstream sectors but producing emission- and
energy-intensive products in its own sector.  Therefore, an effective
emission reduction policy (i. e. , technology policy) is to improve the
production technology of the critical sector toward a cleaner one that
has less energy consumption and environmental emissions along the
product supply chain. 
Information on environmentally critical paths (Lenzen, 2003) and
clusters (Kagawa Name, 2013a, 2013b, 2015.  Rifki Name, 2017) can support a technology policy in the sense that policymakers can ﬁnd highpriority supply-chain paths (i. e. , upstream products) and clusters
(i. e. , upstream product systems).  However, it is not an easy task to ﬁnd
high-priority paths and clusters from the supply-chain complexity due
to the problem of computation (e. g. , Kagawa Name, 2015). 
Liang Name (2016) proposed a useful indicator, vertex betweenness
centrality, of a speciﬁc sector by combining input-output analysis with
social network analysis.  More speciﬁcally, Liang Name (2016) formulated
the vertex betweenness centrality index by applying the notion of network centrality (Freeman, 1977, 1978.  Freeman Name, 1979) to structural path analysis (Lenzen, 2003.  Defourny and Thorbecke, 1984).  Liang
Name (2016) deﬁned a speciﬁc sector with higher vertex betweenness
centrality in a supply-chain network as a critical transmission sector in
the sense that many sectors supply their products to ﬁnal consumers
by passing through the speciﬁc sector, and consequently the transmission sector contributes to emitting a large amount of environmental
emissions in the economy.  Although key sector analysis (Rasmussen,
1956.  Hirschman, 1958.  Hazari, 1970.  Lenzen, 2003) implicitly
considers the transmission power of a speciﬁc sector, previous analyses
failed to deﬁne this as vertex betweenness centrality consistent
with network theory (Freeman, 1977, 1978.  Freeman Name, 1979).  A
technology policy for reducing environmental emissions should target
high-priority sectors with higher vertex betweenness centrality. 
In this study, we develop another centrality index, edge betweenness centrality, consistent with environmental energy input-output
analysis following Liang Name (2016) and prove a mathematical relationship between “edge” betweenness centrality and “vertex” betweenness centrality.  Edge betweenness centrality indicates how much
‘embodied’ environmental emissions of products ﬂow through the
transaction and to what extent sectors are connecting through a speciﬁc
edge (i. e. , a transaction) in terms of supply-chain complexity.  It is
important to note that the embodied environmental emissions
(e. g. , embodied CO2 emissions) in supply-chain networks are caused
by embodied energy consumption in the entire economy (Hertwich
and Peters, 2009.  Peters Name, 2011). 
The edge betweenness centrality for a particular transaction
developed in this study can be regarded as the sum of environmental
emissions associated with ‘inﬁnite’ supply-chain paths that include the
speciﬁc transaction identiﬁed using structural path analysis (SPA)
(e. g. , Lenzen, 2003.  Oshita, 2012.  Owen Name, 2016.  Nagashima Name,
2017).  However, a technical problem of SPA is that it is impossible to identify ‘inﬁnite’ paths that include the particular transaction.  therefore, the
edge betweenness centrality developed in this study can be a useful indicator to express the importance (or criticality) of a particular transaction
in the entire supply-chain network. 
Liang Name (2015) also proposed strongest path betweenness.  This
index represents the importance of a sector in the supply-chain network
as a center transmitting or facilitating the creation of environmental impacts.  Roughly speaking, it is deﬁned as the sum of the strengths of all
strongest paths in the supply-chain network passing through a sector. 
The strongest path in Liang Name (2015) is deﬁned as the environmentally
important path that causes the largest CO2 emissions in sector i owing to
one unit of value added in sector j.  It is important to note that the strongest path developed in Liang Name (2015) is deﬁned for a path, whereas
the edge betweenness centrality developed in this study is deﬁned for a
transaction.  A strongest path from sector i to sector j represents the
most inefﬁcient path among all possible paths from i to j.  The point of difference from vertex and edge betweenness centrality is that strongest
path betweenness does not consider ‘inﬁnite’ supply-chain paths. 
In this study, we compute the edge and vertex betweenness centrality
indices using the environmentally extended multi-regional input-output
table covering 35 industrial sectors and 41 countries and regions in
2008 (Dietzenbacher Name, 2013.  Timmer Name, 2015) and identify
high-priority sectors with higher vertex betweenness centrality and
high-priority transactions with higher edge betweenness centrality in
global supply-chain networks.  Finally, we argue how those high-priority
sectors and transactions can contribute to reducing CO2 emissions as
climate mitigation. 
It should be noted that although we mainly focus on CO2 emissions
as a case study, the method developed in this paper can be applied to
energy consumption and other environmental pollutants such as NOx
and SOx.  In particular, although energy consumption and CO2 emissions
are both typical analysis subjects for these methods, our reason for
mainly focusing on CO2 emissions is interest in the effects on recent
global warming.  For this purpose, we conducted similar betweenness
centrality analyses focused on energy consumption and computed
rank correlation coefﬁcients for both vertex and edge betweenness
centralities for CO2 emissions and energy consumption.  Finally, we
discuss a more direct relationship between CO2 emissions and energy
consumption with a focus on vertex and edge betweenness centralities
in Section 5. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 revisits
vertex betweenness centrality as proposed in Liang Name (2016). 
Section 3 develops edge betweenness centrality consistent with inputoutput analysis.  Section 4 presents the mathematical relationship
between vertex betweenness centrality and edge betweenness centrality. 
Section 5 presents and discusses the results.  and ﬁnally Section 6
concludes the paper. 
2.  Vertex betweenness centrality proposed in Liang. 
The vertex betweenness centrality of a speciﬁc sector proposed
in Liang Name (2016) was deﬁned as the sum of environmental
emissions associated with the supply-chain paths passing through
the speciﬁc sector.  Fig.  1 illustrates the vertex betweenness centrality of sector v in a supply-chain network with seven vertices
and six edges.  In the ﬁgure, ea, eb, and ec are respectively the environmental emissions in upstream sectors a, b, and c triggered by
the transactions among downstream sectors, d, e, and f.  In this
case, the vertex betweenness centrality of sector v can be calculated as bv = ea + eb + ec. 
Following Liang Name (2016), the vertex betweenness centrality bv of
a speciﬁc sector v can be formulated as this where w(s, k1, k2, … , kr, t) is the environmental emissions associated
with all supply-chain paths from sector s to sector t passing through
r sectors, sector s →sector k1→sector k2→⋯→sector kr→sector t via
sector v, and qr is the number of times that sector v appears in the
supply-chain paths.  w(s, k1, k2, … , kr, t) also means the environmental emissions associated with all supply-chain paths from sector s
to sector t with a path length of r + 1.  Following the idea of structural
path analysis (e. g. , Lenzen, 2003.  Defourny and Thorbecke, 1984),
w(s, k1, k2, … , kr, t) can be formulated as fsask1ak1k2
⋯ akrtyt, where yt is
the ﬁnal demand of sector t, ak1k2 is the intermediate input from sector k1 directly required for producing one unit of output in sector k2,
and fs is the direct environmental emissions per unit of output of sec⋯ akrt represents the intermediate input. 
We further deﬁne the following supply-chain path
where bv(l1,l2) represents the environmental emissions associated with
supply-chain paths that pass through sector v that has upstream industrial supply chains with path lengths of l1 and downstream industrial
supply chains with path lengths of l2.  Then, we can rewrite bv(l1,l2) as
the following matrix multiplication. 
where y=(yj) represents an (n×1) ﬁnal demand vector expressing the
ﬁnal demand for sector j, A=(aij) (n×n) is an input coefﬁcient matrix
expressing the intermediate input from sector i per unit of output of
sector j, Jv is an (n×n) matrix whose (v,v) element is 1 and other matrix
elements are 0, and f=(fi) represents an (n × 1) emission coefﬁcient
vector expressing direct environmental emissions per unit of output
of sector i.  The prime denotes the matrix transpose.  (f′Al1)v and (Al2y)v
represent the v-th elements of the respective computed vectors. 
It is well known that the direct and indirect requirement matrix
(i. e. , Leontief inverse matrix) can be obtained as the following power
series expansion. 
The matrix computation in Eq.  (5) yields the vertex betweenness
centrality of sector v.  Hence we can compute vertex betweenness
centrality for each node (i. e, each sector) in Ο(nw) time, where w denotes
the matrix multiplication exponent.  It is well known that w b2. 373
(Williams, 2012).  Since the number of sectors is n, the total running
time is Ο(nw+1) and therefore very low. 
3.  Edge betweenness centrality. 
In this study, we develop another betweenness centrality, edge betweenness centrality, for supply-chain networks.  Let (u,v) be a directed
edge (i. e. , a transaction from sector u to sector v in a supply-chain network).  We then deﬁne the edge betweeness centrality for a speciﬁc
transaction (u,v) as the amount of environmental emissions associated
with all supply-chain paths passing through the transaction (u,v).  As
in Eq.  (1), we can formulate the edge betweeness centrality for the
transaction (u, v) as follows. 
where pr represents the number of times that transaction (u,v) appears in
all supply-chain paths from sector s to sector t passing through r sectors. 
As with vertex betweenness centrality, edge betweenness centrality
is explained using a simple example.  Fig.  2 illustrates the betweenness
centrality of transaction (u, v) in a supply-chain network with eight
vertices and seven edges.  In Fig.  2, ea, eb, ec, and eu are respectively the
environmental emissions in upstream sectors a, b, c, and u triggered
by the transactions among downstream sectors, d, e, f, and v.  In this
case, the betweenness centrality of transaction (u,v) can be calculated
as buv = ea + eb + ec + eu. 
As in Eq.  (2), we denote by buv(l1,l2) the environmental emissions
associated with supply-chain paths that pass through a transaction
from sector u to sector v that has upstream industrial supply chains
with path lengths of l1 and downstream industrial supply chains with
path lengths of l2 as follows. 
Here Juv represents an (n×n) matrix whose (u,v) element is 1 and
other elements are 0.  It should be noted that when l1 =l2 =0,
buv(0, 0) = fuauvyv.  Considering all the supply-chain paths passing
through transaction (u,v), edge betweenness centrality buv in Eq.  (6)
can be computed based on the following matrix computation. 
If a speciﬁc transaction from u to v does not exist in the supply-chain
network, its edge betweenness centrality is zero because we have
auv= 0.  As in vertex betweenness centrality, each edge betweenness
centrality is computed in Ο(nw).  The total running time is Ο(nw+2)
because there may exist Ο(n2) transactions.  Moreover, let m be the
number of transactions in the input-output table.  If an input-output
matrix is sparse, we can compute all edge betweenness centralities in
Ο(mnw) time.  Therefore, the computation cost is also very low. 
4.  Relationship between vertex betweenness centrality and edge
betweenness centrality. 
We describe the relationship between vertex betweenness centrality
and edge betweenness centrality from the point of view of graph theory. 
First, we deﬁne the edge betweenness centrality matrix. 
Deﬁnition 1.  The matrix B=(buv) is called the edge betweenness centrality matrix. 
We will ﬁrst give some notation and deﬁnitions used in graph theory. 
Given a directed and weighed graph G=(V,E), we denote the weight for
edge (u,v) by wuv.  In graph G, let a vertex set of neighbors of v be N(v). 
We also denote by Nin(v)={u|(u,v)∈E} the subset of N(v) such that vertex v is a target node.  Similarly, we denote by Nout(v)={u|(v,u)∈E} the
subset of N(v) such that vertex v is a source node.  Thus we have N(v)=
Nin(v)∪Nout(v).  We further deﬁne indeg(v)=∑u∈Nin(v)wuv as the
weighted in-degree of vertex v and outdeg(v)=∑u∈Nout(v)wvu as the
weighted out-degree of vertex v. 
If we regard the edge betweenness centrality matrix B=(buv) as the
above adjacency matrix W=(wuv), then the weighted in-degree of
sector v, indeg(v), expressing the environmental emissions associated
with supply-chain paths that pass through the transactions from other
sectors to sector v and the weighted out-degree of sector v, outdeg(v),
expressing the environmental emissions associated with supply-chain
paths that pass through the transactions from sector v to other sectors
can be formulated as follows. 
Lemma 1.  The following two equations for respectively the weighted indegree of sector v and the weighted out-degree of sector v hold. 
We can prove similarly that bv=outdeg(v)−f′JvTy also holds. 
Theorem 1 shows that the vertex betweenness centrality of sector v
is equal to the weighted in-degree of sector v minus the amount of all
sectors' embodied emissions triggered by the ﬁnal demand of sector v,
and it also shows that the weighted out-degree of sector v minus the
amount of v's embodied emissions triggered by the ﬁnal demands of
sectors coincides with the vertex betweenness centrality of sector v. 
<Middle> Data and results. 
5. 1.  Consumption-based emissions of nations. 
Using the inventory database of energy consumption and CO2 emissions from fossil fuels combustion of 35 industrial sectors of 41 countries and regions provided by the 2008 world input-output database
(see Supporting Information for the country and sector classiﬁcations)
(Dietzenbacher Name, 2013.  Timmer Name, 2015), we ﬁrst calculated
the consumption-based emissions of nations estimated by the conventional carbon footprint method (Wiedmann and Minx, 2008.  Peters,
2008.  Hertwich and Peters, 2009.  Kanemoto Name, 2012).  The total
number of sectors in this study is n=35×41=1435, and thus the network analysis formulated in the previous section can be easily extended
to a multi-regional framework (Supporting Information). 
The result based on the world input-output database shows that the
total of all consumption-based CO2 emissions in 2008 was 25,598 MtCO2, of which the U. S. A.  and China accounted for 21% and 18%, respectively (Fig.  S1).  Thus, it is well known that the U. S. A.  and China have
contributed a large amount of CO2 emissions through consumption of
goods and services (Hertwich and Peters, 2009).  An important point is
that the U. S. A.  transferred a large portion of its consumption-based
CO2 emissions to developing countries such as China and India, whereas
China and India transferred relative small portions of their CO2
emissions to other countries (Fig.  S2) (e. g. , Peters Name, 2011.  Kagawa
Name, 2015). 
As shown in Fig.  S2, CO2 emission transfers are greatly inﬂuenced by
the structure of global supply-chain networks (e. g. , Kagawa Name, 2015). 
Accordingly, if we adopt emission reduction measures focused on
the sectors and transactions of highest priority within supply-chain
networks, we can expect to efﬁciently reduce emissions associated
with entire supply chains.  Up to now, however, no one has proposed a
centrality index that reﬂects the complex structure of global supplychain networks associated with the ﬁnal demand for particular products
or analyzed such structures. 
5. 2.  Vertex betweenness centrality in global supply-chain networks. 
As explained in Section 2, Liang Name (2016) developed a new network index called vertex betweenness centrality.  This index indicates
the intermediate nodes of huge supply-chain paths, or in other words,
the “mediating function” of sectors.  For the induced CO2 emissions in
the global supply chains considered in this study, sectors having a
high vertex betweenness centrality represent environmentally important sectors along a supply chain. 
Table 1 summarizes the results for the top 30 sectors in terms of vertex betweenness centrality in global supply-chain networks associated
with the ﬁnal demand in each demand country.  It is clear from the
table that most of the CO2 emissions indirectly generated via the sectors
of high vertex betweenness centrality are induced by the ﬁnal demand
in the same country (Table 1).  More speciﬁcally, we see that China's
Basic Metals and Fabricated Metal sector—the sector having the highest
vertex betweenness centrality (1253 Mt-CO2)—is an important sector in
global supply chains formed by the ﬁnal demand in China (Table 1). 
Since approximately 90% of the 4. 6 Gt of CO2 emissions induced by
the ﬁnal demand in China (i. e. , China's consumption-based emissions)
are emitted in China (Fig.  S1), it follows that to effectively reduce CO2
emissions associated with global supply-chain networks within China,
the Basic Metals and Fabricated Metal sector—the sector having the
highest vertex betweenness centrality—requires more environmentally
friendly supply-chain management of raw materials inside China
(Table 1). 
The Electrical and Optical Equipment sector of China, ranked at both
No.  5 and No.  20 in Table 1, is clearly an important sector in the global
supply chains formed by the ﬁnal demands in both China and the
U. S. A.  Based on the betweenness centrality, 414 Mt of the CO2 emissions
induced by the ﬁnal demand in China is indirectly generated via China's
Electrical and Optical Equipment sector, but in addition 164 Mt of the
CO2 emissions induced by the ﬁnal demand in the U. S. A.  are also emitted
via this sector (Table 1).  This result demonstrates that substantial
amounts of CO2 emissions are induced by the ﬁnal demands in other
countries. 
To obtain vertex betweenness centrality for a network created by
superimposing the global supply-chain networks formed by the ﬁnal
demand in each country, we substitute yg ¼
demand obtained by summing the ﬁnal demand yr in each country,
into the right-hand side of Eq.  (5) (Table S3).  From Table S3, we see
that of the CO2 emissions associated with the ﬁnal demands in all
countries (41 countries and regions), emissions from China's Electrical
and Optical Equipment sector amounted to 1037 Mt (Table S3), which is
similar with Japan's total CO2 emissions in 2008 (1282 Mt) (Ministry of
the Environment Government of Japan).  If we compare the value of vertex betweenness centrality of China's Electrical and Optical Equipment
sector associated with the ﬁnal demand in China (No.  5 in Table 1) with
the value of vertex betweenness centrality of the same sector relating to
world ﬁnal demand (No.  4 in Table S3), we ﬁnd that approximately 60%
of CO2 emissions induced by the ﬁnal demands outside China are generated in this speciﬁc sector of the Chinese economy.  Remarkably, the
ﬁnal demand in the U. S. A.  accounts for approximately 16% of the CO2
emissions, while the ﬁnal demands in Japan and Germany account for
approximately 4% each.  Undoubtedly therefore, this is a key sector for
the CO2 emission transfer to China via supply chains (Tables 1, S3). 
From the above observations, we can conclude that environmentally
friendly production management and raw material procurement in
China's Electrical and Optical Equipment sector, which has a high vertex
betweenness centrality in global supply-chain networks with respect
to the total ﬁnal demand worldwide, has the potential for effectively reducing CO2 emissions over entire global supply-chain networks. 
We also found that the Spearman's rank correlation of vertex betweenness indices of CO2 emissions and energy consumption associated
with the ﬁnal demand by each demand country is very high, 0. 997
(Fig.  3), which means that the above-mentioned CO2 mitigation policy
(i. e. , environmentally friendly production management and raw material procurement) focused on high-ranked sectors listed in Table 1
should be straightforwardly consistent with an energy reduction policy
in those sectors.  The detailed results for vertex betweenness centrality
of energy consumption and a comparison between CO2 emissions and
energy consumption are shown in Tables S7, S8, S11, and S12. 
5. 3.  Edge betweenness centrality in global supply-chain networks. 
Vertex betweenness centrality as discussed above is an indicator
that focuses on the centrality of sectors, but it does not take into consideration the role played by transactions between two different sectors in
global supply-chain networks.  For this reason, for segments of high
vertex betweenness centrality, implementing supply-chain management practices that focus on the environmental burden associated
with all the raw materials from the upstream sectors needed for
manufacturing products is very difﬁcult.  Since the edge betweenness
centrality formulated as Eq.  (9) in Section 3 makes it possible to identify
transactions between sectors through which large amounts of CO2
emissions ﬂow, promoting technological and economic cooperation between sectors of high edge betweenness centrality has the potential to
effectively reduce emissions for entire supply chains. 
Table 2 summarizes the results for the top 30 transactions in terms
of edge betweenness centrality in global supply-chain networks
associated with the ﬁnal demand in each demand country.  The numbers
in brackets in Table 2 are the ranks in terms of vertex betweenness centrality shown in Table 1.  Table 2 shows that the edge betweenness centrality of domestic transactions associated with the ﬁnal demand in the
same country is high, in particular showing that the edge betweenness
centrality of transactions within China associated with the ﬁnal demand
in China is high.  This demonstrates that the majority of CO2 arising from
the ﬁnal demand in the same country is not emitted abroad in global
supply chains via sectors that have a high value of edge betweenness
centrality. 
Comparison with vertex betweenness centrality shows that the
vertex betweenness centrality of at least one of the endpoints of
transactions with a high edge betweenness centrality also tends to be
high (Table 2).  If the vertex betweenness centrality of both the upstream sector u and the downstream sector v in a particular transaction
(u,v) is high, a large amount of CO2 is emitted from the sectors upstream
of upstream sector u associated with the ﬁnal demands of sectors downstream of downstream sector v. 
For a transaction from the U. S. A. 's Electricity, Gas and Water Supply
sector to its Public Admin and Defence.  Compulsory Social Security
sector, edge betweenness centrality is high, despite the fact that the vertex betweenness centrality at both endpoints is low (Table 2).  The reason is that a high proportion of the CO2 emissions associated with these
transactions are higher primary ripple effect (fuauvyv) CO2 emissions
arising from upstream sectors (e. g. , U. S. A. 's Electricity, Gas and Water
Supply) associated with the ﬁnal demands of downstream sectors
(e. g. , U. S. A. 's Public Admin and Defence.  Compulsory Social Security). 
For these kinds of transactions, characterized by sectors of low vertex
betweenness centrality and high edge betweenness centrality, emission
reduction measures focused on the particular transaction do not
contribute much to limiting emissions over the entire global supply
chain.  Therefore, emission reduction efforts need to be focused on the
relevant sectors themselves in these cases. 
In order to view the relationship between CO2 emissions and energy
consumption in terms of edge betweenness centrality, we computed
the Spearman's rank correlation of edge betweenness indices of CO2
emissions and energy consumption associated with the ﬁnal demand
in each demand country and found it to be 0. 998.  This implies that a
very high rank correlation of CO2 emissions and energy consumption
also supports emission reduction efforts being made by effective energy
reduction measures in the relevant high-priority sectors indicated in
Table 1 and the relevant high-priority transactions in Table 2.  The detailed results for edge betweenness centrality of energy consumption
and a comparison with CO2 emissions are shown in Tables S9, S10,
S13, and S14. 
Next, we examine the edge betweenness centrality matrix B=(buv),
composed of the edge betweenness centrality values buv of each transaction (u,v).  Figs.  4 and 5 illustrate the networks consisting of the top
100 transactions in terms of edge betweenness centrality for CO2
emissions in global supply chains associated with the ﬁnal demands
in the U. S. A.  and Germany, both of which have high emissions transfers, as shown in Fig.  S2.  In the global supply-chain networks shown
in these two ﬁgures, a higher vertex betweenness centrality is indicated by a larger circle, while a higher edge betweenness centrality
is indicated by a thicker edge.  Both in the case of the U. S. A.  and
Germany, the edge betweenness centrality of transactions that
have Electricity, Gas and Water Supply as an upstream sector is
high, which means that this sector tends to spread CO2 emissions
to domestic sectors (Figs.  4 and 5).  In addition, since the vertex betweenness centrality of the Electricity, Gas and Water Supply sector
is low, the quantity of CO2 emissions indirectly generated via this
sector is low.  it generates CO2 itself. 
If we look at the important supply-chain network graphs for global
warming alleviation, that is, having strong edge betweenness centrality
as shown in Figs.  4 and 5, we ﬁnd that although the ﬁnal demands in the
U. 