 Introduction Although not required, most large companies now issue reports on corporate social responsibility (CSR) performance. 1 This voluntary disclosure of CSR activities is likely driven at least in part by a desire to communicate CSR information to investors.  If CSR activities affect the company’s future earnings and cash ﬂows, investors will ﬁnd related disclosures useful for their valuation decisions.  However, it is possible that investors react to CSR disclosures for another reason as well.  If investors value the societal beneﬁts associated with CSR activities, they may respond positively to disclosures that the company has engaged in such activities independent of how they expect the activities to affect future earnings and cash ﬂows.  We conduct an experiment to test whether investors respond to managers’ disclosure of their CSR investment independent of the effect on the company’s future cash ﬂows.  In addition, we examine whether managers anticipate investors’ response when making their disclosure decisions.  Finally, we examine whether managers’ CSR investment decisions are driven only by investors’ expected response or also by their preferences for the societal beneﬁts associated with their CSR investments.  Understanding how investors’ respond to CSR disclosure is important because this can help explain managers’ voluntary CSR disclosure practices.  For example, knowing that investors value the societal beneﬁts of CSR activities would help explain why managers’ CSR disclosures tend to focus on such beneﬁts.  Also, knowing whether investors’ reaction to CSR disclosures goes beyond the expected effect of CSR activities on the company’s future cash ﬂows could help explain the rapid growth in Socially Responsible Investment (SRI) funds (Social Investment Forum Foundation, 2012).  More broadly, a more complete understanding of investors’ reaction to CSR disclosure can inform standard setters who are considering whether CSR disclosures should be required, what information should be disclosed, and whether such disclosures should be audited. 2 Finally, understanding why managers invest in CSR activities helps inform the ongoing debate regarding whether all CSR activities must be shareholder value maximizing (Friedman, 1970.  Karnani, 2010) or whether some such activities sacriﬁce proﬁts in the social interest (Benabou and Tirole, 2010.  Reinhart et al. , 2008.  Kolstad, 2007).  We examine a particular type of CSR activity, green investment to reduce carbon emissions, in an experimental market setting.  There are several critical features of our setting that allow us to isolate the effects necessary to answer our research questions.  First, in our experimental setting, the impact of a manager’s green investment is fully reﬂected in the company’s current earnings, and as such there can be no further impact on the company’s future cash ﬂows.  This ensures that any observed investor reaction to disclosure of the green investment is not based on investors’ expectations regarding how the investment will affect future earnings.  Second, we ensure that both investors and managers in our experiment know that the ﬁnancial cost to the company of a green investment always exceeds the ﬁnancial beneﬁt, i. e. , the investment is always unproﬁtable.  Thus, any green investment a manager makes always lowers shareholder value, and therefore any positive investor response to the disclosure of a green investment must reﬂect the investors’ desire to reward the manager for engaging in an activity that the investors value.  We ﬁnd that potential investors’ standardized bids for the company are higher when managers disclose their green investments than when they do not, providing evidence that investors value the societal beneﬁts associated with the investment.  We also provide some evidence that investors respond more positively when managers’ disclosures focus on the societal beneﬁts of their investment rather than on the cost to the company.  In addition, managers anticipate investors’ reaction and thus overwhelmingly disclose their investment and tend to focus their disclosure on the societal beneﬁts of the investment rather than on the cost to the company.  Finally, despite investors’ positive response to a disclosed green investment, both managers and current shareholders nevertheless bear a cost when the manager makes a green investment.  Thus, managers’ investment decisions must reﬂect the value they place on the associated societal beneﬁts in addition to any expected investor response.  Our ﬁndings contribute to the CSR literature in several ways.  First, our ﬁnding that investors’ positive response to disclosures of a green investment are based at least in part on the societal beneﬁts associated with the investments helps us better understand the rapid increase in SRI funds (Social Investment Forum Foundation, 2012).  Second, our results offer insights into how and why managers disclose their CSR activities to investors.  Third, our study helps inform standard setters who are considering possible CSR disclosure requirements.  Finally, our study demonstrates the advantages of using experiments to examine important CSR issues that are difﬁcult to study effectively using archival data.  In Sections 2 and 3 we provide background information and present our hypotheses.  We describe our experiment in Section 4 and report our results in Section 5.  The paper concludes with a discussion of our results and their implications in Section 6.  2.  Background.  The KPMG International Survey of CSR (2013) reports that 93 percent of the 250 largest global companies and 86 percent of the 100 largest US companies now engage in some type of voluntary CSR disclosure.  If CSR activities affect the company’s future earnings and cash ﬂows, disclosing such activities will be useful for investors’ valuation decisions.  There are several ways that CSR performance could affect a company’s future earnings.  For example, being more socially responsible could add customers, increase sales, or increase pricing power (Lev et al. , 2010), attract or motivate employees (Balakrisnan et al. , 2011, Bhattacharya et al. , 2008), lower the cost of equity capital (Dhaliwal et al. , 2011) or reduce the risk of governmental regulation (Paine, 2000).  Based on such arguments, researchers have often focused on establishing a positive association between CSR and measures of ﬁnancial performance.  Margolis et al.  (2009) conduct a meta-analysis of 251 such studies over the last 40 years and conclude that “the overall effect is positive but small…and the results for the 106 studies for the past decade are even smaller. ” Of the 251 studies, 59% reported a non-signiﬁcant result, 28% found a positive result, 2% a negative result, and the remaining 10% did not report sample size or signiﬁcance.  Although the prior research does not completely resolve whether companies’ CSR performance is associated with their future ﬁnancial performance, investors’ reactions to CSR disclosures are likely to be at least partially based on their expectations about the effect on ﬁnancial performance.  However, investors could also react to CSR disclosures because they value the societal beneﬁts associated with CSR activities.  Such a reaction would be difﬁcult to isolate using archival data because it occurs simultaneously with any reaction based on expectations of how CSR activities affect earnings.  We overcome this problem by using an experimental setting in which the impact of the CSR activity is fully incorporated into current earnings.  This ensures that any investor reaction is not due to expectations regarding the impact of CSR activities on future cash ﬂows.  3.  Development of hypotheses.  A positive response by investors to disclosed CSR activities could reﬂect their desire to reward company managers for taking an action they value.  The recent rapid growth in SRI funds is consistent with an expanding group of investors rewarding companies for being socially responsible. 3 Such behavior is consistent with the social norm of reciprocity, in which a kind act is reciprocated with a similarly kind act in return (Rabin, 1993).  Reciprocity has been documented in many settings including labor markets and other experimental games.  In labor market settings, prior studies show that in incomplete contract environments, employers often offer a “gift” of a wage greater than the market-clearing level and workers reciprocate with a “gift” of greater effort than the minimum enforceable amount (Akerlof, 1982.  Fehr et al. , 1993, 1997.  Hannan et al. , 2002.  Hannan, 2005.  Kuang and Moser, 2009, 2011). 4 Another widely studied experimental setting documenting reciprocity is the “trust game” (Berg et al. , 1995), in which a ﬁrst mover is given a sum of money and decides how much of it to give to an anonymous counterparty.  Any money given is increased by a multiplier, and then the counterparty decides how much of this new amount to give back to the ﬁrst mover and how much to keep for him/herself.  The ﬁrst mover in this setting typically transfers a signiﬁcant portion of their money to the counterparty, and the counterparty reciprocates this action by returning a signiﬁcant amount of the new multiplied amount to the ﬁrst mover.  Our experimental setting shares some features with the gift-exchange and trust games described above in that our managers are similar to the employers in the gift-exchange studies and to the ﬁrst movers in the trust game studies, while our investors are similar to the workers in the gift-exchange studies and the counterparty in the trust game studies.  However, our setting differs from the previous settings in important ways.  First, while the manager’s green investment in our study is similar to the employer’s gift and ﬁrst mover’s transfer in the previous studies, it differs in that, unlike in the previous studies, the manager’s green investment does not ﬁnancially beneﬁt the investors directly.  Therefore, in our setting any reciprocal motivation on the part of investors must operate through the value they place on the societal beneﬁts of the green investment rather than on any potential personal ﬁnancial gain.  Second, managers who make a green investment in our setting affect both their own wealth and the wealth of another current shareholder.  In the other settings, when employers (ﬁrst movers) offer a gift (transfer), they only reduce their own wealth.  Third, in prior studies, the employee (second mover) could directly reciprocate the employer’s (ﬁrst mover’s) behavior, but in our market setting, it is less clear that any individual investor can directly reciprocate the manager’s behavior because only the winning bidder can ultimatelyThe differences described above make reciprocation by investors less likely in our setting than in previous reciprocity studies.  Nevertheless, there are still reasons to expect that investors will react positively when managers disclose their green investment.  Martin (2009) found that investors in a market setting similar to ours were willing to bear part, but not all, of the cost of a green investment made by the sole owner of a company.  Elfenbein and McManus (2010) used data from eBay auctions to show that customers were more likely to buy, and pay higher prices for, items for which the seller had committed to donate a portion of the sales proceeds to charity than identical items for which the seller had not made such a commitment.  Again, the higher prices paid by customers reduced, but did not fully offset, the cost to the company of the charitable contribution.  Finally, Balakrishnan et al.  (2011) provide evidence that employer charitable giving can help motivate employee effort that beneﬁts the employer, but, again, many employers only recovered part of the cost of their charitable donations.  Thus, our ﬁrst hypothesis is.  Hypothesis 1(H1).  Holding the distribution of possible cash ﬂows constant, investors will respond more positively to disclosure of a green investment than to no report about green investing.  As hypothesized above, we expect investors who value the societal beneﬁts of green investments to reciprocate the manager’s behavior by paying higher prices when managers disclose that they made a green investment.  However, investor reaction is also expected to vary depending on how managers frame their green investment disclosure.  Different framing of equivalent information has been shown to inﬂuence individuals’ judgments in many different settings (see Levin et al. , 1998 for a review of the framing literature).  If investors’ reciprocal response reﬂects the value they place on the societal beneﬁts of a green investment, they are likely to respond more favorably to reports that focus on the societal beneﬁts of the investment rather than on the cost of the investment to the company.  Thus, our second hypothesis is.  Hypothesis 2 (H2).  Investors will react more positively to disclosures that focus on the societal beneﬁts of green investments than to disclosures that focus on the costs to the company of such investments.  Since disclosures of CSR activities are largely voluntary, managers can decide what, if anything, they wish to disclose about such activities.  Managers likely decide what to disclose based on their expectations regarding investors’ reaction.  However, in our experimental setting the impact of the green investment is fully incorporated into the company’s current earnings, and thus managers’ disclosure decisions must be based on expectations of investors’ response to non-economic information in the disclosure.  If investors respond as predicted in H1 and H2, managers would likely either anticipate or learn which forms of disclosure yield the most positive investor response.  Thus, our third and fourth hypotheses are.  Hypothesis 3 (H3).  Managers who make a green investment will more often disclose to investors that they have done so rather than make no report.  Hypothesis 4 (H4).  Managers’ disclosures of their green investment will more often focus on the societal beneﬁts of the investment than on the cost to the company.  Because in our setting any green investment is always unproﬁtable, the manager and the other current shareholder will always bear a cost when the manager makes a green investment unless investors reciprocate sufﬁciently to offset the full cost of the unproﬁtable investment.  If managers are repeatedly willing to bear a personal cost and to impose a cost on the other current shareholders, this suggests that their green investments do not reﬂect a naive belief that investors will fully compensate them for the cost of the investment.  Rather, managers’ green investments must reﬂect the personal value they place on the societal beneﬁts of such investments.  <Middle> Experiment.  4. 1.  Overview.  We conducted our experimental markets using z-tree software (Fischbacher, 2007) in a networked computer lab.  We recruited 90 volunteer participants from the lab participant pool of approximately 1,300 individuals.  Our participants were 55% male and averaged 21 years of age.  Three experimental sessions with 30 participants each were conducted.  Each session consisted of 20 independent periods and lasted approximately 90 minutes.  At the conclusion of each session, one of the 20 periods was randomly selected and participants were paid their $5 participation fee plus their earnings for the randomly selected period.  Participants’ earnings depended on the decisions that they and other participants made during the experiment (details provided below).  In each of the three sessions, participants were randomly assigned to one of three roles.  (1) a manager who was a shareholder in the company, (2) another current shareholder in the company, or (3) one of three potential investors in the company, and these roles were constant throughout the experiment.  We distinguish between “potential investors” and “current shareholders” in our setting and measure investor reaction based on the price set by the potential investors.  Although our other current shareholders do not play a role in setting the market price, we included them in our design to reﬂect the fact that, like our managers, they also bear a direct ﬁnancial cost when managers make an unproﬁtable green investment.  Each period, one manager was randomly matched with one current shareholder and three potential investors, creating a group of 5 participants.  There were 6 such groups of 5 in each of our 3 experimental sessions, resulting in a total of 18 groups.  Thus, our 90 participants consisted of 18 managers (one per group), 18 current shareholders (one per group) and 54 potential investors (three per group).  With 20 periods in each session, this resulted in 360 observations (investment and reporting decisions) from managers (18 managers  20 periods) and 360 observations (winning bids) from the potential investors (one winning bid for each of the 18 groups of three investors  20 periods).  Because managers, current shareholders, and potential investors were randomly re-matched into new 5-member groups each period, they never knew with whom they were matched at any point in their experimental session.  Therefore, participants knew that all decisions were anonymous and neither managers nor investors could form reputations. 5 At the start of each period, the manager and the other current shareholder each owned one-half of the company.  This ownership structure captures forces that are important in actual corporate settings.  Speciﬁcally, this structure provides managers with (1) a personal ﬁnancial deterrent against investing in the unproﬁtable green project, (2) a deterrent against investing in the unproﬁtable green project because of a ﬁduciary responsibility to the other current shareholder, and (3) an incentive to invest in the unproﬁtable green project because half of the cost of the investment can be shifted to the other current shareholder.  Managers decided whether to make a green investment and what to disclose about their investment choice to potential investors.  Potential investors then placed bids to purchase the company.  Both managers and potential investors knew that any amount of green investment that was made had a real societal beneﬁt in reducing carbon emissions because they knew that the full amount of any green investment would be donated by the researchers to Carbonfund. org, a real non-proﬁt environmental organization that invests contributions in renewable energy and reforestation projects that reduce the amount of greenhouse gases in the environment. 6 After the experiment was completed, the actual dollar amount of the green investment made by managers for the randomly selected payment period was contributed to Carbonfund. org.  4. 2.  Detailed experimental procedures.  A time-line of the steps in each period of each experimental session is provided in Fig.  1.  As shown in Step 1, each period managers learned the amount of earnings for the company before they made any green investment (hereafter referred to as the “before-investment earnings”) and then decided whether to invest a portion of those earnings to reduce carbon emissions.  Possible green investment amounts ranged from $0 to $20 in $1 increments.  The company’s before-investment earnings for each period were drawn from a uniform distribution ranging from $25 to $35 in two stages.  In the ﬁrst stage, a distribution with a smaller $5 range was randomly drawn from the uniformly distributed larger $10 range ($25–$35).  We refer to this smaller $5 range as the “before-investment earnings range. ” In the second stage, the before-investment earnings amount (i. e. , a single speciﬁc earnings amount) was randomly drawn from the uniformly distributed smaller $5 before-investment earnings range.  This speciﬁc amount is the before-investment earnings amount that managers saw before making their green investment decision.  As described in more detail later, the company’s before-investment earnings were selected using this two-stage process to limit the inferences potential investors could make regarding whether a green investment had been made.  Because any amount of green investment reduced the company’s energy costs, the net cost of the green investment to the company was always less than the amount contributed to Carbonfund. org.  (hereafter referred to as the societal beneﬁt associated with the investment). 7 In other words, every $1 of green investment the manager made to reduce carbon emissions resulted in a net cost to the company of $0. 50.  This design feature reﬂects the fact that in many cases green investments have both societal beneﬁts and ﬁnancial beneﬁts for the company and that in some cases the beneﬁts to society exceed the costs to the company.  As shown in Step 2, after managers made their investment decision, they decided what information to disclose about their decision to the potential investors and the other current shareholder.  Managers chose one of the reporting options shown in Table 1 depending on whether they chose to make a green investment.  If they made a green investment, they could (1) send no report, (2) disclose that they made an investment to reduce carbon emissions without any amounts, (3) disclose that they made an investment to reduce carbon emissions along with the amount of the investment, (4) disclose that they made an investment to reduce carbon emissions along with both the amount of investment and the related cost to the company, or (5) disclose that they made an investment to reduce carbon emissions along with only the net cost to the company.  If they did not make a green investment, they could (1) send no report, or (2) send a report indicating that they did not make an investment to reduce carbon emissions.  Table 1 provides the exact wording used on the computer screens for each type of report.  The computer program ensured that any report the manager made to the investors was truthful. 8 Any disclosure managers chose to make was provided to the potential investors, along with the $5 range of possible after-investment earnings.  This $5 range of after-investment cash ﬂows was obtained by subtracting the cost to the company of any green investment the manager made from the $5 before-investment range described above. 9 As shown in Step 3, after receiving the $5. 00 range of equally likely after-investment company earnings and any report that the manager chose to provide, each potential investor submitted a bid indicating the price s/he was willing to pay for the entire company.  At the start of each period, each potential investor received a $30. 00 endowment amount, which along with the $5. 00 participation fee could be used to purchase the company.  The potential investor making the highest bid purchased the company from the manager and current shareholder.  In the event of a tie, the computer randomly determined which potential investor making a highest bid purchased the company.  At the conclusion of each period, potential investors were required to repay $15 of their $30 endowment. 10 8 As in much of the prior disclosure literature (Verrecchia, 1983.  King and Wallin, 1995.  Forsythe et al. , 1999), we assumed there was an anti-fraud provision that prevented false reporting.  That is, managers in our experiment could only truthfully report whether they invested to reduce carbon emissions, and if they chose to report the amount of their investment or the cost to the company of their investment, these amounts had to be reported truthfully as well.  We required truthful reporting to ensure a clean test of investors’ reaction to the content of the reports.  We did not allow blatantly dishonest reporting (e. g. , reporting that a green investment was made when none actually was) for two reasons.  (1) investors’ reactions to the reports would have been confounded by their concerns regarding the credibility (versus the content) of the report, and (2) we were concerned that the amount of dishonest reporting and investors’ expectations of such reporting would be higher in the experiment than in actual corporate settings where there would be consequences if the lies were exposed.  We note that our managers still had considerable leeway in what information they chose to disclose, ranging from disclosing no information to full information about their green investments and the cost to the company.  As shown in Step 4, the potential investor making the highest bid purchased the company from the manager and current shareholder.  Because the amount paid by the potential investor who purchased the company is shared evenly by the manager and the other current shareholder as 50% owners, potential investors knew that their bidding decisions would affect the wealth of both the manager and the other current shareholder.  As shown in Step 5, after the winning bid was determined, potential investors learned which speciﬁc amount from the $5. 00 distribution of equally likely after-investment earnings was the actual after-investment earnings amount.  This amount was paid as a liquidating dividend to the potential investor who purchased the company.  Finally, as shown in Step 6, participants’ payoffs for the period were determined as speciﬁed in Table 2.  Because managers initially owned one-half of the company, they received 50% of selling price of the company (i. e. , the winning bid) plus their $5 participation fee.  Potential investors’ payoffs depended on whether they purchased the company.  Potential investors who purchased the company received the liquidating dividend (i. e. , the actual company earnings) minus the price they paid to buy the company plus their $5 participation fee plus $15 ($30 endowment minus $15 repayment).  Potential investors who did not purchase the company received their $5 participation fee plus $15 ($30 endowment minus $15 repayment).  Because current shareholders initially owned one-half of the company, they received 50% of the selling price of the company plus their $5 participation fee.  The six steps described above were repeated for each of the 20 periods in each of the three experimental sessions.  After all periods were completed, participants responded to a post-experiment questionnaire, a volunteer participant drew a number from a container holding the numbers 1 through 20 to determine the payment period, and participants received their participation fee and their payoff amount for this randomly selected period.  4. 3.  Procedures to limit investor inferences.  Two features of the experimental procedures described above were designed speciﬁcally to limit investors’ inferences about whether a green investment was made or the amount or cost of any investment.  First, the managers knew the underlying $10 distribution from which the smaller $5 before-investment earnings ranges were selected, but the potential investors were never provided any information about this larger initial distribution.  Using a fairly wide range of randomly selected smaller distributions drawn from the larger distribution ensured that there was signiﬁcant variation in the distributions potential investors encountered across periods. 11 Had the same distribution been used each period, repeated observations may have allowed potential investors to infer the distribution and therefore infer whether the manager had made a green investment.  In addition, had potential investors known that the underlying range was from $25 to $35, they would have been able to infer the amount of any green investment for some randomly drawn smaller distributions because the after-investment distribution could have included an amount below $25.  For example, a green investment with a cost to the company of $2 could have resulted in a range of $23–$28 being shown to potential investors, allowing the investors to infer that the manager had made a green investment with a cost to the company of at least $2.  Second, managers making a green investment knew that their investment reduced the company’s energy cost by an amount equal to 50% of their investment, but this exact percent of cost reduction was not known by the potential investors. 12 If potential investors had been provided with this exact percentage (i. e. , 50%), they would have been able to infer with certainty either the amount of the investment (i. e. , the societal beneﬁt) or the net cost to the company whenever the manager chose to disclose either one of these in their reports.  For example, if the manager’s report disclosed that the green investment was $2, potential investors would have been able to infer with certainty that the net cost to the company was $1.  Likewise, if the manager’s report disclosed that the cost to the company was $1, potential investors would have been able to infer with certainty that the amount of the green investment was $2.  Because we are interested in potential investors’ reaction to the speciﬁc information that managers choose to disclose, it was important that investors not be able to infer information about managers’ green investment decisions beyond that disclosed by the managers.  We took the steps described above to limit investors’ inferences about the manager’s green investment decision even though any report the manager provided to investors was irrelevant for how wealth-maximizing investors would value the company because their bids would be based exclusively on the after-investment distribution of cash ﬂows.  However, because our hypotheses assume that some potential investors value the societal beneﬁts of green investments, it was important that they could not infer information about the manager’s investments beyond that disclosed by the managers.  Although our procedures severely limited any inferences investors could make about the manager’s green investment, we cannot be certain that investors did not infer any information about the manager’s investment as they gained experience in the market after multiple periods.  However, if investors did infer any information regarding a manager’s green investment beyond that disclosed by the manager, this works against ﬁnding differences in investors’ bidding behavior across different disclosures.  5.  Results.  5. 1.  Overview.  Our ﬁrst two hypotheses relate to investors’ reactions to managers’ disclosures.  In order to test these hypotheses, it is necessary to ﬁrst show that some managers made green investments and that there was variation in what managers disclosed to potential investors about their investments.  As explained earlier, our experimental design yields 360 group-level responses (i. e. , 18 groups  20 periods).  Panels A and B of Table 3 report the frequency and percentage of green investments by amount of green investment (Panel A) and frequency and percentage of report type (Panel B).  Recall that in our setting wealth maximizing managers would never make a green investment unless they expected investors to fully compensate them for the personal cost they bear to make the investment.  Neoclassical economic theory also predicts that managers’ disclosures will not affect wealth maximizing potential investors’ behavior, and thus managers will be indifferent as to what they disclose to investors.  Panel A of Table 3 shows that managers made a green investment 50% of the time (180 out of 360 cases).  Panel B of Table 3 shows that, while there is variation in report type, managers made some report types more often than others, which suggests that they expect that potential investors value the societal beneﬁts of green investing and thus may react more positively to some report types than others.  We discuss managers’ behavior in more detail later in conjunction with the tests of our H3 and H4.  5. 2.  Test of H1.  Table 4 reports descriptive statistics by type of report managers made to investors.  For each broad report type group, Panel A of Table 4 shows the frequency of such reports, the average before-investment earnings range, the managers’ average green investment amount, the average net cost of the investment to the company (i. e. , the investment amount reduced by the 50% cost savings), and the average after-investment earnings range.  Panel B of Table 4 presents the same information as Panel A broken out by speciﬁc report type for all no reports and all reports that disclosed a green investment.  Panel C of Table 4 reports the average winning bid, the average lowest possible earnings (from the last column of Panel B), and the standardized winning bid for the same reports shown in Panel B.  The standardized winning bid shown in the last column in Panel C of Table 4 is our primary dependent variable for testing H1 and H2.  We standardize the investor’s winning bid by subtracting the lowest value in the $5 distribution of the after-investment cash ﬂows to isolate any incremental effect of different green investment reports on investors’ winning bids separate from the economic impact of differing cash ﬂows.  Two items could cause the cash ﬂows that investors see before making their bids to differ for the different types of reports.  1) differences in the random draw of possible earnings, and 2) different amounts of green investment.  Our standardized winning bid removes the effect of both such differences in cash ﬂows, and therefore it provides a clean measure of how investors’ winning bids are inﬂuenced by different reports beyond any economic effect due to differing cash ﬂows.  As such, our standardized winning bid allows us to isolate whether investors value the societal beneﬁts of managers’ green investments.  H1 predicts that investors will respond more positively to disclosure of a green investment than to no report regarding the manager’s green investing decision.  We test H1 by comparing the standardized winning bid for cases in which the manager reported that they made a green investment versus cases in which they made no report (see Panel C of Table 4). 13 For our test of H1 and all subsequent analyses involving standardized winning bids, we use the Huber-White method to estimate robust standard errors after adjusting for non-independence caused by repeated measures (Huber 1967.  White 1982).  As shown in Panel A of Table 5, consistent with H1, the standardized winning bid was signiﬁcantly higher (t¼1. 79, p¼0. 04) when managers disclosed that they made a green investment (mean standardized winning bid¼$2. 03 from Table 4) than when managers made no report (mean standardized winning bid¼$1. 48 from Table 4). 14 This result indicates that investors value the societal beneﬁts of green investment and therefore reward managers for disclosing that they made such an investment.  Although investors’ actual bidding behavior in the experiment provides the most direct support for our interpretation that investors bid more because of the societal beneﬁts associated with a disclosed green investment, this interpretation is also consistent with investors’ responses to our post experiment questionnaire.  Potential investors’ average rating of their willingness to contribute to environmental causes was 3. 55 on a scale with endpoints of 0 (Not Willing) and 6 (Very High Willingness), and a midpoint of 3 (Moderate Willingness). 15 5. 3.  Test of H2.  H2 predicts that investors will react more positively to disclosures that focus on the societal beneﬁts of green investments than those that focus on the cost to the company.  We used two comparisons of standardized winning bids to test this hypothesis.  First, we compared the standardized winning bids for Green Investment Only reports to the standardized winning bids for Green Investment and Cost reports and then we compared the standardized winning bids for Green Investment Amount reports to the standardized winning bids for Green Investment Amount and Cost reports.  We used these comparisons because the only difference between the two report types in each comparison is the inclusion of cost information.  For the ﬁrst comparison, Model 1 in Panel B of Table 5 shows that, consistent with H2, the standardized winning bids are signiﬁcantly higher (t¼1. 68, p¼0. 05) when managers’ disclosure focused on the societal beneﬁt (n¼56, mean standardized winning bid¼$2. 18 from Panel C of Table 4) than when they also reported the speciﬁc cost to the company (n¼33, mean standardized winning bid¼$1. 49 from Panel C of Table 4).  However, for the second comparison, Model 2 in Panel B of Table 5 shows that there is no signiﬁcant difference (t¼0. 07, p¼0. 47) when managers’ disclosure focused on the societal beneﬁt (n¼31, mean standardized winning bid¼$2. 21 from Panel C of Table 4) than when they also reported the speciﬁc cost to the company (n¼34, mean standardized winning bid¼$2. 18 from Panel C of Table 4).  The second comparison above suggests that investors may not always react less positively when cost information is disclosed.  Although we did not anticipate this result, a possible explanation is that the disclosed cost information in the second comparison made salient the reduction in energy costs associated with the green investment.  That is, although any green investment always had a net cost to the company in our setting, the amount of the societal beneﬁt was twice as high as the net cost to the company, and this was made salient when the report included information about both the amount of the societal beneﬁt and the cost to the company.  This may explain why the second comparison did not support H2, while the ﬁrst did.  Although wealth maximizing potential investors should ignore any disclosure regarding green investment in our setting, the results for H1 and H2 reported above show that they respond differently to different types of reports.  Fig.  2 summarizes these results.  The ﬁrst column of the ﬁgure corresponds to the results for H1, showing that, on average, the standardized winning bid was $0. 55 and 37. 2% higher when managers disclosed that a green investment was made versus when they made no report.  The last four columns of Fig.  2 correspond to the results for H2, showing that there is a positive difference in the standardized winning bids between No Report and the Green Investment Only ($0. 70 and 47. 3%), Green Investment Amount ($0. 73 and 49. 3%) and Green Investment Amount and Cost ($0. 70 and 47. 3%) reports, but virtually no difference in the standardized winning bids (0. 01 and 0. 7%) between the Green Investment Cost report and No Report.  The results for H1 and H2 reported above show that potential investors bid more when the green investment is disclosed and when the disclosure focuses on the societal beneﬁts of the green investment.  Investors’ higher bids in response to these disclosures reduce the cost of the green investment to the manager and the other current shareholder.  However, despite this reduction in cost, the manager and the current shareholder nevertheless still bear a signiﬁcant ﬁnancial cost when the manager made a green investment.  That is, even though investors responded more favorably to such disclosures, a regression model with the joint payoff for the manager and current shareholder as the dependent variable and amount of the green investment as an independent variable shows that the joint payoff was negatively affected (t¼-23. 64, po0. 001.  not tabulated) by the amount of green investment. 16 Moreover, this result holds separately for each report type (all t’s43. 88, p’so0. 01.  not tabulated) and for both the ﬁrst and the second half of the experiment (both t’s416. 06, p’so0. 01.  not tabulated). 17 These results provide evidence that, although investors’ bids are higher when managers disclosed that they made a green investment, managers and current shareholders still bore a signiﬁcant ﬁnancial cost regardless of the type of report that managers made regarding their investment decision.  In summary, investors shared only part of the costs of managers’ unproﬁtable green investment, with the remaining cost being borne by the manager and other current shareholder.  5. 4.  Test of H3.  Before testing H3, we note that, as shown in Panel A of Table 3, managers made a green investment 50% of the time (180 out of 360 cases).  Most investments were for lower amounts, i. e. , $1. 00 (16. 7%) or $2. 00 (9. 2%), but the next highest percentage was for the maximum possible amount of $20. 00 (8. 3%).  For the 180 cases in which an investment was made, the average investment was $6. 17, which represents 21% of the company’s expected earnings of $30.  Seventeen of the 18 managers (94. 4%) made a green investment, with 5 managers making more than 15 investments, 4 making 11 to 15, 3 making 6 to 10, and 5 making 5 or less.  Given the frequency of green investments and the ﬁnancial disincentive to make such investments, it is unlikely that the large number of investments were random errors.  Moreover, managers’ responses to a post experiment question indicate that those who made green investments did so because they value the societal beneﬁts.  Managers rated their willingness to contribute to environmental causes on a 7 point scale with endpoints of 0 (Not Willing) and 6 (Very High Willingness), and a midpoint of 3 (Moderate Willingness).  A logistic regression with investment as an indicator dependent variable coded as 1 (0) when a manager made (did not make) an investment and the response to this question as the independent variable shows that managers with higher responses were more likely to make an investment (z¼1. 58, p¼0. 055). 18 H3 predicts that managers who make a green investment will disclose that they have done so.  Given that our earlier results show that investors respond differently to different types of disclosures, we expect managers to anticipate this and make their disclosure decisions accordingly.  As shown in Panel B of Table 3, consistent with H3, managers disclosed their green investment in 155 of the 180 cases (86. 1%).  This proportion of disclosed cases (86. 1%) is signiﬁcantly greater (z¼28. 02, po0. 001) than the proportion of cases not disclosed (13. 9%). 19 Managers’ responses to post experiment questions provide further evidence that they considered investors’ reaction when making their disclosure decisions.  Managers rated how they expected investors to react to a report that a green investment was made and to no report on separate scales with endpoints of 0 (Very Unfavorably) and 6 (Very Favorably), and a midpoint of 3 (Neither Favorably or Unfavorably).  The average response for a report that a green investment was made (3. 11) is signiﬁcantly greater (t¼3. 83, po0. 001) than for no report (1. 89), suggesting that, on average, managers expected investors to react favorably to a report that a green investment was made, but unfavorably to no report. 20 5. 5.  Test of H4.  H4 predicts that managers who disclose their green investment will focus their disclosure on the societal beneﬁts of their investment more often than on the cost to the company.  We test H4 by examining the types of reports that managers made to investors.  We used the same two comparisons of report types to test H4 as we used earlier to test H2.  First, we compared Green Investment Only (n¼56) to Green Investment and Cost (n¼33) and then we compared Green Investment Amount (n¼31) to Green Investment Amount and Cost (n¼35).  The only difference between the two report types in each comparison is cost information.  We compared the proportion of the ﬁrst type of report (reports that focused on the societal beneﬁts without the cost) to the proportion of the second type of report (reports that included cost information).  Consistent with H4, the ﬁrst comparison shows that there were signiﬁcantly more (z¼2. 44, po0. 01) reports that focused on the societal beneﬁts (56/89¼62. 9%) of the green investment than those that also disclosed speciﬁc information about the cost to the company (33/89¼37. 1%).  However, for the second comparison, the proportion of reports for the two report types (31/66¼47. 0% and 35/66¼53. 0%) is not signiﬁcantly different (z¼0. 492). 21 As for H2, there is an explanation for why the second comparison does not support H4.  When cost information is disclosed along with the amount of the societal beneﬁt, the reduction in energy costs from the green investment is made salient, and some managers may have tried to highlight this positive aspect of their investment.  As shown earlier when testing H2, disclosing both the societal beneﬁts and the associated cost did not hurt managers because investors reacted as favorably to such reports as to reports that disclosed only the societal beneﬁts.  5. 6.  Additional analysis.  5. 6. 1.  Amount of Green Investment.  Our results for H1 show that investors value knowing that a green investment was made, but do not address investors’ response to the amount of the investment.  Therefore, we examined whether the standardized winning bids increased as the disclosed amount of investment increased.  Panel C of Table 5 shows that the standardized winning bids increased by approximately $0. 11 for each $1. 00 of disclosed investment amount (t¼1. 69, p¼0. 05).  Thus, not only are the standardized winning bids higher when an investment is disclosed, they also increase as the disclosed investment amount increases.  However, our data also suggest that managers may not have expected investors to react favorably to all amounts of green investment.  Speciﬁcally, when managers made a green investment of $10 or less (n¼143), they disclosed the amount of the investment 44. 8% of the time, but when managers made a green investment of more than $10 (n¼37), they only disclosed the amount of the investment 5. 4% of the time.  Consistent with this observation, Panel B of Table 4 shows that the “Average Green Investment” amounts in column 2 are larger for managers who invested and did not disclose the amount of their investment (No Report¼$10. 66 and Green Investment Only¼$7. 91, combined average¼$8. 74) than for managers who invested and disclosed the amount of their investment (Green Investment Amount¼$3. 35 and Green Investment Amount and Cost¼$3. 82, combined average¼$3. 60). 22 This suggests that managers were concerned that potential investors may view very high amounts of unproﬁtable green investment unfavorably.  While managers rarely disclosed the amount of their investment greater than $10, they nevertheless still disclosed that they made such an investment most of the time (67. 6%¼ 25/37). 23 We cannot directly test how potential investors reacted to such high investment amounts because managers rarely disclosed them.  Further evidence that managers were concerned that very high investment amounts might be viewed less favorably by investors comes from their responses to a post experiment question asking them to rate how they expected investors to respond to all possible amounts of green investment ($0 through $20 in one dollar increments) on a seven point scale with endpoints of 0 (Very Unfavorably) and 6 (Very Favorably) and a midpoint of 3 (neither favorable or unfavorable).  Managers rated amounts of $5 and below as favorable (mean¼4. 