
The literature on oil and commodity markets during the last
decade has shown the importance to identify and understand the
causes and consequences of commodity price shocks.  Some of the
key insights (Kilian, 2008a) are that (i) most commodity prices
are endogenous with respect to the global business cycle, and (ii)
demand shocks cause delayed and sustained price movements while
supply shocks have small and transitory effects.  Whereas disentangling the supply and demand components in a structural model is
now common in the empirical literature to understand commodity price dynamics (especially for crude oil price), some important
concerns are missing regarding the effect of second-order moments
(especially the one related to uncertainty). 
So far, the previous literature is indeed silent on the effects of
macroeconomic uncertainty on the volatility of commodity prices. 
This issue is nevertheless worthy of investigation since the impact
of uncertainty on the global economy has been widely documented. 
For instance, theories of investment under uncertainty explain
why under irreversibility condition or ﬁxed costs, uncertainty over
future returns reduces current investment, hiring, and consumption
through an “option value to wait”. 1 The starting point is that at a
micro level, uncertainty may diminish the willingness of ﬁrms to
commit resources to irreversible investment and the readiness of
consumers to spend or allocate their earning and wages.  It follows
that micro-level uncertainty may be transmitted to the macro level
because uncertainty about the return to investment at a micro level
may create cyclical ﬂuctuations in aggregate investment at a macro
level (see Bernanke, 1983). 2 The crucial point here is that there is
no reason why such mechanism at both micro and macro levels
should not be extended to commodity markets.  Indeed, at a micro
level, commodity ﬁrms in several sectors (especially in oil industry)
are confronted to high costs and should be impacted by uncertainty
about returns to investment.  Similarly, at a macro level, as prices are
related to global supply and demand conditions, uncertainty about
macroeconomic aggregates should also affect commodity prices. 
In the wake of the literature about the origins of commodity price
movements, the aim of this paper is to investigate the impact of
uncertainty on commodity price returns and volatility.  Regarding the
previous literature, the bulk of the studies have looked at the reverse
relationship and highlighted the signiﬁcance of uncertainty in oil
prices in explaining economic ﬂuctuations and in exacerbating asymmetry in the oil price-economic activity nexus. 3 All of them suggest
that oil price uncertainty impacts output, investment, and consumption in the U. S. 