
China’s excess air pollution is widely known.  In 2014, for example,
annual ﬁne particulate (PM2. 5) levels in 31 Chinese major cities (4
province-level cities and 27 provincial capitals) were 23-124 μg/m3,
with a mean of 65 μg/m3, exceeding the World Health Organization
(WHO) guideline level of 10 μg/m3 by a factor of N6 (Nam,
forthcoming).  As demonstrated by a substantial body of the epidemiological literature, conventional air pollutants, such as PM2. 5, increase
health risks substantially (Dockery Name, 1989, 1992.  Dockery and
Pope, 1994).  Given its excessiveness, air pollution in China has posed
enormous and imminent threats to the public health of urban residents. 
Many impact studies motivated to increase public awareness of the
threats have used such epidemiological evidence to estimate pollution-induced socioeconomic burdens.  A conventional approach ﬁrst keeps
track of the morbidity and mortality cases that occur due to exposure
to excess pollution, applying concentration-response functions, drawn
from the epidemiological literature, to given pollution levels.  Each case
is then valuated in monetary terms, using market or surveyed data for
each health endpoint.  A substantial number of China-focused studies
have adopted this approach, and their estimated pollution-health costs
range from 3. 5 to 5. 9% of China’s historic gross domestic product (GDP)
(see Section 4. 2). 
One potential problem in the literature is a lack of dynamic thinking
in economic valuation.  Many available estimates for China are based on a
static application of the conventional approach mentioned above, considering only a single point in time.  However, the effects of pollutioncaused damage may remain in an economy for a long time (Nam Name,
2010).  Labor loss in one period, for example, reduces incomes and savings, which will then lead to less investment and growth in the future. 
Also, increased demand for medical services can hardly be met without
drawing resources from other sectors, distorting cross-industry resource
allocation.  Distorted resource allocation due to an external shock
(i. e. , pollution) can reduce economy-wide efﬁciency over time, in a cumulative manner.  Neglecting such dynamic dimensions can lead to substantial underestimation. 
Other areas for improvement include a ﬁner unit of analysis and the
adoption of local epidemiological evidence.  Due to the lack of data, a dynamic impact analysis of China’s pollution is often conducted at the national level.  Given the substantial subnational heterogeneity in terms of
air quality or socioeconomic conditions, however, the disadvantage of
treating China as a single entity is substantial.  In addition, many studies
simply apply Western epidemiological evidence to China’s context, although a huge gap in background air quality may lead to different
exposure-response relationships between the two regions.  Accordingly,
it seems important to incorporate local epidemiological evidence, away
from direct application of Western estimates. 
In this study, we ﬁll the gap in the literature through application of a
dynamic assessment tool, following in the footstep of Matus Name (2012). 
The method developed in this study is distinct from others in that it can
capture cumulative dimensions of the pollution-health effects, which are
often overlooked in the literature, with subnational details.  We also focus
on PM2. 5, instead of PM10, given its closer relevance to human health, and
incorporate local epidemiological evidence to improve the accuracy of
our estimates. 
2.  Literature Review. 
A substantial body of literature has so far estimated pollution-health
effects in China’s context.  Among the pioneering studies on China is a
1997 study by the World Bank (World Bank, 1997).  This study estimates
that in 1995 the socioeconomic burden associated with PM10 pollution
was as large as 4. 6% of China’s historic GDP, even when its cumulative
dimension is ignored.  A follow-up World Bank study (World Bank and
SEPA, 2007) concludes that a comparable economic loss from PM10 pollution in 2003 was around 3. 8% of GDP, conﬁrming its earlier ﬁnding
and reﬂecting an improving air-quality trend in China.  In terms of method, these two studies take a static approach in impact estimation and a
contingent valuation method (CVM) in valuation of statistical life.  Many
other studies apply a similar static method, taking human capital (HC)
or cost of illness (COI) approaches, as well as a CVM (e. g. , Cai, 2009. 
Greenpeace and Peking University School of Public Health, 2015.  Kan
Name, 2004.  Mu and Zhang, 2013.  Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development, 2014.  Xie Name, 2016.  Gao Name,
2015.  Zeng Name, 2015.  Huang Name, 2012.  Hammitt and Zhou, 2006. 
Zhou Name, 2014.  Xu Name, 2015, 2016).  In general, those estimates
based on HC or COI methods tend to be smaller than CVM-based estimates, due to their restrictive focus on economic damage (Viscusi
Name, 2005). 
A key problem of the studies adopting a static approach is that they
tend to neglect cumulative dimensions of economic damage (Matus
Name, 2012).  Pollution-caused wage loss in one period, for example,
means a reduced pool of capital inputs available for growth in the following periods, and such effects remain in an economy for a long time
(Nam Name, 2010).  Also, increased exposure to pollution drives up the
demand for healthcare services, requiring an economy to allocate
more of the available intermediate or factor inputs toward the
healthcare sector at the expense of other sectors’ output (Matus Name,
2008).  Such distorted resource allocation caused by pollution likely
introduces economy-wide inefﬁciency, and this effect lasts beyond a
single time period.  Failure to consider these cumulative dimensions
can result in substantial underestimation of pollution-health costs
(Reilly Name, 2013). 
For this reason, more recent studies take a dynamic approach, often
employing computable general equilibrium (CGE) models (Bollena and
Brink, 2014.  Matus Name, 2012.  Nielsen and Ho, 2013.  Saari Name, 2015. 
Wu Name, 2017.  Xie Name, 2016).  With the explicit description of a
pollution-related production nest within a CGE framework, we can
trace cross-industry interactions and associated pollution-health
costs2, and the model’s dynamic application allows us to capture cumulative effects of economic damage over time, leading to a more complete
impact assessment (Boehringer and Rutherford, 2008.  Clarke Name,
2009.  Dai Name, 2017.  Yang Name, 2005.  Karplus Name, 2016.  Li Name,
2012.  Qi Name, 2014.  van Ruijven Name, 2012.  Zhang Name, 2013.  Zhu
Name, 2017.  G.  Wang Name, 2016.  X.  Wang Name, 2016).  Estimates
based on a dynamic approach tend to be greater than static estimates,
given their additional consideration of such missing dimensions in the
latter.  For example, Matus Name (2012) estimate that PM10-associated
health damage in 2005 reached 5. 9% of China’s GDP, which exceeds
the World Bank’s static estimate available for 2003 (3. 8%) by 2. 1 percentage point.  Part of this difference is due to the former’s more complete inclusion of cost dimensions, although a parallel comparison of
the two studies is hard, due to dissimilar time covered and methodological details (e. g. , assumption of PM10-related threshold effects). 
The latter group of studies, however, also present substantial room
for further improvement.  Most notably, China-focused dynamic analysis
often treats entire China as a single region, due to lack of reliable subnational data (e. g. , Matus Name, 2012).  This approach may not be reasonable, given China’s substantial subnational heterogeneity in terms of air
quality or socioeconomic conditions (Nam, forthcoming).  Another area
for improvement is incorporation of local epidemiological evidence.  Recently, a few studies have shifted toward regional CGE modeling, presenting substantial improvement in the ﬁrst aspect, but they still tend
to apply Western epidemiological evidence to China’s context (e. g. , Xie
Name, 2016).  This application neglects the possibility that a huge gap in
background air quality can lead to substantially different exposureresponse relationships in China and Western countries (Burnett Name,
2014).  In recognition of these problems, we conduct a dynamic
pollution-health effects analysis at subnational levels, incorporating
local epidemiological evidence. 
<Middle> Theoretical Framework and Method. 
Our dynamic analysis is based on the China Regional Energy Model
(CREM) extended for health-effects analysis (CREM-HE), developed as
part of the Regional Emissions Air-Quality Climate Health (REACH) assessment framework (Kishimoto Name, 2017.  Zhang Name, 2013. 
Karplus Name, 2016.  Luo Name, 2016).  Our method in detail is described3. 1.  REACH assessment framework. 
The REACH assessment framework is self-consistent and intends to
capture comprehensive energy-environment-economy dynamics in response to a policy shock.  This framework is a key product of the China
Energy and Climate Project, co-led by Tsinghua University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Zhang, 2016.  Kishimoto Name, 2017). 
As shown in Fig.  1, the following four components compose the REACH
framework.  an energy and economy model (CREM), an emission inventory module, an atmospheric chemistry transport model, and a healtheffects evaluation module.  In the ﬁgure, thin gray arrows indicate the
ﬂow variables among the components.  This framework can be applied
for various policy-driven cost-beneﬁt analyses at multiple levels, and
its spatial resolution can be easily increased by incorporating provincial
details of energy and economic systems and other spatial distribution
information, such as emissions and population. 
In response to a policy shock, CREM ﬁrst simulates economic growth,
energy use, and emissions pathways for each region.  Then, the air quality
modeling system, composed of a pollutant emissions inventory model
and a regional atmospheric chemistry model, uses CREM’s simulation
results to generate air-quality layers.  The pollutant emissions inventory
model, such as the Multi-resolution Emission Inventory for China
(MEIC) or the Regional Emission Inventory in Asia (REAS), can generate
detailed emission datasets by source and species, supporting climate and
air quality modeling at multiple spatial resolutions and time scales.  The
regional chemical transport model, such as the Community Multi-scale
Air Quality (CMAQ), translates emissions into concentrations, considering potential nonlinearity.  The air quality layers are then passed to the
CREM-HE model to conduct health effects analysis.  Implementing the
four modules in this order, we can mimic complex bidirectional feedback
loops between human and earth systems, and conduct a realistic
pollution-health effects analysis under various policy scenarios. 
For a complete employment of REACH model framework, we need to
conduct multi-iterations and obtain the solution when key parameters
converge to ﬁnite interval.  In this study, however, we conduct a counterfactual analysis of the past time periods (2007-2015), for which historic
air quality data already exist, and thus we do not need the ﬁrst three
steps explained above.  That is, we directly simulate CREM-HE under historic PM2. 5 levels and concentration-based policy targets, without translating emission-based targets into concentrations. 
3. 2.  CREM-HE. 
CREM is a multi-sector, multi-region, recursive dynamic CGE model,
where each province represents a separate region (Table 1).  CREM has
been used in conjunction with the China-in-Global Energy Model
(CGEM), to conduct a comprehensive impact assessment associated
with China’s national and subnational energy and climate polices
(Zhang Name, 2013, 2016.  Karplus Name, 2016.  Luo Name, 2016).  CREM consists of 35 regions in total, including 30 Chinese provinces and 5 international regions (Fig.  2).  The model has 15 sectors in total (13 production
and 2 consumption sectors), and its central economic data is from
China’s 2007 provincial input-output tables.  The 13 production sectors include ﬁve energy production sectors (coal, crude oil, natural gas, oil reﬁnery, and electricity and heat production), which have key importance in
China’s industrialization and urbanization processes.  Further technical details of the model are described in Zhang Name (2013) (see also Supplementary Material). 
In this study, we extend the standard version of CREM to assess
pollution-health effects, and call this extended version CREM-HE.  As
done in Matus Name (2008, 2012) and Nam Name (2010), air pollution is
introduced to the model as an economic shock, and the conventional social accounting matrix has been reconstructed to include the household
service sector, dedicated to mitigate the pollution-health effects (Fig.  3). 
Exposure to excess air pollution increases the incidence of morbidities
and mortalities.  Morbidities associated with pollution incur labor loss
and service costs for recovery from illness, and are modeled to drive up
the demand for the household services.  As the household services sector
draws labor and service inputs from other sectors for its production, increased output of the household services sector can be attained at the expense of reduced output of other sectors.  In addition to direct loss (lost
wage and medical expenditure required for recovery from illness), such
distortions in resource allocation causes inefﬁciency to an economy. 
Labor loss associated with mortalities is simply subtracted from the available pool of labor. 
Morbidities and mortalities also cause loss of leisure, but leisure does
not directly enter the economic system as a production factor (Fig.  4). 
Leisure, instead, is treated as potential labor input, as part of it can be
converted into labor hours.  Following conventional economic theory,
workers are assumed to value a unit leisure hour as much as a unit
labor hour, and they have a choice between them.  In this framework,
excessive pollution imposes both direct (i. e. , labor and leisure loss and
medical expenditures) and indirect (i. e. , efﬁciency loss from distorted
resource allocation) costs on the economy. 
3. 3.  Air Quality Input, Health Endpoints, and Relative Risk Factors. 
In terms of pollutant, we focus on PM2. 5, given its large impacts on
human health and well-established epidemiological evidence (World
Bank and Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, 2016).  Our baseline
PM2. 5 levels are constructed from monitored data in 367 Chinese cities in
2015 (Green Peace, 2016).  The original data are converted into a
0. 25°×0. 25° grid, applying an inverse distance weighted interpolation
method.  Then, this grid is overlaid with a 0. 25°×0. 25° population grid
(CIESIN, 2016) to compute population-weighted PM2. 5 concentrations
at the province level (Fig.  5). 
The simulation of CREM-HE also requires baseline PM2. 5 levels in
2007 and 2010, but monitored data for these two years are not available. 
Accordingly, province-speciﬁc PM2. 5 levels for these two years were estimated by adjusting the 2015 PM2. 5 layer to match China’s national PM2. 5
levels in 2007 and 2010, reported to the World Bank (2017). 
In terms of health endpoints, our analysis covers nine categories.  Four
of them are related to chronic exposure to particulate matter (PM) pollution.  chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), ischemic heart disease (IHD), lung cancer (LC), and stroke (see Supplementary Material for
further details).  This category of disease develops over a relatively long
time period and eventually leads to premature deaths.  An absolutely
large share of the PM-caused health costs arises from such mortalities associated with chronic exposure, exceeding any acute exposure effects
(Matus Name, 2008, 2012.  Nam Name, 2010).  Given this importance, looking
at four sub-categories separately can help explore more detailed chronic
effects dimensions (Pope and Kanner, 1993.  Pope Name, 1995, 2004. 
Pope, 1996, 2000.  Mccubbin Name, 2004.  Park and Bae, 2006.  Davidson
Name, 2007.  Stanaway Name, 2016.  Kassebaum Name, 2014.  MAPS Working
Group.  GBD, 2016).  The other ﬁve health endpoints covered are morbidities and mortalities related to acute exposure.  hospital admission due to
respiratory disease (RHA), hospital admission due to cardiovascular and
cerebrovascular disease (CHA), emergency room visits (ERV), and bronchitis (CB), and premature deaths from acute exposure (AM). 
Increased incidence of each health endpoint when exposed to pollution is computed, using relative risk (RR) factors.  One crucial improvement made in this study in this respect is the incorporation of local
epidemiological evidence.  After surveying a body of the locally conducted epidemiological literature, we identiﬁed multiple RR estimates for the
ﬁve health endpoints associated with acute exposure.  Even those estimates for an identical health endpoint present a substantially large standard deviation, due to dissimilar methods, sample group and size, study
region and time periods.  Thus, among the estimates for each endpoint,
we choose one near the center, avoiding extreme values of the range
(Xie Name, 2011.  Li Name, 2013.  Qiu Name, 2013.  G.  Wang Name, 2016.  X. 
Wang Name, 2016).  The RR factors chosen for this study are listed in
Table 2.  For the four health endpoints associated with chronic exposure,
we adopt the estimates for China by Burnett Name (2014), which are illustrated in Fig.  6. 
3. 4.  Case Calculation and Valuation. 
Case calculation in CREM-HE is based on the RR factors introduced in
the previous section.  RR is deﬁned as increased health risk when exposed
to pollution, relative to the control case (i. e. , not exposed).  For acute exposure (AE) categories, increased incidence of health endpoint i in region
AE) is computed using Eq.  (1), where F and P refer to
r at time t (Casesirt
baseline incidence and the size of exposed population, respectively. 
Here, the term [1−1/RRi] is deﬁned as the population attributable
risk—potential reduction in incidence of morbidity or mortality when
entire population is avoided from exposure to pollution. 
For the chronic exposure (CE) category, case calculation is made by
age group.  Premature deaths in this category take a long time to develop,
and occur as an outcome of exposure to PM, accumulated over a lifetime. 
Accordingly, exposure to PM needs to be treated as a function of age.  In
this study, we assume that premature deaths from chronic exposure
occur only to those with age of ≥30, consistent with the existing literature (Bickel and Friedrich, 2005.  Matus Name, 2012.  Pope Name, 2004).  InCE) is
creased mortality risk from chronic exposure in age group j (Casesijrt
computed as shown in Eq.  (2), where C and Djrt are pollutant concentrations and the share of age group j in exposed population, respectively,
and other notations are as deﬁned earlier.  In this equation, it needs to
be noted that RRi is not a constant but a function of Ctr. 
CREM-HE considers these chronic exposure effects beyond a single point in time.  Given an economy-wide life expectancy of 75
years, for example, those who died at age 50 due to chronic exposure
would continue to affect the economy for the following 25 years.  Direct wage and leisure losses associated with these premature deaths
in that year affect investment and growth over the 25-year period in
a cumulative manner. 
Estimated health risk, in terms of increased incidence, is then valuated in monetary terms.  Each health endpoint, except for mortalities from
chronic exposure, is valuated, based on CVM and COI methods (Table 3). 
For this purpose, we ﬁrst construct a national valuation table, using available market price data and willingness-to-pay survey results.  Then this
table is adjusted for each province, with reference to local consumption
indices.  In contrast, mortalities from chronic exposure are valued at average regional wage rates, which are endogenously determined within
CREM-HE and are adjusted for each age group based on China’s agespeciﬁc wage proﬁles. 
<Conclusion> Results and Discussion. 
4. 1.  Scenario setting. 
For model simulation, we construct four scenarios—Historical, Green,
Policy I, and Policy II (Table 4).  Among them, Historical is a reference case
scenario, where China’s actual PM2. 5 levels are set.  The CREM-HE is calibrated to reproduce each province’s historic GDP under this scenario.  The
other three are counterfactual scenarios, where no anthropogenic pollution is assumed (Green) or WHO guideline levels (Policy I) or China’s
Class 2 standards (Policy II) are met over the entire period of analysis. 
Our impact analysis is based on the comparison of the simulation results
under Historical and those under one of the three policy scenarios. 
4. 2.  National analysis. 
At the national level, China’s PM2. 5-associated welfare loss reached
$248 billion in 2015 (Fig.  7). 3 In this study, we deﬁne welfare as the
sum of consumption and leisure, following the deﬁnition used by
Matus Name (2012).  Under the two policy scenarios positing more realistic control targets than Green, the estimated costs are reduced to $197
billion (Policy I) and $103 billion (Policy II), but are still substantially
large.  In all three cases, the costs in absolute terms tend to increase
over time, despite relatively stable PM2. 5 levels during the period.  This
is mainly due to increased value for unit labor loss (i. e. , increased
productivity over time) and cumulative effects of the loss over time.  In
relative terms, however, the costs tend to be stable over time at aroundWhen decomposed by economic loss category, the largest fraction of
the costs is from direct loss associated with chronic exposure—labor and
leisure loss that occurred due to premature deaths from chronic exposure (Fig.  8).  Direct loss from chronic exposure accounts for over half
the total costs (53-66%), presenting a declining trend over time.  Direct
loss from acute exposure, including medical expenditure as well as lost
labor and leisure, accounts for 9-10% of the total costs.  Broader economic
loss—economy-wide lost efﬁciency, which is not captured by the two direct loss categories—accounts for the remaining 25-38% of the costs.  In
contrast to the other direct loss categories, the relative share of broader
economic loss tends to increase over time, as lost efﬁciency at one time
point affects an economy for a long time in a cumulative manner.  The
rapid increase of this category’s contribution reﬂects China’s fast
economic growth, suggesting that neglect of this dimension in China’s
context could lead to substantial underestimation. 
4. 3.  Provincial analysis. 
As shown in Fig.  9, the magnitude of PM2. 5-caused health damage
varies across provinces (see Supplementary Material for further details).  Overall, ﬁve health endpoints associated with acute exposure
show similar distribution patterns, where associated health risk tends
to be higher in populous provinces with high PM2. 5 levels, such as
Henan Province and the Jing-Jin-Ji (Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei) region.  One
exception to the pattern is the ERV case, where associated cases are particularly high in Jiangsu and Guangdong Provinces, which are not as
polluted as Henan or Jing-Jin-Ji.  High baseline ERV incidence rates in
these provinces, as well as their large population size, also partly underlie
this result.  The number of mortalities associated with chronic exposure is
particularly large in Shandong Province.  This is mainly due to the mixture of its large population and high PM2. 5 levels—Shandong is China’s
second most populous province and recorded the ﬁfth highest PM2. 5
levels in 2015.  Those regions sharing similar conditions, such as Henan,
Jiangsu, and Sichuan Provinces, also show high increases in mortality
cases due to chronic exposure. 
When such estimated health risk is evaluated in monetary terms in a
dynamic setting, the costs in absolute terms are particularly large in
populous and wealthy coastal regions (Fig.  10).  These regions include
Jiangsu, Guangdong, Shandong, and Zhejiang Provinces, showing a welfare loss of $13-21 billion in 2015.  Henan and Hebei Provinces, which
are among the most populous and most polluted regions in the country,
also suffer large health costs, estimated at $8-9 billion in the same year,
but these estimated costs are smaller than those in the coastal regions
mentioned above, given the gap in unit labor productivity. 
However, the cost distribution across provinces substantially differs
when the size of each local economy is controlled for (Fig.  11).  In relative
terms, the pollution-health costs in each province are presenting substantial variations at 0. 5%-5. 8% of regional welfare in 2015.  The relative
costs in most regions are N2%, including such western regions as Guizhou
and Guangxi, where PM2. 5 levels are relatively low.  The costs are particularly large, exceeding 4%, in a cluster of central inland or northern coastal regions, located in the north of the Yangtze River.  This spatial
distribution pattern of relative costs substantially overlaps with that of
PM2. 5 levels.  As illustrated in Fig.  12, regional PM2. 5 levels, given as multiples of the WHO guideline level (10 μg/m3) and associated health damage measured in relative terms to regional welfare, present a strong
positive correlation. 
In terms of sector, economic loss from air pollution tends to be
comprehensive, but leading to relatively large output reductions in
manufacturing and service sectors (Fig.  13).  In 2015, for example, the
output of the service, other manufacturing, and energy-intensive industries in the eastern region could increase by $145 billion, $175 billion,
and $97 billion (4. 5%, 3. 3%, and 3. 8% of the baseline levels), respectively,
if no PM2. 5 pollution is assumed.  This result reﬂects these sectors’ relatively high dependence on labor and service inputs for production.  As
explained earlier, increased incidence of morbidities and mortalities
under excess pollution reduces the pool of labor and service inputs,
available for the production of conventional goods and services.  The reduction is due to both direct labor loss and distorted market allocation
in favor of the household service sector, dedicated to the mitigation of
pollution-health effects.  Such sector-wise effects are more obvious in
the eastern and central regions, whose non-primary sectors are larger
than the western region. 
When compared with other studies, which often measure the costs in
terms of GDP loss, our results (3. 1% of historic GDP) are located near the
lower bound of the available estimates (3. 5-5. 9%).  For this comparison
purpose, we recalculated PM2. 5-associated health costs, focusing on conventional GDP components (investment, government purchase, and net
export, as well as consumption) while excluding leisure, although a parallel comparison across studies is difﬁcult due to different methods and
time periods analyzed (Table 5).  Part of the reason seems related to
our focus on a more recent period, given that air quality in China has substantially improved in the past 5-20 years.  Earlier studies may also arrive
at higher estimates because they often applied Western RR estimates in
China’s context, which can lead to overestimation, or paid insufﬁcient attention to subnational heterogeneity.  However, these are all possibilities
whose validity requires additional scientiﬁc tests within an identical
methodological framework. 
5.  Conclusions. 
In this study, we develop CREM-HE and apply the model to the analysis of PM2. 5-related health effects in China.  In several respects, our
method presents a substantial improvement over the existing literature. 
CREM-HE is a dynamic assessment tool, and its application allows us to
capture cumulative dimensions of pollution-caused economic damage,
which are often overlooked in many existing studies.  The CGE model
also treats each province as a separate region, reﬂecting substantial heterogeneity across subnational regions, in terms of air quality, population
size and structure, income levels, and public health conditions.  We also
focus on PM2. 5, instead of PM10, given its closer relevance to human
health, and incorporate local epidemiological evidence without applying
Western estimates to China’s context. 
Our results show that PM2. 5 has caused substantially large health
costs to China’s economy, conﬁrming the ﬁndings of many existing studies.  PM2. 5-associated welfare loss at the national level is estimated to
have been $248 billion in 2015.  The two direct loss categories (medical
expenditure and labor/leisure loss that directly arise from morbidities
and mortalities) jointly account for 62% of the total costs.  Premature
deaths from chronic exposure comprise the largest fraction of the costs
(53%), ﬁve times the direct loss associated with acute exposure (9%). 