 1.  Introduction Most liberalized electricity markets suffer from market power, with high concentration indices, and are frequently subject to market investigations (see for example DG COMP, 2007).  Academics and consultants alike struggle to model the exercise of this market power and the implications of possible reforms, such as increasing interconnection (Newbery et al. , 2004), moving to nodal pricing (Joskow and Tirole, 2000), market coupling (Newbery et al. , 2016), breaking up larger companies such as EdF in France (INSEAD, 2004), introducing capacity auctions (Entriken and Wan, 2003.  Genoese et al. , 2012.  Hach et al. , 2015.  Hu and Hobbs, 2008) or by increasing the volumes of renewables (Liski and Vehviläinen, 2015.  Newbery, 2016).  The main problem facing those wishing quantiﬁed results rather than illustrative examples lies in the considerable diﬃculty of modeling strategic behaviour in markets with various capacity and transmission constraints, in which the participants interact daily on auction markets under conditions of great transparency.  Electricity is possibly the best example of the textbook example of a perfectly homogenous product that would seem to favour intense price competition, but, as observed above, liberalized electricity markets are characterized by oligopoly and deviations from competitive behaviour.  Moreover, generators have very complete information about their own and rivals’ short-run cost functions, which are determined by known technologies and observable fuel prices.  Cournot models may be suitable for modeling potential market power and prices for speciﬁc levels of demand (Moselle et al. , 2006) but electricity demand varies substantially hourly, daily and seasonally.  In practice, and more extensively now that the EU has almost completed market coupling at the day-ahead stage, generating companies offer their supply as a function of offer prices (often a step function, see Newbery et al. , 2013) into EUPHEMIA,2 the auction platform that determines day-ahead prices for the whole of the market-coupled EU.  The natural way of modeling the outcomes of that auction are to look for Supply Function Equilibria, but these are notoriously hard to solve or even simulate (Day et al. , 2002).  Nevertheless, the central idea of a supply function is helpful, in that it requires agents to form a view of the supplies offered by other generators, which, when subtracted from total demand, gives a perceived residual demand.  Each agent can then choose an optimal supply response.  If all agents have well-deﬁned supply behaviour it is in principle possible to ﬁnd a Nash equilibrium in which each oligopolist maximizes its proﬁts given the behaviour of other market participants.  The agents may choose to offer ﬁxed quantities – Cournot behaviour – or may choose to mark-up their offers on their variable costs, and the relevant demand facing those with market power may have competitive supplies subtracted from total demand.  The central point of this paper is that while the residual demand facing an agent depends on the choices of other agents, the assumption that the market will settle at the Nash equilibrium of these speciﬁc choices needs to be tested for robustness.  The equilibrium will not be robust if it is proﬁtable for an agent, knowing the strategies of all other players, to choose a different strategy.  This paper tests the robustness of various popular modeling approaches for an electricity market with a small number of players.  We study two particular forms of mark-up pricing.  ﬁxed and proportional, where in the former, ﬁrms set a ﬁxed mark-up on their marginal cost schedule and in the latter, ﬁrms choose a proportional mark-up.  We analyze these two mark-up pricing models because most studies (some of which are reviewed below) ﬁnd that where electricity markets are concentrated, generators are selling at prices above the competitive short-run marginal cost.  They have the attraction that the choice of a single parameter (the mark-up) considerably simpliﬁes the modeling problem (Weidlich and Veit, 2008).  More important, they are consistent with the forms of offers that are allowed in most power exchanges and by EUPHEMIA.  We compare the results with the standard Nash-Cournot model in which agents just choose the quantity to supply to the market.  In auction markets like power pools and EUPHEMIA this would require producers to offer a ﬁxed amount at some minimum price (e. g.  variable cost) and then receive the price set by the interaction of total supply andWe note that for the case of linear marginal costs and linear demand, the supply function equilibrium is a proportional mark-up model (Klemperer and Meyer, 1986), but we are interested in a wider set of cost and demand functions.  One of the main conclusions of this paper is that the proportional mark-up model would seem to have wider appeal in modeling market power than just in the linear case, and in that sense it forms a useful simpliﬁcation of complex supply function models that lends itself to modeling market power.  We examine the robustness of both forms of mark-up pricing and ask whether these models are robust against more sophisticated (Stackelberg) strategies. 