 1.  Introduction  Prior theoretical research posits that private lenders have comparative advantages over other debt market participants at  monitoring borrowers’ current and likely future compliance with ﬁnancial covenants and other loan contract terms (hereafter, “loan contract monitoring”) ( Diamond, 1984.  Fama, 1985.  Diamond, 1991 ).  Prior empirical research ﬁnds that commercial borrowers provide lenders with private information to facilitate loan contract monitoring ( Acharya and Johnson,  2007.  Bushman et al. , 2010.  Frankel et al. , 2011.  Ivashina and Sun, 2011, Massoud et al. , 2011.  Minnis and Sutherland, 2017 ).   However, with the notable exception of Minnis and Sutherland (2017) , these prior studies do not identify the speciﬁc mechanisms by which lenders obtain such information or types of information obtained.  This limits the insight provided about  how lenders obtain and use accounting-related borrower private information for monitoring, a natural question for accounting research.   We  examine  whether  lenders’  demand  for  information  for  loan  contract  monitoring  explains  the  existence  of  loan  covenants that commit borrowers to disclose accounting-related private information (hereafter, “borrower private information”) periodically after loan origination to lenders.  We also examine the effects of these covenants on the frequency of loan  contract amendments and on informed trading by lenders in secondary loan markets.  To conduct these analyses, we collect  a sample of 3309 original private loan contracts, both single-lender and syndicated loans, ﬁled as exhibits to public borrowers’ Form 10K/Q and 8K ﬁlings.  These contracts generally include a category within the aﬃrmative covenant section that  speciﬁes borrower ﬁnancial reporting covenants.  We identify two types of borrower private information speciﬁed in these  covenants.  (1) projected ﬁnancial statements for future periods (hereafter “projected ﬁnancial statements”) and (2) more  frequent than quarterly (usually monthly) and not yet publicly available historical ﬁnancial statements (hereafter, “monthly  ﬁnancial statements”).  Almost half (47%) of the loan contracts in our sample include one or both of these covenants, with  projected ﬁnancial statements being required almost twice as often as monthly ﬁnancial statements (40% versus 21% of contracts, respectively).  Despite their prevalence, to our knowledge prior researchers have not examined or even been aware of  these contractual requirements for borrowers to disclose these types of private information.   We argue that loan contracts include borrower private information covenants only when their loan contract monitoring  beneﬁts exceed their costs Lenders may receive beneﬁts from these covenants through (1) improved loan contract monitoring, (2) more eﬃcient loan contract amendment, and (3) trading on the information.  Borrowers beneﬁt to the extent  that competition induces lenders to pass along some of their beneﬁts by offering lower interest rates or other terms more  desirable to borrowers.  Such passing along of beneﬁts is essentially necessary to induce ﬁrms seeking to borrow to commit  contractually to provide their private information, because borrowers primarily bear the costs of these covenants.  Actual or  perceived costs to borrowers may arise from (1) the production of the information.  (2) lenders using the information to  obtain more favorable loan contract terms, i. e. , the “hold-up” problem.  (3) trading by lenders leading to broader dissemination of borrower private information and thus proprietary (e. g. , competitive) costs.  (4) borrowers missing performance  projections.  and (5) borrowers making economically shortsighted decisions to manage their within-quarter performance.   We  provide  two  sets  of  evidence  regarding  the  beneﬁts  of  borrower  private  information  covenants  for  lenders’  loan  contract monitoring.  First, prior research shows that the beneﬁts of monitoring increase with (1) borrower credit risk and  uncertainty, as long as these factors are not so large that monitoring is not cost effective ( Diamond, 1991.  Minnis and  Sutherland, 2017.  Nikolaev, 2016 ).  (2) borrower-lender information asymmetry ( Minnis and Sutherland, 2017.  Suﬁ, 2007 ).   and (3) loan contract terms that reallocate control rights, adjust loan contract terms, or require borrowers to take some  action in lenders’ favor when borrowers are determined to violate the terms ( Asquith et al. , 2005.  Christensen and Nikolaev, 2012.  Flannery and Wang, 2011.  Nikolaev, 2016.  Rajan and Winton, 1995, Minnis and Sutherland, 2017 ).  Motivated by  this research, we hypothesize and provide descriptive evidence that loan contracts more frequently include borrower private  information covenants when borrowers have higher credit risk and uncertainty, when borrower-lender information asymmetry is higher, and when the contracts include ﬁnancial covenants or other terms for which this information enhances loan  contract monitoring.  We further predict and ﬁnd that loan contracts more frequently require projected (monthly) ﬁnancial  statements when additional or more timely information about borrowers’ future (historical) accounting performance is more  important.   Second, prior research shows that loan contract amendments occur when lenders receive and evaluate information after  loan origination that resolves uncertainty about borrowers’ credit quality and alternative borrowing opportunities ( Nikolaev,  2016.   Roberts  and  Suﬁ,  2009 ).   Information  may  resolve  uncertainty  either  unfavorably  or  favorably,  transferring  control  rights or bargaining power either to the lender or the borrower, and thus may lead to amendments that beneﬁt either  the lender or the borrower.  Motivated by this prior literature, we hypothesize and provide evidence that borrower private  information covenants are positively associated with the frequency of amendments.  We further predict and ﬁnd that the  two types of covenants exhibit distinct associations with the timing of the ﬁrst amendments of loan contracts.  Borrowers  required to provide monthly ﬁnancial statements do so multiple times each quarter prior to the public release of their  quarterly ﬁnancial information, which incorporates the three most recent monthly ﬁnancial statements.  Hence, we predict  and ﬁnd that the provision of monthly ﬁnancial statements is most associated with ﬁrst amendments in the quarter after  loan origination, i. e. , very timely amendments.  In contrast, borrowers required to provide projected ﬁnancial statements  generally do so only once annually around the ﬁscal year end.  Hence, we predict and ﬁnd that the provision of projected  ﬁnancial statements is most associated with ﬁrst amendments around the provision of the projections, which typically is  beyond the quarter after loan origination, i. e. , less but still fairly timely amendments.   In order to link borrower private information covenants to amendments, or any other loan contract monitoring-related  outcome, the covenants must provide lenders with valuable information about borrowers, and lenders must process and  use that information.  To further conﬁrm that these conditions are met, we examine whether lenders trade on the two  types  of  borrower  private  information  in  the  secondary  loan  market.   Although  lenders  generally  are  expected  to  keep  borrower private information conﬁdential, prior research ﬁnds that lenders trade on this information in various markets  ( Acharya and Johnson, 2007.  Bushman et al. , 2010.  Ivashina and Sun, 2011.  Massoud et al. , 2011 ).  We examine the secondary loan market because.  (1) Informed trading by lenders is most likely to occur in this market, since private loans  are not public securities governed by the Securities Acts of 1933 and 1934.  and (2) loan contracts should include borrower  private information covenants when that information is value-relevant for the loans involved.  Because loan contracts require borrowers to provide the two types of borrower private information at different periodicities, we propose and test  distinct hypotheses as to when lenders’ trading on each type of information is reﬂected in borrowers’ loan returns.  We  predict and ﬁnd that abnormal loan returns over various windows leading up to and including the contractually required  delivery date of projected ﬁnancial statements, but not over randomly selected windows of equal length, are signiﬁcantly  positively associated with the subsequently reported change in operating cash ﬂows for the following year.  We predict and  ﬁnd that the intraquarter speed of price discovery in the secondary loan market, measured following Bushman et al.  (2010) ,  is faster when loan contracts require borrowers to provide monthly ﬁnancial statements.  We emphasize that these results  only indicate that the borrower private information provided to existing lenders ﬁnds its way into secondary loan prices,  not necessarily that the informational playing ﬁeld in secondary loan markets favors those lenders.   Our study is most directly related to Minnis and Sutherland (2017) , who examine a sample of lender requests for two  types of accounting-related private information—annual or interim ﬁnancial statements and tax returns—to small commercial  borrowers provided by a proprietary data source.  Minnis and Sutherland (2017) provide evidence that these requests.  (1)  Exhibit an inverse U-shaped relation with borrower credit risk, being highest for borrowers with intermediate credit risk.   (2) fall with the length of the lending relationship.  and (3) rise with collateral for non-real estate loans in lender friendly  states with laws that make collateral more readily available to lenders.  They further ﬁnd that ﬁnancial statements and tax  returns can be either substitutes or complements, depending on borrower characteristics and the degree of borrower-lender  information asymmetry.   Our study both is complementary to and generates signiﬁcant additional results beyond Minnis and Sutherland (2017) in  four primary respects.  First, we identify and examine only borrowers’ contractual commitments to provide speciﬁc types  of private information to lenders, whereas their proprietary data source does not indicate whether information requests  stem from loan contracts.  Second, the availability of ﬁnancial reports (including loan contract exhibits) and other public  information for our sample of public borrowers enables us to examine a richer set of determinants of borrower private  information covenants (e. g. , borrower characteristics and a more extensive set of loan contract terms) than is possible with  their  proprietary  data  source.   This  increases  the  statistical  power  of  our  tests  of  these  determinants.   It  also  enables  us  to document two important effects of borrower private information covenants.  loan contract amendments and trading by  lenders in secondary loan markets upon the receipt of borrower private information.   Third, we examine public and relatively large borrowers who ﬁle ﬁnancial reports each period with the SEC, whose equity and other securities typically trade in reasonably liquid markets, and for which lending eﬃciency is most likely to be  promoted by ﬁnancial covenants and other contractual incentives for lenders to monitor ( Rajan and Winton, 1995 ).  Hence,  borrower private information covenants involve different beneﬁts and costs for our borrowers than for Minnis and Sutherland’s (2017) private borrowers, for which lending eﬃciency is most likely to be promoted by enhancing lending relationships and borrower credit reputation ( Diamond, 1991 ).  For example, public borrowers’ more extensive public information  likely reduces the beneﬁts of borrower private information covenants for loan contract monitoring.  These borrowers’ greater  access to securities markets likely also reduces borrowers’ costs associated with the hold-up problem, although it may also  enable informed investors to better infer borrower private information from lenders’ trading.   Fourth, we examine projected and monthly ﬁnancial statements, which yields various new predictions and results.  For  example, we predict and ﬁnd that borrowers’ provision of projected ﬁnancial statements is positively associated with.  (1)  accounting-based performance covenants and performance pricing, loan contract features that have been a focus of prior  accounting  research (e. g. ,  Asquith  et  al. ,  2005.   Christensen and Nikolaev,  2012.  Nikolaev,  2016 ).  (2) longer-horizon loan  contract amendments.  and (3) informed trading by lenders in secondary loan markets in advance of the public release of  the realization of the projected information.   Like Minnis and Sutherland (2017) , we provide evidence that lenders’ collection of borrower private information serves  various purposes beyond strict enforcement of ﬁnancial covenants and contractual transfer of control rights to lenders upon  covenant violations by borrowers, the focuses of most prior accounting research on debt contracting.  These purposes include facilitating loan contract amendment prior to borrowers’ violation of ﬁnancial covenants.  In fact, such purposes must  motivate covenants that require borrowers to provide projected ﬁnancial statements, which are unveriﬁable information  about borrowers’ future prospects that cannot be used by lenders to evaluate borrowers’ current compliance with ﬁnancial  covenants or to transfer control rights.   Our  study  is  subject  to  a  number  of  caveats.   Most  importantly,  we  document  interesting  and  heretofore largely  unknown  associations,  not  causal  relations,  between  borrower  private  information  covenants  and  borrower  characteristics,  borrower-lender information asymmetry, loan contract terms, loan contract amendment frequency and timing, and trading  by lenders on borrower private information in secondary loan markets.  While our analysis is motivated by prior research,  these covenants are jointly determined with other loan contract terms and the loan contract setting ( Armstrong et al. , 2010 ),  and they constitute only one of many possible mechanisms for lenders to obtain and borrowers to supply borrower private  information.  We discuss the caveats to our study, and the opportunities they constitute for future research, further in the  conclusion.   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 discusses the motivation, supporting theory, and related  empirical research.  Section 3 describes the data and summary statistics.  Section 4 outlines the research design and presents  the empirical results.  Section 5 concludes.   2.  Motivation and background.  2. 1.  Loan contract monitoring and borrower private information covenants.  Lenders’ primary goal is to ensure that they earn adequate returns on their loans.  To help achieve this goal, loan contracts  often include ﬁnancial covenants and other terms that, upon violation by the borrower or in other speciﬁed circumstances,  transfer control rights to lenders, adjust loan contract terms, or require borrowers to take some action in lenders’ favor  ( Asquith et al. , 2005.  Christensen and Nikolaev, 2012.  Flannery and Wang, 2011.  Minnis and Sutherland, 2017.  Nikolaev,  2016.  Rajan and Winton, 1995 ).  Although considerable empirical research beginning with Booth (1992) examines banks’ role  in loan contract monitoring, relatively little is known about what activities are involved in monitoring and thus what information lenders use in performing these activities.  We argue that lenders monitor borrowers’ current and likely future  compliance with loan contract terms for three primary reasons.  (1) To determine when and how to exercise their contractual rights, (2) to motivate borrowers to act in ways that do not require lenders to exercise their rights, and (3) to promote  lending relationships through timely (e. g. , pre-violation) loan contract amendment.  Lenders likely also monitor their significant borrowers for ﬁrm-level credit risk management, accounting, and regulatory purposes.  Lastly, lenders may trade on  information obtained from monitoring.   It may not be necessary for loan contracts to include borrower private information covenants in order for lenders to be  able to monitor borrowers’ compliance with the contract terms effectively.  Lenders have various alternative means to obtain  desired information.  Public borrowers ﬁle ﬁnancial reports each quarter with the SEC that contain detailed and standardized  historical ﬁnancial statement information.  Most loan contracts require that borrowers satisfy reasonable information requests  from lenders (see Appendix A for an example), allowing lenders to request information on an as needed basis.  Loan contracts  with ﬁnancial covenants typically require borrowers to provide covenant compliance reports.   Finally, lenders may obtain desired information through established lending and non-lending relationships with borrowers ( Bharath et al. , 2007.  Boot,  20 0 0.  Fama, 1985.  Mester et al. , 2007 ).   We expect borrower private information covenants to enhance lenders’ ability to monitor borrowers’ compliance with  loan contract terms, for several reasons.  First, under the non-contractual alternatives discussed above, borrowers may be  unwilling to disclose unfavorable information or may not have the information systems in place to satisfy lenders’ ad hoc  information requests, and negotiations regarding information requests may be costly or delay the provision of useful information.  Second, the theoretical disclosure literature suggests that commitments to disclose enhance eﬃciency compared  to the alternative of discretionary disclosure of private information.  For example, Verrecchia (2001) develops a series of  modeling examples that collectively support his conclusion that “often arrangements in which managers are granted the  discretion to disclose ex post are ineﬃcient in comparison to arrangements in which the ﬁrms (or managers) precommit ex  ante” (p.  146).  Third, in the loan contracting setting, covenants that require borrowers to provide information in each period  over the loan contract term should help reduce information asymmetry between the lender and borrower over that term.   Roberts (2015) emphasizes the “importance of the attenuation of information asymmetry over the loan contract term. ” We expect loan contracts to contain borrower private information covenants only when the loan contract monitoring  beneﬁts of these contractual commitments to disclose exceed their costs.  Naturally, these covenants can only provide beneﬁts to the extent that (1) they require information incremental to that available to lenders through the alternative means  described above (e. g. , are not simply lender-speciﬁc boilerplate), and (2) lenders process the information provided and use  it to monitor borrowers.   Borrower private information covenants can provide incremental information to lenders in three primary, non-mutually  exclusive ways.  First, the speciﬁed borrower private information may be more timely than the other information available  to lenders, being provided at more closely spaced intervals (as in the case of monthly ﬁnancial statements) or with shorter  reporting lag.  More timely information should improve the timeliness of lenders’ loan contract monitoring.  Second, the speciﬁed information may disaggregate (e. g. , by ﬁnancial statement line item) or indicate the quality of the available information.   Such supplemental information should improve the accuracy of lenders’ loan contract monitoring. 