 1.  Introduction At the 21st Conference of the Parties (COP) under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in Paris, the parties agreed on an ambitious target to limit the increase in global mean temperature to 1. 5–2. 0 °C.  Among other countries, Russia proposed a reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, and has submitted a pledge to the United Nations (UN), which proposes a 25–30% reduction in Russia's GHG emissions by 2030 compared to 1990 (Carbon Brief, 2015).  At present, Russia is one of the world's largest producers of GHG emissions.  Russia's share of global GHG emissions accounted for approximately 5% in 2012 (WRI, 2012).  In 2014, Russia's GHG emissions without land use, land-use change and forestry were nearly 30% below the 1990 level (UNFCCC, 2016).  This implies that Russia would need a stricter climate policy to prevent any increase in It is likely that Russia might not need any “standard” climate policy instrument, such as a carbon tax or an emission trading system, to achieve a substantial reduction in GHG emissions.  This is because, similar to many other economies, the Russian economy is distorted by preexisting subsidies imposed on domestic energy consumption.  For example, Russia imposes high export taxes on crude oil, oil products, and natural gas (Roskazna, 2015).  Furthermore, domestic gas prices are regulated in Russia, and they remain substantially lower than export netback prices (Gazprom, 2015).  Export taxes and the regulation of gas prices operate as implicit subsidies to domestic consumers.  Economic intuition suggests that the elimination of those pre-existing distortions will make the energy market as well as the whole economy more efﬁcient.  Moreover, it will contribute to a reduction in GHG emissions and stimulate investments in energy saving technologies.  As a large consumer and exporter of fossil fuels, the Russian economy will certainly be affected by domestic and foreign climate policies, while foreign economies might be affected by Russia's climate policy.  In the course of anticipated reductions in the international demand for fossil fuels, Russia would need to ﬁnd other revenue sources by developing a dynamic comparative advantage in the production of high valueadded, non-fossil fuel intensive commodities and services.  Recently, a few publications addressed the economy-wide effects of Russia's energy policy (e. g. , Heyndrickx et al. , 2012.  Orlov, 2015a, 2015b).  Hypothetical carbon taxation and prospects for a double dividend were analysed by Orlov and Grethe (2012), Orlov et al.  (2013), and Orlov and Grethe (2014).  However, these studies are hampered by several limitations.  First, they are based on single-country models, which are unable to depict the response of other economies and terms-of-trade effects.  Second, market inertias such as imperfect labour mobility and immobility of extant capital are not depicted.  Third, the studies do not show how the Russian economy might be affected when other countries implement stricter climate policies.  Fourth, the effects resulting from Russia's climate policy on other economies were not analysed.  Our study aims to shed light on these important political issues.  The main objectives of this paper are to analyse the economy-wide effects of international climate policy on the Russian economy as well as the effects of Russia's climate policy on the European economies.  Our analysis is based on a dynamic multi-region, multi-sector computable general equilibrium (CGE) model, a model for Global Responses to Anthropogenic Changes in the Environment (GRACE) (Aaheim and Rive, 2005), which has been calibrated using an electricity-detailed extension of Version 9 of the Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP9-Power) database and its satellite database accounts for CO2 and non-CO2 emissions.  To improve the credibility of policy simulation results, we incorporated market inertias, such as imperfect sectoral labour mobility and vintage capital.  Based on the GTAP9-Power database, the power generation sector was disaggregated into ﬁve power generation technologies.  Economic analyses usually address the total welfare effects arising from policy, and therefore, many CGE studies typically focus on welfare effects.  However, competitiveness and income distribution effects are also vital to policy-makers.  In our analysis, we neglect the issue of income distribution, but we address competitiveness by showing how climate policy in one country affects the economic activities in other countries and regions.  The results from our analysis might be of interest, not only for policy-makers, but also for private investors.  Although this study focuses on Russia, the results might be of relevance to other energy-exporting countries that also impose direct or indirect subsidies on domestic consumption of fossil fuels.  It should be noted that many developing countries have explicit or implicit subsidies on fossil fuel consumption (OECD/IEA, 2015).  The remainder of the paper is organised as follows.  Section 2 provides a brief description of the model and database.  Section 3 discusses policy simulations.  Section 4 presents the results and discussion.  Section 5 concludes.  <Middle> Database and model.  2. 1.  Database.  For our analysis, we use the GTAP9-Power database, which is an electricity-detailed extension of Version 9 of the GTAP database (Aguiar et al. , 2016.  Peters, 2016).  The GTAP9-Power database depicts the global economy in 2011 and provides data on 140 regions and 68 commodities.  We aggregated all regions into three regions.  Rest of the World (RoW), the European Union 28 (EU) and Russia.  This analysis focuses on Russia and the EU as this region is the main importer of fossil fuels from Russia.  Further, to assess the economy-wide effects of Russia's climate policy on the European economies, we disaggregated the EU into 16 member countries. 1 All commodities and services are aggregated into one sector output for each of 23 sectors.  The GTAP9-Power provides data on base- and peak-load power generation.  The expected annual market effects of international climate policy are not significantly affected by the division into base- and peak-load generation.  Therefore, we aggregated all base- and peak-load technologies but distinguish between gas-ﬁred, coal-ﬁred, nuclear, hydro, and renewable power generations.  On the demand side, the output from all power technologies was aggregated into electricity.  The GTAP9-Power database includes satellite databases on energy and CO2 emissions, while the data on non-CO2 emissions are obtained from Version 9 of the GTAP database.  We found some inconsistencies in the GTAP9-Power database, which were corrected.  To balance the database, we adjusted the capital account, which is residually built in GTAP and therefore very uncertain.  According to the GTAP9-Power database, the export tax on gas in Russia is more than 300%, whereas the export tax rate on natural gas has been set to 30%, according to the Russian Tax Code.  Therefore, we reduced the export tax rate on gas from Russia from 300% to 30% by increasing the pre-tax value of Russia's gas exports.  The balancing of the database implies an increase in the capital cost in Russia's gas sector.  Furthermore, the GTAP9-Power database depicts high sale taxes on gas consumption in Russia, while in reality domestic gas prices are regulated, and they remain signiﬁcantly lower than export netback prices (Gazprom, 2015).  This implies domestic consumers of gas are indirectly subsidised in Russia via low consumer prices.  Another issue relates to output shares of different power generation sub-sectors.  The World Energy Outlook 2013 (OECD/IEA, 2013) shows that the output shares of nuclear and hydro power were 16% each in 2011, whereas in the GTAP9-Power database, these output shares are very low (Supplementary Material, Table A2).  To correct for this, we adjusted the pre- and post-tax values of domestic gas consumption in Russia as follows.  First, we eliminated all consumption taxes on gas by increasing the pre-tax value of industrial gas consumption.  To balance the database, we increased the capital cost in Russia's gas sector.  Then, we reduced the pre-tax values of domestic gas consumption in Russia by 62%.  The balancing of the database in this case implied a reduction of the capital cost in Russia's gas sector, and an increase in the capital cost in other sectors to compensate for decreased costs of gas consumption.  The balancing of the database in the power generation sector implied an increase in their capital cost.  This resulted in increased output from nuclear power and hydropower.  Finally, we incorporated a domestic gas subsidy by increasing total production cost of gas via capital costs in Russia's gas sector.  The calculated subsidy rate on domestic gas consumption in Russia accounts for 40%.  For more details on the data adjustments and calculation of the domestic gas subsidy, see Supplementary Material, Appendix A.  The values of export tax rates on crude oil and oil products depicted in the GTAP9-Power are reasonable.  for example, the export tax rate on crude oil accounts for 37% and for petroleum and coal products, it is 19%.  Therefore, we maintain these initial tax rates reported in the GTAP database.  2. 2.  Model.  Our analysis is based on a dynamic multi-region, multi-sector CGE model, GRACE (Aaheim and Rive, 2005).  CGE models, such as GRACE, aim to derive the broader economic consequences of changes in the decision framework for economic agents.  They are widely used for macroeconomic analyses, especially to study interactions between factor and output markets, and trade effects.  Following Mathiesen (1985) and Rutherford (1995), economic equilibrium in the GRACE model is formulated as a Mixed Complementarity Problem (MCP) of inequalities and associated variables.  To achieve equilibrium, three general equilibrium conditions have to be satisﬁed.  (1) zero proﬁt, (2) market clearing, and (3) income balance.  The model is coded in the General Algebraic Modeling System (GAMS), using the Mathematical Programming System for General Equilibrium analysis (MPSGE) (Brooke et al. , 1996.  Rutherford, 1998), and is solved by using the PATH solver (Dirkse and Ferris, 1995).  Production technologies as well as consumption preferences are depicted, using Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES) functions.  The model depicts inter-fuel and factor-fuel substitution in production.  Furthermore, we incorporated an imperfect competition in the gas market and implemented the vintage capital approach.  To depict market inertias associated with switching from one technology to another, power generation technologies are modelled as imperfect substitutes.  Moreover, we incorporate a technology-speciﬁc factor on the supply side of power generation from renewables, nuclear power, and hydro power.  This can be interpreted as a natural resource constraint.  The speciﬁc factor is assumed substitutable with the value added, meaning that we calibrate the substitution elasticity to achieve an assumed price elasticity of supply.  The detailed description of the model (e. g. , nesting structures, closures, and dynamics) can be found in Supplementary Material, Appendix B.  3.  GHG emissions and policy simulations.  3. 1.  GHG emissions.  In 1990, EU's GHG emissions without land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) accounted for 5642 million tonnes of CO2 equivalent (MtCO2-eq), and these decreased over the period 1990–2014 with an annual average growth rate of −1. 14% (Fig.  1).  Given the assumption that EU's GHG emissions will further decrease at the same rate, the EU will nearly fulﬁl its pledge of a 40% reduction in GHG emissions by 2030 relative to 1990.  Russia's pledge submitted to the United Nations (UN) accounts for a 25–30% reduction in GHG emissions by 2030 compared to 1990 (Carbon Brief, 2015).  In 1990, Russia's total GHG emissions without LULUCF accounted for 3768 MtCO2-eq, which increased over the period 1998– 2014 by 1. 07% per year (Fig.  2).  Given the assumption that GHG emissions will further increase at the same rate, Russia's GHG emissions without LULUCF will account for 3137 MtCO2-eq by 2030, which exceeds the pledged emission reductions of 25–30% by 11–19%, respectively.  According to the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) report, global GHG emissions are projected to be approximately 54,000 MtCO2-eq in 2030, if all the Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC) submitted to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, as a part of the Paris Agreement from 2015, will be implemented (UNEP, 2015).  Excluding Russia's and EU's emissions, it becomes 47,978 MtCO2-eq.  According to the GTAP9 database, total GHG emissions of the RoW in 2011 amounted to 34,370 MtCO2-eq.  This implies that to fulﬁl the pledged emissions reduction, the growth rate of total GHG emissions in the RoW should not exceed 1. 77% per year, whereas from 1990 to 2013 GHG emissions in the RoW increased by 3% per year (WRI, 2015).  3. 2.  Implicit energy subsidies in Russia.  To achieve the pledged reduction in GHG emissions, Russia might need to implement a more ambitious climate policy.  At the same time, the Russian economy has considerable potential to reduce energy intensity and the consumption of fossil fuels via elimination of implicit subsidies on energy consumption.  Domestic gas prices are administratively regulated in Russia, and they are lower than export netback prices (Fig.  3).  From 2010 to 2014, the average domestic gas price in Russia was approximately 32% of the export netback price for gas sold by Gazprom to Europe and 40% of the export netback price for gas sold to the Former Soviet Union (FSU) countries.  Furthermore, there is an ad valorem export tax on natural gas in Russia, at a tax rate of 30%.  Exports of crude oil and petroleum products are subject to speciﬁc export taxes.  Higher export taxes lead to lower domestic prices (Fig.  4). 2 In fact, export taxes operate as implicit subsidies on domestic consumption and hence a part of resource rents is dissipated by subsidising domestic consumers.  Eliminating implicit subsidies on domestic energy consumption might lead to a signiﬁcant reduction in GHG emissions and encourage economic and energy efﬁciency in Russia.  Indeed, an increase in domestic gas prices has been on Russia's policy agenda for a long time (the Russian Government, 2010).  however, it has always been postponed.  Moreover, the Russian government also considered a reduction in export taxes on crude oil and oil products compensated by an increase in the mineral extraction tax on crude oil to increase government tax revenues (Reuters, 2013.  ITAR-TASS, 2014).  From an economic point of view, royalty on resource extraction is more efﬁcient than export taxes, while a cash ﬂow tax tends to be more efﬁcient than royalties (Boadway and Flatters, 1993).  3. 3.  Reference scenario and policy simulations.  Our reference scenario is calibrated as follows.  Based on the World Development Indicators (World Bank, 2017) and the World Energy Outlook 2016 (OECD/IEA, 2016), we assume that the annual average growth rate of gross domestic product (GDP) over the period 2011– 2030 in the EU is 1. 4%, in Russia, it is 1. 9%, and in the RoW, it is 3. 2%.  Growth in the labour force is driven by population growth.  Based on the Population Estimates and Projections (World Bank, 2017), the annual average population growth rate is set to 1. 02% for the RoW, 0. 11% for the EU, and −0. 12% for Russia.  Following the MIT EPPA6 model (Chen et al. , 2015), we assume an annual autonomous energy efﬁciency improvement of 1. 0% for non-electric sectors and 0. 3% for the power generation sector.  In the reference scenario, GHG emissions in Russia and RoW are endogenously determined in the model, whereas EU's GHG emissions pathway are calibrated based on the Current Policies Scenario of WEO 2016, i. e. , we assume that EU's GHG emissions decrease by 0. 9% per year.  We conduct the following policy simulations.  → NDC.  This scenario represents an implementation of Nationally Determined Contributions from the EU and rest of the world (RoW) excluding Russia, i. e. , all countries meet their own commitments, but Russia do not implement climate policy to meet their intentions.  → +Gas price reform.  The “NDC” scenario supplemented by a gas price reform in Russia, which implies elimination of implicit domestic gas subsidy by increasing the regulated gas price.  → +Energy tax reform.  The “NDC” scenario supplemented by an energy tax reform in Russia, which implies elimination of domestic gas subsidy and export taxes on crude oil, petroleum products, and gas.  → +Cap-and-trade.  The “NDC” scenario supplemented by Russia's energy tax reform and a cap-and-trade system to achieve Russia's intensions to control emissions and thereby meet their national determined contributions.  We run the GRACE model from 2011 until 2030.  In the policy simulations, the pledged emission reductions in the EU and RoW are implemented gradually from 2020 to 2030, whereas the domestic gas subsidy and export taxes on fossil fuels in Russia are reduced by 20% per year beginning from 2020.  The elimination of domestic gas subsidy generates additional government revenues in Russia, while export taxes on crude oil and petroleum products are replaced by a lump-sum tax, which aims to mimic a cash-ﬂow tax.  In reality, a cash-ﬂow tax could operate as a pure rent tax, which has no distortionary impact on the economy (Boadway and Flatters, 1993).  The ﬁrst policy simulation aims to show how international climate policy will affect the Russian economy.  The following policy simulations reveal the interactions between international and Russia's climate policies.  We compare the results from policy simulations to the reference scenario, i. e. , the results are presented as absolute or percentage deviations from the reference scenario.  <Conclusion> Results and discussion.  4. 1.  Effects of international climate policy on Russia.  4. 1. 1.  NDC of EU and RoW.  This section analyses the economy-wide effects of international climate policy on Russia.  Table 1 reveals the changes in total private consumption under four policy simulations.  Agricultural and food products, trade services and other services account for the largest shares of total private consumption in Russia.  Decreased international demand for fossil fuels leads to lower returns to capital and natural resources in Russia.  Hence, due to a lower real income and lower government revenues from the fossil fuel sector, Russia's private consumption of all commodities declines in the “NDC” scenario (Table 1).  Fig.  5 shows the welfare effects in Russia under four policy simulations.  Due to the international climate policy, Russia's real GDP declines annually by 0. 5% on average.  Although Russia's real GDP is lower than under the reference scenario, it still increases compared to the previous year.  The annual average private welfare loss measured by the equivalent variation (EV) accounts for 1. 8% of base household expenditures.  It should be noted that relative changes in private welfare are more pronounced than those of GDP because real GDP is calculated as ﬁnal consumption and exports less imports.  The sectoral effects (Tables 3a, 3b) reveal that export supplies of many commodities and services increase, whereas the demand for imports declines.  As a result, the relative reduction in private consumption is stronger than the relative decrease in the real GDP.  Changes in export supplies of fossil fuels from Russia are shown in Table 2.  The international climate policy is associated with a lower global consumption of fossil fuels and hence there are reductions in export supplies of petroleum products, coal, and gas from Russia to the EU and RoW, whereas the export supply of crude oil to the RoW increases moderately.  Decreased export supplies of fossil fuels from Russia and lower international prices for fossil fuels ultimately imply a lower income from value added and lower revenues from taxes (i. e. , export taxes, mineral extraction taxes, and proﬁt taxes), which accounts for a large part of Russia's government revenues.  Table 3a reveals the sectoral effects resulting from climate policies.  Due to a lower international demand for fossil fuels, Russia's domestic production of coal, gas, and crude oil declines, whereas domestic consumption of these fossil fuels increases, thereby leading to carbon leakage.  Furthermore, there are decreases in the domestic production of food products, construction, and trade and other services, which are mainly driven by a lower domestic demand due to a decreased real income.  In contrast, the production of many other commodities and services increases.  In particular, Russia's producers of energy-intensive commodities and services, such as chemicals, metals, transport services, and minerals, increase their production, driven by decreased prices of fossil fuels and electricity (Table 4) and increased prices for energyintensive commodities elsewhere.  In other words, Russia gains a comparative advantage in the production of energy-intensive commodities for domestic and export markets.  As a result, export supplies of many energy-intensive commodities increase, whereas imports of these commodities decline (Table 3b).  The changes in sectoral production and domestic consumption drive the changes in GHG emissions.  According to Version 9 of the GTAP database, CO2 emissions in Russia accounted for 68. 1% of total GHG emissions in 2011, followed by CH4 (25. 8%), N2O (4. 2%), and ﬂuorinated gases (F-gases) (1. 9%).  In the “NDC” scenario, Russia's CO2 emissions increase from 2020 to 2030 compared to the reference scenario because the international climate policy leads to lower international prices for fossil fuels, thereby encouraging domestic consumption of fossil fuels in Russia.  As a result, Russia's GHG emissions increase by 77 MtCO2-eq in 2030 compared to the reference scenario (Fig.  6).  The cumulative increase in Russia's GHG emissions over the period 2020–2030 amounts to 487 MtCO2-eq.  The changes in N2O, CH4, and F-gases emissions are moderate.  Higher GHG emissions in Russia resulting from international climate policy indicate a moderate carbon leakage.  4. 1. 2.  The gas price reform in Russia.  This section analyses the interactions between the international climate policy and Russia's gas price reform.  Overall, eliminating the domestic gas subsidy in Russia has a positive effect on the Russian economy.  it slightly alleviates Russia's welfare loss.  For example, the private welfare loss and the decline in the real GDP resulting from the international climate policy is reduced by 0. 3% points each (Fig.  5).  Overall, this is consistent with the results obtained by Orlov (2015b), who showed that increasing the domestic gas price would lead to welfare gains.  Intuitively, an implicit subsidy on domestic gas consumption distorts the allocative efﬁciency, while eliminating that distortionary subsidy places the Russian economy on a more efﬁcient pathway.  At the sectoral level, the gas price reform in Russia results in a lower supply of gas to domestic markets, whereas the export supply to the RoW increases due to a reduction in the marginal production cost in Russia's gas sector (Tables 2 and 3a, 3b).  The export supply of gas to the EU is also higher compared to the “NDC” scenario.  Orlov (2016), using a partial equilibrium model, also showed that the gas price reform leads to higher export supplies of gas.  For example, he showed that the export supply of gas from Russia could increase by 33. 7 billion cubic meters (bcm) per year, whereas our analysis reveals moderate impacts.  Furthermore, increasing domestic gas prices induces substantial sectoral effects.  On average, the domestic consumer price of gas in Russia increases annually by 25% from 2020 to 2030 compared to the reference scenario (Table 4).  A higher gas price diminishes the reduction in the electricity price, which is caused by decreased international prices for fossil fuels.  Production of electricity from gas-ﬁred plants declines, whereas the output from other power generation technologies, in particular coal-ﬁred generation, increases (Table 4).  Overall, the production of electricity decreases moderately.  There are still increases in domestic production and export supplies of many energy-intensive commodities and services, such as metals, minerals, transport, textiles, and other manufacturing (Table35a, b).  however, these increases are less pronounced compared to the “NDC” scenario due to increased domestic prices for gas and electricity.  Increasing the domestic price level for gas in Russia eliminates the carbon leakage resulting from international climate policy.  for example, Russia's GHG emissions in 2030 is by 129 MtCO2-eq lower compared to the reference scenario (Fig.  6).  The cumulate reduction in GHG emissions over the period 2020–2030 accounts for 1107 MtCO2-eq.  Although the output from coal-ﬁred plants as well as total domestic consumption of coal increases in Russia, total GHG emissions decline because of lower emissions from gas consumption.  In other words, the reduction in emissions from gas outweighs the increase in emissions from the use of coal.  This is because gas accounts for a larger share of total energy consumption compared to coal, and coal and gas are imperfect substitutes in consumption.  It should, however, be noted that the results are very sensitive to the value of the substitution elasticity between coal- and gas-ﬁred power generation.  Assuming a higher value of substitution elasticity could lead to an increase in GHG emissions due to a higher output from coal-ﬁred plants.  However, many empirical studies do not support a very strong inter-fuel substitution in the power generation sector (cf. , Atkinson and Halvorsen, 1976.  Ko and Dahl, 2001.  Petterson et al. , 2012.  Serletis et al. , 2010.  Soederholm, 2001).  GHG emissions from the EU and RoW are assumed to be controlled by an emissions trading system such that there are no changes in emissions in other economies.  4. 1. 3.  The energy tax reform in Russia.  Apart from the regulation of domestic gas prices, Russia imposes high export taxes on crude oil, petroleum products, and natural gas, which also operate as implicit subsidies on domestic energy consumption because export taxes typically reduce domestic consumer prices.  With reference to the welfare economics, eliminating these distortionary export taxes tends to provide welfare gains.  Here, we analyse how eliminating the export taxes on fossil fuels will affect the Russian economy.  As shown in Fig.  5, the energy tax reform provides a further cost-saving effect.  the welfare loss resulting from international climate policy is reduced by 0. 6% points, and there is even an increase in the real GDP by 0. 3% compared to the reference scenario.  Similar results were shown by Orlov (2015a), who, using a single country CGE model, analysed the economy-wide effects of the energy tax reform.  Intuitively, eliminating domestic implicit subsidies on fossil fuels allows, to some extent, compensation for the reduced revenues from exports of fossil fuels.  At the sectoral level, the energy tax reform in Russia results in higher export supplies of crude oil and gas to the EU and RoW compared to the “+Gas price reform” scenario (Table 2).  Note that elimination of the export taxes on crude oil and petroleum products leads to reductions in export supplies of petroleum products.  This is because abolishment of the export tax on crude oil induces a higher production cost (i. e. , opportunity costs) for Russia's oil reﬁneries.  Overall, Russia's domestic production and export supply of crude oil increases, whereas domestic production and export supplies of petroleum products decreases.  Moreover, the energy tax reform results in stronger increases in export supplies of gas compared to the “+Gas price reform” scenario because the energy tax reform also implies the abolishment of the export tax on gas.  The energy tax reform in Russia leads to higher consumer prices for gas, petroleum products, and electricity (Table 4). 