 1.  Introduction  In the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (hereafter, the “Dodd–Frank Act”), policymakers made an unprecedented move towards using securities regulation to address issues unrelated to the Securities  and Exchange Commission’s (SEC) core mission of protecting investors and maintaining the fair and eﬃcient functioning  of ﬁnancial markets ( Lynn, 2011 ).  Section 1503 of the Dodd–Frank Act requires SEC-registered ﬁrms to include information regarding mine-safety performance in their ﬁnancial reports.  In this paper, we examine the real effects (i. e. , changes  in mining-related citations, injuries, and labor productivity) of the mandatory inclusion of mine-safety disclosures in the  ﬁnancial reports (“MSD”) of the 151 SEC-registered ﬁrms whose ownership of a U. S.  mine make them subject to Section  1503 of the Dodd–Frank legislation.  A key feature of our setting is that the information provided through MSD is already  publicly available on the Mine Safety and Health Administration’s (MSHA) website.  this allows us to isolate and estimate  the magnitude of the incremental real effects of including information in ﬁnancial reports.   Section 1503 of the Dodd–Frank Act requires reporting citations for violations of mine-safety regulations both periodically in mine owners’ ﬁnancial reports (i. e. , Forms 10K and 10Q) and immediately upon the receipt of an imminent danger  order (IDO) through a Form 8K ﬁling.  MSD advocates make the implicit argument that including this information in ﬁnancial reports has implications that such information does not have when only disclosed on the MSHA website.  However, it  is unclear whether the information included in MSD is news to investors or other interested parties.  One reason the inclusion of safety information in ﬁnancial reports could have an incremental effect is because ﬁnancial reports broadcast the  information to a wide range of interested parties, thereby increasing awareness of ﬁrms’ safety records.   If MSD increases awareness of ﬁrms’ safety records, then political costs, reputational concerns, and/or activism by investors or other parties could provide an incentive for managers to improve mine safety.  For example, if managers anticipate  that the revelation of poor safety performance will have a negative effect on ﬁrm value, they may invest more in safety to  limit such effects.  Investors may react negatively to poor safety performance either because of the future cash ﬂow consequences or because of their non-cash-ﬂow-based preferences.  Cash ﬂow effects could occur, for example, through ﬁnes,  mine closures, or other costs imposed by activists.  Non-cash-ﬂow-based preferences could also lead investors to require  higher returns for ﬁnancing the operations of ﬁrms engaging in activities that conﬂict with those preferences, such as maintaining relatively unsafe working conditions (e. g. , Fama and French, 2007.  Friedman and Heinle, 2016 ).  If MSD increases the  implications of safety issues for ﬁrm value, then MSD will give managers an incentive to alter resource allocation decisions  to improve safety.  It is also possible that MSD could affect managers’ safety-investment decisions through channels other  than ﬁrm value, such as, for example, negative reputational costs arising from the public revelation that a manager operates  a ﬁrm with poor safety conditions.   Using data obtained from the MSHA, we ﬁrst assess the effect of MSD on the incidence rate of citations for violations  of mine-safety regulations.  For these analyses, we employ a difference-in-differences (“DiD”) design that compares changes  in citations issued to mines owned by SEC registrants (“MSD mines”) with those issued to mines owned by non-SEC registrants (“non-MSD mines”) around the effective date of Dodd–Frank.  We control for ﬂexible time trends and static, mine-level  differences by including both year and mine ﬁxed effects.  We document a decrease in citations per inspection hour of approximately 11% for MSD mines relative to non-MSD mines.  Our evidence suggests this reduction in citations is attributable  to an increase in compliance with mine safety regulations rather than a change in inspector behavior.   Next, we analyze the effect of MSD on injury rates.  An im plicit assum ption of MSD, which focuses almost exclusively on  the reporting of citations for safety violations, is that a decrease in citations will translate into a reduction in injuries.   However,  the  link  between  compliance  with  mine  safety  regulations  and  actual  safety  improvements  is  debatable  (e. g. ,  Ruffennach, 2002.  Gowrisankaran et al. , 2015 ).  Consistent with a meaningful improvement in safety, we document a 13%  decrease in injuries for MSD mines relative to non-MSD mines.  For the average ﬁrm, this 13% reduction translates into  approximately 0. 2 fewer injuries annually per 100 full-time employees (the equivalent of 200,000 mine-hours worked).   While the above results suggest that MSD has substantial beneﬁts, it is unlikely that the observed safety improvements  are costless.  Gowrisankaran et al.  (2015) posit that mines produce a joint output of safety and mineral production, which  suggests that an increase in safety could lead to lower mineral production per hour worked.  We examine this tradeoff by  testing whether productivity in coal mines, where we have measures of production and labor quantities, changes around the  adoption of MSD.  Using a DiD research design, we ﬁnd evidence of a signiﬁcant reduction in labor productivity following the  implementation of MSD.  The observed decline translates into increased labor costs of approximately 0. 9% of total revenue.   A critical assumption of our identiﬁcation strategy is that the trends in mine safety and productivity for MSD and nonMSD mines would have been the same in the absence of MSD (i. e. , the parallel-trends assumption).  We assess the validity  of this assumption by mapping out the counterfactual treatment effect of MSD in the pre-MSD period (from 2002 to 2009).   This analysis shows that the trends for MSD and non-MSD mines are similar.  Even given similar pre-treatment trends, other  factors, such as public outrage over a mining disaster, which differentially affect MSD and non-MSD mines, could potentially  confound our inferences.  To address this possibility, we ﬁrst demonstrate that there is no difference in the reactions of MSD  and non-MSD mines to another major regulatory event (the 2006 MINER Act) that pertains to all mines and was triggered  by events similar to those that led to MSD.   To provide evidence that an increased public awareness of safety issues is a likely explanation for the observed real  effects, we assess whether more attention is paid to safety after MSD.  First, we provide descriptive evidence of an increase in  media and analyst coverage.  Second, we compare short-window stock returns and changes in mutual fund holdings around  IDO disclosures before and after MSD.  We ﬁnd a 155 (140) basis point more negative average (median) market reaction  when a safety citation is reported in an 8K ﬁling and disclosed on the MSHA’s website, compared to the period when such  citations are disclosed only on the website.  These market reactions are most negative for ﬁrms operating primarily in the  mining industry, where safety violations likely have the greatest implications for ﬁrm value.   For mutual fund holdings, in the pre-MSD period, we ﬁnd a signiﬁcant reduction in ownership in the quarter following an  IDO announcement, indicating that some sophisticated investors were aware of, and responded to, IDO website disclosures  prior to MSD.  In the post-MSD period, the reduction in ownership when the safety information is also disseminated through  an 8K is signiﬁcantly larger, which suggests that mutual fund managers care more about safety issues when other parties’  awareness of these issues increases.  These effects are particularly pronounced for funds with explicitly stated preferences  for socially responsible investment.   Our paper contributes to the existing literature by documenting the magnitude of the real effects of including information  on social responsibility in ﬁnancial reports.  Prior research shows accounting disclosures can have real effects because.  (i)  disclosure reduces information asymmetry and agency costs (e. g. , Biddle and Hilary, 2006 .  Biddle et al. , 2009 .  McNichols and  Stubben, 2008 ), (ii) accounting numbers are used in contracts and regulation (e. g. , Holthausen and Leftwich, 1983 ), and (iii)  managers learn new information from their own disclosures and the disclosures of peers (e. g. , Shroff, 2017 ).  There is also a  literature that shows that disclosure through channels other than ﬁnancial reports can have real effects ( Jin and Leslie, 2003.   Chuk, 2013 ).  Our paper contributes to this prior work primarily because mine-safety records are already publicly available  outside of a ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial reports, which allows us to isolate and estimate the incremental effect of including information  in ﬁnancial reports as opposed to the effects of disclosing information not previously publicly released elsewhere.   Understanding  the  real  effects  of  regulations  requiring  information  on  social  responsibility  in  ﬁnancial  reports  is  increasingly important given the recent trend towards employing such policies ( Leuz and Wysocki, 2016 ).  U. S.  policymakers  are currently considering implementing similar reporting requirements for political contributions, conﬂict minerals from  the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and, more broadly, the standards issued by the Sustainability Accounting Standards  Board.  The European Union (EU) also recently mandated disclosures related to ﬁrms’ environmental, social, and governance  performance ( Grewal et al. , 2015 ).  Although our relatively narrow focus on the mining industry and MSD regulation could  limit the generalizability of our ﬁndings, our study nonetheless provides direct evidence on the real effects of mandating the  inclusion of information on social responsibility in ﬁnancial reports—a feature that is common to all of the aforementioned  initiatives.   2.  Institutional background.  The mining industry is both an economically important and historically unsafe sector of the U. S.  economy.  In 2014, the  mining industry contributed $225. 1 billion to GDP and nearly two million jobs to the U. S.  economy ( NMA, 2014 ).  Since 1900,  more than 10 0,0 0 0 workers have died and many more have been injured in U. S.  mines ( MSHA, 2014 ).  Although mining is  no longer among the ten most dangerous jobs in the U. S.  (based on fatalities), it remains one of the most heavily regulated  sectors in terms of employee health and safety.   As is often the case with policy interventions, catastrophic events frequently trigger mine-safety regulation ( Ruffennach,  2002 ).  The Upper Big Branch disaster, which killed twenty-nine miners in West Virginia on April 5, 2010, is among these.   However, in an unprecedented move, policy-makers turned to securities regulation for a solution.  Following the congressional practice of tacking off-topic provisions onto other pieces of proposed legislation, West Virginia Senator Jay Rockefeller  IV introduced MSD into the Dodd–Frank Act, which primarily focuses on regulations intended to reform the ﬁnancial services sector.  Public comments suggest that MSD was explicitly motivated by the intention to improve safety rather than aid  1 Senator Rockefeller himself publicly indicated that the goal of the  investors in assessing ﬁnancial performance ( Lynn, 2011 ).   regulation was to “make mine safety a top priority” (Senator John D.  Rockefeller IV, Press Release May 07, 2010), and, not  surprisingly, the strongest supporters of MSD in comment letters on the regulation written to the SEC were organizations  representing mine workers (e. g. , the United Mine Workers of America).   Dodd–Frank Section 1503(a) requires SEC-registered mine owners to include their safety records for U. S.  mines in their  periodic reports (i. e. , 10Qs and 10Ks for domestic issuers and 20Fs and 40Fs for foreign issuers).  Under the Federal Mine  Safety and Health Act of 1977 (the Mine Act), the MSHA is required to inspect surface mines at least twice a year and  underground mines at least four times a year.  Inspections are also conducted in response to hazardous condition complaints.   If inspectors identify violations of safety and health standards, they issue citations or orders, which may carry monetary  penalties or, in some cases, result in mine closures.  Under MSD, from these inspections, issuers must report.  severe citations  for violations of the Mine Act, proposed penalties, legal actions, and fatalities.  Section 1503(b) of the Act also requires issuers  Unlike most SEC reporting requirements,  issuers must report safety records even if their omission is unlikely to inﬂuence the decisions of ﬁnancial report users (i. e. ,  there is no materiality threshold for MSD ﬁlings).  In Appendix A , we provide an example of a typical MSD 8K and 10K ﬁling,  a screenshot from the MSHA website, and a more detailed description of the MSD reporting requirements.   Importantly, since 20 0 0, the MSHA has disclosed all information included in MSD ﬁlings on its website, typically within  twenty-four hours, making it a timelier source than the ﬁnancial reports.  The prior disclosure of the safety records allows us to estimate the effect of including this information in ﬁnancial reports independent from the effects of disclosing the  information for the ﬁrst time.   <Middle> Reasons MSD could have real effects.  If the inclusion of safety information in ﬁnancial reports increases public awareness of safety records, MSD could have  real effects through managers’ rational anticipation of its implications for cash ﬂows, discount rates, and/or their own reputation.  MSD could affect cash ﬂows by exposing a ﬁrm to heightened political costs, reputational concerns, and activism  by safety-conscious stakeholders.   Information on safety could affect a ﬁrm’s discount rate if a signiﬁcant proportion of investors prefer owning ﬁrms with  strong safety records for reasons independent of the cash ﬂow implications of those safety records.  If a ﬁrm conducts an  activity in opposition to some investors’ non-cash-ﬂow-based preferences, revelation of this activity will likely decrease the  demand of those investors, which could in turn affect the ﬁrm’s stock price ( Fama and French, 2007 ).  Friedman and Heinle  (2016) build on Fama and French (2007) to model the asset pricing implications of CSR, which, given the subject of MSD, is  directly relevant in our setting.  Their model predicts that, given a suﬃcient number of investors with non-cash-ﬂow-based  preferences, the market will price CSR disclosures.   It is also possible that MSD affects managers’ safety-investment decisions through channels other than ﬁrm value.  In the  mining industry, because of the potential political consequences, the importance of safety goes beyond its direct implications  for ﬁrm value.  For instance, managers are likely to face reputational costs from the public revelation that they operate  a ﬁrm with poor safety conditions.  Such costs could manifest on a personal (e. g. , shame) or professional level (e. g. , career  5 Dewatripont et al.  (1999) show how managerial incentives can be shaped not only by explicit incentive contracts  concerns).   but also by personal reputation and career concerns.  If managers of ﬁrms with poor safety records are less attractive labor  market candidates, they have a strong incentive to improve safety performance.   Regardless of the explanation for why safety information affects safety, what creates tension, and allows us to separate the effect of including information in ﬁnancial reports from the ﬁrst-time disclosure of that information, is that all  mine-safety records in the ﬁnancial reports are already publicly available on the MSHA’s website.  Thus, for MSD to affect  managers’ incentives to invest in safety, it must increase awareness of ﬁrms’ safety records or lead some interested parties  to assign greater importance to safety issues.   One reason MSD could increase awareness is that the information in ﬁnancial reports is more broadly disseminated than  the information on the MSHA website.  SEC-required disclosures on Forms 8K, 10Q, and 10K are effectively the billboards  of the ﬁnancial community.  Since ﬁnancial reports are so widely disseminated and have such low incremental acquisition  costs, after MSD, investors, ﬁnancial analysts, and the news media that follow SEC ﬁlings are more likely to become aware  of violations of the Mine Act—even if they are not explicitly looking for them.   Even if relatively sophisticated investors were already familiar with mine safety records prior to MSD, as less sophisticated parties also become aware of safety violations, the cost of investing in a ﬁrm that owns an unsafe mine could increase  after MSD.  For example, increased awareness that an institutional investor owns a company with a poor safety record could  lead to heightened public disapproval—particularly if third parties, such as the news media, scrutinize the investor’s portfolio holdings (as may be the case, for example, with university endowments, public pensions, or mutual funds).   Even if all investors were already fully informed about safety issues, citations might nevertheless become more costly to ﬁrms if other  stakeholders able to impose costs on ﬁrms (e. g. , activists) become aware of safety issues after MSD.   In the end, whether the mandatory inclusion of information on social responsibility in ﬁnancial reports has economically  signiﬁcant real effects is an empirical question.  Our goal in this paper is to estimate the magnitude of any such effects.   4.  Real effects of MSD.  In our analyses of the real effects of MSD, we focus on changes in safety citations, mining-related injuries, and labor  productivity around the enactment of MSD.   4. 1.  Implications of MSD for mine safety.  In this section, we assess the effect of MSD on the incidence rate of citations for violations of the Mine Act and miningrelated injuries.  Our empirical strategy relies on the fact that only SEC-registered ﬁrms are subject to Dodd–Frank and,  hence,  only  mines  owned  by  SEC-registrants  have  their  safety  records  included  in  ﬁnancial  reports.   We  use  a  standard  difference-in-differences (DiD) framework, where mines owned by non-SEC registrants are the control group.  Our baseline  model, suppressing year and mine subscripts.  The dependent variable is either the incidence rate of citations per inspection hour ( Citations ) or injuries per 20 0,0 0 0  hours worked ( Injuries ).  To mitigate the concern that our inferences could be affected by a change in inspection hours, in  the citation analysis, we alternatively include the log of inspection hours as a control variable and scale by mine hours  worked (see Internet Appendix Table IA1).  MSD , the variable of interest, is an indicator coded as one after Dodd–Frank for  mines disclosed in ﬁnancial reports.  We include year ﬁxed effects to control for changes over time in safety technology and  regulations other than Dodd–Frank, which likely have a similar effect on both MSD and non-MSD mines.  We include mine  ﬁxed effects to control for differences in production technologies and other time-invariant factors among mines.   In this speciﬁcation, we identify the effect of MSD from changes in incidence rates around the entry-into-force date of Dodd–Frank  for MSD relative to non-MSD mines.  We estimate block-bootstrapped standard errors at the mine-owner level, which adjust  for the lack of independence within mine owner (e. g. , Bertrand et al. , 2004 ).   The block bootstrap approach adjusts standard errors to account for the lack of independence within mine owner by  resampling observations (over 100 iterations) at the mine-owner level (i. e. , keeping mine-level observations for a speciﬁc  owner together).  As an alternative approach, we cluster observations at the mine-owner level using the OLS speciﬁcation  (see Internet Appendix Table IA1).   We estimate Eq.  (1) using a standard OLS regression, where we measure incidence rates over both one- and two-year periods.  Although one-year incidence rates are consistent with the length of the 10K reporting period, one year is a relatively  short interval over which to measure infrequent outcomes such as citations and injuries.  To mitigate this concern, we also  estimate Eq.  (1) using incidence rates measured over two years.  However, even when measured over two years, the infrequency of citations and injuries still results in a high density of observations at zero.  An OLS regression does not effectively  account for this concentration of observations, which could lead to biased estimates of the treatment effect ( Wooldridge,  2002 ).  We therefore also estimate Eq.  (1) using a Poisson regression.   The Poisson probability distribution captures the infrequent and discrete nature of citations and injuries and is widely  used to model similar events (e. g. , Rose, 1990.  Li et al. , 2012 ).  In the Poisson speciﬁcation, the dependent variable is the  count of citations or injuries.  In the case of citations (injuries), we use inspection hours (hours worked) as the exposure  variable—meaning the interpretation of the estimated coeﬃcient on MSD is comparable to the OLS speciﬁcation.  We report  average  treatment  effects  for  both  the  OLS  and  Poisson  regressions  where  incidence  rates  are  measured  over  one-  and  two-year periods, but because it conceptually best addresses low incidence rates, our preferred speciﬁcation is the Poisson  regression with incidence rates measured over two years.   We  obtain  mine-level  data  from  the  U. S.   Department  of  Labor  MSHA  Open  Government  Data  website,  which  compiles  an array of datasets on health and safety for mining operations located in the U. S.  We use the Inspection, Violation, Accident/Injuries , and CDC Address/Employment (AE) databases.  We include all observations from 2002 to 2013 that meet our  sample criteria.  We restrict the analyses of injuries to mine-years with at least ﬁve full-time equivalent employees (i. e. ,  more than 10,0 0 0 hours worked) to reduce the inﬂuence of very small mines.  In the OLS regressions, we truncate the top  1% of incident rates.  We do not truncate the incidence rates in the Poisson speciﬁcation because it is essentially a log-linear  model, which can effectively deal with outliers without truncation.  We include a relatively long pre-period (six years) to  enable a better assessment of the parallel-trends assumption (see Section 4. 3. 2 ).   We determine which mines in the MSHA database are disclosed in ﬁnancial reports (and therefore are included in our  treatment sample) through a comprehensive search of all relevant ﬁlings in the SEC’s Edgar database.  We provide a detailed  description of this data collection procedure in Appendix B .  Our control sample consists of all non-MSD mines available in  the MSHA database (i. e. , those not identiﬁed as MSD mines through the Edgar search).   Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for the 151 issuers subject to MSD.  The average MSD issuer owns about 24 mines.   Relative to the average issuer in Compustat , MSD ﬁrms are larger, with an average book value of total assets of $15B (the  Compustat average is $12B).  Coal-mining companies represent 11% of our sample and non-coal mining companies 18%— making mining the most frequent primary industry sector of MSD issuers.  However, mining is not the main business activity  of many SEC registrants owning mines.  In fact, 75% of the ﬁrms that own coal mines have a primary industry that is not  coal mining.   4. 1. 1.  Compliance with the Mine Act.  In this section, we present the results for our analysis of the effect of MSD on citations.  Table 2 provides descriptive  statistics for the variables used in the citation analysis.  After excluding inactive mines and truncating the top 1% of citations  per inspection hour, the dataset contains 2,726 MSD mines and 23,533 non-MSD mines.  For MSD (non-MSD) mines, on  average, one inspection hour results in 0. 08 (0. 10) citations.  Minimum, median, and maximum values are also similar.  We  provide further evidence on the covariate balance between MSD and non-MSD mines in connection with the matching  analysis in Appendix C .  Overall, the descriptive statistics indicate that MSD and non-MSD mines are similar in terms of the  citations they receive before conditioning on MSD.   We present results for the estimated average effect of MSD on the incidence of citations in Table 3 .  In Columns (1) and  (3), we estimate Eq.  (1) using OLS and measuring Citations over one- and two-year periods, respectively.  In both speciﬁcations, the coeﬃcient on MSD is negative and signiﬁcant (−0. 011 and −0. 009, respectively).  The estimated coeﬃcients imply a reduction in Citations of between 11% and 13% when we compare the coeﬃcient on MSD to the mean incidence rate of  citations for MSD mines prior to MSD.  In Table 3 Columns (2) and (4), we estimate Eq.  (1) using Poisson regressions over  one- and two-year periods, respectively.  For both speciﬁcations, the coeﬃcient on MSD is negative and signiﬁcant (  −0. 112 and −0. 113, respectively) and the estimated magnitudes imply a reduction in Citations of 11%.  Overall, the estimates for the  average effect of MSD in Table 3 are consistent across speciﬁcations and indicate a signiﬁcant reduction in the incidence of  citations for MSD mines relative to non-MSD mines subsequent to Dodd–Frank.   An important caveat makes it diﬃcult to unambiguously interpret the results from the citation analysis in Table 3 — it is not clear whether the observed reduction in citations is attributable to increased compliance with the Mine Act or  changes in MSHA enforcement.  Given that our objective is to assess whether MSD improves compliance, ideally, we would  examine actual violations of the Mine Act, rather than citations for violations.  However, violations do not result in citations  when they go undetected or when inspectors use the discretion available to them in the Mine Act to exercise forbearance.   Inspectors might consider the consequences of citing a mine for a violation before writing the citation and, knowing the  consequences are greater subsequent to MSD (i. e. , a severe citation must be included in the ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial reports), might  ignore violations by MSD mines (but not non-MSD mines)—Jin and Leslie (2003) document a similar effect for restaurant  hygiene inspectors.  Managers may also recognize the consequences of including citations in ﬁnancial reports and, subsequent  to MSD, spend more resources persuading inspectors to ignore violations (e. g. , through arguments or bribes).   To address this possibility, we separately examine Severe Citations , which for MSD-mines are included in ﬁnancial reports,  and  Not-Severe  Citations ,  which  are  not  included  in  any  ﬁnancial  reports.  We  deﬁne  Severe  Citations ,  for  both  MSD  and  non-MSD mines, as those citations classiﬁed by the MSHA as Severe and Signiﬁcant (“S&S”) violations.  We deﬁne all other  citations as Not-Severe Citations .  As shown in Table 2 , Severe Citations comprise about one fourth of all citations.  Table 4  Columns (1) and (2) report regression results separately for Severe Citations and Not-Severe Citations .  If MSD causes a change  in inspector behavior, we would expect to see a decrease only for Severe Citations , because it is only these citations that  are disclosed under MSD (we assume that there is a cost to inspectors of ignoring legitimate violations).  On the contrary,  and consistent with MSD increasing compliance with the Mine Act, we ﬁnd a negative and statistically signiﬁcant coeﬃcient  on MSD for both Severe and Not-Severe Citations .  It is not clear why inspectors would have any incentive to change their  behavior around MSD for citations that are not included in ﬁnancial reports.   Overall, the evidence in this section indicates that compliance with the Mine Act increased in response to MSD.  However,  because it is not obvious what impact compliance with the Mine Act will have on safety (e. g. , Ruffennach, 2002 ), it is  diﬃcult to interpret reductions in citations as providing suﬃcient evidence to conclude that safety has improved.   4. 1. 2.  Injuries.  In this section, we present results for injury rates.  MSD focuses on the reporting of Mine Act compliance records.  Yet, a  reduction in injury rates is clearly the ultimate policy objective (e. g. , Rockefeller, 2010 ).  Following mine-industry standards,  we deﬁne the injury rate as the number of injuries per 20 0,0 0 0 employee hours worked.  To mitigate any effects of injury reporting bias, we include only injuries that lead to an absence of at least one week, permanent disability, or a fatality.   Table provides descriptive statistics. 