
Stock liquidity is central to the efficient functioning of trade in the financial markets and is determined in part by
information asymmetry among traders.  Since voluntary disclosure can affect information asymmetry among traders, theoretical research has shown that voluntary disclosure can affect stock liquidity (e. g. , Bushman and Indjejikian, 1995). 
However, empirical tests of this mechanism must recognize that a manager's provision of disclosure is a product of many
forces, all of which must be identified. 1 It has proved difficult to construct an empirical model of disclosure that incorporates
all these forces (e. g. , Joos, 2000; Leuz and Verrecchia, 2000).  Index funds, by contrast, trade primarily for nonstrategic
reasons, and theory suggests that such nonstrategic traders unambiguously prefer higher disclosure relative to privately
informed managers and strategic investors.  This implies that I can use index funds' disclosure preferences to construct an
empirical model of voluntary disclosure that abstracts away from managers' strategic disclosure motives.  Accordingly, I use
an index-fund setting to construct a recursive model of voluntary disclosure, index fund ownership, and stock liquidity, and
demonstrate that voluntary disclosure increases stock liquidity. 
The effect of index fund ownership on liquidity can arise from two mechanisms: (1) index funds' unambiguous preference for additional disclosure, and (2) index fund ownership itself (e. g. , increased nonstrategic trading related to portfolio
rebalancing).  Separating these two mechanisms is crucial for understanding the determinants of liquidity, but it cannot be
done with simple OLS or regression discontinuity (RD) techniques.  For example, even if index funds elicit more disclosure
from managers, instrumenting disclosure with index fund ownership does not solve the identification problem: Any effect
on liquidity related to common variation in disclosure and index fund ownership could be due to either increased disclosure
or index fund ownership itself (the same is true for RD designs).  An appropriate empirical solution for separating these
effects is to construct structural equations for disclosure and index fund ownership, and then to use recursive estimation to
obtain each mechanism's liquidity effect (Greene, 2002, p.  397). 2
Constructing the recursive model requires that index fund ownership be properly identified.  To achieve this goal, I use an
index-fund-inclusion setting.  An important feature of this setting is that changes in the index's constituent firms are made
by the index's governing body (such as S&P), and are therefore exogenous to index funds themselves.  When a firm is added,
index funds must take an ownership position in that firm, and this exogenous ownership position confers control rights. 
When index funds acquire control rights through ownership, any link between an increase in voluntary disclosure due to
this control and stock liquidity can be construed as causal.  By contrast, it is harder to make such claims for strategic investors
(including managers) without explicitly modeling their endogenous preferences for disclosure, ownership, and liquidity.  The
same goes for atomistic or retail traders, who can trade at will according to their disclosure preferences and are too small to
influence managers' disclosure choices. 
I use inclusion in the S&P 500 index as the key economic phenomenon to test whether disclosure affects stock liquidity.  At
the time of a firm's index inclusion, the ownership level assumed by index funds is determined by their assets under management (AUM).  Since index fund AUM varies across time and index inclusions occur throughout time, the index-fund setting
generates substantial variation in index fund ownership.  This setting has other benefits as well.  Since firm managers can
neither influence index fund AUM nor control the timing of index inclusions, the index fund ownership stake is exogenous to
the firm (see Section 3. 1). 