 1.  Introduction  Theory suggests banks’ demand for high quality ﬁnancial reports varies with their lending strategies and internal information structures.  For example, Stein (2002) predicts that larger intermediaries, with a need to transmit information to  multiple agents within their hierarchical organizations, more frequently request veriﬁed reports from borrowers.  Smaller  ﬁnancial intermediaries, which typically have fewer layers of internal information transfer, are conversely more likely to use  soft information acquired through personal interactions with ﬁrms ( Berger et al. , 2005 ).  In addition to bank size, theories  suggest that exposure concentration may play an equally important role in shaping banks’ interactions with ﬁrms ( Dell’  Ariccia et al. , 1999.  Winton, 1999 ).  These theories suggest a bank’s concentration in a sector implies a degree of expertise.   banks with more exposure to a sector have more interactions with borrowers and are thus more informed.  Banks with less  exposure, and thus fewer substitute sources of information, may demand more detailed and veriﬁed information when contracting with those borrowers, resulting in a negative relation between exposure concentration and high quality information  demand.   A negative relation between the concentration of a bank’s loan portfolio and the extent of information collection from  borrowers is not obvious, however.  Concentration in an industry or region not only increases information about that sector,  but also ampliﬁes portfolio risk.  Collecting more reliable and precise information about concentrated exposures is a plausible  strategy for managing the risk and related scrutiny from regulators, depositors, and the board of directors.   Thus, a positive association may emerge between a bank’s lending concentration and its high quality information collection.   Understanding the relation between the concentration of a bank’s portfolio and its information collection practices is  of interest for several reasons.  First, the banking market has consolidated considerably following more than two decades  of mergers and bank failures.  As a result, the loan market has become more concentrated and individual bank loan portfolios have become more diverse.  Depending on the relation between portfolio concentration and information collection,  these market shifts can affect the demand for auditing from the predominantly private commercial borrowers that choose  whether to have audited ﬁnancial statements, in part, as a function of lending relationships.  Second, C&I loan exposures are  rarely securitized, and banks typically retain their loan exposures after origination ( Loutskina, 2005 , FDIC call reports).  As  a result, regulators expect banks to document more information collection from their larger positions to mitigate portfolio concentration risk ( Basel, 20 0 0.  OCC, 2011 ).  Requiring more collection of hard information about concentrated positions  could, however, impede lending to opaque ﬁrms when a bank is willing to lend based on knowledge arising from its specialization in the borrower’s sector.  Despite a close link between exposure concentration and borrower monitoring techniques  in theoretical models, empirical evidence establishing a link between concentration and information collection is sparse  because banks disclose limited details about their exposures or information collection practices.   We use a bank-level dataset supplied by the Risk Management Association (RMA) to examine the relation between a  bank’s commercial lending concentration and its level of ﬁnancial information quality requested of borrowers.  The dataset  includes the ﬁnancial statement collection records and commercial loan exposures of banks representing a substantial portion of the U. S.  commercial and industrial (C&I) loan market.  RMA compiles ﬁnancial reports collected by member banks  and categorizes them according to report type as.  unqualiﬁed audit, review, compilation, tax return, or other.  Unqualiﬁed  audits provide the highest level of independent veriﬁcation and the most ﬁnancial information.  Each category is tabulated  by six-digit NAICS code, six borrower size groups, six regions, and the ten years 2002–2011.  We use these data to measure  the frequency of banks’ audit collection from borrowers and their C&I exposure concentration within a bank-year.  RMA conﬁdentially provided these data at the bank level, allowing us to map lending exposures and statement collection records by  bank to FDIC call reports.   Our central ﬁnding is that banks’ audited statement collection is negatively related to portfolio concentration.  We begin  by using bank-year observations and ﬁnd that banks with more concentrated commercial loan portfolios collect audited  statements from borrowers less frequently, controlling for bank and borrower sizes and year ﬁxed effects.  Although these  results reﬂect differences unrelated to bank or borrower size, they could be the result of omitted bank characteristics that  are related to both concentration and ﬁnancial report collection practices.  Therefore, we use the panel structure of the  data and bank-year and industry-region-year ﬁxed effects to mitigate concerns about unobservables.  We ﬁnd banks collect  audited statements at lower rates from borrowers in industry-regions in which they have more concentration.  In our main  speciﬁcation, a one standard deviation increase in a bank’s exposure to an industry reduces the rate of audited statement  collection by approximately 2. 4 percentage points, or about 19% of the unconditional mean audited statement collection rate  in the sample.   In additional tests using portfolio sorts of bank size, borrower size, and concentration, we compare the magnitude of our  loan concentration ﬁnding to the more broadly studied characteristic of bank size.  Prior work (e. g. , Stein, 2002 .  Berger et al. ,  20 05.  Liberti and Mian, 20 09 ) argues larger banks are more reliant on hard information.  Consistent with this argument, we  ﬁnd larger banks are more likely to collect audited ﬁnancial statements from borrowers compared to smaller banks, even  after controlling for the average borrower size across banks.  Moreover, our estimates suggest the difference in borrower  audit rates across different concentration levels within bank is as large as the difference in borrower audit rates across  banks of different sizes.   An explanation consistent with our evidence is that concentration fosters lending expertise.  A bank with more exposure  to an industry has better information about it and, thus, less need to obtain high quality (and costly) ﬁnancial performance  information from borrowers in the industry.  By contrast, banks with less exposure to (and thus less information about) the  same borrowers face an adverse selection concern, and thus demand high quality information to substitute for their relative lack of expertise.  We conduct cross sectional tests to further examine whether exposure concentration builds expertise,  which in turn reduces demand for audited statements.  First, if concentration fosters bank expertise, our results should be  stronger in settings with more severe adverse selection and information asymmetry concerns.  We identify such settings using the extent of bank market competition within an industry-region and the performance dispersion of borrowers within  an industry.  Dell’ Ariccia (2001) suggests that adverse selection concerns are most acute in imperfectly competitive banking markets, because potential entrant banks are particularly uninformed.  In such situations, novice banks will demand  high quality information from borrowers to offset their information disadvantage.  Next, we argue performance dispersion  makes it more diﬃcult for banks with less exposure in those industries to interpret and utilize low quality information  gathered from individual ﬁrms, which increases their demand for high quality reports.  Thus, we expect to ﬁnd stronger results in industries with more performance dispersion.  We ﬁnd the negative relation between a bank’s exposure to a given  industry-region and its audited report collection from borrowers in that industry-region is stronger when either bank market  competition is lower or borrower performance dispersion is higher.   Second, if concentration allows a bank to acquire information about a given sector over time, the negative relation should  strengthen as the bank gains experience.  To examine this, we perform cross sectional tests based on variation in the length  of bank exposures.  We use only the banks that are in the dataset for all ten years and count the years each bank has  been lending to each industry-region as of the last year of data.  We ﬁnd a negative relation between experience and audit  collection and that this negative relation increases in the bank’s concentration in the given industry-region.  Moreover, the  negative relation between concentration and audit collection emerges only after the bank has been exposed to a sector for  about four and half years, suggesting the beneﬁcial information acquisition from concentration accumulates over time.   To further examine whether expertise through concentration is accumulated over time, and to ensure that the negative  relation between concentration and audited report collection is not the result of banks lowering standards to attract new  borrowers, we examine instances when banks ﬁrst enter an industry-region.  We ﬁnd that when banks ﬁrst lend to a sector,  the audit rate for new exposures is 6. 4% higher than for the bank’s other contemporaneous exposures.  We then show the  incremental audit collection rate declines as the bank gains experience in the industry-region.  This ﬁnding is consistent with  banks facing an adverse selection problem when entering new markets and mitigating it by collecting audited statements.   however, as banks better understand the new market the need for veriﬁed statements declines.   These results, however, do not address the concern that banks choose which new exposures they enter into.  One example  of how this concern could be a threat to our inferences is that banks could ﬁrst hire a sector expert and, only after having  acquired sector expertise via the new employee, subsequently increase exposure to the sector while decreasing the audit  collection rate.  This explanation differs from ours, as our hypothesis is that a bank’s increase in sector concentration leads  to the expertise increase.   Although we do not have random assignment of banks to new exposures, we address the concern that banks choose  exposures by using the housing boom of the 20 0 0s as a setting where bank entry into a sector is plausibly driven less by  endogenous bank strategy and more by demand-side factors.  The housing boom increased loan demand from construction  borrowers ( Lisowsky et al. , 2017 ) and we argue banks not exposed to construction borrowers in 2002 (“novice banks”)  gained exposure to construction ﬁrms by 2005, at least in part, because of the signiﬁcant demand shock.  We ﬁnd novice  banks indeed increase their relative exposure to construction lending substantially during the period.  We next compare the  information collection of novice banks to more established construction lenders in 2005 and ﬁnd that novices are more  likely to collect audited statements from construction ﬁrms.  These tests help corroborate our ﬁnding that banks entering a  new exposure are more likely to rely on audited ﬁnancial statements.   Is either an audit veriﬁcation strategy or an expertise strategy related to better performance.  We ﬁnd no indication either  future loan charge-offs or future bank return on assets is related to audited statement collection, exposure concentration, or  their interaction.  This offers suggestive evidence that specialized banks are trading off alternative information sources rather  3 Given we observe performance at only the bank rather than the exposure level, we  than recklessly forgoing audit requests.   caution that our ﬁndings do not necessarily indicate banks are pursuing an optimal monitoring strategy.   Our study makes two contributions.  First, it furthers our understanding of how organizational characteristics of a contracting party are related to the use of ﬁnancial information by that party (e. g. , Berger et al. , 2005.  Brickley et al. , 2009 ).   Our ﬁnding that bank concentration within an industry is negatively related to the use of higher quality ﬁnancial reports  is consistent with Paravisini’s et al.  (2015) result that banks concentrating in particular Peruvian export markets possess  expertise that shapes their lending decisions.  We advance this line of work by showing how a bank’s expertise relates to its  screening and monitoring activities, and examining different channels through which banks use and develop expertise.   Second, we contribute to an emerging literature linking ﬁnancial reporting to the characteristics of capital providers (e. g. ,  Our hypothesis is that banks have more substitute sources of knowledge about  Gormley et al. , 2012.  Lo, 2014.  Kalay, 2015 ).   borrowers from industries in which they have more expertise and this reduces their demand for costly audits for such  borrowers.  Our results are consistent with this hypothesis, implying that one source of bank demand for veriﬁed ﬁnancial  reports is a lack of substitute knowledge from sources such as relationships or industry experience.  Considering that the  typical U. S.  bank is much larger and less specialized following decades of consolidation, our ﬁndings are relevant to the  literature examining factors affecting the use of ﬁnancial reporting in capital allocation.   2.  Prior literature and motivation.  Seminal research by Diamond (1984) and Boyd and Prescott (1986) models banks as delegated monitors with an advantage in providing loans.  A key force driving the net beneﬁt of delegating private information collection about, and monitoring  of, borrowers to a bank is the diversiﬁcation of borrowers in the bank’s portfolio.  Diversiﬁcation reduces the risks associated  with idiosyncratic shocks and lowers the costs of monitoring the bank by depositors, thus increasing the bank’s likelihood  of meeting its obligations to depositors and allowing the bank to bear lending risks at a lower risk premium than individual  investors.  Moreover, such diversiﬁcation need not arise exclusively from the mix of loans the bank originates, but can be  bolstered when banks rebalance their loan portfolio exposures by buying and selling loans ( Cebenoyan and Strahan, 2004 ).   Traditional arguments based on these foundational papers suggest banks will avoid concentration risk.  These arguments,  however, presume banks are equally informed about all exposures in the economy.  Winton (1999) argues that a bank’s  monitoring effectiveness is lower in new sectors.  Dell’ Ariccia et al. 