 1.  Introduction International environmental agreements have motivated binding national targets to reduce CO2 emission (e. g.  European Commission, 2009.  Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.  UNFCCC, 2015).  Around 40 countries and more than 20 cities, states and provinces have either implemented or are planning to implement a carbon tax or similar carbon pricing scheme (Farrell and Lyons, 2016.  World Bank, 2014a.  World Bank, 2014b).  In many developed economies, a carbon tax has been found to be regressive, having a proportionally greater impact on the incomes of poorer households than richer households (Callan et al. , 2009.  Farrell and Lyons, 2016).  Understanding the distribution of incidence has been the subject of much analysis to date (e. g.  O’Donoghue, 1997.  Kerkhof et al. , 2008.  Callan et al. , 2009.  Rausch et al. , 2011).  Within the carbon tax literature, revenue ‘recycling’ via the taxbeneﬁt system is commonly suggested as a means to offset regressive impacts.  Generally, redistribution is considered in the context of achieving a progressive distribution of incidence, measured according to changes in burden for aggregated income groups (e. g.  O’Donoghue, 1997.  Kerkhof et al. , 2008.  Callan et al. , 2009.  Rausch et al. , 2011).  While the distribution is progressive in aggregate, low income households that beneﬁt from the redistribution policy are not necessarily those households that lose out due to the imposition of the carbon tax.  Indeed, it is the progressive distribution of the total tax-beneﬁt system that is of greatest importance, as ‘losers’ may be compensated elsewhere in the tax-beneﬁt system (Mirrlees and Adam, 2011).  However, as carbon taxes grow through time (Tol, 2013.  van den Bergh and Botzen, 2015), potentially replacing more traditional forms of taxation, these regressive impacts may grow in magnitude.  Offsetting the regressive impacts speciﬁc to carbon taxation will therefore be of increasing importance going forward.  This paper provides the evidence base to inform any policy amendments required to ensure a progressive tax-beneﬁt policy, post-carbon tax incidence.  This is carried out by decomposing measures of inequality of carbon tax incidence by socioeconomic determinant, identifying the cohorts affected by regressive impacts and thus informing revenue redistribution policy.  Measures of income inequality are a quantiﬁable indicator of pro-rich or pro-poor distributive burden, giving insight into whether the burden of carbon tax falls disproportionately on poor households. 