 1.  Introduction Many studies explore the effects of regulatory monitoring and enforcement activities on the subsequent behavior of facilities constrained by regulatory laws.  These regulatory activities are effective if they prompt facilities to improve their compliance with laws.  From the standard theory of deterrence (Becker, 1968), regulatory monitoring and enforcement activities prompt subsequent improvements in compliance by deterring non-compliance through increases in either the certainty of punishment, severity of punishment, or both.  However, many studies identify alternative, non-monetary motivations for complying with regulatory laws. 1 As the most prominent alternative motivation, regulated facilities may be intrinsically motivated to comply with regulatory laws.  Intrinsic motivation involves many dimensions, such as external refs, e. g. , adhering to professional norms, and internal refs, e. g. , adhering to one's own self-identity as law abiding or cooperative.  Our study extends the standard theory of deterrence by incorporating these additional motivations into our conceptual framework.  Using this framework, we explore regulated facilities' perceptions of the effectiveness of regulatory monitoring and enforcement efforts for inducing compliance with regulatory laws.  In particular, our study explores the inﬂuence of these perceptions on facilities' responses to regulatory inspections and enforcement actions conducted at a given facility (“speciﬁc deterrence”) or other similar facilities (“general deterrence”).  No previous study explores this dimension of regulatory monitoring and enforcement.  As the closest topic, various studies explore regulated facilities' perceptions of the fairness of environmental protection laws (Lazarus, 1997.  Lazarus, 1993.  Tarlock, 1992.  Hsu, 2004.  Schroeder, 1993.  Zinn, 2002.  Wiener, 1999).  For example, environmental regulation can be perceived by regulated entities as “unfair” partially because it does not provide ﬂexible means of compliance (Zinn, 2002).  Within this literature, surprisingly few studies explore the issue of enforcement fairness within the realm of compliance with environmental protection laws (Rechtschaffen, 1998.  Kagan, 1994.  Costle, 1982.  White, 1996).  Earnhart et al.  (2016) explores the link from the perceived fairness of environmental enforcement on regulated facilities' compliance with efﬂuent limits, ﬁnding that greater fairness undermines the extent of compliance.  speciﬁcally, facilities who perceive that their regulators treat them fairly “always” comply less with their efﬂuent limits than facilities who perceive that their regulators only treat them fairly “sometimes”.  Another literature explores regulated facilities' responses to regulatory monitoring and enforcement (e. g. , Earnhart, 2004a.  Earnhart, 2009.  Earnhart and Segerson, 2012).  Gray and Shimshack (2011) survey the evidence regarding environmental enforcement, concluding that both monitoring and enforcement improve compliance, proving generally effective deterrents.  None of these previous studies explores the role played by the perception of enforcement effectiveness.  In fact, because these studies adopt the standard theory of deterrence, there is no role for factors other than pecuniary (extrinsic) motivations.  Yet evidence suggests that non-monetary or intrinsic motivations may be relevant even for regulated ﬁrms.  For example, several studies demonstrate the importance of enforcement style.  Short and Toffel (2010) ﬁnd that explicit threats can reduce compliance with environmental regulations, while both Winter and May (2001) and Earnhart and Glicksman (2015) demonstrate that coercive enforcement styles can be counter-productive.  These ﬁndings are consistent with aggressive enforcement styles crowding out the intrinsic motivation to comply or cooperate with regulators.  To explore the different paths through which perceptions of effectiveness might inﬂuence compliance decisions, we develop a general conceptual framework that includes both standard monetary incentives and behavioral factors such as intrinsic motivation.  Beyond these scholarly contributions, our study's results possess policy implications.  As long as perceptions inﬂuence the effects of government interventions on environmental compliance, policymakers – the EPA and state environmental protection agencies – should incorporate this insight into their enforcement of environmental protectionFor our empirical analysis, we examine the Clean Water Act, which restricts discharges from point sources, such as industrial factories, by imposing discharge limits through issued permits.  Environmental protection agencies induce compliance with these discharge limits by conducting inspections and taking enforcement actions.  As our sample, we examine chemical manufacturing facilities permitted under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) during the years 2002 to 2004.  Using an original survey of these facilities, we collect data on facilities' self-reported perceptions of the effectiveness of regulatory monitoring and enforcement activities.  One survey question asks whether the respondent believes that inspections effectively induce chemical facilities to comply with discharge limits.  a second question asks whether the respondent believes that monetary ﬁnes effectively induce chemical facilities to comply.  For each question, respondents chose from four categories.  deﬁnitely not, probably not, probably yes, and deﬁnitely yes.  We construct two perception indicators by contrasting “yes” categories and “not” categories.  Our empirical analysis interacts these perception indicators with standard measures of inspection- and enforcement-related deterrence to assess whether facilities that perceive regulatory monitoring and enforcement activities as effective respond differently to actual monitoring and enforcement activities conducted against the individual facility or similar facilities.  We investigate both speciﬁc and general deterrence and state and federal inspections.  We ﬁnd that, on average, federal inspection-related general deterrence is the only effective means of improving the extent of compliance.  However, when we estimate the effects separately for those who perceive enforcement to be effective and those who do not, our conclusions differ substantially.  For facilities that perceive enforcement to be effective, increased deterrence of any type generates little gain, with only federal inspection-related general deterrence (marginally) signiﬁcantly affecting the extent of compliance.  For managers who already perceive enforcement to be effective, increased deterrence does not change the extent of compliance.  The effects on those who perceive enforcement to be ineffective are very different.  In particular, the actual experience of being inspected (speciﬁc deterrence) by a state agency proves effective, while greater state inspection-related general deterrence does not.  Greater general deterrence from federal inspections is also effective.  Our results reveal that a complex set of motivations inﬂuence the compliance decisions of environmental managers.  2.  Regulatory Context.  Our empirical analysis examines the wastewater discharged by U. S.  chemical manufacturing facilities regulated under the U. S.  Clean Water Act's NPDES system between 2003 and 2004.  Environmental protection agencies issue facility-speciﬁc permits to facilities regulated as point sources.  These permits identify the pollutant-speciﬁc discharge limits with which facilities must comply.  Due to considerations over local ambient water quality, wastewater discharge limits vary across facilities and time regardless of sector.  NPDES permits require regulated facilities to monitor and self-report their discharges on a regular basis. 2 By comparing these reported discharges to permitted discharges, we calculate the “discharge ratio”, which measures the extent of compliance.  To induce compliance with discharge limits, the EPA and state agencies periodically inspect facilities and take enforcement actions as needed.  Nearly all states possess “primacy” to implement the NPDES system.  These authorized state agencies are primarily responsible for monitoring and enforcement.  However, the EPA retains authority to monitor and sanction facilities.  Inspections are a key component of environmental agencies' efforts to collect evidence for enforcement (Wasserman, 1984), maintain a regulatory presence (EPA, 1990), and offer technical assistance as opportunities arise.  Federal and state agencies use a mixture of informal enforcement actions (e. g. , warning letters) and formal enforcement actions (e. g. , ﬁnes).  Our analysis considers both federal and state inspections and all types of federal enforcement actions.  ﬁnes, other formal enforcement actions, and informal enforcement actions.  Our empirical analysis focuses on chemical manufacturing facilities permitted under the U. S.  Clean Water Act during the years 2002 to 2004.  This focus on a single sector is consistent with other empirical studies of industrial pollution (e. g. , Laplante and Rilstone, 1996.  Barla, 2007.  Earnhart, 2009.  Earnhart and Harrington, 2014). 3 3.  Conceptual Framework.  This section offers a simple conceptual framework for heuristically deriving competing hypotheses, which our empirical analysis tests.  Our framework incorporates three motivations for complying with environmental protection laws.  extrinsic motivation, intrinsic motivation, and social signaling (Ariely et al. , 2009.  Gneezy et al. , 2011.  Bowles and Polania-Reyes, 2012).  Hypothesis H1A.  Increases in either the inspection frequency or ﬁne magnitude are effective at improving compliance.  Compliance involves both beneﬁts and costs.  The manager of a regulated facility chooses the extent of compliance to maximize the net beneﬁts of compliance.  According to the standard model of enforcement (Becker, 1968.  Polinsky and Shavell, 2000), deterrence depends exclusively on explicit monetary disincentives or extrinsic motivation.  Increases in either the likelihood or severity of punishment increase compliance.  i. e.  enforcement is effective at improving compliance.  The manager bears at least partially the costs stemming from compliance efforts as long as her contract connects proﬁts to managerial compensation and compliance efforts lower proﬁts.  Similarly, the manager bears at least partially the costs of non-compliance, which includes the hassle of regulatory monitoring inspections, the monetary sting of ﬁnes, and the external impacts associated with other forms of enforcement (e. g. , loss of consumer and investor support).  Hypothesis H1B.  Increases in either the inspection frequency or ﬁne magnitude are ineffective or counter-productive at improving compliance.  In addition to extrinsic motivation, a manager may be intrinsically motivated to cooperate with regulators or abide by the law, or use compliance to signal adherence with professional and social norms to regulators, a local community, and the market.  Gneezy et al.  (2011) and Bowles and Polania-Reyes (2012) summarize the evidence showing how raising monetary incentives often crowds out these other motivations.  For example, the signaling potential of compliance decisions is strongest when extrinsic motivation is weak (Ariely et al. , 2009). 4 If increased enforcement crowds out the intrinsic or signaling motivations for compliance, then increased enforcement may fail to improve compliance or may even lower compliance (Winter and May, 2001.  Short and Toffel, 2010.  Earnhart and Glicksman, 2015).  Further, while theoretical models assume that inspection probabilities and ﬁne sizes are known, in reality, facility managers must form expectations of these amounts based on their own experiences (speciﬁc deterrence) and the experiences of other similar facilities (general deterrence).  This formation of expectations creates the potential for additional undermining factors to operate.  The manager interprets observations about other facilities' experiences through the lens of her perception of how the enforcement process works.  For example, if the manager perceives that inspection budgets are ﬁxed, then observing more inspections at other facilities may be interpreted as a lower likelihood of future inspections for her own facility, resulting in lower compliance. 5 This effect reﬂects an additional countervailing force in the event of greater general deterrence.  Hypothesis H2A.  Increases in either inspection frequency or ﬁne magnitude generate the same impact on compliance regardless of manager perceptions.  Facility managers are heterogeneous in their perceptions regarding the effectiveness of regulatory enforcement.  However, according to the standard model of enforcement, these perceptions are irrelevant and should not alter managerial responses to regulatory interventions.  Hypothesis H2B.  Increases in either inspection frequency or ﬁne magnitude are more effective at improving compliance for managers who perceive enforcement actions to be effective than for managers who perceive them to be ineffective.  This hypothesis could hold if manager perceptions are related to the importance of non-pecuniary factors in their decision making.  Speciﬁcally, if non-pecuniary motivations play only a minor role for managers who believe that enforcement is effective, yet these motivations play a major role for managers who perceive enforcement to be ineffective, then the crowding out of alternative motivations from increased enforcement is greater for managers who perceive enforcement is ineffective.  Hypothesis H2C.  Increases in either inspection frequency or ﬁne magnitude are less effective at improving compliance for managers who perceive enforcement actions to be effective than managers who perceive them to be ineffective.  Alternatively, manager perceptions might reﬂect their subjective estimates of the likelihood and magnitude of enforcement.  Managers might perceive enforcement as effective if they believe that inspection likelihoods and ﬁne magnitudes are sufﬁciently high and perceive enforcement as ineffective when their estimates of enforcement are low.  The observation of greater enforcement should lead both types of manager to revise upwards their subjective estimates of enforcement.  However, this upward revision might be greater for managers who consider enforcement ineffective.  <Middle> Econometric Framework.  To test these hypotheses, we construct an econometric framework that reﬂects the theoretical framework, while adding control factors.  In each period, the manager operating a regulated facility decides on its extent of compliance, measured by the ratio of actual to permitted discharges (“discharge ratio”), which represents the dependent variable (Earnhart, 2004a, 2004b, 2004c.  Earnhart, 2009.  Earnhart and Segerson, 2012).  We also formulate a set of primary explanatory variables measuring regulatory enforcement and monitoring.  Each facility must form expectations about monitoring and enforcement before selecting its extent of compliance.  Our empirical analysis assumes that each facility bases its expectations of future monitoring and enforcement on the experiences of other similar facilities along with its own recent experiences (Shimshack and Ward, 2005.  Earnhart, 2004a, 2004b, 2004c.  Earnhart, 2009).  General deterrence reﬂects the ex ante general “threat” of future punishment based on the recent experiences of other facilities with regulatory interventions (Sah, 1991.  Cohen, 2000).  Speciﬁc deterrence adjusts this general threat based on the speciﬁc enforcement and monitoring experiences of particular facilities in the recent past (Cohen, 2000.  Earnhart and Friesen, 2013).  Since facilities most likely need weeks or perhaps months to respond to their own and others' experiences with monitoring and enforcement, our analysis lags the measures of inspections and enforcement actions (Earnhart, 2004a, 2004b.  Earnhart, 2009.  Shimshack and Ward, 2005).  Based on standard deterrence theory, deterrence divides into punishment certainty and punishment severity, with inspections and ﬁnes playing different deterrent roles.  We interpret inspections as a measure of punishment certainty and ﬁnes as a measure of punishment severity.  To improve separation between the certainty and severity of punishment, we use the ﬁne conditional average amount, i. e. , dollars per imposed ﬁne, as our severity measure.  Based on these measures, we construct particular deterrence factors, starting with inspection-based measures of punishment certainty.  For the general deterrence measure, we calculate the aggregate count of inspections against all other similar facilities – major chemical manufacturing facilities operating in the same state – over the preceding 12-month period.  Then we divide the aggregate count of inspections by the number of months other major chemical facilities were operating in each state over the 12-month period.  For the speciﬁc deterrence measure, we assess inspections conducted at the individual facility in the preceding 12-month period, treating these lagged inspections as an exogenous regressor. 6 As with general deterrence, we divide the number of inspections by the number of months a particular facility was active in the preceding 12-month period.  Thus, both regressors measure inspections per month of activity.  We next construct ﬁne-based measures of punishment severity.  For the general deterrence measure, we examine the aggregate count and monetary value of ﬁnes (in dollars) imposed against other similar facilities over the preceding 12-month period.  To calculate the conditional average ﬁne, we divide each aggregate monetary value of ﬁnes by the aggregate count of ﬁnes.  For the speciﬁc deterrence measure, we sum ﬁnes imposed on an individual facility in the preceding 12-month period. 7 For comparability with the general deterrence measure, we divide each summed monetary value of ﬁnes by the summed count of ﬁnes.  We treat this lagged ﬁne-based measure as an exogenous regressor. 8 We construct control factors related to the costs of compliance or non-compliance.  The ﬁrst set of factors reﬂects non-compliance costs, mostly additional regulatory factors (Helland, 1998a.  Earnhart, 2004a, 2004b.  Nadeau, 1997).  We additionally measure deterrence stemming from enforcement actions beyond ﬁnes, separately constructing measures of formal enforcement actions that do not impose ﬁnes, such as consent decrees, and informal enforcement actions, such as warning letters.  We construct both measures of general deterrence and speciﬁc deterrence in ways identical to the inspection-based deterrence measures.  We count the number of enforcement actions over the preceding 12month period and divide that by the number of months in which facilities were operating.  We also include a measure of regulatory stringency.  permitted discharge limit, constructed as an index across all regulated pollutants discharged by a facility in a given month. 9 And we include EPA region and year indicators.  The second set of control factors reﬂects compliance (abatement) costs.  Facility and ﬁrm characteristics inﬂuence marginal abatement costs (Earnhart, 2004a.  Bandyopadhyay and Horowitz, 2006.  Gray and Shadbegian, 2005).  Flow design capacity proxies for facility size, which we measure by the average ﬂow of wastewater over the preceding 12-month period.  We include the ratio of actual wastewater ﬂow to ﬂow design capacity as a proxy for treatment capacity utilization.  Sectoral indicators control for variation in regulated facilities' abilities to modify their production processes according to the type of manufactured product.  Seasonal indicators control for variation caused by weather conditions.  Table 1 identiﬁes a priori expectations for the control factors.  5.  Data.  Our empirical analysis exploits data from a survey of regulated facilities and EPA databases.  5. 1.  Survey of Regulated Entities.  We ﬁrst describe the survey data.  Our survey was administered to a sample of U. S.  chemical manufacturing facilities whose wastewater discharges were regulated by discharge limits imposed within NPDES permits in 2001.  The population of 2596 NPDES-regulated facilities in the chemical manufacturing industry, as of September 2001, was extracted from the EPA's Permit Compliance System database.  We limited the survey sample to the 1003 facilities meeting these screening criteria.  (1) possessed a NPDES permit, (2) faced limits on their wastewater discharges, (3) discharged into surface water bodies, (4) were operating as of 2002, and (5) contact information was available.  Of the 1003 facilities contacted between April of 2002 and March of 2003, 267 facilities completed the survey for a 27% response rate.  This rate is comparable to previous large-scale surveys of industrial sectors (e. g. , Arimura et al. , 2008.  Arimura et al. , 2011.  Nakamura et al. , 2001) and lies above the average response rate of 21% identiﬁed by a review of 183 studies based on business surveys published in academic journals (Paxson, 1992). 10 The survey gathered various data elements, including data on facilities' subjective perceptions of the effectiveness of inspections and ﬁnes for inducing compliance with Clean Water Act-imposed discharge limits. 11 The speciﬁc wording of the survey questions was.  “Do you think that government inspections are effective ways for inducing individual chemical facilities to comply with permitted water discharge limits. ” and “Do you think that the imposition of monetary ﬁnes is an effective way for inducing individual chemical facilities to comply with permitted water discharge limits. ”.  For both questions, respondents were able to choose from four responses.  deﬁnitely not, probably not, probably yes, and deﬁnitely yes.  5. 2.  Publicly Available Data on Regulated Facilities.  To complement the survey data, we extracted publicly available data from the EPA Permit Compliance System database.  This database provides information on each facility's (1) location, (2) NPDES major or minor classiﬁcation, (3) four-digit standard industrial classiﬁcation (SIC) code, (4) monthly discharge limits, (5) self-reported monthly discharge levels, (6) inspections conducted by federal and state regulators, (7) ﬁnes and other formal enforcement orders issued by federal administrative and civil courts, and (8) informal enforcement actions.  We aggregate the many sub-sectors in the chemical manufacturing sector into three broad categories.  organic chemicals, inorganic chemicals, and “other” chemicals. 12 Since discharge limits apply to speciﬁc pollutants, we consider each pollutant separately.  In general, discharge limits constrain wastewater measured as a quantity, e. g. , pounds per day, or as a concentration, e. g. , milligrams per liter of wastewater.  We calculate the monthly discharge ratio for each regulated pollutant, which enables us to combine these two disparate forms of measurement.  For each month, we ﬁrst calculate the pollutant-speciﬁc discharge ratio separately for quantity limits and concentration limits as relevant. 13 Then we combine the two measurement forms, as relevant, into a composite pollutantspeciﬁc discharge ratio based on the median value.  Finally, we identify the median discharge ratio considering all of the regulated pollutants. 14 This median discharge ratio represents a comprehensive measure of the extent of compliance with all Clean Water Act-based discharge limits relevant for a single facility in a given month.  We purposely focus on facilities' compliance decisions following completion of the survey while avoiding compliance decisions prior to the survey since these historical decisions most likely inﬂuenced the facilities' perceptions of regulatory effectiveness.  Similarly, we avoid regulatory activities conducted prior to the survey with a 12-month lag.  Thus, for each survey respondent, the sample period begins 12 months after the facility's survey completion.  Consequently, our sample period begins in 2003 or 2004 depending on the individual facility's survey completion date.  Since facilities' perceptions can change over time, we focus on the few months following survey completion.  While arbitrary, we end our sample period in September of 2004.  Thus, the number of months included in the sample for a given facility ranges from7 months to 18 months.  The PCS database systematically records wastewater discharges and discharge limits only for “major facilities”,which receivemore regulatory attention than “minor facilities” (Earnhart, 2009.  Earnhart and Segerson, 2012). 15 Of the 103 survey respondent major facilities, the PCS database only contains records that provide data on discharge limits and wastewater discharges over the sample period for 88 major facilities.  For all of our analysis, we focus on these 88 major facilities for which we possess both survey data and EPA data on limits and discharges.  The unbalanced sample includes 1126monthly observations.  5. 3.  Summary of Dependent and Independent Variables.  Table 1 provides statistical summaries of the formulated dependent variable and regressors.  Table 1. a summarizes the discharge ratio.  The mean discharge ratio of 0. 16 implies that facilities on average generate discharges that are 84% below their monthly limits.  This average indicates a need to analyze the extent of compliance rather than status of compliance. 17 Similarly, the maximum discharge ratio of 2. 56 implies that some facilities allow their discharges to surge as high as 156% above the permitted limits.  This maximum indicates a need to analyze the degree of non-compliance rather than the status of non-compliance.  Table 1. b summarizes the regressors.  We highlight the primary regressor.  regulated facilities' perceptions of effectiveness in the case of inspections and ﬁnes.  In order to concentrate the explanatory power of these regressors, we transform the four response categories into a binary measure of effectiveness.  “yes” versus “no”.  Based on these binary measures, 90% of facilities perceive inspections as either probably or deﬁnitely an effective means of inducing compliance with wastewater discharge limits, while 75% of facilities perceive ﬁnes as either probably or deﬁnitely an effective means of inducing compliance.  As a joint binary measure, we distinguish between facilities that perceive either type of regulatory activity – inspection or ﬁne – as an effective means of inducing compliance and facilities that perceive neither type of regulatory active as effective. 