
Renewable energy sources are increasingly used in order to curb
CO2 emissions and mitigate climate change.  In particular, solar photovoltaic systems are being deployed at an exponential rate (see e. g. ,
IEA, 2016).  However, this technology has the drawback of generating electricity when residential demand is relatively low.  In fact, solar
radiation is maximal around noon, when many homes are empty. 
Conversely, households’ electricity usage peaks in the evening, when
solar radiation is nil.  This mismatch constitutes a potential obstacle to the diffusion of electricity produced from solar sources, even
if it can be mitigated in different ways.  Grid expansions would help
in transporting electricity for remote consumption.  Storage capacities would allow delayed consumption.  Demand-response measures
may be implemented so that electricity is used when and where it is
produced. 
While the ﬁrst two solutions are supply-side measures requiring high installation costs (Beaudin Name, 2010) and involving losses
(Denholm and Hand, 2011), demand-side management might prove
relatively inexpensive and easy to implement.  An additional advantage of demand-side interventions is that they can be implemented
rapidly, while deployment of new technologies on a large scale can
only be achieved in the long run (Dietz Name, 2009).  It has also been
argued that different solutions like storage and demand management should be considered as complementing each other for grid
balancing (Elliott, 2016). 
Mitigating imbalances between electricity production and usage
is a particularly serious issue in remote areas.  In fact, when large
amounts of solar energy are produced in isolated regions at times of
low demand, providers may ﬁnd the technical installations necessary
to accommodate excess supply too expensive and could prefer to
literally destroy the electricity produced. 1 This dismal anecdote
illustrates how supply-side measures might fail when it comes to
integrating electricity from renewable sources in the grid.  In such
situations, demand-side management becomes crucial. 
Even if this paper focuses on the misalignment of solar energy
production and electricity consumption, its scope extends to the
general issue of the increasing importance of renewable technologies.  Because the new renewable energy sources (sun and wind) are
intermittent by nature, relying more on these will imply managing
demand more actively in order to minimize the cost of using the
electricity produced. 
In this paper, using a randomized control trial, we investigate
whether and by how much households shift intraday electricity
usage when provided with incentives to do so.  More precisely, the
objective of our intervention is to encourage households to increase
their share of electricity used between 11 a. m.  and 3 p. m.  (when
most solar radiation takes place), while discouraging any voluntary increase in overall consumption. 2 The ﬁrst treatment consists
of information feedback sent monthly via paper mail.  Households
included in this group obtain details about their own consumption,
its pattern within the day, and similar information about households
of comparable size.  The second treatment is a contest in which the
best performers (i. e. , those who achieve the strongest shift in electricity usage while keeping total usage at reasonable levels) receive
cash prizes determined by their position in the ranking. 
Using a difference-in-differences approach, our results suggest
that both treatments induce a reaction, but the type of reaction
depends on the treatment.  Households exposed to information feedback globally decrease electricity usage regardless of the hours of the
day, but they do not shift consumption toward the indicated hours. 
Conversely, households exposed to ﬁnancial incentives display a signiﬁcant shift toward the solar energy production hours.  They achieve
an increase in their proportion of electricity used between 11 a. m. 
and 3 p. m.  by about 1 percentage point, which is not negligible
considering this proportion is around 20% on average. 
The remainder of the paper unfolds as follows.  Section 2 discusses how our contribution ﬁts into the recent literature.  Section 3
presents our experimental design.  Section 4 describes our dataset
and provides a descriptive analysis of the impacts of our intervention.  Section 5 explains our econometric strategy and reports our
empirical results.  Section 6 discusses the policy implications and
concludes. 
2.  Literature review. 
Our paper is located at the intersection of two distinct bodies
of literature.  The ﬁrst is composed of technical contributions that
examine the feasibility of integration of large amounts of variable
renewable energy sources (sun and wind) into the energy system
(see the review by Kondziella and Bruckner, 2016).  This branch of
the literature focuses on engineering solutions and essentially analyzes supply-side measures, whereby the issue is to render electricity
distribution amenable through grid expansion and/or storage, and it
makes assumptions to simulate consumers’ behavior.  For instance,
Denholm and Margolis (2007) evaluate scenarios where up to an
arbitrary 10% of demand can be shifted to absorb excess photovoltaic
generation, and Steinke Name (2013) simply keep demand constant. 
In our study, we tackle a similar problem but look at it from an
opposite perspective, that is, focusing on demand management. 
We obtain exact consumption data and observe actual households’
reaction, but we make simplifying assumptions concerning the
supply of renewable energy. 
Among the technical studies, Pina Name (2012) stand out as they
analyze the impact of demand-side management strategies in an
electricity mix characterized by high shares of renewable energy. 