 1.  Introduction Oil consumption has risen over the last 50 years, as nations have become reliant on oil for daily activities such as home heating, industrial processes and transportation (IEA, 2015).  There have historically been few substitutes for oil, so oil prices and shocks to oil prices have had a major impact on global economic activity (Brown and Yucel, 2002.  He et al. , 2010).  High oil prices in the 1970s had adverse economic impacts in the industrialized world, and contributed to low growth, high unemployment and high inﬂation (Blanchard and Gali, 2007).  This caused oil importing nations to re-examine energy security, and resulted in movements towards energy efﬁciency and the development of alternative energy sources (Natural Resources Canada, 2012.  Department of Energy and Climate Change, 2012).  On the other hand, when oil prices drop, oil producing and exporting countries face a reduction in revenue streams (U. S.  Energy Information Administration, 2016a, 2016b), which can potentially lead to economic downturns.  While oil prices were high for much of the early 2000s, prices declined sharply in the summer of 2014 to levels that were less than half of their 2012 values (US EIA, 2016b).  The West Texas Intermediate (WTI) spot price for crude oil was $105 per barrel as of July 2014 and by January 2015 it had dropped to 44 $/barrel.  Canada is a major player in the global market for oil and gas.  proven reserves in Canada are third in the world after Venezuela and Saudia Arabia, while production and exports are ﬁfth and fourth, respectively.  Further, the oil and gas sector accounted for 7. 5% of Canadian GDP in 2013 (Natural Resources Canada, 2015).  Given this dependence on the oil and gas sector, it is clear that shocks to oil prices may have hard-hitting and potentially long-lasting effects on the national economy.  With a lower value of Canadian production and exports, Canada suffers a loss of international purchasing power (Royal Bank of Canada, 2014).  In Canada, the oil and gas sector is especially predominant within the provinces of Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Newfoundland and Labrador (NL).  In NL, the Oil Extraction and Supporting Activities sector, comprised primarily of the offshore oil ﬁelds Hibernia, Terra Nova, and White Rose, is by far the largest individual contributor to GDP, responsible for approximately 30% of provincial GDP.  Provinces such as NL, which saw great beneﬁts from the rise of oil prices prior to the shock in the 2000s, have been the hardest hit when prices drastically fell.  The shock to oil prices has resulted in increased unemployment, reduced production and GDP.  “Production in oil and gas related industries declined by 8% between the fourth quarters of 2014 and second quarter of 2015, while business investment linked to these industries fell sharply” (Bank of Canada, 2015).  In NL, preliminary estimates show that there has been a 2% drop in real GDP since 2014, an expected decline in production by about 16% as of 2015 and an increase in unemployment by about 0. 6% in 2015 (Government of Newfoundland and Labrador, 2015a, 2015b).  Further, the oil price drop has reduced government revenue (royalties).  the NL government receives a signiﬁcant portion of its provincial revenue (33%) from the various royalty regimes associated with the offshore oil extraction projects (Royal Bank of Canada, 2015).  Understanding the impact of a major change in oil prices on factors such as those described above can prove crucial for developing the optimal policy responses in reaction to shifting prices.  Our goal is to estimate the short run (5 year) and long run (30 year) economic costs and impacts to NL from a drop in oil prices in the magnitude observed in 2014.  To analyse this shock, we develop a dynamic Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) Model that has been calibrated to the NL economy.  The model tracks important economic variables like production, GDP, labour, investment, consumption and trade across 21 sectors up until the year 2040.  CGE models can capture both direct impacts to the oil and gas sector, as well as indirect and induced impacts in other sectors.  Given the impact of oil price ﬂuctuations, many studies have examined the economic impact of oil price shocks since the 1970s (Pindyck and Rotemberg, 1983.  Kilian, 2008.  Hooker, 1996.  Jiménez-Rodríguez and Sánchez, 2005.  Blanchard and Gali, 2007.  Bernanke et al. , 1997.  Hamilton, 2009.  Doroodian and Boyd, 2003).  As summarized in Aydin and Acar (2011), the general consensus is that oil price shocks will have an inverse relationship with economic activity, and higher prices will lower GDP in oil importing regions.  However, as noted above, lower prices may adversely impact oil exporting nations.  CGE models have gained momentum in the past few decades in analysing energy phenomenon (Beckman et al. , 2011).  Researchers can focus on variables of interest and follow how the rest of the economy (multiple economic sectors) adjusts in response to speciﬁc shocks.  A popular adjustment in energy related models targets speciﬁc commodity prices.  For instance, Solaymani et al.  (2015) adapt the CGE model from Solaymani and Kari (2013) to analyse the economic and environmental consequences of energy subsidy adjustments on the Malaysian transport sector.  They investigate impacts from 3 scenarios.  high oil prices, energy subsidy reforms, and a combination of both.  Their ﬁndings show that higher oil prices raise real GDP and household income, stimulate investment, and increase Malaysian terms of trade in the long run.  Aydin and Acar (2011) examined the general equilibrium impacts of a change in oil prices, focusing on GDP, the CPI, tax revenues, trade ﬂows, and carbon emissions in Turkey.  The model they used was called TurGEM-D, which is a multi-sectorial dynamic model suited for the Turkish economy, a small open net oil importing country.  Their oil price scenarios include low, reference, and high oil prices.  Their results show that high oil prices led to reductions in output and consumption, however they also found that the higher prices reduced carbon emissions.  Canada, a net exporter of oil, would likely gain from higher oil prices, as the value of production rises with prices.  Maisonnave et al.  (2012) used the GEM-E3 model to determine whether climate policy would lessen the impact of higher energy prices in the EU.  They found that a rise in oil prices would cost the EU 2. 2% of GDP in the absence of climate change policy, and 1. 5% in the presence of climate change policy.  In the current application, we use a multi-sector dynamic CGE model for the province of NL.  We examine the impact of a decrease in oil prices, similar to many studies in the past that examined the impact of higher prices.  In the current application, we model oil price reductions as a reduction in royalties (the land royalty payments in the oil and gas sector).  We follow this route since land inputs are exogenous in the model, and shocking royalties will allow us to capture the reduction in the productive capacity (and the value of production) of the oil and gas sector due to lower prices. 