 
Following a series of accounting scandals in the early 20 0 0s (e. g. , Enron and WorldCom), capital market participants 
questioned how auditors and regulators failed to identify the misreporting.  However, in a comprehensive examination of 
fraud cases from 1996 to 2004, Dyck Name (2010) ﬁnd that a ﬁrm’s employees identify and reveal fraud more often (17% 
of the time) than both auditors (10%) and the corporate ﬁnance division of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 
(7%).  Given that employees provide ex-post discipline of ﬁnancial reporting by helping uncover fraud after it has occurred, 
a natural question is whether employees are able to impose ex-ante discipline on ﬁnancial reporting before violations take We examine whether the quality of a ﬁrm’s workforce is associated with ﬁnancial reporting quality.  We proxy for the 
quality of a ﬁrm’s workforce in two ways: (1) the average education level of the workforce in the Metropolitan Statistical 
Area (MSA) where the ﬁrm is headquartered, and (2) the average education level of the workforce across all MSAs mentioned 
2 Using these measures, we examine two broad research questions.  First, are highly educated 
in the ﬁrm’s Form 10-K ﬁling.  
employees associated with improved mandatory disclosure quality.  Second, are highly educated employees associated with 
improved voluntary disclosure quality.  
Prior research examines whether executive (i. e. , CEO and CFO) characteristics contribute to ﬁnancial reporting quality 
( Aier Name, 2005; Bamber Name, 2010; Dyreng Name, 2010; Ge Name, 2011; Demerjian Name, 2013 ).  However, the literature 
largely ignores whether characteristics of the ﬁrm’s entire workforce are associated with ﬁnancial reporting outcomes.  Because a ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial data originate far from the C-suite, we argue that the ﬁrm’s entire workforce plays an important 
role in shaping the quality of a ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial reporting.  Furthermore, while lawmakers and regulators have traditionally 
focused on other ﬁrm monitors (i. e. , investors, board of directors, the SEC, auditors, and corporate executives) to improve 
reporting quality, we examine whether a high-quality workforce is associated with better reporting outcomes.  
High-quality employees can improve their ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial reporting environment in at least two ways.  First, they can 
provide superior information as inputs to executives’ reporting choices.  Second, high-quality employees can identify and 
uncover intentional ﬁnancial misreporting, perhaps even before it develops into a larger misreporting event.  Our proxy for 
high-quality employees, the education level of the ﬁrm’s workforce, is associated with both channels through which employees can improve ﬁnancial reporting.  First, more educated employees provide their superiors with higher-quality inputs 
(i. e. , fewer errors), resulting in higher-quality reporting outcomes ( Merchant and Rockness, 1994; O’ Fallon and Butterﬁeld, 
2005 ).  Second, highly educated employees are more likely to recognize when a transaction appears abnormal, elevating con3 Consistent with this point, 
cerns to management before it becomes a more serious misstatement ( Glaeser and Saks, 2006 ).  
Call Name (2016) ﬁnd that executives grant more stock options to rank and ﬁle employees during periods of misreporting in 
an effort to discourage whistleblowing, suggesting that executives engaged in misconduct believe their employees have the 
ability to uncover information that would bring ﬁnancial misconduct to light.  
We ﬁnd signiﬁcant variation in education levels throughout the United States.  
4 Speciﬁcally, the highest education levels 
are in Boston, Silicon Valley, and several cities that are home to large public universities (e. g. , Iowa City, IA, Columbia, MO, 
Madison, WI), suggesting that ﬁrms with operations in these areas employ more highly educated employees with greater 
ability to improve ﬁnancial reporting quality.  On the other hand, Dallas, Los Angeles, and Las Vegas are in MSAs that are 
among the bottom half of workforce education, suggesting that ﬁrms with operations in these areas often rely on employees 
with less ability to improve reporting quality.  
We ﬁrst examine the association between education levels and three attributes of mandatory reporting quality—the quality of the ﬁrm’s accruals, the propensity of the ﬁrm to report an internal control weakness, and the likelihood the ﬁrm 
restates its ﬁnancial statements ( Dechow and Dichev, 2002; Hennes Name, 2008; McGuire Name, 2012 ).  After controlling 
for several MSA-level attributes (i. e. , macroeconomic indicators, microeconomic indicators, and location speciﬁc monitoring 
variables), we ﬁnd that the average education level of a ﬁrm’s workforce is positively associated with accruals quality, negatively associated with the likelihood that the ﬁrm reports an internal control weakness, and negatively associated with 
the likelihood that the ﬁrm restates its ﬁnancial statements.  These ﬁndings suggest that ﬁrms with high-quality employees 
exhibit superior mandatory disclosure quality.  
Next, we examine whether these ﬁndings extend to the ﬁrm’s voluntary reporting quality—namely, the quality of management earnings forecasts.  These forecasts differ from mandatory disclosures in that they are “forward-looking” (rather 
than “backward-looking”) and are not subject to an external audit.  As a result, there is more discretion afforded to managers 
when making voluntary disclosure choices, and the impact of high-quality employees on the quality of these disclosures is 
unclear.  Consistent with our results related to mandatory disclosures, we ﬁnd that the average education level of a ﬁrm’s 
workforce is positively associated with the frequency and horizon of management forecasts, and is negatively associated 
with absolute forecast errors, forecast bias, and forecast range.  These ﬁndings suggest that employee quality is positively 
associated with voluntary disclosure quality.  
In additional analyses, we ﬁnd strong support for the notion that employee quality at the ﬁrm’s headquarters is associated with reporting outcomes, with relatively weaker support for the role of employees at non-headquarter locations.  
Further, although only a very limited number of ﬁrms in our sample changed their headquarters location during our sample 
period, we ﬁnd that changes in the education level in the headquarters location for these ﬁrms (i. e. , moving from a less 
educated MSA to a more educated MSA) is generally positively associated with changes in both mandatory and voluntary 
disclosure reporting quality.  We therefore conclude that our main ﬁndings are primarily driven by the quality of employees at the ﬁrm’s headquarters, suggesting that aggregating and summarizing accounting data from across the ﬁrm plays a 
unique role in the ﬁrm’s reporting outcomes.  However, we note that we measure the education level of non-headquarter 
employees with considerable error, which may contribute to our relatively weaker results for these employees.  Therefore, 
our ﬁndings should not be interpreted to suggest that employees at non-headquarter locations are irrelevant to ﬁnancial reporting outcomes.  
Our study contributes to the literature on ﬁnancial misreporting and corporate governance.  Recent research suggests that 
employees play a role in monitoring the ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial reporting.  For example, Bowen Name (2010) ﬁnd that employee 
whistleblowing events are associated with negative stock price reactions, future earnings restatements, subsequent lawsuits, 
and poor future ﬁrm performance.  Similarly, Dyck Name (2010) ﬁnd that employees detect and reveal 17% of frauds, exceeding the rate of auditors (10%) and regulators (7%).  Collectively, the ﬁndings of these studies suggest employees play an 
important governance role after fraud has been committed.  We extend this research by providing evidence that employees 
can discipline ﬁnancial reporting before the incidence of fraud.  
We also contribute to the literature examining the effect of idiosyncratic, employee-speciﬁc attributes on ﬁnancial reporting outcomes.  Prior research focuses on the relation between CEO and CFO personal traits and the impact of these characteristics on their ﬁrms’ policy choices.  For example, CEO and CFO traits such as age, education, ﬁnancial and legal expertise, 
and personal risk-aversion have been linked to voluntary disclosure ( Bamber Name, 2010 ), earnings quality ( Demerjian et 
al. , 2013 ), ﬁnancial misreporting ( Aier Name, 2005; Ge Name, 2011 ), option backdating ( Dhaliwal Name, 2009 ), and tax aggressiveness ( Dyreng Name, 2010; Chyz, 2013 ).  We contribute to this literature as the ﬁrst to establish that characteristics of 
employees outside the C-suite are also associated with disclosure outcomes.  
Finally, our study relates to recent literature examining the effects of MSA-level attributes on reporting quality.  McGuire 
Name (2012) ﬁnd that ﬁrms headquartered in MSAs with religiously adherent residents have fewer restatements and are less 
likely to be sued for accounting malfeasance.  They conclude that religion acts as a substitute for other forms of monitoring.  
Two recent papers explore the link between education and external monitoring by analysts ( Gunn, 2013 ) and auditors ( Beck 
Name, 2017 ).  We demonstrate that the education of the ﬁrm’s own employees can serve as a form of internal monitoring.  
2.  Background and motivation. 
2. 1.  Prior literature on education. 
Prior research examines whether CEO and CFO education impacts ﬁnancial reporting quality.  Hambrick and Mason’s 
(1984) upper echelons theory predicts that cross-sectional differences in managers’ education are likely to shape their values 
and cognitive biases, which in turn will affect their managerial styles.  In addition, prior literature establishes that managers 
with an MBA develop different styles relating to conformity, conventionality, rationality, and ethics than do their counterparts without the same educational backgrounds ( Chen, 2004; Ghoshal, 2005; Gintis and Khurana, 2008 ) .  Consistent with 
this literature, Bamber Name (2010) ﬁnd that CEOs and CFOs with an MBA issue forecasts that are more accurate, consistent 
with the notion that the education of senior management (i. e. , CEO and CFO) is associated with reporting outcomes.  
The economics literature also ﬁnds that education levels are associated with the monitoring of fraudulent behavior.  
Glaeser and Saks (2006) document that, from 1990 to 2002, United States federal prosecutors convicted more than 10,0 0 0 
government oﬃcials of acts of corruption.  They appeal to Lipset’s (1960) theory that highly educated (and high-income) 
voters are more able and willing to monitor and take action when public employees violate the law.  Consistent with this 
idea, they ﬁnd that more educated states and, to a lesser extent, more aﬄuent states, have lower levels of corruption.  
Finally, two contemporaneous papers link the education level of capital market participants outside the ﬁrm (i. e. , analysts 
and auditors) to improved reporting outcomes.  Gunn (2013) appeals to urban economics theory and predicts that the human 
capital depth in a geographic area, as measured by the average education level, creates knowledge spillovers that result in 
positive economic outcomes ( Moretti, 2004; Glaeser and Gottlieb, 2009 ).  He ﬁnds that sell-side analysts located in MSAs 
with higher education levels issue more accurate and informative earnings forecasts than do analysts located in MSAs with 
lower education levels.  
Beck Name (2017) investigate a different type of capital market intermediary—the ﬁrm’s auditor.  They measure auditor 
human capital as the education level of the city in which the auditor’s oﬃce is located.  They ﬁnd a positive association 
between the average education level in the MSA surrounding an auditor’s local oﬃce and accrual quality of the ﬁrms they 
audit.  Beck Name (2017) conclude that auditors located in highly educated areas perform higher-quality audits, but acknowledge the possibility that superior reporting outcomes could also be driven by the education of the client ﬁrm’s employees.  
They leave this issue for future research.  
Three features of our study distinctly separate it from these contemporaneous papers.  First, at a conceptual level, we use 
the education level of the community as a proxy for the quality of the employees themselves, whereas Gunn (2013) and 
Beck Name (2017) argue that analysts and auditors simply beneﬁt from living and working around educated people, regardless of their own education levels.  Second, we examine education levels of the workforce in the MSA in which the ﬁrm 
is headquartered (rather than the education levels where the ﬁrm’s auditor or analysts are located).  Finally, we examine 
outcomes that are outside the scope of ﬁnancial analyst reports and ﬁnancial statement audits (i. e. , management forecasts, 
internal control weaknesses, and, in supplemental analysis, whistleblowing after misreporting events), allowing our ﬁndings 
to speak directly to the association between ﬁrms’ employees and ﬁnancial reporting quality.  
2. 2.  Prior literature on the role of a ﬁrm’s workforce in ﬁnancial reporting 
While academic research frequently focuses on senior executives and their role in the ﬁnancial reporting process 
( Bergstresser and Phillipon, 2006; Cheng and Warﬁeld, 2005; Feng Name, 2011; Hennes Name, 2008; Bamber Name, 2010 ), 
we know relatively little about the impact of the broader workforce on either voluntary or mandatory disclosure quality.  
Although CFOs are ultimately responsible for the quality of the ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial reporting, the entire workforce not only participates in the preparation of accounting information, but also plays an indirect role in ﬁnancial reporting by providing the 
raw internal data that form the basis for the executives’ reporting choices.  
Dyck Name (2010) examine a comprehensive sample of alleged corporate fraud in large US companies and ﬁnd that the 
ﬁrm’s own employees, some of whom are not senior executives, uncover more corporate wrongdoing than do investors, 
regulators, auditors, or the media, suggesting that employees outside the C-suite can play an important role in bringing 
reporting violations to light.  In describing the role of employees in monitoring ﬁrm behavior, Dyck Name (2010) indicate 
that “employees clearly have the best access to information,” and that “few, if any frauds can be committed without the 
knowledge and often the support of several employees” (page 2240).  Relatedly, Call Name (2016) ﬁnd that ﬁrms grant more 
stock options to non-executive employees during periods of misreporting in an effort to discourage employee whistleblowing, suggesting that corporate leaders are aware that lower-level employees participate in and have the potential to monitor 
the ﬁrm’s reporting practices.  
3.  Hypothesis development. 
There are two ways in which a highly educated workforce can, ex ante, improve ﬁnancial reporting quality.  First, they 
can provide higher-quality information (i. e. , fewer errors) as inputs to the accounting system.  Speciﬁcally, highly educated 
employees should make fewer unintentional errors in the process of gathering and generating data that are in turn processed 
into ﬁnancial information appearing in various ﬁnancial reports (i. e. , Form 10-K, Form 10-Q, Form 8-K, among others).  If 
fewer errors are input into the accounting system, the resulting ﬁnancial statements should be of higher quality.  
One might question whether unintentional accounting errors offset in the aggregate.  For instance, if one error has the 
effect of increasing earnings, another error may decrease earnings, and the cumulative error could be close to zero, even for 
ﬁrms with employees who make a large number of errors.  However, in untabulated Monte Carlo and mathematical analyses, 
Thus, we show that the absolute cumulative error is increasing in the number of unintentional errors that are committed.  
highly educated employees should make fewer unintentional errors, resulting in smaller absolute cumulative errors.  
Second, in addition to making fewer unintentional errors, highly educated employees are more likely to recognize when 
a transaction appears abnormal and possibly fraudulent, elevating that information to management before it becomes a 
more serious misstatement.  In the context of the political process, Glaeser and Saks (2006) ﬁnd that political corruption 
is lower when the voting population is more highly educated, as an educated voter base imposes discipline on its elected 
politicians.  Consistent with executives believing their employees have the ability to uncover ﬁnancial misconduct, Call Name 
(2016) ﬁnd that executives grant more stock options to lower-level employees during periods of misreporting to discourage 
whistleblowing.  
We do not assume that a ﬁrm’s workforce needs a working knowledge of generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) 
to improve reporting outcomes.  Employees from outside the accounting function provide information that is relevant to the 
ultimate reporting decision made by senior management.  For example, when sales and production personnel provide better 
information about past and projected activity, senior management is in a better position to provide informative disclosures.  
Further, employees need not understand the rules surrounding revenue recognition to recognize when production and shipping activities are abnormal (i. e. , concentrated at the end of the quarter, shipped without a purchase order), when standard 
procedures are bypassed (i. e. , reduction in quality-control checks, skipping planned maintenance), or when product returns 
are abnormal.  An employee who does not understand the nuances of GAAP but who understands when something is amiss 
can elevate the issue to a superior who is more likely to be ﬁnancially sophisticated and have an understanding of GAAP.  In 
fact, prior research shows that when they suspect corruption, educated individuals are more proactive than less educated 
individuals ( Glaeser and Saks, 2006 ).  Thus, even when non-accounting employees are more educated, the ﬁrm’s reporting 
outcomes should be superior.  
We ﬁrst investigate these issues in the context of mandatory reporting quality.  We predict that employee education 
levels are associated with higher-quality accruals (i. e. , the extent to which accruals map into past, present, and future cash 
ﬂows ( Dechow and Dichev, 2002 )), fewer internal control weaknesses, and fewer restatements of prior ﬁnancial statements 
( Hennes Name, 2008; McGuire Name, 2012 ).  
Hypothesis 1A.  Employee education is positively associated with accruals quality.  
Hypothesis 1B.  Employee education is negatively associated with the likelihood of internal control weaknesses.  
Hypothesis 1C.  Employee education is negatively associated with the likelihood that the ﬁrm restates its ﬁnancial statements.  
Unlike mandatory disclosures, voluntary management forecasts provide forward-looking information and are not subject 
to an external audit.  Despite these differences, we predict that employee education levels are also associated with higherquality voluntary disclosures.  Research suggests that voluntary disclosure increases with the quality of managers’ information ( Francis Name, 2008; Ball Name, 2012; Dorantes Name, 2013 ).  We argue that more educated employees provide senior 
executives with better information, increasing their willingness to issue voluntary disclosures.  We therefore predict that 
highly educated employees are associated with earnings forecasts that are (1) more frequent, (2) issued earlier in the period (i. e. , longer horizon), (3) more accurate (i. e. , smaller absolute forecast error), and (4) more precise (i. e. , smaller forecast 
8 Further, prior research suggests greater external monitoring reduces the upward forecast bias inherent in managerange).  
ment’s estimates of future ﬁrm performance ( Rogers and Stocken, 2005; Ajinkya Name, 2005 ), and we expect highly educated 
employees play a similar (albeit internal) monitoring role, thereby reducing any upward bias in management earnings forecasts.  
Hypothesis 2A.  Employee education is positively associated with the frequency and horizon of management earnings forecasts.  
Hypothesis 2B.  Employee education is negatively associated with the absolute error, bias, and range of management earnings 
forecasts.  
<Middle> Research design and empirical results. 
4. 1.  Measuring workforce education and sample selection. 
The average education level of a ﬁrm’s workforce is unobservable.  Therefore, we rely on education data collected annually 
by the United States Census Bureau, as part of the much larger American Community Survey (ACS), to proxy for employee 
9 Beginning in 2001, the ACS survey has been performed in every non-census year and involves collecting 
education levels.  
responses from a sample of the population from each MSA.  While results of the ACS are available from the Census Bureau, 
the data require extensive manipulation before being machine-readable.  Therefore, we obtain data from the University of 
10 IPUMS–USA provides harmonized 
Minnesota’s Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS–USA; Ruggles Name, 2010 ).  
economic microdata derived from annual ACSs and decennial censuses.  
IPUMS provides information about both the MSA in which the employee lives and the MSA in which the employee works.  
Because we are interested in the education of the workforce where ﬁrms are located, we utilize the MSA corresponding to 
the respondent’s place of work (IPUMS data item PWMETRO).  When PWMETRO is not reported, we use the respondent’s 
home MSA (IPUMS data item METAREA) to identify the individual’s location.  Because information about the individual’s 
place of work is only available from 2005 to 2011, our analysis is limited to this time period.  
We compute the weighted-average education level of the MSA’s workforce using the sampling weights provided in the 
IPUMS data (PERWT).  These sampling weights indicate the estimated number of residents in an MSA with similar characteristics to the respondent.  We restrict responses to records pertaining to active members of the workforce.  The IPUMS education variable indicates the highest level of schooling completed by the respondent.  For instance, a value of six corresponds 
to someone completing the 12th grade, while a value of 10 indicates four years of college.  Thus, our variable of interest, 
EDUC , is the MSA-level weighted average of these responses.  Appendix A provides an illustration of these calculations.  
Using this data, we develop two proxies for the average education level of the ﬁrm’s employees.  First, we use the average 
education level of the workforce in the MSA in which the ﬁrm is headquartered ( EDUC-HQ ).  Second, we compute the average 
8 Management forecast errors can be driven by the noise in both forecasted earnings and the actual earnings realization. 