
This paper examines the relation between industry-wide and firm-specific information contained in earnings and the extent to
which this information is reflected in stock prices.  Economic theory suggests that firm performance determined by industry
fundamentals (e. g. , consumer taste, production technology, and regulatory environment) is relatively long-lasting.  On the other
hand, performance that deviates from industry norms tends to dissipate more quickly because learning and imitation improve
industry losers’ performance but erode industry winners’ competitive edge (e. g. , Mueller, 1977, 1986, 1990; Waring, 1996).  To the
extent that accounting earnings are a (noisy) measure of economic profits, we expect the industry-wide component of earnings to
be more persistent than the firm-specific component.  Prior research suggests that investors tend to fixate on reported earnings,
however, not fully recognizing differences in the persistence of its components (e. g. , Sloan, 1996).  As a result, we expect the market
to underreact to the higher persistence of the industry-wide component of earnings. 
Predicting greater persistence of the industry-wide component of earnings inherently assumes industry homogeneity
and stationarity.  Firms in homogeneous industries face relatively similar economic forces, and thus industry-wide earnings
should be more persistent than in heterogeneous industries.  Earnings components should also be more persistent in stable
industries than in those disrupted by business shocks.  The effect of business shocks, however, should be smaller on
industry-wide earnings than on firm-specific earnings if, as expected, industry-wide earnings are more stationary in
general.  Investors that underestimate the persistence of industry-wide earnings are thus more likely to do so for
homogeneous industries and in the presence of a large industry-wide business shock. 
Our focus on economic fundamentals represents a departure from Sloan’s (1996) work on accruals and cash flows, which
are components of earnings defined by accounting systems (Dechow, 1994; Subramanyam, 1996).  He shows that even
though the accrual component is less persistent than the cash flow component, stock prices act as if investors fail to fully
appreciate this difference.  Thus, we also gauge the differential persistence and pricing of earnings components classified by
both economic forces and accounting constructs.  We decompose industry-wide and firm-specific earnings into their
respective cash flow and accrual components.  Considering both economic fundamentals and accounting constructs suggests
that industry-wide cash flows is the most persistent component of earnings, while at the other extreme firm-specific
accruals is the least persistent.  The relative persistence of the other two components – industry-wide accruals and firmspecific cash flows – is less clear.  On the one hand, there is robust prior evidence that cash flows are more persistent than
accruals.  On the other hand, economic theory suggests that industry-wide performance is more persistent than firm-specific
performance. 
We test our empirical predictions over the period 1988–2011.  Following Bhojraj Name (2003), we use Global Industry
Classification Standard (GICS) industry codes and define industry-wide earnings as average earnings (scaled by assets) of all
firms in the same eight-digit GICS industry.  We define firm-specific earnings as the difference between a firm’s reported
earnings (scaled by assets) and the industry-wide earnings. 
Consistent with predictions, we find that industry-wide earnings are significantly more persistent than firm-specific
earnings.  However, investors fail to fully distinguish this differential persistence as stock prices place similar weights on
these two earnings components in forecasting one-year-ahead earnings.  In other words, the market underreacts to the
persistence of industry-wide earnings and overreacts to the persistence of firm-specific earnings. 
To further test the implications of industry fundamentals on the persistence and pricing of earnings components, we
partition the sample using three alternative proxies for industry homogeneity, i. e. , within-industry similarity in size,
operating activities, or the number of business segments.  As expected, industry-wide earnings are significantly more
persistent in homogenous industries compared to heterogeneous industries.  In contrast, the persistence of firm-specific
earnings does not vary with industry homogeneity.  Further, the market fails to understand the consequences of industry
homogeneity for the relative persistence of industry-wide earnings.  In fact, the underreaction to industry-wide earnings is
significant only in homogeneous industries. 
In a similar vein, we find that the market fails to understand the consequences of business model shocks on the
persistence of earnings components.  We identify large industry-wide business shocks following Guay Name (2014) and firmspecific business shocks following Owens Name (2014). 