
Reducing global poverty and mitigating climate change are two
major challenges facing mankind in the twenty-ﬁrst century.  Economic
growth leads to absolute poverty reduction, particularly if it is not associated with rising income inequality (e. g.  Dollar and Kraay, 2002;
Bourguignon, 2003).  There is a substantial literature that investigates
the relationship between income and carbon dioxide emissions (the
main driver behind the increase in global surface temperature).  This literature suggests that economic growth, at least up to a certain level of
economic development, increases greenhouse gases (IPCC, 2014;
Jakob Name, 2014).  Consequently, from the perspective of a developing
country, economic growth may alleviate poverty, but intensify climate
problems.  A related issue is whether there is also a tradeoff between income inequality and carbon emissions, as stated by Ravallion Name
(2000).  As we discuss below, the theoretical and empirical literature
generates mixed results on this question, pointing to different mechanisms and effects (for a survey see Berthe and Elie, 2015).  Much of
this literature is, however, based on econometric methods that are biased in the presence of time-varying unobserved heterogeneity, and
on older data on both inequality as well as emissions.  We improve
upon the existing literature in both of these respects. 
A particular innovation with respect to the existing literature is that
we use a group ﬁxed effects estimator (Bonhomme and Manresa, 2015)
as opposed to a standard ﬁxed effects estimator.  This grouped ﬁxed effects estimator takes into account that different regions of the world
adopt clean technologies at different rates or face different structural
challenges and dynamics.  Furthermore, the estimator arguably deals
better with endogeneity due to unobserved heterogeneity.  Finally, the
within transformation associated with the standard country-based
ﬁxed effects estimator would eliminate most of the variation in the
Gini data, leaving only the relatively small intertemporal variation
(see the literature on the debates on inequality and growth literature,
e. g.  Forbes, 2000, Banerjee and Duﬂo, 2003, Scholl and Klasen, 2016). 
To the best of our knowledge, only ﬁve papers are closely related to
our empirical investigation of the link between per capita carbon dioxide emissions, per capita output, and inequality.  There are also related
studies investigating the link between inter-country inequality and
emissions (e. 