 1.  Introduction The Genuine Progress Indicator (GPI) remains one of the most ubiquitously applied alternatives to Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in sustainable development research and policy settings.  Unlike GDP and related measures that have a dubious connection to economic welfare, the GPI attempts to measure it directly by accounting for the beneﬁts of both market and nonmarket goods and services as well as the economic, social, and environmental costs of economic activity.  Pioneered by Herman Daly and John Cobb in 1989, the basic structure and calculation methods for the GPI (known originally as the Index of Sustainable Economic Welfare) have changed relatively little despite theoretical reﬁnements that have been suggested in recent literature and a proliferation of new methods and sources of data for many of the GPI's basic adjustments.  Recent GPI studies have been completed at multiple scales including the world as a whole (Kubiszewski et al. , 2013), at the country level for Japan (Hayashi, 2015), Brazil (Andrade and Garcia, 2015) and Italy (Armiento, 2016), at the state or province level for Liaoning Province (Hou, 2016), Oregon (Kubiszewski et al. , 2015), Hawaii (OstergaardKlem and Oleson, 2014), northeast Ohio (Bagstad and Shammin, 2012), Maryland (McGuire et al. , 2012), Utah (Berik and Gaddis, 2014), Vermont (Erickson et al. , 2013), Flanders (Bleys, 2013) and Tuscany (Pulselli et al. , 2012) and at the city level for Baltimore (Posner and Costanza, 2011.  Talberth and Weisdorf, 2014), Hong Kong (Delang and Yu, 2015), Singapore (Delang and Yu, 2015) and a group of six cities in China (Li et al. , 2016).  While all these studies replicate core elements of the original methodology, they also reﬂect a wide divergence in some important details, for example, regarding whether nor not to include the social cost of carbon emissions or assign value to the spillover beneﬁts of higher education.  At the same time, the GPI and other sustainability indicators are facing increasing demands for use in justifying green economy interventions, monitoring economic performance, and guiding public budgets and investments.  The outcome document “The Future We Want” from the 2012 Rio + 20 Conference on Sustainable Development plus a set of Sustainable Development Goals adopted by the UN highlight the urgency of using robust quantitative sustainability metrics that go beyond GDP (Bartelmus, 2013).  In response to these new demands and to help ensure that the GPI remains policy relevant practitioners worldwide have called for greater consistency and a uniform framework to guide future GPI studies – GPI 2. 0 (Bagstad et al. , 2014).  There are several theoretical and methodological issues that GPI 2. 0 ought to resolve.  Among the most fundamental is the question of what the GPI is intended to measure and what purpose it serves.  Is the GPI a measure of sustainability, a measure of current welfare, or a bit of both.  What role can it play in economic policy making.  Another signiﬁcant issue is the basis for valuation.  The existing literature offers ambiguous and sometimes conﬂicting guidance for assigning monetary values to various positive and negative adjustments that are nonmarket in nature.  GPI 2. 0 should establish a uniform protocol for this.  Bagstad et al.  (2014) provide a thorough review of methodological issues GPI 2. 0 should address and propose a list of modiﬁcations, many of which have already appeared in one or more recent studies.  Among the most signiﬁcant include inversion of certain adjustments (ecosystem services and leisure) to measure beneﬁts remaining rather than costs of depletion, development of a less arbitrary adjustment for income inequality, removal of certain indicators that lack a solid theoretical basis, and adoption of more rigorous metrics for calculation ofOn December 19th, 2013 Center for Sustainable Economy launched an online discussion forum to engage the community of GPI researchers and practitioners worldwide on these theoretical and methodological challenges in order to more thoroughly explore alternatives for GPI 2. 0.  Center for Sustainable Economy (CSE) is a non-proﬁt environmental economics think tank based in Portland, Oregon.  Among other issues, CSE specializes in sustainability indicators, including the GPI, and their application in policy settings. 1 The forum is still active, and, to date has engaged ﬁfty-two researchers, practitioners, and public agency partners with varying degrees of involvement and experience with the GPI.  Detailed technical papers were submitted and discussed, as well as lengthy posts on 22 distinct topics that were grouped under headings such as deﬁnition, architecture, externalities, human capital, local scale adaptations, inequality adjustment and column-by-column methods and data sources.  In addition to these online discussions, the Gund Institute for Ecological Economics at the University of Vermont and think tank Demos hosted GPI 2. 0 workshops during this period.  This paper attempts to operationalize some of the consensus that emerged from these discussions.  It addresses both theoretical and methodological issues with conventional GPI accounting and presents a set of pilot accounts for the United States, State of Maryland, and City of Baltimore that incorporates speciﬁc reﬁnements discussed in detail.  The pilot accounts also include suggested reﬁnements that have yet to be discussed at length, but which could serve as a platform for future research.  The remainder of this paper is organized as such.  In Section 2, we revisit some of the theoretical foundations of the GPI and make suggestions for reﬁning its deﬁnition and purpose, valuation basis and mathematical representation.  In Section 3 we provide an overview of suggested components and high-level indicators for GPI 2. 0 and highlight major differences from conventional GPI accounting at this conceptual level.  Important ﬁner-scale differences from conventional GPI accounts are discussed in detail in Appendices A and B.  In Section 4 we present and discuss results.  In Section 5, we conclude by discussing how this suggested framework, if adopted, could be further improved and identify several important areas where consensus should be sought before a GPI 2. 0 methodology can be fully embraced.  2.  Theoretical Reﬁnements.  The GPI's theoretical foundations have been thoroughly articulated and defended, primarily by Daly (1979), Daly and Cobb (1994) and Lawn (2003, 2008).  But connecting the dots between this theoretical foundation and actual components, indicators, and metrics used in many GPI studies has been a somewhat less rigorous undertaking – a shortcoming that has helped fuel the trend towards divergent methodologies (Bagstad et al. , 2014) as well as a number of criticisms about the GPI's apparent arbitrariness (e. g.  Neumayer, 1999, 2000).  In this section we ﬂag three theoretical aspects that could beneﬁt from additional reﬁnement and describe where we landed for each in the context of the GPI 2. 0 pilot accounts.  2. 1.  Deﬁnition and Purpose.  Throughout its history, a precise deﬁnition of the GPI has eluded practitioners.  Despite the GPI's prominence in sustainability indictor applications, there has never been a clear consensus on how the metric is deﬁned, what purposes it serves, and what basic architecture is thus justiﬁed for organizing its various components.  Since its inception, the GPI has been variously deﬁned as (1) an index of sustainable economic welfare, most closely aligned with the notion of maximum sustainable income deﬁned by Hicks (1946). 