 1.  Introduction  Various business and political leaders in the United States have expressed concerns that the U. S.  system of taxing multinationals effectively subsidizes foreign takeovers ( White, 2014 .  Hatch, 2014 ).  Prior research on mergers and acquisitions  (M&A) demonstrates how variation in tax rates ( Scholes and Wolfson, 1990, Arulampalam et al. , 2010 ) and in tax systems  ( Huizinga and Voget, 2009 .  Feld et al. , 2016 ) impact the market for corporate control.  As a result, ﬁrms under a worldwide  tax system are tax-disadvantaged acquirers .  Furthering this line of inquiry, we posit that ﬁrms under a worldwide tax system  are also tax-favored targets of foreign acquirers.  We ﬁnd that U. S.  ﬁrms with locked-out earnings are tax-favored to foreign  acquirers (or equivalently tax-disfavored to U. S.  acquirers).   Foreign earnings “lockout” results when ﬁrms avoid or delay foreign earnings repatriation.  Under the U. S.  worldwide tax  system, taxes owing to the U. S.  government on the earnings of foreign subsidiaries are deferred until those earnings are  repatriated to the U. S.  Consequently, ﬁrms’ repatriation decisions are sensitive to the level of repatriation taxes ( Desai et  al. , 2001.  Hines and Hubbard, 1990 ) and tax incentives lead to higher overseas cash holdings ( Foley et al. , 2007 ).  Hanlon  et al.  (2015) and Edwards et al.  (2016) demonstrate that ﬁrms use “trapped cash” to make suboptimal foreign investments,  increasing total lockout.  A foreign acquirer may be able to free a target’s foreign subsidiaries’ locked-out earnings from the  U. S.  worldwide tax system using “out-from-under” strategies, utilizing trapped cash elsewhere and liquidating suboptimal  foreign investments so the proceeds may be more eﬃciently redeployed.   To test this hypothesized relation between tax lockout in target U. S.  ﬁrms and the nationality of acquirers – foreign  versus U. S.  – we use a sample of 4611 majority acquisitions of U. S.  public company target ﬁrms from 1995 to 2010.  We  measure lockout using the hand-collected balance of permanently reinvested earnings (PRE) reported in the tax footnote.   Employing a probit model, we observe a positive association between the target ﬁrm’s level of PRE and the probability that  the acquirer is foreign.  The effect is economically signiﬁcant.  a standard deviation increase in PRE is associated with a 12%  relative increase in the likelihood that an acquirer is foreign.  These ﬁndings suggest that potential U. S. -based acquirers of  U. S.  targets with trapped cash and suboptimal foreign investments are losing out to foreign acquirers.   Building upon these initial ﬁndings and improving identiﬁcation of our main hypothesized effect, we posit that foreign  acquirers of U. S.  target ﬁrms with higher levels of tax lockout are more likely to be residents of countries that use territorial  tax systems.  In a territorial system, foreign earnings are subject to low or no home country tax, thereby eliminating the  lockout effect.  Categorizing acquisitions according to acquirer tax systems, we observe a signiﬁcant association between  our lockout measures and foreign acquisitions occurring under the territorial (as opposed to worldwide) tax regime.   In an additional test we exploit an exogenous change in the tax system for a subset of acquirers.  during our sample  period, ﬁve OECD countries switched from worldwide to territorial tax systems.  As it is unlikely that switching tax systems  increased incentives to acquire U. S.  ﬁrms with higher levels of tax lockout for reasons other than taxation (e. g. , general  preference for targets with greater foreign activity or higher proﬁtability), this test allows for stronger causal identiﬁcation.   Taken together, these tests provide strong evidence that the relationship between a target’s level of locked-out earnings and  the likelihood of an acquirer being foreign is concentrated in acquiring ﬁrms that operate under territorial tax systems.   Our ﬁndings suggest that U. S.  potential acquirers of U. S.  target ﬁrms with greater levels of locked-out earnings are losing  out to foreign acquirers.  These results speak directly to the current U. S.  policy debate on repatriation taxes as well as the  broader issue of the relative merits of territorial versus worldwide (with deferral) taxation systems.  These ﬁndings are also  relevant to those countries considering a transition between worldwide and territorial tax systems, as notably undertaken  by the U. K.  and Japan.  Likewise, this examination of the relationship of tax systems, lockout, and foreign acquisitions of U. S.   target ﬁrms highlights a facet of the current worldwide tax system and may serve to inform its adjustment or alteration.   The subsequent section of this paper provides institutional information and discusses prior literature.  Section 3 describes  the hypotheses.  Section 4 details the sample selection and research design.  Section 5 presents our ﬁndings.  Section 6 discusses additional analyses.  Section 7 concludes.   2.  Institutional background and prior literature  2. 1.  U. S.  tax and accounting treatment of foreign earnings  The U. S.  taxes its multinational corporations on a worldwide basis.  For a single legal entity, worldwide earnings are taxed  immediately in the period earned.  For ﬁrms comprised of multiple legal entities, however, U. S.  taxation of income earned  in foreign subsidiaries is typically deferred until repatriation.  This U. S.  tax is reduced by foreign tax credits associated with  foreign taxes paid on foreign earnings.  This calculation is complicated by foreign operations in multiple jurisdictions, but  the residual tax due is approximately equal to any excess of the U. S.  tax rate over the weighted average rate of the foreign  jurisdictions.  Given the option of deferral and the high U. S.  corporate tax rate, there is a potential policy concern that foreign  investment by U. S.  multinationals is ineﬃciently subsidized, so that ﬁrms are induced to reinvest their earnings abroad even  when the potential returns are lower than those available domestically, effectively “locking out” these earnings.   Under U. S.  Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, the expectation future U. S.  tax payments associated with foreign  earnings requires ﬁrms to record a deferred tax expense and the related deferred tax liability.  However, Accounting Standards Codiﬁcation 740 allows an exception to this rule, called the Indeﬁnite Reversal Exception.  If management has the  intent and ability to indeﬁnitely reinvest the earnings of a foreign subsidiary, the permanently reinvested earnings (PRE)  designation is invoked, whereby the company avoids recognizing the deferred tax expense.  This designation must be supported by speciﬁc plans for future ﬁnancing and investment, or be accompanied by an assertion of intent to distribute the  earnings in a tax-free liquidation.   2. 2.  Prior literature  Theoretical models, such as those in Hartman (1985) and Scholes et al.  (2014) , show that repatriation decisions are  chieﬂy driven by differences in marginal after-tax rates of return, in the foreign jurisdiction relative to the U. S.  In these  models, the repatriation tax itself is irrelevant, since the foreign earnings are already “trapped” and must eventually face  the repatriation tax.  it does not matter if the ﬁrm can defer this tax burden – the present value of taxes due is the same  whether paid immediately or in the future.  Of course, these results might not be obtained in a richer model.  For example,  if the repatriation tax is not constant over time, then a ﬁrm will delay repatriations until periods with low tax rates, even  at the cost of lower after-tax foreign returns ( De Waegenaere and Sansing, 2008 ).  Tax-induced lockout effect is exacerbated  by the accounting designation of foreign earnings as PRE and multinationals’ desire to maintain higher book income by  avoiding the deferred tax expense on foreign earnings.  This arises because an actual repatriation would force the immediate  recognition of the related domestic tax expense, which, in the case of PRE, by deﬁnition, had not yet been recognized.  In  fact, Graham et al.  (2011) survey tax executives and ﬁnd that these two parallel effects are equally important in driving  ﬁrms’ initial foreign location and subsequent repatriation and reinvestment decisions.   This study contributes to the literature on the role of the frictions created by the system of worldwide taxation on crossborder M&A.  Until recently the majority of empirical studies examining cross-border acquisitions have not considered the  effect of U. S.  international tax rules (e. g. , Doukas and Travlos, 1988.  Moeller and Schlingemann, 2005.  Black et al. , 2007.  Dos  Santos et al. , 2008.  Ellis et al. , 2011.  Erel et al. , 2012 ).  More recently, researchers have begun to investigate the role of taxes  in cross-border M&A.  Using M&A as a proxy for foreign investment, Edwards et al.  (2016) and Hanlon et al.  (2015) document  that U. S.  ﬁrms with locked-out earnings or high levels of trapped cash make less proﬁtable cash acquisitions of foreign target  ﬁrms.  Our study differs from these studies as it examines the impact of the U. S.  tax system on the acquisition of speciﬁcally  U. S.  target ﬁrms.   Feld et al.  (2016) examine the role of an acquirer’s tax system type on outbound M&A.  Focusing on country-level acquirer  characteristics, they provide evidence that ﬁrms from territorial countries are less competitive in bidding on targets in low  tax countries.  Feld et al.  (2016) only include cross-border acquisitions in their sample and so are silent on the whether an  acquisition is cross-border or domestic.  In contrast to Feld et al.  (2016) , we examine how one ﬁrm-speciﬁc tax attribute, the  level of locked-out earnings, impacts the likelihood that a U. S.  ﬁrm (a high tax country resident) is the target of an inbound  foreign acquisition.  We observe that U. S.  acquirers are less likely to acquire certain U. S.  targets – those with higher levels  of locked-out earnings.  Our research setting is speciﬁc to the U. S.  and so has the advantage that it holds constant the tax  system and statutory tax rate faced by the target ﬁrms.   Huizinga and Voget (2009) ﬁnd that countries with high international double taxation attract smaller numbers of parent  ﬁrms, and the headquarters activities that come with them, following cross-border M&A.  In contrast to our study, Huizinga  and Voget (2009) take the ﬁrms involved in an M&A transaction, and their locations, as given and examine if the parent  location is selected in a tax eﬃcient manner.  We examine the prior step in the M&A process, speciﬁcally how the M&A  parties are paired.  Alternatively stated, we examine a potential cause of the speciﬁc pairing of ﬁrms, the lockout effect  created by the U. S.  tax system.  The ﬁndings of Huizinga and Voget (2009) imply that, given the pairings we document, the  parent of the combined ﬁrm is more likely to choose to locate outside of the U. S.  following the merger.   Finally, Bird (2017) ﬁnds that low-tax foreign bidders are more likely to acquire more proﬁtable U. S.  target ﬁrms relative  to high-tax domestic bidders, and that increases in a target ﬁrm’s tax shields lead to decreases in the probability of foreign  acquisition.  Where Bird (2017) examines the impact of target proﬁtability and existing tax deductions, attributes that vary  within both domestic only and multinational ﬁrms, on inbound foreign M&A activity, our study examines the impact of  foreign subsidiary earnings that are locked-out by the U. S.  worldwide system of taxing foreign subsidiary proﬁts on inbound  M&A activity.   3.  Hypothesis development  3. 1.  Worldwide taxation and inbound mergers and acquisitions  Given that U. S.  tax and ﬁnancial reporting systems lead U. S.  ﬁrms to hold more earnings overseas, these ﬁrms can become  attractive – that is, tax-favored – targets for foreign buyers.  First, accumulated locked-out earnings might appeal to foreign  acquirers because the takeover could help free the target’s foreign subsidiaries’ past earnings from the U. S.  worldwide tax  system.  Following an acquisition, it is possible for a foreign acquirer to access the existing stock of unrepatriated foreign  earnings in the foreign subsidiary, using what are known as “out-from-under” or “hopscotching” transactions.  Out-fromunder planning is highly fact-speciﬁc and different strategies are used depending on the attributes of the ﬁrms involved.   Kleinbard (2014) presents an example of this type of transaction, wherein a subsidiary with assets that the ﬁrm wishes  to “free” can lend previously trapped assets to the foreign parent and thus “hop” over the U. S.  The parent is then able to  use the assets as they wish (invest in other assets, repay debt, etc. ) without being liable for U. S.  taxation.  Prior to 2010,  a similar transaction was possible that used an exchange of assets of the U. S.  ﬁrm’s foreign subsidiary for shares in the  new foreign parent.  The transfer could be treated as a dividend from the foreign subsidiary to the foreign parent to the  extent of existing earnings and proﬁts.  The dividend did not incur U. S.  tax because it was from one foreign corporation (the  subsidiary) to another (the new foreign parent) and did not involve a U. S.  entity.   The past locked-out earnings of the target could be held as cash or other ﬁnancial assets.  these assets are fungible  and could readily be redeployed.  The past locked-out earnings of the target could also be held in operating assets as prior  research has documented evidence consistent with U. S.  multinationals using trapped cash to make suboptimal foreign investments ( Edwards et al. , 2016.  Hanlon et al. , 2015 ).  A foreign ﬁrm that acquires a U. S.  target with locked-out earnings  sub-optimally invested could liquidate those investments and redeploy the resources for a more useful purpose.   Accordingly, we propose the following hypothesis.   H1.  The likelihood of an acquirer being foreign is increasing in a target’s level of locked-out earnings.   Our hypothesis relates to the identity of the winning bidder.  We acknowledge that there are other ways to investigate  valuation differences in M&A – using information on prices or the identity of the winning bidder, for instance.  however,  using the valuation information embedded in price premiums causes several empirical diﬃculties.  We do not know what  process determines acquisition prices, which is key to understanding how valuations feed into the observed price.  For example, if a ﬁrst price auction is descriptive, the observed price tells us about that bidder’s valuation directly, ignoring issues  related to surplus sharing between the target and acquirer.  However, if a second price auction is descriptive, the relevant  valuation is that of the losing bidder.  This problem could be minimized if we could observe the other bids for the target.   however, in most cases even the identity of the other bidders is unknown, let alone their bids.  Accordingly, we use the identity of the winning bidder to infer valuation differences in a way that is robust to alternative price structures and does not  rely on observing losing bids.  Differences in the country of residence for different bidders will reveal these valuation differences as long as the M&A market has some element of eﬃciency – the probability of a bidder winning must be increasing  in its valuation.  This should hold on the margin even if bidders suffer from overconﬁdence or a predilection towards empire  building.   We note that several factors could mitigate or counteract our hypothesized effect.  First, a U. S. -based acquirer with suﬃcient proﬁtable overseas investment opportunities could access the trapped cash and suboptimal foreign investments of the  target and redeploy those resources itself.  Second, U. S.  acquirers could be anticipating a favorable change in the taxation  of foreign earnings, or could potentially use their own foreign tax credit carryforwards to shelter repatriations of acquired  locked-out funds.  Finally, during our sample period, U. S.  acquirers could potentially return foreign earnings and cash via  complex tax planning ( Martin et al. , 2015 ).   3. 2.  The acquirer tax system  As noted above, countries can tax the proﬁts of foreign subsidiaries using worldwide or territorial tax systems.  While  most large developed economies use territorial tax systems, some still use worldwide systems (e. g. , as of 2010, 7 of the 34  OECD countries use a worldwide system).  Foreign bidders from territorial tax systems are able to free the acquired ﬁrm’s  foreign subsidiaries’ locked-out earnings from the U. S.  worldwide system and not face incremental parent country tax on  those earnings.  Foreign bidders under a worldwide system could also have a tax advantage compared to U. S.  bidders if the  statutory rate in the foreign jurisdiction is lower than in the U. S.  This is because, even if the foreign acquirer is able to  repatriate past and future foreign subsidiary earnings around the U. S. , those earnings will face repatriation taxes under the  new parent’s worldwide regime.  Alternatively stated, the tax advantages to acquiring a U. S.  ﬁrm with locked-out earnings  are likely greater for foreign acquirers from territorial countries, but the incentives to acquire a U. S.  target with locked-out  earnings could still exist for a foreign acquirer in a low tax rate worldwide country.  Accordingly, we propose the following  hypothesis.   H2.  The association between the likelihood of an acquirer being foreign and a target’s level of locked-out earnings is concentrated in acquiring ﬁrms located in territorial tax systems.   This second hypothesis follows directly from hypothesis 1 and has the added beneﬁt of improving identiﬁcation of our  main hypothesized effect.  More speciﬁcally, in one of our tests of the second hypothesis we are able to exploit an exogenous  change in the tax system faced by a subset of acquiring ﬁrms.  Since we expect our hypothesized relation to exist primarily  in settings where the foreign ﬁrms face a territorial system, the change from a worldwide to territorial system of a number  of countries during our sample period provides better causal identiﬁcation and substantial comfort that our hypothesized  effect is driving differences in foreign versus domestic acquirers, as opposed to some other unobservable country speciﬁc  effect.   <Middle> Research design.  4. 1.  Sample.  We test our hypotheses by examining acquisitions of publicly traded U. S.  target ﬁrms from the Thomson SDC Platinum  database.  Focusing our analysis on target ﬁrms in one country has the advantage of ensuring that all the sample M&A  activity take place under a similar regulatory and institutional environment.  We begin with all majority transactions (where  the acquirer ends up with   50% of the target) that involved a publicly-traded U. S.  target from 1995 to 2010 (the last year  6 For a transaction to be included in the sample, the target company must have nonfor which we hand collected data).   missing values of total assets (at), proﬁts (ebitda), debt (dltt), and intangibles (intan) available in Compustat.  We exclude  all M&A transactions that are valued at less than one million dollars and where the target had less than ten million dollars  in total assets.  We also exclude acquisitions by private equity and non-taxable entities as the hypothesized tax motivated  effect should not impact these acquirers.  Using this base sample, we use a Python script to extract PRE disclosures from the  most recent 10K ﬁled by the target company prior to the deal and hand collect the ﬁrm’s reported level of PRE.  Appendix  A provides a more complete discussion of the PRE data collection process.  The above methodology yields a sample of 4611  unique acquisitions.   4. 2.  Acquirer location and earnings lockout.  We examine the association between the probability of a U. S.  target ﬁrm being acquired by a foreign ﬁrm versus a  domestic ﬁrm and earnings lockout using the following probit model, where ForeignAcq is an indicator variable equal to one if the acquirer was a foreign ﬁrm and zero otherwise.  The independent  variable of interest, LOCKOUT , is our proxy for the target ﬁrm’s locked-out earnings.  Deﬁning and thus identifying exactly  what earnings are locked out is debatable – one could argue that all unremitted foreign earnings are locked-out but this  would obviously be an upper bound estimate.  Also, these data are not publicly available for all ﬁrms.  As a result, we use  PRE as our primary measure of LOCKOUT , and perform additional analyses with two alternative measures, PRE Indicator and  Repatriation Cost.  PRE is a measure of the reported permanently reinvested earnings of the ﬁrm calculated as the total dollar  amount of PRE disclosed in the tax footnote scaled by total assets.  PRE captures the cumulative amount of foreign earnings  a target ﬁrm has declared it has or will indeﬁnitely reinvest abroad and captures a subset of past foreign earnings.  Graham  et al.  (2011) document that 75% of their surveyed ﬁrms classify all their unremitted foreign earnings as PRE.  We note that  these earnings could be retained overseas for both tax and non-tax (i. e. , foreign growth opportunities) reasons.   Following hypothesis 1, we expect B to be positive, consistent with locked-out earnings helping to explain which U. S.   target ﬁrms are acquired by foreign, versus domestic, ﬁrms.  Note that to be included in the sample for this test, the target  ﬁrm must have been successfully taken over.  In theory, we would expect a similar lockout effect to drive selection into the  takeover sample – a ﬁrm that has high locked-out earnings could not only be more likely to be acquired by a foreign ﬁrm,  but also be more likely to be targeted.  We focus on the sample conditional on takeover in order to limit the hand collection  of PRE data.  The clearest alternative hypothesis to hypothesis 1 would be a direct preference by foreign acquirers for U. S.  targets with  foreign activities.  that is, a foreign acquirer could prefer locked-out earnings simply because the target, like the acquirer, also  operates outside of the U. S.  While it is possible that foreign acquirers target U. S.  ﬁrms with foreign operations to expand  into a foreign country, it is unlikely that this would be a foreign ﬁrm’s ﬁrst choice and it is unlikely that the choice to enter  some foreign market is speciﬁcally related to the magnitude of PRE.  A more direct path into a new foreign market could  be achieved through greenﬁeld investment or the acquisition of a ﬁrm based in the foreign country.  That said, we control  for the foreign activities of the U. S.  targets.  Because of the diﬃculty in measuring U. S.  multinationals’ foreign activity using  publicly available data, we attempt to accomplish this in two ways ( Donohoe et al. , 2012 ).  First, we include both a control  variable that is an indicator variable equal to one when the target ﬁrm has any foreign earnings and zero otherwise, and  a control variable for the fraction of total earnings that are foreign.  Second, in untabulated tests, we alternatively include  a control variable for the total foreign sales of the target, from the Compustat segment data, relative to total assets of the  target ﬁrm.   In addition to the control variables designed to capture the extent of foreign operations of the U. S.  target ﬁrms, we  include a control variable for net operating loss carryforwards relative to total assets, and an indicator variable for current  period losses, since these reﬂect differences in future tax rates faced by the targets that could affect foreign and domestic  takeovers in different ways, given different home country tax rates and business strategies ( Bird, 2017 ).  We also include  the log of market capitalization to control for target ﬁrm size.  We further include control variables for target proﬁtability  (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization) scaled by total assets, intangible assets scaled by total assets,  and leverage (debt over total assets).  The inclusion of the ﬁrst two of these variables controls for the fact that foreign and  domestic acquirers could have differential access to income shifting strategies, which themselves are more valuable if the  target ﬁrm has more proﬁts to shift, and potentially easier to implement if the target has more intangible assets.   In addition to the beneﬁt of a foreign acquirer unlocking past earnings, the new entity could also beneﬁt from further tax savings in the future through increased income shifting, speciﬁcally through interest stripping and reorganization.   First, with respect to interest stripping, the new foreign parent could lend to the U. S.  subsidiary (the former U. S.  based  parent), thereby increasing interest deductions in the U. S.  As a result, we control for target ﬁrm leverage.  If a target has  low current U. S.  leverage, they could lever up post acquisition and strip future U. S.  based earnings going forward.  However, it is also possible that a foreign acquirer interested in earnings stripping could acquire a U. S.  multinational with high  U. S.  debt outstanding, and after the acquisition lend to the target ﬁrm which then pays off the existing debt, resulting  in interest stripping.  Further, interest stripping is accomplished through internal debt, which is not observable based on  public disclosure.  For these reasons it is very diﬃcult to test for the interest stripping motivation separately.  Second, on  a go forward basis, the foreign acquirer could undergo a reorganization so that the future foreign earnings of the preexisting U. S.  foreign subsidiaries are no longer subject to U. S.  tax as the new parent ﬁrm is not domiciled in the U. S.  For  example, following an acquisition the acquiring foreign parent can “freeze” the value of the target foreign subsidiaries by  exchanging the existing common stock of the subsidiaries held by the U. S.  corporation for preferred shares of the subsidiaries while issuing new common shares to a related foreign entity within the multinational.  A number of the control  variables can also be interpreted as proxies for the future taxable proﬁts of the target ﬁrm overall, and of the foreign subsidiaries in particular.  The control variables for “foreignness,” proﬁtability, and intangibility will also capture the tax-favored  effect of future proﬁts and positive coeﬃcients on these variables would also be consistent with foreign acquirers being  tax-favored.   4. 3.  Acquirer location, tax system, and earnings lockout  The main test of hypothesis 2 involves distinguishing the foreign acquirers by whether they are located in countries that use a worldwide or territorial system.  If hypothesis 2 is descriptive, the increased propensity to acquire ﬁrms  with locked-out earnings by foreign over domestic ﬁrms should be greater when the foreign acquirers face territorial  (versus worldwide) systems.  To test hypothesis 2, we rerun the analysis from Section 4. 2 on four separate subsamples.   The ﬁrst includes all domestic acquisitions and only those foreign acquisitions from territorial countries.  The second includes all domestic acquisitions and only those foreign acquisitions from worldwide countries.  The third includes acquisitions from territorial countries coded as one and both U. S.  domestic acquisitions and foreign acquisitions from worldwide countries in the zero group.  Finally, the fourth includes only acquisitions by foreign ﬁrms and codes the dependant variable as one for territorial country acquirers, and zero for worldwide.  Consistent with hypothesis 2, the association between the likelihood of an acquirer being foreign and a target’s locked-out earnings is concentrated in acquirers  from territorial countries, we expect positive marginal effects for earnings lockout for the ﬁrst, third, and fourth speciﬁcation.  A marginal effect for earnings lockout not statistically different from zero is expected in the second speciﬁcation as all acquirers are from worldwide tax systems – thus these foreign acquirers are not expected to be tax-favored  over U. S.  domestic acquirers except to the extent that the foreign corporate statutory tax rate is much lower than the  U. S.  rate.   A remaining empirical concern with these tests is that foreign acquirers could have a particular preference for U. S.  target  ﬁrms because of their foreign operations regardless of their locked-out earnings, or for ﬁrms with locked-out earnings for  correlated non-tax reasons, or because other features of their tax codes could facilitate accessing the foreign earnings of  the target ﬁrm at a lower tax cost.  To account for these possibilities, in the ﬁnal set of tests, we include acquirer country  ﬁxed effects in the models.  For many of the acquirer countries in the sample, the ﬁxed effect would be perfectly predictive  of territorial or worldwide tax systems, as many countries did not change their tax systems over the sample period.  As a  result, in ﬁxed effects models we only include acquisitions by acquirers located in countries that satisfy two criteria.  First,  during the sample period the country must have switched tax systems.  Second, at least one ﬁrm from the country must  have made an acquisition during the sample period before the reform and at least one ﬁrm from that country must have  made an acquisition following the reform.   The resulting sample consists primarily of acquiring ﬁrms located in the U. K.  and Japan, which both switched from  worldwide to territorial systems in 2008.  A positive marginal effect of the lockout variable would be consistent with the  preference of foreign acquirers from a speciﬁc country for targets with locked-out earnings increasing after a switch from a  worldwide to a territorial system.  This tax system switching empirical strategy reduces concerns that the results observed  in the earlier tests are being driven by ﬁrms’ desire to acquire the foreign operations of the U. S.  target ﬁrms or by ﬁxed  country-speciﬁc variables and allows better causal identiﬁcation.   5.  Empirical ﬁndings.  5. 1.  Descriptive statistics.  The sample includes 4611 unique acquisitions, of which 791 have positive values of PRE.   There are 3812 deals with domestic acquirers (15% have PRE with a median value of $37 million, or 4. 7% of target ﬁrm assets) and 799 deals with  foreign acquirers (24% have PRE with median value of $38 million, or 5. 3% of target assets).  Using the alternative measure  of earnings lockout based on a ﬁrm’s potential repatriation costs, in lieu of the hand collected PRE data, yields a sample of  5243 unique acquisitions.   Table 1 panel A details the sample composition.  The number of acquisitions per year is relatively constant, with a small  peak around 20 0 0 and a valley during the ﬁnancial crisis of the late 20 0 0s.  Table 1 panel B provides a breakdown of the  acquirers by country.  No single country accounts for more than 20% of the acquisitions.  About half the foreign acquisitions  are from the major western economies of the U. K. , Canada, France, and Germany.   In untabulated analysis we examine a number of additional acquisition characteristics.  For transactions where the acquirer’s industry is known, a similar portion of domestic and cross-border transactions involve a target and acquirer within  the same industry, providing comfort that our ﬁndings are not due to cross border differences in the desire to diversify.  We  also observe that targets of both foreign and domestic acquirers have similar asset tangibility.  Targets of both groups also  have similar cash holdings.  These data provide further comfort that the targets of domestic and foreign acquirers are similar  in non-tax attributes.   Table 2 panel A provides summary statistics for the LOCKOUT measures and the control variables.  Appendix B provides  detailed variable deﬁnitions for the variables.  All continuous variables are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels to reduce  the inﬂuence of outliers.  The descriptive statistics indicate that acquirers are foreign for 17% of the sample deals and 16% of  target ﬁrms report positive values of PRE.  Approximately a third of target ﬁrms have foreign earnings and ﬁrms on average  report 10% of their earnings as coming from foreign sources.   Table 2 panel B presents the sample size and means of the variables, split according to the pairing of acquirer (foreign or  domestic) and target type (domestic operations only or multinational).  Column (1) restricts to observations with purely domestic targets and domestic acquirers, column (2) purely domestic targets with foreign acquirers, column (3) multinational  targets with domestic acquirers and column (4) multinational targets with foreign acquirers.  Foreign ﬁrms acquire 477 purely  domestic ﬁrms, 14% of the 3529 targets that have only U. S.  domestic operations.  Foreigners acquire 399 multinationals, 23%  of the 1714 targets that are U. S.  multinationals.  a signiﬁcant and substantially larger percentage of the multinational acquisitions than the domestic only acquisitions, consistent with a preference of foreign ﬁrms for U. S.  targets with foreign  operations.   The partitions also illustrate the differences in the LOCKOUT proxies across acquirer type for domestic and multinational  targets.  For example, the mean PRE of purely domestic targets of domestic acquirers is 0. 0 0 0 compared to 0. 003 for purely  11 The mean PRE of multinational targets of domestic acquirers is 0. 029 compared to  domestic targets of foreign acquirers.   0. 032 for multinational targets of foreign acquirers.  The control variables are similar across these cuts, particularly when  holding target type constant (i. e. , between columns (1) and (2).  and columns (3) and (4)).   Table 2 panel C provides the correlations of our test and control variables.  One notable observation is the strong positive  correlation between the proxies for earnings lockout.  Both of the PRE measures and the tax repatriation cost variable are  highly correlated, ranging from 0. 236 to 0. 699, providing some comfort that they are capturing the same underlying construct of earnings lockout.  The correlations among the measures of earnings lockout and the indicator for foreign acquirers  are signiﬁcantly positive and provide suggestive evidence for our ﬁrst hypothesis.  The measures of the targets’ foreign activities are also positively correlated with the foreign acquirer indicator.  This highlights the importance of controlling for  foreign activities to disentangle the effect of locked-out earnings from foreign activities of the target ﬁrm in general.   5. 2.  Acquirer location and earnings lockout  Columns (1) and (2) of Table 3 presents the results of estimating Eq.  (1) where PRE is used as the measure of locked-out  earnings.  The estimated marginal effect of this measure is 0. 525 (standard error of 0. 137) and is statistically signiﬁcant at the  1% level.  This effect corresponds to an increase in the probability that the acquirer will be foreign of 0. 525 percentage points  for a one percentage point increase in the PRE measure, or a 2. 1 percentage point increase for a one standard deviation  increase in the measure.  This effect size can be compared to the average foreign acquirer probability in the sample of 17%  and represents a 12% (2. 1%/17%) relative increase in the likelihood that the acquirer is foreign.   The estimated marginal effects for the control variables in column (1), when signiﬁcant, are generally consistent with  expectations.  Proﬁtability loads positively, consistent with foreign acquirers valuing pre-tax earnings due to their potential  tax savings on future proﬁts.  The intangibility ratio loads positively, consistent with intangible assets making income shifting  less costly and being more tax advantageous to foreign acquirers.  The loss indicator loads positively, consistent with Bird  (2017) who documents a similar preference by foreign acquirers for loss ﬁrms and attributes the result to a non-tax preference.  We also note that the estimated marginal effect of leverage is not signiﬁcant at traditional levels.  This non-ﬁnding can  be interpreted as consistent with either the test not being particularly diagnostic, or potential future income stripping not  being a driver of foreign takeovers.  It could also be that ﬁrms are already stripping earnings out of the U. S.  through debt or  that thin capitalization rules are viewed as binding.   In column (2) of Table 3 , we add the foreignness controls, an indicator variable equal to one for any foreign earnings and  the fraction of earnings that are foreign.  The marginal effect of PRE declines to 0. 328 (standard error of 0. 157) but remains  statistically signiﬁcant.  This decline, combined with the positive marginal effect estimated for these variables, suggests that  foreign acquirers prefer targets with more foreign activities, and that this preference explains about half of the effect of PRE  in column (1).  In untabulated tests, we use an alternative foreignness control variable – the ratio of foreign sales to total  assets of the target ﬁrm.  This change also yields a positive and signiﬁcant marginal effect of PRE .  The positive and signiﬁcant  effects of some of the foreignness, proﬁtability and intangibility control variables are also consistent with foreign acquirers  being tax-favored because these variables also capture the tax beneﬁts on future proﬁts.   To triangulate our results, we repeat our analysis with two alternative measures of LOCKOUT.  The ﬁrst measure, PRE  Indicator , is an indicator variable set equal to one for any positive value of PRE or a general disclosure of the existence of  PRE without a speciﬁc dollar amount.  The second measure, Repatriation Cost , is based on Foley et al.  (2007) and calculated as pre-tax foreign income multiplied by the U. S.  corporate statutory tax rate less any foreign taxes paid, scaled by total assets.  13 Columns (3) and (4) report the results from the same two specifications with PRE Indicator as the lockout measure, and columns (5) and (6) report the results using Repatriation Cost .  All four specifications yield similar results and inferences.  We also estimate the cumulative magnitude of the effect in dollar terms over our sample period.  The cumulative effect is economically significant.  Based on our empirical findings, an additional $186 billion in U. S.  assets ended up in foreign hands as the result of this effect.  For simplicity of interpretation, this effect is estimated using the marginal effect on the PRE indicator after controlling for the foreignness of the targets (i. e. , the marginal effect on the PRE indicator from column.  5. 3.  Acquirer location, tax system, and earnings lockout.  We investigate hypothesis 2 by splitting the sample depending on whether the acquirer is resident in a country that  employs a territorial or a worldwide system using various different subsamples.  In column (1), observations with U. S.  domestic acquirers and only foreign acquirers from territorial countries are included.  Column (2) presents a falsiﬁcation test  where observations with domestic acquirers are compared to acquisitions by foreign acquirers from worldwide countries.  As  articulated in hypothesis 2, the tax advantage to foreign acquirers will primarily exist for foreign acquirers that are located  in countries that utilize a territorial system.  The tax advantage to foreign acquirers facing worldwide systems will be lower  as any freed past proﬁts, as well as future proﬁts, will face eventual home country taxation.  As a result, we do not expect  to observe a signiﬁcant marginal effect of LOCKOUT in column (2).   Consistent with hypothesis 2, the effect of PRE is positive and statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level for the foreign  territorial versus domestic comparison and not signiﬁcantly different from zero for the foreign worldwide versus domestic  comparison.  These ﬁndings imply that the results from the foreign versus domestic models used to test hypothesis 1 are  driven primarily by acquirers resident in territorial tax system countries and is consistent with our hypothesized tax relation.  This ﬁnding is also inconsistent with foreign acquirers simply preferring more proﬁtable U. S.  multinational targets as  PRE should then also load signiﬁcantly for worldwide acquirers.  Note that the control variables load similarly across both  subsamples, implying that both types of foreign acquirers have similar non-tax preferences over targets.   Domestic acquisitions are fundamentally similar to acquisitions originating from worldwide countries as both the U. S.   and these foreign acquirers share the same type of (worldwide) tax systems.  We exploit this similarity and implement an  alternative approach to testing the territorial versus worldwide system distinction by including domestic acquisitions with  the foreign worldwide acquirers in the worldwide system category.  Column (3) presents the results from this speciﬁcation  where the estimated effect of PRE (marginal effect of 0. 300, standard error of 0. 126) suggests a clear, statistically signiﬁcant  difference between acquirers from worldwide and territorial systems.  The observed effect corresponds to an increase in the  probability of a territorial, relative to a worldwide, acquirer of 1. 2 percentage points for a one standard deviation increase  in PRE .  This effect size can be compared with the average likelihood of a territorial acquirer of 11%.   In column (4) of Table 4 , we remove domestic acquisitions of U. S.  ﬁrms from the sample and redeﬁne the dependent  variable to be one (zero) if the foreign acquirer comes from a territorial (worldwide) country.  We remove the foreignness  control variables as the sample is restricted to acquisitions by foreign acquirers.  If the hypothesized tax effect is driving  the above results, we expect a positive sorting of territorial acquirers towards targets with high levels of PRE.  We observe  a positive marginal effect of 0. 536 that is statistically signiﬁcant at the 10% level.  Overall, the results in Table 4 provide  evidence consistent with hypothesis 2.  Acquirers resident in territorial countries exhibit a stronger preference for U. S.  target  ﬁrms with locked-out earnings than acquirers from worldwide countries (including domestic acquirers).   In order to improve the identiﬁcation of our tests, in Table 5 we examine acquisitions from countries that switched their  tax system from a worldwide to territorial system (the U. K. , Japan, and New Zealand as of 2009.  Italy and Finland as of  2004).  Given that relatively few countries have changed tax systems, these tests are necessarily performed on a reduced  sample.  The smaller sample increases estimated standard errors and so reduces the power of the tests.  We view this as an  acceptable trade-off, given the beneﬁts in identiﬁcation.  This reduced sample includes 214 acquisitions, 12% of which occur  following countries’ tax system changes.   Column (1) presents the results from estimating the same model as in Table 4 for acquirers in the switching countries.   The dependent variable is coded 1 (0) for acquisitions occurring under the territorial (worldwide) system in the foreign  acquirers country.  The results are consistent with hypothesis 2, the loading on PRE is positive and signiﬁcant.  As above, this  implies that territorial country acquirers are more likely to be the acquirer of U. S.  target ﬁrms with high levels of locked-out  earnings.   In column (2) of Table 5 , we add country ﬁxed effects for the system switching countries.  The loading on PRE is 1. 214  and signiﬁcant at the 1% level.  The lower marginal effect of PRE is suggestive of an unobserved time constant variable that  explains both a country’s having a territorial system, and having acquirers that prefer targets with locked-out earnings.   However, this variable does not completely explain the previous results.  When a country switches from a worldwide to a  territorial system, its acquirers increase their preference for targets with PRE , consistent with tax system differences, not just  a preference by foreign ﬁrms for acquiring the foreign or U. S.  domestic assets of U. S.  multinationals, being the underlying  cause for our ﬁndings.  Next, we perform two placebo tests to ensure our results are not driven by a time trend where foreign  acquirers simply have an increasing preference for ﬁrms with locked-out earnings.  In column (3), the sample includes all  observations from non-switching worldwide system countries and the dependent variable is set equal to one assuming a  pseudo switch in 2009 (mirroring the switches in the U. K.  and Japan, which comprise the bulk of the switches in columns  (1) and (2)).  This falsiﬁcation test fails to yield a signiﬁcant marginal effect on PRE.  In column (4), the sample includes  observations from the two non-switching countries closest in size to the largest switching countries, the U. K.  (Canada and  France) and Japan (Switzerland and Bermuda).  The dependent variable is again set equal to one assuming a pseudo switch  in 2009.  This falsiﬁcation test also fails to yield a signiﬁcant marginal effect of PRE.  Taken together, the results in Table  5 provide strong evidence of a causal relationship between the tax beneﬁts of locked-out earnings and the likelihood of  foreign acquisition from a country with a territorial tax system.  These tax system switching tests also help rule out the  alternative explanation that foreign acquirers simply have a preference for more proﬁtable U. S.  multinationals, as proxied by  PRE , as there is no reason to expect that preference to be correlated with the tax system switches we examine, other than  through the association with earnings lockout.   6.  Additional analyses.  6. 1.  Robustness tests.  The main analysis does not include industry or time ﬁxed effects as we do not suspect time series or cross sectional  correlation to be an issue as we study the sensitivity of acquisitions to locked-out earnings, rather than just the identity of  the acquirer.  While the latter could be subject to secular time trends (for example, based on exchange rates or cross country  differences in macroeconomic conditions), it is not clear why these would impact the sensitivity of foreign acquisitions to  our proxies of locked-out earnings.  However, in Table 6 panel A we repeat our analysis including both industry and time  ﬁxed effects.  Column (1) presents results including the basic set of controls and column (2) adds the foreignness controls.   Row (1) reproduces the primary results from Table 3 to provide a baseline.  Row (2) presents results after including year  ﬁxed effects.  Row (3) presents results after including industry ﬁxed effects.  Row (4) presents results after including both  year and industry ﬁxed effects simultaneously.  Results under all speciﬁcations are consistent with the baseline model from  the main tests.   Our sample includes some relatively large target ﬁrms, possibly limiting the number of feasible acquirers.  Further, the  mean size of the multinational targets is larger than the domestic only targets, although the size of multinationals acquired  by foreigners is similar to those with U. S.  acquirers (see Table 2 panel B).  To address this concern, we repeat our analysis  including a control for acquirer size.  Note, this test reduces the sample size by 27% to 3192 observations (as many acquirers  are private ﬁrms).  To provide further comfort that our results are not driven by acquisitions of large ﬁrms, we repeat our  analysis independently dropping the largest 10% of targets and acquirers.  for symmetry, we also drop the smallest 10% of  targets and acquirers.  Row (1) of panel B reproduces the results from Table 3 to provide a baseline, row (2) includes a control  variable for acquirer size, row (3) drops the smallest 10% of targets from the sample, row (4) drops the largest 10% of targets,  row (5) drops the smallest 10% of acquirers, and row (6) drops the largest 10% of acquirers.  Results are all consistent with  the baseline tests.   Some prior research includes acquirer country tax rates, or the tax rate differential between the acquirer and target, as  controls or test variables.  In the primary analysis we exclude tax rate variables for both practical and theoretical reasons.  On  a practical level, we are unable to observe the tax rates the acquirers are facing, although this could potentially be proxied  for using the home country’s top statutory rate.  On a theoretical level, it is not clear why the home country tax rate is  an issue in our setting.  For territorial acquirers, the parent country tax rate is not relevant, as the foreign earnings will  not face parent level tax (i. e. , the rate is zero).  For the worldwide acquirers, the vast majority of observations come from  Japan and the U. K.  (91% by value, 68% by count), which had statutory rates similar to the U. S.  during the sample period.   The only worldwide country in the sample with a substantially lower tax rate than the U. S.  is Ireland, which accounts for  only 6 acquisitions.  We perform several additional analyses to alleviate the concern that the acquirers’ tax rate is driving  our ﬁndings.  Table 6 panel C reports the results from these tests.  Row (1) reproduces the results from Table 3 to provide  a baseline, row (2) drops the observations from the low tax worldwide system (i. e. , Irish acquirers) from the sample, and  row (3) drops all acquisitions from tax havens from the sample.  Results from both of these analyses are consistent with the  baseline results from the main tests.   While in our primary analysis we include all U. S.  acquirers, we perform several untabulated tests to ensure that our ﬁndings do not rely on this choice.  First, we separately rerun our tests using observations with foreign acquisitions and either  (i) purely domestic U. S.  acquirers, or (ii) U. S.  multinational acquirers, as the control group.  Inferences remain unchanged.   Second, we perform a falsiﬁcation test and repeat the analysis including only observations with U. S.  acquirers and coding  the dependent variable as 1 (0) if the acquirer is a multinational (purely domestic ﬁrm) and fail to observe a signiﬁcant  marginal effect of PRE.  This ﬁnding is consistent with no discernable preference for locked-out earnings by U. S.  multinational acquirers, lending further support that our hypothesized relation is driving the tabulated observed results.   6. 2.  Past locked-out earnings and future earnings.  As noted above, foreign acquirers could, with appropriate tax planning, avoid U. S.  taxes on future foreign earnings,  thereby creating an advantage over domestic acquirers.  Although it is diﬃcult to disentangle the potential motivations,  we perform some additional analysis on this issue.  First, we examine a subsample of targets that do not report foreign income or tax expense in the current year.  Although these ﬁrms do not report current foreign activity, a small portion report  non-zero values for PRE .  This PRE should represent past locked-out earnings, without being correlated with future foreign  earnings given the current absence of activity.  Using this subsample, we observe (untabulated) a positive and signiﬁcant  marginal effect of PRE, consistent with past locked-out earnings impacting the likelihood that an acquirer is foreign.  We  caution from drawing strong inferences from this test as it is based on a sample of 3529 ﬁrms, of which 68 report non-zero Finally, we partition our sample on two measures of growth in foreign operations, as the tax beneﬁts to a foreign acquisition of a U. S.  ﬁrm with high foreign growth are likely partially attributable to expected future foreign earnings.  Separately,  we split our sample at the median of foreign earnings growth and foreign sales growth.  Untabulated results from both partitions are generally stronger in the high growth group, consistent with at least some beneﬁt coming from potential future  foreign earnings.   6. 3.  Locked-out earnings versus trapped cash  As noted, the relation between locked-out earnings and the domicile of acquirers should exist for all forms of locked-out  earnings, regardless of the form of the underlying assets.  The locked-out earnings could be held as ﬁnancial assets (i. e. ,  trapped cash) or reinvested in operating (non-ﬁnancial) assets either purchased directly or through a suboptimal foreign  cash acquisition as documented by Edwards et al.  (2016) and Hanlon et al.  (2015) .  The ﬁnancial assets could be current or  long term and are not all, strictly speaking, “cash. ” While our primary analysis does not examine a preference by foreign acquirers for trapped cash speciﬁcally, our ﬁndings are consistent with this trapped cash story.  Unfortunately, an examination  of trapped cash directly is diﬃcult.  Foreign cash holdings are not a required disclosure and, until the SEC began requesting  this information in recent years, few ﬁrms disclosed this information.  Even if the amount of foreign cash was known, disentangling the amount that is tax induced would be diﬃcult.  As an alternative, prior studies suggest that the Repatriation Cost  17 Hanlon et al.  (2015) estimate tax-induced foreign cash (their  measure can also be interpreted as a proxy for trapped cash.   variable Predicted Foreign Cash-REPAT ) using the estimated coeﬃcient on the Foley et al.  (2007) repatriation tax cost variable  from a regression of foreign cash on the repatriation tax cost measure and controls.  Using the Hanlon et al. 