
A growing body of research considers the role of sentiment in financial decisions.  In common usage, the term sentiment
refers to feelings or beliefs about a situation, state of affairs, or event.  Applied in the finance and accounting literature,
however, the term sentiment more narrowly depicts beliefs that are unjustified based on available information (e. g. , Baker
and Wurgler, 2007).  While evidence indicates economic data justify the majority of beliefs about the state of the economy
(e. g. , Lemmon and Portniaguina, 2006), research shows that sentiment has meaningful effects in both asset pricing and
corporate decision-making settings.  For example, Baker and Wurgler (2006) find sentiment is associated with return reversals in stocks that are difficult to value and arbitrage, though the effects are less evident in highly competitive and liquid
markets where investors can arbitrage away security mispricing and discipline the potential effects of psychological biases. 
Importantly, corporate decision making settings lack an easily accessible arbitrage mechanism to discipline biased decisions,
increasing the likelihood that sentiment will affect individual decisions, especially in settings of high uncertainty (Bloomfield, 2010).  Consequently, behavioral forces acting on individuals have the ability to influence the behavior of institutions in
predictable ways.  Indeed, prior research indicates that sentiment affects analysts’ estimates (Clement Name, 2011; Hribar and
McInnis, 2012), institutional investors’ portfolio allocations (Cornell Name, 2014), and managers’ pro-forma earnings disclosures (Brown Name, 2012). 
In this study, we investigate whether managerial sentiment – managers’ unjustified beliefs about future firm outcomes – is
associated with errors in accrual estimates.  Accrual estimates require managerial judgment and estimation about expected
future realizations.  The inherent uncertainty in future outcomes allows for both strategic discretion and unintentional errors in
accrual estimates.  Consistent with the aforementioned research showing that decisions of sophisticated individuals exhibit
sentiment in settings of uncertainty, we posit that managerial sentiment may lead to errors in accrual estimates, where
managers’ over (under) optimism results in accrual estimates that are too low (high). 
To study our research question, we examine bank managers’ estimates of the loan loss provision.  In the banking setting,
managerial beliefs that are unjustifiably optimistic (pessimistic) could lead to under (over) estimation of future charge-offs
and thus a negative association between managerial sentiment and the loan loss provision.  The loan loss provision is a
particularly well-suited accrual for detecting the potential effect of sentiment on accrual estimates for three reasons.  First,
the loan loss provision is the most significant and economically important accrual in the banking industry.  Second, available
data on loan accounts allow us to observe the economic realization (i. e. , charge-offs) to which the provision relates, and thus
to evaluate the accuracy of loan loss provision estimates.  Third, regulators require banks to file call reports, enabling us to
collect private bank financial statement data and use a private bank sample to rule out some of the alternative explanations
for our results that are based on capital market incentives. 
Our primary tests use measures of managerial sentiment derived from the Duke University/CFO Magazine Business
Outlook Survey, which surveys managers’ levels of optimism about their firms’ future prospects.  Using the aggregate survey
data, we examine both the unadjusted quarterly measure of average managerial optimism from the survey (‘raw beliefs’),
and the residual from a regression of the quarterly measure of average managerial optimism on an inclusive set of macroeconomic variables (which more directly captures unexplained beliefs or ‘sentiment’).  The second measure follows directly from sentiment reflecting managers’ beliefs unjustified by available information.  Regressing the raw measure of
beliefs on macroeconomic factors allows us to separate the justified or rational component of the survey responses, from the
unjustified or sentiment component. 
We first examine the association between managerial sentiment and the loan loss provision.  If managerial sentiment
affects the loan loss provision, then variation in the provision should be negatively associated with managerial sentiment,
after controlling for other determinants of the provision.  Using quarterly data from 2002 to 2013 for publicly traded
commercial banks, we find that both raw beliefs and the unexplained beliefs are negatively associated with loan loss
provisions.  When measures of quarter t sentiment are higher, ceteris paribus, the loan loss provision estimated in quarter t is
lower.  Consistent with prior research, we find that economic fundamentals are the primary driver of the loan loss provision. 
However, we also show that managerial sentiment has a nontrivial effect on the provision.  On average, a one standard
deviation change in sentiment is associated with a 1. 60% change in the loan loss provision, or a 1. 04% change in after-tax net
income.  In addition, we find that for banks where the loan loss provision is more difficult to predict, a one standard deviation change in sentiment is associated with a 3. 60–4. 80% decrease in the loan loss provision, and a 2. 34–3. 12% change in
after-tax net income. 1
We next consider whether accrual estimates made in periods of high (low) sentiment are too low (high) by examining
future charge-offs as the realization of the accrual.  If managerial sentiment biases managers’ accrual estimates, then loan
loss provisions estimated during periods of high sentiment should be associated with greater future charge-offs per dollar of
provision compared to those estimated during periods of low sentiment.  We find that the ratio of future charge-offs to
current loan loss provision is significantly higher when the provision is estimated in quarters when measures of sentiment
are high.  Specifically, a one standard deviation increase in sentiment is associated with one-year ahead charge-offs that are
3. 25% higher per dollar of provision.  These magnitudes are comparable to the effects of earnings management incentives on
the loan loss provision.  For example, a one standard deviation change in earnings before the provision (tier 1 capital ratio)
results in a 3. 03% (6. 12%) increase in future charges-offs per dollar of provision. 2 Our result suggests that managerial sentiment is associated with biased accrual estimates and mitigates concerns that the result of the test of our first hypothesis
simply signals managers’ rational responses to private or public information that is correlated with our measure of
sentiment. 
This test also helps us validate our decomposition of beliefs into justified and unjustified components.  Regardless of
whether managers’ beliefs are justified or unjustified, either component should lead managers to adjust their loan loss
provision.  Therefore, we expect both explained and unexplained beliefs to be associated with the provision.  In contrast, only
unjustified beliefs should be associated with a change in future charge-offs relative to the current provision.  Thus, if our
decomposition is effective, we should observe that the unexplained component of quarter t beliefs has a greater effect on
the ratio of future charge-offs to quarter t provision than does the explained component.  Consistent with these expectations,
we find that both the explained and unexplained components of beliefs are negatively associated with the loan loss provision, suggesting that both components explain variation in the provision.  Importantly, however, we find the effect of
beliefs on the ratio of future charge-offs to the current provision is weakly significant (or insignificant) for the explained
component, whereas it is highly significant for the unexplained component at both the one-quarter ahead and one-year
ahead horizons.  These results are consistent with the unexplained component being a more direct measure of sentiment
that leads to estimation error in the loan loss provision estimates. 
Finally, to help rule out the concern that the bias in accrual estimates associated with managerial sentiment is strategic, we
repeat our primary tests using a sample of private banks.  Simpson (2013) argues that during high sentiment periods, managers
strategically bias accruals to induce a short-term increase in stock price or to meet overly optimistic analysts’ forecasts.  Our
sample of private banks has neither analyst following nor the opportunity for managers to generate short-term stock price
increases by strategically biasing accruals.  Thus, if our results are attributable to the strategic explanations in Simpson (2013),
we should not observe similar findings among the private banks.  Here, we find the results of the private bank tests are
consistent with the public bank results, suggesting that the bias in loan loss provisions is unlikely to be attributable to strategic
accrual manipulation arising from incentives to temporarily increase stock price or meet analysts’ expectations. 
We conduct a number of additional analyses to further examine the association between managerial sentiment and
accrual estimates.  Consistent with theoretical and empirical work suggesting that the effects of sentiment and similar biases
are greater in settings of higher uncertainty (e. g. , Hirshleifer, 2001; Daniel Name, 1998, 2002; Baker and Wurgler, 2006;
Hribar and McInnis, 2012), we find the association between managerial sentiment and provision estimates is significantly
larger when charge-offs are more difficult to predict.  We also find that the primary results are robust to excluding the
financial crisis period. 
Our study makes several contributions to the literature.  Within the financial reporting literature, prior work suggests
that managers can identify and respond to mispricing generated by less than fully rational investors.  For example, Bergman
and Roychowdhury (2008) and Seybert and Yang (2012) find evidence consistent with managers strategically responding to
investor sentiment in their earnings forecasts.  We add to the growing body of evidence suggesting that psychological biases
can also unduly influence corporate decisions (Baker and Wurgler, 2013; Ben-David Name, 2013) by showing that managerial
sentiment affects accrual estimates.  Our results suggest that managers can be overly optimistic (pessimistic) in periods of
high (low) sentiment for non-strategic reasons, especially when uncertainty is high. 
In addition, our study contributes to the literature on earnings quality by providing evidence that managerial sentiment
lowers earnings quality by generating bias in accrual estimates.  Our results suggest the magnitude of the sentiment-induced
bias is economically meaningful, but also credible, given the presence of external auditors and regulators who monitor
banks’ financial reports.  Given the central role that earnings quality plays in valuation and contracting decisions (e. g. ,
Penman and Sougiannis, 1998; Watts and Zimmerman, 1978; Lambert, 2001) and the fact that psychological biases are likely
to affect accrual estimates in systematic and predictable ways, we believe the results of this study will be of interest to
investors, standard setters, auditors, and regulators. 
Finally, our study contributes to the research that identifies determinants of loan loss provisions and informs the
standing debate over the accounting for credit losses (Bushman and Williams, 2012; Bikker and Metzemakers, 2005;
Bouvatier and Lepetit, 2012; Beatty and Liao, 2011).  Under FAS 114, current loan loss accounting uses an incurred loss model
which specifies that for an expected loss to be accruable, a loss-causing event must have occurred by the date of the
financial statements.  However, managers must still apply significant judgment in estimating the loss-causing events (and
their impact) that have occurred up through the date of the financial statements (e. g. , Grant Thornton, 2012).  In June 2016
the FASB issued an Accounting Standards Update, effective beginning in 2018, requiring banks to record credit losses on
loans based on expected losses (FASB, 2016).  While permitting managers to use more forward-looking models in provisioning for loan losses could be beneficial, these models require increased judgment and estimation from managers, which
allows for greater estimation errors. 
2.  Background and hypothesis development
Considerable research in accounting examines the determinants and consequences of intentional accrual manipulation,
which is generally assumed to reduce earnings quality (e. g. , Dechow Name, 2010).  This research provides evidence consistent
with firm-level attributes (e. g. , Dichev Name, 2013; Francis Name, 2005), managerial incentives (Armstrong Name, 2010),
capital market incentives (e. g. , Ayers Name, 2006; Graham Name, 2005; Burgstalher and Dichev, 1997), and constraints—
including governance features, auditors, regulators, and other external parties—affecting managers’ accrual decisions. 
In contrast, relatively few studies consider the determinants and consequences of non-strategic errors in accrual estimates.  Examples of previously considered determinants of errors include objective difficulties in projecting future outcomes
due to environmental uncertainty, management lapses, and clerical errors (Francis Name, 2005; Hennes Name, 2008; and Lev
Name, 2010).  Errors from these types of factors can generate noise in accruals.  Other possible sources of bias in accrual
estimates relate to individual psychology.  While the evidence in social psychology on individual decision-making is vast,
surprisingly little archival research considers whether these same forces generate bias in accrual estimates. 
One possible source of errors that could result in biased accrual estimates is managerial sentiment.  Similar to the definition of investor sentiment used in prior literature (DeLong Name, 1990; Morck Name, 1990; Chan and Fong, 2004; Baker
and Wurgler, 2006, 2007; Sabherwal Name, 2011; Simpson, 2013), we define managerial sentiment as managers’ beliefs
about future firm outcomes that are not justified by the information available to them.  Although our definition of managerial sentiment is similar to the definition of investor sentiment used in prior literature, the two constructs are distinct, as
investor sentiment is defined as investors’ unjustified beliefs about firm value, whereas managerial sentiment refers to
managers’ unjustified beliefs about their firms’ financial prospects. 
Two conditions are necessary for managerial sentiment to impair accrual estimates.  First, managers must be subject to
sentiment; that is, at times, some managers hold beliefs about future firm outcomes that are unjustified by the information
available to them.  Second, the financial reporting process must provide sufficient latitude for accrual estimates to incorporate managers’ unjustified beliefs.  Thus, a priori, it is unclear whether managerial sentiment affects accrual estimates. 
On the one hand, several studies suggest that managers are sophisticated individuals who are able to identify and exploit
the incorrect beliefs of investors.  For example, prior research finds that managers identify and exploit investor sentiment in
equity issuances (Baker and Wurgler, 2002), dividend payouts (Baker and Wurgler, 2004; Li and Lie, 2006), investment
(Gilchrist Name, 2005; Polk and Sapienza, 2008), and disclosures (e. g. , Bergman and Roychowdhury, 2008; Brown Name,
2012).  Simpson (2013) suggests that managers cater to investor sentiment via accrual manipulation and Hribar and Quinn
(2013) use managers’ trading patterns to provide evidence that managers trade against and exploit investor sentiment for
personal gain.  Taken together, these studies depict managers as sophisticated individuals who, rather than having incorrect
beliefs themselves, recognize and take advantage of the incorrect beliefs of unsophisticated investors. 
On the other hand, several recent studies suggest that sophisticated individuals are subject to sentiment.  Hribar and
McInnis (2012) document a positive relation between sentiment and analyst forecasts for "difficult-to-value” firms, consistent with analysts being subject to sentiment.  Walther and Willis (2012) provide additional evidence that sentiment
affects analyst forecasts.  Cornell Name (2014) find that when investor sentiment is high, institutional investors increase their
holdings in “difficult-to-value” firms with low-quality accounting information, and sell-side stock analysts issue more favorable recommendations for the same firms.  Moreover, unlike investor sentiment where rational arbitrageurs can correct a
mispriced stock, there is no arbitrage mechanism to correct a manager’s incorrect accrual assessment, although it should
become apparent when the accrual reverses. 
Of particular importance to our paper are several studies that provide evidence consistent with managerial sentiment
influencing managers’ decisions in other settings.  Brown Name (2012) study the effects of investor sentiment on the disclosure of pro forma earnings and find that managers release higher pro forma earnings when sentiment is high.  Although
they find evidence that managers identify periods of high investor sentiment and opportunistically report pro forma
earnings to take advantage of investor sentiment, they also find some evidence suggesting that managers themselves are
affected by sentiment.  In addition, Ben-David Name (2013) find that Chief Financial Officers (CFOs) are, on average, severely
miscalibrated.  By showing that their miscalibration measure based on CFO forecasts of S&P 500 returns is highly correlated
with their miscalibration measure based on CFOs’ own-firm projected returns, Ben-David Name (2013) shed new light on the
biases in managers’ corporate forecasts and beliefs. 
To investigate whether managerial sentiment is associated with accrual estimates, we consider the effect of sentiment on
banks’ loan loss provisions.  We avoid using common measures of discretionary accruals in our study for two reasons.  First,
many accruals are not estimates.  For example, there are changes in working capital accounts that constitute a substantial
component of aggregate accruals that might reflect a relatively small amount of estimation (e. g.  purchases of inventory). 
Thus, using a measure of discretionary aggregate accruals would reduce the power of our tests.  Second, by disaggregating
total accruals and focusing on a specific accrual estimate, we can test our hypotheses using an account specific model of the
accrual estimate, thereby avoiding some of the measurement issues associated with models of aggregated accruals
(McNichols, 2000; McNichols and Wilson, 1988; Guidry Name, 1999; Leone and Rock, 2002). 
We use banks’ loan loss provisions as our accrual estimate of interest for several reasons.  First, by definition, loan loss
provisions represent managers’ estimates of incurred losses associated with banks’ loan assets.  Second, banks’ loan loss
provisions are very important in terms of economic magnitude relative to other accruals.  For example, using a sample of
banks from 2005 to 2012, Beatty and Liao (2014) find that the mean of the absolute value of the loan loss provision is 56% of
the mean of the absolute value of total accruals.  Third, loan loss provisions reflect managers’ estimates of future loan chargeoffs.  Because banks are required to report loan charge-offs, we can use this data to evaluate the accuracy of managers’ loan
loss estimates.  Finally, the banking industry allows us to use a sample of private banks to more directly address concerns and
competing explanations related to managers’ capital market incentives. 
Accounting for the loan loss provision is similar to the accounting for bad debt expense.  The loan loss reserve (or allowance) account is a contra asset account, which reduces banks’ recognizable receivables by the amount that bank
managers expect to be unable to collect due to loss-causing events.  Managers increase the loan loss reserves through the
loan loss provision with net loan charge-offs reducing the reserves as loans become uncollectible.  During our sample period,
FAS 114 stipulates that banks reserve for loan losses using the incurred loss model, which requires that a loss in quarter t be
provisioned for only when (1) information is available prior to the issuance of the quarter t financial statements that the
asset (receivable) has been impaired (i. e.  a loss-causing event has occurred) and (2) the amount of the loss is reasonably
estimable.  Because many loss-causing events may not be observed until well after the events have occurred (e. g. , a borrower’s loss of employment), managers use loss-estimation methodologies to infer the amount of loans that have likely
been impaired.  The SEC (see Staff Accounting Bulletin No.  102, “Selected Loan Loss Allowance Methodology and Documentation Issues”) and bank regulatory agencies recommend that managers’ loss estimation methodologies incorporate
numerous factors such as prevailing industry conditions, national and local economic and business trends, competition,
legal and regulatory requirements, and the effects of changes in credit concentrations (e. g. , Grant Thornton, 2012).  Although
these adjustment factors rationally affect managers' beliefs about loan losses, the discretion in estimating the effects of these
factors on loan losses also provides a mechanism for sentiment to affect the provision. 
We propose several hypotheses concerning the association between managerial sentiment and managers’ estimates of
loan loss provisions. 3 If managerial sentiment affects the loan loss provision, then when managerial sentiment is high (low)
(i. e. , managers hold unjustifiably positive (negative) beliefs about expectations of future firm prospects), managers will
under (over) provision for future charge-offs, resulting in a loan loss provision that is lower (higher) than what is justified by
the information available to them.  Thus, we expect the contemporaneous correlation between loan loss provisions and
sentiment to be negative.  We formalize our first hypothesis as follows (stated in the alternative form):
H1: The contemporaneous association between loan loss provisions and managerial sentiment is negative. 
In general, managers increase (decrease) the loan loss provision when there is an increase (decrease) in the amount of
loans that are likely impaired.  However, if managerial sentiment biases managers’ accrual estimates, then on average, in
periods of high (low) sentiment managers will under (over) provision for future charge-offs.  Thus, for every dollar of loan
loss provision estimated in a period of high (low) sentiment, we expect banks to exhibit relatively greater (lower) realized
future charge-offs.  Therefore, we expect the ratio of future charge-offs to the period t provision to vary positively with
managerial sentiment.  If managerial sentiment does not affect provision estimates (or our measure of sentiment simply
proxies for some macroeconomic factor that affects estimates of loan loss provision), then the ratio of future charge-offs to
period t provisions should not vary with sentiment.  Consistent with the arguments above, we propose our next hypothesis
as follows (also in alternative form):
H2: When current period sentiment is high, the amount future charge-offs per dollar of current period loan loss provision is
higher than when current period sentiment is low. 
Simpson (2013) posits that managers use discretionary accruals to exploit investors’ incorrect beliefs about firm value in
order to maximize short-term stock prices.  Consistent with the findings in Ali and Gurun (2009), Simpson argues there is a
“greater price effect per unit of accruals in high-sentiment periods than in low-sentiment periods, which probably heightens
incentives for managers seeking a short-term boost to stock prices to inflate accruals during high sentiment periods relative
to low-sentiment periods” (Simpson, 2013, 873).  She finds a positive association between investor sentiment in quarter t 1
and discretionary accruals in quarter t, and contends that managers are able to identify periods of mispricing (caused by
investor sentiment) for their own firm, then opportunistically manage earnings to temporarily increase stock price.  Although Simpson (2013) documents a positive relation between current accruals and lagged investor sentiment, if measures
of investor sentiment are correlated with measures of managerial sentiment and both measures are autocorrelated, it is
possible that this catering theory could explain a negative relation between loan loss provisions and contemporaneous
managerial sentiment. 
Simpson (2013) also argues that high investor sentiment may induce managers to manipulate earnings in order to meet
overly optimistic analysts’ forecasts.  Thus, if investor sentiment is correlated with managerial sentiment, a negative association between loan loss provisions and measures of managerial sentiment could result from managers manipulating
earnings in response to optimistic bias in analyst forecasts, consistent with investor sentiment affecting such forecasts. 
Bergman and Roychowdhury (2008) and Hribar and McInnis (2012) find that the optimistic bias in analyst forecasts increases with investor sentiment and prior research suggests that managers face strong incentives to meet analysts’ expectations (Brown and Caylor, 2005; Graham Name, 2005).  If managers manipulate accrual estimates in order to achieve
earnings expectations set by analysts who are affected by investor sentiment, and measures of investor sentiment are
correlated with measures of managerial sentiment, this behavior could explain a negative relation between loan loss
provisions and managerial sentiment. 
The potential link between the strategic accrual manipulation hypothesized by Simpson (2013) and managerial sentiment hinges on managers having incentives to manipulate accruals to meet analysts’ forecasts or to strategically exploit
investor sentiment to temporarily boost stock price.  One way to help distinguish between our main hypothesis and the
strategic response or catering hypothesis is to test for a relation between accrual estimates and managerial sentiment in a
setting in which managers do not have these incentives. 
If the relation between managerial sentiment and contemporaneous loan loss provisions reflects managers catering to investor sentiment, it should not exist in settings where
these incentives are absent.  However, if sentiment generates an unintentional bias in the provision, then the hypothesized
negative relation should exist even in the absence of these incentives. 
Beatty Name (2002) note that private firms have concentrated ownership structures with a relatively small number of
shareholders, a large portion of which participate in managing the firm.  Shares of private companies are thinly traded, and
given the makeup of existing and potential shareholders, it is unlikely that managers of private companies have the ability
and incentives to exploit variation in the sentiment of unsophisticated investors and generate short-term increases in stock
price by intentionally manipulating accrual estimates. 4 In addition, because analysts typically do not provide earnings
forecasts for private banks, managers of private banks do not have incentives to manipulate earnings to meet analysts’
earnings expectations.  We note that managers of private banks are likely to have other incentives to manage earnings.  Such
incentives could be related to capital and regulatory requirements (Beatty Name, 2002) or profitability targets.  However,
there is little reason to expect that these incentives are associated with sentiment.  Thus, evidence of an association between
accrual estimates and managerial sentiment in a sample of private banks mitigates concerns that the association simply
reflects accruals manipulation related to incentives to meet analysts’ expectations or to exploit investor sentiment to
temporarily boost stock price.  Consistent with this discussion, we hypothesize that our predictions from H1 and H2 will hold
in a sample of private banks.  We formalize these hypotheses as H3a and H3b (stated in the alternative form):
H3a: The contemporaneous association between loan loss provisions of private banks and managerial sentiment is
negative. 
H3b: When current period sentiment is high, future charge-offs per dollar of current period loan loss provision is higher for
private banks than when current period sentiment is low. 
<Middle> Methodology and sample. 
3. 1.  Measuring managerial sentiment. 
We derive our measures of managerial sentiment from the Duke University/CFO Magazine Business Outlook Survey. 5 For
each quarter, the survey aggregates the individual responses of hundreds of CFOs from both public and private companies in
many different industries.  Survey questions are designed to capture inter-temporal changes in financial executives’ perceptions on a variety of issues including corporate optimism, growth expectations, and capital investment plans. 6 We
construct our first measure of managerial sentiment using the median response, each quarter, to the following question:
“Rate your optimism about the financial prospects of your own company on a scale of 0–100, with 0 being the least optimistic and 100 being the most optimistic. ” We scale the median response by 100 and label it BELIEFSt. 7 The solid line in Fig.  1
displays the median survey responses of managers over our sample period. 
3. 2.  Explained and unexplained beliefs. 
One issue with using BELIEFSt as a measure of sentiment is that macroeconomic conditions undoubtedly affect managers’
beliefs and their estimates of loan loss provisions.  Because we define managerial sentiment as managers’ beliefs that are
unjustified by the information available to them, it is important to account for any macroeconomic factors that both affect
BELIEFSt, and justifiably affect LLPi,t.  Hence, we follow prior literature (e. g. , Baker and Wurgler, 2006; Lemmon and Portniaguina, 2006) and use OLS to decompose BELIEFSt into two components: a component explained by macroeconomic
conditions (EXP_BELIEFSt) and a component that is not explained by macroeconomic conditions (UNEXP_BELIEFSt).  Both
Baker and Wurgler (2006) and Lemmon and Portniaguina (2006) discuss the construct of sentiment as being unwarranted
by fundamentals and both studies use the residuals from regressions of sentiment indexes on macroeconomic fundamentals
to develop “cleaner proxies” for sentiment.  Thus, we use UNEXP_BELIEFSt as a second proxy for managerial sentiment. 
We acknowledge that our decomposition of BELIEFSt into EXP_BELIEFSt and UNEXP_BELIEFSt may not perfectly separate
managers’ justified and unjustified beliefs.  For example, any systematic over- or under-reaction by managers to macroeconomic fundamentals could be captured by EXP_BELIEFSt.  Thus, a portion of the variation in EXP_BELIEFSt could reflect
variation in managerial sentiment.  In addition, to the degree that the set of regressors used to decompose BELIEFSt is
incomplete, UNEXP_BELIEFSt could reflect rational beliefs.  Nevertheless, consistent with Baker and Wurgler (2006) and
Lemmon and Portniaguina (2006), we use UNEXP_BELIEFSt as our second proxy for managerial sentiment as UNEXP_BELIEFSt
represents the component of managerial beliefs that is orthogonal to fundamentals. 
In decomposing BELIEFSt, we follow Lemmon and Portniaguina (2006) and employ a broad set of macroeconomic
variables.  Specifically, we include the return on the CRSP value-weighted index including distributions (MKTRETt), the
difference between the yields to maturity on Baa- and Aaa-rated bond yields (DEFt), the yield on the three-month Treasury
bill (YLD3t), GDP growth (GDPt), personal consumption expenditures (CONSt), labor income (LABORt), the unemployment
rate (URATEt), the consumer price index inflation rate (CPIQt), and the consumption-to-wealth ratio (CAYt). 8 Also consistent
with Lemmon and Portniaguina (2006), we include contemporaneous, lagged, and lead measures of the macroeconomic
variables in the model. 9 We estimate the following OLS model,
where LEADS represents the leading values (quarter tþ1) of the macroeconomic variables and LAGS represents the lagged
values (quarter t1).  The residual, ε^t, represents the component of managers’ beliefs unexplained by macroeconomic
conditions, our second measure of managerial sentiment.  We label the residual from Eq.  (1) UNEXP_BELIEFSt and the predicted component EXP_BELIEFSt.  The dashed line in Fig.  1 displays the residual from Eq.  (1) over our sample period. 
Although the explained portion of beliefs potentially includes some sentiment, if UNEXP_BELIEFS, as compared to EXP_BELIEFS, is a more direct measure of beliefs that are not justified by fundamentals, then we should observe evidence
consistent with our predictions related to H1 and H2.  In particular, we predict a negative contemporaneous association
between the loan loss provision and both EXP_BELIEFS and UNEXP_BELIEFS, as we expect managers’ beliefs (whether justified
or not) to affect the loan loss provision.  However, the relation between the current loan loss provision and future charge-offs
discussed in H2 should be stronger for UNEXP_BELIEFS compared to EXP_BELIEFS.  Because a variety of forces can constrain or
influence accruals, and because some of the variation in EXP_BELIEFS could be attributable to managerial sentiment, it is
possible that EXP_BELIEFS also affects the relation between the current loan loss provision and future charge-offs.  However,
to the extent that UNEXP_BELIEFS better captures sentiment, we predict that this component will have a greater effect on the
relation between loan loss provisions and future charge-offs than will EXP_BELIEFS. 
Empirical design. 
3. 3. 1.  Tests of H1. 
H1 suggests that the contemporaneous association between managerial sentiment and loan loss provisions is negative. 
To test H1, we first estimate the following pooled OLS models,
where LLPi,t is the loan loss provision estimated for bank i in quarter t and BELIEFSt is our measure of managerial sentiment
obtained from the Duke CFO survey for quarter t. 10 Our interest in Eq.  (2a) centers on β1.  If managerial sentiment affects
estimates of the loan loss provision, then when sentiment is higher (lower), we expect the estimated provision to be lower
(higher) such that β1 should be negative because an optimistic manager will reduce the loan loss provision, ceteris paribus. 
In Eq.  (2b) we replace BELIEFS with its decomposition into expected and unexpected components: EXP_BELIEFS and
UNEXP_BELIEFS. 
In Eqs.  (2a) and (2b), we control for numerous bank-level variables shown to affect loan loss provisions.  Consistent with
prior literature (Beatty and Liao, 2014; Bushman and Williams, 2012; Liu and Ryan, 2006), we include ΔNPAi,tþ 1 and ΔNPAi,t
in the model to reflect the possibility that some banks use current and forward-looking information on non-performing
loans in estimating loan loss provisions.  We include ΔNPAi,t 1 and ΔNPAi,t 2 to capture the fact that banks use historical
information about non-performing loans to estimate loan loss provisions.  We control for bank size (SIZEi,t 1) given the
potential differences in regulatory scrutiny or monitoring for banks of different sizes.  We control for loan growth (ΔLOANi,t),
as loan loss provisions may be higher when the bank extends credit to more clients with lower credit.  We also follow prior
research and include the lagged loan loss allowance (ALWi,t 1) (see Beaver and Engel, 1996; Beck and Narayanamoorthy,
2013).  If a bank has recognized relatively high provisions in prior quarters, then a lower current provision may be justified,
as the prior quarter loan loss allowance may be sufficient to account for expected uncollectibles.  Because the amount of
charge-offs is related to the level of the allowance, which in turn affects provisions, we follow prior research and include net
charge-offs (COt) in the model (Wahlen, 1994; Collins Name, 1995; Beatty Name, 1995).  We add controls for earnings before the
provision (EBPi,t) and tier 1 capital ratio (CAPR1t) to control for potential incentives to manage earnings (e. g. , Bushman and
Williams, 2012; and Beatty and Liao, 2014).  We scale all firm-level variables by total loans in quarter t 1.  Finally, we include
the change in GDP (ΔGDPt), the return on the S&P/Case-Shiller U. S.  National Home Price Index (CSRETt), and the change in
unemployment (ΔURATEt), as prior literature identifies these variables as determinants of loan loss provisions (e. g. , Bushman and Williams, 2012; Beck and Narayanamoorthy, 2013). 
3. 3. 2.  Tests of H2. 
H2 predicts that the amount of realized future charge-offs per dollar of loan loss provision estimated in quarter t is
increasing in the level of quarter t sentiment.  We test this hypothesis by estimating the following pooled OLS model. 
In Eq.  (3a), our interest is in assessing whether current period sentiment is related to the amount future charge-offs per
dollar of current period provision.  Therefore, in Eq.  (3) we include control variables that prior research suggests may bias the
provision (i. e. , affect the provision but not future charge-offs).  We include EBPi,t and CAPRi,t 1, to account for managers’
incentives to smooth earnings (e. g. , Bushman and Williams, 2012) and meet regulatory capital requirements (Beatty and
Liao, 2014).  A positive coefficient on BELIEFSt indicates that an increase in quarter t sentiment is associated with more future
charge-offs per dollar of quarter t provision.  This association is consistent with managers under (over) provisioning for loan
losses due to unjustified optimism (pessimism) about the future collection of receivables. 