 1.  Introduction International environmental agreements have motivated binding national targets to reduce CO2 emission (e. g.  European Commission, 2009.  Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.  UNFCCC, 2015).  Around 40 countries and more than 20 cities, states and provinces have either implemented or are planning to implement a carbon tax or similar carbon pricing scheme (Farrell and Lyons, 2016.  World Bank, 2014a.  World Bank, 2014b).  In many developed economies, a carbon tax has been found to be regressive, having a proportionally greater impact on the incomes of poorer households than richer households (Callan et al. , 2009.  Farrell and Lyons, 2016).  Understanding the distribution of incidence has been the subject of much analysis to date (e. g.  O’Donoghue, 1997.  Kerkhof et al. , 2008.  Callan et al. , 2009.  Rausch et al. , 2011).  Within the carbon tax literature, revenue ‘recycling’ via the taxbeneﬁt system is commonly suggested as a means to offset regressive impacts.  Generally, redistribution is considered in the context of achieving a progressive distribution of incidence, measured according to changes in burden for aggregated income groups (e. g.  O’Donoghue, 1997.  Kerkhof et al. , 2008.  Callan et al. , 2009.  Rausch et al. , 2011).  While the distribution is progressive in aggregate, low income households that beneﬁt from the redistribution policy are not necessarily those households that lose out due to the imposition of the carbon tax.  Indeed, it is the progressive distribution of the total tax-beneﬁt system that is of greatest importance, as ‘losers’ may be compensated elsewhere in the tax-beneﬁt system (Mirrlees and Adam, 2011).  However, as carbon taxes grow through time (Tol, 2013.  van den Bergh and Botzen, 2015), potentially replacing more traditional forms of taxation, these regressive impacts may grow in magnitude.  Offsetting the regressive impacts speciﬁc to carbon taxation will therefore be of increasing importance going forward.  This paper provides the evidence base to inform any policy amendments required to ensure a progressive tax-beneﬁt policy, post-carbon tax incidence.  This is carried out by decomposing measures of inequality of carbon tax incidence by socioeconomic determinant, identifying the cohorts affected by regressive impacts and thus informing revenue redistribution policy.  Measures of income inequality are a quantiﬁable indicator of pro-rich or pro-poor distributive burden, giving insight into whether the burden of carbon tax falls disproportionately on poor households.  This paper addresses a methodological gap offered by commonly employed techniques.  Microsimulation-type analyses show the distribution of burden by income group or between socioeconomic cohorts (e. g.  comparing the burden imposed on urban vs.  rural dwellers or large vs.  small households).  This identiﬁes the distributional outcome, but does not give insight into the factors driving this result.  It is therefore diﬃcult to compare the inﬂuence each factor plays in the overall regressive impact.  While traditional regression-based analyses (e. g.  Büchs and Schnepf, 2013) can isolate the expected inﬂuence that each socioeconomic factor plays in carbon consumption, the regressivity of this relationship is not accounted for.  One must combine information on the propensity to consume carbon with the gradient of this consumption across the income distribution to elicit this information.  This paper provides this contribution by carrying out a multivariate decomposition of the concentration index, a method commonly employed to decompose socioeconomic inequalities in health outcomes (Walsh and Cullinan, 2015.  van Doorslaer et al. , 2004.  Yiengprugsawan et al. , 2009.  Wagstaff et al. , 2001).  This analysis of this paper is applied to an Irish case study and the results are threefold.  First, this paper has quantiﬁed the incidence of carbon tax expenditure.  For the considered Irish case study, electricity and ‘other’1 fuel-related carbon taxes have the greatest pro-poor distribution of incidence.  In terms of magnitude, less wealthy households spend a greater proportion of their income on ‘other’ fuel and motor fuel-related carbon taxes.  Second, the determinants of carbon tax expenditure are identiﬁed.  Location, occupation and household structure are important for motor fuel-related carbon tax expenditure.  Education, location, household structure and home heating method inﬂuence ‘other’ fuel-related carbon tax expenditure, while dwelling type, household structure and appliance ownership are important determinants of electricity-related carbon tax expenditure.  Third, the extent to which each socioeconomic determinant affects inequality has been quantiﬁed for each carbon source.  Most notably, income is associated with a large proportion of ‘other’ fuelrelated inequality in Ireland, however, it is found to be of lesser importance for electricity or motor fuel-related carbon tax incidence.  For motor fuels, location and occupation are important determinants.  In particular, farmers and own account workers are associated with regressive effects.  Household size, structure and appliance ownership is important for electricity-related carbon tax incidence.  While a greater number of inhabitants increases the household’s carbon tax cost, this impact is only regressive in relation to the number of children present.  This is especially true for electricity-related carbon tax incidence.  Potential channels that may offset negative distributional effects have also been identiﬁed in this paper.  When considering methods to counteract the regressivity associated with electricity-related carbon taxes, adjusting housing-related taxes and transfers may be effective.  Income dominates regressivity associated with ‘other’ fuels and income-based redistribution measures such as cash transfers or incentives to support less carbon-intensive heating technologies or energy eﬃciency upgrades may be most appropriate.  In providing these contributions, this paper proceeds as follows.  Section 2 reviews the previous literature in the ﬁeld of carbon taxation, concentration indices and decompositional analysis, highlighting the gap addressed by this paper.  Section 3 outlines the data and methodology employed.  Section 4 presents the results.  First, the regressive impact of each carbon tax is explicitly quantiﬁed using the concentration and Kakwani indices.  Next, regression analyses are presented to identify the determinants of carbon tax consumption.  Following the methodology of Wagstaff et al.  (2003), the total regressive impact is decomposed according to constituent socioeconomic drivers.  Presenting the results in this fashion allows for more complete insight into how carbon taxes affect the income distribution, while emphasising the beneﬁt of adopting the decomposed concentration index methodology.  Section 5 offers insight into the important policy implications of these ﬁndings.  Section 6 offers some concluding comments.  2.  Literature Review Callan et al.  (2009) have comprehensively reviewed the literature analysing the distribution of carbon tax incidence amongst households.  Microsimulation-based methods are most-often used to analyse the incidence of cost relative to income.  Most analyses to date focus on changes in income as a result of direct emission of CO2 (Poterba, 1991.  Saﬁrova et al. , 2004.  Pearson and Smith, 1991.  O’Donoghue, 1997.  Scott and Eakins, 2004.  Callan et al. , 2009).  Taxbeneﬁt microsimulation models have been used to consider the distributional impact relative to the full tax and beneﬁt system (Callan et al. , 2009.  O’Donoghue, 1997).  Advances in this ﬁeld have generally focussed on incorporating further sources of emission or incorporating a behavioural response to price changes.  Indirect consumption of CO2 embedded in goods and services has been incorporated through integration with an input-output or CGE model (Beck et al. , 2015.  Cornwell and Creedy, 1996.  Ekins et al. , 2011.  Hamilton and Cameron, 1994.  Labandeira and Labeaga, 1999.  Lyons et al. , 2012.  Verde and Tol, 2009.  Wier et al. , 2005).  Kerkhof et al.  (2008) analyse the distributional effects of taxing multiple greenhouse gases.  They ﬁnd that the tax is less regressive and more cost-effective than taxing carbon alone.  Analyses by Brannlund and Nordstrom (2004), Labandeira and Labeaga (1999) and Tiezzi (2001) include a system of demand equations to incorporate demand response to carbon taxinduced price changes, with these studies also ﬁnding regressive impacts.  Despite the wide range of methodological developments, the literature to date has not decomposed regressive impacts by socioeconomic determinant.  A number of methods have been applied to approximate these impacts.  Büchs and Schnepf (2013) use a regression-based analysis to elicit the determinants of carbon tax emission.  Comparing the socioeconomic determinants of carbon emission with the determinants of income gave qualitative insight into distributional impacts.  However, quantiﬁcation of distributional effect and ranking of importance is not facilitated by this analysis.  This is important information to effectively offset negative income effects through social transfer design.  Presenting incidence by income or socioeconomic cohort (Callan et al. , 2009.  Ekins et al. , 2011.  Grainger and Kolstad, 2010) gives intuitive insight into incidence amongst population groups.  However, it is diﬃcult to compare between-factor impacts in this manner, such as comparing the inﬂuence of education vs.  social class in determining the regressivity of a carbon tax, as determinants are confounded in such analyses.  Indeed, when such an analysis is extrapolated out over a number of determinants, easy comparison, quantiﬁcation of effect and ranking of importance is diﬃcult.  Such information may be important when designing an effective suite of social transfer policies.  To address this deﬁciency, this paper quantiﬁes the contribution each socioeconomic factor makes towards unequal carbon tax incidence using regression-based decomposition methods.  Regression-based decomposition methods have been used by Fields (2003), Morduch and Sicular (2002) and Yun (2006) to quantify the relative inﬂuence of different socio-economic determinants in overall income inequality.  Morduch and Sicular (2002) used this measure to identify the socio-economic determinants of income inequality for a number of income quintiles in rural China.  Fields (2003) used this method to identify the inﬂuence of socio-economic factors in both the overall rate of inequality in 1979 and 1999 in the USA, while also proposing a method to quantify the inﬂuence of each factor in the change in inequality between time periods.  Brewer and Wren-Lewis (2012) have carried out a similar analysis to track the relative contribution of each factor to change in inequality over a number of intervals from 1968 to 2009.  Similarly, regression-based methods have been used to decompose the unequal prevalence of a certain factor such as a health outcome, using the concentration index.  The concentration index is a metric of inequality commonly employed to analyse the socioeconomic gradient of health outcomes, with multivariate decomposition of this metric widely applied in the ﬁeld of health economics.  Applications to date have analysed socioeconomic inequalities in obesity (Walsh and Cullinan, 2015), vaccine uptake (Doherty et al. , 2014), malnutrition (Wagstaff et al. , 2001), doctor utilisation (van Doorslaer et al. , 2004) and disease (Yiengprugsawan et al. , 2009).  This paper augments the ﬁeld of application to analyse socioeconomic inequalities in carbon tax incidence.  The concentration index is used for this paper as it explicitly focuses on the regressive determinants of a particular outcome variable.  We do not employ a full tax-beneﬁt microsimulation model which allows for understanding in the broader context of the entire system of taxes and social transfers.  Such models explicitly consider measures that may offset any regressive impacts of carbon taxation.  Instead, we focus on the distributional impact of carbon tax in isolation.  In doing so, we elicit the distributional impact of this particular taxation measure.  As carbon taxes grow as a share of general taxation, these ﬁndings may inform measures to counteract regressive impacts of carbon taxation in the context of the wider tax-beneﬁt<Middle> Data and Methodology.  3. 1.  Data.  The contribution of this paper is demonstrated by means of an Irish example.  Ireland has income and consumption patterns representative of many developed countries, with levels of income inequality at the EU average, post-taxes and transfers (Eurostat, 2015).  Alongside this, there exists detailed microdata on household income and expenditure, allowing for analysis of incidence that is differentiated by source.  Such insight is of importance as, in many EU countries, electricity-related emissions are subject to a carbon price set by the EU Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS), while emissions from motor and household fuels are subject to a domestic carbon price, if any (Farrell and Lyons, 2016).  The imposition of carbon taxation in Ireland is thus representative of that experienced in many countries.  The anonymised Irish Household Budget Survey (HBS) for 2009/10 (CSO, 2012) are the primary data used in this analysis.  The HBS details household-level income and expenditures for a representative random sample of all private households in Ireland over a two week period.  In 2009/2010, 5891 private households participated with a response rate of just under 40% (CSO, 2012).  Responses are weighted to minimise any bias that may occur due to participant non-response.  The impact of a carbon tax is analysed with respect to three categories of emission source.  motor fuels, electricity and ‘other’ fuels.  Other fuel sources are predominantly used for heating or cooking and comprise domestic piped gas, gas (bulk purchase), peat, coal, anthracite and heating oil.  We thus elicit the distributional impact of carbon prices differentiated by source.  As the focus of this paper is on presenting a decomposed measure of income inequality, we follow the analyses of Callan et al.  (2009), O’Donoghue (1997), Pearson and Smith (1991), Poterba (1991), Saﬁrova et al.  (2004) and Scott and Eakins (2004) to concentrate on direct impacts.  Indirect carbon consumption comprises a small share of total carbon tax incidence and tends to be progressively distributed (Verde and Tol, 2009).  Taking an Irish case study, Verde and Tol (2009) show that indirect costs are €0. 50– 1. 50/week, assuming no ETS-related carbon taxation, while the direct cost is €3–4 per week.  Of greater importance, however, is the positive distribution of this impact.  Indeed, the proportional impact is constant for deciles 2–10 and comprises about 10% of the proportional impact for all carbon taxation for the lowest income decile.  Thus, direct emission through the consumption of electricity and fuels is the primary driver of regressive impacts and thus of most importance for policymakers when considering revenue redistribution mechanisms.  To concentrate on the primary contribution of this paper, the use of the decomposed concentration index, and to avoid superﬂuous analysis of predominantly non-regressive impacts, we limit this analysis to direct effects of carbon taxation.  An extension to consider indirect effects may be carried out in futureHousehold-level carbon emissions are calculated by ﬁrst converting expenditures to quantities consumed and then deriving the carbon content of consumed items.  To do this, we divide total expenditure by unit price data following the approach of Callan et al.  (2009), Büchs and Schnepf (2013) and Leahy and Lyons (2010).  For each quarter of analysis, the Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland (SEAI) have provided average retail price data for constituent fuels.  For electricity, we use unitary prices and standing charges applicable for the 2009/2010 survey period.  This is carried out by reducing the gross expenditure amount by 13. 5% to account for VAT and then deducting the standing charge for the standard ESB (Electricity Supply Board) Customer Supply electricity tariff (ESB, 2009).  To calculate the quantity of electricity consumed, the remaining electricity expenditure amount is divided by the unitary cost of electricity (CER, 2010c, 2011b).  Once the number of units consumed are identiﬁed, emissions coeﬃcients are taken from Scott and Eakins (2004) from which the quantity of CO2 emitted may be identiﬁed.  This quantity is then multiplied by the carbon price to elicit the carbon tax paid per household.  To calculate the unequal incidence of a carbon tax, we compare the cost to equivalised household disposable income.  Disposable income is income after taxes and social transfers.  Equivalisation is a weighting procedure to account for household size-related economies of scale.  The ‘OECD-modiﬁed scale’ is the preferred equivalence scale of Eurostat and the OECD and is used for this analysis.  This scale weighs household income according to the number and status of household inhabitants.  A weight of 1 is assigned to the ﬁrst adult, a weight of 0. 5 to each additional adult and a weight of 0. 3 to each child (Hagenaars et al. , 1994).  For ‘other’ fuel-related expenditures, we notice outliers that indicate unfeasibly high levels of usage.  For example, some households report spending €200 on peat briquettes, where the median value for those who consumed peat briquettes was €3. 83.  We follow Büchs and Schnepf (2013) and omit these observations as they can lead to biased regression results.  We omit values in excess of three standard deviations from the mean of consumption for each constituent fuel in the ‘other’ fuel category.  This is calculated conditional on consumption being greater than zero.  This trims 79 observations or 1% of the total sample.  Trimming the data in this way minimises any potential bias introduced by implausibly high data points (Büchs and Schnepf, 2013).  This restricted sample is used for analyses pertaining to emissions sourced from ‘other’ fuels and total fuel usage.  3. 2.  Methodology.  3. 2. 2.  Determinants of Carbon Tax Incidence.  A carbon price must be chosen for this analysis.  Ireland has a domestic carbon tax of €20/tCO2 applicable to motor fuels and fuels commonly used for heating (domestic piped gas, gas (bulk purchase), peat, coal, anthracite and heating oil).  In Ireland, exemptions exist for fossil fuels used for participants in the EU Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS), including electricity, as this scheme provides a price for carbon for these emissions sources (Department of Finance, 2014).  We choose a uniform price so that regressive impacts are comparable between sources.  Therefore the analysis of this paper is carried out with respect to a €20/tCO2 carbon tax across all sources.  Regression-based decomposition of an inequality index requires estimation of the inequality index and regressions to predict carbon tax expenditure as constituent calculations.  Each of these constituent analyses are presented in this paper to give a complete insight into the distributional impact of carbon taxation while also emphasising the added value of the decompositional methodology.  Each step will now be outlined in turn.  3. 2. 1.  Measuring Inequality of Carbon Tax Incidence.  The unequal incidence of each carbon tax is ﬁrst estimated in aggregate.  The concentration index (CI) is used to quantify the degree of income-related inequality in carbon tax incidence.  The CI is easily quantiﬁed and is measured between the ranges −1 and 1, with zero representing perfect equality.  The CI can be constructed according to a number of methodologies.  Following Kakwani et al.  (1997) and Doherty et al.  (2014), we calculate the CI in the following way, where yi represents carbon tax payments for household i, l is mean of carbon tax payments, Ri is the fractional rank of households along the income distribution, where household i is ranked 1 if at the bottom of the income distribution and N if at the top of the income distribution.  While the concentration index gives insight into how carbon taxes are distributed across the income distribution, it is also important to understand the progressivity of this incidence with respect to income.  To carry this out, the CI for the carbon tax must be compared to a measure of income inequality.  An index of income inequality provides a metric of how evenly income is distributed across the population.  The Gini coeﬃcient (G) is the most commonly employed index of income inequality and is related to the CI.  Once again ranking households by income, the Gini coeﬃcient may be calculated as follows, where ai is equivalised disposable income for household i, ¯a is mean equivalised disposable income and all other variables are as previously deﬁned.  The Kakwani index (K) is commonly used to measure the progressivity of a tax intervention such as a carbon tax.  This can be calculated in a number of ways.  In this paper, it is calculated as the concentration index for the analysed carbon tax, less the Gini coefﬁcient of income inequality.  The larger the Kakwani index, the more progressive the distribution of the carbon tax.  3. 2. 2.  Determinants of Carbon Tax Incidence.  A multivariate regression-based decomposition is carried out to elicit the socioeconomic determinants of inequitable carbon tax incidence.  This comprises a number of stages.  First the determinants of carbon tax expenditure are identiﬁed by means of a multivariate OLS regression, following the analysis of Büchs and Schnepf (2013), where the dependent variable (yi) is carbon tax cost per household i, the xj variables are j explanatory variables, bj is the average partial effect of variable j on carbon tax expenditure and 4 is the error term.  This is analysed for each source of carbon expenditure.  electricity, motor fuels and all other fuels (previously deﬁned).  Explanatory variables included in this analysis represent a range of socioeconomic and household variables that explain household consumption of carbon and the gradient of this consumption across the income distribution, informed by economic theory and the literature (Büchs and Schnepf, 2013.  Leahy and Lyons, 2010).  The following independent variables are included.  Location is coded according to three dummies representing Dublin.  Border, Midland, West.  and South, Mid-West, Mid-East excluding Dublin.  Dummy variables are used to represent each category of occupation, education and age of the Household Reference Person (HRP).  The presence of adults and children and Old-Age Pensioners (OAPs) are also categorised by dummy variables.  Equivalised disposable income is log-transformed to model a linear relationship with emissions and following the approach taken in the literature (Büchs and Schnepf, 2013.  Doherty et al. , 2014.  Walsh and Cullinan, 2015).  The existence of a loan indicates the degree of indebtedness for a household and may affect their propensity to consume across the income distribution and this is thus included as a dummy variable (Watson and Maitre, 2015).  Household size and type, along with water heating, space heating and cooking method, affects the consumption of electricity and other fuels (Leahy and Lyons, 2010) and these variables are included in the analysis for these regression speciﬁcations only.  Preliminary analyses found that the only appliances that varied suﬃciently across the income spectrum to inﬂuence the socioeconomic gradient of carbon tax incidence were the number of motor vehicles in a household, along with dishwasher and tumble dryer ownership.  These are thus included in the analysis.  While appliance ownership, dwelling characteristics and heating method have been found to be determinants of energy usage (Leahy and Lyons, 2010) and thus carbon tax incidence, such variables are often not observable by policymakers.  Omitting these variables and comparing the results gives further insight into the socioeconomic variation of incidence.  Thus, regression speciﬁcations are imposed that respectively include and omit these variables.  When specifying these regressions, variance inﬂation factors are calculated to test for multicollinearity, with no variables reporting a value in excess of 6. 51, well below the recommended threshold of 10.  3. 2. 3.  Multivariate Decomposition of Inequality.  Wagstaff et al.  (2001) have shown that by coupling the concentration index (Section 3. 2. 1) with regression analysis (Section 3. 2. 2) total inequality can be partitioned into inequalities for a set of J determinants.  Drawing on the relationship between yi and xj,i illustrated in Eq.  (4), Eq.  (1) can be rewritten as Eq.  (5), where ¯xj is the mean of xj.  Cj is the concentration index for determinant xj (deﬁned analogous to CI).  and all other variables are as previously deﬁned.  van Doorslaer et al.  (2004) gives a good interpretation of Eq.  (5).  Eq.  (5) shows that CI is equal to a weighted sum of the concentration indices of the j regressors, with the contribution each j regressor makes towards CI is calculated according to The weight or ‘share’ for xj, is the elasticity of y with respect to xj .  The second term may be interpreted as a residual andreﬂects the inequality in the outcome variable that is not explained by systematic variation across income groups in the xj variables.  As our dependent variable (carbon tax expenditure) is continuous, we use the standard concentration index in our decomposition (van Doorslaer et al. , 2004). l¯xjl It is important to bear in mind Eq.  (5) when interpreting results in Section 4. 3.  IfC j is negative, variable j has a greater association with lower incomes, and vice versa.  If the elasticity term for variable j is negative, variable j has a greater association with lower carbon tax incidence, and vice versa.  Should both parameters be negative, variable j will contribute towards increasing the inequality associated with carbon tax incidence.  Should both parameters be positive, variable j will contribute positively.  Should one parameter be negative and one positive, the greater parameter will determine the association.  4.  Results.  A full understanding of carbon tax incidence requires an understanding of the magnitude, distribution and drivers of incidence.  In Section 4. 1 we highlight the aggregated distribution on incidence across the income spectrum to understand the relative impact that each source of carbon tax expenditure may have on income inequality.  In Section 4. 2, we present the determinants of carbon tax expenditure.  This gives insight into the relative inﬂuence each socioeconomic determinant has in driving carbon tax expenditure.  Section 4. 3 applies the multivariate decomposition of the concentration index, outlined in Section 3.  This decomposes changes in income inequality by socioeconomic determinant, the primary contribution of this paper.  Together, these steps provide a complete understanding of where, to what extent and how carbon taxes increase income inequality.  This provides a complete understanding for policymakers to design effective redistribution measures.  4. 1.  Inequality.  The concentration index (CI) (Table 1) reports a single metric to summarise the distribution of carbon tax expenditures across the income spectrum.  As all CI values are positive, it follows that richer households pay a greater share of total carbon tax revenues than poorer households.  This is greatest for expenditure on motor fuels.  Carbon tax expenditure on electricity and ‘other’ fuels shows less variation across the income distribution, however, we ﬁnd that rich households spend more by a modest amount.  Together, these ﬁndings sum to indicate that total carbon tax expenditure is skewed towards wealthy households.  Interpreting the CI value for total carbon tax expenditure, we follow Doherty et al.  (2014) and van Doorslaer et al.  (2004) by saying that an 8. 34% redistribution of carbon tax payments from rich households to poor households would result in equal payments across the income spectrum.  Fig.  1 demonstrates the socioeconomic gradient of carbon tax expenditure by means of a concentration curve.  Each point on the concentration curve represents the cumulative share of total carbon tax paid by the cumulative number of households, where households are ranked by equivalised disposable income.  Alongside this, we graph the ‘Lorenz’ Curve of income inequality, which displays the cumulative share of equivalised disposable income paid by households ranked by equivalised disposable income.  The dotted 45◦ line represents perfect equality.  a curve along this line suggests equal distribution amongst all households.  A curve above this line indicates a greater share for the poor and a curve below this line indicates a greater share for the rich.  Analysing Fig.  1, one can see that a carbon tax for all carbon tax sources is pro-rich.  Fig.  1 shows that motor fuels have the greatest pro-rich gradient.  Electricity and other fuels have a lesser pro-rich gradient than motor fuels.  The gradients for electricity and other fuels are similar to each other, however electricity has a lesser pro-rich gradient for the poorest 20%.  While the concentration index shows trends of usage across income categories, interpretation relative to ability to pay gives a more complete understanding.  The Kakwani index carries this out.  We see that for all carbon tax payments, a negative Kakwani index is observed (Table 1).  This suggests that carbon taxes are regressive.  Carbon consumption in relation to electricity and ‘other’ fuels has a greater pro-poor bias as the Kakwani index is more negative.  Fig.  1 provides further insight into this trend, where we see the gradient of incidence across the income distribution.  Fig.  1 shows that each concentration curve lies above the Lorenz curve of income.  This suggests that, at any point in the income spectrum, the cumulative share of carbon taxes paid is more than the cumulative share of income received by those households.  This incidence relative to income is explored further in Fig.  2.  Where Fig.  1 showed the share of cost by income group, Fig.  2 shows the average ton of CO2 per € of equivalised disposable income for ten income groups or ‘deciles’.  This allows for the magnitude of incidence between income groups to be compared.  We see that households consume, on average, more carbon per unit of income due to ‘other’ fuel consumption, followed by motor fuel consumption and then electricity.  The magnitude of incidence is of greatest concern for the ﬁrst decile.  We see that households in the ﬁrst decile consume, on average, more carbon per unit of income than households in other deciles.  The average carbon consumed per unit of income for ‘other’ fuels is over 4 times greater for the lowest income decile than for higher income deciles.  A similar trend is observed for motor fuels and electricity-related CO2 emission, however the magnitude is lower.  The relatively high incidence amongst the ﬁrst decile is driven by the presence of households with very low disposable income.  the presence of larger households, due to equivalisation, who tend to consume more carbon.  and the greater propensity of low-income households to use more carbon-intensive home heating fuels such as coal and peat.  Motor fuel-related carbon consumption shows a progressive trend for deciles 2–6, falling slightly for deciles 7–10.  Electricity and ‘other’ fuel-related carbon consumption shows a regressive pattern of incidence across the entire income distribution.  Given the great magnitude of incidence, negative income impacts of ‘other’ fuel-related carbon taxes are likely to be of greatest concern for policymakers.  Despite demonstrating a less-regressive trend of incidence, negative income effects of a motor-fuel related carbon tax are likely to be of a greater magnitude than those related to electricity.  4. 2.  Multivariate Analysis.  The second stage of analysis is to assess the determinants of carbon tax expenditure.  Following Büchs and Schnepf (2013) and Leahy and Lyons (2010), we model this impact using OLS regressions with robust standard errors to correct for heteroskedasticity.  These ﬁndings are reported in Tables 2 and 3.  We split determinants by category and discuss each category in turn.  4. 2. 1.  Location.  Living outside of Dublin is associated with higher motor fuelrelated carbon tax expenditure and lower electricity-related carbon tax expenditure.  These effects are of a greater magnitude for residents in Border, Midland and Western (BMW) regions than those in south, midwest and mideastern rural areas.  Greater motor fuelrelated expenditure may be explained by a more dispersed population in rural locations and thus greater use of motor vehicles.  Lower electricity-related carbon tax expenditure suggests that urban areas use more electrical devices and appliances.  When we do not control for appliance usage and dwelling characteristics, living in a rural area has an insigniﬁcant effect on electricity-related carbon tax incidence.  This may be explained by the higher prevalence of larger and detached households in rural areas which may have greater electricity-related carbon tax incidence and thus countering the negative effect observed when these factors are controlled for.  When we control for appliance usage and dwelling characteristics, living in a rural area has an insigniﬁcant effect on ‘other’ fuel-related carbon taxes for BMW residents and signiﬁcantly negative for south, midwest and mideastern rural areas.  However, this becomes signiﬁcantly positive when appliance and household variables are omitted from the analysis (Table 3).  This would suggest that while rural residents incur greater ‘other’ fuel-related carbon tax costs, this is largely due to urban/rural differences in space heating method, appliance ownership and dwelling characteristics.  4. 2. 2.  Occupation.  Occupation is of importance for motor fuel and electricity-related carbon taxes only.  Own account workers and farmers incur the greatest cost associated with motor fuel and electricity-related carbon taxes, perhaps due to the high levels of independent travelling and potential spillover domestic usage associated with these professions.  ‘Professionals’ incur the next greatest motor fuel cost.  Other fuel-related carbon tax expenditure does not vary signiﬁcantly by profession.  4. 2. 3.  Education.  Relative to a postgrad degree or higher, those with secondary school education (or lower) incur a signiﬁcantly greater level of carbon tax cost related to the consumption of ‘other’ fuels.  However, this is countered by a lower use of motor fuels, resulting in an insigniﬁcant difference in total carbon tax cost by education level.  4. 2. 4.  Age.  Households where the Household Reference Person (HRP) is aged 35 and older pay more carbon tax for the consumption of ‘other’ fuels than those where the HRP is younger than 35.  This impact is greater in magnitude when not controlling for appliance usage and dwelling characteristics, suggesting that appliance usage and dwelling characteristics are contributory factors driving differences in costs incurred between age groups.  Indeed, we see that age has a signiﬁcant impact on motor fuel-related carbon tax incidence when the number of motor vehicles is not controlled for, indicating that age-related differences in motor fuel-related carbon tax incidence exists, explained by age-related differences in motor vehicle ownership.  4. 2. 5.  Household Structure.  A greater number of household inhabitants leads to greater carbon tax cost.  The magnitude of impact, and carbon source responsible, varies depending on the household structure.  The presence of 3 or more adults is associated with greater motor vehicle-related carbon tax cost.  ‘Other’ fuels show the lowest rate of change with respect to the number of adults, reﬂecting economies of scale associated with cooking and heating requirements.  Having 3 or more children is associated with higher carbon tax cost, especially in relation to ‘other’ fuels and electricity usage.  This is perhaps due to the presence of children resulting in greater time spent at home along with greater heating, cooking and appliance usage.  There is a lower cost for electricity and motor fuel-related carbon taxes if one or more inhabitants are Old-Age Pensioners (OAPs).  While other fuels shows no signiﬁcant difference, this becomes signiﬁcant in the restricted model, suggesting that variation in dwelling size and type, along with heating fuel and appliance usage, explain much of the OAP-related variation in ‘other’ fuel consumption.  Higher incomes are associated with a greater carbon tax cost for ‘other’ fuels and motor fuels.  Income has an insigniﬁcant effect on electricity-related carbon tax cost, suggesting that income-related variations in electricity usage are determined by other factors controlled for in the model.  This is conﬁrmed by Table 3 where income is positively signiﬁcant.  This suggests that appliance ownership, heating/cooking method and dwelling characteristics are responsible for much of the income-related variation in electricity-related carbon tax expenditure.  If the household has a loan, the incurred carbon tax cost tends to be lower, perhaps due to a more prudent spending pattern as a result of indebtedness.  This is particularly evident for motor fuel and ‘other’ fuel usage, suggesting that, on foot of being in debt, households are more likely to reduce motor fuel and ‘other’ fuel consumption.  4. 2. 6.  Dwelling Characteristics, Heating System and Appliance Ownership.  Larger, detached houses incur a greater carbon cost associated with electricity and other fuels.  Owning a dishwasher and tumble dryer is associated with greater carbon tax cost for electricity, with ownership of a dishwasher translating into a signiﬁcantly different cost for total carbon tax.  The number of motor vehicles in a household is the primary determinant of motors-related carbon tax cost, as one would expect.  Space heating is found to be more important than cooking or water heating method when determining carbon tax cost.  Relative to electricity-related space heating, oil, backboiler, solid fuel and gas technologies incur a greater carbon cost.  Finally, households that own dishwashers and tumble dryers incur a much greater level of electricity usage and thus a much greater carbon tax cost, however this only translates to a signiﬁcantly different level of total carbon tax incidence for dishwasher use.  4. 3.  Multivariate Decomposition of Unequal Incidence.  The analysis of Section 4. 2 identiﬁes the socioeconomic characteristics associated with a greater carbon tax cost.  However, households that incur a greater cost do not necessarily coincide with households that incur the most regressive impacts.  Results presented in Tables 4 and 5 decompose the concentration index to quantify these impacts.  Table 4 shows a number of details relating to the incidence of total carbon tax expenditure.  We present the contribution each determinant gives towards the overall regressive incidence of the carbon tax total, in both actual and percentage terms, alongside the elasticity of the CI with respect to each determinant and the CI of the determinant variable.  Table 5 shows the percentage contribution made by each socioeconomic variable for each constituent carbon tax source.  A negative contribution increases the regressivity of incidence while a positive contribution increases the progressivity of incidence.  We split determinants by category and discuss each category in turn.  4. 3. 1.  Location.  Being located in the BMW region is associated with a more regressive carbon tax incidence, primarily due to greater motor fuel and other fuel use.  A progressive association with electricity use tempers the overall regressive impact.  However, as the proportional cost of motor fuel-related carbon taxes are greater than those arising from electricity usage (see Fig.  2), this results in a negative total contribution.  This pattern prevails for the south, midwest, mideast rural regions but the effect is of a lesser magnitude.  4. 3. 2.  Occupation.  Tables 2 and 3 have shown that own account workers and farmers are associated with a greater incidence of motor fuel and electricityrelated carbon tax costs.  Table 4 shows that these occupations are negatively distributed along the income distribution and thus this results in farmers and own account workers being associated with a regressive contribution towards the unequal incidence of carbon taxation.  Households where the HRP is gainfully employed in an unknown occupation are associated with lower incomes and lower carbon tax incidence and thus a positive contribution to overall inequality is observed.  4. 3. 3.  Education and Age.  Households with a secondary education or less consume a signiﬁcantly higher level of ‘other’ fuels and have a pro-poor concentration index (see Table 4).  Such households thus contribute towards increased regressivity of carbon tax incidence.  A similar pattern is observed with respect to age, however, we ﬁnd that the proportional contribution is of a much lower magnitude.  4. 3. 4.  Household Structure.  Household structure has a considerable impact on carbon tax incidence and it is through the analysis of this determinant, in particular, that the contribution of the decomposed concentration index can best be illustrated.  Tables 2 and 3 have shown that the number of adults has a greater impact on incurred carbon tax costs than the presence of 1–2 children, with an impact of slightly lesser magnitude than the presence of 3+ children.  However, Table 4 shows that a greater number of adults is associated with a progressive equity impact while a greater number of children is associated with a regressive impact.  Examining Table 5, we see that the magnitude of these impacts is of greatest concern with respect to electricityrelated carbon tax incidence.  Thus, should policymakers make recommendations based on the traditional regression-based analyses of Tables 2 and 3, revenue redistribution measures focussing on household size and the number of adults in particular may be pursued.  However, the ﬁndings of this paper show that to offset regressive impacts of carbon tax, transfers corresponding to the number of children are more effective, especially when offsetting electricity-related carbon tax inequalities.  Further beneﬁts associated with the decomposed concentration index methodology can be observed with respect to Old-Age Pensioners (OAPs).  The presence of OAPs increases the progressive incidence of total carbon tax incidence.  Although OAPs have lower incomes, they also use less electricity.  This reduction in electricity usage outweighs their lower income levels and thus a negative elasticity exists with respect to the concentration index for total carbon taxes (Table 4).  Thus, the CI methodology allows us to quantitatively compare these competing effects on the distribution of incidence to determine that OAPs contribute positively towards the progressive incidence of total carbon tax expenditure.  However, when we delve deeper into the socioeconomic gradient of carbon tax by source, we ﬁnd that different carbon taxes affect this socioeconomic cohort in different ways.  Given the lower propensity to incur electricity and motor fuel-related carbon taxes, these OAPs are associated with a progressive distribution of this cost.  Given a higher propensity to incur ‘other’ fuel related carbon taxes, OAPs are associated with a regressive distribution of this cost.  Thus, OAPs are an important consideration in relation to the negative impact of carbon taxes associated with ‘other’ fuels, but of lesser concern with respect to electricity and motor4. 3. 5.  Income.  Income accounts for a substantial portion (24. 45%) of the pro-rich distribution of total carbon tax incidence.  Table 5 shows that this is largely driven by income-related gradient in ‘other’ fuel usage.  A lower income gradient is found with respect to motor fuel-related carbon taxes, with socioeconomic differences in usage thus playing a more important role in the unequal incidence of motor and other fuel-related carbon taxes.  A negative value exists with respect to electricity usage.  As the coeﬃcient for electricity usage in Table 2 is negative and insigniﬁcant, this suggests that all income-related gradient in electricity usage-related carbon tax is controlled for by the socioeconomic determinants in the model.  4. 3. 6.  Dwelling Characteristics, Heating System and Appliance Ownership.  Dwelling characteristics contribute a great deal towards the variability of carbon tax incidence.  Relative to living in an apartment, living in a detached house has a positive impact on the overall progressive impact.  This is because inhabitants of houses consume more electricity and other fuels but also have higher incomes.  The positive gradient in income across this socioeconomic group outweighs the positive gradient in usage and thus a progressive impact prevails.  This implies that a more regressive impact is imposed on inhabitants of apartments.  The number of rooms has the same pattern of incidence.  We ﬁnd that a greater number of rooms is positively associated with a progressive carbon tax incidence for both electricity and ‘other’ fuels, suggesting that smaller households incur a more regressive impact.  Tables 4 and 5 show that ownership of electricity-intensive appliances such as a dishwasher or a tumble dryer contributes a considerable degree towards the pro-rich distribution of carbon tax incidence, especially in relation to electricity-related carbon taxes.  This is driven by the pro-rich incidence of appliance ownership with income, and the highly positive elasticity of appliance ownership with electricity usage, as demonstrated in Table 4.  While this is an intuitive ﬁnding, the decomposition methodology of this paper allows for the contribution of these factors to be quantiﬁed.  This allows for greater understanding of the mechanisms driving regressivity of incidence associated with appliance usage, along with providing a quantitative benchmark against which the relative contribution of other drivers may be compared.  Space heating method is of considerable importance for carbon tax incidence, with water heating and cooking method contributing to a much lesser extent towards inequality.  Relative to electricitybased central heating, households with oil, backboilers or solid fuels increase the inequality of carbon tax incidence, while households with gas reduce this inequality.  Analysing this socioeconomic variable gives further insight into the added value offered by the CI methodology, as the drivers of this inequality may be identiﬁed.  For oil, backboilers and solid fuel space heating, the elasticity parameter is of a much greater magnitude than this determinant’s CI.  Thus, the regressive impact associated with this space heating technology is primarily driven by the carbon content and thus elasticity of carbon tax expenditure with respect to usage.  Conversely, the progressive association of gas-based space heating is primarily driven by a strongly positive association with4. 3. 7.  Relative Weighting of Each Category.  While the preceding analysis has highlighted the factors contributing towards the negative impact of carbon tax incidence, the relative importance of each socioeconomic determinant is a further important contribution of this paper.  Tables 4 and 5 present the relative weighting of importance that each socioeconomic determinant contributes towards overall inequality of incidence, where we ﬁnd that different socio-economic traits are responsible for incidence amongst each emission source.  For electricity, we ﬁnd that the contribution of income is overshadowed by the presence of electricityusing appliances, with dishwasher and tumble dryer ownership, an indicator of ownership of electricity intensive goods associated with high income households, accounting for around 50% of unequal incidence across the income spectrum.  Income-related consumption of electricity-intensive goods is thus the most important factor.  This is followed by the number of rooms of the household (28%).  the number of adults (12. 61%) and children (−11%).  location (11%) and space heating technology (−16%).  For motor fuels, the number of motor vehicles is the predominant determinant (58%), followed by income (19. 55%), occupation (12%) and location (−10. 2%).  For ‘other’ fuels, income is the overriding concern, contributing 85. 51% of unequal incidence.  This is followed by education (−26. 7%), number of rooms (19. 7%) and house type (10. 3%).  The presence of Old Age Pensioners (OAPs) and children leads to an unequal pattern of incidence for ‘other’ fuels, contributing −8. 41% and −6% respectively.  Water heating and space heating technologies are also important considerations.  In particular, the presence of an oil, backboiler, or solid fuel space heating technology increases the regressive impact of total carbon tax by −5. 92% (-42. 8% of ‘other’ fuel-related inequality) relative to electric space heating.  <Conclusion> Discussion and Policy Implications.  To the author’s knowledge, this paper is the ﬁrst to apply the concentration index methodology to give novel and policy-relevant insight into the incidence of carbon taxation by socioeconomic group.  While Büchs and Schnepf (2013) have compared determinants of carbon incidence with determinants of income to provide qualitative insight into distributional implications, providing quantitative evidence to conﬁrm many of these distributional hypotheses was identiﬁed as a gap in the literature (Büchs and Schnepf, 2013).  This paper provides that contribution, giving insight into the relative importance of each socioeconomic characteristic in addressing negative income effects.  As carbon taxes grow as a share of total tax revenue, and regressive impacts grow in magnitude, offsetting these impacts becomes of greater concern for policymakers.  Perfect targeting of revenue redistribution is perhaps out of scope for most policymakers, as it requires precise information on socioeconomic characteristics and location along with a mechanism for explicit targeting.  However, policymakers may adjust the tax-beneﬁt system.  This cannot identify each household individually but it does allow policymakers to target certain socioeconomic groups by adjusting particular policy levers.  While the primary concern for policymakers is to ensure an overall progressive tax-beneﬁt policy, rather than focus on the regressivity of a particular tax mechanism (Mirrlees and Adam, 2011), the ﬁndings of this paper can inform the progressive design of wider tax-beneﬁt policy.  As carbon taxes grow as a proportion of total tax revenue, adjustments to the tax beneﬁt system may be required to offset regressive effects and to ensure that the progressivity of the tax-beneﬁt system is maintained.  A number of key policy insights are offered by this analysis.  The results of Table 5 show that regressive impacts vary by source of carbon expenditure.  Should different sources be faced with different carbon tax rates, then policymakers will need to consider measures to offset negative income impacts from each carbon source separately, conﬁrming the ﬁndings of Büchs and Schnepf (2013).  This is the case in many countries, particularly those participating in the EU ETS (Farrell and Lyons, 2016).  Fig.  2 of Section 4. 1 has shown that, for the considered Irish case study, carbon consumption has a lesser pro-rich gradient for electricity and ‘other’ fuels than for motor fuels.  The channels that are most effective for offsetting negative income impacts have also been identiﬁed and the policy implications of these ﬁndings will now be outlined.  Sections 4. 2 and 4. 3 ﬁnd that income is associated with 85. 51% of ‘other’ fuel-related inequality.  This ﬁnding corresponds to that of Watson and Maitre (2015) who state that fuel poverty is a subset of total poverty as opposed to something that requires separate treatment.  The method of space heating is responsible for a great degree of socioeconomic gradient of incidence.  In particular, oil, solid fuel or backboiler space heating increase regressive effects by 42. 8% relative to the presence of electric heating, while gas heating reduces regressive effects by 63. 6%.  Income-based redistribution measures such as cash transfers may thus be appropriate to counteract regressivity associated with this carbon tax source.  However, one must consider that space heating technology is a long-term, capital investment and as carbon taxes affect the marginal cost of consumption, a temporal disconnect exists with respect to the fuel choice decision.  While weekly cash transfers may subsidise fuel purchase and thus alleviate regressive impacts in the short term, they are unlikely to affect a consumer’s decision to change technology and the unequal effect may persist.  In this context, incentives to switch space heating technologies or to facilitate energy eﬃciency upgrades may be more effective in reducing carbon tax incidence amongst such households.  Indeed, such intervention provides a potential beneﬁt not observed by this analysis, as householders will be less prone to fossil fuel price ﬂuctuations with the resulting reduced fossil fuel consumption.  Retroﬁt policies, such as the UK’s energy eﬃciency obligation scheme, have required suppliers to carry out a certain number of eﬃciency installations, with a certain proportion targeted at low income households (Rosenow et al. , 2013).  Incorporating such mechanisms in a revenue recycling scheme, by using a portion of carbon tax revenue to ﬁnance upgrades for low income households, may both reduce the unequal incidence of cost while facilitating further emissions reductions.  While conﬁrming the recommendations of Watson and Maitre (2015), the CI methodology of this paper suggests that income is of lesser importance with respect to electricity or motor fuel-related carbon tax incidence than for ‘other’ fuels. 