 1.  Introduction Energy serves as the material basis of human activity and a prerequisite to and guarantee of economic development.  With its rapid economic development, China's energy consumption has signiﬁcantly increased in recent decades.  from 1. 04 billion tons of standard coal in 1991 to 4. 26 billion tons in 2014.  At the beginning of China's reform and opening up, the level of economic development was relatively low, and the scale of energy consumption was relatively small.  China's energy consumption surged with the expansion of reform and opening up and the rapid development of its economy.  During the last several decades, China has achieved remarkable economic growth, and the living standard of Chinese citizens has been signiﬁcantly improved.  In the meanwhile, alongside robust economic growth and rapid industrialization and urbanization, China's energy consumption was soaring In 1992, China's total energy consumption exceeded its total energy production for the ﬁrst time, and since then, the gap between energy consumption and production has grown.  To meet the increasing energy demand, energy imports have continued to grow, and this has become a potential hurdle to China's sustainable development.  In addition, because coal dominates China's energy mix, the rapid increase in energy consumption has also had a negative inﬂuence on environmental quality, which is visually reﬂected by the serious haze and smog pollution that have affected most areas of eastern and northern China in recent years.  Since 2006, China has replaced the U. S.  as the largest carbon dioxide emitter in the world.  There is evidence that the current development pattern is not consistent with China's pursuit of sustainable and harmonious development.  The rapid increase in China's energy consumption has an inherent economic logic, and understanding this economic logic is important for controlling the rapid increase in energy consumption and improving the environmental quality.  One important characteristic is the convergence in China's per capita energy consumption.  Convergence is an important economic theory that was originally applied to investigate the convergence of per capita income across different regions and countries.  According to neoclassical growth theory, if a country's interior regions are open to each other, under a functioning market mechanism and bound by the law of diminishing returns, the free mobility of factors will produce a self-correcting effect on any imbalance in regional economic development, with the result that the per capita income and/or output levels in different regions will tend toward equilibrium.  Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995) use a technology diffusion model to study this effect and ﬁnd that the relatively low imitation cost for the technology follower and the relatively high degree of openness are two key reasons for the existence of economic convergence (i. e. , the phenomenon that per capita incomes of poorer economies would tend to grow at faster rates than those of richer economies).  Several types of convergence have been identiﬁed so far, including β-convergence, σ-convergence, stochastic convergence, deterministic convergence and club convergence.  β-convergence refers to the fact that regions with a lower per capita output level at the beginning of a period tend to have faster economic growth.  In other words, with β-convergence, there is a negative correlation between the per capita output growth rate and output level in different regions.  Because the deﬁnition of convergence was originally raised in the ﬁeld of economics, so far there have been a large amount of studies on economic convergence (e. g. , Baumol, 1986.  Barro et al. , 1991.  Islam, 2003.  Maasoumi et al. , 2007).  Since mid-1990s, partly because of China's dramatic economic growth, a growing number of literature has focus on the economic convergence across provinces and regions within China.  For instance, Chen and Fleisher (1996) ﬁnd evidence of the conditional convergence of per capita production across China's provinces from 1978 to 1993 by employing the framework of an augmented Solow growth model.  In contrast, using provincial panel data, Weeks and Yao (2003) ﬁnd empirical evidence for system-wide income divergence between regions in China during the post-reform period 1978–1997.  Aroca et al.  (2008) conﬁrm that there was an increase in the spatial dependence of per capita GDP during the last two decades of the 20th century and that the spatial effect plays an important role in China's regional convergence.  In recent years, as the problems of energy shortage and environmental degradation have become acute for many countries, a growing number of studies have investigated the convergence in energy consumption and environmental quality.  For instance, Herrerias (2012) uses a weighted distribution dynamics approach to reexamine and verify the convergence in world energy intensity, although the characteristics of convergence differ in developing and developed countries.  Markandya et al.  (2006) verify the existence of convergence in energy intensity among 12 transition countries in Eastern Europe and 15 countries in the European Union (EU), and the energy consumption intensity in transition countries signiﬁcantly converges to the average of EU countries.  Similarly, using a dataset of IEA countries, Liddle (2009) ﬁnds evidence for the convergence in commercial and industrial electricity intensities.  More recently, the unit root test techniques were frequently used in the studies on the convergence in energy consumption.  Meng et al.  (2013) examine and verify the conditional convergence in energy consumption per capita in Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries over the period 1960–2010 by applying Lagrange multiplier (LM) tests and the LM tests based on the residual augmented least squares regression (RALS-LM).  Using similar unit root tests for panel data, Mishra and Smyth (2014) ﬁnd supportive evidence for stochastic conditional convergence of per capita energy consumption in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) countries.  However, not all of extant studies support the existence of convergence in energy consumption.  Mohammadi and Ram (2017) explore convergence in per capita energy consumption across the US States by employing parametric and nonparametric methods, while they fail to ﬁnd solid evidence for the existence of convergence in per capita energy consumption in the U. S.  In recent years, as environmental problems attracted worldwide attention, the issue of convergence in environmental quality has also been investigated by some researchers.  In a pioneering study of this ﬁeld, List (1999) utilizes the time series method to verify the convergence in emissions of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide among different states in the United States.  Strazicich and List (2003) verify the β-convergence of CO2 emissions among 21 industrialized countries from 1960 to 1997 by employing cross-sectional and time series techniques.  Panopoulou and Pantelidis (2009) apply the convergence test method proposed by Phillips and Sul (2007) and ﬁnd that carbon dioxide emissions in 128 countries present a form of club convergence.  Recently, Hao and Wei (2015) and Hao et al.  (2015) used China's provincial data to test and verify the existence of convergence in CO2 and SO2 emissions across Chinese provinces, respectively.  The investigation on the convergence in per capita energy consumption across different provinces has important policy implications for China that is currently pursuing sustainable economic growth.  If the convergence in per capita energy consumption indeed exists, it is possible that the total energy consumption could be held under control (Jobert et al. , 2010).  Given that the combustion of fossil energy especially coal is the main source of air pollutions in China (Chen et al. , 2006.  Bloch et al. , 2012), to curb total energy consumption is vital for the improvement in environmental quality.  As a result, if the convergence in per capita energy consumption could be veriﬁed, Chinese government could formulate differentiated and targeted policies for different provinces to control energy consumption and improve the environmental quality.  For instance, for the provinces with relatively high energy consumption per capita, because the energy consumption has a tendency to grow slower or decrease faster, strict regulations on energy consumption and environment could be conducted.  In contrast, for the provinces that have relatively low energy consumption per capita, convergence implies the potential of further cutting energy consumption is limited.  Therefore, to improve environmental quality, the policy makers in these provinces should pay more attention to the other inﬂuential factors of energy consumption and the environmental conditions such as industrial structure and trade openness.  The purpose of this study is thus to ﬁll the gap in the literature by exploring the existence of convergence in per capita energy consumption across Chinese provinces.  Speciﬁcally, the main contribution of this paper is twofold.  First, through the quantitative analysis on the convergence in energy consumption across China's provinces, the important relationship between the convergence of energy consumption and environmental quality is highlighted.  Especially, some inﬂuential factors of environmental equality are also incorporated to evaluate their effects on energy consumption and the environment.  Second, appropriate spatial econometric methods are employed to examine the convergence in per capita energy consumption across Chinese provinces so that the potential endogeneity caused by spatial dependency could be well addressed.  By fully accounting for the spatial dependency of energy consumption, the estimation results are more reasonable and reliable.  The rest of this paper is organized as follows.  the second section brieﬂy introduces the theoretical framework for the empirical study, suggesting that there may be convergence in per capita energy consumption.  the third section interprets the spatial econometric tools utilized in this study.  the fourth section explains the source of the data and the variables used in the estimations.  the ﬁfth section provides the estimation results and the corresponding analysis.  and the ﬁnal section concludes the research and provides corresponding political recommendations.  2.  Theoretical framework.  According to neoclassical growth theory (e. g. , Solow, 1956.  Mankiw et al. , 1992), the per capita income of different economies may converge to the same steady state level.  In other words, the farther an economy is originally away from the steady state, the faster its growth rate of per capita income would be.  Because a large body of literature has veriﬁed the close relationship between energy consumption and economic development (e. g. , Huang et al. , 2008.  Zhang and Xu, 2012.  Stern and Enﬂo, 2013), the existence of economic convergence implies the convergence in energy consumption.  As for China, because many scholars have found evidence for the existence of economic convergence across different regions (e. g. , Weeks and Yao, 2003.  Ding et al. , 2008), the convergence in per energy consumption is well worth being investigated.  Although some studies have utilized multinational data and U. S.  state-level data to examine the existence of convergence in energy consumption (e. g. , Meng et al. , 2013.  Mishra and Smyth, 2014.  Mohammadi and Ram, 2017), the theoretical explanation for the potential convergence in energy consumption is still scarce.  As an exception, Dalgaard and Strulik (2011) apply Kleiber's (1932) law in biology to a macroeconomic model to study electricity distribution networks.  They imagine the economic “organism” as an electricity transporting network whose size is related to the amount of capital to be “fed. ” They assume that electricity originates from a source (a power plant) and then is diffused by means of a power grid to transfer sites where it is used.  The deﬁnition of the distance between a transfer site and a source is the number of transfer sites that are passed in the transport of the electricity.  The number of transfer sites will rise with the amount of capital, assuming a space-ﬁlling network and scale-invariant transfer sites.  The total size of the network is proportional to LD, where D is the dimension of the network, and L is the linear size of the network.  D = 3 is appropriate because the electricity is distributed within three-dimensional space.  For a given size of the network LD, they assume that the total electricity consumption is linear in population size P.  There is a log-linear association between per capita electricity use and the amount of capital per capita k, which is determined up to a constant q.  They state that electricity is used to run, maintain, and create capital where the small above K means to differentiate K(t) with respect to time t (the same below).  Let η be the electricity required to operate and maintain a capital good, while ν is the electricity costs required to create a new capitalDividing by the population size P in the energy conservation equation, we can obtain.  Assume that the population grows at a constant rate of h.  For reasonable values of a, 2 − 1/a b 1.  Therefore Eq.  (5) implies that there is β-convergence in electricity consumption.  Although Dalgaard and Strulik's model is originally designed for electricity consumption, its use is more general.  In this study, this theoretical framework is adopted to investigate China's energy consumption.  Eq.  (5) implies that there may be convergence in per capita energy consumption, which is the theoretical basis for the empirical estimations of this<Middle> Empirical method.  3. 1.  Spatial dynamic panel model.  Compared with the cross-section data, the panel data has relatively big sample size and therefore can better deal with the heteroscedasticity problem and to some extent correct for estimation bias that might be caused by ignoring variables (Wooldridge, 2012).  As such, in this paper the panel data is used for analysis.  Following the seminal literature on economic convergence such as Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992) and Mankiw et al.  (1992), the benchmark speciﬁcation of the regression equation for β-convergence in per capita energy is as following, where, ei,t represents the per capita energy consumption in province i at year t, and the dependent variable ln(ei,t/ei,t−1) is the growth rate of per capita energy consumption from year t-1 to year t.  xi,t is the row vector that is composed of control variables, andη is the column vector that is composed of the coefﬁcients of the control variables.  ξi is the individual effect.  it does not change over time but impacts per capita energy consumption.  εi,t is the independent and identically distributed (i. i. d. ) random error term.  Although Eq.  (6) is generally estimated by static regression methods, it is in essence a dynamic equation because the ﬁrst-order lag of et appears at both sides of the equation.  Because some extant studies have veriﬁed that China's energy consumption and environmental quality may have some degree of inertial (e. g. , Auffhammer and Carson, 2008.  Du et al. , 2012).  In other words, the levels of current energy consumptions and pollutant emissions may be affected by their historical levels.  Note that the left side of Eq.  (6) could be rewritten as ln(ei,t/ei,t−1)= ln(ei,t)−ln(ei,t−1), adding ln(ei,t−1) to both sides of Eq.  (6) yields this.  If τ is statistically signiﬁcant and b1 (i. e. , β1 b0), the β-convergence of per capita energy consumption is conﬁrmed.  Absolute β-convergence means all regions will eventually converge to the same steady state, which could be tested if no control variable is included in the regression equation.  Conditional β-convergence is veriﬁed when other control variables are added.  The original meaning of conditional β-convergence is that if different areas obtain the same development condition, such as human capital level or infrastructure construction, the less developed areas tend to obtain a faster development speed.  In other words, conditional β-convergence refers to β-convergence conditional on other variables being constant.  Given the remarkable variations in the level of economic development across countries and regions, the different economies may converge to differentiated steady states.  In this study the β-convergence is investigated unless otherwise speciﬁed.  According to Tobler's (1970) First Law of Geography, all attribute values on a geographic surface are related to each other, but close indicators are more related than distant ones.  The degree and properties of spatial correlation are determined by the absolute position and relative position among the regions (including industrial distribution and spatial distance).  Spatial correlation reﬂects spatial interaction effects in reality, such as the ﬂow of economic factors among regions, the diffusion of domestic trade, innovation and technology spillovers.  One possible explanation of the spatial correlation of environmental quality in China is that, if an area's economy has developed rapidly, the adjacent regions may imitate its development pattern and industrial structure layout, so the energy consumption and environmental quality in the adjacent areas will be affected by its development and environmental policies.  Neglecting the issue of spatial correlation may lead to biased estimations (LeSage and Pace, 2009).  Given that there may be spatial correlation of per capita energy consumption, the spatial factor is incorporated into Eq.  (7), and appropriate spatial dynamic econometric models are employed to conduct the estimations.  There are two significant advantages of using spatial dynamic econometric models in this study.  1) they allow for dynamics.  and 2) they can effectively deal with the potential spatial correlation.  Therefore, the spatial dynamic econometric models have the merits of both dynamic econometric models and spatial econometric models, which ensure that the estimation results are more accurate and reliable (Elhorst, 2014).  Concretely, spatial dynamic lag model (SDAR), spatial dynamic error model (SDEM) and spatial dynamic Durbin model (SDDM) are currently most frequently used spatial econometric models.  The speciﬁcations of these three models are as follows, where wi,j is an element of the spatial weights matrix, ρ is the scalar spatial autoregressive parameter and λ is the scalar spatial error coefﬁcient.  The SDAR describes the spatially substantive dependence which implies the spatial interaction effects of explained variable among regions.  Spatial dynamic error model (SDEM) is here.  Spatial dynamic Durbin model is here.  Eq.  (11) is expressed in the form of a matrix, and all bold characteristics stand for vectors.  et and et − 1 are the column vectors that are composited of provincial energy consumptions at year t and t-1, respectively.  W is the spatial weights matrix in matrix form.  X is a matrix of which the element xij is the jth explanatory variable in province i. η1, η2 are two column vectors that are made up of the coefﬁcients of the explanatory variables in the matrixes Xt and WXt, respectively. ξ is the column vector composited of the individual effects of all provinces, as following.  ln(et)=τ·ln(et−1)+ξ+Xtη+(I−λW)−1ϵt.  The implication of this equation is that a random shock introduced into a speciﬁc province would not only affect dependent variable (per energy consumption in this study) in that province but in the other provinces through the spatial transformation (I−λW)−1.  Therefore, in SDEM the regional spillover effect is caused by the interaction of random shocks.  It is noteworthy that in SDAR the spatial term is introduced as an explanatory variable, while in SDEM the spatial term directly affects the residual term.  The SDDM integrates the characteristics of SDAR and SDEM and could be seen as a combination of SDAR and SDEM (LeSage and Pace, 2009).  As stressed by Elhorst (2012), ignoring spatial dependence in the error term only affects the efﬁciency of the estimator.  However, if substantive spatial dependence within variables is neglected, the estimator would lose consistency and may even be biased.  Fingleton and López-Bazo (2006) argue that spatial lag model is most appropriate for the analysis of conditional convergence.  As a result, in this study, SDAR is chosen as the benchmark estimation method, and the SDER and SDDM are also employed to offer robustness checks.  In fact, in previous studies, the estimation results of different spatial econometric methods were often reported at the same time for the purpose of comparison (e. g. , Poon et al. , 2006.  Hao et al. , 2016).  To perform estimations using spatial dynamic econometric models, the concrete form of spatial weights matrix should be at ﬁrst determined.  There are several forms of spatial weights matrix that have been frequently used in previous studies (e. g. , Maddison, 2006.  Plümper and Neumayer, 2010).  The choice of spatial weights matrix is generally based on experiences and the speciﬁc research problem, because there is no obviously ‘correct’ functional form of the spatial weights matrix to specify the connectivity (Anselin, 2002).  In this paper, the popular and commonly utilized contiguity matrix is selected as the benchmark form of spatial weights matrix.  Speciﬁcally, for the contiguity matrix, wi,j=1 when provinces i and j are geographically adjacent (share the same boarder), otherwise wi,j=0.  Then the matrix is row-standardized to ensure that the sum of all elements in each row is 1.  In other words, the continuity matrix measures the spatial impacts of a certain province's energy consumption per capita on neighboring provinces.  Due to the introduction of spatial term and dynamics, OLS is not suitable for estimating spatial econometric models because the OLS estimation results would be biased and inconsistent (Elhorst, 2014).  The common regression methods for spatial econometric models include maximum likelihood estimation (ML) and quasi-maximum likelihood estimation (QML), instrumental variables (IV), generalized method of moments (GMM) and Bayesian estimation.  this paper adopts ML approach as it is the most popular regression method for spatial econometric models (Elhorst, 2014.  Plümper and Neumayer, 2010).  3. 2.  The test of spatial correlation.  A spatial autocorrelation index, Moran's (1950) I, can be used to determine whether there is a spatial correlation among spatial units.  The Moran's I index values are in [−1, 1].  A value being lower than 0 means negative correlation, which shows a certain level competitive relationship among the adjacent areas.  equal to 0 means that it is uncorrelated, and higher than 0 indicates a positive correlation, which suggests that the variables experience a positive feedback effect among the adjacent regions (Elhorst, 2014).  The closer the value of Moran's I is to 1, the more the regional observations tend toward spatial clustering.  The formula in the cross-sectional data is this.  A Moran's I can also be obtained based on panel data.  We can use block diagonal matrix C=IT⨂W to replace spatial weights matrix W in the cross-sectional data, and the formula.  IT is a unit matrix with the dimension of T⨂T.  ⨂ is the Kronecker Product Operator.  4.  Data.  In this study, we use provincial panel data from 1994 to 2014 that includes all of China's 30 provincial-level administrative units except for Tibet. 4 All of the data are obtained from the China Statistical Yearbook, the China Energy Statistical Yearbook and the provinces' provincial statistical yearbooks for each year.  The key variable, which is the focus of this study, is energy consumption per capita.  Fig.  1 depicts the energy consumption per capita at the beginning and end of the sample period (1994 and 2014, respectively) and the corresponding average annual growth rate for each province.  At ﬁrst glance, it can be observed that the provinces with relatively high per capita energy consumption initially (e. g. , Beijing, Shanghai and Tianjin) generally have a relatively lower growth rate of energy consumption per capita and vice versa.  In other words, there may be a convergence in energy consumption per capita.  However, solid conclusions can only be made after further accurate estimations.  In addition to per capita energy consumption, the empirical analysis of conditional convergence includes several control variables,which are listed below.  (1) Per capita GDP Many studies indicate that per capita energy consumption has a relationship with per capita GDP.  Economic entities with higher income tend to consume more commodities and services.  however, with the improvement of per capita GDP and the progress of society, energy-saving technology eventually achieve widespread use, and environmentally friendly products gradually gain popularity.  To date, a growing body of literature has studied whether there is an Environmental Kuznets Curve (EKC) relationship between pollutant emission and per capita GDP.  Poon et al.  (2006) ﬁnd an inverted U-shaped relationship between China's carbon dioxide emissions and per capita GDP using cross-sectional data.  To more comprehensively depict the relationship between per capita energy consumption and economic development, we bring in the square of per capita GDP.  To address the impact of price levels, all GDP data are converted into 1978 constant prices.  (2) Ratio of secondary industry value-added to GDP (SECIND) Energy demand may be remarkably affected by the industrial structure.  The production activity in the industrial sector requires a high amount of energy, while services and emerging technologies have a lower degree of dependence on energy and can create greater economic value with less energy.  Mi et al.  (2015) demonstrate that industrial structure has a signiﬁcant impact on energy consumption and carbon dioxide emission.  China's industrial structure has changed.  its proportion of value-added by tertiary industry is 46. 1%, for the ﬁrst time surpassing that of secondary industry.  Hence, industrial structure, which is measured by the proportion of value-added to GDP by secondary industry is introduced as a control variable.  (3) Trade openness Trade openness, which is measured by the ratio of total foreign trade volume to GDP, reﬂects the importance of a country's foreign trade and may have both positive and negative effects on energy consumption (Du et al. , 2012).  Import and export commodities contain a large amount of indirect energy consumption, and external trade can eventually affect energy consumption by inﬂuencing a country's economic growth, changes in its industrial structure and the absorption of foreign advanced technology.  Nasreen and Anwar (2014) testify that trade openness has a positive effect on energy consumption by analyzing panel data for Asian countries from 1980 to 2011.  (4) Population density Population density is an inﬂuential indicator frequently utilized in energy and environmental research (Eriksson and Zehaie, 2005.  Auffhammer and Carson, 2008).  However, the correlation between population density and per capita energy consumption is not determinate.  On the one hand, the degree of urbanization and industrialization is relatively high in areas with high population density, which leads to high per capita energy consumption.  On the other hand, high population density makes it possible to use energy more efﬁciently and intensively, which has a negative effect on per capita energy consumption.  (5) Per capita foreign direct investment (FDI) FDI is an important driving force for the steady growth of China's economy (Madariaga and Poncet, 2007).  In the meanwhile, FDI may have potential inﬂuences on environmental quality.  On one hand, the so-called ‘pollution haven hypothesis’ raised by Walter and Ugelow (1979) suggests that FDI would cause more environmental pollution in developing countries that are eager for investment.  To attract more foreign capital inﬂows, developing countries may tend to lower the threshold of environmental access to engage in the production of heavy pollution and in high energy consumption industries.  However, on the other hand, the ‘pollution halo hypothesis’ argues that low-tech countries can take advantage of the technology spillover effect of multinational corporations to accelerate the development of domestic technology, such as advanced management experience and low carbon technology, which can improve energy use efﬁciency and reduce pollution (Eskeland and Harrison, 2003.  Cole et al. , 2008).  So far, several studies have investigated the impacts of FDI on China's environment but drew controversial conclusions (e. g. , He, 2006.  Lan et al. , 2012.  Cole et al. , 2011).  Thus, the net impact of FDI on energy consumption and environmental quality is ambiguous and worth studying.  To summarize, Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics of the variables that are used in the empirical study.  5.  Empirical results.  5. 1.  Spatial autocorrelation test.  Moran's I has been widely used to explore the existence of spatial dependence.  If most of the points in the Moran's I scatter diagram are clustered in the ﬁrst and third quadrants, it indicates a positive spatial autocorrelation.  Otherwise, clustering in the second and fourth quadrants reﬂects a negative spatial autocorrelation.  Uniform distribution across the four quadrants suggests no spatial autocorrelation.  Following the previous literature, in this study, a Moran's I index is utilized to measure the degree of spatial autocorrelation for China's per capita energy consumption at the provincial level from 1994 to 2014.  As a comparison, the Moran's I scatter plots for the years 1994 and 2014 are depicted in Fig.  2 below.  Most of the points in both Moran's I scatter diagrams of per capita energy consumption are located in the ﬁrst and third quadrants, which implies that the per capita energy consumption displays an obvious positive correlation in spatial distribution.  Therefore, research on the convergence of China's per capita energy consumption at the provincial level must consider spatial correlations. 