 1.  Introduction Many countries subsidise the production and consumption of fossil fuels.  Most subsidies are given downstream, to reduce the cost of consuming fossil fuels (Coady et al. , 2016).  While these subsidies beneﬁt fuel consumers, at least in the short run, they also have a number of negative effects (IEA, 2014).  First, they contribute to ﬁscal imbalances and thus crowd out other government spending.  Second, subsidies stimulate excessive fossil fuel consumption contributing to increased emissions of harmful pollution such as CO2.  Finally, in the long run low oil prices encourage the development of energy-intensive industries and discourage development of renewable technologies.  Despite the negative effects, it has proven difﬁcult to remove fossil fuel subsidies.  In many countries fossil fuel subsidies were originally introduced to improve consumer welfare, and proposals to remove such subsidies could result in citizen protests.  We ﬁnd, however, that the biggest subsidisers may increase their welfare by removing their oil subsidies.  The reason is that subsidy removal allows these countries to shift oil from the domestic market to the international market where prices are higher.  The biggest fossil fuel subsidisers are also major producers and exporters of oil and gas.  In fact, the heaviest fossil fuel subsidisers are the OPEC countries, mostly located in the Middle-East and North-Africa (MENA) region.  Public spending on subsidies – estimated as the gap between international and domestic prices – is, on average, much higher in the oil exporting MENA region than in other countries.  In particular, there are extensive subsidies in the transport sector.  According to IMF (2014), subsidies to gasoline and diesel in the MENA countries amounted to almost 4% of the regional GDP in 2012.  Oil products used in the transport sector are also subsidised to a certain degree in other Non-OECD countries.  Price control is often a key element in fossil fuel subsidies.  However, subsidies can also include cash transfers directly to consumers, as well as tax exemptions and rebates.  Assessing the magnitude of fossil fuels subsidies in all its forms is a task challenged by poor data quality, limited data availability and lack of data comparability (Ellis, 2010).  Like many other studies, we use the price-gap method, calculating the combined effect of reducing the wedge between domestic and international (reference) prices (Koplow, 2009).  The reference price on goods that are traded on the international market, like oil, is usually the international or border price adjusted for market exchange rates, transport and distributional costs, and country speciﬁc taxes and tariffs.  As we focus on price-gap subsidies in the transport sector, we can apply a consistent and uniform dataset as in GIZ (2014) (formerly GTZ), which lists the retail prices of diesel and gasoline in 174 countries, and assess the effects of subsidy reforms. 1 The oil price fall in late 2014 has presented countries with a unique opportunity to phase out fossil fuel consumption subsidies, since the wedge between the global and domestic regulated prices has been reduced.  As a result, consumers would be less hurt by subsidy removal, at least in the short run.  In addition, the recent drop in the oil price has reduced government incomes in OPEC countries, and removal of fossil fuel subsidies would help improve ﬁscal balances.  Several OPEC countries have recently reduced (implicit) subsidies on gasoline and diesel, including Angola, UAE, Saudi-Arabia, Iran, Kuwait, Qatar and Venezuela (IEA, 2016a.  Bloomberg, 2016).  According to IEA (2016b) this has slowed consumption and increased the potential for export.  Other countries outside OPEC, such as India, have also started similar price reforms on gasoline and diesel (IEA, 2016a).  This paper analyses how removal of oil consumption subsidies in the transport sectors might affect oil consumption and production in major geographic regions in the world.  The transport sector currently accounts for 54% of the world's fuel liquid consumption, and the share is expected to increase towards 2040 (IEA, 2014).  We focus on subsidy removal primarily in OPEC countries, but also to a certain extent in other countries.  We also consider a situation where all subsidising countries introduce moderate fuel taxes.  We compare the welfare effects of these policies for different regions, distinguishing between effects on consumers, producers and the government.  To analyse these effects, we use a numerical model of the international oil market called Petro2 (Aune et al. , 2017).  The model incorporates dynamic behavior by oil producers and distinguishes between competitive producers and producers with market power.  The model is described in more detail below.  Our analysis suggests that OPEC countries may achieve signiﬁcant welfare gains by removing the oil subsidies in their transport sector.  On the one hand, OPEC consumers experience a loss due to the higher consumer prices.  There is also a producer surplus loss following a lower world market oil price.  On the other hand, removing oil subsidies involves a huge transfer from oil consumers to the government (or to oil producers, depending on who is in fact paying the subsidies), such that the losses from reduced subsidies are dominated by government gains.  The reason is that subsidy removal reduces OPEC oil consumption, and this oil can be sold in the global oil market at signiﬁcantly higher prices.  In other words, the willingness to pay for oil is higher in the global oil market than within OPEC (before subsidies are removed).  Further, we ﬁnd that when all countries remove oil subsidies in the transport sector, the global welfare gains increase.  However, our analysis suggests that this leads to lower welfare gains for OPEC as the value of their oil resources deteriorates due to lower oil prices.  Although subsidy removal may be proﬁtable for OPEC, it could have some feedback effects in the oil market that are worth studying.  One feedback mechanism is leakage, i. e. , reduced demand for oil in the transport sector in OPEC may lead to lower oil prices and correspondingly higher consumption in other countries (Felder and Rutherford, 1993.  Böhringer et al. , 2014).  Another feedback mechanism is related to the “green paradox” (Sinn, 2008.  van der Ploeg and Withagen, 2012), that is, fossil fuel suppliers might ﬁnd it proﬁtable to accelerate extraction if they foresee reduced demand in the future, for example due to gradual phasing out of subsidies, more stringent climate policies etc.  The two feedback mechanisms are related to each other, and both are highly dependent on the price responsiveness of demand and supply in the energy markets.  The more price responsive demand is relative to supply, the bigger the leakage effects.  The green paradox effect depends heavily on the timing of the subsidy removal, but also on the price responsiveness.  Two characteristics of the oil market may be of particular importance when we study the feedback mechanisms of subsidy removal, namely market power and intertemporal behavior.  There is little consensus in the literature regarding OPEC's behavior in the oil market, except that most studies reject the hypothesis of competitive behavior (see e. g.  Smith, 2005.  Hansen and Lindholt, 2008.  Kaufmann et al. , 2008.  Huntington et al. , 2013.  Nakov and Nuño, 2013.  Boug et al. , 2016).  We present a model where we assume Cournot behavior meaning that a core of countries within OPEC takes Non-OPEC's and OPEC-Non Core's extraction path as given, but maximizes joint proﬁts taking into account the price responsiveness on the demand side.  Similar assumptions have been made in earlier simulation models of the oil market (e. g. , Salant, 1982.  Berg et al. , 1997, 2002.  Aune et al. , 2010.  Okullo et al. , 2015).  However, none of these studies analyse the effects of phasing out subsidies.  Another potentially important feature is the fact that oil is an exhaustible resource, i. e. , extraction of oil has intertemporal effects as it reduces available resources in the future (Hotelling, 1931).  This is taken into account in our model, as oil producers are forward-looking and maximize their net present value of oil extraction.  This dynamic feature is important for the “green paradox” effect.  Many studies have analysed different effects of reducing fossil fuel subsidies.  Ellis (2010) surveys ﬁve studies that examine the effect of reducing subsidies on fossil fuels.  All studies ﬁnd welfare increase in the subsidising countries.  Burniaux and Chateau (2014) analyse a phase-out of fossil fuel subsidies using a general equilibrium model, ﬁnding that such a subsidy reform will reduce GHG-emissions and improve welfare for the world as a whole, although some regions will experience reduced welfare.  The above-mentioned studies do not consider impacts on the global oil market.  Other studies (Larsen and Shah, 1992.  Salehi-Isfahani, 1996.  Gurer and Ban, 2000) use oil supply and demand elasticities to study the effects of fuel subsidy removal on the subsidising country's welfare.  We have only found one study that focuses on the effects of fuel subsidy removal on the global oil market, i. e. , Balke et al.  (2015).  They ﬁnd that subsidy removal in 24 oil-producing countries generally is welfare enhancing for both oilimporting and oil-exporting countries.  Their model is based on competitive behavior and static modeling of oil supply, which means that they cannot include transition dynamics like in our study.  The paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 describes the Petro2 model, Section 3 presents the policy scenarios analysed, the approach used in the analysis of welfare effects, and results from the numerical model.  Section 4 concludes.  <Middle> Model description.  Petro2 is a dynamic simulation model that permits the analysis of policy changes or other external shocks to the market (e. g. , shifts in cost or oil reserve levels) on oil markets.  The model has previously been used in Aune et al.  (2017), who study the effects of fuel efﬁciency improvements in the oil market.  The main outputs from the model are oil prices and production/consumption in different regions and sectors, both in the short and long run.  Petro2 has seven regions.  Western Europe, United States, Rest of OECD, China, Russia, OPEC and Rest of World.  We further distinguish between six end-users within each region with greater detail among transport sectors, and one transformation sector.  Each sector in each region demands oil, natural gas, electricity, coal, biomass and biofuel.  The time path of the oil price (and thus oil product prices) is endogenous, whereas the prices of the other (non-oil) energy goods are exogenous (based on price projections from the IEA, 2013).  In this study we focus on oil in the transport sectors.  On the supply side OPEC is divided into OPEC-Core (Saudi-Arabia, Kuwait, UAE and Qatar) and OPEC-Non Core, assuming that only OPEC-Core exerts market power.  The supply of oil in all regions is modeled intertemporally, meaning that oil producers maximize the net present value of current and future extraction.  The global oil market clears in each period, i. e. , total oil supply from all regions equals total demand over all regions.  The time period in the model is one year, and the base year is 2007.  Appendix A provides a formal description and also presents sources of data.  The model is solved in GAMS (Brooke et al. , 1996), using MCP (Mixed Complementarity Problem).  2. 1.  Demand.  Demand is divided into one transformation sector (power generation) and six end-user sectors.  industry, household, road and rail transport, domestic/international aviation and domestic shipping, international shipping, and other sectors.  The model has six energy goods.  oil (aggregate of different oil products), gas, electricity, coal, biomass and biofuels for transport.  The road and rail transport sector, for instance, demands oil, gas, electricity and biofuels.  Demand for energy goods is basically derived from the demand for energy services.  Hence, we assume that every region and sector demands an energy aggregate, which may be thought of as an energy service, modeled as a Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES)-aggregate of the various energy goods.  The price of this energy aggregate (in a sector in a region) is assumed to be the weighted CES-aggregate of the prices of these energy goods, where the initial budget shares are weights.  The model speciﬁes the long-term demands for the energy aggregate as log-linear functions of population, income (GDP) per capita, and price of the energy aggregate.  The direct price elasticities are constant as we use log-linear demand functions for the energy aggregate.  Demand for a speciﬁc energy good in a sector and region is a function of the initial budget share, the demand for the energy aggregate as well as the end-user price of the energy aggregate relative to the end-user price of the speciﬁc energy good.  The substitution elasticities determine how fast the demand for an energy good responds to changes in relative prices.  All energy goods are bought at regional product prices.  The end-user prices include costs of transportation, distribution and reﬁning in addition to existing taxes/subsidies.  End-user prices and regional product prices are linked as follows.  The end-user price of a given fuel in a given sector and region is equal to the regional producer price of the fuel (node price) plus costs of transportation, distribution and reﬁning in addition to existing taxes/subsidies.  GIZ (former GTZ) gathers information on the actual diesel and gasoline prices in N170 countries worldwide.  To estimate the size of oil consumption subsidies in various countries they construct an average benchmark retail price of diesel and gasoline, which includes industry margin, VAT/sales tax, and a 10 US-cents road tax. 3 These prices are considered benchmarks for a non-subsidised road transport policy.  If the actual fuel prices are below these benchmarks, the country is subsidising consumption.  To estimate the size of subsidies in a demand region in the model, we construct an average diesel and gasoline price, which is weighted by the consumption in each country in that region.  In 2007, the fuel prices in OPEC were 18% and 26% of the benchmark prices for diesel and gasoline, respectively.  2. 2.  Oil supply.  Production allocation over time is important for the suppliers, since oil is an exhaustible resource.  Extracting one more unit today will affect a supplier's costs or access to oil resources in the future.  Hence, a rational producer will not only consider the current price or market condition before choosing the current optimal oil supply.  We therefore model the supply of oil intertemporally with the producers maximizing the present value of their oil wealth.  A market interest rate of 10% is used as a (real) discount rate in all regions except for OPEC, which has a rate of 5%.  Oil production in OPEC is more government-controlled than in most other regions.  The oil extraction is also to a larger extent than in Non-OPEC countries undertaken by state-owned companies.  For these reasons, we assume a lower interest rate for OPEC than for Non-OPEC countries.  Further, OPEC governments have a high dependence on oil, which is likely to remain for years to come.  Thus, OPEC may attach more weight to long-term income than most other producers.  This assumption is conﬁrmed by estimation of the property-rights model in e. g.  Marks and Swan (1988).  To analyse the importance of market power, the international oil market is modeled as a market with a cartel (corresponding to OPECCore) and seven competitive fringe producers (i. e. , the Non-OPEC regions plus OPEC-Non Core).  The fringe producers always consider the oil price path as given, while the cartel regards the price as a function of its supply.  Hence, the marginal revenue for the fringe is equal to the price, whereas for the cartel, marginal revenue is in general less than the price.  Both the fringe producers and the cartel take the supply of all other producers as given when deciding their own production proﬁle (Salant, 1976).  Hence, we have a Nash-Cournot model with one Cournot producer and a competitive fringe.  The initial cost level of the different producer groups differs, reﬂecting among other things that extraction costs in OPEC countries generally are lower than in the rest of the world.  The cost functions of both the cartel and the fringe are assumed to be increasing functions of cumulative production, i. e. , costs increase due to depletion of the oil resources.  The scarcity rent of a producer then reﬂects that extracting one more unit today increases costs tomorrow.  Hence, we focus on economic exhaustion rather than physical exhaustion.  Unit costs are reduced by a constant rate each year due to technological change, independent of production.  This means that over time unit costs may be reduced or increased, depending on the production rate (depletion vs.  technology effect, cf.  Lindholt, 2015).  We assume that it is costly to alter production in the initial years for the fringe producers.  This is modeled as increasing marginal costs also within a period (in addition to costs increasing in accumulated production).  Hence, output from the fringe producers is quite rigid initially, but the effect is gradually reduced over time.  We check the robustness of this assumption in the sensitivity analysis.  This initial inﬂexibility is not modeled for the OPEC-Core producers as they have generally more spare capacity and lower capital costs (see Appendix A).  In equilibrium, the price in each period for the fringe producers must be equal to the marginal costs plus the scarcity rent.  The latter is equal to the shadow costs associated with cumulative production, i. e. , the alternative cost of producing one more unit today (as it increases future costs).  Similarly, for the cartel OPEC-Core the oil price must be equal to the marginal costs plus the scarcity rent as well as the cartel rent.  3.  The effects of oil subsidy removal in transport sectors.  As subsidies are removed, consumer prices rise in previously subsidising countries.  Consumers in these countries will buy less oil, and this will put a downward pressure on the global oil price.  So, while removal of oil subsidies reduces oil consumption in some regions, oil consumption will likely increase elsewhere.  Below we explore the oil market effects of three scenarios for oil subsidy removal.  We also estimate the welfare changes following subsidy removal for consumers, producers and the government for the OPEC-Core countries.  A brief sensitivity analysis with respect to the calibration of important Petro2 parameters is provided in Appendix B.  3. 1.  Policy scenarios.  We consider three policy scenarios for fossil fuel subsidies removal in the transport sector (including household private transportation), see Table 1, and compare the effects for the oil market and for the welfare in different countries.  In the ﬁrst scenario, subsidies are removed only in OPEC countries, while in the second scenario subsidies are removed in other countries, too.  Removal of fossil fuel subsidies could be driven by ﬁscal necessity but also by international pressure related to climate policy.  The third scenario considers the case where, in addition to subsidy removal, fuel taxes in the transport sector are increased to the current US level (regions with tax levels at least as high as in the US do not change their taxes).  While removal of fossil fuel subsidies would improve the ﬁscal situation of subsidising countries, these countries may also experience social instability when consumers' welfare is reduced.  If the overall welfare effect in society is positive, fossil fuel consumers may be compensated for their welfare loss.  For each scenario, we explore the welfare effects to see if such compensation is feasible.  If the domestic price for oil in the transport sector (cf.  Section 2) is lower than the oil market price (plus ﬁxed transport and distributional costs), the domestic oil price is considered subsidised.  Subsidy removal is implemented in the model by removing the price difference in these cases.  The policy scenarios are compared to a reference scenario, which to a large degree mimics the projections of the New Policy Scenario in IEA (2013) until 2035, and then assumes a gradual decline in the use of oil in all sectors of the economy (following, e. g. , IPCC, 2014).  4.  Numerical analysis.  This section presents numerical results for the oil market from the different simulations, including region speciﬁc effects on welfare following the subsidy removal policies.  Before examining the policy scenarios, we brieﬂy present the reference scenario.  4. 1.  Simulation results.  reference scenario.  Fig.  1 shows the development of the oil price towards 2050 in the reference scenario.  We emphasize that the reference scenario is not a projection of the future, but a starting point to study the effects of different policies.  As the model assumes that oil producers have perfect foresight, and there are no adjustment costs in production for OPECCore, the oil price path shows a smooth increase over time even through the economic downturn after the ﬁnancial crisis in 2008–9 and the price fall in 2014–15.  However, the economic downturn and its effects on global oil consumption are reﬂected in slow growth in global oil production (sum of OPEC and Non-OPEC in Fig.  1).  The price increase continues through 2050 even though the share of oil gradually declines over time in all sectors and regions.  The reason is that despite technological improvements in oil extraction, a gradual scarcity of oil pushes the oil price upwards.  Our reference price scenario is somewhat higher than the New Policy Scenario in IEA (2015), but in the range of the Current Policy Scenario up to 2040.  Note that the price growth in the reference scenario is unimportant for the effects of the various policy scenarios.  Fig.  1 also shows the development in total OPEC, OPEC-Core and NonOPEC production towards 2050.  We notice that global production is increasing over time, especially until 2040, and that OPEC's market share is growing.  The latter is due to bigger reserves and lower extraction costs than in Non-OPEC countries.  4. 2.  Simulation results.  policy scenarios.  Fig.  2 shows the effects on oil consumption in the transport sector in OPEC in the three policy scenarios.  Notice that in 2007, 32% of the volume of global diesel demand and 27% of the global gasoline demand were subsidised to a smaller or larger extent.  If fuel subsidies are gradually removed over the period 2007–2020, fuel demand contracts substantially, with a 26% reduction in 2020.  The reason for this large reduction is that the subsidy removal more than doubles the end-user price of oil in the transport sector in OPEC (in 2020).  After 2020, the relative reduction is moderated somewhat as the relative importance of the existing subsidies decline along with higher oil prices in the reference scenario.  Removing subsidies in other Non-OECD countries could have some indirect effects on OPEC consumption through oil price changes, but these effects are negligible (see the ﬁgure).  However, if fuel taxes are also implemented in OPEC countries (at US levels), oil demand is further reduced by an additional 3 percentage points.  Thus, removing fuel subsidies has far bigger impacts on OPEC's oil demand than implementing fuel taxation at US levels.  Effects on global oil consumption in the transport sector are shown in Fig.  3.  In the scenario where only OPEC countries remove their subsidies, global consumption is reduced by up to 3%.  This reﬂects that OPEC countries account for almost 10% of global oil consumption in the transport sector in 2020.  However, due to somewhat lower oil prices (see Fig.  4) there is a slight increase in oil demand in Non-OPEC countries' transport sector.  The oil consumption leakage is 22% in 2020 in the scenario when only OPEC countries remove their subsidies.  When all countries remove their subsidies, the decline in oil consumption is only slightly bigger, as fuel subsidies are much more widespread in OPEC countries than in most other countries.  Implementing fuel taxes at a minimum of US levels has bigger impacts on oil consumption, cf.  Fig.  3.  We also notice from the ﬁgure that there is in fact a slight increase in initial oil consumption in the three policy scenarios.  The explanation is that oil producers (mainly OPEC-Core), foreseeing that fuel subsidies are gradually removed over time, realize that future oil prices will be reduced.  As a result, it is optimal to accelerate extraction to some degree, implying slightly lower oil prices also initially.  Fig.  4 shows the percentage change in the oil price towards 2050 compared to the reference scenario.  A removal of subsidies to oil in OPEC, with associated reduced consumption, persistently lowers the oil market price by 0. 7 to 1% (until 2050).  Removing subsidies in other countries as well again has limited impacts.  One reason for the moderate price effect is that lower oil prices increase demand in other countries, dampening the initial price effect of reduced demand due to subsidy removal.  We have only found one study that looks at subsidy removal when the oil price is endogenous (Balke et al. , 2015).  The oil price decline in our study is lower than in their study, where the removal of fuel subsidies in oil producing countries would reduce the world oil price by 6%.  Part of the reason could be that we model OPEC-Core as a cartel, which ﬁnds it proﬁtable to reduce production to prevent the oil price from declining too much.  We further see from Fig.  4 that if fuel taxes in the transport sector are increased in all regions up to a minimum of the current US level (i. e. , regions with initially higher fuel taxes do not change their tax levels), the oil price declines somewhat more, i. e. , by 1 to 1. 5%.  Still, it is fair to conclude that the oil price is not much affected by subsidy removal or moderate fuel taxation.  Figs.  5, 6 and 7 show the production of OPEC along with OPEC-Core and Non-OPEC countries, respectively.  All three groups of producers reduce their oil production in the policy scenarios.  Except for the ﬁrst few years, we see that the biggest reduction comes from OPEC-Core.  This reﬂects that OPEC-Core considers its market power, knowing that it can inﬂuence the oil price by cutting back on its production when demand contracts.  On the other hand, we also notice that OPEC-Core produces more initially (Fig.  6) to compensate for the bleaker demand prospects in future years.  This is similar to the “green paradox” effect mentioned in the introduction, which is a result of our modeling of oil as an exhaustible resource.  That is, extraction of oil has intertemporal effects as it reduces available resources in the future.  Due to spare capacity, OPEC-Core is more able to adjust its initial production than other oil producers, who hardly change their initial extraction because of the subsidy removal.  4. 3.  Welfare effects following subsidy removal policies.  This section examines how removing oil subsidies in the transport sector affects welfare.  We approximate changes in welfare, as compared with the reference scenario, using yearly changes in consumer surplus, producer surplus and receipts to the government from subsidy elimination.  We then calculate the present values of these changes for all regions and sectors over time, using a yearly social discount rate of 5% and linear approximations to the demand and supply functions around the market outcome.  The welfare effects in a region following subsidy removal policies depend on whether it is a net exporter or net importer of oil.  As shown in the previous section, subsidy removal reduces the global oil price.  This affects the terms of trade between regions.  Whereas lower oil prices beneﬁt net oil importers through a lower net oil import bill, net exporters lose income from oil sales.  Further, removing oil subsidies involves a transfer from oil consumers to the government.  We do not consider the distributional effects this may have in the present paper.  We ﬁnd, however, that consumer losses from reduced subsidies are dominated by government gains.  Fig.  8 shows the changes in regional welfare, relative to the reference scenario, for the simulation where we phase out fossil fuel consumption subsidies to all transport sectors in OPEC within 2020 (TranspOPEC).  To get a sense of the magnitudes, we present the ﬁgures as percentages of regional GDP in 2007.  That is, 100 multiplied by the present value of the sum of changes in current and future welfare for a given region divided by regional GDP in 2007, using a yearly discount rate of 5%. 4 As expected, the effects are much larger in OPEC than in the other parts of the world.  Receipts to the government from subsidy elimination are the present value of subsidies net of taxes, multiplied with regional oil consumption (over the whole time-horizon).  OPEC consumers experience a loss due to increased consumer prices following subsidy removal.  Regarding changes in OPEC oil revenue, the change in producer surplus depicted in Fig.  7 refers to the initial producer surplus loss following a lower world market oil price.  On the other hand, a subsidy removal allows OPEC to sell all its oil at the world market oil price, which is substantially higher than the low subsidised prices in the reference scenario.  The associated increase in oil revenue is equal to the “government receipts from subsidy elimination” in Fig.  8.  OPEC also increases yearly oil exports by between 1 and 2% (it varies over time) when OPEC consumer subsidies are removed.  The change in the value of OPEC oil resources following subsidy removal may be interpreted as equal to the sum of “government receipts from subsidy elimination” and “producer surplus” in Fig.  8. 5 All in all, the net present value of the welfare gain amounts to 9% of the base year GDP in OPEC.  Except for Russia and Rest of OECD, all other regions are net importers of oil over the whole time-horizon and thus also experience welfare gains due to lower oil prices, but the magnitudes are modest and b2% of regional base year GDP.  Russia is a net exporter of oil and loses due the lower oil prices.  The Russian welfare loss is approximated to 5% of its GDP.  Rest of OECD switches from being a net importer to a net exporter in 2034 (in all scenarios), and gains very little from lower oil prices. 6 Remember that Rest of OECD consists of both oil exporting countries like Canada, and oil importing countries like Japan.  The signiﬁcant welfare gain in OPEC may explain why Saudi Arabia, UAE and other OPEC countries reduced their oil subsidies on gasoline and diesel in 2015 (IEA, 2016c).  As seen in Fig.  8, however, there is a substantial OPEC consumer loss associated with subsidy removal, which can make these policies unpopular and difﬁcult to implement.  This may help explaining the timing of the OPEC members' cut in oil subsidies.  That is, they may use the current low oil price to dampen the experienced loss in consumer surplus following oil market subsidy reductions.  Fig.  9 illustrates how phasing out OPEC fossil-fuel transportationsubsidies affects the producer surplus, consumer surplus and receipts to the government in OPEC over time.  The ﬁrst two years feature a drop in OPEC consumer oil prices, and hence a positive change in consumer surplus.  The explanation is that the subsidy removal is implemented gradually, and initially this effect is dominated by the fall in the world oil prices (cf.  discussion of this above).  Thereafter, the changes in the welfare components all have the expected sign.  The total change in welfare, measured in percentages of OPEC yearly GDP, grows initially as the subsidy is phased out and peaks at 0. 61%.  The increase in projected GDP thereafter causes a gradual decline in the percentage welfare change over time.  These results are in the range of the ﬁndings of the studies surveyed by Ellis (2010), which showed that GDP increased from 0. 10 to 0. 70% per year from 2010 to 2040 in the countries that introduced subsidy reforms.  The second scenario we consider in this section is the TranspTax scenario, where we phase out all oil consumption subsidies to transport sectors and implement US transport tax levels in all regions within 2020 (given that the region initially has taxes below US tax levels). 7 As expected the effects are somewhat larger in all regions, but still small compared with OPEC, see Fig. 