
The important role of oil in the world economy has motivated the
research on the economic and ﬁnancial consequences caused by oil
price changes.  In his seminal study on oil price changes and the
macroeconomy, Hamilton (1983) ﬁnds that an oil price shock is a
contributing factor to US recession.  Since then, scholars have performed
much research on this issue (Jones Name, 2004.  Hamilton, 2008.  Herrera
Name, 2011.  Filis and Chatziantoniou, 2014.  Salisu Name, 2017, among
others).  Stock markets act as the barometer for anticipating economic
changes in economic activity (Fama, 1990).  Oil price is also likely to
play an important role in predicting stock prices by at least two channels
as follows.  On the one hand, since oil is an important input in the
production of many goods, oil price changes may affect future cash
ﬂows of enterprises.  As a result, higher oil prices may increase the
production cost of enterprises, dampening corporate proﬁts and thus
further depressing stock prices (Sadorsky, 1999.  Apergis and Miller,
2009).  On the other hand, oil price changes may impact the discount
rate.  Rising oil prices are often seen as indicative of inﬂationary
pressures.  Central banks typically address it by raising the interest rate
(Huang Name, 1996.  Miller and Ratti, 2009).  Since the link between
oil price changes and stock markets has important implications for
portfolio management strategies, this issue has attracted considerable
attention in recent studies (e. g. , Park and Ratti, 2008.  Naifar, 2016. 
Kayalar Name, 2017). 
Despite the increased interest in the oil-stock relationships, there are
relatively few papers that investigate the time-varying relationships
between them (e. g. , Chang Name, 2013.  Broadstock and Filis, 2014.  Joo
and Park, 2017).  This series of study reﬂects the importance of allowing
the relationships to be variable.  However, they do not systematically
isolate bearish and bullish markets.  Quantile regression is able to
describe the entire conditional distribution of the dependent variable
and can solve this problem effectively.  Applying this approach, Lee
and Zeng (2011) argue that the impacts of oil price shocks on real
stock returns vary with the stock performances (e. g. , bearish and bullish
markets).  Sim and Zhou (2015) also indicate that oil shocks affect US
stock returns depending on market circumstances by using the
quantile-on-quantile approach.  Moreover, the majority of the existing
studies investigate the oil-stock relationships in a linear framework. 
However, Mork (1989) and Mork Name (1994) conclude that oil price
increases have a negative effect on GDP, whereas oil price decreases
have not been found to have a positive impact on output or an impact
of the same degree.  Some related works explore the non-linear effects of
oil price changes on stock returns (Cong Name, 2008.  Park and Ratti,
2008.  Ramos and Veiga, 2013.  Tsai, 2015.  Reboredo and Ugolini, 2016). 
In a recent study, Kang and Ratti (2013) argue that the relationships
of oil-stock are not formed in isolation from economic policy uncertainty. 
This is because oil price shocks and economic policy uncertainty are
interrelated and jointly inﬂuence stock returns.  Relatively little attention, however, has been paid to the relationships between economic
policy uncertainty and the stock market.  Economic policy uncertainty
might have an impact on asset prices by many channels.  First, policy
uncertainty might delay or change important decisions taken by
ﬁrms and other economic agents, such as employment, investment,
consumption and saving decisions (Gulen and Ion, 2016).  Second,
policy uncertainty might increase spending on ﬁnancing and production by inﬂuencing supply and demand, as well as increasing disinvestment and economic contraction.  Third, economic policy might also
inﬂuence interest rate, inﬂation and expected risk premiums (Pástor
and Veronesi, 2013).  A growing number of studies provide evidence
that uncertainty affects ﬁnancial markets, such as equity portfolios
and stocks (Anderson Name, 2009.  Bekaert Name, 2009.  Pástor and
Veronesi, 2012.  Brogaard and Detzel, 2015.  Bekiros Name, 2016),
volatility and investment opportunities (Bloom Name, 2007.  Bloom,
2009), and energy and metals markets (Reboredo and Uddin, 2016). 
In particular, given the relationships between oil prices and economic
policy uncertainty, if one or both constructs are misrepresented in the
model, there is a substantial likelihood that the coefﬁcient of one
variable is contaminated by another variable (Arouri Name, 2014). 
At present, only a few, albeit important paper, have investigated the
effects of oil price changes on stock markets accounting for economic
policy uncertainty (Kang and Ratti, 2013, 2015.  Arouri Name, 2014. 
Kang Name, 2017).  The papers, however, neglect the distributional
heterogeneity of stock returns and do not take account into the nonlinear effects of oil price changes.  Reboredo and Ugolini (2016) argue
that stock prices reactions to oil price changes may be complex and
the reactions may be depending on whether a market is bullish or
bearish.  Moreover, Chang Name (2015) argue that the effects of
economic policy uncertainty may be different depending on whether
the stock markets are bullish or bearish phases.  Besides, the possible
effects of market turmoil or ﬁnancial crisis must be considered because
the relationships may change at the onset of the crisis.  The global
ﬁnancial crisis is believed to have signiﬁcant inﬂuence on oil prices as
well as other markets such as stock and exchange rate markets. 1 Chen
and Lv (2015) examine whether the relationships between the crude
oil market and the Chinese stock market are changed by a crisis and
conclude that the Chinese stock market exhibits stronger external
dependence with the oil market during the subprime crisis.  Luo and
Qin (2017) also explore the role of the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis in the
oil-stock nexus in China.  Ignoring crisis may render inappropriate or
inaccurate estimation. 
Additionally, we focus on China due to the rapid rise of emerging
markets and increasing importance of developing countries.  Developing
countries have not received sufﬁcient research attention compared
with developed ones.  Furthermore, oil consumption in China has
dramatically increased since its economic reforms are initiated in
1978.  According to the Energy Information Administration (EIA,
2014), China took the place of the US as the largest net importer of
crude oil and other liquids in September 2013.  Lu Name (2015) discuss
China's energy consumption structure in detail and present the trend
of the proﬁts of new energy companies in the Chinese stock market
over the period 2002 to 2010.  Additionally, the uncertainty in the oil
market or economic policy may cause greater effects on developing
countries due to the immature ﬁnancial policies and investors.  The
relationships between oil price changes and the stock market for
China have attracted scholars' attention (Cong Name, 2008.  Zhang and
Chen, 2011.  Broadstock Name, 2012.  Wang Name, 2013.  Fang and You,
2014.  Li Name, 2017.  Bouri Name, 2017).  As regards to the relationships
between economic policy uncertainty and stock returns in China, the
related studies include Arouri Name (2014), Kang and Ratti (2015), Li
Name (2016) and so on. 
To the best of our knowledge, no study has established the
relationships between oil price changes, economic policy uncertainty,
and stock returns in China accounting for distributional heterogeneity
in a panel quantile regression framework.  Thus, our contribution is
complementary to this research.  More speciﬁc, we add to the extant
literature from the following aspects.  (a) we examine the joint effects
of oil price changes and economic policy uncertainty on stock returns
in China, both before and after the global ﬁnancial crisis.  The theoretical
literature is aware of a possible joint effect of oil price changes and
economic policy uncertainty on stock returns, but few empirical studies
have analysed this issue satisfactorily.  (b) to study the non-linear effects
of oil price changes, we separate positive shocks from negative ones by
deﬁning two auxiliary variables.  Dramatic oil increases could depress
national economic growth, but little evidence proves that an oil price
decrease could accelerate economic development.  For this reason,
there might be non-linear effects of oil price shocks on the stock
markets.  (c) by employing a panel quantile regression model, we
extend the earlier analysis by exploring the impacts of factors not only
on the mean but also on the shape of the conditional distribution of
stock returns.  In particular, we examine whether oil price changes and
economic policy uncertainty affect stock returns under different market
circumstances, including bearish (lower quantile) and bullish (upper
quantile) ones, which has implications for investors in terms of risk
management and the predictability of stock prices. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 reviews
the literature.  Section 3 outlines the methodology.  Section 4 describes
the data used in this paper.  The empirical results of panel quantile
regression model are presented in Section 5.  Section 6 concludes the2.  Literature review. 
Oil is one of utmost important natural resources in the modern
economy.  Following the major oil price shocks of 1970s, the bulk of
article has studied the relationships between oil price shocks and
economic activity.  In a pioneering work, Hamilton (1983) ﬁnds that
oil price shocks are responsible for US recession.  Oil prices might affect
economy by the real balance channel, income transfer channel and
allocate channel (Fang and You, 2014).  Although the documentation
that oil price shocks have signiﬁcant effects on economic activity,
relatively less work has appeared on the oil-stock relationships, and
the results are inconclusive.  Jones and Kaul (1996) conclude that oil
price increases have a signiﬁcantly negative effect on aggregate stock
returns in the post-war period.  By using 1947–1996 monthly data,
Sadorsky (1999) indicates the negative effects of oil price shocks
on stock prices.  Similar conclusions have been documented by
Papapetrou (2001), Park and Ratti (2008), Cunado and de Gracia
(2014), Filis and Chatziantoniou (2014), and Mensi Name (2017).  In
contrast, Sadorsky (2001), El-Sharif Name (2005), Gogineni (2007),
Yurtsever and Zahor (2007), Chen and Lv (2015), and Zhu Name
(2016) indicate that there exists a positive connection between oil
price shocks and stock returns.  In addition, Huang Name (1996),
Apergis and Miller (2009), and Sukcharoen Name (2014) do not ﬁnd a
signiﬁcant relationship between oil futures prices and stock returns.  In
light of these contradicting results, more detailed investigation of the
impacts of oil price shocks on the stock market deserves particular
attention. 
There is a growing literature focusing on the time-varying relationships between oil price shocks and stock returns (e. g. , Sadorsky, 2012. 
Antonakakis and Filis, 2013.  Antonakakis Name, 2014.  Sadorsky, 2014. 
Filis, 2014.  Inchauspe Name, 2015.  Antonakakis Name, 2017).  They
suggest that the effects of oil price changes on stock markets change
over time.  Indicatively, Antonakakis Name (2014) exploit dynamic
relationships between crude oil and stocks for a sample of both net
oil-exporting and net oil-importing countries, which permit the effects
to differ in varying development conditions.  The authors conclude that
the effects of oil price changes on stock market are not constant over
time.  Chang and Yu (2013) conclude that the effects of oil price shocks
on stock returns are regime dependent.  Inchauspe Name (2015) suggest
that oil prices became more inﬂuential in inﬂuencing stock returns after
2007.  However, these studies do not systematically isolate bearish and
bullish markets.  Quantile regression can solve this problem effectively
by providing a more complete picture of the factors affecting the stock
markets.  For instance, using this method, Nusair and Al-Khasawneh
(2017) explore the effects of oil price shocks on the stock returns of
the Gulf Cooperation Council countries and conclude that the coefﬁcient
estimates have not been constant throughout the distribution of stock
returns. 
Another strand of the literature studies the interaction of policy
uncertainty and stock markets, such as Ozoguz (2009), Dzielinski
(2012), Boutchkova Name (2012), Pástor and Veronesi (2012, 2013),
Antonakakis Name (2013), Arouri Name (2014), Lam and Zhang (2014),
Lean and Nguyen (2014), Chang Name (2015), Liu and Zhang (2015),
Arouri and Roubaud (2016), Dakhlaoui and Aloui (2016), Kang and
Ratti (2013, 2015), and Kang Name (2017).  Indicatively, Arouri Name
(2014) conclude that economic policy uncertainty has a negative effect
on stock returns in the US, Europe, China and the Gulf Cooperation
Council and that the effect is inﬂuenced by oil price changes.  Lean and
Nguyen (2014) conclude that US policy uncertainty affects Dow Jones
Sustainability Indices for the Asia Paciﬁc and North America regions
during a crisis period.  By using panel causality method, however,
Chang Name (2015) conclude that there exist inconsistent patterns in
the linkages between policy uncertainty and stock prices across seven
OECD countries.  The neutrality hypothesis is supported for Canada,
France and Germany.  Arouri and Roubaud (2016) ﬁnd that economic
policy uncertainty signiﬁcantly negatively affects stock returns, whereas
positively affects market volatility in the US and India.  Speciﬁcally,
Dakhlaoui and Aloui (2016) conclude that there is a time-varying
correlation between US economic policy uncertainty and BRIC stock
market volatility.  Using a quantile regression approach, Mensi Name
(2014) conclude that US economic policy uncertainty has no impact
on BRICS stock markets. 
Existing research on stock markets has mainly focused on developed
economies,2 whereas relatively few studies have investigated emerging
countries, especially in China.  Due to the rise of China as a major
economic power, there are increasingly more studies that focus on
China.  On the one hand, a number of studies in the literature explore
the oil-stock relationships. 3 Caporale Name (2015) examine the timevarying relationships between oil price uncertainty and sectoral stock
returns in China.  After controlling for structural break, Broadstock
Name (2016) explore the relationships between oil prices, gasoline prices
and stock returns in the different sub-samples using ﬁrm level data.  On
the sectoral level, Bouri Name (2017) explore whether the relationships
between oil and sectoral indexes change according to the reform of the
reﬁned oil pricing mechanism (March 27, 2013).  Similarly, Luo and Qin
(2017) also explore the role of the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis in the oil-stocks
nexus in China.  On the other hand, as for the relationships between
economic policy uncertainty and stock returns in China, Arouri Name
(2014) conclude that economic policy uncertainty has negative effects
on stock returns and that the extent is inﬂuenced by oil price changes. 
Using a structural VAR model, Kang and Ratti (2015) show that a
positive shock to China's economic policy uncertainty has a delayed
negative impact on real stock market returns in China.  Li Name (2016)
argue that there are bidirectional causal relationships between
economic policy uncertainty and stock returns in China in several
sub-periods. 
This paper aspires to bring together the two key strands of the
literature, namely, the impacts of oil price shocks on stock markets
and the impacts of economic policy uncertainty on stock markets. 
Particularly, we explore the time-varying effects between oil price
shocks, economic policy uncertainty and stock returns in China using a
panel quantile regression approach.  Although much of the literature
has explored the relationships in a time-varying framework, they do
not systematically isolate bearish and bullish markets.  Quantile regression can describe the entire conditional distribution of stock returns
and solve this problem effectively.  Additionally, we explore whether
the results are sensitive to the sample period.  A comparative analysis
is conducted on the nexus of both oil-stock and economic policy
uncertainty-stock in the pre- and post-crisis periods. 
<Middle> Model speciﬁcation and methodology. 
We examine the impacts of oil price changes and economic policy
uncertainty on industry stock returns in China.  The following baseline
empirical model is applied to panel data incorporating the potential
inﬂuences of other control variables where ri,t denotes the real return on the i-th industry in time t, eput is
economic policy uncertainty index, oilt, irt and ert represent the ﬁrst
natural logarithm difference of real oil price, real interest and exchange
rate, respectively.  εi, t refers to the random error term.  αi denotes
industry effects.  Similar to Arouri Name (2016) and Reboredo and
Ugolini (2016), the lagged return, denoted as ri,t−1, is also included. 4
Our results verify the necessity of including the lagged dependent
variable, which appears to be almost strongly signiﬁcant.  There appear
to be important economic and econometric ramiﬁcations to this.  βi is
the sensitivity of stock returns to the corresponding inﬂuential factors. 
The advantage of this model is that intercept (αi) can vary with industry
for unobserved heterogeneity, taking account any possible industryspeciﬁc factors that may have an inﬂuence on stock market returns
beyond the explanatory variables included (Wooldridge, 2012).  Also,
panel data model enhances both the quality and quantity of data and
allows for more accurate model inference to control the impacts of
omitted variables (Ramos and Veiga, 2013). 5 In addition, many of the
problems confronted by different industries have a trans-boundary
character and thus need a collective response.  Speciﬁcally, as
international oil prices are consistent across sectors, cross-sectional
dependence is also allowed in our panel data analysis, which makes
the panel data inference more reliable. 
Eq.  (1) assumes the rising and falling oil prices have symmetrical
effects on stock returns.  To capture the non-linear effects of oil
price changes on stock returns, following Mork (1989) and MoyaMartínez Name (2014), we separate positive changes from negative
ones by deﬁning two auxiliary variables oilpt=max(0,oilt) and oilnt=
min(0,oilt). 
This model helps answer the question “whether oil price increases
and decreases have symmetrical effects on stock returns”.  However, it
cannot answer another important question.  “do positive and negative
oil price shocks inﬂuence stock returns differently for markets with
low returns and for markets with high returns. ” From a policy perspective, it is more interesting to understand what occurs in extremes (in
our case, bearish and bullish).  To answer these important questions,
quantile regression, developed by Koenker and Bassett (1978), is used. 
Speciﬁcally, the motivation to use quantile regression is as follows. 
Quantile regression is an extension of the standard regression, providing
a more complete picture of a conditional distribution.  In our case, it
helps us obtain the complex impacts of the independent variables
throughout the conditional distribution of stock returns.  Moreover, the
quantile regression estimators are robust to outlying observations,
heteroskedasticity, and skewness on the dependent variable (Koenker
and Hallock, 2001).  This is of particular advantage in the stock returns
equations setting since the common features of ﬁnancial data are
characterized by these features, as seen, for instance, in Baur (2013). 
Generally, the function can be formulated in the following manner
where 0bτb1, Qyt(τ|xt) denotes the τ-th conditional quantile of yt, xt is a
vector of independent variables, and βτ and ατ represent the estimated
coefﬁcients and unobserved effects at quantile τ, respectively.  In the
mean regression, coefficients measure the effects of
the independent variables on the conditional mean of the dependent
variable.  whereas in the quantile regression case the coefﬁcient βτ
represents the effects of the independent variables on the conditional
τth quantile of the conditional distribution of that variable.  Only under
the assumption of the marginal effects of the independent variable
being a simple “location shift” will the impact at the mean be the same
as the impact for the entire distribution (Heckman Name, 1997). 
Eq.  (3), however, does not take into account unobserved individual
heterogeneity (in our case industry heterogeneity).  There has been little
but growing work focused on the econometric theory of applying
quantile regression to panel data contexts that can solve this issue,
including Koenker (2004), Lamarche (2010), Galvao (2011) and Canay
(2011).  The use of panel rather than time series data not only increases
the total number of observations and their variation but also reduces the
noise coming from the individual time series regressions (Westerlund
Name, 2015). 6 Therefore, Eq.  (3) is improved to the panel quantile
regression model where Qyit(τ|αi, xit) denotes the τ-th conditional quantile of yi, t for
individual i in time t.  The main problem with this model is the incidental
parameters since it includes a large number of ﬁxed effects (Neyman
and Scott, 1948.  Lancaster, 2000).  The estimator will be inconsistent
when the number of cross-sectional units goes to inﬁnity while the
number of observations for each cross-sectional unit is ﬁxed (Kato and
Galvao, 2010).  The standard demeaning (or differencing) approaches
to eliminate unobserved ﬁxed effects is unfeasible in the quantile
regression model.  These methods rely on the fact that expectations
are linear operators, which is not the case for conditional quantiles
(Canay, 2011).  Koenker (2004) proposes a shrinkage method to address
such problem.  The author treats unobservable ﬁxed effects as parameters to be jointly estimated with the covariate effects for different
quantiles.  Speciﬁcally, parameters are estimated as follows, 
where wk is the relative weight given to the τk-th quantile, which
controls for the contribution of the k-th quantile on the estimation of
the ﬁxed effects.  ρτk(u)=u(τk−I(u b0)) is the “check function”.  and
I(. ) is an indicator function.  The solution to this problem is obtained
using the linear programming algorithm suggested by Koenker and
D'Orey (1987).  The pair bootstrap procedure introduced by Buchinsky
(1995) can be used to obtain the standard errors for the estimated
coefﬁcients.  λ is the tuning parameter that shrinks the individual effects
towards zero to improve the performance of the estimate of β.  As the
term λ approaches zero, the penalty term disappears, and we obtain
the usual ﬁxed effect estimator.  as the term λ approaches inﬁnity,
we obtain the estimate of the model without the individual effects.  In
this paper, we set λ=1 (Damette and Delacote, 2012.  Lee Name, 2012)
and wk= 1/K (Lamarche, 2011.  Alexander Name, 2011).  To check the
robustness of our results, we also conduct sensitivity analysis with
different values of λ. 
To study the effects of oil price shocks and economic policy uncertainty on stock returns by accounting for heterogeneity throughout
the returns distribution, Eq.  (2) is transformed into the corresponding
panel quantile regression model as follows. 