 
In the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (hereafter, the “Dodd–Frank Act”), policymakers made an unprecedented move towards using securities regulation to address issues unrelated to the Securities 
and Exchange Commission’s (SEC) core mission of protecting investors and maintaining the fair and eﬃcient functioning 
of ﬁnancial markets ( Lynn, 2011 ).  Section 1503 of the Dodd–Frank Act requires SEC-registered ﬁrms to include information regarding mine-safety performance in their ﬁnancial reports.  In this paper, we examine the real effects (i. e. , changes 
in mining-related citations, injuries, and labor productivity) of the mandatory inclusion of mine-safety disclosures in the 
ﬁnancial reports (“MSD”) of the 151 SEC-registered ﬁrms whose ownership of a U. S.  mine make them subject to Section 
1503 of the Dodd–Frank legislation.  A key feature of our setting is that the information provided through MSD is already 
publicly available on the Mine Safety and Health Administration’s (MSHA) website; this allows us to isolate and estimate 
the magnitude of the incremental real effects of including information in ﬁnancial reports.  
Section 1503 of the Dodd–Frank Act requires reporting citations for violations of mine-safety regulations both periodically in mine owners’ ﬁnancial reports (i. e. , Forms 10K and 10Q) and immediately upon the receipt of an imminent danger 
order (IDO) through a Form 8K ﬁling.  MSD advocates make the implicit argument that including this information in ﬁnancial reports has implications that such information does not have when only disclosed on the MSHA website.  However, it 
is unclear whether the information included in MSD is news to investors or other interested parties.  One reason the inclusion of safety information in ﬁnancial reports could have an incremental effect is because ﬁnancial reports broadcast the 
information to a wide range of interested parties, thereby increasing awareness of ﬁrms’ safety records.  
If MSD increases awareness of ﬁrms’ safety records, then political costs, reputational concerns, and/or activism by investors or other parties could provide an incentive for managers to improve mine safety.  For example, if managers anticipate 
that the revelation of poor safety performance will have a negative effect on ﬁrm value, they may invest more in safety to 
limit such effects.  Investors may react negatively to poor safety performance either because of the future cash ﬂow consequences or because of their non-cash-ﬂow-based preferences.  Cash ﬂow effects could occur, for example, through ﬁnes, 
mine closures, or other costs imposed by activists.  Non-cash-ﬂow-based preferences could also lead investors to require 
higher returns for ﬁnancing the operations of ﬁrms engaging in activities that conﬂict with those preferences, such as maintaining relatively unsafe working conditions (e. g. , Fama and French, 2007; Friedman and Heinle, 2016 ).  If MSD increases the 
implications of safety issues for ﬁrm value, then MSD will give managers an incentive to alter resource allocation decisions 
to improve safety.  It is also possible that MSD could affect managers’ safety-investment decisions through channels other 
than ﬁrm value, such as, for example, negative reputational costs arising from the public revelation that a manager operates 
a ﬁrm with poor safety conditions.  
Using data obtained from the MSHA, we ﬁrst assess the effect of MSD on the incidence rate of citations for violations 
of mine-safety regulations.  For these analyses, we employ a difference-in-differences (“DiD”) design that compares changes 
in citations issued to mines owned by SEC registrants (“MSD mines”) with those issued to mines owned by non-SEC registrants (“non-MSD mines”) around the effective date of Dodd–Frank.  We control for ﬂexible time trends and static, mine-level 
differences by including both year and mine ﬁxed effects.  We document a decrease in citations per inspection hour of approximately 11% for MSD mines relative to non-MSD mines.  Our evidence suggests this reduction in citations is attributable 
to an increase in compliance with mine safety regulations rather than a change in inspector behavior.  
Next, we analyze the effect of MSD on injury rates.  An im plicit assum ption of MSD, which focuses almost exclusively on 
the reporting of citations for safety violations, is that a decrease in citations will translate into a reduction in injuries.  
However,  the  link  between  compliance  with  mine  safety  regulations  and  actual  safety  improvements  is  debatable  (e. g. , 
Ruffennach, 2002; Gowrisankaran Name, 2015 ).  Consistent with a meaningful improvement in safety, we document a 13% 
decrease in injuries for MSD mines relative to non-MSD mines.  For the average ﬁrm, this 13% reduction translates into 
approximately 0. 2 fewer injuries annually per 100 full-time employees (the equivalent of 200,000 mine-hours worked).  
While the above results suggest that MSD has substantial beneﬁts, it is unlikely that the observed safety improvements 
are costless.  Gowrisankaran Name (2015) posit that mines produce a joint output of safety and mineral production, which 
suggests that an increase in safety could lead to lower mineral production per hour worked.  We examine this tradeoff by 
testing whether productivity in coal mines, where we have measures of production and labor quantities, changes around the 
adoption of MSD.  Using a DiD research design, we ﬁnd evidence of a signiﬁcant reduction in labor productivity following the 
implementation of MSD.  The observed decline translates into increased labor costs of approximately 0. 9% of total revenue.  
A critical assumption of our identiﬁcation strategy is that the trends in mine safety and productivity for MSD and nonMSD mines would have been the same in the absence of MSD (i. e. , the parallel-trends assumption).  We assess the validity 
of this assumption by mapping out the counterfactual treatment effect of MSD in the pre-MSD period (from 2002 to 2009).  
This analysis shows that the trends for MSD and non-MSD mines are similar.  Even given similar pre-treatment trends, other 
factors, such as public outrage over a mining disaster, which differentially affect MSD and non-MSD mines, could potentially 
confound our inferences.  To address this possibility, we ﬁrst demonstrate that there is no difference in the reactions of MSD 
and non-MSD mines to another major regulatory event (the 2006 MINER Act) that pertains to all mines and was triggered 
by events similar to those that led to MSD.  
To provide evidence that an increased public awareness of safety issues is a likely explanation for the observed real 
effects, we assess whether more attention is paid to safety after MSD.  First, we provide descriptive evidence of an increase in 
media and analyst coverage.  Second, we compare short-window stock returns and changes in mutual fund holdings around 
IDO disclosures before and after MSD.  We ﬁnd a 155 (140) basis point more negative average (median) market reaction 
when a safety citation is reported in an 8K ﬁling and disclosed on the MSHA’s website, compared to the period when such 
citations are disclosed only on the website.  These market reactions are most negative for ﬁrms operating primarily in the 
mining industry, where safety violations likely have the greatest implications for ﬁrm value. 