 Introduction Shareholders hire a CEO and design the compensation contract to mitigate agency costs and motivate the CEO to make value-increasing decisions.  In addition to the compensation contract, the ﬁrm's debt contract terms and the possibility that the ﬁrm's creditors may wrest control of the ﬁrm also motivate the CEO.  From the perspective of the shareholders, who each year revise the CEO's compensation contract, the incentives provided by long-term debt contracts are pre-existing.  The shareholders potentially adjust the compensation contract such that the compensation incentives, layered on top of the debt contract incentives, modify the CEO's interests to align with those of the ﬁrm's owners.  Whether the pre-existing incentives provided by the debt contract are large enough to affect how compensation contracts are written is an interesting open question.  This study investigates whether the pre-existing debt contract provisions affect the compensation contract struck between the ﬁrm's owners and the CEO.  I document that when the ﬁrm's debt contracts include earnings-based covenants the CEO's cash compensation contract is less sensitive to earnings performance measures.  Prior studies that consider only the performance incentives embedded in the compensation contract potentially underestimate the strength of the CEO's incentives to perform.  Debt contracts are an important class of contracts that provide incentives to the CEO.  Prior literature explores the use of earnings performance measures in debt and compensation contracts, respectively, and documents that contracted performance measures inﬂuence the CEO.  However, the literature is silent on how the use of a performance measure in one contract relates to its use in the other.  In this study, I investigate how the inclusion of earnings-based performance measures in debt contracts inﬂuence the use of earnings-based performance measures in the CEO's compensation contract.  Moreover, this study speaks to the recent and repeated criticism of executive compensation practices in both academic literature and the business press.  Criticisms of the apparently weak relation between the CEO's compensation and the ﬁrm's earnings performance highlight the importance for researchers, investors, and the media to understand how the CEO's incentives are shaped.  By ignoring the earnings incentives provided by the ﬁrm's debt contracts, critics may underestimate the CEO's incentives to perform.  This study provides a unique view of the CEO's earnings incentives as the combined incentives provided by earnings-based provisions in debt contracts and earningsbased performance measures in compensation contracts.  Shareholders use contractible performance measures, such as earnings, to motivate CEOs to apply effort and make decisions in the shareholders’ best interests.  By tying cash compensation to earnings, shareholders provide the CEO with incentives to deliver higher earnings performance.  Empirical studies consistently corroborate theoretical predictions of positive correlations between earnings and CEO cash compensation (e. g. , Lambert and Larcker, 1987.  Sloan, 1993.  Baber et al. , 1996).  In debt contracts, earnings-based performance measures also motivate the CEO to focus on earnings.  Beneish and Press (1993, 1995) ﬁnd that violating ﬁnancial debt covenants results in real costs to the ﬁrm such as higher interest rates and renegotiation costs.  Incremental to these ﬁrm-speciﬁc costs, Nini et al.  (2012) document a personal cost for the CEO following technical default.  Holding other performance variables constant, Nini et al.  (2012) ﬁnd that the likelihood of forced CEO turnover increases by 60% upon technical default.  Additionally, violating the ﬁrm's debt contract terms may damage the CEO's relationship with the lender and strain future negotiations.  Thus, debt contracts provide the CEO with performance incentives such that CEOs will strive to maintain earnings above the level speciﬁed in earnings-based covenants.  Both debt and cash compensation contracts provide the CEO with incentives to focus on earnings through the explicit use of earnings-based performance measures. 1 When debt contract terms are pre-existing (i. e. , the debt contract is in place when the compensation contract is structured) shareholders should consider the effect of these terms and determine how much more (or less) earnings-based incentive to provide in the CEO's cash compensation contract.  I expect that shareholders will reduce the earnings-based incentives provided by the compensation contract when debt contracts provide the CEO with pre-existing earnings-based incentives.  Thus, the inclusion of earnings-based covenants in the debt contract relate to a tilting of the CEO's incentives in the compensation contract away from earnings performance.  However, the CEO's combined incentives, provided by the earnings-based measures in the debt and compensation contracts, are at the level that best serves the shareholders’ interests.  Consequently, I predict that earnings-based covenants are associated with a reduction in the CEO's cash compensation sensitivity to earnings (hereafter CCSE).  In addition to the inclusion of earnings-based covenants in the debt contract, earnings-based covenant slack (i. e. , the distance between current performance and the covenant threshold) may be associated with the CEO's earnings incentives.  When a ﬁrm's earnings performance is near an earnings-based covenant threshold, the tight covenant slack likely increases the CEO's incentives to maintain or improve earnings performance.  If tight earnings-based covenant slack provides the CEO with greater earnings incentives then the shareholders will reduce the explicit earnings incentives in the compensation contract.  Consequently, I predict that within the sample of ﬁrms negotiating earnings-based covenants into their debt contracts tight earnings-based covenant slack is associated with a reduction in CCSE.  I test my hypotheses using earnings-based covenant details from the Thomson Reuters Loan Pricing Corporation's syndicated loan data in DealScan, CEO compensation data from Execucomp, ﬁnancial data from Compustat, and market data from CRSP for the period 1992 through 2012.  I test whether earnings-based covenants are negatively associated with CCSE holding ﬁrm and executive characteristics constant.  Additionally, I test whether CCSE varies with covenant slack for ﬁrms negotiating earnings-based covenants into their debt contracts.  Consistent with my ﬁrst hypothesis, I ﬁnd that CCSE is negatively associated with earnings-based covenants.  More speciﬁcally, I ﬁnd the sensitivity of the CEO's cash compensation to return on assets (ROA) is signiﬁcantly weaker when an earnings-based covenant is present.  This ﬁnding is economically meaningful.  For a one standard deviation increase in ROA, the corresponding increase in cash compensation for CEOs in ﬁrms with earnings-based covenants is roughly 22% less than that received by CEOs in ﬁrms without earnings-based covenants.  In addition to the negative association between CCSE and the presence of earnings-based covenants, I ﬁnd the negative association holds for continuous variables that proxy for the incentives provided by earnings-based covenants.  The results indicate a signiﬁcant negative association between CCSE and (1) the fraction of ﬁrm debt that is subject to an earnings-based covenant and (2) the total number of earnings-based covenants in the ﬁrm's debt contracts.  Together, the results support the hypothesis that the CEO's earnings incentives in the compensation contract are muted when the ﬁrm's debt contracts provide earnings incentives.  I also ﬁnd some evidence suggesting CCSE varies with covenant slack in a sample of ﬁrms negotiating earnings-based covenants into their debt contracts.  In the main analysis that estimates CCSE in the cross-section, I fail to ﬁnd a signiﬁcant negative association between CCSE and tightly set earnings-based covenants at contract inception.  However, in additional analysis that utilizes measures of CCSE as disclosed in the ﬁrm's proxy statements, I ﬁnd a negative and signiﬁcant association between CCSE and the tightness of earnings-based covenants.  Together the ﬁndings in this paper suggest that on average the compensation contract provides weaker earnings incentives when debt contracts provide earnings-based incentives.  However, within a sample of ﬁrms with earnings-based covenants, the negative association between earningsbased covenant slack and CCSE is sensitive to the research design speciﬁcation.  The tests of an association between CCSE and earnings-based covenants may suffer from self-selection bias such that the choice to include earnings-based covenants in the debt contract is not random.  To control for potential self-selection bias attributable to unobservable factors I use a Heckman two-step approach.  Consistent with the main results, the Heckman two-step analysis indicates that the presence of earnings-based covenants is negatively associated with CCSE.  This result suggests self-selection bias does not explain the negative association between CCSE and earnings-based covenants reported in the main analysis.  Additionally, I test the robustness of the main ﬁnding to alternative explanations and research designs.  An alternative explanation for the reported ﬁndings is reverse causality.  Speciﬁcally, the earnings-based covenants are negotiated into the debt contract dependent on the CEO's earnings-based incentives in the compensation contract.  I address this concern using CEO turnovers as a setting to ensure the compensation contract is negotiated after the debt contract is in place.  As a second robustness analysis, I test whether the negative association between earnings-based covenants and CCSE is robust to controlling for additional debt contract features.  Third, I test my hypotheses with an alternative research design that uses the weight on earnings as disclosed in the ﬁrm's proxy statements as the measure of CCSE.  Lastly, I test the robustness of my ﬁndings to address the concern that the measures of earnings-based covenants used in the analysis are stale due to the frequency of debt contract renegotiations.  To address this concern, I reexamine my ﬁrst hypothesis with a sample restricted to the two years subsequent to a debt contract origination.  Overall, the additional analyses provide robust results suggesting shareholders reduce the explicit earnings incentives in the compensation contract when debt contracts include earningsbased covenants.  To summarize, I contribute to the literature in several ways.  This study is the ﬁrst to investigate how debt contract terms relate to the compensation contract struck between the CEO and the ﬁrm's owners.  The evidence presented in this study has several implications for academics and practitioners.  This study relates to the recent criticism of executive compensation practices that spotlights weak associations between compensation and ﬁrm performance.  The ﬁndings indicate that the CEO's incentives for earnings performance include not only the direct incentives provided by their pay package but also the implicit incentives from earnings-based covenants in debt contracts.  These ﬁndings suggest that weak pay sensitivity to earnings may not indicate inefﬁcient or sub-optimal CEO compensation practices but instead may be indicative of strong implicit incentives in the debt contracts.  More generally, my ﬁndings demonstrate how the use of accounting information in one contract setting alters the contracting parties’ incentives and the use of those accounting measures in subsequent contracts.  2.  Background literature and hypothesis development.  Since Jensen and Meckling (1976), the notable conﬂicts of interest between parties to the ﬁrm are well recognized.  In particular, prior work investigates the conﬂicts of interest between shareholders and debtholders, and between managers and shareholders, respectively.  As Stiglitz (1985) notes in his multiple-principal agent problem, creditors and shareholders contribute capital and each contract with the manager to motivate him to act in their respective interests.  The abovementioned conﬂicts of interest are readily recognizable during the negotiation of these contracts, whereby debtholders impose debt contract provisions and shareholders structure compensation contracts to motivate and restrict the manager's actions. 2 Prior literature largely ignores the potential interaction between these two contract settings, where each contract is intended to inﬂuence a single manager.  This study is a step towards ﬁlling this gap.  More speciﬁcally, I investigate how the use of earnings based provisions in debt contracts affect the use of earnings in CEO compensation contracts.  I will brieﬂy discuss prior work on how earnings are used in debt contracts and in compensation contracts, respectively, and then what the use of earnings in debt contracts implies for the use of earnings in compensation contracts.  2. 1.  The use of earnings in debt contracts.  Jensen and Meckling (1976), Smith and Warner (1979) and Myers (1977) develop theories of levered ﬁrms and suggest debt covenants mitigate the agency cost of debt arising from the shareholders’ and debtholders’ divergent interests.  More recently, Bradley and Roberts (2004), Garleanu and Zwiebel (2009), and Demiroglu and James (2010) document that when the risk of wealth shifting from the creditors to self-interested managers and shareholders is greater, then the use of covenants is more prevalent.  These ﬁndings are consistent with the theoretical predictions that covenants protect debtholders’ investment from downside risk and mitigate the agency costs of debt.  Accounting measures are commonly used in private debt contract provisions in two ways.  First, restrictive covenants prohibit actions that would shift wealth from debtholders to shareholders.  For example, restrictive covenants provide threshold levels of accounting measures below which a borrowing ﬁrm cannot pay dividends, repurchase shares, or issue new debt.  Second, afﬁrmative covenants specify accounting measures that alert debtholders of deteriorating ﬁrm performance or increased credit risk.  Afﬁrmative covenants specify threshold values of the borrower's ﬁnancial measures that must be maintained to avoid technical default (i. e. , a default not associated with a failure to make debt payments).  Christensen and Nikolaev (2012) further classify afﬁrmative covenants as either performance covenants (i. e. , covenants constructed from income statement data, cash ﬂow statement data, or a combination of income statement, cash ﬂow statement and balance sheet data) or capital covenants (i. e. , covenants constructed from balance sheet data alone).  Earnings-based covenants are afﬁrmative, performance covenants that rely on measures of the borrowing ﬁrm's earnings performance.  Earnings-based debt covenants stipulate a minimum level of earnings that must be met in order to avoid technical default.  Earnings-based covenants may include, but are not limited to, maximum debt-to-EBITDA ratio, minimum EBITDA and several coverage ratios relying on measures of earnings.  In the event of technical default on earnings-based debt covenants, lenders have the right to renegotiate the terms of the debt contract at the borrowing ﬁrm's expense or call the debt (i. e. , demand immediate repayment).  Beneish and Press (1993, 1995) and Dichev and Skinner (2002) ﬁnd technical default results in costs to the ﬁrm through increased interest rates, increased restrictions in the debt agreements, renegotiation costs, and a reduction in available credit.  These studies ﬁnd the inclusion of earnings-based debt covenants impose real costs to the ﬁrm when earnings fall below the covenant threshold.  The existence of earnings-based covenants provides incentives for the CEO to maintain earnings above the covenant threshold and avoid personal costs associated with default.  Dichev and Skinner (2002) argue that CEOs, in both ﬁrms with poor and good ﬁnancial health, avoid technical default because of the personal cost to the CEO in terms of the time and effort associated with renegotiations.  Moreover, debt covenant violations increase the likelihood of CEO dismissal, which imposes heavy ﬁnancial and reputational costs on the CEO.  Nini et al.  (2012) ﬁnd the likelihood of forced CEO turnover increases by 60% following a violation of ﬁnancial covenants. 3 This effect is incremental to the effect of ﬁrm performance.  Therefore, CEOs seek to avoid these personal costs of covenant violation by striving to keep earnings above covenant thresholds.  2. 2.  The use of earnings in the CEO's compensation contract.  Prior theoretical studies, empirical studies, and articles in the business press suggest a common presumption that executive compensation should closely reﬂect earnings performance.  Theoretical models of efﬁcient contracting and empirical studies demonstrate how earnings performance measures provide the CEO with incentives to apply effort and make decisions in the best interest of the shareholders.  Watts and Zimmerman (1978) argue that accounting information provides veriﬁable, shared information to contracting parties, such as shareholders and the CEO.  Holmstrom (1979), Lambert and Larcker (1987), Banker and Datar (1989), and Sloan (1993) provide theoretical models of compensation contracts that suggest accounting earnings provide contractible information that facilitates efﬁcient contracting and risk sharing between shareholders and the CEO.  Empirical evidence corroborates the use of accounting measures in incentive contracts by showing strong correlations between earnings and executive compensation (Lambert and Larcker, 1987.  Sloan, 1993.  Baber et al. , 1996).  Moreover, recent critics of executive compensation argue CEO pay should more closely reﬂect ﬁrm performance.  Bebchuk and Fried (2006) criticize executive compensation practices as reﬂections of CEOs opportunistically extracting rents from shareholders without delivering performance to match the extravagant pay.  Likewise, the media frequently criticizes compensation practices for not being a fair representation of ﬁrm performance.  In spite of theoretical predictions, empirical evidence, and the business press highlighting the value of earnings for CEO performance evaluation several studies document its costs.  Smith and Watts (1982) and Dechow and Sloan (1991) argue that earnings performance measures encourage myopic management decisions.  Smith and Watts (1982) refer to this myopia as the ‘horizon problem’ where the CEO chooses lower net present value projects to sustain earnings over higher net present value projects that reduce current earnings.  CEOs with excessive incentives to maintain earnings may decline riskier projects with high net present value, preferred by the shareholders, due to the cost of reducing current earnings.  Additionally, Crocker and Slemrod (2007) model the effect of the manager's performance-contingent bonus schemes on truthful ﬁnancial reporting.  Their model implies the use of earnings as a contracting tool comes with the cost of earnings management.  Consistent with this, Healy (1985) and Gaver et al.  (1995) ﬁnd earnings-based performance measures increase the manager's manipulation of earnings.  Taken together, these studies provide evidence of a tradeoff between the beneﬁcial effort and costly myopia, both supplied by the CEO, when earnings performance measures are used in the CEO's compensation contract.  2. 3.  Interaction between debt and compensation contracts.  Shareholders, cognizant of the costs and beneﬁts of the CEO focusing on earnings performance, are likely to take into account the CEO's pre-existing earnings incentives when structuring the compensation contract.  When debtholders, sensitive to the downside risks of the borrowing ﬁrm, negotiate earnings-based covenants into the debt contract the CEO is provided earnings incentives.  Thus, shareholders are likely to weight earnings in compensation contracts in such a way that the compensation incentives, layered on top of the pre-existing debt contract incentives, align the CEO's interest with their own.  More speciﬁcally, because earnings provisions in debt contracts provide CEOs with implicit incentives, shareholders may choose to tilt the CEO's incentives away from earnings to reduce the potential costs associated with earnings incentives (i. e. , short-term, myopic behavior and earnings management).  For example, shareholders could increase the CEO's long-term incentives by granting additional stock options or restricted stock, thereby shifting the CEO's effort away from a focus on current earnings to mitigate myopic behavior.  Moreover, the shareholders could increase the sensitivity of the CEO's compensation to measures of current performance not captured in earnings such as qualitative or customer satisfaction measures. 4 My ﬁrst hypothesis considers the shareholders’ approach to weight earnings in the CEO's cash compensation contract as it relates to the earnings incentives provided by the debt contract.  H1.  The sensitivity of the CEO's cash compensation to earnings, CCSE, is lower when the ﬁrm's debt contracts contain earningsbased covenants.  Although I expect a negative association between CCSE and the presence of earnings incentives in the debt contracts, this does not indicate whether or how CCSE varies within the subset of ﬁrms with earnings-based covenants.  Demiroglu and James (2010) and Garleanu and Zwiebel (2009) suggest that ﬁrms signal strong future performance by accepting debt contracts with tight covenant slack.  Furthermore, Demiroglu and James (2010) ﬁnd that ﬁrms with tightly set covenants experience subsequent improvements in performance and posit that accepting tightly set covenants signals a low likelihood of default.  However, risk-averse CEOs may ﬁxate on the tightly set earnings-based covenant such that tightly set covenants provide strong earnings incentives.  If tight earnings-based covenant slack provides stronger earnings incentives to the CEO, beyond the incentives provided by the presence of earnings-based covenants, then shareholders would mute earnings incentives in the compensation contract further.  I summarize this prediction in my second hypothesis.  H2.  Within the subset of ﬁrms entering into debt contracts with earnings-based covenants, the sensitivity of the CEO's cash compensation to earnings, CCSE, is lower when covenants are set with tight covenant slack.  It is not clear ex ante whether tight covenant slack is associated with CCSE.  If accepting tightly set covenants signals strong future performance (Demiroglu and James, 2010.  Garleanu and Zwiebel, 2009) such that the CEO perceives low likelihood of default, then the tightly set earnings-based covenants may have little or no effect on the CEO's earnings incentives.  Additionally, prior research documents a high frequency of debt covenant renegotiations (Demiroglu and James, 2010.  Roberts and Suﬁ, 2009).  If tightly set earnings-based covenants are frequently renegotiated then the slack at contract origination may not signiﬁcantly contribute to the CEO's earnings incentives beyond that provided by the presence of earnings-based covenants.  It is important to note recent empirical studies investigating debt and compensation contracts.  Anatharaman et al.  (2014) ﬁnd debt contracts contain fewer covenants when CEOs have larger balances of debt-like compensation (e. g. , pensions and other deferred compensation).  Chava et al.  (2010) ﬁnd a positive relation between attributes of managerial entrenchment and the likelihood of including investment, consolidation, and merger restricting bond covenants.  Brockman et al.  (2010) ﬁnd a positive (negative) association between CEOs’ portfolio delta (vega) and the maturity of publicly traded bonds.  These studies suggest certain components of the CEO's compensation resolve or exacerbate conﬂicts between debtholder and shareholder interests.  Taken together, the results of these studies indicate that in practice debtholders recognize CEO compensation potentially affects the value of the debtholders’ claim and adjust debt contract terms accordingly.  This study differs from these recent studies in that I investigate how debt contract terms play a governance role and inﬂuence the design of the CEO's compensation contract.  Of particular importance is the use of cash compensation in this study whereas the prior studies focus on the CEO's portfolio of debt-like and equity-based pay.  This distinction is important for several reasons.  First, cash compensation payments are determined annually with a typical performance period of 12 months.  Therefore, shareholders adjust cash compensation terms several times over the life of a debt contract. 5 The debt contract terms are ﬁxed for cash compensation arrangements made subsequent to debt contract negotiation and which will be paid prior to debt maturity.  Second, unlike equity and debt-like compensation, upon payment cash offers no further incentive to the CEO.  What was paid in cash to the CEO in prior periods has, arguably, no bearing on the CEO's incentives in the current or future periods over which the debt contract will mature and the debtholders’ claim is at risk.  Therefore, it is unlikely cash compensation practices inﬂuence debtholders’ negotiations of debt contract terms.  <Middle> Sample selection and research design.  3. 1.  Sample selection.  I test my hypotheses with a sample constructed from the intersection of the CRSP, Compustat, Execucomp, and LPC's DealScan databases over the period 1992 through 2012.  I ﬁrst identify ﬁrms with stock price, ﬁnancial, and CEO compensation data in CRSP, Compustat, and Execucomp, respectively.  I use the 2012 updated Compustat-DealScan linking table from Chava and Roberts’ (2008) matching procedure to identify loans in DealScan corresponding to ﬁrms with ﬁnancial and compensation data.  I exclude ﬁrms that (1) do not access the syndicated loan market covered by DealScan over the sample period and (2) do not have at least one debt contract subject to ﬁnancial covenant restrictions over the sample period. 6 The ﬁnal sample comprises 2,497 ﬁrms with 26,575 ﬁrm-year observations.  DealScan provides ﬁnancial covenant details for 8,656 loans made to ﬁrms with ﬁnancial and compensation data.  The earnings-based covenant types reported by DealScan include maximum debt-to-EBITDA, maximum senior debt-to-EBITDA, minimum EBITDA, minimum ﬁxed charge coverage, minimum interest coverage, and minimum debt service coverage.  Additionally, DealScan provides data on non-earnings-based ﬁnancial covenants including maximum capital expenditures, maximum debt-to-equity, and maximum leverage ratio among others.  The frequency of earnings-based covenant usage in the sample closely resembles that of the DealScan loan population.  The maximum debt-to-EBITDA covenant comprises approximately 21% of all ﬁnancial covenants reported in DealScan and 24% of all ﬁnancial covenants for sample ﬁrms.  Following in prevalence are the minimum interest coverage ratio and minimum ﬁxed charge ratio covenants, which are 18% and 15% (20% and 17%) of the ﬁnancial covenants in DealScan (the sample), respectively.  Table 1 contains descriptive statistics for the 8,656 DealScan loans with ﬁnancial covenant details.  The average maturity is slightly more than 48 months and the average loan amount is roughly $622 million.  Each loan contains, on average, 2. 1 ﬁnancial covenants and 1. 5 earnings-based covenants.  Roughly half of the loans are secured and nearly all are classiﬁed as senior loans.  Earnings-based covenants are common, with 54% of loans containing the most prominent earnings-based covenant (i. e. , maximum debt-to-EBITDA).  3. 2.  CCSE and earnings-based covenants.  I use a cross-sectional research design similar to that in Banker et al.  (2009) to test my hypotheses. 7 I estimate CCSE by interacting earnings with earnings-based covenants and the control variables.  Banker et al.  (2009) suggest this research design to allow for the cross-sectional variation in the CEO's compensation sensitivity to earnings across ﬁrms.  To test H1, the variable of interest is the interaction between earnings performance and earnings-based covenants.  This interaction captures the incremental cash compensation sensitivity to earnings attributable to earnings-based covenants.  I begin by measuring the effect of earnings-based covenants with the indicator variable, EarnCovenant, equal to one for ﬁrm-years with earnings-based covenants and zero otherwise. 8 Additionally, I test H1 with two alternative measures for the use of earningsbased covenants in the ﬁrm's debt contracts.  First, I measure EBRatio, as the fraction of ﬁrm debt subject to an earningsbased covenant.  For example, if a ﬁrm has two loan packages with values of $3 million subject to earnings-based covenants and $1 million without earnings-based covenants then EBRatio equals $3 million/($1 millionþ$3 million) or 0. 75. Second, following Beatty et al.  (2008) I measure NumEBCov as the natural logarithm of the number of earnings-based covenants in the ﬁrm's debt contracts.  I predict the direct incentive to focus on earnings provided in the compensation contract is weaker when the ﬁrm's debt contracts provide stronger earnings incentives with higher values of EarnCovenant, EBRatio and NumEBCov.  Therefore, I expect a negative and signiﬁcant coefﬁcient estimate (β3o0) in the following model, where CovVar is equal to either EarnCovenant, EBRatio or NumEBCov.  The subscripts i and t represent ﬁrm and year, respectively.  CashComp equals the CEO's annual salary and bonus. 9 Earnings-based covenants are most commonly calculated on earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization.  Therefore, I measure ROA as earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization scaled by average assets. 10 Ret equals the cumulative return for the prior 12months adjusted by the value-weighted market index.  In Eq. (1), Cont is a vector of control variables including Size, Leverage, MTB, SalesGrowth, DCV, varROA, Delta, Vega, and Age.  The control variables capture characteristics of the ﬁrm's earnings, the ﬁrm itself and the CEO.  Gabaix and Landier (2008) argue that measures of market value are the most appropriate proxy of ﬁrm size for empirical studies of executive compensation.  Therefore, to control for ﬁrm size I include the natural logarithm of average market value. 11 To control for the effect of the ﬁrm's capital structure on compensation, I include Leverage measured as total debt (i. e. , debt in current liabilities and long-term debt) divided by total assets.  Lambert and Larcker (1987) argue that CEO compensation is less sensitive to earnings in the early stages of investment since managerial actions focus on future period earnings.  To control for growth potential, I include market-to-book value (MTB) as a control variable.  Additionally, I capture recent growth with SalesGrowth, measured as the percentage change in sales from the previous year.  I expect ﬁrms in growth stages to be less likely to use measures of current earnings for the CEO's compensation.  I include varROA and DCV to control for characteristics of the ﬁrm's reported earnings.  I measure varROA as the variance of ROA over the previous ﬁve years.  To the extent that volatile earnings decrease the stewardship value of earnings, I expect varROA to be negatively related to CCSE.  Additionally, I control for the debt contracting value of earnings, DCV, measured following Ball, Bushman and Vasvari (2008).  DCV equals the Somer's D goodness-of-ﬁt statistic from industry speciﬁc probit regressions of quarterly credit downgrades on seasonally adjusted changes in quarterly earnings over the four quarters prior.  As in Ball et al.  (2008), I run estimations for each two-digit Standard Industrial Classiﬁcation (SIC) code.  This yields 63 industry speciﬁc DCV measures capturing how well earnings predict credit downgrades.  TheDCV sample mean of 0. 383 reported in Table 2 is similar to the reported mean value of 0. 356 in Ball et al.  (2008).  According to Lambert and Larcker (1987), the more executive wealth tied to stock price, the more likely the board of directors will tie current compensation to earnings.  Therefore, I include control variables to measure the change in the CEO's wealth for a 1% change in stock price and for a 1% change in stock price volatility, Delta and Vega, respectively.  To measure Delta and Vega, I ﬁrst calculate the value of the CEO's option portfolio using the methodology described in Core and Guay (2002).  I include Age to control for CEOs nearing retirement, measured as the natural logarithm of the CEO's age.  I also allow CCSE to vary by industries, based on Fama and French's 12 industry classiﬁcations, and by year. 12 I winsorize continuous variables at the 1st and 99th percentiles and report descriptive statistics for the sample in Table 2.  3. 3.  Self-selection bias.  The tests of H1 described above may suffer from self-selection bias such that inclusion in the treatment and control groups is not randomly determined.  This non-random assignment may result in systematic differences across the treatment and control groups that make it difﬁcult to estimate the treatment effect.  In tests of H1, self-selection bias may be present if systematic differences exist between the observations with earnings-based covenants (i. e. , the treatment effect) and without (i. e. , the control group).  I use the Heckman (1979)two-step approach to control for selection bias due to unobservable characteristics. 13 In the ﬁrst stage, I use a probit model to estimate the likelihood of ﬁrm i's debt contracts containing earnings-based covenants in year t with the following model.  The model includes ﬁrm and debt contract characteristics from Christensen and Nikolaev (2012) (i. e. , FirmAge, DivYield, Leverage, Size, MTB, ROA, Loss, Advertise, RD, Tangibles, AltZ, Maturity, LendFreq and Secured). In addition, I include variables for the CEO's age and total equity holdings (i. e. , Age and EquityComp) to capture the CEO's risk-aversion, which prior literature ﬁnds inﬂuences debt contract design (Anatharaman et al. , 2014.  Chava et al. , 2010.  Brockman et al. , 2010).  Finally, I include variables measuring the debt contracting value of earnings and earnings volatility (i. e. , DCV and varROA) as these measures likely inﬂuence the choice to include earnings-based covenants in the debt contracts.  All variable deﬁnitions are contained in Appendix A. 14 I calculate the inverse Mill's ratio from the ﬁrst stage estimation of Eq. (2). In the second stage, the inverse Mill's ratio is included as an independent variable in Eq. (1) to test H1. This process mitigates selection bias on the variable of interest, EarnCovenant, such that the unobservable characteristics inﬂuencing the choice to include earnings-based covenants do not bias the second stage coefﬁcient estimates.  3. 4.  Covenant slack and CCSE.  For the second hypothesis, I test for variation in CCSE using the three most common earnings-based covenants.  minimum EBITDA, minimum interest coverage, and maximum debt-to-EBITDA.  I restrict the sample to the ﬁrst two years of new debt contracts with earnings-based covenants.  This sample includes ﬁrm-years with at least one earnings-based covenant and allows measurement of covenant slack set at debt contract origination.  I start with the covenant slack measure in Demiroglu and James (2010), deﬁned as the difference between the ﬁrm's current performance and the most restrictive covenant normalized by the standard deviation of performance.  Since my research questions focus on the CEO's earnings incentives, I modify the covenant slack measure in Demiroglu and James (2010) to be in terms of earnings.  In other words, I measure slack as the difference between current earnings performance and the earnings performance speciﬁed by the most restrictive covenant normalized by the standard deviation of earnings.  For each earnings-based covenant type (i. e. , minimum EBITDA, minimum interest coverage, and maximum debt-to-EBITDA), I ﬁrst calculate the level of earnings triggering default on the most restrictive covenant, then I calculate the distance between current earnings and earnings triggering default and normalize by the standard deviation of earnings over the most recent ﬁve years.  Thus, all covenant slack measures can be interpreted as the number of standard deviations earnings performance would need to drop in order to violate the covenant.  Appendix B provides details of the slack calculations for each of the three earnings-based covenants.  The resulting sample for the covenant slack analysis is comprised of1,107 ﬁrm-years with a measure of minimum EBITDA covenant slack (i. e. , EBITDASlack), 7,360 ﬁrm-years with a measure of minimum interest coverage covenant slack (i. e. , ICSlack) and 9,351 ﬁrm-years with a measure of maximum debt-to-EBITDA covenant slack (i. e. , DESlack).  Table 2 contains descriptive statistics for the covenant slack measures and the ﬁrm's actual performance measures subject to the earningsbased covenants (i. e. , EBITDA, interest coverage ratio and debt-to-EBITDA ratio).  Table 2 also reports the most restrictive covenant thresholds (i. e. , EBITDACovenant, ICCovenant, and DECovenant). For ﬁrm-years subject to a minimum EBITDA covenant, the average minimum EBITDA threshold triggering default is $94 million.  The mean value of the most restrictive minimum interest coverage covenant is 2. 92, such that on average ﬁrm-years subject to a minimum interest coverage covenant must maintain $2. 92 of income for every $1 of interest expense.  The mean value of the most restrictive maximum debt-to-EBITDA covenant is 3. 43, such that on average ﬁrm-years subject to a maximum debt-to-EBITDA covenant are restricted to $3. 43 of debt for every $1 of EBITDA.  The measures of slack are admittedly noisy proxies.  To the extent debt agreements specify inclusions and exemptions from the measures of earnings (or any other variable used in covenant calculation) the slack proxies will be measured with noise.  Additionally, DealScan reports the covenant restrictions speciﬁed at contract origination.  To the extent covenants are renegotiated within two years of contract origination, the slack variables will be measured with obsolete covenant restrictions.  I attempt to mitigate this noise by restricting the sample to include only ﬁrm years in which all available measures of slack (i. e. , EBITDASlack, ICSlack and DESlack) consistently indicate either tightly set or loosely set covenant slack.  In other words, I aggregate the slack measures to a single indicator variable.  TightCovMedian is equal to one for ﬁrm-years with all covenant slack measures below the sample median and zero for ﬁrm-years with all covenant slack measures greater than or equal to the sample median. 15 This aggregate measure of tight covenant slack eliminates ﬁrm-years with one type of earnings-based covenant classiﬁed at tight (i. e. , below the sample median) and another classiﬁed as slack (i. e. , above the sample median). 16 This results in 7,949 ﬁrm-years with a measure of TightCovMedian.  I substitute TightCovMedian into Eq. (1) to test H2.  The coefﬁcient of interest,β3, represents the incremental effect on CCSE for ﬁrms with tight earnings-based covenant slack as compared to ﬁrms with greater earnings-based covenant slack.  Similar to TightCovMedian, I create an alternative measure of tight covenant slack for covenants in the bottom and top terciles of covenant slack.  TightCovTercile equals one if each earnings-based covenant slack measure is below the bottom tercile and equal to zero if each earningsbased covenant slack measure is above the top tercile. 17 4.  Empirical results.  4. 1.  Tests of H1.  In the main analysis, I investigate the relationship between CCSE and earnings-based covenants, controlling for ﬁrmspeciﬁc and executive-speciﬁc characteristics.  My ﬁrst hypothesis predicts that earnings-based covenants are associated with a reduction in CCSE. A negative value for β3 in Eq. (1) would indicate the shareholders recognize the pre-existing incentives in earnings-based debt covenants and reduce the explicit earnings incentives in the CEO's cash compensation contract.  Table 3 contains results from tests of H1 using reduced and full model speciﬁcations of Eq. (1). In the reduced model in column one, the coefﬁcient on the interaction between the indicator variable EarnCovenant and ROA is  1. 105 with a tstatistic of  3. 15, signiﬁcant at the 1% level using a one-tailed test. 18 This indicates that on average for a one standard deviation increase in ROA (i. e. , 0. 107), a CEO in a ﬁrm with earnings-based covenants will receive roughly 22% less cash compensation as compared with a CEO in a ﬁrm without earnings-based covenants (i. e. , $118,235less cash compensation for CEOs in years with earnings-based covenants).  The second column includes the control variable Ret and the interaction between Ret and EarnCovenant.  The coefﬁcient of interest, β3, remains negative ( 1. 227) and signiﬁcant (t-statistic of  3. 46). It is worth noting the positive coefﬁcient on the interaction between Ret and EarnCovenant (i. e. , coefﬁcient estimate of 0. 078 and t-statistic of1. 71). This suggests earnings-based covenants are not associated with a panoptic reduction in pay sensitivity to performance measures.  Instead, earnings-based covenants are associated with changes in the pay sensitivity to earnings-based performance measures as predicted by H1. 19 The third column of Table 3 presents the full model controlling for variation in CCSE attributable to ﬁrm and CEO characteristics.  The coefﬁcient on the interaction term of interest is  0. 512 with a t-statistic of  1. 70, signiﬁcant at the 5% level.  The coefﬁcient estimates for the control variables, in general, are consistent with those in prior literature.  In the fourth and ﬁfth columns of Table 3, I report analyses using EBRatio and NumEBCov in place of the indicator variable EarnCovenant.  The coefﬁcients on the interactions between EBRatio and ROA and NumEBCov and ROA are negative and signiﬁcant at the 5% and 10% level, respectively.  In sum, the results reported in Table 3 indicate that when the ﬁrm's debt contract provides the CEO with earnings incentives, less weight is placed on earnings in the cash compensation contract.  Fundamental differences between the ﬁrms selecting debt contracts with earnings-based covenants and ﬁrms selecting debt contracts without earnings-based covenants may confound the reported results.  To mitigate the effect of the unobserved heterogeneity in the sample, I identify a subset of ﬁrms that either add or drop debt contracts containing earningsbased covenants in the sample period.  Admittedly, this within-ﬁrm analysis does not completely control for fundamental changes at the ﬁrm-level that may occur around changes in debt contract covenants and may also have implications for compensation contracting.  However, the within-ﬁrm comparisons should alleviate some concern about the potential for fundamental differences between ﬁrms with debt contracts containing earnings covenants and ﬁrms without.  The within-ﬁrm comparison sample includes ﬁrms with ﬁve years of data in which the debt contracts contain (do not contain) earnings-based covenants followed by ﬁve years without (with) earnings-based covenants.  The resulting sample comprises 286 ﬁrms, each with ﬁve years of data with earnings-based covenants and ﬁve years of data without earnings-based covenants for a total of 2,860 ﬁrm-years.  This sample allows within-ﬁrm comparisons of CCSE around a change in the ﬁrm's debt contracts to either include or exclude earnings-based covenants holding the ﬁrm constant. 20 I retest my ﬁrst hypothesis using this restricted sample to mitigate the unobserved heterogeneity in the full sample that may confound the results.  Table 4 contains the results from the within-ﬁrm comparisons.  Consistent with the main results reported in Table 3, I ﬁnd CCSE is weaker during the period in which the debt contracts contain earnings-based covenants.  Also consistent with the full sample results, the interaction between Ret and EarnCovenant is insigniﬁcant, providing no evidence of a negative association between earnings-based covenants and pay sensitivity to non-earnings-based performance measures.  The coefﬁcient on the interaction between EarnCovenant and ROA is  1. 610 ( 1. 400) with a t-statistic of  2. 34 ( 2. 37) in the reduced (full) model speciﬁcation.  Similarly, Table 4 reports a negative and statistically signiﬁcant association between CCSE and EBRatio at the 1%level (i. e. , coefﬁcient estimate of  1. 925 and t-statistic of  2. 97). The coefﬁcient on the interaction between ROA and NumEBCov of  0. 988 is negative and signiﬁcant at the 5% level (i. e. , t-statistic of  1. 86).  Table 5 presents the ﬁrst and second stage estimation results for the Heckman two-step approach.  The ﬁrst column reports the probit regression restricting Eq.  (2) to only include the variables from Christensen and Nikolaev (2012), hereafter CN.  The coefﬁcients on the independent variables load similarly to that in CN (i. e. , DivYield, Leverage, Size, ROA, RD, MTB, FirmAge, Tangibles, Maturity, and Secured) with a few exceptions.  The coefﬁcient on Advertiseis insigniﬁcant whereas CN reports a signiﬁcantly positive coefﬁcient.  Additionally, I ﬁnd signiﬁcant coefﬁcients on Loss, AltZ and LendFreq with signs opposite to those reported in CN.  There are a few explanations for these inconsistencies.  First, the dependent variable in CN is the ratio of performance-based covenants to total ﬁnancial covenants.  Although similar to my dependent variable indicating the presence of an earnings-based covenant, the ratio of performance covenants to all covenants is a different construct.  Additionally, ﬁrm-year is the unit of observation in this study, whereas in CN a loan package represents the unit of observation and ﬁrm-level measures are computed as of the end of the ﬁscal year prior to the debt's issuance.  The second column of Table 5 contains the second stage regression results testing H1 and including the inverse Mill's ratio from the ﬁrst stage.  The coefﬁcient of  0. 590 on the interaction between ROA and EarnCovenant is signiﬁcant at the 5% level with a t-statistic of  2. 16. 21 This ﬁnding indicates the results reported in Table 3 are robust to controlling for self-selection bias.  Columns three and four of Table 5contain ﬁrst and second stage results of the Heckman two-step procedure using the full model in Eq.  (2). For the ﬁrst stage, the signs and signiﬁcance of the variables from CN are similar to that reported in column one.  The second stage results, reported in column four, are similar to that reported in column two, with a negative coefﬁcient estimate on the interaction between ROA and EarnCovenant, signiﬁcant at the 5% level.  The consistently negative association between CCSE and earnings-based covenants indicates that self-selection bias does not account for the results of the main tests.  Taken together, the tests of H1 support the prediction of a reduction in CCSE when earnings-based covenants provide incentive to maintain earnings.  As discussed above, this empirical relationship is consistent with the shareholders recognizing the CEO's pre-existing earnings incentives in the debt contract.  This decrease in CCSE can accomplish two things.  (1) shift the CEO's effort allocation away from current earnings and (2) facilitate optimal contracting such that the shareholders do not provide monetary incentives for earnings performance when earnings-based covenants provide incentives to maintain earnings.  4. 2.  Covenant slack and CCSE.  Results from tests of the second hypothesis are reported in Table 6.  In column one, the interaction between TightCovMedian and ROA is insigniﬁcant with a coefﬁcient estimate of 0. 510and a t-statistic of 0. 81. In column two of Table 6, I repeat the analyses with the alternative measure of tight covenant slack.  Instead of splitting the covenant slack variables at the sample medians, TightCovTercile is equal to one when all available covenant slack measures are in the bottom tercile and zero when all available covenant slack measures are in the top tercile.  The interaction between ROA and TightCovTercile has a positive coefﬁcient estimate of 1. 438 and a t-statistic of 1. 68. Therefore, I fail to ﬁnd support for H2 which predicts weaker CCSE when earnings-based covenants are set tightly at debt contract origination.  However, results reported in Section 5. 3 of the additional analyses utilizing measures of CCSE as disclosed in the ﬁrm's proxy statements support the prediction of H2.  5.  Robustness tests.  I run several additional tests to explore the robustness of the main results.  First, I use a sample of CEO turnovers as an exogenous shock, subsequent to the origination of ﬁrm debt contracts, to test the robustness of H1. 22 Using CEO turnovers as a setting to test H1ensures the compensation contract is negotiated subsequent to the debt contract and controls for the confounding effect of a CEO controlling both the terms of the debt and compensation contracts.  Second, I control for debt maturity and spread to test whether the reported results are robust to the inclusion of additional debt contract features.  Third, I re-test the hypotheses using an alternative research design that measures CCSE as the weight placed on earnings in the CEO cash compensation contract as disclosed in the ﬁrm's proxy statements.  Fourth, in untabulated analysis, I retest H1 using a sample of ﬁrm-years within two years of debt contract initiation to address the concern of possible earnings-based covenant misclassiﬁcations due to subsequent contract renegotiations. 