 1.  Introduction The environment has attracted unprecedented attention from ecologists, researchers and policymakers in recent years.  While the objective of the diverse stakeholders is to maintain a high standard of living and reduce global poverty, which can be considered justiﬁable ends in their own right, an unrestricted exploitation of natural resources could also cause an irrevocable loss to the biosphere and hurt the world's long-term economic and social development objectives.  The catch lies in the fact that the environment cannot be sustained without sacriﬁcing at least some of the long-term growth and development objectives.  Consequently, to satisfy basic human needs, some damage to the environment is inevitable.  Attitudes towards the environment vary substantially, particularly among policymakers.  Even if the biosphere can be exploited in a variety of ways which lead to a range of consequences, many ecologists believe that the ecosystem could be managed in a way that it can adapt itself to continuously changing conditions (El Kholy et al. , 2012).  The environmental Kuznets curve (EKC), a theory of the relationship between economic development and environmental quality, hypothesizes that over time there will be a reduction in the level of emissions for most countries.  This reduction can take place possibly because well developed economies should develop and raise sufﬁcient revenues in the long-run to afford newer and cleaner technologies that can help abate pollution.  Environmental degradation sustains a heavy price in terms of health and life sacriﬁces.  According to recent estimates, outdoor pollution kills more than three million people in the world every year, while many more people suffer from a range of diseases (OECD, 2014).  The prospects of long-term development are also hurt by the degradation of the quality of natural resources.  Fisheries for example are damaged because of water pollution, and deforestation leads to erosion siltation, disrupts the hydrological cycle of major watersheds and reduces the productivity and returns of natural resources such as forests, agricultural lands and ﬁsheries translate (Dixon et al. , 2013).  The catch lies in the fact that the objectives of sustainable development are often inconsistent with the goals of maintaining the afﬂuent lifestyle of the developed world and reducing the poverty of the burgeoning masses in the developing world (See Daly, 1991.  Arrow et al. , 1995).  Economic growth is a precondition for effective poverty reduction initiatives (Bourguignon, 2004.  Suryahadi et al. , 2012.  Thorbecke, 2013), but the increased revenues resulting from higher growth are used to pursue overly redistributive policies (Bhagwati and Panagariya, 2014).  However, the existing development paradigm is unsustainable because it favors a level of prosperity, which invariably results in more consumption and greater pressure on natural resources (Aşıcı, 2013).  Sustainable economic growth depends on the availability of renewable energy sources, and the integrated development of such sources is essential for an environmentally friendly development of countries or regions.  One of the widely used sources of renewable energy in the United States is biomass which is any organic (decomposable) matter derived from plants or animals, and hence is available on a renewable basis.  Biomass includes wood and agricultural crops, herbaceous and woody energy crops and municipal organic wastes as well as manure.  This renewable energy source contains a complex mix of carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen and oxygen.  Unlike the conventional fossil fuels such as petroleum and coal, biomass is a source of renewable energy based on the carbon cycle.  Thus, in virtue of its abundant sources, biomass is likely to be a prevalent option for generating electricity in the future.  The study examines the short- and long-run relationship between carbon emissions and their determinants in the presence of structural breaks and determines whether biomass energy consumption improves environmental quality by reducing carbon pollutants.  It particularly seeks to discern whether the EKC hypothesis for economic growth and carbon exists in the presence of biomass consumption and trade openness.  Finally, it strives to examine the causality between biomass energy consumption, trade openness and carbon emissions.  To our knowledge, these multifaceted relationships of biomass energy consumption have not been addressed adequately in the existing literature.  This paper makes the following ﬁve-fold contributions to the existing literature.  (i) It uses biomass energy consumption as an indicator of renewable energy in an augmented carbon emissions function.  (ii) It investigates the quadratic and cubic association between economic growth and carbon emissions in the presence of biomass energy and trade variables.  (iii) It applies the single and double unknown structural break unit root test to estimate the unit root properties of the variables.  (iv) It uses the bounds testing approach to cointegration that accommodates structural breaks in the series to test whether cointegration exists or not.  (v) It checks the causality between the variables by applying the VECM Granger causality test in the presence of structural breaks in the series.  The results ﬁnd cointegration between carbon emissions and their determinants and highlight that biomass energy consumption improves environmental quality by lowering carbon emissions.  Moreover, the relationship between economic growth and carbon emissions is inverted U-shaped (i. e. , EKC exists) and N-shaped in the presence of biomass energy consumption and structural breaks.  Additionally, trade openness (exports, imports) is inversely linked with carbon emissions in the presence of biomass energy consumption.  The causality analysis demonstrates a feedback effect between biomass energy consumption and carbon emissions, while economic growth causes CO2 emissions.  The causal association between trade openness (exports, imports) and carbon emissions is bidirectional.  The remainder of study is organized as follows.  Section 2 surveys the literature on EKC, biomass energy consumption and trade openness.  Section 3 develops the empirical model and Section 4 presents the methodological framework.  Section 5 discusses the empirical results.  Section 6 provides the conclusion and policy implications.  2.  Biomass energy consumption and regulations in the U. S.  In comparison with the other sources of energy, biomass provides a distinctive advantage with respect to maintaining the environment since it is “carbon neutral”.  Although the combustion of biomass generates as much carbon dioxide as fossil fuels do, CO2 emissions released is removed when a new plant grows (Agbor et al. , 2014.  Al-Mulali et al. , 2016).  In other words, some CO2 emissions from one year's combustion of biomass are captured by future biomass crops through the process of photosynthesis.  In relation to its energy uses by industry, biomass energy can be used for heat or power generation or for combined heat and power generation as a direct substitute for fossil fuels.  In short, the biomass use is growing in signiﬁcance as an input to a number of major functions of industries, ranging from research into an application of material inputs to industrial processes through to an implementation of mass produced intermediate and ﬁnal products (Burritt and Schaltegger, 2012).  The potential beneﬁts of biomass include an increase in the values of agricultural products and a support for farmers and the agricultural sector in both developed and developing countries, a potential reduction in greenhouse gases emissions relative to the petroleum-based fuels and an improved energy security for countries that grow their own feed stocks.  Projected increases in biofuel trade are also considered as a potential driver of economic growth in the tropics and subtropics regions, which are likely to hold a comparative advantage in feedstock production due to high biomass productivity (Marshall, 2007).  Biomass energy is one of the earliest and most primary sources of energy to provide processing and heat for industrial facilities in the United States.  Historically, in this country it has come from three primary sources.  wood, waste, and alcohol fuels.  More recently, it has come from corn as well.  Each of these forms of biomass energy (wood energy, waste energy and biofuel) is used in the United States.  Collectively, they represent almost half of the total renewable energy production.  Most electricity generation from wood biomass occurs at lumber and paper mills and these facilities use wood waste to provide much of their own steam and electricity needs.  The adoption of biomass has been increasing over the years in the United States.  Biofuel production increased from 1382 ktoe in 1990 to 3000 ktoe in 2000, and further to 28,440 in 2013 (BP Statistical Review of World Energy, 2014).  Over the years, the U. S.  government has introduced several policies to improve the share of renewable energy in the total energy mix, including an increase in the use of biomass.  For instance, the Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) policy, which is a state regulation, calls on electric utilities to ensure that a speciﬁc percentage of all produced electricity should come from renewable resources.  The ﬁrst RPS was ratiﬁed in Iowa in 1983, under a slightly different name, but with the same basic construction.  The 1990s really sparked the adoption of RPS, as seven more U. S.  states enacted RPSs of similar varieties.  Currently there are 30 states, along with the District of Columbia, that have adopted some form of an RPS policy.  RPS allows for ample state ﬂexibility including a variation of different target goals and deadlines, market trading mechanisms and renewable energy types used to comply with the RPS policy.  This ﬂexibility makes this particular policy tool especially popular, as evident by the recent exponential increase in RPS adoption.  Even though the adoption of RPS is becoming rather common, this policy tool is still relatively new, with few scholarly attempts at ascertaining the results of its implementation (Eastin et al. , 2014).  The second policy is the renewable fuel standard (RFS) program, which is a national policy that requires a certain volume of renewable fuels to replace or reduce the quantity of petroleum-based transportation fuel, heating oil or jet fuel.  The Congress created this program as part of the Energy Policy Act in 2005 in an effort to reduce greenhouse gases emissions and expand the nation's renewable fuels sector, while reducing reliance on imported oil (Barros et al. , 2011).  The RFS program was expanded under the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007.  The RFS was conceived by policy makers as a tool to reduce the demand for transportation fuels derived from foreign oil by stimulating the production of domestic biofuels that could be mixed with or replace gasoline at a time when foreign imports and prices were at or near alltime highs.  The RFS, administered by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), mandates the annual minimum volumes of biofuels across four nested categories that must be incorporated into the nation's transportation fuel supply.  The biofuel categories include total renewable fuels, advanced renewable fuels, cellulosic biofuel, and biomassbased biodiesel.  It also requires electricity providers to acquire speciﬁc amounts of renewable energy generation over time which are prevalent within the United States (Barros et al. , 2011).  The government has also introduced several additional policies including the Production Tax Credit or PTC, which is a per-kilowatthour tax credit for electricity generated (through renewable energy sources including biomass) by qualiﬁed energy resources and is paid for by the U. S.  taxpayers.  These policies also include the Investment Tax Credit or ITC, which allows the tax credit to be taken based on the amount invested rather than electricity produced.  They also include the Modiﬁed Accelerated Cost Recovery System Depreciation Schedule or MACRS, which gives bonus depreciations and reduces taxes on large biomass projects (Zhou et al. , 2016).  3.  Literature review.  The issues of climate change and carbon dioxide emissions are at the forefront of policy debates in both developed and developing countries.  Correspondingly, there is now a vast literature on the determinants of emissions (including income and energy prices among others), with the majority of the studies utilizing the EKC hypothesis in the analyses, which has often yielded mixed and conﬂicting results.  The literature on EKC has expanded so much that even causality techniques are now used to infer the presence of the EKC (Soytas and Sari, 2007.  Dogan and Turkekul, 2016).  Due to the lack of available data, some studies have traditionally estimated the EKCs with cross-country panel data.  Given that the quality of such data is often questionable, the empirical results obtained may be a suspect.  Furthermore, since the common method of estimation with panel data assumes that all cross-sections adhere to the same EKC, it may be unreasonable to impose isomorphic EKCs if cross-sections vary in terms of resource endowments, infrastructure, etc.  (List and Gallet, 1999). 1 We classify the considered literature under three strands.  income and emissions.  energy consumption and income.  and energy consumption, income and carbon emissions.  3. 1.  Income and emissions.  This ﬁrst strand of the literature has considered income as the only determinant of emissions within the EKC framework in the United States.  For instance, Unruh and Moomaw (1998) utilize graphical analysis to examine the presence of EKC for 16 countries including the United States.  Using a data set for the period 1950–1990, these authors are able to provide evidence of the presence of EKC in the U. S.  Subsequently, List and Gallet (1999) analyze the presence of EKC in the 50 U. S.  states by using the ordinary least square (OLS) technique for the period 1929–1994.  They conﬁrm the presence of EKC in 18 states when income and income squared are entered as independent variables, with the mono nitrogen oxides serving as the indicator of emissions.  However, when income and income squared are entered as independent variables, and with sulfur dioxide serving as the indicator of emissions, those authors notice the presence of the N-shape for 103. 2.  Energy and income.  The papers on the causal relationship between energy consumption (or its various components) and real GDP constitute the bulk of the existing literature that uses the bivariate and multivariate approaches.  This strand is also the earliest part of the literature dating back to 1978.  We will focus on this aspect of the literature because it is believed that energy consumption and real income are associated with emissions.  The earliest papers have utilized the bivariate approach to consider the relation between energy consumption and economic growth but provided inconclusive empirical results for the US economy. 2 The earliest studies that also looked at the relationship from a multivariate perspective include Glasure and Lee (1995) which incorporated the ratio of wages and energy prices as control variables for the period 1973. M1–1984. M6.  Using the Engle and Granger (1987) method, their ﬁndings provide evidence that supports the neutrality hypothesis.  Similarly, Stern (2000) employs the Johansen (1988) and Johansen and Juselius (1990) to examine the relationship between energy use, capital, labour and real GDP for the period 1947–1994 and the empirical ﬁndings provide evidence supporting a unidirectional causality from energy use to economic growth.  Thoma (2004) analyzes the causality involving industrial production as well as total electricity usage and electricity usage in commercial, industrial, residential and other sectors for the period 1973M1–2000M1.  Using the Engle and Granger (1987) method and the Granger causality test, the authors' results support the existence of a unidirectional causality running from economic growth to electrical usage.  Soytas and Sari (2006) utilize the dataset of seven countries to explore the causal relationship between total energy consumption, energy consumption, capital stock, labour force and real GDP per capita during the period 1960–2004.  They use the Johansen and Juselius (1990) approach to show a unidirectional causality running from energy consumption to real GDP.  Narayan and Prasad (2008) investigate the causal relationship between electricity consumption and real GDP, using the Hacker and Hatemi-J (2006) causality test but ﬁnd no causality between the variables.  In a series of related papers, Bowden and Payne (2009) and Payne (2009a) use different indicators of energy consumption such as primary energy (and usage in various sectors), renewable and non-renewable energy consumption, and nuclear energy, respectively.  Their empirical ﬁndings provide evidence of no causality in the case of the total and transportation primary energy consumption, renewable and non-renewable energy consumption and nuclear energy.  There is a unidirectional causality running from industrial production to primary energy consumption and a bidirectional causality in the case of commercial and residential primary energy consumption.  Payne (2009b) supports the growth-hypothesis i. e.  energy consumption causes economic growth in the case of the U. S.  state of Illinois.  Wolde-Rufael and Menyah (2010) utilize the Toda and Yamamoto (1995) to examine the causality involving nuclear energy consumption and economic growth, while controlling for capital stock and labour in nine developed countries for the period 1971–2005.  Their results yield support for a bidirectional causality in the United States.  Lee and Chiu (2011) show no support for a causality between nuclear energy consumption and economic growth, but a support for the growth hypothesis in the case of oil consumption.  Gross (2012) uses total energy consumption, and energy consumption in the industrial, commercial and transportation sectors as indicators for energy consumption.  The results suggest no causality in the total energy consumption, the industrial sector and the commercial sector but a bidirectional causality in the transportation sector.  Tugcu et al.  (2012) provide mixed evidence of no causality and a bidirectional causality.  Kum et al.  (2012) consider the causal relationship between natural gas consumption and economic growth in the G-7 countries during the period 1970–2008.  By using the Hacker and Hatemi-J (2006) causality tests, their results reveal evidence of a bidirectional causality between natural gas consumption and economic growth.  Yildirim et al.  (2012) utilize the Hacker and Hatemi-J (2006) method to examine the causal relationship in various indicators of energy consumption, employment, investment and real GDP for the period 1949–2010.  The empirical ﬁndings reveal a unidirectional causality from energy consumption to economic growth in the case of the biomass-waste-derived energy consumption and no causality in the case of the total renewable energy consumption, geothermal energy consumption, hydro-electric energy consumption, biomass energy consumption and biomass-wood-derived energy consumption.  Tiwari (2014) provides similar evidence for coal consumption, natural gas consumption, primary energy consumption, total renewable energy consumption and total electricity consumption as indicators of energy consumption in the U. S.  The most comprehensive strand in the existing literature is the one that integrates energy consumption, income and emissions into the same model.  However, this strand has only gained popularity recently, with very few studies existing in this area.  Conventional studies have used the normal regression and also the causality analysis to infer the existence of EKC.  Soytas et al.  (2007) is one of the earliest studies to integrate energy consumption, income and emissions in one function for the U. S.  The authors utilize the Toda and Yamamoto (1995) method to explore the relationship between income, energy consumption, carbon emissions, labour and capital.  There is evidence of a causality ﬂowing from energy consumption to emissions but no causality between real GDP and emissions, and between energy consumption and real GDP.  Since no causality ﬂows from real GDP to emissions, the authors conclude that there is no EKC in the U. S.  Menyah and WoldeRufael (2010) analyze the causal relationship between CO2 emissions, renewable and nuclear energy consumption and real GDP and the results support the presence of a bidirectional causality between CO2 emissions and income.  Burnett et al.  (2013) utilize a dataset of the U. S.  for the period 1981Q1–2003Q4 to examine the relationship between carbon dioxide emissions, personal income and energy production.  Using the dynamic OLS of Stock and Watson (1993), the results show there is no presence of the EKC hypothesis.  In another recent study, Dogan and Turkekul (2016) examine the existence of EKC in the U. S.  for the period 1960–2010 in a multivariate framework that includes emissions per capita, energy consumption per capita, real output per capita, trade openness, urbanization and ﬁnancial development by employing the ARDL bounds testing approach of Pesaran et al.  (2001) and the Granger causality test.  Their results suggest a bidirectional causality between energy consumption and emissions and between income and emissions.  The coefﬁcient suggests that income decreases emissions but income square increases emissions.  None of the foregoing papers examines the EKC hypothesis in the presence of biomass energy consumption.  With the exception of Dogan and Turkekul (2016), none of the previous papers have utilized both the regression analysis and causality analysis.  Table 1 presents a summary of studies investigating association between economic growth and carbon emissions in the case of the U. S.  economy for the three strands of the existing literature.  3. 4.  Biomass energy and emissions.  Very few studies have investigated the association between biomass energy consumption and carbon emissions for Turkey and U. S.  economies, using trivariate and bivariate models accordingly.  For instance, Katircioglu (2015) employs the carbon emissions function by including biomass energy and fossil fuel consumption.  The empirical evidence indicates that the use of biomass energy is environment-friendly, but on the other hand fossil fuel consumption adds to carbon emissions.  Bilgili et al. 