 1.  Introduction Freshwater availability in suﬃcient quality and quantity is one of the major challenges that society will face this century.  Freshwater represents just 2. 5% of Earth’s water and is increasingly threatened by human (economic) activity and climate change.  Many studies have conﬁrmed that water scarcity will increase signiﬁcantly over the coming decades and this will bring problems for food security, environmental sustainability, and economic development (Alcamo et al. , 2007.  Ercin and Hoekstra, 2012.  Hoekstra, 2014a,b).  The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reported that unabated climate change has the potential to strongly impact freshwater resources with wide ranging consequences for societies and ecosystems (Murray et al. , 2012.  Pachauri and Meyer, 2014).  At present about two-thirds of the global population presently live in conditions of severe water scarcity for at least 1 month of the year and half a billion people face severe water scarcity all year round (Mekonnen and Hoekstra, 2016).  Climate change is predicted to exacerbate water scarcity even further.  Hydrological cycles are predicted to undergo large changes and cause global shifts in precipitation patterns as well as increase the frequency and severity of extreme events (Bates and Kundzewicz, 2008).  Signiﬁcant regional differences exist across the globe leading to simultaneous increases and decreases in land-surface run-off depending on latitude, altitude, and other geographic factors.  In general, wet areas will tend to get wetter and dry areas will get dryer, leading to less reliable water availability (Kumar et al. , 2013).  While there is considerable uncertainty in modelled precipitation and evapotranspiration projections at high resolution, regional trends allow the comparison of different climate change scenarios over time.  The frequency of heavy precipitation over most areas is predicted to increase with the consequences of rain-generated ﬂoods potentially overwhelming existing infrastructure leaving little opportunity for water storage.  The likelihood of extreme droughts is also predicted to increase with a tendency for continental interiors to dry during the summer, especially in the sub-tropics and low and midlatitudes.  One recent example that has been attributed to global warming was the 2003 heat-wave in Europe (Schar et al. , 2004) contributing to annual precipitation deﬁcits of up to 300 mm and an estimated 30% drop in gross primary production of terrestrial ecosystems (Ciais et al. , 2005).  Events like this highlight the signiﬁcant impact that water scarcity can have on economic productivity.  Changes to the atmospheric water content, intensity of extremes, reduced snow cover, widespread melting of ice, changes in soil moisture and droughts are therefore predicted to exacerbate water scarcity problems in the 21st century (Bates and Kundzewicz, 2008) This analysis uses the latest scientiﬁc evidence for quantifying the likely effects of climate change on water scarcity across the globe under different climate change scenarios (i. e. , IPCC AR5).  However, there are other dynamic factors that must also be considered, these include economic growth, technological progress, national water endowment, structure of production (at sectoral level), international trade, and population growth.  This analysis captures the dynamic interaction of these different factors on water scarcity out to 2100.  While most of the existing literature has focused on the link between water scarcity and economic activity this work highlights the importance of considering water scarcity in the context of climate change.  The novelty introduced by the present study is given by the combination of two measures of water scarcity, which take into account the social needs (i. e. , providing enough water for social and economic requirements) and the physical constraints imposed by water availability, driven by climate change.  We assess the social and economic effects of water scarcity by country and by sector, applying a multi-regional input-output model (MRIO), extended with water intensity coeﬃcients.  It goes beyond the previous global water demand scenario studies because the MRIO approach allows the recovery of the whole supply-chain, both at national and global levels, and to calculate both the direct and indirect feedback effects due to inter-industrial linkages in the global economy, between now and 2100.  In the analysis that follows we disentangle these different effects and identify the main drivers of water scarcity over the next century.  Using four different climate change scenarios and data on global trading patterns we assess the respective social and economic effects of water scarcity by country and by sector.  We proceed with a multi-regional input-output model (MRIO) extended with water intensity coeﬃcients and calculate both direct and indirect water consumption between now and 2100.  We then apply sectoral production functions to describe the trade and production relationships for 35 sectors across all major OECD countries, their major trading partners and a selection of large emerging economies.  The main research questions we aim at answering include (i) what are the main drivers of water scarcity over this century. , (ii) what effect will climate change have on water scarcity. , (iii) can virtual water trade and technological progress stem the economic impacts of scarce water. , and (iv) what sectors and regions are most impacted by water scarcity.  The paper proceeds in Section 2 with a short review of the literature.  Section 3 describes the main methods that were used and Section 4 gives details on the data and various deﬁnitions.  The mathematical models are derived and presented in Section 5.  The discussion of the results is given in Section 6, while Section 7 develops the sustainability assessment and it provides the implied technological progress.  Section 8 brieﬂy explains the main uncertainties and limitations.  Finally, Section 9 discusses the implications of the main results for future water management and policy.  2.  Review of Literature.  Existing studies have largely used the concepts of virtual waterintroduced by Allan (1993), and “water footprint” (WF) (Hoekstra et al. , 2011) to study the changing global landscape and the embodied trade of scarce water resources.  The former (VW) returns the water embodied in traded goods outside national borders and excludes domestic consumption.  The latter (WF) includes the water embodied in goods throughout the entire supply chain on a consumption basis.  One commonly used method to calculate VW trade and WF is the multi-regional input-output (MRIO) model.  IO tables express the monetary value of economic transactions occurring across sectors of an economy to account for sectoral interdependencies in the economic system.  MRIO models have been widely used to calculate the consequences of international trade on regional water footprints (e. g. , Antonelli et al. , 2012.  Duarte and Yang, 2011.  Lenzen et al. , 2013).  These studies are particularly useful as they assess the effect of international trade on domestic water resources, the effect of water availability on international trade, and the consequences of international trade to improve or worsen the effects of global water scarcity (Hoekstra et al. , 2011).  Recently, the attention is shifted from an ex-post static calculation towards an ex-ante scenario analysis for enhancing the policy relevance of water scarcity under different climate change scenarios.  Alcamo et al.  (2007) analysed the change in blue water (surface and groundwater) withdrawals for two alternative trajectories for population and economic growth, based on the A2 and B2 IPCC scenarios, ﬁnding that the principal cause of increasing water stress is growing domestic water use stimulated by income growth.  De Fraiture (2007) elaborated four alternatives scenarios for 115 countries in order to provide alternative strategies for meeting the increasing demands for water and food by 2050.  Energy production, local action, and climate change were found to be the most crucial variables for improved water management.  Ercin and Hoekstra (2012) developed four water footprint scenarios, until 2050, based on population and economic growth, production/trade patterns, consumption patterns, and technological development.  They stated that reducing humanity’s water footprint, to sustainable levels, is still possible even under the assumptions of increasing population, provided that consumption patterns change.  Dalin  (2012) estimated the evolution of the virtual water trade network, using as control variables GDP, rainfall on agricultural area and population.  They found that few importing countries are likely to concentrate a signiﬁcant portion of virtual water trade through food commodities.  Konar et al.  (2016) projected international staple crop trade and the related water footprint under climate and policy scenarios for the year 2030.  They found that trade liberalization should lead to increasing water exploitations with higher WF.  In the context of IO modeling, most of the scenario analyses have been devoted to the estimation of future carbon emissions (e. g. , Koning et al. , 2016.  Lutz and Wiebe, 2012.  Scott et al. , 2013), to the economic effects of climate change (e. g. , Dellink, 2013), or to the impact of the power sector on water resources (e. g. , Wan et al. , 2016).  The aim of this paper is to apply the MRIO approach to compare future scenarios (e. g. , Duchin and Levine, 2016) on scarce water resources.  To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time an MRIO model has been used to assess the sustainability water resources considering the multiple confounding factors of economic growth, technological progress, water availability, population dynamic, and climate change based on the most recent IPCC AR5 projections.  <Middle> Method.  In line with best practice in climate change research, we use pre-deﬁned IPCC climate change scenarios to explore the long-term relationships between complex socio-ecological and economic conditions under uncertainty.  The scenarios adopted in this paper are consistent with those from the ﬁfth assessment report (AR5) and the results produced from the CMIP5 multi-model ensemble analysis.  The new scenario framework adopted in the latest IPCC assessment allows for an internally consistent and integrated analysis1.  Within this framework the so called Shared Socioeconomic Pathways2 (SSPs) (Rozenberg et al. , 2013.  Ruijven et al. , 2013) and Shared Policy Assumptions (SPAs) relate directly to one of the four radiative forcing concentration pathways (van Vuuren et al. , 2012).  Each of the four different IPCC economic-climate scenarios are compared using the most recent projections of GDP and population growth from the latest OECD projections.  The OECD model, ENVgrowth, places special emphasis on the drivers of GDP growth over the projection period rather than projecting convergence directly on income levels.  The ENV-growth model features additional inputspeciﬁc factor productivity for labour and energy. , out to 2100, and explicitly accounts for the variation of total renewable freshwater resources over time.  This study takes into account all the major OECD countries, their major trading partners, and a selection of large emerging economies.  In particular we take into account the heterogeneous impacts of climate change across the globe on precipitation (P) and evapotranspiration (PET) and their effect on renewable fresh-water resources.  We report both social and physical water stress indices and express water scarcity in terms of the direct and indirect water needs on production and consumption requirements within an economy.  When demand for water exceeds renewable fresh-water availability we derive the technological progress that is required to meet economic growth projections under this scenario3.  In addition, we assess the conditions under which international virtual water trade (VWT) is able to redistribute scarce water resources between water rich and water scarce countries under different climate change scenarios.  Finally we disaggregate the virtual water scarcity index into 35 major economic sectors and quantify the impacts of population growth, economic productivity, environmental degradation and climate change.  4.  Data and Deﬁnitions.  Climate change projections from four climate change scenarios (RCP26, RCP45, RCP60 and RCP85) are taken from the CMIP5 multimodel ensemble HadGEM2-ES (Jones, 2011)4.  Monthly total precipitation and evapotranspiration values were extracted over the period 2005 to 2100 for each of the four climate change scenarios.  Annual total values were then estimated for precipitation (P) and evapotranspiration (PET) by summing over the year for each geographic area.  The net ﬂux of water at land surface is estimated as precipitation minus evapotranspiration P − PET (Seager et al. , 2007).  Using this well established relationship we develop an index representing the relative water availability at land surface as precipitation over evapotranspiration P/PET.  The mean of P/PET for the base period (2005–2015) is used to normalise future changes in this index, making it possible to estimate the relative expected change in landsurface run-off over the modelling period (see Fig.  1).  Each pixel on the map, shown in Fig.  1, represents the expected change in the P/PET index over the modelling period.  For each P/PET pixel located within a country a distribution of the index is ﬁtted giving the expected change in land-surface run-off for that country.  There are 116 countries in this database where the expected change in landsurface run-off and the corresponding 95% conﬁdence intervals can be estimated for each of the four scenarios.  We structure our simulations on the so called Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs) (Rozenberg et al. , 2013.  Ruijven et al. , 2013) and Shared Policy Assumptions (SPAs).  These scenarios are consistent with the ﬁfth assessment report (AR5) and with the results produced by the CMIP5 multi-model ensemble analysis.  They allow the exploration of future vulnerabilities to climate impacts (Hibbard et al. , 2007.  Taylor et al. , 2011) under different GHG emission trajectories.  Each scenario is based on the stabilisation of a particular level of radiative forcing occurring as a result of different atmospheric GHG concentrations.  This approach provides a method for systematically analysing the growing complexity of social economic systems (e. g. , technological progress, and climate policy) within an internally consistent framework5.  Table 2 provides a synthesis of the main assumptions for each scenario and the projected evolution of the key drivers6.  GDP and population growth, technological progress, globalization, global inequality, environmental sustainability, and change in global average temperatures.  Numerical simulations are developed for four pre-deﬁned SSPs, under the assumptions given for each of the Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs).  Each SSP scenario represents a unique and internally consistent scenario for how key socio-economic and climate change variables may evolve over time7.  For example, SSP1 represents the most sustainable scenario with the lowest climate change impacts.  This scenario beneﬁts from high GDP growth, high environmental quality, and strong technological progress paired with low levels of global inequality.  SSP2 is labelled “Middle of the road” because it shows patterns that lie in between those coming from the other scenarios.  SSP3 is a scenario built to take into account a possible fragmentation of the world with increasing global inequality leading some rich countries to obtain high levels of GDP and technological growth, while less developed countries would face high population growth rates with relatively low income.  SSP4 was excluded from this analysis due to its similarity with SSP3.  SSP5 is the business as usual scenario, where the (uneven) economic growth is pushed up by increasing fossil fuel consumption, inducing high levels of GHG emissions with a consequent increase of global temperatures, projected to exceedEconomic data are taken from WIOD8 and contains information on 40 countries around the world including all of the EU countries the USA and other important developing countries such as India, China and Brazil.  They represent, in 2010, more than 75% of global Gross Domestic Product (GDP), more than 50% of total water resources9 (see Table 1 in the Appendix), and they are responsible of almost the 70% of global water footprint for dietary consumption (Tamea et al. , 2014).  This database also includes input-output data on 35 economic sectors and their respective imports and exports to all other sectors and countries included in the database.  Sectoral water use, as reported in WIOD, was derived from the estimations provided by Mekonnen and Hoekstra (2010), FAOSTAT and EXIOPOL.  The International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) and the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) provide data on the reference scenarios for each of the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP).  GDP projections, consistent with these SSP scenarios, are computed by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development(OECD)10.  Data on present day water availability (Wa) are taken from FAO GAEZ11 with future estimates of Wa calculated from the change in P/PET as described above.  FAO (2015) and Hoekstra et al.  (2011) deﬁne several water based indicators used in this paper.  These indicators are used to frame sustainability analysis and to determine when environmental water needs are excessively exploited.  The virtual water (VW) content of a product is the amount of freshwater required for production, measured over the entire production chain of the product.  The water footprint (WF) of a nation is equal to domestic water use from national resources, minus virtual water exported to other countries plus the virtual water imported from other countries.  Green water (GN) indicates the consumptive use of rainwater stored in the topsoil and used for vegetative and agricultural purposes.  Blue water (B) refers to the consumptive use of ground or surface water, while grey water (GY) represents water contamination and is measured as the volume of water required to assimilate pollutants caused by human activity. 