 1.  Introduction Vehicles are a major source of pollution in most countries.  In Canada, for instance, light duty vehicles generated 82 million tonnes of greenhouse gases, approximately 12% of the country’s total emissions (Canada, 2015).  Vehicles also produce other pollutants that adversely affect human health and well-being.  These including nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, and particulate matter among others.  Pollution from cars and trucks is often viewed as the archetypal economic externality.  the costs associated with emissions accrue to society but are not fully borne privately by drivers.  Reducing transportation-related gasoline consumption has, unsurprisingly, become a focus of policy makers.  An expanding array of policies have targeted vehicular emissions in Canada (Antweiler and Gulati, 2013).  Several provinces have offered rebates for the purchase of fuel eﬃcient vehicles such as hybrid-electric or electric vehicles (Chandra, 2010).  Ontario and the federal government used a system of taxes and rebates based on fuel economy (Rivers et al. , 2017.  Sallee and Slemrod, 2012).  British Columbia, Alberta, Ontario, and Quebec apply a carbon price as a disincentive on the consumption of fossil fuels (Antweiler and Gulati, 2016.  Rivers et al. , 2015), and similar carbon prices are required across all provinces by 2018 under the Pan-Canadian Framework on Green Growth and Climate Change.  The federal government has provided a tax credit to encourage commuting by public transport rather than private vehicle (Rivers and Plumptre, 2016.  Chandler, 2014) and recently adopted new vehicle greenhouse gas intensity regulations requiring manufacturers to achieve speciﬁc targets for ﬂeet-wide emissions per kilometre. 1 The optimal stringency of each of these programs depends, at least to some degree, on the responsiveness of the fuel economy of vehicles to the price of gasoline.  Policy makers therefore require reliable estimates of key elasticities relating to the choice of and use of the vehicle stock in response to gasoline prices and other policies.  Yet, despite the breadth of attempts to address externalities from automobile usage, little is known about how gasoline prices actually inﬂuence consumer decision-making with respect to new vehicle fuel economy.  We estimate the elasticity of new vehicle fuel eﬃciency with respect to gasoline price by exploiting a rich dataset covering gasoline prices, vehicle registrations, vehicle fuel economy, and demographic variables at the neighborhood level in 42 Canadian cities from 2000 to 2010.  Our data and econometric models enable us to credibly control for unobserved time-varying and cross-sectional variables that may otherwise bias estimates of the elasticity.  Our main ﬁnding is that a 1% increase in gasoline prices leads to a 0. 08% improvement in the fuel economy of new vehicles.  This elasticity is slightly smaller (in absolute value) than previous estimates, suggesting that consumers may be less responsive to gasoline prices than previously thought.  Having established this main result, we proceed to show that the responsiveness to gasoline prices is greater in more urbanized regions compared to less urban regions.  In particular, we use four proxies for the level of urbanization in each of the neighborhoods in our data set.  (1) the distance to the urban core (more “urban” neighborhoods are closer to the urban core).  (2) the population density (more “urban” neighborhoods have higher population densities).  (3) the mode share of public transit (more “urban” neighborhoods have a higher mode share of commuting by public transit).  and (4) city population (more “urban” cities are larger).  We interact each of these proxies with the gasoline price variable in our main regression and ﬁnd stronger responses to increased gasoline prices in more “urban” areas, which are robust to our classiﬁcation of “urbanization”.  While we lack the data to explore the mechanisms behind this differential response, the ﬁnding that vehicle choice in more urban areas is more sensitive to gasoline prices than in peri-urban areas is novel and interesting on its own.  Finally, we demonstrate another important result, similar to one that has been found in a range of recent work.  consumers are more responsive to changes in excise taxes than to equivalent changes in gasoline prices due to other factors.  This larger responsiveness to changes in taxes has been noted in several papers focused on gasoline demand (Rivers et al. , 2015.  Li et al. , 2014.  Scott, 2015.  Lawley and Thivierge, 2018) and, more recently, in another Canadian study by Antweiler and Gulati (2016) on vehicle choices.  Our results suggest that consumers respond to a change in excise taxes by improving fuel eﬃciency four to ten times as much as to an equivalent change in tax-exclusive prices.  This has important implications for policy makers considering using excise taxes as a way to encourage more fuel eﬃcient vehicle choices.  The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 presents our conceptual framework and offers a review of similar studies.  Section 3 explains the data and empirical strategy.  The main results are presented in Section 4, while the heterogeneity of these estimates is investigated in Section 5.  Section 6 concludes.  2.  Conceptual framework.  Vehicle gasoline consumption can be decomposed as the product of three factors. 2 Denote the fuel eﬃciency of the on-road vehicle stock—i. e. , the number of litres required to travel a kilometre—with F.  Consumers consider the price of gasoline when selecting the fuel eﬃciency of vehicles, so F is a function of the price of gasoline, p.  The second factor is vehicle utilization, D—i. e. , the number of kilometres travelled per vehicle.  Conditional on the fuel consumption rating of the vehicle as well as the price for gasoline consumers choose the distance to drive.  Thus, this second factor, D, the intensity of vehicle use, is a function of both the price of gasoline, p, as well as fuel eﬃciency, F.  Finally, V(p) is the total number of vehicles in the ﬂeet, also a function of the price of gasoline.  Combining these three factors allows us to write a reduced-form expression for total gasoline consumption.  Taking the total derivative of this expression yields a decomposition for the short-run elasticity of gasoline demand with respect to price that is comprised of distinct moving parts.  the change in ﬂeet fuel economy with respect to gasoline price, the change in distance travelled with respect to gasoline price, the change in ﬂeet size with respect to gasoline price and the change in distance travelled with respect to ﬂeet fuel economy.  Referring to this elasticity as 4, weThere are four parameters in this expression.  First, g is the elasticity of vehicle fuel eﬃciency with respect to gasoline price, and V is the elasticity of aggregate vehicle stock with respect to gasoline prices.  These elasticities, respectively, show the percent change in the per vehicle gasoline demand and the percent change in the number of vehicles in the ﬂeet that result from a 1% increase in gasoline prices.  The next two components are D , the elasticities of distance driven with respect to fuel economy and gasoline price. 4 The product g(1 + h) describes the interaction between changes in ﬂeet fuel economy and distance travelled, with the term in brackets often referred to as the “rebound effect”.  Rebound effects arise from the feedback between vehicles’ fuel eﬃciency and the cost of driving – namely, increases in ﬂeet fuel economy may result in additional driving demand by reducing the private cost of driving (Borenstein, 2013.  Sorrell and Dimitropoulos, 2008.  Chan and Gillingham, 2015).  Each of these key elasticities helps to determine the overall change in gasoline consumption in response to a change in gasoline price or other similar policy.  Several studies exist that estimate l.  For example, Gillingham (2014), Gillingham et al.  (2015) and Greene et al.  (1999) estimate the elasticity of vehicle miles travelled with respect to gasoline price in the US, l.  The consensus value is approximately −0. 2.  Using aggregate data, Barla et al.  (2009) ﬁnd virtually identical estimates for Canada, while Moshiri and Kamil (2017) ﬁnd a value of −0. 12, or roughly half, using Canadian micro data.  This paper’s focuses is on estimating g, the elasticity of ﬂeet fuel economy with respect to gasoline price (since we do not observe actual driving behavior in the data for this paper, we have no way of estimating h or l).  There are a handful of estimates for g, although few in Canada.  Li et al.  (2009) use detailed US vehicle registration data from 1997 to 2005 to determine how changes in gasoline prices affect the fuel economy of vehicle sales.  They ﬁnd that a 1% increase in gasoline prices causes an improvement in ﬂeet fuel economy of 0. 2%.  Klier and Linn (2010) identify changes in US fuel economy from monthly vehicle sales.  They ﬁnd that a 1% change in gasoline price results in about a 0. 1% improvement in fuel economy.  Burke and Nishitateno (2013) use cross-sectional aggregate data from 43 countries to estimate the relationship between new vehicle fuel economy and gasoline price.  They ﬁnd an elasticity of about −0. 2. 5 It is not obvious how much policy-makers should trust many older estimates of g, however.  Often strong assumptions were needed to identify the effect of gasoline prices on fuel eﬃciency of new vehicle purchases (Klier and Linn, 2010).  In cross-sectional studies, such as West (2004), a maintained assumption is that there is no relationship between gasoline prices and unobserved consumer preferences, an assumption that is violated, for example, if consumers engaged in residential sorting based on gasoline prices or if unobserved consumer preferences are an important determinant of gasoline taxes (Hammar et al. , 2004).  Other studies based on country-, state-, or province-level panel data, such as Barla et al.  (2009), Burke and Nishitateno (2013), andSmall and Dender (2007), use the panel structure of the data to control for time-invariant unobservables.  While a signiﬁcant improvement on earlier cross-section analysis, the level of aggregation of these analysis prevent them from exploring geographic heterogeneity in responses.  Moreover, because they have fewer observations (because they are based on aggregate data), estimates are often less precise.  Klier and Linn (2010) and Li et al.  (2009) made signiﬁcant progress by using detailed micro-datasets to relax key identifying assumptions and to provide credible causal estimates of the elasticity of vehicle fuel economy with respect to gasoline price.  We build on this research in two ways.  First, we estimate the elasticity in a Canadian context.  Consumer behavior may differ between Canada and the US, especially as the structure of the two countries’ macroeconomies differs.  Second, we probe various forms of heterogeneity, especially related to the characteristics of urban centres, and different components of gasoline prices – i. e. , taxes versus market ﬂuctuations – inﬂuence consumer decisions.  With the exception of Antweiler and Gulati (2016), no previous study, to the best of our knowledge, has investigated these channels.  <Middle> Data and empirical strategy.  3. 1.  Dataset construction and summary statistics.  We aim to estimate the elasticity of new vehicle fuel economy with respect to the gasoline price.  Several data sources are combined for the analysis.  First, we obtain data on individual vehicle registrations. 6 This database covers the universe of passenger vehicles registered in all Canadian provinces from 2000 to 2010.  Vehicles are categorized by make (e. g. , Toyota), model (e. g. , Camry), series (e. g. , XLE), model year, engine size, number of engine cylinders, transmission type and fuel type.  A vehicle i is deﬁned as a unique combination of vehicle year, make, model, series, engine size, number of cylinders, and fuel type.  Thus, for example, a 2006 Toyota Camry LE 4-cylinder 2. 0 L gasoline car is considered a “vehicle” in the dataset, while a 2006 Toyota Camry XLE 4-cylinder 2. 4 L gasoline car is a distinct vehicle.  Registrations are recorded according to the forward sortation area (FSA) of the home address of the vehicle registrant. 7 Each observation corresponds to a unique combination of FSA-vehicle-year and reﬂects the number of registrations of each type of vehicle in each FSA in each year.  We focus on new vehicle purchases rather than the total stock of registered vehicles, so only retain new vehicles.  The vehicle registration data do not include vehicle-speciﬁc fuel economy, so we use information from Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) and the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to obtain vehicle-year fuel economy ratings.  Every year, both agencies issue information on the rated city and highway fuel consumption for virtually all new vehicles according to their characteristics (i. e. , make, model, model year, series, engine size, etc. ).  Regression-based imputation methods are applied to match fuel economy ratings to vehicles in the dataset.  For each fuel economy rating dataset (EPA and NRCan), vehicle fuel economy is imputed via two alternative models.  Model one predicts fuel economy based on main vehicle effects (e. g. , make, model, engine size), while model two predicts fuel economy using an expanded speciﬁcation including both main effects and the interactions between variables (e. g. , make, engine size, make × engine size).  These imputations are referred to as NRCan1, NRCan2, EPA1, and EPA2, depending on (a) the fuel consumption dataset and (b) the imputation model.  Our preferred speciﬁcations use the EPA2 model (i. e. , use the EPA fuel economy rating and the imputation model with interactions), but we include all four permutations for robustness. 9 These models yield accurate predictions for vehicle fuel economy and explain the majority of the variation in rated fuel consumption.  R2 values range from 0. 77 to 0. 94 depending on the speciﬁcation.  The appendix contains additional description of this imputation and itsGasoline prices for 42 Canadian cities are collected from MJ Ervin/Kent Marketing Services, based on a weekly survey of over 700 gasoline stations located throughout each city. 10 A city-speciﬁc sales-weighted average annual price series is constructed.  Information on gasoline taxes, which we use in our analysis, is also included with these data.  Population, median income and other demographics are from a summary of the T1 tax ﬁler data released by the Canada Revenue Agency and supplied by Statistics Canada.  These data provide annual description of the populations in each FSA inGasoline prices for 42 Canadian cities are collected from MJ Ervin/Kent Marketing Services, based on a weekly survey of over 700 gasoline stations located throughout each city. 10 A city-specific sales-weighted average annual price series is constructed.  Information on gasoline taxes, which we use in our analysis, is also included with these data.  Population, median income and other demographics are from a summary of the T1 tax filer data released by the Canada Revenue Agency and supplied by Statistics Canada.  These data provide annual description of the populations in each FSA inThese disparate data sources are combined as follows.  The vehicle data record the number of new vehicle registrations of vehicle i in FSA f in year t.  We refer to these FSA-vehicle-year registrations as Rift.  The imputed fuel economy rating of each unique vehicle i in the registration dataset is referred to as ˆFi.  A unique ˆFi is assigned according to each of the four imputation permutations (i. e. , the NRCan and EPA series and the two models).  Average fleet fuel efficiency of all newly registered vehicles by FSA is then calculated as follows is our dependent variable on which we regress gasoline prices (plus controls).  Fig.  1 plots the trends in sales-weighted fleet fuel efficiency ratings for cars, trucks and all vehicles.  Clear differences between the NRCan and EPA ratings are apparent.  This is expected and a feature of the rating methodologies.  NRCan updated its rating methodology in 2015 to improve the match between rated fuel economy and on-road fuel economy, but our data uses the older methodology as this is the information that would be available to consumers at the time. 11 Despite differences in levels between the NRCan and EPA ratings, trends are similar across the two series, likewise the trends for the different imputation models are similar.  As mentioned analysis is conducted using all four permutations.  Fig.  1 shows the improvement in vehicle fuel efficiency over the decade, with a gain in roughly 1 L per 100 km between 2000 and 2010.  As a next step, the FSA-level average fuel consumption ratings are matched with real gasoline prices for each city c in year t. 12 To do this, a concordance is established between FSAs f and cities c, by taking the centroid of each city and each FSA.  By determining the distance between each centroid pair, gasoline prices from city c are assigned to FSA f as long as two criteria are satisfied.  First, city c must be the closest city to FSA f in the dataset and city c must be within 30 km from the centroid of FSA f.  Beyond 30 km, we judge that gasoline prices in city c will not be the same as in FSA f.  Since the gasoline price data are only available in urban areas, our data set includes only FSAs that are proximate (within 30 km) to urban areas.  This means that our second criterion implies that we do not work with the entire set of Canadian FSAs.  Instead we use those 900 FSAs that are within the pre-specified radius of 42 cities for which price data are available.  The complete set of matched FSA-city pairs is shown via the map inThe final step of dataset assembly involves mapping gasoline prices in city c to each FSA within city c for each year t.  Gasoline prices in each of the cities share a common trend, but there is distinct variation over time and between cities. We use the within-city variation in gasoline prices, after conditioning on year and city fixed effects, to identify our main coefficients on the effect of gasoline prices on vehicle fuel economy.  Table 1 presents summary statistics.  The final dataset includes 900 FSAs across 42 cities from years 2000 to 2010.  In total, there are approximately 8600 complete observations as gasoline price data are missing for about 1% of observations.  The mean fuel efficiency rating methodologies for the four approaches are comparable and range from 10. 1 L/100 km to 11. 5 L/100 km.  The average number of vehicles registered in a FSA-year equals 778, but ranges from 1 to 24,547.  Average gasoline prices are 82. 6 c/L inclusive of the average tax which is equal to 14. 0 c/L.  Finally, the average distance between city and FSA centroids is 11. 8 km, but spans from 0. 2 km to 30 km.  3. 2.  Primary econometric specification.  Our objective is to quantify the influence of gasoline price on the fuel economy of new vehicles.  We do this by exploiting within-city variation in gasoline prices, so our main specification is F.  ft is the imputed fuel economy of the new vehicle fleet in FSA f in year t.  It is important to note that ˆFft is an imputed variable (as described above) and is therefore measured with error.  Given the methods described in the appendix, it is reasonable to assume that the measurement error is classical, so we obtain less precise, but unbiased, coefficient estimates.  gaspriceft is the price of gasoline in cents per litre.  Our preferred specification takes the logarithms of these two variables, such that it is possible to interpret b1 as the elasticity of new vehicle fuel consumption with respect to gasoline price.  As we discuss later on, consumer choices of vehicle fuel economy depend on expectations of future fuel prices, which we do not observe.  We thus interpret our elasticity as a short-run elasticity of fuel economy with respect to gasoline price. 13 X represents additional covariates (described below), while dt and kf are fixed effects for years and FSAs, respectively.  dt controls for time-invariant changes in vehicle fuel economy that may be due to, say, federal trade agreements, while kf captures time-invariant unobservable factors that are unique to a specific FSA (e. g. , geography).  Including kf means that identification is based on within-FSA variation in gasoline price.  4ft is the error term.  We cluster standard errors on FSAs to accommodate arbitrary temporal correlation in the data.  4.  Main results.  effect of gasoline prices on new vehicle fuel economy.  This section presents results from our primary speciﬁcations.  Section 5 explores important sources of heterogeneity including the role of vehicle type and the differential effect of tax variation compared with market-based variation in prices.  Table 2 has four columns of results using the fuel economy rating imputed from the EPA rating system with the full model including interactions (i. e. , EPA2).  The identifying variation is altered in each speciﬁcations by including and excluding ﬁxed effects.  The ﬁrst column is a naive model which pools the data (excludes all ﬁxed effects).  Identiﬁcation is from variation over the combined changes between regions and over time.  Column (1), for this naive model, shows an elasticity of new vehicle fuel economy rating with respect to the gasoline price of −0. 22.  This elasticity is comparable to others in the literature such as those in Small and Dender (2007) and Li et al. Despite the similarity between the naive model and prior estimates, unobserved factors, such as the geographic attributes of the region, might be correlated with both gasoline prices and the new vehicle purchase decisions.  These confounders may potentially bias our estimates from the naive model.  To address this, we include ﬁxed effects for both time and geography in subsequent columns of the table.  Column (2) includes FSA ﬁxed effects and shows an elasticity of −0. 15.  An elasticity of −0. 40 is presented in the third column with only time ﬁxed effects.  Both time and FSA ﬁxed effects are included in column (4), our preferred regression.  We ﬁnd a statistically signiﬁcant and economically meaningful elasticity of new vehicle fuel economy with respect to gasoline price equal to −0. 08, value that is meaningfully smaller (in absolute value) than the −0. 22 from column (1).  The elasticity in our preferred specification, column (4), suggests that a 1% increase in gasoline prices leads to a 0. 08% improvement in average new vehicle fleet fuel economy after controlling for unobservable factors that are invariant to the FSA andTable 3 explores the sensitivity of column (4) from Table 2 to the different measures of fuel efficiency and imputation method.  There are four columns in Table 3.  In each column, we report the results of a regression of the log of rated fuel consumption (in litres per 100 km) on the log of gasoline price, the log of median income and both FSA and year fixed effects for both year and forward sortation area.  The first two columns use the fuel consumption ratings from NRCan – NRCan1 and NRCan2, respectively – while the third and fourth columns use the fuel economy ratings from the EPA – EPA1 and EPA2 (i. e. , this latter model is identical to column (4) from Table 2).  Columns (1) and (3) use imputed fuel economy ratings from the more parsimonious model in which only the main effects for each vehicle characteristic are used to assign fuel economy ratings.  Columns (2) and (4) use the model with fully saturated interactions between main effects to increase the predictive power of the fuel economy models.  Overall, the effects of fuel rating and imputation methodologies are small.  Comparing point estimates across columns reveals very similar elasticities.  In particular, each model implies that the elasticity of rated fuel consumption of new vehicles with respect to gasoline price is between −0. 08 and −0. 09, with each being statistically significant at the 1% level.  The coefficients suggest that a 10% increase in gasoline price leads to a 0. 8 to 0. 9% improvement in the fuel economy rating of the new vehicle fleet, elasticities that are smaller (in absolute value) than those found in the comparable naiveThese elasticities warrant several comments.  To start, they are in the range of others in the literature but are more precise.  Using aggregate Canadian data at the provincial level from 1990 to 2004, Barla et al.  (2009) estimate that the elasticity of fleet fuel economy with respect to gasoline price is −0. 12 in the long run, while, for the US, Small and Dender (2007) find an elasticity of −0. 20.  Li et al.  (2009), using household level data, also obtain a value of −0. 20.  Two conclusions can be inferred.  First, our estimate, using rich city-level data, produces values of comparable magnitude to estimates using more aggregated information.  Nonetheless, our values are attenuated slightly and we believe that our method yields more credible identification.  This suggests that policy makers should be conservative in their projections of the effect of increased (or decreased) gasoline prices on consumer decisions to purchase a more fuel efficient vehicle.  Second, the evidence appears to indicate that the elasticity of fleet fuel economy with respect to gasoline price is lower (in absolute value) in Canada compared to the US.  Canadians appear to be less sensitive to gasoline prices than Americans.  Two potential explanations are that gasoline prices in Canada are higher, so Canadians have already made low-cost fuel economy investments.  Alternatively, the structure of Canada’s economy is more resource focused.  This sector may require specific classes of vehicles that have fewer opportunities for substitution.  Tables 2 and 3 also show that our results are mixed with respect to the relationship between rated fuel economy and income.  Our preferred specification (column (4) of Tables 2 and 3) shows a 1% increase in income causes a 0. 01% improvement in rated fuel economy.  However, this estimate is sensitive to changes in both the fuel efficiency rating methodology and the source of identifying variation.  Using aggregate data, neither Barla et al.  (2009) nor Small and Dender (2007) found a statistically significant relationship between income and vehicle stock fuel economy, so our results accord with theirs.  A series of robustness checks are contained in the appendix Table B. 8.  To buttress the coefficients reported in Tables 2 and 3, we include FSA-by-year time trends, a suite of additional demographic variables (i. e. , average age, proportion of females, proportion of married individuals and proportion of individuals living in apartments for each FSA-year combination) and adopt a different unit of clustering for the standard errors.  Each specification yields results that are very similar to our preferred specification.  5.  Heterogeneity in the effect of gasoline prices on new vehicle fuel economy.  The preceding analysis presents the main policy take-away from our analysis.  a 10% increase gasoline prices leads to an increase the average fuel economy of the new vehicle ﬂeet of 0. 8%.  In this section, we explore two key ways in which the elasticity may depart from this average value.  First, we build on prior literature to show how consumers respond more to permanent components of the gasoline price compared to volatile components.  Second, we show how the main result is affected by cross-sectional heterogeneity in urban characteristics.  5. 1.  Differential effect of excise taxes compared with tax-exclusive gasoline prices.  Several recent studies show differential responsivenesses to the more volatile compared to the more permanent components of gasoline prices (Rivers et al. , 2015.  Li et al. , 2014.  Davis and Kilian, 2011.  Scott, 2015.  Tiezzi and Verde, 2014.  Antweiler and Gulati, 2016). 14 All have reached the conclusion that, in the short run, gasoline demand is more elastic with respect to changes in excise taxes than with respect to changes in other components of the gasoline price. 15 The prevailing explanation for this phenomenon is that consumers perceive changes in excise taxes as more permanent than comparable movements in other prices and hence respond accordingly.  We build on this literature to evaluate whether new vehicle fuel eﬃciency is also more responsive to excise taxes compared with other components of gasoline prices.  Vehicles are a durable good, so expectations of future prices likely play an important role in shaping choices (this effect is likely much less important for the short-run studies on gasoline consumption).  To conduct our analysis, we incorporate data on excise taxes into the analysis.  Each province sets excise taxes independently and these taxes are revised periodically.  Further, several municipalities in Canada use excise taxes on gasoline sold within the city, typically to fund public transit.  where gasprice is the provincial excise tax-exclusive price of gasoline and excisetax and transittax are self-explanatory.  Unlike the earlier regressions, this speciﬁcation is a semi-log model where gasoline prices and taxes enter as levels rather than as logs.  (We also report results with logged variables).  This approach facilitates interpretation of the coeﬃcients, since b1 and b2 can be treated as the percent change in ﬂeet fuel eﬃciency due to a $1/L change in gasoline prices or taxes.  If excise taxes, transit taxes and other changes in gasoline price affect consumer vehicle choice in the same manner, we expect that H0 .  b1 = b2 = b3.  As a supplementary case, we also group excise taxes and municipal transit taxes together.  Results from Eq.  (3) are reported in Table 4.  In column (1), we repeat the earlier analysis, but show levels of gasoline price, rather than logs, for comparability with previous tables.  The coefﬁcient is precisely estimated and suggests that a $0. 10/L increase in gasoline price reduces rated fuel consumption of the new vehicle stock by 0. 9%.  Columns (2) and (3) decompose the gasoline price into the base price, provincial excise tax and municipal transit tax.  Column (2) suggests a signiﬁcantly different response to excise taxes compared to other gasoline price movements (a Wald test rejects the hypothesis that the coeﬃcients are equal at the p < 0. 01 level).  Consumers are much more responsive to changes in excise taxes than to other changes in gasoline price.  While a $0. 10/L increase in provincial gasoline excise taxes is associated with a 3. 6% improvement in ﬂeet fuel economy, the same change in other components of gasoline price is only associated with a 0. 03% improvement – less than one twelfth as large.  The substantial difference in these coeﬃcients suggests that studies that apply estimates for how consumers respond to undecomposed gasoline price elasticities to changes in taxes may be too conservative.  Column (2) also reports an estimate of the consumer response to changes in the municipal transit tax.  The parameter is not as precisely estimated and the value is slightly smaller.  Still, the point estimate remains roughly 8 times as large as the coeﬃcient associated with non-tax price increases.  The imprecision is not surprising as it is likely a result of the small number of municipalities that employ transit taxes (Vancouver, Victoria, and Montreal are the only cities in Canada with such a levy) as well as the small number of tax adjustments in the data (i. e. , there is minimal variation).  Moreover, it is plausible that the response to transit taxes is lower than for provincial excise taxes as it is much easier for consumers to avoid municipal transit taxes by purchasing gasoline from outside municipal boundaries (it more challenging to cross-border shop to avoid provincial excise taxes).  Further, this result, which uses city-level variation in both taxes and prices, suggests that it is actually distinct consumer behavior, and not aggregation bias as discussed in Levin et al.  (2017), that leads to the different elasticities on the different components of gasoline prices.  Column (3) then aggregates provincial excise and municipal transit taxes into a combined tax variable and continues to ﬁnd a signiﬁcant difference in the magnitude of response compared to the non-tax component of price (again, a Wald test rejects the null hypothesis of equal coeﬃcients at p < 0. 01).  Column (4) repeats the analysis using a log-log speciﬁcation for comparison with the earlier results.  We implement the log-log speciﬁcation using the approach suggested by Li et al.  (2014). 17 The results suggest an elasticity of new vehicle fuel economy with respect to the untaxed gasoline price of −0. 08 and with respect to the excise and transit tax combination of −0. 31.  Thus, the log-log speciﬁcation yields similar results as the semi-log speciﬁcation and also suggests a much stronger consumer response to gasoline taxes than other price changes when purchasing new vehicles.  Overall, these results complement Antweiler and Gulati (2016), Li et al.  (2014) and, Rivers et al.  (2015) that show identify differential elasticities for excise taxes and the tax-exclusive market driven component of gasoline prices.  5. 2.  Gasoline prices and urban characteristics.  The analysis in this paper uses data from all urban FSAs in Canada (deﬁned here as areas within 30 km of an urban core).  While we focus on urban areas, substantial cross-sectional differences between FSAs exist.  An individual living 30 km from a city core has different constraints (and potentially different preferences) than someone residing downtown.  Parking costs, distance to amenities, transit availability, density and walkability all differ substantially between urban and peri-urban areas.  It is likely that these differences inﬂuence vehicle choice.  Our vehicle registration data shows that individuals in areas closer to the city centres are more likely to own subcompact or compact vehicles, whereas individuals in less urban areas are more likely to buy pickup trucks.  As a result, individuals in more urban areas have a tendency for more fuel eﬃcient vehicles.  To illustrate this, consider Fig.  3.  Fig.  3 shows the patterns in transit mode share, population density, and vehicle choice across the 143 FSAs in the Greater Toronto region.  Panel (a) is for population density.  Darker colors represent greater density per km2.  The core downtown FSA contains more than 20,000 individuals per km2 compared periphery neighborhoods with only several hundred people per km2.  Panels (b), (c) and (d), demonstrate the intra-city transportation heterogeneity that exists within Toronto.  Panels (b) and (c), respectively, show that households proximate to the downtown core are more likely to take public transit and less likely to own a pickup truck.  Finally, panel (d) displays the FSA average new vehicle fuel economy.  Darker colors represent less fuel eﬃcient vehicle (i. e. , more litres consumed per 100 km).  Visually, it is more diﬃcult to detect a pattern in panel (d) compared with panels (b) and (c).  To explore the potential relevance of heterogeneity of urban characteristics, we focus on whether differences in where individuals live inﬂuence how they respond to changes in gasoline prices in their choice of new vehicles.  Three variables are used to deﬁne the urban environment.  First, we measure how far each FSA is from the nearest urban core based on the great-circle distance from the centroid of the FSA to the city hall of the nearest city.  Second, we calculate the population density for each FSA and explore differences in dense versus sparse regions.  Estimates of the population are based on the 2006 census, with the area calculated based on Statistics Canada’s boundary ﬁles.  Finally, we use an estimate of the public transit mode share in each FSA.  This is calculated from the percentage of households in the 2006 census that report using public transit as their primary mode of transport to work. 