 Introduction Business risks stemming from a firm's business model and operating environment are important determinants of its cost of equity capital (Modigliani and Miller, 1958).  One characteristic that regulators, researchers, and practitioners view as important in assessing the risks inherent in a firm's current and future cash flows is the concentration of the firm's customer base.  For instance, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No.  131 (previously SFAS No.  14) requires firms to disclose information about major customers because these customers represent “a significant concentration of risk. ” The SEC under Regulation S-K Item 101 also has similar disclosure requirements.  Further, anecdotal evidence suggests that firms explicitly recognize this risk. 4 While approximately 45% of public firms report relying on at least one customer for a sizeable portion of revenues (Ellis et al. , 2012), there is surprisingly little empirical evidence on whether customer concentration risk affects firms’ financing costs.  In this study, we aim to fill this gap by investigating the relation between the concentration of a supplier’s customer base and its cost of equity.  Depending on a major customer for a large portion of sales can be risky for a supplier for two primary reasons. 5 First, a supplier faces the risk of losing substantial future sales if a major customer becomes financially distressed or declares bankruptcy, switches to a different supplier, or decides to develop products internally.  Consistent with this notion, Hertzel et al.  (2008) and Kolay et al.  (2015) document negative supplier abnormal stock returns to the announcement that a major customer declares bankruptcy. 6,7 Further, a customer's weak financial condition or actions could signal inherent problems about the supplier’s viability to its remaining customers and lead to compounding losses in sales.  Second, a supplier faces the risk of losing anticipated cash flows from being unable to collect outstanding receivables if the customer goes bankrupt. 8 This assertion is consistent with the finding that suppliers offering customers more trade credit experience larger negative abnormal stock returns around the announcement of a customer filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy (Jorion and Zhang, 2009.  Kolay et al. , 2015).  While the above evidence suggests that a concentrated customer base can increase a supplier’s risk, whether this risk is priced into a supplier’s cost of equity is unclear and thus an empirical question.  To test the relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity, we first create three measures that capture various dimensions of customer concentration over the years 1981–2011.  Next, we follow prior research and measure a supplier’s cost of equity as the average of several implied cost of equity estimates derived from analysts’ earnings forecasts (e. g. , Hail and Leuz, 2006.  Li, 2010).  In our empirical tests, we control for omitted variables that can affect all suppliers in the same industry during any given year and several characteristics known to impact a supplier’s cost of equity.  Across all three measures of customer concentration, we find evidence that greater risk associated with a concentrated customer base results in a higher cost of equity.  Our findings suggest that a supplier that depends on one or more major customers for at least 10% of its annual revenues has a cost of equity that is 21. 2 basis points higher, which represents an additional annual cost of $7. 99 million for the average supplier to finance with equity.  This effect is economically significant relative to our other control variables, such as measures of information asymmetry.  For instance, the effect of depending on sales from a major customer on a supplier’s cost of equity is equivalent to the effect of a 1. 5 standard deviation increase in analyst forecast dispersion.  We also document a positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s systematic risk, as measured by the supplier’s equity beta.  This finding is consistent with traditional asset pricing theories that suggest that customer concentration risk would have to be related to systematic risk in order to be non-diversifiable and therefore priced into a supplier’s cost of equity (e. g. , Lambert et al. , 2007.  Lintner, 1965.  Sharpe, 1964).  Further, this result supports the conclusion that the risk associated with having a concentrated customer base is in part non-diversifiable. 9 We also conduct several cross-sectional tests that exploit settings where the risk associated with having a concentrated customer base is predictably larger.  If greater customer concentration increases a supplier's risk, then the positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity should be especially strong when these relationships are predictably riskier.  Specifically, this relation should be stronger when a supplier has a major customer that is more likely to default or declare bankruptcy or a major customer that has fewer barriers to switching to a different supplier.  This relation should also be more pronounced for a supplier that is more likely to have unpaid invoices if a major customer defaults and for a supplier that lacks a diverse stream of revenues that can coinsure against the loss of a major customer.  We use several measures to proxy for these situations and find evidence that is consistent with all four predictions.  Our estimates of the effect of customer concentration on a supplier's cost of equity could suffer from an omitted variable bias.  In particular, our control variables may insufficiently account for differences between suppliers that do and do not have concentrated customer bases.  Thus, the estimated effect of customer concentration on a supplier's cost of equity could be picking up nonlinear effects of our control variables.  We are also unable to observe the extent to which different customer–supplier relationships are governed by implicit versus explicit contracts as well as the extent to which managerial-specific relationships between customers and suppliers affect the risk of losing a major customer.  To help alleviate these endogeneity concerns, we perform a propensity score matched sample analysis and implement an instrumental variables approach.  The results from both analyses continue to show that a supplier with a more concentrated customer base has a higher cost of equity, suggesting a causal link from customer concentration to a supplier's cost of equity.  The focus of our paper is on the relation between a concentrated base of corporate customers and a supplier's cost of equity.  Yet, a supplier can also be highly dependent on revenues from the U. S.  federal government.  Unlike corporate customers, however, federal government customers are much less likely to default or declare bankruptcy, and government purchases are typically regulated by longer-term procurement contracts (Goldman et al. , 2013), which reduce the risk that government customers will switch suppliers.  As such, a supplier that depends on the federal government for a large portion of revenues gains operational efficiencies from selling to a major customer but does not bear many of the risks associated with relying on a major corporate customer.  Consequently, we expect a negative relation between federal government customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity.  We find that the cost of equity is 19. 1 basis points lower for a supplier that depends on the federal government for at least 10% of its annual revenues.  In our last set of analyses, we examine the relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of debt.  If a supplier with a concentrated base of corporate customers loses a major customer, the financial losses the supplier incurs could limit its ability to service debt payments.  As such, we expect that creditors demand a higher rate of return on loans made to a supplier with a more concentrated customer base.  We measure a supplier’s cost of debt using loan spreads on new issues of both bank loans and public bonds.  Our results show that a supplier that depends on at least one major corporate customer has 5. 0–6. 0% higher borrowing costs on bank debt and 7. 0–9. 9% higher borrowing costs on public bonds.  Thus, a concentrated customer base increases a supplier’s cost of accessing not only external equity but also debt capital.  We provide new empirical evidence that the concentration of a supplier’s customer base impacts its cost of equity.  Broadly, this finding contributes to the literature investigating the determinants of a firm's cost of equity.  Prior work predominantly focuses on how various forms of information risk affect firms' cost of equity, including voluntary financial and nonfinancial disclosure (Botosan, 1997.  Dhaliwal et al. , 2011.  Francis et al. , 2008), earnings transparency (Barth et al. , 2013), and internal control quality (Ashbaugh-Skaife et al. , 2009).  While studies find that business risks stemming from a firm’s operating environment and business model tend to have a larger impact than managerial discretion on a firm’s cost of equity (Bhattacharya et al. , 2012.  Francis et al. , 2005), they do not identify the sources of such business risks.  Our work extends this literature by documenting how a prevalent source of business risk—a concentrated customer base—impacts a firm’s financing costs.  Our findings also validate the inclusion of a “customer concentration risk premium” as an input in practitioner models of a firm’s cost of equity (e. g. , Duff & Phelps). 10,11 Our findings also extend the literature that examines how the concentration of a supplier’s customer base affects its characteristics and financial policies.  While prior work shows that suppliers with a concentrated base of customers tend to be more profitable because they realize operational efficiencies (Cen et al. , 2013.  Kalwani and Narayandas, 1995.  Patatoukas, 2012), our findings imply that a concentrated customer base raises suppliers’ risk and financing costs.  Thus, our paper relates to work documenting that a concentrated customer base is associated with higher idiosyncratic risk and a greater likelihood of receiving a going-concern opinion (Albuquerque et al. , 2014.  Dhaliwal et al. , 2014).  Last, several other studies find that suppliers with greater customer concentration tend to maintain lower financial leverage ratios (Banerjee et al. , 2008.  Kale and Shahrur, 2007), recognize bad news sooner (Hui et al. , 2012), have more discretionary accruals (Raman and Shahrur, 2008), hold more cash (Itzkowitz, 2013), and pay fewer dividends (Wang, 2012).  Finally, our study contributes to literature showing that nonfinancial stakeholders have a significant impact on a firm’s financing costs.  For instance, Chen et al.  (2011) show that labor unions increase labor adjustment costs and make wages stickier, resulting in higher operating leverage and a higher cost of equity.  Yet, Chen et al.  (2012) find that unionization lowers a firm’s cost of debt.  In addition to showing that major customers impact a firm’s financing costs, we show that the type of customer exposes suppliers to differential business risks.  Specifically, we show that a supplier with a major corporate customer has a higher cost of equity and debt, while a supplier with a major federal government customer has a lower cost of equity but not a lower cost of debt.  The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 describes our data and empirical methodology.  Section 3 reports our empirical findings.  Section 4 documents the results of additional robustness tests.  Section 5 concludes.  <Middle> Data and empirical methodology.  2. 1.  Sample selection.  We obtain data to estimate the implied cost of equity capital from the Institutional Brokers’ Estimate System (IBES), customer–supplier data from Compustat’s segment customer files, financial statement data from Compustat, and stock return data from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) files.  The intersection of these databases creates our main sample that consists of 44,218 supplier-year observations.  This sample includes industrial firms that have publicly-traded stock over the 1981–2011 period, are incorporated in the U. S. , and have non-missing data for the main variables of interest.  We exclude utilities (SIC 4900–4999) and financial firms (SIC 6000–6999).  We winsorize continuous variables at their 1st and 99th percentiles to reduce the influence of outliers and express all dollar values in 2009 dollars. Implied cost of equity capital estimates We empirically estimate the cost of equity that is implied in current stock prices and analysts’ earnings forecasts using IBES data as of June in the following year and four cost of equity models introduced by Claus and Thomas (2001), Gebhardt et al.  (2001), Easton (2004), and Ohlson and Juettner-Nauroth (2005). 