 Introduction Shareholders hire a CEO and design the compensation contract to mitigate agency costs and motivate the CEO to make value-increasing decisions.  In addition to the compensation contract, the ﬁrm's debt contract terms and the possibility that the ﬁrm's creditors may wrest control of the ﬁrm also motivate the CEO.  From the perspective of the shareholders, who each year revise the CEO's compensation contract, the incentives provided by long-term debt contracts are pre-existing.  The shareholders potentially adjust the compensation contract such that the compensation incentives, layered on top of the debt contract incentives, modify the CEO's interests to align with those of the ﬁrm's owners.  Whether the pre-existing incentives provided by the debt contract are large enough to affect how compensation contracts are written is an interesting open question.  This study investigates whether the pre-existing debt contract provisions affect the compensation contract struck between the ﬁrm's owners and the CEO.  I document that when the ﬁrm's debt contracts include earnings-based covenants the CEO's cash compensation contract is less sensitive to earnings performance measures.  Prior studies that consider only the performance incentives embedded in the compensation contract potentially underestimate the strength of the CEO's incentives to perform.  Debt contracts are an important class of contracts that provide incentives to the CEO.  Prior literature explores the use of earnings performance measures in debt and compensation contracts, respectively, and documents that contracted performance measures inﬂuence the CEO.  However, the literature is silent on how the use of a performance measure in one contract relates to its use in the other.  In this study, I investigate how the inclusion of earnings-based performance measures in debt contracts inﬂuence the use of earnings-based performance measures in the CEO's compensation contract.  Moreover, this study speaks to the recent and repeated criticism of executive compensation practices in both academic literature and the business press.  Criticisms of the apparently weak relation between the CEO's compensation and the ﬁrm's earnings performance highlight the importance for researchers, investors, and the media to understand how the CEO's incentives are shaped.  By ignoring the earnings incentives provided by the ﬁrm's debt contracts, critics may underestimate the CEO's incentives to perform.  This study provides a unique view of the CEO's earnings incentives as the combined incentives provided by earnings-based provisions in debt contracts and earningsbased performance measures in compensation contracts.  Shareholders use contractible performance measures, such as earnings, to motivate CEOs to apply effort and make decisions in the shareholders’ best interests.  By tying cash compensation to earnings, shareholders provide the CEO with incentives to deliver higher earnings performance.  Empirical studies consistently corroborate theoretical predictions of positive correlations between earnings and CEO cash compensation (e. g. , Lambert and Larcker, 1987.  Sloan, 1993.  Baber et al. , 1996).  In debt contracts, earnings-based performance measures also motivate the CEO to focus on earnings.  Beneish and Press (1993, 1995) ﬁnd that violating ﬁnancial debt covenants results in real costs to the ﬁrm such as higher interest rates and renegotiation costs.  Incremental to these ﬁrm-speciﬁc costs, Nini et al.  (2012) document a personal cost for the CEO following technical default.  Holding other performance variables constant, Nini et al.  (2012) ﬁnd that the likelihood of forced CEO turnover increases by 60% upon technical default.  Additionally, violating the ﬁrm's debt contract terms may damage the CEO's relationship with the lender and strain future negotiations.  Thus, debt contracts provide the CEO with performance incentives such that CEOs will strive to maintain earnings above the level speciﬁed in earnings-based covenants.  Both debt and cash compensation contracts provide the CEO with incentives to focus on earnings through the explicit use of earnings-based performance measures. 1 When debt contract terms are pre-existing (i. e. , the debt contract is in place when the compensation contract is structured) shareholders should consider the effect of these terms and determine how much more (or less) earnings-based incentive to provide in the CEO's cash compensation contract.  I expect that shareholders will reduce the earnings-based incentives provided by the compensation contract when debt contracts provide the CEO with pre-existing earnings-based incentives.  Thus, the inclusion of earnings-based covenants in the debt contract relate to a tilting of the CEO's incentives in the compensation contract away from earnings performance.  However, the CEO's combined incentives, provided by the earnings-based measures in the debt and compensation contracts, are at the level that best serves the shareholders’ interests.  Consequently, I predict that earnings-based covenants are associated with a reduction in the CEO's cash compensation sensitivity to earnings (hereafter CCSE).  In addition to the inclusion of earnings-based covenants in the debt contract, earnings-based covenant slack (i. e. , the distance between current performance and the covenant threshold) may be associated with the CEO's earnings incentives.  When a ﬁrm's earnings performance is near an earnings-based covenant threshold, the tight covenant slack likely increases the CEO's incentives to maintain or improve earnings performance.  If tight earnings-based covenant slack provides the CEO with greater earnings incentives then the shareholders will reduce the explicit earnings incentives in the compensation contract.  Consequently, I predict that within the sample of ﬁrms negotiating earnings-based covenants into their debt contracts tight earnings-based covenant slack is associated with a reduction in CCSE.  I test my hypotheses using earnings-based covenant details from the Thomson Reuters Loan Pricing Corporation's syndicated loan data in DealScan, CEO compensation data from Execucomp, ﬁnancial data from Compustat, and market data from CRSP for the period 1992 through 2012.  I test whether earnings-based covenants are negatively associated with CCSE holding ﬁrm and executive characteristics constant.  Additionally, I test whether CCSE varies with covenant slack for ﬁrms negotiating earnings-based covenants into their debt contracts.  Consistent with my ﬁrst hypothesis, I ﬁnd that CCSE is negatively associated with earnings-based covenants.  More speciﬁcally, I ﬁnd the sensitivity of the CEO's cash compensation to return on assets (ROA) is signiﬁcantly weaker when an earnings-based covenant is present.  This ﬁnding is economically meaningful.  For a one standard deviation increase in ROA, the corresponding increase in cash compensation for CEOs in ﬁrms with earnings-based covenants is roughly 22% less than that received by CEOs in ﬁrms without earnings-based covenants.  In addition to the negative association between CCSE and the presence of earnings-based covenants, I ﬁnd the negative association holds for continuous variables that proxy for the incentives provided by earnings-based covenants.  The results indicate a signiﬁcant negative association between CCSE and (1) the fraction of ﬁrm debt that is subject to an earnings-based covenant and (2) the total number of earnings-based covenants in the ﬁrm's debt contracts.  Together, the results support the hypothesis that the CEO's earnings incentives in the compensation contract are muted when the ﬁrm's debt contracts provide earnings incentives.  I also ﬁnd some evidence suggesting CCSE varies with covenant slack in a sample of ﬁrms negotiating earnings-based covenants into their debt contracts.  In the main analysis that estimates CCSE in the cross-section, I fail to ﬁnd a signiﬁcant negative association between CCSE and tightly set earnings-based covenants at contract inception.  However, in additional analysis that utilizes measures of CCSE as disclosed in the ﬁrm's proxy statements, I ﬁnd a negative and signiﬁcant association between CCSE and the tightness of earnings-based covenants.  Together the ﬁndings in this paper suggest that on average the compensation contract provides weaker earnings incentives when debt contracts provide earnings-based incentives.  However, within a sample of ﬁrms with earnings-based covenants, the negative association between earningsbased covenant slack and CCSE is sensitive to the research design speciﬁcation.  The tests of an association between CCSE and earnings-based covenants may suffer from self-selection bias such that the choice to include earnings-based covenants in the debt contract is not random.  To control for potential self-selection bias attributable to unobservable factors I use a Heckman two-step approach.  Consistent with the main results, the Heckman two-step analysis indicates that the presence of earnings-based covenants is negatively associated with CCSE.  This result suggests self-selection bias does not explain the negative association between CCSE and earnings-based covenants reported in the main analysis.  Additionally, I test the robustness of the main ﬁnding to alternative explanations and research designs.  An alternative explanation for the reported ﬁndings is reverse causality.  Speciﬁcally, the earnings-based covenants are negotiated into the debt contract dependent on the CEO's earnings-based incentives in the compensation contract.  I address this concern using CEO turnovers as a setting to ensure the compensation contract is negotiated after the debt contract is in place.  As a second robustness analysis, I test whether the negative association between earnings-based covenants and CCSE is robust to controlling for additional debt contract features.  Third, I test my hypotheses with an alternative research design that uses the weight on earnings as disclosed in the ﬁrm's proxy statements as the measure of CCSE.  Lastly, I test the robustness of my ﬁndings to address the concern that the measures of earnings-based covenants used in the analysis are stale due to the frequency of debt contract renegotiations.  To address this concern, I reexamine my ﬁrst hypothesis with a sample restricted to the two years subsequent to a debt contract origination.  Overall, the additional analyses provide robust results suggesting shareholders reduce the explicit earnings incentives in the compensation contract when debt contracts include earningsbased covenants.  To summarize, I contribute to the literature in several ways.  This study is the ﬁrst to investigate how debt contract terms relate to the compensation contract struck between the CEO and the ﬁrm's owners.  The evidence presented in this study has several implications for academics and practitioners.  This study relates to the recent criticism of executive compensation practices that spotlights weak associations between compensation and ﬁrm performance.  The ﬁndings indicate that the CEO's incentives for earnings performance include not only the direct incentives provided by their pay package but also the implicit incentives from earnings-based covenants in debt contracts.  These ﬁndings suggest that weak pay sensitivity to earnings may not indicate inefﬁcient or sub-optimal CEO compensation practices but instead may be indicative of strong implicit incentives in the debt contracts.  More generally, my ﬁndings demonstrate how the use of accounting information in one contract setting alters the contracting parties’ incentives and the use of those accounting measures in subsequent contracts.  2.  Background literature and hypothesis development.  Since Jensen and Meckling (1976), the notable conﬂicts of interest between parties to the ﬁrm are well recognized.  In particular, prior work investigates the conﬂicts of interest between shareholders and debtholders, and between managers and shareholders, respectively.  As Stiglitz (1985) notes in his multiple-principal agent problem, creditors and shareholders contribute capital and each contract with the manager to motivate him to act in their respective interests.  The abovementioned conﬂicts of interest are readily recognizable during the negotiation of these contracts, whereby debtholders impose debt contract provisions and shareholders structure compensation contracts to motivate and restrict the manager's actions. 2 Prior literature largely ignores the potential interaction between these two contract settings, where each contract is intended to inﬂuence a single manager.  This study is a step towards ﬁlling this gap.  More speciﬁcally, I investigate how the use of earnings based provisions in debt contracts affect the use of earnings in CEO compensation contracts.  I will brieﬂy discuss prior work on how earnings are used in debt contracts and in compensation contracts, respectively, and then what the use of earnings in debt contracts implies for the use of earnings in compensation contracts.  2. 1.  The use of earnings in debt contracts.  Jensen and Meckling (1976), Smith and Warner (1979) and Myers (1977) develop theories of levered ﬁrms and suggest debt covenants mitigate the agency cost of debt arising from the shareholders’ and debtholders’ divergent interests.  More recently, Bradley and Roberts (2004), Garleanu and Zwiebel (2009), and Demiroglu and James (2010) document that when the risk of wealth shifting from the creditors to self-interested managers and shareholders is greater, then the use of covenants is more prevalent.  These ﬁndings are consistent with the theoretical predictions that covenants protect debtholders’ investment from downside risk and mitigate the agency costs of debt.  Accounting measures are commonly used in private debt contract provisions in two ways.  First, restrictive covenants prohibit actions that would shift wealth from debtholders to shareholders.  For example, restrictive covenants provide threshold levels of accounting measures below which a borrowing ﬁrm cannot pay dividends, repurchase shares, or issue new debt.  Second, afﬁrmative covenants specify accounting measures that alert debtholders of deteriorating ﬁrm performance or increased credit risk.  Afﬁrmative covenants specify threshold values of the borrower's ﬁnancial measures that must be maintained to avoid technical default (i. e. , a default not associated with a failure to make debt payments).  Christensen and Nikolaev (2012) further classify afﬁrmative covenants as either performance covenants (i. e. , covenants constructed from income statement data, cash ﬂow statement data, or a combination of income statement, cash ﬂow statement and balance sheet data) or capital covenants (i. e. , covenants constructed from balance sheet data alone).  Earnings-based covenants are afﬁrmative, performance covenants that rely on measures of the borrowing ﬁrm's earnings performance.  Earnings-based debt covenants stipulate a minimum level of earnings that must be met in order to avoid technical default.  Earnings-based covenants may include, but are not limited to, maximum debt-to-EBITDA ratio, minimum EBITDA and several coverage ratios relying on measures of earnings.  In the event of technical default on earnings-based debt covenants, lenders have the right to renegotiate the terms of the debt contract at the borrowing ﬁrm's expense or call the debt (i. e. , demand immediate repayment).  Beneish and Press (1993, 1995) and Dichev and Skinner (2002) ﬁnd technical default results in costs to the ﬁrm through increased interest rates, increased restrictions in the debt agreements, renegotiation costs, and a reduction in available credit.  These studies ﬁnd the inclusion of earnings-based debt covenants impose real costs to the ﬁrm when earnings fall below the covenant threshold.  The existence of earnings-based covenants provides incentives for the CEO to maintain earnings above the covenant threshold and avoid personal costs associated with default.  Dichev and Skinner (2002) argue that CEOs, in both ﬁrms with poor and good ﬁnancial health, avoid technical default because of the personal cost to the CEO in terms of the time and effort associated with renegotiations.  Moreover, debt covenant violations increase the likelihood of CEO dismissal, which imposes heavy ﬁnancial and reputational costs on the CEO.  Nini et al. 