
The important role of oil in the world economy has motivated the
research on the economic and ﬁnancial consequences caused by oil
price changes.  In his seminal study on oil price changes and the
macroeconomy, Hamilton (1983) ﬁnds that an oil price shock is a
contributing factor to US recession.  Since then, scholars have performed
much research on this issue (Jones Name, 2004.  Hamilton, 2008.  Herrera
Name, 2011.  Filis and Chatziantoniou, 2014.  Salisu Name, 2017, among
others).  Stock markets act as the barometer for anticipating economic
changes in economic activity (Fama, 1990).  Oil price is also likely to
play an important role in predicting stock prices by at least two channels
as follows.  On the one hand, since oil is an important input in the
production of many goods, oil price changes may affect future cash
ﬂows of enterprises.  As a result, higher oil prices may increase the
production cost of enterprises, dampening corporate proﬁts and thus
further depressing stock prices (Sadorsky, 1999.  Apergis and Miller,
2009).  On the other hand, oil price changes may impact the discount
rate.  Rising oil prices are often seen as indicative of inﬂationary
pressures.  Central banks typically address it by raising the interest rate
(Huang Name, 1996.  Miller and Ratti, 2009).  Since the link between
oil price changes and stock markets has important implications for
portfolio management strategies, this issue has attracted considerable
attention in recent studies (e. g. , Park and Ratti, 2008.  Naifar, 2016. 
Kayalar Name, 2017). 
Despite the increased interest in the oil-stock relationships, there are
relatively few papers that investigate the time-varying relationships
between them (e. g. , Chang Name, 2013.  Broadstock and Filis, 2014.  Joo
and Park, 2017).  This series of study reﬂects the importance of allowing
the relationships to be variable.  However, they do not systematically
isolate bearish and bullish markets.  Quantile regression is able to
describe the entire conditional distribution of the dependent variable
and can solve this problem effectively.  Applying this approach, Lee
and Zeng (2011) argue that the impacts of oil price shocks on real
stock returns vary with the stock performances (e. g. , bearish and bullish
markets).  Sim and Zhou (2015) also indicate that oil shocks affect US
stock returns depending on market circumstances by using the
quantile-on-quantile approach.  Moreover, the majority of the existing
studies investigate the oil-stock relationships in a linear framework. 
However, Mork (1989) and Mork Name (1994) conclude that oil price
increases have a negative effect on GDP, whereas oil price decreases
have not been found to have a positive impact on output or an impact
of the same degree.  Some related works explore the non-linear effects of
oil price changes on stock returns (Cong Name, 2008.  Park and Ratti,
2008.  Ramos and Veiga, 2013.  Tsai, 2015.  Reboredo and Ugolini, 2016). 
In a recent study, Kang and Ratti (2013) argue that the relationships
of oil-stock are not formed in isolation from economic policy uncertainty. 
This is because oil price shocks and economic policy uncertainty are
interrelated and jointly inﬂuence stock returns.  Relatively little attention, however, has been paid to the relationships between economic
policy uncertainty and the stock market. 