 1.  Introduction Strategies that provide information about the environmental impact of activities are increasingly seen as an effective way to encourage conservation behavior (Evans et al. , 2009).  The environmental impact of everyday activities is often invisible to consumers who cannot gauge the impact of their actions.  Information strategies that aim to correct this information asymmetry are increasingly common (Foulon et al. , 2002.  Kennedy et al. , 1994).  These include mercury and air pollution advisories (Cutter and Neidell, 2009.  Shimshack and Ward, 2010.  Shimshack et al. , 2007.  Zivin and Neidell, 2009).  mandatory and voluntary corporate disclosure (Bennear and Olmstead, 2008.  Delmas et al. , 2010.  Evans et al. , 2009.  Khanna, 2001.  Konar and Cohen, 1997.  Lyon and Maxwell, 2007.  Powers et al. , 2011) and ecolabels (Hallstein and Villas-Boas, 2013.  Teisl et al. , 2002).  Such strategies are based on the principle that more and better information about the environmental impact of activities will encourage consumers to conserve.  Electricity conservation has been an especially active context for the deployment of information strategies.  Electricity and heat generation accounts for over 40% of greenhouse gases across the world (International Energy Agency, 2014) and effective conservation programs could contribute to signiﬁcant environmental improvements.  A large number of energy conservation experiments have been conducted using various information strategies to reduce energy use (Allcott, 2011.  Allcott and Rogers, 2014.  Asensio and Delmas, 2015.  Delmas and Lessem, 2014.  Jessoe and Rapson, 2014).  These include providing users with energy saving tips, historical individual usage, real time energy usage, peer usage, etc.  Meta-analyses of these ﬁeld experiments ﬁnd these strategies to be effective for conservation (Delmas et al. , 2013), although effectiveness varies with the type of message provided.  However, until very recently (McRae, 2015.  Pellerano et al.  2015), there have been no ﬁeld experiments in developing countries that focus on information strategies for energy conservation behavior.  Indeed, a recent meta-analysis based on 156 ﬁeld trials published in peer-reviewed journals from 1975 to 2012 found that 100% of the studies were conducted in developed countries, mostly Europe and the United States (Delmas et al. , 2013).  Developing countries differ in many characteristics from developed countries, including income and education levels, and information technology infrastructure, and it is unclear how energy information strategies would perform in such contexts.  For example, conducting ﬁeld experiments in developing countries could allow researchers to provide meaningful monetary gains and losses with the same amount that would be considered trivial in developed countries (Harrison and List, 2004.  Kachelmeier and Shehata, 1992.  Slonim and Roth, 1998). 1 At the same time, the demographic stratiﬁcation of developing countries is changing rapidly, with an increase share of middle classes with higher income levels.  For example, the middle class population of India is estimated at 267 million individuals and to double to 547 million individuals by 2026. 2 We still know little about the attitudes of these middle class households towards energy conservation and how to best engage them in conservation behavior (Mawdsley, 2004).  Some have described middle classes as particularly responsive to environmental issues because they have inherited a culture of conservation due to scarcity of resources (Vyas, 2012).  Others have suggested that middle class exhibit a lack of concern about the public good because they are swept into the global frenzy of consumption (Gidwani and Reddy, 2011).  So it is unclear how middle class households in developing countries will engage with information about energy conservation and act on it.  Since the majority of the growth in energy demand over the next few decades will come from the developing world (Wolfram et al. , 2012), and because of the rapid growth of middle class households, identifying cost-effective strategies for promoting energy conservation behavior for the middle class in these countries could have a profound impact on greenhouse gas emissions.  In this study, we contribute to the energy conservation behavior literature by conducting a ﬁeld experiment on electricity conservation behavior in urban India.  In recent years, India has emerged as one of the fastest growing economies of the world, entailing an equally rapid increase in energy consumption (Balachandra et al. , 2010).  The estimated electricity consumption in India was of 882,592 GWh in 2013, showing an annual growth rate of 9% since 2006 (Government of India, 2015).  India's consumption of energy is now the fourth largest in the world, behind China, the U. S and Russia (IEA, 2012).  Although the Indian economy is gradually becoming more energy efﬁcient, India is still among the least energy efﬁcient countries in the world (Balachandra et al. , 2010).  Most importantly, electricity generation is a major source of air pollution in India (Guttikunda et al. , 2013), since 66% of the electricity generation is derived from coal power plants (Guttikunda and Jawahar, 2014). 3 The pollution from these plants resulted in an estimated 80,000–115,000 premature deaths and N20 million asthma cases from exposure to total particulate matter (PM) 2. 5 pollution (Guttikunda and Jawahar, 2014).  Because of the signiﬁcant health impact of electricity generation in India, we decided to conduct a randomized ﬁeld experiment to test how motivations on the health impact of energy use motivate consumers to conserve electricity as compared to more conventional monetary motivations to conserve.  Buildings in India account for N30% (264,778 GWh) of overall energy consumption and residential building are responsible for 93% (246,243 GWh) of building energy consumption (Batra et al. , 2013.  CEA, 2012).  Indian residential energy use is expected to increase by around 65–75% in 2050 compared to 2005 (Van Ruijven et al. , 2011).  The urban population constitutes about a third of the total population and a major share of the residential energy consumption (Chaturvedi et al. , 2014).  Studying middle class urban households is particularly important because research shows that the impact of urbanization on emissions is more pronounced in the middle-income group than in the other income groups (Poumanyvong and Kaneko, 2010).  We therefore focus our research on identifying the most effective information strategies for energy conservation behavior in the residential sector for urban middle class households.  We replicated the methodology used in a randomized ﬁeld experiment conducted in the U. S.  by Asensio and Delmas (2015, 2016).  We provided real-time, smart metering energy feedback to 19 Indian households over an academic year, to test the effectiveness of two different messaging strategies based either on the environmental and health impacts of electricity consumption, or on the monetary savings of reducing electricity consumption.  While our sample size was relatively small, our advanced energy metering system enabled us to collect high frequency data with the statistical power necessary to detect changes in energy consumption behaviors.  This aspect of our energy metering system is remarkable as low technology electricity infrastructure as often been the main barrier to conduct energy information experiments in developing countries.  Indeed, in India, electriﬁcation rates are low, and the electricity grid frequently fails to provide a reliable supply of power when people need it (Urpelainen, 2014).  Furthermore, our system allowed us to identify participants' level of engagement with the treatment messages.  Namely how many times participants actually read the messages we sent them and how many times they visited their personalized electricity usage dashboard.  This feature allows us to assess the effect of the actual treatment, speciﬁcally when people access their energy feedback information, rather than just measuring the effect of the intent to treat, that is to say sending the email or making the information available on the dashboard.  This contrasts with previous energy conservation messaging strategies that relied mostly on “intent to treat” study designs (Schultz et al. , 2007.  Allcott, 2011).  This method also allows us to measure the link between engagement with the information and conservation behavior.  Our results show that non-monetary messages that framed electricity consumption in terms of environmental and health impacts were more effective than monetary messages that framed electricity consumption in terms of ﬁnancial savings.  Households in the environmental/health treatment group were more engaged with their electricity feedback, and reduced their electricity usage by 18. 4% relative to the control group, while households in the monetary group did not make signiﬁcant changes in their usage throughout the 12 weeks of the experiment relative to the control group.  These revealed preferences provide stark contrast to the stated preferences disclosed in a survey of 1820 residents of urban India, in which survey participants identiﬁed monetary savings, not health protection, as their main motivation for energy conservation.  Our ﬁndings illustrate the advantage of ﬁeld experimental techniques to reveal conservation behavior and the potential for nonmonetary information strategies for encouraging energy conservation behavior in developing countries.  The failure to engage in energy efﬁciency has been characterized as a market failure associated with imperfect information.  individuals lack the relevant information or knowledge to engage in energy saving behaviors (Golove and Eto, 1996.  Brown, 2001.  Gillingham et al. , 2009) and acquiring such information is costly.  One potentially effective informational tool is the provision of frequent feedback to consumers regarding their energy usage.  Such information can allow consumers to better understand when and how they are using electricity, and help them improve energy usage decisions (Fischer, 2008).  Being reminded of energy usage periodically may also help trigger conservation activities by making energy usage more salient.  Conservation strategies based on energy feedback and information increase individual awareness of the issues and of the possibilities to inﬂuence the problem.  However, they do not automatically lead to energy conservation behavior.  Once individuals have this information, they weigh the beneﬁts versus the cost of their actions before deciding to engage in conservation.  Information strategies can focus on different types of motivations of behavior, such as for example pecuniary motivations or moral payoffs.  Yet, it is unclear which strategies are more effective depending on the context in which they are implemented.  Furthermore, bounded rationality suggests that consumers are rational but face cognitive constraints in processing information that lead to deviations from rationality in certain circumstances (Gillingham et al. , 2009.  Yoeli et al.  2017).  Thus the need to investigate the effectiveness of different information framing for energy conservation.  2. 1.  Pecuniary strategies.  Pecuniary strategies represent a set of strategies commonly used in conservation behavior studies.  Lowered energy use results in ﬁnancial beneﬁts to households that pay their own electricity bills.  Individuals should be expected to take up energy conservation as long as the beneﬁts of doing so are larger than the costs.  Many energy conservation experiments inform participants about the ﬁnancial expenses and/or savings potential associated with their energy usage (see Delmas et al. , 2013 for a review).  Some studies found strong effects of price signals on the timing of electricity consumption (Faruqui et al. , 2010.  Newsham and Bowker, 2010), or total energy consumption (Gillingham et al. , 2009.  Ito et al. , 2015), demonstrating that price signals affect behavior.  However, other studies indicate that pecuniary incentives might be counterproductive for energy conservation because they might crowd out more altruistic or prosocial motivations (Bénabou and Tirole, 2006.  Bowles, 2008).  Furthermore, pecuniary strategies might not be effective if the monetary incentives are small.  The literature is therefore divided on the effectiveness of pecuniary strategies for energy conservation.  2. 2.  Moral payoffs.  There is a rich literature on the importance of moral payoffs and social norms on household consumption decisions.  Research has shown that normative strategies can motivate human behavior in the interests of the long-term beneﬁts of the social group rather than the short-term, self-interested behavior of the individual (Nolan et al. , 2008).  Learning that one's marginal consumption imposes social costs on others can lead to different moral sensitivities to the health impact on others.  Research suggests that disclosing environment and healthbased externalities to consumers can be effective at shifting conservation preferences by increasing the perceived moral beneﬁts of conservation (Thaler and Sunstein, 2008).  However, health motivations differ from purely moral motivations since conservation provide not only health beneﬁts to others, but also potential health beneﬁts to the individual taking the conservation action.  Asensio and Delmas (2015, 2016) studied the effectiveness of monetary savings and environmental and health messaging strategies on energy conservation behavior in the U. S.  They conducted a randomized controlled trial in 118 apartments in Los Angeles over 8 months and found that environment and health-based information treatments motivated 8% energy savings versus control, and were particularly effective on families with children, who achieved up to 19% energy savings.  They did not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant impact on energy conservation of a message on monetary savings.  However, it is unclear how such information strategies would work when implemented in a developing country.  For example, because monetary gains in developing countries might be a more salient motivation than in developed countries, we might expect framing based on monetary savings to be a more effective strategy (Harrison and List, 2004).  Indeed, cultural attitudes toward energy conservation might differ in developing countries from those in developed countries and lead to different responses to information.  In India, for example, some have argued that people living in urban areas have a culture of ‘deep conservation’, where conservation is a learned habit due to scarcity of resources (Shrinivasan et al. , 2013), and that the potential for conservation has already been tapped.  This is in contrast to conservation attitudes observed in developed countries (Brounen et al. , 2013).  In order to explore attitudes towards energy conservation in India, a door-todoor survey of 1820 residents of urban India was conducted in 2013 (Batra et al. , 2013). 4 The goal of this survey was to better understand the motivations to conserve energy as well as opinions about the use of information technologies for conservation.  Middle- and highincome households in urban India were chosen as the focus population because they have access to electricity and own multiple types of appliances, allowing for various conservation strategies. 5 Among other things, each participant was asked how often they engage in speciﬁc energy conservation behaviors as well as their motivations for engaging in those behaviors.  The most common action to conserve electricity was unplugging appliances, with 86% of respondents stating they always or often engage in this behavior.  This was followed by turning off the air conditioner (81%), buying energy efﬁcient appliances (80%), turning off lights (67%), and changing appliance settings (55%).  We were particularly interested in the motivations for taking speciﬁc actions to reduce electricity consumption.  The responses from this survey are summarized in Table 1.  Health was among the least common motivation for almost every energy conservation behavior.  Overall, for respondents that always or often engage in energy conservation behaviors, 84% cited saving money as a motivation and 43% cited habits.  Only 9% of respondents cited the health of themselves or their family as a motivating factor for engaging in energy conservation. 6 For example, regarding unplugging appliances, as shown in Table 1, out of the households who unplug appliances always or often, 70% said they do so to save money, whereas 29% did so out of habit.  Only 0. 6% of these households unplugged their appliances because of health concerns.  The relatively low percentage of respondents who indicated health as a motivation for energy conservation was quite surprising since energy production in India is a major cause of air pollution.  This might indicate a lack of understanding of the link between energy use, the generation of electricity, and its associated air pollution.  Most studies tend to show low awareness of the health impact of air pollution and low understanding of how electricity is generated (Dunlap et al. , 1993.  Bickerstaff, 2004.  Lee et al. , 2015).  Although existing studies tend to be focused on North America, Europe and Japan.  One survey of 1724 respondents in India showed that while 78% were quite aware of the air pollution in their locality, very few respondents could identify the cause of air pollution.  Based on the motivations from the survey, we would expect that information about monetary savings would be more effective to drive conservation behavior than information about health beneﬁts since monetary motivations were cited more often than health motivations.  However, research shows that there is often a gap between intentions and behavior.  Thus this importance of conducting a ﬁeld experiment.  <Middle> Methodology.  While the survey is useful to gather information about energy conservation attitudes, it is limited in its ability to assess real conservation behavior.  In order to test the effectiveness of monetary and nonmonetary information strategies on electricity conservation behavior in India, we conducted a randomized controlled ﬁeld experiment in a modern faculty apartment building located at the Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology (IIIT-D) in New Delhi.  Our data includes 375,805 ﬁfteen-minute electricity readings from 19 households over an academic year.  Our ﬁeld experiment, while small in size, takes advantage of two randomized treatment groups and a control group, high-frequency electricity data, detailed personalized electricity feedback, and knowledge of each participant's engagement with their electricity consumption feedback.  This experimental design allowed us to test the impact of information strategies on energy conservation as well as the impact engagement with energy usage information has on conservation.  In one treatment, households received energy feedback messages describing the additional cost of their energy consumption in comparison to their most efﬁcient neighbors.  In the other treatment, households received feedback about their consumption in the metric of reduced air pollution emissions rather than as dollar costs to the household.  That is, one group received information about how energy efﬁciency was serving their self-interest, and the other about how energy efﬁciency was contributing to the common good of reduced air pollution. 