
Destructive ﬁshing is considered to be one of the most important
problems in marine governance (Clark Name, 2005.  Sethi Name, 2005). 
According to the United Nations Environment Program, about 25% of
ﬁsheries worldwide are in jeopardy of collapse due to destructive ﬁshing (Shakouri Name, 2010).  The threat of destructive ﬁshing, such as
the use of poison, dynamite and illegal nets, is especially devastating
for inshore ﬁsheries in tropical and developing countries where small
communities are engaged in subsistence ﬁshing (Belton and Thilsted,
2014).  The collapse or even serious degradation of local ﬁsheries due
to the use of destructive ﬁshing gears has a very negative impact on
the material well-being of these communities.  As a result, there have
been frequent attempts to persuade ﬁshers who are using destructive
gears to change their behavior, and switch to more environmentallyfriendly ﬁshing gears (Samoilys Name, 2008).  In most cases this involves
policy measures, such as gear-exchange programs or monetary incentives for resource conservation (Verheij Name, 2004).  These policies are
motivated by the assumption that a major motivation for using destructive ﬁshing gear is impatience or short-sightedness (low discount factors) and the lack of availability of high capital stocks. 
This assumption is based on standard economic models of renewable resources, going back to Hotelling (1931), which frame natural resource extraction as an intertemporal optimization problem, where
discount factors1 indicate the value given to expected future consumption.  This implies that, higher discount factors meaning higher valuation
of expected future consumption, leads to lower rates of extraction and
vice versa.  Following Farzin (1984) we refer to this as the conservation
effect.  However Farzin (1984) offers a different point of view and argues
that, for high cost of extraction, the relationship between discount factors and resource extraction is opposite to the generally held one, meaning that higher discount factors result in higher extraction levels and
vice versa.  This is based on the view, that, patient ﬁshers are able to invest more in their extraction capabilities.  We refer to this as the disinvestment effect. 
We add to this discussion by applying the underlying logic of these
models to the speciﬁc context of the adoption of destructive ﬁshing
gears in small-scale artisanal ﬁsheries.  Our main objective is to distinguish between scenarios where the policies based on the conservation
effect are justiﬁed and the conditions under which they are not justiﬁed. 
Typical policies, like livelihood diversiﬁcation or temporal closures with
income compensation, may lead to undesirable effects in a situation
when the disinvestment effect dominates the conservation effect.  We
contribute to solving this conundrum, by providing a better understanding of ﬁsher's motivation to adopt destructive gears and its relationship to individual time preferences. 
This research question is motivated by empirical research in Zanzibar which suggests that patient ﬁshermen have higher extraction level
since they can invest more in their extraction capability (see Javaid Name, 2016).  This surprising ﬁnding triggered some interesting and unanswered questions.  Does the relationship between time preferences and
extraction behavior change depending on the circumstances.  What role
do external factors play in this decision-making.  How do beliefs and
perceptions impact this relationship.  While these questions are motivated and based on empirical research in Zanzibar ﬁsheries, they are
not limited to this case.  The use of destructive ﬁshing gear is common
in other regions as well, such as different parts of East Africa (Guard
and Masaiganah, 1997.  Cinner, 2009.  Wells, 2009), Indonesia and
other parts of Southeast Asia (Cassels Name, 2005.  Burke Name, 2006),
parts of South Asia (Rajasuriya Name, 2004) along with other developing
and developed country ﬁsheries.  For the purpose of this paper we limit
ourselves to focus on the case of destructive ﬁshing gears in small scale
communities with open or shared access to the resource. 
Our model shows that the impact of individual discount factor on the
adoption of destructive ﬁshing gears is mediated by two key factors.  (i)
the nature of destructive gear i. e.  whether the destructive gear is costcutting low-proﬁt gear or whether it is high-cost high-proﬁt ﬁshing
gear, and (ii) the level of social dilemma, meaning the number of people
who share the same resource.  Additionally, we ﬁnd that individual beliefs about the actions of other resource users and future resource condition can have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on whether the conservation
effect prevails or not.  Overall, our model helps in clarifying the conditions under which the above mentioned policy measures may be expected to work as intended and conditions where other alternative
policy measures should be adopted. 
2.  Background Information. 
2. 1.  Destructive Extraction Methods. 
Destructive methods are deﬁned as ﬁshing methods, gears or practices whose impact is so indiscriminate and/or irreversible that they
are universally considered destructive irrespective of the environment
in which they are used (FAO 2005–2014).  In more concrete terms,
these destructive ﬁshing gears typically have a higher propensity to
physically damage habitats like corals reefs, capture a high proportion
of juvenile ﬁsh, or target species that are crucial to sustain
(McClanahan and Mangi, 2001.  McClanahan and Mangi, 2004.  Mangi
and Roberts, 2006.  Mangi Name, 2007).  Examples of destructive gears
in small scale ﬁsheries include beach seine, ring nets, explosives/dynamites, spear-guns and poison(Jiddawi and Öhman, 2002.  Cinner, 2009). 
In small-scale ﬁsheries, destructive ﬁshing gears can range from
highly proﬁtable to those which are even less proﬁtable than the traditional gears.  Similarly, in terms of capital costs (both ﬁxed and maintenance), some destructive ﬁshing gears (such as beach seines and
dynamites) are much more expensive than traditional gears, while
others (such as spear guns or poison) are less capital intensive even
compared to most basic traditional gears.  Similar comparison can be
made between labor cost required to maintain and operate destructive
ﬁshing gears (for more details see Mangi Name (2007)).  What drives
people towards these gears is an extremely important and relatively
under-researched question.  It stands to reason that given this variation
in types of destructive gears, different ﬁshers are attracted to different
destructive gears.  Earlier studies argue that destructive gear usage is
often associated with a combination of poverty, low socio-economic
conditions and myopic behavior (Cinner, 2009.  Silva, 2006).  Similarly
others have argued that institutional and normative factors can also
play an important role in destructive gear choice (Wallner-Hahn Name,2. 2.  Destructive Fishing Methods and Time Preferences. 
In economics, time preferences refer to the relative value given to future utility as compared to present utility.  Earlier research shows that
there is a considerable degree of heterogeneity in individual time preferences, some value future consumption very highly while others do
not (Tanaka Name, 2010).  Similar pattern can be observed for natural resource-users (ﬁshers) as well (Teh Name, 2014).  According to standard
economic models, ﬁshers with high value for present consumption are
likely to extract more resources (Koopmans, 1974).  This can lead to
the choice of destructive methods, as these gears often provide higher
beneﬁts in the present, but destroy future harvest possibilities.  Furthermore, unlike overﬁshing, the damage caused by using destructive ﬁshing gear is highly visible and occurs in very short time period (Cinner,
2009).  Therefore, ﬁshers using destructive ﬁshing methods are more
aware of the fact that they are causing serious long term damage to
the resource, and that the future productivity of the resource is going
to be very low as a result of their actions.  This suggests that people
with relatively lower subjective value of future consumption (impatient
ﬁshers) are more likely to use destructive ﬁshing gears as compared to
those who give higher subjective value to future consumption (patient
ﬁshers), as they can enjoy higher immediate consumption even at the
cost of potentially large decrease in future consumption. 
However, these standard economic models do not account for the
fact that, adoption of destructive gears typically requires initial investment (both capital and time investment in learning to operate the
new gear) (Farzin, 1984).  Destructive ﬁshing methods can be more expensive, either in terms of ﬁxed or variable costs than the traditional
methods.  Investing a substantial amount of money in buying a destructive gear means that this money is not available for present consumption.  This consideration is especially important for artisanal ﬁshers,
who in general don't possess large reserve capital (Cinner, 2009).  Overall, this point of view suggests that higher preference for present consumption is negatively associated with the possibility of using
destructive gear, as these gears generally require larger initial
investment. 
Thus, we have two competing accounts of the impact of individual
time preferences on the decision to adopt destructive ﬁshing methods. 
In this paper, we try to understand the conditions and assumptions
under which the conservation effect overtakes disinvestment effect
and vice versa. 
2. 3.  Adoption of Destructive Extraction Methods as Technology Diffusion
Phenomenon. 
The stereotypical description of artisanal communities is ﬁshers engaged in traditional or primitive methods threatened by the advent of
large-scale modern ﬁshing industry.  However, in many cases, these artisanal ﬁshers are aware of small-scale innovations in extraction
methods.  These innovative, yet destructive ﬁshing methods are adopted
relatively slowly due to the associated risks and learning effects.  In general, these methods start from a small area and spread to different ﬁshing sites over time (Wells, 2009). 
In this sense the adoption of destructive ﬁshing methods shares a lot
of similarities with technology diffusion process. 2 Technology diffusion
research seeks to understand how new products spread throughout a
society over time (Rogers, 2010).  Bass (1969) is one of the most prominent examples of this approach.  For a detailed review of this stream of
literature see Meade and Islam (2006).  In recent years, agent based
modeling approach has been used extensively to build models
explaining key features of the technology diffusion process (for a comprehensive review Garcia and Jager (2011), Kiesling Name (2012)). 
Agent based modeling approach to diffusion offers two key advantages
over the traditional (differential equation based) models.  First, agents
make decisions based on their own preferences, and decision rules.  In
contrast to traditional models these rules and preferences differ for different agents.  Secondly, agents are affected by what is happening
around them, as agents are connected to others in the form of a social
network.  Decisions made by others in the social network affect agent's
own choices.  We take the basic approach from these agent based
models of technology diffusion and apply them to the speciﬁc context
of adoption of destructive ﬁshing gears in small-scale artisanal ﬁsheries. 
<Middle> Model Description. 
In this section we describe the basic elements of our agent based
model as well as the important decision-making processes which we
focus on.  Although our empirical work in Zanzibar provided a motivation to develop this model, the model does not aim to mimic a speciﬁc
case in Zanzibar.  Instead the model is more stylized and captures the
broader quest of understanding the use of destructive ﬁshing methods. 
Our model consists of three major components and one ancillaryI.  Natural resource.  ﬁsh stock in our case
II.  Agents.  ﬁshers in our case
III.  Resource extraction technologies.  ﬁshing gears in our case
And lastly a social network structure which determines how agents
are connected to each other. 
The role of network structure in diffusion of technologies has been a
well-researched subject (see for example Rahmandad and Sterman
(2008)).  We implement a scale-free network (taken from Shinde and
Haghnevis, 2010) because using this particular network structure is
that it represents key features of social interaction among ﬁshers in
many small-scale artisanal ﬁsheries.  In small-scale ﬁshers a handful of
individuals play a key role in inﬂuencing the decisions regarding ﬁshing
activities.  Largely these individuals do not have signiﬁcant direct inﬂuence over others, rather their role as information aggregators is the
most important one.  Unskilled or inexperienced ﬁshers often take
their cues from these successful and well-connected individuals
(Bodin and Crona, 2008.  Ferrol-Schulte Name, 2014).  Indeed, this is
true for other natural resource extraction scenarios as well, such as agriculture, where key well-connected individuals enjoy disproportionately larger role in determining agricultural practices and reap
substantially higher margins (Fafchamps and Minten, 1999.  Conley
and Udry, 2010). 
For the purpose of this paper we focus mostly on the gear properties
and agents' decision-making processes which form the major components of the model, while keeping the social network constant.  For
more detailed analysis of the impact of social network on technology
diffusion refer to Valente (1995), Valente and Davis (1999), among3. 1.  Adoption of Destructive Fishing Gear.  Agent-based Model. 
Consider a case of small-scale artisanal ﬁsheries, which has the following characteristics. 
1) Resource (ﬁsh stock) which is deﬁned by the standard logistic population growth function,
where g is the intrinsic growth rate of the resource, K is the carrying capacity and Rt is the condition of resource in time period t. 3
2) “N” (=500) total population of agents (ﬁshers) in the model.  while
“n” number of agents share the same resource.  Agents extract this
resource for their personal consumption. 
3) Different gear types, which are deﬁned by the following
characteristics,
where Lm is the earnings per unit of effort (or in other words gear productivity), Dm the destruction per unit of effort and C is the related ﬁxedWe assume that gears target the same resource and that each resource unit extracted is priced at the same level.  Extracting resources result in increased wealth and consumption which is desirable for agents. 
The amount of effort devoted to extraction determines the current earnings along with the gear used for extraction.  So agent i's earnings in time
period t (pit) are determined by the effective effort level (Xit), total effective effort level (in the same time period) of other agents sharing
the common resource (XJt = ∑n
j¼−i X jt ), and the current resource
level (Rt).  Effective effort level is the product of effort level (xi) and
gear (Gm) used by the agent, where G1 is the environment-friendly
gear and G2 is the destructive gear.  Since we are mainly interested in
the gear adoption process, we assume that agent's effort level (xi) is
ﬁxed over time. 
where v is the coefﬁcient indicating congestion in terms of ﬁshing
effort,5 a & b are coefﬁcients for earnings and resource level respectively
which determine the total current earnings.  a + b b 1 which depicts the
decreasing marginal return of effort and resource level. 
Earnings from ﬁsheries extraction results in higher wealth (W). 6
Wealth at the start of time period t is given as,
where Wo is the initial wealth level which is determined randomly at
the start of the simulation.  Si is the savings rate which is given as Si =
f(δi,si) where si is the individual speciﬁc saving rates, and δi is the individual discount factor representing an individual's time preference. 
Extraction activities result in destroying part of the resource.  The
damage done to the resource (V) by all agents in current time period depends on the effort level and gear being used,
where Dmit is the damage-to-effort ratio (damage per unit of effort) of
the gear Gm being used by agent i in current time period, such that Dm
for G1 (traditional gear) is always less than Dm for G2 (the destructiveEq.  (1) gives us the resource available to agent population for extraction in next period as7. 
3. 2.  Agent's Decision-making Process (Gear Choice Decision). 
At the start of simulation, all agents use the same traditional gears. 
Additionally, we assume that the system is in equilibrium, meaning
that agents (ﬁshers) are extracting at a level which is economically
and biologically sustainable. 8 Agents alternate between three states. 
not susceptible, susceptible, and switched.  Agents in the “not susceptible” state keep using the same gear they were using before without
making any calculations.  Agents in the “susceptible” state decide
whether to stick with the gear they are using or to switch to the alternative gear.  Agents in the “switched” state have already made the switch
to the alternative gear. 9 Agents only consider switching once they become susceptible.  Here we report results from the most basic version
where agents become susceptible as soon as the destructive ﬁshing
gear is introduced. 
The central concern in this article is the role of time preferences in
determining the adoption of destructive ﬁshing gear, so we assume
that agents consider future implications of their actions and make
plans accordingly.  In deciding whether to switch to a more destructive
gear, agents consider the present and the future earnings from
switching. 11 However as agents do not possess perfect information
about the present or the future so they calculate expected percentage
of higher beneﬁts from switching (E[Z]) based on their beliefs about future state of the world,
where E[Pit (G2)] is the expected total earnings/proﬁts from using G2,
E[Pit (G1)] is the expected total earnings from using G1, and disc.  (Cit)
are the costs associated with switching to G2, all calculated in time period t. 
Expected total earnings by each gear depend on expected earnings
in current time period E[pit], and the present value of expected future
earnings E[piT],
where δi is the individual time preference or discount factor used to
evaluate the present value of future earnings,12 T is the planning time
horizon of the agent, and E[pi(t+h)] is the expected earnings in the hth
time step from current time period (t).  Notice that these total earnings
are based on agent's expectation in time period t about what is going to
happen in planning time horizon T. 
Expected earnings in the current time period t are given by,
where xi is the ﬁxed effort level, Lm′it is the assumed earning per unit of
effort of gear m by agent i in time period t, Rt is the current resource
level and X′Jt is the assumed effective total effort by others in the current
time period.  It should be noted here that agents do not know the actual
gear productivity deﬁned as earnings per unit of effort (Lm) of any gear
and have to form expectation about gear productivity (Lm′it) in each
time period where they consider switching.  Agents' expectations regarding the productivity of the gear they are currently using are based
on their own earlier experience.  Whereas, for new gears or gears not
being used by the agent, their expectations are based on experience of
those using these gears.  This expected gear productivity (Lm′it) is calculated based on local information from agent's social network so it may
differ for different agents and over time. 
Expected future earnings (E[pi(t+h)]) depend on the effective effort
level and the expected future resource level(R′i(t+h) ),
where R′(t+h) and X′J(t+h) are assumptions made by the agent regarding the expected future resource level and the expected extraction
level of others respectively.  The expected future resource condition
R′(t+h) estimate depends on agent's assumption about the resource
growth rate (gi′), what others are going to do in future (X′J(t +h)) and
her own actions. 
Similarly the relative costs from switching (cost differential) are
given as, where C(G1) and C(G2) are costs associated with G1 and G2
respectively. 13 Even though agents incur this ﬁxed cost in the time period where they decide to switch (i. e.  current time period), we assume
that agents see this as an investment with depreciable value for the
life span of the gear.  The discounted costs (Cit) are the agent's evaluation
of the cost of switching in time period t using Tc as her planning horizon,
where the time period Tc refers to the nearest of either the agent's planning horizon (T) or the time period when the agent expects the resource
to collapse.  RV is the difference in resale value of G2 as compared to
G1. 14 In effect, agents weigh the beneﬁts of using G2 while assuming
that any investment in G2 will bring beneﬁts until time period Tc, therefore spreading part of the additional costs of switching to G2 over this
time horizon. 
Ultimately the agent only switches to destructive gear if. 
Zmin is the minimum beneﬁt threshold where the agent decides to
change from traditional gear to the destructive gear,15 Wit is agents'
total wealth and ɤ*Wit is predeﬁned fraction of agent's total wealth
which the agent is willing to use for investment in ﬁsheries related
capabilities. 
Fig.  1 depicts agents' decision-making process with respect to the
switching decision. 
Our modeling approach allows experimentation with different types
of assumptions about agents' beliefs and representing agent heterogeneity.  Moreover, we can depict real life situation where ﬁshers do not
have perfect information about the productivity of the gears.  In order
to make an informed guess about the productivity of different gears,
ﬁshers have to rely on their fellow ﬁshers especially those in their social
network. 