 1.  Introduction The US Endangered Species Act (ESA) and Canadian Species at Risk Act (SARA) mandate that recovery strategies be developed for endangered and threatened species.  Of the 1872 species or populations listed under the ESA or SARA, two thirds (1393) have formal recovery plans (Fig.  1).  Despite this large-scale effort, relatively few listed species have been sufﬁciently recovered as to be removed or down-listed from either the ESA or SARA.  Of the 61 species delisted from the ESA, only half (32 species) have been delisted because they have met recovery goals, 10 species have been removed due to extinction, and the remainder as a result of updated information (e. g.  taxonomic revisions) (https. //ecos. fws. gov/tess_public/reports/delisting-report accessed 7 December, 2015), while only 3 species under SARA have been delisted because they were recovered (Favaro et al. , 2014).  The challenge of recovering species often stems from uncertainty in the causes of decline, mitigating or circumventing the drivers of decline, and having sufﬁcient resources to meaningfully address these problems at the often large spatial and temporal scales required for species recovery.  Recovery decisions for endangered species are often made quickly and with limited data with which to inform recovery objectives (Martin et al. , 2012.  Gerber and Hatch 2002).  However, reviews of ESA recovery plans found that plans with a higher number of clear quantitative recovery goals (i. e.  target population sizes and number of populations) are associated with improving species status (Gerber and Hatch 2002.  Himes Boor, 2014), suggesting that leveraging even limited data in a quantitative framework to inform species recovery is useful.  Others have also suggested steps to improve science-based decision making that are applicable across taxa, including specifying quantitative requirements for species recovery and recovery timelines, as well as identifying the number of populations or the spatial extent to which recovery measures apply (Boersma et al. , 2001.  Clark et al. , 2002.  Gerber and Schultz, 2001.  Himes Boor, 2014.  Possingham et al. , 1993.  Scott et al. , 1995.  Waples et al. , 2013), but such standards have yet to be adopted in a way that improves planning (Himes Boor, 2014.  Doak et al. , 2015.  Troyer and Gerber, 2015).  For instance, recent updates to the US Fish and Wildlife Service and National Marine Fisheries Service failed to make any quantitative criteria or standards mandatory (Troyer and Gerber, 2015).  Integrating quantitative measures into recovery planning can be challenging due to lack of data for rare species, uncertainties in recovery costs, and sociopolitical factors (Restani and Marzluff, 2002.  Scott et al. , 1995).  One way to leverage limited data to support choices between alternative recovery actions is to apply decision theory, which provides a logical structure for complex problems (Keeney and Raiffa, 1976.  fold difference in the beneﬁt-cost ratio between alternative predator removal strategies (Engeman et al. , 2002), and for the kokako, an endangered bird in New Zealand, that an increase in spending for predator control does not always lead to an increase in the number of breeding pairs (Fairburn et al. , 2004).  These examples highlight the need to explore tradeoffs between the cost of management actions, and the resulting net beneﬁt to the population or species.  In many cases, recovery costs are not incorporated into biological analyses of recovery options (e. g.  Drechsler et al. , 1998.  Regan et al. , 2005.  VanderWerf et al. , 2006), but often play a large role in whether a recovery option is successfully implemented (Hughey et al. , 2003) and thus it is useful to explicitly consider costs during the decisionmaking processes.  Weighting a recovery option by its associated cost in a decision analysis framework can help identify pathways to recovery that are easier to achieve given both ﬁnancial and biological constraints, and ensure that limited funds are not allocated to recovery options that are unlikely to succeed.  Here, we use decision analysis in a novel way by incorporating both the biological efﬁcacy and monetary cost of recovery to quantitatively assess alternative population supplementation strategies, captive breeding or head-starting wild embryos, and to explore the return on investment for each potential management action while considering the initial state of the population (i. e.  wild population size).  Captive breeding and head-starting are two commonly proposed population supplementation tools for critically endangered populations (Fischer and Lindenmayer, 2000.  Zippel and Mendelson, 2008), particularly for amphibians which are at higher risk of extinction than many other vertebrate taxa (Hoffmann et al. , 2010.  Stuart et al. , 2004).  Captive breeding and release involves establishing a population in captivity, in which individuals mate and produce offspring that are subsequently released into a separate wild population.  Head-starting and release typically involves removing individuals at an early life stage (embryos or larvae) and raising individuals in captivity through sensitive life stages before releasing into a wild population.  Although both options include rearing individuals in captivity for a period of time, the relative genetic and demographic consequences, as well as the economic tradeoffs between captive-breeding and head-starting are largely unknown (Grifﬁths and Pavajeau, 2008).  In general, the effectiveness of population supplementation, regardless of method, has been difﬁcult to assess (Dodd and Seigel, 1991.  Grifﬁths and Pavajeau, 2008), and thus is often reserved for when other threat mitigation strategies (e. g.  habitat degradation, competition with invasive species) are not feasible (Zippel and Mendelson, 2008).  We identiﬁed 24 alternative supplementation strategies using either eggs from captive females (captive breeding) or wild collected eggs (head-starting), which we compared to no supplementation (for a total of 25 alternative scenarios, Fig.  2), to aid the recovery of a critically endangered population of Oregon spotted frogs (Rana pretiosa).  Using empirical data and an existing population demographic model (Kissel et al. , 2014) we evaluated the biological efﬁcacy of each of the 25 supplementation strategies (henceforth recovery pathway) and conducted a decision analysis from the perspective of conservation managers who wanted to choose a recovery strategy to achieve a baseline recovery target of reducing the 10-year extinction risk below 10% while minimizing cost.  We calculated the cost of each alternative recovery pathway and used stochastic population viability analysis to estimate the reduction in extinction risk over 10 years of continuous implementation of each pathway.  We explored uncertainties in the top ranked scenario with sensitivity analyses by relaxing model assumptions and recovery targets, which allowed us to assess the robustness of the top-ranked recovery pathway under non-static conditions.  We found that decision analysis is a feasible, intuitive method for providing a quantitative basis for ranking alternative recovery actions, and can be a useful lens through which to balance tradeoffs between costs and endangered species management.  Morgan and Henrion, 1990.  Peterman and Anderson, 1999).  While most natural resource management decisions are ultimately made based on more than scientiﬁc data (e. g.  economic, social, cultural, political factors), decision analysis can provide clear support to these decisionmaking processes by identifying and ranking options that meet stated objectives and provide quantitative information regarding tradeoffs among alternative actions, and can accommodate both qualitative (i. e.  expert opinion) and quantitative data (i. e.  models to estimate extinction risk or occupancy) in the process.  A decision analysis can help to streamline decision-making processes that often involve multiple pathways to achieve an objective, and an array of different stakeholders, sometimes with competing objectives (Peterman and Anderson, 1999).  The steps of a decision analysis include.  1) explicitly stating the objectives or targets, 2) outlining alternative pathways to achieve the targets, 3) identifying uncertainties or unknowns in the data (referred to as ‘uncertain states of nature’) and explicitly incorporating them into the analysis, 4) using a quantitative model to determine the outcomes of each potential pathway, 5) determining the ‘optimal’ decision by ranking the outcomes with respect to the objectives, and 6) performing sensitivity analyses on key parameters in the model to determine the robustness of the ‘optimal’ decision (Peterman and Anderson, 1999).  Acknowledging uncertainty in the process by assigning probabilities to each identiﬁed uncertain state of nature (step 3), and performing sensitivity analyses on critical parameters (i. e.  targets or key model assumptions, step 6), decreases the likelihood of choosing an ineffective recovery option by increasing the quantitative basis of the decision-making process.  Decision analysis models have been applied to numerous conservation problems, such as invasive species management, designing ecological reserves, and endangered species planning.  Several studies highlight the utility of decision analysis for endangered species management, and it can be a valuable tool for quantifying tradeoffs between the biological efﬁcacy and economic cost of a suite of alternative recovery strategies.  A fundamental assumption of most recovery efforts is that increased spending will result in improvements in species status.  However, it has been demonstrated for marine turtles that there can be a three<Middle> Methods.  2. 1.  Study Species.  Oregon spotted frogs (Rana pretiosa) are categorized as ‘Vulnerable’ under the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), and federally listed as ‘Endangered’ under the U. S.  ESA and Canada's SARA.  The species historically ranged between northern California and southwestern British Columbia (BC), but has been extirpated from N90% of its distribution (Hammerson and Pearl, 2012).  In BC, there are ﬁve extant populations of R.  pretiosa, each of which are estimated to have fewer than 250 breeding females by the Canadian Oregon spotted frog Recovery Team (COSFRT, unpublished data).  Head-start and captive breeding supplementation programs were implemented for the BC populations in 2008 and 2010 respectively as part of a federal recovery strategy to address declines (Kissel et al. , 2014).  2. 2.  Decision Analysis.  The goal of our decision analysis is to support decisions between alternative supplementation strategies to reduce the extinction risk of R.  pretiosa.  Our baseline management target was to reduce the 10-year extinction risk of an imperiled R.  pretiosa population (n = 100 breeding females) to below 10% and minimize the ﬁnancial cost of recovery (step 1 of decision analysis).  We chose a 10-year time horizon to coincide with the stated recovery objectives in the BC Oregon spotted frog recovery plan (COSFRT, 2012), and a 10% extinction risk threshold as it is consistent with the IUCN quantitative criteria for ‘Endangered’ (20% over 20 years, IUCN, 2012).  We used a stage-based stochastic matrix model (developed in Kissel et al. , 2014, see supplemental materials, Fig.  S1) to estimate the consequences of 25 management pathways, which we deﬁned as the combination of 10-year extinction risk for the wild R.  pretiosa population, and ﬁnancial cost of the pathway.  Demographic population models are a common tool for assessing extinction risk of populations, and (Brook et al. , 2000) demonstrate that PVAs frequently match actual population dynamics.  We developed a decision tree to demonstrate each recovery pathway (Fig.  2, step 2 of decision analysis), which consisted of a series of choices.  1) the choice to supplement or not, 2) whether to head-start or captive breed, 3) release individuals as larvae (2–4 week-old tadpoles) or young of the year (YOY, recently metamorphosed frogs), and 4. ) the ‘level of effort’ at which to head-start or captive breed (Table 1, supplemental materials).  Transition probabilities from one life stage to the next, called vital rates (see Kissel et al. , 2014, Fig.  S1), were modeled as uncertain states of nature (Fig.  2, step 3 of decision analysis), and we randomly pulled individual vital rates (e. g.  survival, fecundity) from probability distributions representing the range in values estimated from empirical data to parameterize our matrix model (see Kissel et al. , 2014).  We used these quantitative models to calculate the 10-year R.  pretiosa extinction risk based on λs, generated by running 10,000 simulations of separate models for head-starting and captive breeding at each of the 6 levels of effort, resulting in a model for each of the 24 supplementation pathways (step 4 of decision analysis).  Our ﬁnal pathway consisted of an additional matrix model that did not include any form of supplementation (and thus had a recover cost of $0).  Finally, we quantiﬁed the cost of each pathway (see below), and ranked the pathways according to our objectives.  reduce extinction risk below 10% and minimize cost (step 5 of decision analysis).  The sixth and ﬁnal step in our decision analysis was to explore the robustness of our supplementation pathway rankings with three separate sensitivity analyses (i. e.  explored changes to our baseline scenario) to determine if the optimal pathway changes.  We considered a shift in management objectives (i. e.  varying thresholds of acceptable extinction risk over 10 years), changes in the size of the wild population (number of adult females is either greater or b100), and ﬁnally variation in the reproductive output for captive females.  The ﬁrst sensitivity analysis reﬂects variation in intrinsic social and economic constraints in setting recovery targets, the second acknowledges uncertainty in estimates of wild population sizes affecting extinction risk, both of which are key attributes in recovery planning for endangered species.  We chose to run our ﬁnal sensitivity analysis (variation in reproductive output of the captive populations), because it has been widely documented that successfully breeding amphibians in captivity is difﬁcult for most species, and even when successful, often results in lower rates of reproduction or lower offspring viability compared to wild individuals (Kiik et al. , 2013.  Kouba et al. , 2009.  Muths et al. , 2014.  Penfold et al. , 2014.  Trudeau et al. , 2010).  To reﬂect changes in recovery targets compared to the baseline scenario (reduce 10-year extinction risk below 10% and minimize cost), we assessed three additional scenarios.  reduce extinction risk below 50% over 10 years (the IUCN criteria for ‘Critically Endangered’, IUCN, 2012) and minimize cost, reduce extinction risk below 25% over 10 years and minimize cost, or minimize 10-year extinction risk regardless of cost, which would represent the ideal recovery scenario if funds were unlimited.  To explore uncertainty in measuring abundance for critically small populations (baseline = 100 females), we varied the size of the population between 50 and 150 adult females in increments of ten, representing a range of populations in which extinction risk warrants supplementation (Caughley, 1994.  Kissel et al. , 2014).  Finally, we assessed sensitivity in the optimal pathway to changes in the annual reproductive output of captive females (baseline = 100% captive breeding each year), by exploring whether the optimal decision would shift if only 90%, 75%, or 50% of the females in captivity successfully bred each year.  We compared the beneﬁt-cost ratios of the ‘optimal’ decisions from our baseline analysis and sensitivity analyses as an additional metric to explore tradeoffs in the reduction in extinction risk per conservation dollar spent.  2. 3.  Head-start Program Costs.  We estimated the cost of the head-starting program using actual operational and capital costs from R.  pretiosa recovery efforts in BC (2008 and 2009) at the Greater Vancouver Zoo, where ~5% of the population is brought in each year, reared to metamorphosis and released as YOY (Table S1 and S2).  We divided costs into capital (one time) and recurring and included ‘in-kind’ costs such as husbandry infrastructure and labor not directly supported through recovery funds.  For scenarios outside of current R.  pretiosa recovery efforts (N5% of the population removed for head-starting), we predicted costs as a linear function of the level of ‘effort’ and the starting population size to provide a relative comparison, assuming that cost efﬁciencies gained with increasing the program size were equal among supplementation programs (headstarting and captive breeding), with the exception of capital expenditure for enclosures needed to house individuals (see supplemental materials for details).  2. 4.  Captive Breeding Program Costs.  Costs for captive breeding were based on 2013 estimates from an ongoing R.  pretiosa captive breeding program at the Vancouver Aquarium where ~20 females are bred and offspring are released as larvae 2– 4 weeks post hatching to the wild population (Table S3).  As with the head-start program, we included ‘in-kind’ costs and scaled costs linearly with effort, estimating costs for a range of effort from 10 to 60 adult females in captivity.  For scenarios in which individuals were released as young of the year (YOY) frogs, we assumed the additional costs associated with the post-hatching period would be equal to head-starting and releasing as YOY (Table S1), as estimated above.  For example, at a captive-breeding effort of 20 females, our model predicts that approximately 18,200 tadpoles would be produced annually.  Raising 18,200 tadpoles to metamorphosis would require 182 tanks to house individuals.  This scenario would also require similar recurring costs as the head-start program, thus the total cost of captive breeding with release as YOY was calculated as the sum of the capital and 10-year recurring costs of captive breeding, plus the cost of head-staring the resulting number of tadpoles until they reached metamorphosis.  3.  Results.  The top ranked pathway (i. e.  ‘optimal decision’) for the baseline scenario (reduce 10-year extinction risk below 10% and minimize costs for a wild population of 100 breeding females), was captive breeding, with release to the wild population as larvae, and to do so at a ‘medium-high’ effort (Fig.  3a).  This translates to breeding 40 females each year and releasing offspring as larvae into the wild population.  The total 10-year cost for this strategy was $1. 49 million over 10 years, with a 46% reduction of the 10-year extinction risk (from 53% without supplementation, to 7%), which equates to a beneﬁt-cost ratio of a 3% reduction in extinction risk for every $100,000 spent (Fig.  4).  There was no reduction in extinction risk for the pathway in which supplementation did not occur, and thus we use this pathway to compare the reduction in extinction risk for the 24 remaining pathways.  When we explored the robustness of the top-ranked pathway for the baseline scenario to different management objectives, we found that the optimal decision was highly sensitive to the recovery target (10-year extinction risk).  When we eased the recovery target to equal 25% extinction risk over 10 years (as opposed to the baseline 10%), the optimal decision was still to captive breed and release as tadpoles, but required only a low level of effort (breed and release offspring from 20 captive females as opposed to 40), with a total cost of $750,000 over 10 years (Fig.  3b).  This strategy reduced extinction risk by 36% (from 53% to 17%) and equated to a beneﬁt-cost ratio of 4. 8% reduction in extinction risk for every $100,000 spent (Fig.  4).  When the recovery target was eased further to a 50% chance of extinction in 10 years while also minimizing costs, the top-ranked pathway shifted to headstarting wild collected eggs with release as tadpoles at a minimum effort, which reduced extinction from 53% to 48. 5%, with 10-year total cost equal to $370,000 (1. 2% reduction in extinction risk for every $100,000 spent) (Figs.  3c, 4).  When we minimized the 10-year extinction risk regardless of cost, the optimal decision shifted to headstarting wild eggs and re-introducing them into the population as YOY using maximum effort (equivalent to removing 30% of the reproductive effort from the wild each year) (Fig.  3d).  However, this strategy only reduced extinction risk by 0. 8% for every $100,000 invested (Fig.  4) and would require 482 tanks over the course of 10 years to raise larvae to metamorphosis and a total of $6. 38 million.  When we simulated a range of hypothetical starting wild population sizes from 50 to 150, the resulting optimal scenarios required greater effort as the population size declined (Fig.  5a & b) because the background extinction risk increases as population size decreases.  At population sizes b70 wild females, the optimal strategy was to head-start wild eggs, and release as young of year at a maximum effort, and the total 10-year cost ranged between $3. 02 million and $3. 29 (for a population size of 50 and 60 respectively) (Fig.  5c).  However, if the population size was 70 or above, the optimal strategy was always to captive breed and release as tadpoles at decreasing levels of effort as the starting population increased (Fig.  5d).  Regardless of wild population size, we found that head-starting and release as tadpoles was never an optimal recovery action.  We also explored how assumptions regarding the reproductive output of the captive population affected the optimal decision.  We found that with a 10% reduction in reproductive output each year (i. e.  90% of females successfully reproduce) (Fig.  6a), the optimal decision switched to head-starting and release as YOY at a low effort for a wild population size of 100 breeding females.  For scenarios in which only 75% and 50% of successfully produce offspring, the optimal decision was also to headstart and release as YOY at a low level of effort (Fig.  6b & c respectively), which corresponds to head-starting 10% of eggs in the wild population each year for 10-years.  <Conclusion> Discussion.  We combined biological and economic aspects of species recovery into a decision framework to estimate the optimal strategy for reducing extinction risk for a highly imperiled population of R.  pretiosa.  Our approach of weighing tradeoffs between conservation actions and their costs highlights that a seemingly beneﬁcial recovery option with respect to the biology of a species may not be optimal once monetary resources, often the deciding factor in implementing conservation measures, are considered.  The top-ranked recovery pathway depended on the speciﬁc management target, but in general, captive breeding achieved our baseline recovery target more often than head-starting, with 8 of 10 population sizes resulting in captive breeding and release as larvae (Fig.  5).  Only at the two lowest population sizes we considered (50 and 60 breeding females) was captive breeding unable to reduce extinction risk below 10%, and thus the top-ranked pathway switched to headstarting (at maximum and high efforts respectively).  Although it may be intuitive that extinction risk increases as population size decreases, rarely has uncertainty in the target population size been considered in the decision analysis literature (but see Pestes et al. , 2008).  Similarly, we found that the optimal recovery pathway, captive breeding and release as larvae, was the same whether the recovery target was to reduce extinction risk below 10% (baseline scenario) or 25%, though achieving the latter target could be done more cost-effectively (3% reduction and 4. 8% reduction for $100,000 spent respectively).  However, when the recovery goal was relaxed to extinction risk below 50%, the optimal pathway switched to head-start and release as tadpoles, and although it was the least expensive pathway ($370,000 total cost), the beneﬁt-cost ratio was low (only 1. 2% reduction in extinction risk per $100,000 spent).  When we removed the consideration of cost all together, and prioritized simply minimizing the 10-year extinction risk, the optimum recovery pathway was to head-start and release as YOY, and resulted in a beneﬁt-cost ratio of only 0. 8% reduction in extinction risk per $100,000, but reduced overall extinction risk to below 1% over 10 years.  Although the objective of our decision analysis was to minimize cost (rather than maximize beneﬁt-cost ratio), we've presented the beneﬁtcost ratios above, as these results demonstrate a non-linear relationship between the ﬁnancial costs of recovery actions and their biological efﬁcacy (Fig.  4).  Many studies have incorporated beneﬁt-cost ratios into decision analyses of endangered species recovery (Canessa et al. , 2014.  Engeman et al. , 2002.  Rose et al. , 2015.  Shwiff et al. , 2007).  The majority weigh tradeoffs between categorical recovery options, and rarely do studies present data on incremental increases in recovery ‘effort’ as we have done here (but see Canessa et al. , 2014), allowing managers to compare beneﬁt cost ratios both between alternative supplementation strategies (i. e. 