 1.  Introduction OPEC has a fragile cartel structure.  It does not have a formal enforcement mechanism in place (except for the occasional price war) to incentivize its members to comply with their quota allocations (Alhajji and Huettner, 2000).  As a result, non-compliance to the quota has become a norm among OPEC members over the past decades.  In every single quarter from 1993 to 2005, total OPEC production exceeded the sum of its members’ quotas.  In this period, an OPEC member over-produced its quota by an average of 6. 7%.  In this paper, we provide a framework to explain such a persistent non-compliance pattern based on strategic interactions among members inside OPEC.  Quota violations vary signiﬁcantly among different countries.  For example, Saudi Arabia’s overproduction averaged around 3. 2% from 1995 to 2007 but Qatar’s overproduction averaged around 18. 5% during the same period.  In extreme cases, some members overproduce their quotas by a large margin.  For example, in the second quarter of 1998, OPEC requested that Qatar cut its production to reach a quota of 384 thousand bpd due to falling oil prices, but Qatar kept its production level at 670 thousand bpd–a 75% quota non-compliance.  Another extreme example is Algeria who overproduced its quota by more than 50% in 13 out of 24 quarters between 2002 and 2006.  Moreover, as suggested by a large body of theoretical literature1, the diﬃculty of supporting collusion varies with the economic state of the market.  Based on these preliminary observations, we ask the following.  is non-compliance related to oil market conditions.  If so, is it a pro-cyclical or a counter-cyclical behavior.  How does the degree of non-compliance differ for smaller vs.  larger producers.  To what extent does OPEC rely on the quota system.  There are a number of prominent empirical studies on OPEC behavior, but the majority of them focus on whether OPEC behaves as a cartel or not, rather than analyzing the nature of quotas and violations.  To name a few, Griﬃn (1985), tests the market-sharing hypothesis by looking at the co-movement of each country’s production with that of the rest of OPEC.  He concludes that “OPEC is a looser cartel” given that market sharing considerations only partially affect production decisions.  Gülen (1996) uses a similar intuition to test for parallel movements in members’ output levels.  He ﬁnds evidence of coordination among members, especially during the rationing period, 1982–1993.  Dahl and Yücel (1991) ﬁnd no evidence in support of several hypotheses for OPEC behavior including dynamic optimization, target revenue, cartel, competitive, and swing producers.  Therefore, they conclude that “loose coordination or duopoly” is the closest description to OPEC behavior.  However, as pointed out by Smith (2005), there are serious concerns regarding the low power of the statistical tests employed in these studies and the extent to which they are capable of distinguishing between collusive and competitive behavior within OPEC.  He describes OPEC as “much more than a non-cooperative oligopoly, but less than a friction-less cartel. ” Instead of calling this strand of literature inconclusive, we prefer the conclusion that some of the studies reach—such as Geroski et al.  (1987), Almoguera et al.  (2011) and Kaufmann et al.  (2008)—that OPEC behavior cannot be ﬁtted into a single model, but rather it follows a varying-conduct model that switches between collusive and non-cooperative behavior over time.  We use the same notion in our theory model by formulating the proposed framework as a combination of a cooperative game and a non-cooperative behavior.  Although the empirical evidence for OPEC’s collusion behavior is mixed, the ﬁeld of industrial organization provides a sharp predictions for one of the factors affecting collusion.  the link between market conditions and the incentive to cheat in a cartel. 