1.  Introduction  The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) oversight process involves a range of activities, from advice and monitoring to enforcement actions.  Enforcement actions have been studied in the prior literature to understand both their determinants and consequences.  A ﬁrm’s political connections (PC) in particular are hypothesized from capture theory (e. g. , Stigler,  1971 ) to bias downward the likelihood of enforcement actions and the magnitude of penalties, as politicians can interfere  2 Empirical  with SEC investigations, use budget allocations to control the SEC, or affect SEC oﬃcials’ careers ( Weingast, 1984 ).   evidence suggestive of SEC capture by politically connected ﬁrms is reported in Correia (2014) and Yu and Yu (2011) , who  ﬁnd a negative relation between ﬁrm PC and enforcement actions (which are pursued by the SEC’s Division of Enforcement  or DOE).   Interpreting the results in the prior literature as evidence of lax SEC oversight of PC ﬁrms is complicated by the fact that  SEC oversight involves more than enforcement actions.  In particular, the agency also routinely reviews ﬁrms’ SEC ﬁlings to  monitor and enhance ﬁrms’ compliance with disclosure and accounting regulation ( SEC, (2015b )).  SEC questions and concerns in the course of these reviews are communicated to ﬁrms through comment letters (CLs) that require response and  remediation.  In this paper, we examine the relation between ﬁrm PC and the likelihood of receiving CLs to shed fuller light  on the relation between corporate political connectedness and SEC oversight.   The CL review process is conducted by the SEC’s Division of Corporation Finance (DCF).  The volume of CLs is large, as  between 20% and 40% of U. S.  listed ﬁrms have received a CL in each year between 2005 and 2012.  In contrast, enforcement  actions are relatively infrequent.  CLs are issued on a variety of topics (e. g. , revenue recognition, goodwill impairment) depending on the nature of the SEC concern generated by its review.  The initial CL might request clariﬁcation and disclosure  of further information that leads to a sequence of “rounds” of communication between the SEC and the ﬁrm.  The CL process  concludes when the DCF is satisﬁed with compliance and issues a “no further comment” letter, or when the DCF refers the  matter to the SEC’s DOE.  CLs therefore are an important part of SEC oversight.  In this light, a number of recent studies have  investigated the determinants and consequences of CLs (e. g. , Cassell et al. , 2013.  Bozanic et al. , 2015.  Johnston and Petacchi  2014.  Dechow et al. , 2016 ).  These studies have not, however, examined the relation between ﬁrm PC and the likelihood of  receiving CLs.   SOX Section 408, paragraph (b), identiﬁes some ﬁrm characteristics (“factors”) for the SEC to consider in its CL reviews.   This guidance concludes by stating that “any other factors that the Commission may consider relevant” can also be used in  determining which ﬁrms are reviewed, suggesting that the SEC is given some discretion.  If ﬁrms’ political connections are  one such discretionary factor, then we expect a signiﬁcant relation between ﬁrm PC and CL review likelihood.  Moreover, if  the SEC is captured as suggested in the prior literature, and such capture is manifested through lax oversight, we expect  this relation to be negative.   On the other hand, there are reasons to expect a positive relation between these variables.  For example, the SEC’s CL  review process may not be captured (and, in fact, prior claims of SEC capture, which are based on small samples of ﬁrms  facing enforcement actions, may be overstated).  If so, and if ﬁrm PC is a distinct risk factor for ﬁnancial-reporting issues, we  would expect a positive relation between ﬁrm PC and CL reviews.   To investigate the relation between ﬁrm PC and CL reviews we obtain all comment letters from the Audit Analytics  database for 2005–2012 and retain those related to ﬁrms’ 10-K ﬁlings.  PC ﬁrms are identiﬁed through contemporaneous  contributions to Political Action Committees (PAC) or alternatively through their lobbying expenditures.  Results indicate that  PC ﬁrms are more likely to receive a CL after controlling for a host of CL determinants identiﬁed in the prior literature.  The  controls include accounting quality and complexity proxies, such as accounting restatements, internal control weaknesses,  the length and linguistic complexity of ﬁnancial statements, and the number of SEC ﬁlings made by each ﬁrm during the  year.  Our results on PC contrast with prior ﬁndings of a negative association between PC and SEC enforcement actions and  suggest SEC capture by PC ﬁrms is not indicated in the CL review process.  We return to a discussion of this primary ﬁnding  shortly.   We conduct a range of tests that collectively are intended to mitigate endogeneity concerns and examine the robustness  of  the  primary  result.   First,  we  estimate  the  tests  in  a  propensity-score-matched  sample  wherein  PC  and  non-PC  ﬁrms  are matched by year, the speciﬁc SEC oﬃce conducting the review, and all covariates in the regression model ( Ho et al. ,  2007 ).  Results indicate PC ﬁrms are more likely to receive a CL.  for instance, we ﬁnd that while ﬁrms making political  contributions have a 38. 5% probability of receiving a CL, matched non-contributing ﬁrms have a probability of 33. 7%, a  statistically signiﬁcant difference that also appears to be economically substantive.   Second, we conduct cross-sectional tests exploiting variation in the targets of ﬁrms’ political activities.  Speciﬁcally, we  examine the relation between CL and ﬁrms that have either lobbied the SEC directly or are top contributors to legislators  serving on SEC oversight committees.  We ﬁnd that such ﬁrms are signiﬁcantly more likely to receive CL reviews, providing  further support to the primary result.   Third, to further mitigate more general endogeneity concerns we use an instrumental-variables (IV) approach.  As in prior  research (e. g. , Blackburne, 2014.  Correia, 2014 ), our instruments for a ﬁrm’s PAC and lobbying expenditures are, respectively,  the sum of PAC and lobbying expenditures made by other ﬁrms in the same 4-digit SIC industry and the same size decile.   These industry-size peer contributions are likely to be associated with the political contributions of a given ﬁrm due to peer  effects driving political activity (e. g. , Grier et al. , 1994.  Kim, 2008 ), but they are less likely to directly drive the likelihood  of that ﬁrm receiving a comment letter.  IV results are consistent with our main ﬁndings.  We additionally use a new IV.   state-level voter turnout.  State turnout rates capture the state population’s political engagement and are therefore likely to  be associated with the political contributions of a given ﬁrm (the ﬁrm is more likely to be politically engaged), but turnout  rates are less likely to drive the likelihood of that ﬁrm receiving a comment letter.  The results using this IV are consistent  with the main ﬁndings.   The ﬁnal set of tests examines the substantive characteristics of CL reviews of PC versus non-PC ﬁrms.  We examine  four characteristics, the ﬁrst three of which are from prior literature ( Cassell et al. , 2013 ).  (i) the number of core and noncore earnings topics in the CL.  (ii) the number of days between the initial receipt of a CL and the receipt of a “no further  comment” letter.  (iii) the number of communication rounds between the SEC and ﬁrms.  and (iv) the involvement of an  SEC supervisor in a ﬁrm’s comment-letter review.  We ﬁnd that PC ﬁrms receive more substantive reviews along all these  dimensions, indicating that the SEC’s CL reviews of PC ﬁrms are not perfunctory.   We offer some potential explanations for our primary ﬁnding of a positive association between ﬁrm PC and SEC CL  reviews in comparison to the prior ﬁnding of a negative relation between ﬁrm PC and enforcement.  First, it is possible that  both the DOE and DCF are captured and coordinate such that the DCF proactively “works with” PC ﬁrms in the CL stage  to actively remediate issues and preempt escalation to the enforcement stage.  However, this explanation faces two major  hurdles.  (i) it requires a more elaborate coordination between different divisions of the SEC than is reported (anecdotally)  3 and (ii) it does not explain why PC ﬁrms that have ostensibly captured the SEC could  by current and former SEC oﬃcials.   not simply hire former SEC oﬃcials to vet their ﬁnancial statements prior to submission, thereby lowering the likelihood of  being subject to a publicly visible CL review process.  We therefore do not view this as a likely explanation.   Another potential explanation is that only the DOE, which pursues enforcement actions, but not the DCF, which conducts  the CL reviews, is politically captured.  For instance, the politically appointed Commissioners vote in a closed meeting on the  DOE staff’s enforcement recommendation, but Commissioners do not directly inﬂuence the issuance of a comment letter by  the DCF.  However, this argument of targeted capture of the DOE does not in itself explain a positive relation (as opposed  to no relation) between PC and the likelihood and substantive characteristics of CL as we document.  Thus, this explanation  alone cannot account for our results.   A related explanation is that the SEC DCF actively targets PC ﬁrms in the CL review stage.  This account does not require  an anti-political vendetta on part of the SEC’s DCF.  it may simply be that political connectedness is a useful heuristic for  issues the DCF seeks to address at the CL stage.  Our identiﬁcation tests allay concerns that ﬁrm PC proxies for known and  latent ﬁnancial-reporting risk characteristics.  the tests suggest that the DCF may view ﬁrm PC as a distinct risk indicator.   If true, then the remediation of issues at the CL stage can explain in part the lower likelihood of subsequent enforcement  action against PC ﬁrms documented in the prior literature.  This explanation, which is inconsistent with the SEC capture  hypothesis, appears most likely to us.   A fourth possibility is that the PC measures used in the literature to establish a negative association between ﬁrm political connectedness and SEC enforcement are noisy or biased representations of ﬁrms’ true political connections.  In particular,  the fraud-prone ﬁrms that are more likely to receive SEC scrutiny at the enforcement stage may underreport their political  contributions (e. g. , to diffuse media scrutiny), yielding the negative result in the prior literature.  Since all ﬁrms, not just  fraud-prone ﬁrms, are subject to SEC scrutiny at the CL stage, the concern about underreporting of political contributions is  less likely to apply in our sample.  Put differently, if fraud-prone ﬁrms underreport PC, our sample is less biased than those  used in prior tests, and the true relation between ﬁrm PC and SEC oversight (even at the enforcement stage) is positive,  inconsistent with SEC capture.  While we do not necessarily view this data issue as the most likely explanation for results in  the prior literature, exploring this concern about the prior literature’s measures of PC is an opportunity for future research.   Our ﬁndings give new impetus for such research.   The simple conclusion we draw from our results is that it is diﬃcult to infer that SEC oversight of PC ﬁrms is captured or  lax as is suggested in prior literature.  Rather, our results suggest a more nuanced relation between PC and SEC oversight in  that SEC capture, if it exists, may be less blatant or pronounced than previously thought.  The maintained assumption here,  as in the prior literature, is that some SEC oﬃcials are at least nominally aware of ﬁrms’ political connectedness.  Anecdotal  descriptions of the DCF’s review process are supportive of this idea.  senior SEC oﬃcials, who are more likely to be politically  astute, allocate and oversee staff reviews of ﬁrms.  Moreover, our ﬁnding that more senior SEC oﬃcials are involved in CL  reviews of PC ﬁrms is consistent with this notion.   This paper contributes to the accounting literature on regulation and the political process by presenting a fuller picture of  the role of ﬁrm political connections in SEC oversight.  We also contribute to the growing literature on CL determinants and  consequences (e. g. , Cassell et al. , 2013.  Bozanic et al. , 2015.  Johnston and Petacchi, 2014.  Dechow et al. , 2016 ).  By focusing on  how ﬁrm PC affects the likelihood of receiving CLs, we extend the economic analysis of CL activity into the political domain.   The political behavior of regulators is an important but understudied area in accounting (e. g. , Kothari et al. , 2010 ).  Finally,  our paper is one of the few studies in regulation that provides evidence inconsistent with regulatory capture – although  empirical work on capture is limited, the evidence is largely supportive of capture (see, e. g. , Dal Bó’s, 2006 , review).   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows.  Section 2 describes the institutional background to the SEC’s CL process and  develops our hypotheses.  Section 3 describes the sample and primary research design and presents descriptive statistics.   Section 4 presents the main empirical results.  Section 5 presents results of tests on the substantive characteristics of SEC CL  reviews.  Section 6 concludes.   2.  Background.  2. 1.  The SEC’s comment-letter review process.  The SEC is composed of several divisions, including the Division of Enforcement (DOE) and the Division of Corporation  Finance (DCF).  The former handles investigations of possible violations of federal securities laws, including violations of  requirements for U. S.  listed companies to provide ﬁnancial reports in accordance with U. S.  GAAP.  The latter provides interpretive assistance to listed companies with regards to SEC rules, which includes reviewing ﬁrm ﬁnancial reporting in real  time to monitor and enhance compliance ( SEC, 2015b ).  The goal of the review is the protection of investors and is described  by the DCF as a “dialogue with a company about its disclosures” ( SEC, 2015b ).   Section 408 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX) requires the DCF to review U. S.  listed-ﬁrm ﬁlings at least once  every three years.  This review is done by one of twelve oﬃces at the DCF, each led by an assistant director, where the  4 The assistant directors are overseen by associate directors, and the deputy director and  oﬃces are organized by industry.   director of the DCF oversee the entire ﬁling review process.  Similar to the Internal Revenue Service’s audit formula, the DCF  does not discuss the speciﬁcs of when and why certain ﬁrms are reviewed.  Section 408 of SOX speciﬁes criteria that the  5  The DCF reviews vary in scope  DCF should consider in selecting ﬁrms to review (which we describe in a later section).   by the number of topics covered and the seniority of SEC staff involved ( GAO, 2013 ).  Some reviews focus on just one topic,  e. g. , ﬁnancial-statement presentation.  Other reviews can cover dozens of topics, including substantive accounting issues like  revenue recognition and asset impairment policies.  Similarly, some reviews appear to be largely conducted by junior-level  staff of the rank of staff accountant, while other reviews appear to also involve senior staff of the rank of branch chief or  assistant director.   If questions arise during a ﬁnancial-reporting review, the DCF issues a comment letter to the reporting ﬁrm.  The comment letter is an expression of concern by the SEC and an opportunity for the ﬁrm to respond to SEC questions about the  ﬁrm’s reporting practices.  This comment letter process, once initiated, varies considerably by duration to resolution and the  number of intermediate rounds of formal questions and answers between the DCF and the ﬁrm.   The outcomes of the comment letter process also vary considerably.  The process can result in no action by the ﬁrm if  all of the SEC’s questions are satisfactorily resolved.  It may also result in the ﬁrm ﬁling an amendment to clarify its prior  ﬁnancial reports or agreeing to adjust future ﬁlings in response to a resolution with the SEC over ﬁnancial reporting concerns  ( SEC, 2015b ).  In cases where the SEC’s concerns are signiﬁcant and substantively unresolved by the ﬁrm’s responses, the  comment letter process can end with the ﬁrm making a restatement of past ﬁnancial reports.  In a few cases, the comment  letter process may conclude with the DCF recommending the case to the DOE for enforcement action.  These referred cases  usually involve suspected willful violation of securities laws by the ﬁrms concerned.  To effect coordination between the DCF  and the DOE, the SEC has in place a special department known as the Oﬃce of Enforcement Liaison ( OIG, 2008 ).  Finally, DCF  makes its comment letters and company responses to those comment letters publicly available on the SEC’s EDGAR system.   Fig.  1 shows the timeline of a 10-K comment-letter review for a ﬁrm with a ﬁscal-year ending on December 31, using the  review of American International Group, Inc. ’s (AIG) Form 10-K for the ﬁscal year ended December 31, 2013 as an example.   In particular, AIG ﬁled its 10-K on February 20, 2014 and received the ﬁrst comment letter from DCF on April 29, 2014.  AIG  sent a response to the SEC on May 13, 2014, i. e. , within ten business days, and received the “no further comment” letter  from DCF on June 4, 2014.  The correspondence between the SEC and AIG was published on EDGAR on July 2, 2014, i. e. , no  earlier than 20 business days after the completion of its review.   2. 2.  Regulatory capture.  The regulatory capture hypothesis (e. g. , Stigler, 1971 ) predicts that political connections help ﬁrms extract rents from  public agents like politicians and regulators.  In the context of the SEC speciﬁcally, the capture hypothesis suggests that  politically connected ﬁrms have allies in Congress and the executive administration who can intercede with the SEC on  their behalf if needed.  Congress determines the SEC’s budget and oversees its operations, while the president of the United  States, with the advice and consent of the Senate, appoints SEC commissioners and names the SEC chairman ( SEC, 2015a ).   As such, pursuing enforcement actions against politically connected ﬁrms could be costly to SEC commissioners and staff if  such actions antagonize the SEC’s overseers.  Correia (2014) reports that ﬁrms’ political connections mitigate the likelihood  and degree of SEC enforcement actions in that PC ﬁrms are less likely to receive Accounting and Auditing Enforcement  Releases and receive lower penalties if prosecuted.  Yu and Yu (2011) also report that ﬁrms’ political connections inﬂuence  the likelihood and degree of SEC enforcement decisions.   The possibility of regulatory capture is moderated by the idea that Congress and the president likely balance specialinterest favors with voter support (also see Heese, 2015 ).  If politicians and regulators go too far in terms of providing specialinterest favors (e. g. , sparing politically connected ﬁrms from enforcement actions even after egregious accounting violations  or, at least, doing so too often), then these public agents are likely to face voter backlash (the “political cost hypothesis” of Watts and Zimmerman, 1978 ).  For instance, after the failure of Enron, senior politicians in both parties faced criticisms  over their close connections to that ﬁrm, particularly over concerns that these relationships might have enabled more lax  regulatory oversight.   Overall, given myriad forces that regulators and politicians have to balance, it is unclear how blatant or pronounced SEC  capture is likely to be.  SEC oversight involves activities that are not limited to enforcement actions.  it extends to commentletter reviews.  As such, it is diﬃcult to draw strong conclusions about the laxness of SEC oversight of PC ﬁrms based on  enforcement actions alone.  Our objective in this paper is to provide evidence on the relation between PC and the likelihood  and substantive characteristics of CL reviews.  If SEC capture by PC ﬁrms is empirically descriptive, we expect a negative  relation between PC and the likelihood and substantive characteristics of CL reviews.   As in the prior literature, a maintained assumption in the discussion above is that SEC oﬃcials are at least nominally  aware of ﬁrms’ political connectedness.  Anecdotal interview evidence from a former DCF staffer is supportive of this idea.   The former staffer spoke of a “top-down” management style, where senior SEC oﬃcials, who are more likely to be politically  astute, allocate and oversee staff reviews of ﬁrms.  In line with this anecdotal evidence, a GAO (2013) report notes that “using  selective review criteria, assistant director oﬃces evaluate company and transaction disclosures to determine the appropriate  level of review of each transactional ﬁling” and that assistant directors allocate as well as oversee lower level staff.  Assistant  Directors are monitored by Associate Directors who have to report to the head of the division.  Finally, as maintained by  Blackburne (2014) , DCF staff does not necessarily need to observe the political contributions directly if these contributions  are correlated with other indicators of political connectedness that staff does observe, such as inquiries from congressional  staff or lobbyists.   <Middle> Sample, research design, and descriptive statistics.  3. 1.  Sample.  We obtain data on comment letters from Audit Analytics for 2005 through 2012.  The sample begins in 2005 because  this is the ﬁrst year for which all necessary comment-letter data necessary are publicly available.  The sample ends in 2012, the last year for which we could ensure that we had all relevant comment letters for the study.  We exclude foreign ﬁrms  cross-listed in the U. S. , for two reasons.  First, foreign ﬁrms are less likely to receive comment letters.  Second, and more  importantly for our study, foreign ﬁrms are legally not allowed to inﬂuence electoral outcomes in the United States – for  instance, foreign ﬁrms cannot create a Political Action Committee (PAC).   The ﬁnal sample consists of 33,084 ﬁrm-year observations, representing 5848 distinct ﬁrms as shown in Table 1 , Panel A.   Table 1 , Panel B, shows that on average about one-third of the ﬁrms receive a comment letter, suggesting that the SEC has  achieved its goal of reviewing at least 33% of ﬁrms each year.  The average (median) comment letter addresses nine (seven)  topics, and its resolution takes, on average, 67 (57) days and four (four) rounds of responses with the SEC.   3. 2.  Research design.  The primary regression model to examine the relation between PC ﬁrms and the incidence of receiving a comment letter  is the following, where the subscript i represents the ﬁrm and t the year.   Comment_Letter it is an indicator equal to one if the firm i received a comment letter related to its 10-K filings for the fiscal year ended t , and 0 otherwise.  We estimate Model 1 using logistic regression estimation.  Following prior literature ( Correia, 2014.  Blau et al. , 2013.  Yu and Yu, 2011 ) and guidance from the Center for Responsive Politics ( CRP, 2013 ), we use two primary measures to identify PC firms.  contemporaneous lobbying expenditures by the firm and contemporaneous PAC donations.  7 We obtain data on firms’ lobbying expenditures from the CRP and measure political connections as the natural logarithm of (one plus) firms’ lobbying expenditures, denoted Log_Lobby_Amount .  We obtain data on firms’ PAC contributions from the Federal Elections Commission database and measure political connections as the natural logarithm of (one plus) firms’ PAC contributions, denoted Log_PAC_Amount .  In robustness tests described later in the manuscript we also use alternative measures of political connections.  The control variables in the regression are mainly motivated by SOX Section 408, paragraph (b), as well as Cassell et al.   (2013) who study the likelihood of ﬁrms receiving comment letters.  In particular, SOX Section 408, paragraph (b), identiﬁes  ﬁrms for the SEC to consider in its reviews of ﬁlings.  “(1) issuers that have issued material restatements of ﬁnancial results.  (2) issuers that experience signiﬁcant volatility in their stock price as compared to other issuers.  (3) issuers with the  largest market capitalization.  (4) emerging companies with disparities in price-to-earnings ratios.  (5) issuers whose operations signiﬁcantly affect any material sector of the economy.  and (6) any other factors that the Commission may consider  relevant. ” With respect to factor (1), we include proxies for internal control quality ( IC_Weak ) and previous failures in ﬁnancial  reporting ( Restate ).  We set IC_Weak ( Restate ) equal to 1 if the company reported a material weakness (issued a restatement)  in year t , and 0 otherwise.  As the SEC may increase scrutiny in year t based on prior internal control weaknesses or restatements, we also include lagged values of IC_Weak and Restate , i. e. , IC_Weak_Lag and Restate_Lag , respectively.  With respect to  factor (2), to identify issuers with high volatility in their stock price, we create an indicator equal to 1 if a ﬁrm is in the  highest quartile of the distribution of volatility of abnormal stock returns, denoted High_Volatility .  With respect to factors  (3) and (5), we include ﬁrm size ( Log_Mark_Cap ) in the models.  With respect to factor (4), we use the Market_to_Book ratio  to capture ﬁrms’ growth expectations.  Factor (6) allows discretion to the SEC in deciding ﬁrm characteristics that might  indicate whether more or less ﬁrm scrutiny is warranted, and therefore we include a number of additional proxies that we  expect to affect SEC scrutiny.  The focus of our tests is to examine whether one of these discretionary ﬁrm characteristics is Prior research generally ﬁnds that ﬁnancial reporting quality is higher for larger, more mature, and more proﬁtable companies.  Thus, we include a ﬁrm’s age, denoted as Firm_Age , a Loss indicator that is one if a ﬁrm’s net income is negative,  and zero otherwise, and a Low_Market_to_Book indicator equal to one if the market-to-book ratio is below one.  We include  the Altman Z-Score ( Altman, 1968 ) as a proxy for ﬁnancial distress because ﬁnancially distressed ﬁrms are more likely to  be noncompliant with GAAP ( Brazel et al. , 2009.  Dechow et al. , 1996 ).  Cassell et al.  (2013) ﬁnd that company complexity  increases the extent and likelihood of review.  We therefore include sales growth, Chg_Sales , an indicator for merger and acquisition activity, M&A , and an indicator for restructuring charges, Restructuring .  As prior literature suggests that disclosure  quality and reporting compliance are higher when companies intend to issue securities (e. g. , Ettredge et al. , 2011 ), we follow Ettredge et al.  (2011) and use subsequent debt and equity issuances, Ext_Financing , to proxy for management’s plans to  issue new equity or debt securities.  Following Francis et al.  (1994) , we include an indicator variable for companies in highly  litigious industries, Litigation_Ind , because such companies are likely to be subject to heightened scrutiny from regulators,  investors, and auditors.   We construct an indicator variable, denoted Big_4 , equal to one for all ﬁrms audited by a Big 4 ﬁrm, and zero otherwise.  As Big 4 auditors are generally considered higher quality than non-Big 4 auditors ( DeFond, 1992.  DeFond et al. , 2016.   Palmrose, 1988 ), clients of the Big 4 may be less likely to violate GAAP.  As an additional auditor characteristic, we include  auditor tenure, Auditor_Tenure , which could be associated with higher reporting quality due to auditor learning or lower  reporting quality if auditor independence is compromised ( Geiger and Raghunandan, 2002.  Johnson et al. , 2002.  Myers et  al. , 2003 ).  We differentiate between auditor changes initiated by the client, Auditor_Dismissed , and those initiated by the  auditor, Auditor_Resigned , to control for their potentially varying effects on our dependent variables.   We also include proxies for ﬁrms’ governance characteristics.  Following Cassell et al.  (2013) , we include an indicator if the  CEO is the chairman of the board of directors ( CEO_Chair ), the number of independent board members ( Outside_Directors ),  the  number  of  board  meetings  ( Board_Mtgs )  as  well  as  CEO  and  CFO  tenure  ( CEO_Tenure  and  CFO_Tenure ,  respectively).   Since data required to construct these internal governance variables are available for only a subset of our sample, missing  values are set to 0 but we include separate indicator variables ( Gov_Missing ) set equal to 1 when the governance data are  unavailable, and 0 otherwise ( Cassell et al. , 2013 ).   Finally, we include SEC oﬃce-year ﬁxed effects to control for idiosyncratic oﬃce and time factors that can inﬂuence the  likelihood of receiving a CL.  For instance, Blackburne (2014) suggests that annual SEC oﬃce budgets affect the likelihood  of receiving a comment letter for all ﬁrms reviewed by that oﬃce in a particular year.  Appendix A presents our variable  deﬁnitions.   3. 3.  Descriptive statistics.  Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for the variables described above.  Panel A presents statistics for the complete pooled  sample.  Panel B compares means between PC and non-PC ﬁrms (deﬁned in Panel B as ﬁrms with either PAC or lobbying  activity), while Panel C compares means between comment-letter and no-comment-letter ﬁrms.  Note that while all ﬁrms  are subject to a review once every three years, not all reviewed ﬁrms receive a comment letter.  Panel A of Table 2 shows  that in the full sample 13% (18%) of ﬁrms contribute  to PACs  (have lobbying expenditures), spending on average about  $164,0 0 0 ($1107,0 0 0).  Panel B shows that PC ﬁrms are signiﬁcantly larger, older, less likely to report a loss, and more likely  to have a Big 4 auditor.  They also have a longer relationship with their auditors, fewer instances of auditor resignation or  dismissal, more board meetings and outside directors, shorter CEO tenure, fewer incidences of internal control weaknesses  or restatements, more M&As, and lower Z-Scores.  Panel C shows that ﬁrms with comment letters are signiﬁcantly larger,  older, more likely to have restated ﬁnancials, less likely to have an internal control weakness, more likely to have a Big 4  auditor, and less likely to have a low market-to-book ratio.  They also have a higher volatility, a longer tenure with their  auditors, more board meetings, more outside directors, and smaller changes in sales.   Both measures of ﬁrms’ political connections are correlated with each other (0. 50) and with ﬁrm size (0. 40–0. 46), emphasizing the importance of controlling for ﬁrm size in our empirical tests.   4.  Political connections and the likelihood of receiving a comment letter.  4. 1.  Main results.  Full Sample Tests.  Table 3 shows the results of estimating Eq.  1 in the pooled sample.  We ﬁnd a positive and signiﬁcant  coeﬃcient on both Log_Lobby_Amount and Log_PAC_Amount , indicating that PC ﬁrms are more likely to receive a comment  letter.  These results contrast with prior studies that document a negative association between political connectedness and  SEC oversight in the form of enforcement.  Instead, the results suggest that in the context of DCF reviews, political connections attract greater SEC oversight.   The coeﬃcients on the control variables are consistent with prior research (e. g. , Cassell et al. , 2013 ).  In particular, we  ﬁnd that ﬁrms with lagged internal control weaknesses as well as contemporaneous restatements are more likely to receive  a comment letter.  Larger, older, loss-making, low market-to-book, and restructuring ﬁrms, as well as ﬁrms with more board  meetings, fewer outside directors, and with high volatility are also more likely to receive a comment letter.  Firms with  external ﬁnancing are less likely to receive a comment letter.   4. 2.  Enhancing identiﬁcation.  In this section we describe a battery of tests that address endogeneity concerns stemming from non-random treatment  effects and potential correlated omitted variables, measurement error, and simultaneity.   4. 2. 1.  Propensity-Score matched test.  A potential concern with the results in Table 3 is that PC and non-PC ﬁrms are systematically different and non-randomly  assigned to their respective groups.  To mitigate this concern, we create a propensity-score matched sample of PC and non-PC  ﬁrms.  For these tests, PC is alternatively deﬁned as a ﬁrm with non-zero PAC contributions and non-zero lobbying expenditures.  We then match to each PC ﬁrm a non-PC ﬁrm from the same year, reviewed by the same SEC oﬃce, and of similar  characteristics along all of the covariates used in Table 3 , using a propensity score matching method.  We match PC and  non-PC ﬁrms within a predeﬁned propensity score radius (or “caliper”) of 0. 0 0 05, and allow for replacement in the selection of matches to ensure that we ﬁnd a meaningful match for each of the PC ﬁrms ( Shipman et al. , 2017 ).   For the 4301 PC ﬁrm-years deﬁned as having non-zero PAC contributions, we ﬁnd matches for 768 PC ﬁrm-years yielding a total sample size  of 1536.  For the 5955 PC ﬁrm-years deﬁned as having non-zero lobbying expenditures, we ﬁnd matches for 1943 PC ﬁrm  observations yielding a total sample size of 3886.  As reported in Table 4 , Panel A and B, the mean comparisons of matched  9 As shown in Table 4 , Panel C, while PAC (lobpairs indicate that the matching procedure successfully balances covariates.   bying) ﬁrms have a 38. 5% (35. 7%) probability of receiving a comment letter, matched non-PAC (non-lobbying) ﬁrms have a  probability of 33. 7% (32. 5%).  These differences in comment letter likelihood between PC and non-PC ﬁrms are statistically  signiﬁcant at the 5% level, consistent with the results in Table 3.   The PSM balances on observable covariates, so in order to quantify the potential impact of unobserved covariates we  relax the assumption that matched observations have the same probability of being a PC ﬁrm ( Rosenbaum, 2002 ).  We ﬁnd  that the results would still be signiﬁcant at the 90% conﬁdence level if non-PC ﬁrms were up to 1. 5 (for PAC contributions) or  up to 1. 3 (for lobbying expenditures) times more likely to be a non-PC ﬁrm.  As no benchmark exists to determine whether  a given hidden bias is large ( Armstrong et al. , 2010 ), this ﬁnding only provides an insight into robustness with respect to  potential hidden bias.   4. 2. 2.  Cross-Sectional test.  To further alleviate potential concerns about omitted variables correlated with PC that might be driving the results, we  alternatively identify PC ﬁrms as those with lobbying and PAC contributions targeted speciﬁcally at the SEC.  In particular,  we create an indicator variable, Lobby_SEC , equal to one if the ﬁrm explicitly lobbied the SEC and equal to zero otherwise.   11 For PAC contributions, we  We identify these ﬁrms from lobbying reports ﬁled with the Senate Oﬃce of Public Records.   identify ﬁrms that are the top contributors, denoted Top_SEC_Contributor , to congressmen or senators serving on SEC oversight committees (i. e. , the House or Senate Banking, Commerce, or Appropriations committees) as reported in the Federal  Elections Commission database.  Prior research has argued and shown that politicians serving on these oversight committees  can affect SEC policies more effectively than other politicians (e. g. , Weingast, 1984.  Correia, 2014.  Heese, 2015 ).  About 1. 1%  of ﬁrms in our sample are top contributors and about 0. 6% of ﬁrms lobby the SEC directly.  These cross-sectional measures  of political connectedness are less correlated with ﬁrm size (i. e. , 0. 18 for top contributing ﬁrms and 0. 12 for ﬁrms lobbying  the SEC).   As shown in Table 5 , we ﬁnd that—after controlling for ﬁrms’ overall lobbying expenditures and PAC contributions—ﬁrms  that lobby the SEC directly and are the top contributor to politicians serving on SEC oversight committees are signiﬁcantly  more likely to receive a comment letter.  These cross-sectional tests provide support to the main results that ﬁrm PC attracts  SEC scrutiny in the CL review process.   4. 2. 3.  Instrumental variables test.  As another approach to mitigate endogeneity concerns we use an instrument for ﬁrm PC.  As in prior literature (e. g. ,  Correia, 2014 ), our instruments for a ﬁrm’s PAC and lobbying expenditures are, respectively, the sum of PAC and lobbying  expenditures made by other ﬁrms in the same 4-digit SIC industry and the same employee-size decile.  These industry-size  peer contributions are likely to be associated with the political contributions of a given ﬁrm due to peer effects driving  political activity (e. g. , Grier et al. , 1994.  Kim, 2008 ).  However, they are less likely to directly drive the likelihood of that ﬁrm  receiving a comment letter.  Following the approach described by Larcker and Rusticus (2010) to test the validity of instruments, we ﬁnd that both  instruments are strongly associated with ﬁrms’ political spending (see Table 8 , Panel A, Columns 1 and 3) with partial FTests of 88. 31 and 80. 63, respectively, which are above the thresholds recommended by Stock et al.  (2012) .  The tests for  over-identiﬁcation restrictions, which are appropriate under the assumption that at least one of the instruments is valid, fail  to reject the hypothesis that the instruments are exogenous (p-values are 0. 32 and 0. 38 for lobbying and PAC contributions,  respectively), suggesting the instruments have some validity.  The results of the second stage IV regressions (see Table 6 ,  Panel A, Columns 2 and 4) are consistent with the main results reported earlier.  Speciﬁcally, the results suggest that in the  DCF context PC ﬁrms are more likely to experience SEC oversight via a comment letter.   A concern with the use of the instruments above arises if industry-wide political costs ( Watts and Zimmerman, 1986 )  drive  both  ﬁrm-level  accounting  choices  and  industry-  &  ﬁrm-level  political  contributions.   In  this  case,  the  instrument  (industry-level political contributions) is not exogenous to the response variable (CL review likelihood) because the response  variable is known to be driven by ﬁrm-level accounting choices.  If true, the instrument here is invalid.  We therefore also use  another IV that is less vulnerable to this concern – state-level voter turnout.  (We continue to use the original instruments  to be comparable with prior literature, e. g. , Blackburne, 2014 , and Correia, 2014 . )  State turnout rates, calculated as ballots counted divided by the voting-eligible population for the general elections, can  proxy for the state population’s political engagement and are therefore likely to be associated with the political contributions  of a given ﬁrm (e. g. , the ﬁrm might be more politically engaged).  But turnout rates are less likely to directly drive the  likelihood of that ﬁrm receiving a comment letter, making turnout rates a reasonable instrument in our setting.  Accordingly,  we replace our industry instrument with the state turnout rates and follow the same approach as described above.  We ﬁnd that the instruments in this new approach are associated with ﬁrms’ political spending (see Table 6 , Panel B, Columns  1 and 3) with partial F-Tests of 32. 80 and 56. 10, respectively, which are above the thresholds recommended by Stock et  al.  (2012) .  The tests for over-identiﬁcation restrictions, which are appropriate under the assumption that at least one of  the instruments is valid, also fail to reject the hypothesis that the instruments are exogenous (p-values are 0. 15 and 0. 78  for lobbying and PAC contributions, respectively), suggesting the instruments have some validity.  The results of the second  stage IV regressions (see Table 6 , Panel B, Columns 2 and 4) are consistent with the main results reported earlier.   4. 2. 4.  Other robustness tests.  Long-Term PC measures.  A potential simultaneity concern is that ﬁrms initiate lobbying and political contributions when  they make more opaque accounting choices and that the latter are associated with CL receipt likelihood.  Supplementing the  tests above we further address this endogeneity concern by replacing the contemporaneous measures of political spending  with long-term measures (e. g. , Correia, 2014 ).  In particular, Long_Term_Lobby and Long_Term_PAC are deﬁned, respectively,  as the sum of PAC and lobbying spending over the prior ﬁve years, requiring further that the ﬁrm in question contributed in  the current year.  Such a long-term, consistent history of political spending—that has been established before the start of the  SEC’s three year review cycle—is less likely to be associated with any contemporaneous latent accounting quality concern  that might drive SEC scrutiny.  rather it more likely reﬂects a ﬁrm’s predetermined long-term policy on political spending.   For the sample of PC ﬁrms the average long-term PAC amount is about $372,068 and the average long-term lobbying  amount is $4751,018.  Table 7 presents the multivariate results using Long_Term_Lobby and Long_Term_PAC .  The model in  Table 7 is similar to that in Table 3 .  The results are also similar as the coeﬃcients on the proxies for political connectedness  are positive and statistically signiﬁcant when predicting the likelihood of receiving comment letters.   Differences in accounting quality.  Another potential concern is that ﬁrms’ political connections proxy for accounting  compliance and reporting issues that drive their higher likelihood of receiving comment letters.  We control for this possibility in the regressions described above through multiple proxies.  accounting restatements, internal control weaknesses,  the 10-K length (word count) and linguistic complexity (FOG index), and the number of SEC ﬁlings.  Further, in untabulated  tests, we ﬁnd that PC ﬁrms do not have lower accounting quality than non-PC ﬁrms using these proxies, after controlling  for other known determinants of accounting quality from the prior literature.  This is consistent with recent research ( Duo,  2016 ) that also ﬁnds that PC ﬁrms’ accounting quality is not lower than that of non-PC ﬁrms.   5.  Political connections and comment-letter review characteristics.  To shed more light on the nature of comment-letter reviews for politically connected ﬁrms, in this section we examine  whether the substantive characteristics of SEC CL reviews differ across PC and non-PC ﬁrms.   We use the following regression model where the subscript i represents the ﬁrm and t the year.  We examine several comment-letter characteristics using data obtained from Audit Analytics.  First, we follow Palmrose  and Scholz (2004) and Cassell et al.  (2013) and classify topics in a ﬁrm’s ﬁrst SEC comment letter in a given year that  affect revenues, cost of goods sold, selling, general and administrative expenses, and other primary operating activities as  “core” earnings topics, denoted Core_Topics .  topics that affect special one-time items or non-operating activities, such as  impairments, restructurings, M&A, discontinued operations, extraordinary items, taxes and goodwill, are classiﬁed as “noncore” earnings topics, denoted Non_Core_Topics.  Second, we use the elapsed time in days from a ﬁrm’s ﬁrst SEC comment  letter (in a given year) to the SEC’s “no further comment” letter as a measure of the review period, denoted Time . 