
The dependence of smallholder farmers on forest resources for their
sustenance and livelihoods is a major driver of deforestation and degradation of forest resources in tropical countries (Amare Name, 2012.  FAO,
2007).  African nations lead the global list of countries with the highest
deforestation rates (Naoto, 2006).  Forest degradation in Ethiopia is primarily being caused by human activities (Reusing, 1998.  Teketay Name,
2010) and has led to considerable habitat fragmentation (Wilcove Name,
1986), a decreasing population (Laurance Name, 2006) and extinction of
indigenous plant and animal species (Wright and Muller-Landau,
2006), as well as a decline in provision of soil protection, water conservation and favourable microclimate services (Aerts Name, 2011).  Forest
degradation is most pronounced in the highlands of the Amhara region,
where natural forests and sacred groves have continuously been
overexploited during past decades.  The deforestation has led to high
runoff resulting in degraded landscapes, decreasing crop and livestock
productivity, sedimentation of water bodies, increased food insecurity
and increasingly high loss of the resource base and the attached ecosystem services (Amare Name, 2016.  Bongers Name, 2006.  Aerts Name, 2016). 
Zege peninsula, which is located in the Amhara Regional State, is one
of the remnants of dry Afromontane forest patches in Ethiopia.  This forest has considerable religious, economic and ecological importance as it
attracts local and international pilgrims, serves as a source of livelihood
for local communities, and is rich in biodiversity (Alelign Name, 2007. 
Teklehaymanot and Giday, 2007).  However, recent studies have
shown that unsustainable wood extraction and marketing of wood
products by local populations have increased (Teklehaymanot and
Giday, 2007.  Alelign Name, 2011) thereby contributing to the degradation of the forest ecosystem and the nearby Lake Tana (Amare Name,
2012.  Amare Name, 2017).  This, in turn, has led to reduced livelihood options, economic and habitat losses, threatened biodiversity, undermined
the valuable services provided by biological diversity and increased the
risk of climate change. 
In order to reverse this trend, innovative approaches are required
that integrate environmental conservation objectives and livelihood improvements for the local communities (Alelign Name, 2011).  A more detailed understanding of the link between forests and local livelihoods
enables the promotion of more sustainable management practices
while maintaining acceptable levels of utilization (Shaanker Name,
2004.  Lepetu and Oladele, 2009).  Hence, investigating the dependence
of local communities on their forest resources is vital to devise appropriate forest management and conservation strategies. 
There is no shortage of studies that investigate how socio-economic
household characteristics and local institutions affect deforestation, forest degradation and conservation (e. g. 