
Accruals are fundamental to ﬁnancial reporting and are the underlying innovation of accounting.  While a long line of prior
research notes that accruals are likely to be a function of fundamental economic forces, little is known empirically or theoretically
about how economic factors impact the level of a ﬁrm's accruals (e. g. , Dechow Name, 1995; Bernard and Skinner, 1996; Dechow Name, 2010; Gerakos, 2012; Owens Name, 2013).  Further, prior research generally disaggregates accruals at time tþ1 into discretionary and non-discretionary components based on ﬁnancial information observed at time tþ1; therefore, the research has
provided little guidance for forming expectations of accruals based on ex ante ﬁrm characteristics.  In this study, we consider
accruals as a form of investment and examine whether theoretical predictions from a real options-based investment framework
provide insights for forming expectations of accruals based on ex ante economic factors. 
Prior research in accounting suggests that accruals at least partially reﬂect deliberate investment choices by the ﬁrm
(Fairﬁeld Name, 2003; Zhang, 2007; Dechow Name, 2008; Wu Name, 2010; Bushman Name, 2011; Allen Name, 2013; Momente
Name, 2013; Arif and Lee, 2014).  In addition, a large literature in economics and ﬁnance adopts a real options approach to
investment decision-making and suggests a negative relation between investment and volatility (e. g. , Bernanke, 1983;
McDonald and Siegel, 1986; Ingersoll and Ross, 1992; Dixit and Pindyck, 1994; Schwartz and Trigeorgis, 2004; Grenadier and
Malenko, 2010). 2 The intuition for the expected negative relation between investment and volatility is as follows.  Investment is costly, and sunk costs cannot be recovered.  Therefore, when ﬁrms make investment decisions, they trade off the
returns earned from investing today against the beneﬁt from delaying investment to the future, when information or
business conditions may be better.  Taking into account the beneﬁt of postponing investment – known as the “option to
wait” – means that since higher volatility increases the value of the option to wait, higher volatility dampens investment
because ﬁrms prefer to “wait and see” instead of investing immediately.  Thus, higher (lower) volatility is associated with
lower (higher) investment.  Adopting the investment perspective of accruals, our ﬁrst hypothesis is that a ﬁrm's level of
accruals is negatively associated with volatility. 
We note, however, that this prediction from the real options framework may not directly apply to accruals.  For example,
models of optimal inventory suggest that managers have incentives to avoid inventory shortages and therefore increase
inventory levels as demand volatility rises (e. g. , Petruzzi and Dada, 1999; Cachon and Terwiesch, 2013).  This research
therefore suggests a positive relation between investment in ﬁnished goods inventory and volatility.  Despite this potentially
countervailing force, we adopt the investment perspective and rely on the real options framework to predict a negative
relation between the level of a ﬁrm's net working capital accruals and volatility. 
Second, we investigate the role of ﬁnancial distress in shaping the relation between accruals and volatility.  Eisdorfer
(2008) models the investment decisions of ﬁnancially distressed ﬁrms using a real options framework and ﬁnds that
ﬁnancial distress weakens the negative effect of volatility on investment.  This is because shareholders of distressed ﬁrms
have an incentive to invest when volatility is higher since they enjoy the beneﬁts if things go well, while bondholders bear
the costs if things go badly.  Accordingly, we predict that the negative association between the level of working capital
accruals and volatility is less pronounced for distressed ﬁrms. 
Third, we exploit the real options framework to form predictions regarding the relation between the length of the
operating cycle and the association between accruals and volatility.  The operating cycle measures the average time between
the disbursement of cash to produce a product and the receipt of cash from the sale of the product (Dechow, 1994);
therefore, ﬁrms with a longer operating cycle have greater exposure to changing business conditions and a wider range of
possible accrual investment outcomes.  This suggests that the option to wait is more valuable for ﬁrms with a longer
operating cycle.  Thus, we hypothesize that the sensitivity of net working capital accruals to volatility is stronger for ﬁrms
with a longer operating cycle. 
Fourth, we investigate whether the asset and liability components of net working capital accruals have differing sensitivities to volatility.  We predict that volatility not only negatively affects current asset accruals but also current liability
accruals, given that liabilities partially ﬁnance investments and thus positively co-vary with investment by nature.  However,
we expect current asset accruals to be more sensitive to volatility than current liability accruals since investment decisions
have ﬁrst-order implications for asset accruals but affect liability accruals only to the extent that managers use liabilities
instead of internally generated cash ﬂows or equity issuances to ﬁnance the investment. 
To empirically test our predictions, we examine the relation between year-ahead working capital accruals and expected
volatility.  We highlight that our approach is distinct from prior accounting literature that disaggregates accruals into discretionary and non-discretionary components (e. g. , Healy, 1985; DeAngelo, 1986; Jones, 1991; Dechow Name, 1995).  Speciﬁcally, while the prior earnings management literature models total working capital accruals in year tþ1 as a function of
explanatory variables which are also measured in year tþ1 (e. g.  Healy, 1985; DeAngelo, 1986; Jones, 1991; Dechow Name,
1995), we model accruals in year tþ1 as a function of characteristics in year t.  Further, we view accruals as a form of
investment, rather than as a component of proﬁtability.  As such, our model is grounded in the real options-based investment framework, in which measures of the ﬁrm's characteristics and economic environment (such as expected volatility,
ﬁrm size, market-to-book, leverage, and cash ﬂows) are used as inputs into investment decisions (e. g.  Hayashi, 1982; Dixit
and Pindyck ,1994; Gilchrist and Himmelberg, 1995; Eisdorfer, 2008). 
Our empirical analysis begins by replicating the ﬁnding in Eisdorfer (2008) that there is a signiﬁcant negative relation between
year-ahead capital expenditures and expected volatility for a sample of manufacturing ﬁrms.  We then extend the analysis to net
working capital accruals and ﬁnd a robust negative relation between year-ahead net working capital accruals and expected volatility
in this manufacturing ﬁrm sample.  Next, we broaden the sample to all non-ﬁnancial and non-utility ﬁrms and ﬁnd, consistent with
the economic theory, that higher expected volatility has a dampening effect on year-ahead net working capital investment.  In
addition, consistent with our predictions, we ﬁnd that the association between year-ahead net working capital accruals and expected
volatility is less pronounced for ﬁrms in ﬁnancial distress and more pronounced for ﬁrms with a longer operating cycle. 
We then decompose year-ahead net working capital accruals into its asset and liability components and examine the relation of
each component with expected volatility.  Consistent with our expectations, we ﬁnd that both current asset and current liability
accruals are negatively associated with expected volatility.  Moreover, asset accruals are more sensitive to expected volatility than
liability accruals, giving rise to the overall negative relation between net working capital accruals and expected volatility. 
We provide two types of robustness tests.  First, we note that our dependent variable (i. e. , year-ahead accruals) is affected not
only by expected volatility but also by expected demand.  Thus, as a robustness test, we include additional controls for expected
demand as of the end of year t – including the consensus analyst forecast of year-ahead sales, the median consensus analyst
forecast of year-ahead sales for the industry, and prior 12-month stock returns – and continue to ﬁnd a signiﬁcant negative
relation between year-ahead accruals and expected volatility.  Second, we acknowledge that year-ahead accruals also contain an
unexpected component that may be affected by unexpected demand in year tþ1. 