
The nexus between environmental quality (e. g.  pollution) and
economic development has received much focus for many decades. 
The main objective of this paper is to empirically investigate the
pollution and income relationship across all Swedish municipalities
from a spatial econometric perspective.  Our approach is motivated by
recent but growing literature emphasizing the importance of the spatial
dimension on this link and the implications of ignoring it (e. g.  Burnett
Name, 2013a, 2013b). 
The emissions and income nexus is often modelled within the
framework of the so-called environmental Kuznets curve (EKC)
hypothesis, which posits an inverted U-shaped relationship between
emissions and income, a curvature likely explained by technological
progress and changes in preferences from income growth.  The EKC literature is replete with empirical modelling of different environmental
quality indicators.  The evidence for many pollutants can however be
best described as mixed.  Grossman and Krueger (1991, 1993, 1995)
were among the ﬁrst authors to empirically examine the EKC hypothesis.  In their papers, Grossman and Krueger found the existence of an
inverted U-shaped relationship between air quality (SO2 emission
and “smoke”) and economic growth (per capita GDP).  The inverted
U-shaped relationship implied that the two pollutants' concentration
increased at lower per capita income levels but decreased with
GDP growth at higher levels of income after a certain trajectory. 
Selden and Song (1994) corroborated Grossman and Krueger (1991)
after considering four air pollutants (suspended particulate matter,
sulfur dioxide, oxides of nitrogen and carbon monoxide) and per capita
GDP1 relationship. 
The EKC literature is associated with several criticisms (see Stern,
2004.  Kijima Name, 2010.  Kaika and Zervas, 2013 for EKC survey). 
Criticisms of the EKC have centered among others on poor econometric
applications, limited single country studies using long historical
time series data, lack of theoretical insights/foundation, neglect of
leakage of dirty production from developed to developing countries
(e. g.  Stern, 2002.  Dinda, 2004).  However, this paper focuses on only
one but important incipient criticism.  It relates to biased and inconsistent EKC estimates arising from model misspeciﬁcation due to omission
of spatial interaction effects in emissions data if signiﬁcantly present
(e. g.  Rupasingha Name, 2004.  Maddison, 2006.  Burnett Name, 2013a,
2013b.  Aklin, 2016).  Failure to capture spatial interactions in the data,
if signiﬁcantly present, might bias the estimated results which might
affect policy inferences. 
It is in regard to this criticism and the need for a detailed within
country study that this paper derives its motivation.  Utilizing
advances in geographic information systems (GIS) and spatial
econometrics in applied settings, we model the pollution-income relationship for the following emissions.  carbon dioxide (CO2), sulfur
dioxide (SO2), nitrogen oxides (NOX), carbon monoxide (CO), particulate matter (PM2. 5 and PM10) and total suspended particulates
(TSP).  Even though selection of these emissions is not guided by
any formal criteria, we have reason to believe their importance in
the Swedish environmental policy/code is not in doubt.  CO2 emissions continue to be one of the major components of greenhouse
gases (GHGs) locally and globally which contributes signiﬁcantly to
climate change.  In Sweden, CO2 emissions are based on use of
different classes of fossil fuels such as coal, gas, and oil products. 
Emissions from transportation are considered a major source of concern in Sweden.  The other pollutants are also important sources driving air quality in Sweden and feature prominently in all reports of the
Swedish Environmental Protection Agency and other environmental
agencies (see e. g.  Gustafsson and Kindbom, 2014.  SEPA, 2016).  SO2
emissions from road trafﬁc, shipping and heating from industrial and
other sources are still a major concern even though emission levels
have been reducing in the last two decades or so.  Indeed particulates,
CO and the other emissions have been established to impact adversely
on human health, mortality and related effects besides generally worsening air quality in a particular area (e. g.  Henschel Name, 2013.  Caiazzo
Name, 2013). 
Guided by the spatial nature of emissions, we tested for spatial
effects and estimated a spatial Durbin model (SDM) to capture this
potential spillover in order to correctly analyze the EKC for the
selected emissions.  Spatial effects could operate in our setting
through many channels.  Spatial correlation could occur because
neighbouring municipalities might share similar economic/business
activities, pollution cycles and some meteorological (natural) attributes such as direction and average speed of the wind, precipitation,
relative atmospheric humidity, transportation and spatially correlated unobservables (or omitted variables) that drive pollution levels. 
Other channels could arise through strategic interaction between
municipalities' emissions targets (policy), cooperation in air quality
monitoring and control, transportation linkages among others. 
While some of these variables are difﬁcult to measure and were not
available to us, we believe, and it has been shown in the literature,
that air pollution levels are likely to be spatially correlated.  We
fully utilize the potential beneﬁts from an empirical model speciﬁcation that is able to capture the impact of emission levels not only in
adjacent municipalities on own emissions but also how spillover in
economic activities could affect neighbouring pollution levels.  The
modelling is undertaken in all 290 municipalities for the period
2005–2013.  We ﬁnd evidence in support of the EKC for CO2, SO2,
NOX, PM2. 5, PM10, TSP and potentially CO in the presence of signiﬁcant spatial spillovers. 
Our contribution to the literature is twofold.  First, we contribute
to the relatively small but growing EKC in-country literature for several emissions from a spatial perspective.  Secondly, ﬁndings hold
promise for public policy coordination considerations as far as pollution control in Sweden is concerned.  Understanding the dynamics of
geographical distribution of emission sources can effectively aid mitigation policies as well as inﬂuencing economic activities (Zhao Name,The remainder of the paper proceeds according to the following
structure.  Section 2 discusses related literature.  Details of the
empirical spatial econometric models as well as data issues
are covered in Section 3.  Section 4 presents the empirics and discussion of the results.  We conclude in Section 5 with some brief
remarks. 
2.  Related literature. 
In this section, a brief survey of the EKC literature as it relates to this
paper is undertaken.  Following the initial inﬂuential work by Grossman
and Krueger (1991, 1993, 1995) and Selden and Song (1994), studies on
the pollution-income nexus have grown substantially.  Many studies
since these seminal papers have modelled the EKC hypothesis by
regressing either air or water quality on income per capita (e. g.  Stern
and Common, 2001.  Stern, 2002).  Other papers have motivated
inclusion of covariates beside income to avert the omitted variable
bias problem associated with some studies.  Variables such as population
density, social capital (e. g.  trust), average years of education, income
inequality among other demographic, economic and related variables
have been controlled for (see e. g.  Selden and Song, 1994.  Grossman
and Krueger, 1995.  Carson Name, 1997). 
Grossman and Krueger (1995) failed to ﬁnd evidence to the effect
that environmental quality decreases steadily with economic
growth.  The new evidence was that economic growth induces an initial environmental deterioration followed by a subsequent phase of
improvement.  They ﬁnd the turning points for most pollutants in
their study to be US$8000 per capita income.  Millimet Name (2003)
on the other hand considered both the standard parametric framework as well as a ﬂexible semi-parametric alternative to test for
the EKC hypothesis for U. S.  state-level SO2 and NOx.  They ﬁnd overwhelming evidence to reject the parametric approach.  Paudel Name
(2005) also estimated parametric and semi-parametric models to
test the EKC for Louisiana in the U. S.  The parametric model showed
turning points within $10,241–$12,993, $6636–$13,877 and
$6467–$12,758 for nitrogen (N), phosphorous (P) and dissolved oxygen (DO), respectively. 
Lindmark (2002) emphasized the need for further studies of the
EKC from a historical perspective and consideration of the EKC
framework as a special case of structural analyses for Sweden.  Similar theme and approach runs through the few Swedish studies on the
EKC for CO2 and SO2 (Kriström, 2000.  Kander and Lindmark, 2004. 
Kriström and Lundgren, 2005.  Johansson and Kriström, 2007).  Giving further impetus to the income distribution argument in the
EKC, Brännlund and Ghalwash (2008) on the other hand analyzed
the pollution and income nexus at the Swedish household level
for CO2, SO2 and NOX.  All the Swedish cases pointed toward a
conﬁrmation of the EKC hypothesis for the emissions considered. 
Given the aggregated time series nature and focus of the above studies, there was no possibility to consider spatial effects in their
estimations. 
Despite exponential growth in the EKC literature, there is no uniform
consensus from the empirics to conﬁrm the EKC stylized facts, at
least for some emissions indicators.  Perman and Stern (2003) tested
the EKC hypothesis on a panel data for sulfur emissions and GDP
for 74 countries.  They ﬁnd sulfur emissions to be a convex function
of income, casting doubt on the general applicability of the hypothesized nexus.  The conclusion was that the EKC is quite a problematic
concept, at least for sulfur emissions. 2 Copeland and Taylor's (2004)
statement summarizes the difﬁculties associated with the general
applicability of the EKC, “…our review of both the theoretical and empirical literature work on the EKC leads us to be skeptical about the existence
of a simple and predictable relationship between pollution and per capita
income”. 
Finally, the growing recognition of modelling the EKC for different
emissions in both spatial and temporal contexts has led to the growth
in a new strand of empirical work, at least over the last decade.  These
studies typically look for and analyze spatial patterns or clusters in
pollution data using GIS and spatial statistical tools.  Consequently, the
EKC is then estimated via spatial error (SEM), spatial lag (SAR), spatial
simultaneous autoregressive (SAC/SARAR) or spatial Durbin (SDM)
models using cross-sectional or panel data.  The idea of the spatial
modelling framework is to relax the assumption of independence
between cross-sections/geographic units (e. g.  locations) often invoked
in non-spatial econometric models.  Rupasingha Name (2004) and
Maddison (2006) were among a few to have motivated a shift from
traditional EKC models to include spatial extensions.  They found
signiﬁcant spatial correlation exist in many pollutants thus casting
doubt on the reliability of non-spatial estimates.  Since these evidences,
subsequent analysts have become more careful to at least test for spatial
effects and modelled pollutants using variant spatial econometric
models if signiﬁcant effects are found (see Burnett Name, 2013a,
2013b.  Georgiev and Mihaylov, 2015.  Hao Name, 2016.  Liu Name,
2017).  Among more recent studies, Aklin (2016) examined the
pollution (CO2 emissions) diffusion and trade nexus using a global
database.  The pollution haven hypothesis was then tested with
an EKC speciﬁcation where spatial effects was found to signiﬁcantly
drive this phenomenon.  Our paper is situated within this class of
studies. 
<Middle> Methodology, estimation strategy and data. 
3. 1.  Tests for spatial dependence. 
As a ﬁrst step, we test for spatial autocorrelation in the individual
emissions data.  We apply two tests - the classical global Moran's I3
and Geary's C(Moran, 1948.  Geary, 1954).  The two global measures
of spatial dependence of a series are strongly linked, but the
detection test based on Moran's I statistic is suggested to be more robust and powerful than the Geary's C (Dubé and Legros, 2014). 
Anselin (1995) has shown that Moran's I statistic is more
robust against the form of the spatial weight matrix utilized. 
The tests are global in the sense that it is a spatial dependence measure that describes the overall spatial relationship across all
municipalities. 
Further, we undertake exploratory spatial data analysis (ESDA) to
detect spatial regimes in the emissions data.  Localized version of
Moran's I test for spatial autocorrelation, which measures the extent
to which high and low values are clustered together is utilized.  Unlike
global Moran's I which is a global index representing the entire
geographic area under study, the local indicator of spatial association
(LISA) or local Moran's Ii considers spatial variations in the study areas
locally.  It describes the heterogeneity of spatial association across
different geographic units within the areas under investigation.  We
implement this with the Moran scatterplot (Anselin, 1995, 1996) to
facilitate the detection of spatial clusters in the emissions data.  The
Moran scatter diagram plots the spatial lag of standardized per capita
emissions against the original values.  The values are then distributed
into four quadrants to depict spatial clustering.  The four different
quadrants of the scatterplot correspond to the four types of local spatial
association between a region and its neighbours.  The four quadrants
depict HH clustering (quadrant 1) which means municipalities
with high emissions are associated with neighbours with similar
emission levels (reverse is LL) and LH (quadrant 2) suggests low
emitting municipalities are surrounded by municipalities with high
emissions (reverse is HL).  Quadrants HH and LL indicates positive
spatial autocorrelation whereas LH and HL show negative spatial
autocorrelation. 
Finally, we use cluster and signiﬁcance maps to depict the local
Moran's Ii for detection of spatial clustering and hot spots (Gertis-Ord
∗) in all emissions data.  All these tests are used in order to reach robustconclusion on whether or not spatial modelling of the pollution-income
hypothesis is indeed appropriate. 
3. 2.  Econometric method and estimation strategy. 
Following the conventional approach in the applied spatial
econometric literature, we begin our speciﬁcation with a non-spatial
ordinary least squares (OLS) regression model as our benchmark
(see Elhorst, 2010.  LeSage and Pace, 2009).  We then test the possibility
of extension of the baseline model to include spatial interaction effects. 
The non-spatial benchmark speciﬁcation is given by Eq. 
Using an appropriate spatial weight matrix, Eq.  (1) is subjected to a
classical Lagrange multiplier (LM) (Anselin, 1988) and robust-LM
(RLM) tests4 proposed by Anselin Name (1996).  These tests are conducted on the residuals of the estimated OLS model.  A rejection of the OLS
model in favour of either the spatial lag (SAR) or spatial error (SEM)
models or both would suggest a spatial Durbin model (SDM) should
be estimated (see LeSage and Pace, 2009.  Elhorst, 2010 for more
technical details). 
Eq.  (1) ignores possible spatial dependence in the pollutionincome (EKC) nexus.  However, since the recent literature (e. g. 
Aklin, 2016) have found emissions, income and population/population density among other variables to exhibit signiﬁcant spatial dependence, we extend Eq.  (1) to include spatial interaction effects
speciﬁed, where y5 is an n × 1 vector of dependent variables (lnCO2pc, lnSO2pc,
lnNOxpc, lnCOpc, lnPM2. 5pc, lnPM10pc, lnTSPpc) for each unit of the
sample i = 1, …n, ιn is an n × K vector of ones for the constant term
parameter α, β and θ are a K × 1 vector of parameters associated
with the N × K matrix of explanatory variables X (i.  e.  lnIncomepc,
(lnIncomepc)2 and lnPopdens) and the spatially explicit counterparts. 
ln is the natural logarithmic operator and the variables lncrpc and
Popdens denote real income per capita (and its squared term) and
population density, respectively.  The variables ρ and λ denote the
spatial autoregressive (or lag) and spatial autocorrelation coefﬁcients, respectively.  while Wy and WX represents the endogenous
and exogenous spatial interaction effects among the outcome and
explanatory variables, respectively.  The disturbance terms are denoted by the vector ε = (ε1, …, εn)T where εi is assumed to be independently and identically distributed (i. i. d. ) for all i with mean zero
and variance σ 2. 
The variable W is an n× n matrix that characterizes the degree
of spatial dependence/connectedness of the spatial units within the
sample.  This matrix has all its diagonal elements equal zero since a
municipality cannot be its own neighbour.  Estimation of Eq.  (2) and
any variants of it requires construction/speciﬁcation of an appropriate
spatial weight matrix.  This is a key step in applied spatial econometrics but the choice/selection of a spatial weight matrix is not guided
by any known economic theory, thus becoming a discretionary (or
arbitrary) decision of the analyst (see Leenders, 2002.  Elhorst,
2010).  The spatial weight matrix, W, in its simplest form is deﬁned
as a ﬁrst-order contiguity matrix consisting of zeros along the principal diagonal (since a municipality cannot be its own neighbour) and
elements wij elsewhere, where wij = 1 if i and j are neighbours and
wij = 0 otherwise.  An alternative speciﬁcation of the spatial weight
matrix is based on the distance between municipality centroids
(inverse or squared inverse distance) with and without distance
cut-off point.  In this paper, the spatial weight matrix W used in the
main empirical estimations is deﬁned as a k-nearest neighbours of
every municipality in the sample (here 10-nearest neighbours).  In
applied spatial econometric work, the weight is standardized such
that the sum of the elements in each row equals one (i. e.  row standardization).  That is, row standardization ensures that relative, and
not absolute distance, matters (Ezcurra and Rios, 2015).  The worry
expressed by some practitioners that coefﬁcient estimates are sensitive to the choice of spatial weight matrix has been quelled recently
by LeSage and Pace (2014a, 2014b) and described as a myth rather
than reality.  They demonstrated and argued that this worry arises
only if the researcher has misspeciﬁed models (e. g.  estimated SEM
or SAR with omitted variables) or an incorrect interpretation
of model coefﬁcients as though they were partial derivatives
(LeSage and Pace, 2014a, 2014b).  The conclusion is that sensitivity
to selection of different spatial weight matrix is largely indicative
of model misspeciﬁcation and should pose no problems if model is
well speciﬁed (LeSage and Pace, 2014a, 2014b). 
Eq.  (2) is the general spatial model due to Manski (1993).  It is a
nested model with special cases within it (Elhorst, 2010).  According
to Elhorst (2010), Manski identiﬁed three possible spatial dependencies in speciﬁcation (2), which includes (i) endogenous6 interaction
effects, (ii) exogenous7 interaction effects and (iii) correlated8 effects.  Following the suggestion of LeSage and Pace (2009) and
Elhorst (2010), would imply the best strategy in testing for the effects of spatial dependence is to begin from a general model such
as Manski (1993).  However, due to issues of identiﬁcation, Manski
suggests exclusion of one of the spatial interaction effects before
testing.  LeSage and Pace (2009) suggests that the best option in
this circumstance is to exclude the spatially autocorrelated errorThis results in the SDM (our preferred model of interest where
λ=0.  Anselin, 1988), also a nested model with special cases of speciﬁc
spatial models incorporated. 
The SDM produces unbiased coefﬁcient estimates if the true datageneration process (DGP) is either a spatial lag or spatial error
model.  As noted by Elhorst (2010), the SDM also produces correct
t-values or standard errors of the estimated coefﬁcients if the true
DGP is a SEM.  Additionally, SDM imposes no prior restrictions on
size of the spatial spillover effects (Elhorst, 2010.  LeSage and Pace,
2009).  Since the SDM yields unbiased coefﬁcient estimates if the
true DGP is any other spatial regression speciﬁcations (except for
the Manski model), it is not that costly to make the exclusion
trade-off (Elhorst, 2010).  The SDM now widely appeals to many empiricists, especially in the growth literature (see e. g.  Ertur and Koch,
2007.  LeSage and Fischer, 2008.  Elhorst, 2012.  Ezcurra and Rios,
2015.  Abate, 2016). 9
By testing the following restrictions/constraints, we reduce the
SDM to either a spatial autoregressive (SAR) or a spatial error
(SEM) model.  Imposing θ = 0 implies the model is a SAR (i. e. 
Ho . θ = 0).  Conversely, imposing the non-linear restriction θ = − βρ
(then ρ =λ i. e.  Ho . θ =−βρ) reduces the model to a SEM. 
To obtain an intuitive interpretation of the impact of a change in
the rth covariate on y, we rewrite Eq, where I represents an identity matrix of order n.  The partial derivatives
of y with respect to a change in variable xr from matrix X is given byEq.  (5) can be interpreted in the context of this paper as follows.  a
change in per capita income in a particular municipality will not only
change the emissions in that municipality (i) alone but also on
emissions in neighbouring municipalities ( j) too, j≠ i.  Thus in the language of LeSage and Pace (2009), the former effect represents a direct impact (i. e.  ∂ yi/∂ xir) while the latter, an indirect effect or
spillover responses (i. e.  ∂ yi/∂ xjr).  The sum of these effects denote
the total effect of a unit change in say income on emissions in a
given municipality, (see LeSage and Pace, 2009 and Elhorst,
2010 for detailed technical discussion).  The added advantage of
using the direct and indirect effects to make inference regarding
the EKC hypothesis in this paper is that we are able to isolate the impact of income not only on emissions from the source region, but also
on its neighbours connected in space via the chosen spatial weightFinally, it is instructive to note that the presence of signiﬁcant
spatial dependence in the data makes it inappropriate for the spatial
models to be estimated via OLS since it yields biased and inconsistent
estimates which could lead to wrong inferences.  That is, estimation
of the general SDM with OLS can potentially lead to inconsistent estimates of parameters in the presence of spatially lagged dependent
variables as well as inconsistent spatial parameter estimates
and standard errors (LeSage and Pace, 2009).  As shown in LeSage
and Pace (2009), the SDM (Eq.  (3)) or any variants of it can be estimated by maximum likelihood (ML) (Anselin, 1988), quasi-ML
(Lee, 2004), instrumental variable and generalized method of moments (IV/GMM)10 and Bayesian Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) approaches.  Following LeSage and Pace (2009) and
Anselin (1988), our models are estimated via ML.  One of the
advantages of the (quasi-) ML estimators, especially of spatial
autoregressive models, is that these models can be estimated even
if the disturbances in the models are not truly normally distributed
(Lee, 2004). 
3. 3.  Data. 
We constructed a balanced panel data for all 290 municipalities in
Sweden spanning nine years (2005–2013).  All emissions data measured
in tonnes (CO2, SO2, NOx, CO, PM2. 5, PM10 and TSP) have been retrieved
from the Swedish national emissions database (RUS11 – which stands
for Regional Development and Cooperation on the environment). 
Population data for all municipalities have been obtained from Statistics
Sweden database and used to compute emissions per capita. 
In order to test for the EKC for the seven emissions types, we control for real income per capita and a squared speciﬁcation of the income variable to capture turning points in the EKC model.  Income
in this paper is represented by mean income per capita earned
in each municipality by residents aged 20 years and above
denominated in 2014 constant Swedish Krona prices.  We further
control for the effect of population density (i. e.  population per
square kilometer for each municipality) in the pollution-income
model.  Data on income and population density were also retrieved
from Statistics Sweden.  The descriptive statistics and variable deﬁnition are shown in Table 1. 
4.  Results. 
4. 1.  Baseline. 
The results of both global Moran's I and Geary's C applied on the
natural logarithm of per capita emissions from CO2, SO2, NOx, CO,
PM2. 5, PM10 and TSP are shown in Table 2.  The results show signiﬁcant positive spatial autocorrelation for all pollutants.  This conclusion remains the same independent of the spatial weight matrix
speciﬁcation (i. e.  10-nearest neighbours or inverse distance).  The
implication is that emissions in a municipality also matter for its
neighbours.  That is, positive spatial correlation indicates that municipalities with similar levels of per capita emissions are more likely to
be spatially clustered than could occur by some random chance.  This
reinforces the need for modelling spatial correlations in the empirical analysis.  The results are corroborated by the Moran's scatterplot
(see Fig.  A1 in Appendix) where indication of positive spatial dependence is overwhelmingly evident.  We ﬁnd many of the municipalities for each pollutant to be clustered in the ﬁrst and third
quadrants, characteristic of positive spatial autocorrelation patterns
in many applications. 
Furthermore, we synchronize and display cluster and signiﬁcance
maps for all air emission pollutants averaged over 2005–2013 in
Fig.  A2 (see appendix).  The signiﬁcance maps show municipalities
where local Moran's I is statistically signiﬁcant while cluster maps
indicate pattern of spatial clustering for hot spots (HH clustering)
and cold spots (LL clustering) for each pollutant.  The results show
some signiﬁcant spatial clustering for all pollutants with apparent
differences in terms of clustering patterns for the municipalities. 
We notice in particular that there is signiﬁcant clustering for carbon
monoxide and particulate matter (2. 5, 10 and total suspended)
across almost the entire Sweden.  Our conclusion is that ignoring
such signiﬁcant spatial interdependence in the pollution data will seriously bias the EKC parameter estimates and hence any inferences
thereof. 
In this section of the paper, the spatial Durbin model (SDM) given in
Eq.  (3) is estimated and analyzed.  We begin the analysis by estimating
the non-spatial regression model given by Eq.  (1).  Table 3 presents
results obtained from Eq.  (1) estimated via OLS for all pollutants.  Our
results show the existence of the EKC for all emission types except for
CO2 which shows a U-shaped relationship between pollution and
income.  The estimates for real income and its squared term are, however,
statistically insigniﬁcant for CO2, carbon monoxide (CO) and total
suspended particulates (TSP).  Given the lack of spatial interaction
consideration in the estimated OLS models, we treat these results rather
cautiously.  The estimated coefﬁcients could be severely biased, inconsistent and or inefﬁcient if space does matter.  We therefore investigate
whether a spatial speciﬁcation could be considered over the nonspatial model.  The classic LM and robust-LM tests applied on the residuals of the estimated models all lead to a rejection of the non-spatial
OLS model based on a 10-nearest neighbours spatial weight matrix.  To
clear any doubts about the issue of sensitivity from choice of spatial
weight matrix, we subjected the regression residuals to tests for spatial
dependence via alternative weight matrix speciﬁcations.  Congruent
with the main results, different spatial matrices failed to invalidate our
conclusion (see Table A1 in Appendix). 
We thus proceed to estimate the spatial panel models via maximum
likelihood.  We account for municipality and year ﬁxed effects in all
models estimated.  Furthermore, since in almost all cases both spatial
error (SEM) and spatial lag (SAR) models are favoured over the nonspatial alternative, the SDM is estimated as our preferred speciﬁcation. 
Nonetheless, both SEM and SAR models are estimated for sake of
completeness and as some form of robustness check, see Table A2 in
Appendix for results. 
Columns in Table 4 present results from the SDM for all seven air
pollution emissions.  We performed Wald tests to examine whether
the estimated nested SDM is reducible to either the SEM or SAR.  Results
indicates superiority of the SDM over both SEM and SAR and hence its
appropriateness in the context of this study.  The null hypothesis for
both SAR (Ho. θ=0) and SEM (Ho. θ= −βρ) are strongly rejected at
the 1% statistical signiﬁcance level. 
Following LeSage and Pace (2009, 2014a, 2014b) suggestion that
the point estimates from the SDM speciﬁcation may lead to erroneous conclusions, we focus our interpretation of the EKC results
from the partial derivatives or impacts perspective.  This has been
established as the correct interpretation of coefﬁcient estimates of
the SDM, because by construction there are feedback effects due to
spatial spillovers from a change in the regression covariates in each
municipality in the whole system (see recent example in Ezcurra
and Rios, 2015).  This is much more interesting because we are able
to decompose the effect of income growth on pollution from the
angle of a direct, indirect and total effects.  Table 4 shows the SDM estimates together with information on the three impact analyses.  We
ﬁnd signiﬁcant spatial interaction effects in all the pollution-income
models given by the spatial autoregressive parameter (ρ).  The positive spatial lag parameter implies that changes in the level of emissions on a speciﬁc municipality have impact on pollution levels
beyond the pollution source.  That is, there is potential pollution spillover into other jurisdictions.  We also observe that neighbouring municipalities' income growth cannot be conﬁned to the municipality
alone but also spills over to drive emissions in neighbouring municipalities.  That is, we ﬁnd that an increase in a neighbours' income,
which possibly also imply demand for higher environmental quality,
has a dampening spillover effect on own municipality emission
levels.  This might be due to the spatial interactions effects due to
say diffusion of technical progress (e. g.  clean energy that reduces
emissions from transport, industry, etc. ).  A similar result came out
for population density.  The negative coefﬁcient of population
density is largely in line with the literature (e. g.  Selden and Song,With regard to the main objective of this paper, our results conﬁrm
the presence of the EKC for all emissions types since the income parameter estimates are correctly signed as hypothesized.  The only candidate
emission with insigniﬁcant income estimates similar to the OLS results
is carbon monoxide (CO).  These results are comparable to the spatial
error and lag models (see Table A2 in the appendix). 
Turning attention to the direct, indirect and total effects estimates in Table 4, we see that the linear and quadratic income
terms mimic the point estimates of the main results with only
minor differences noticeable in the magnitude of the effects.  As expected, the direct effect coefﬁcients are nearly similar to the main estimates in the spatial Durbin model, with minor variations due to the
spatial feedback effects.  Similarly, the parameter estimates for CO,
PM2. 5, PM10 and TSP are almost identical in both direct and indirect
instances.  However, the indirect impact of the explanatory variables
on pollution is much stronger for CO2, SO2 and NOx.  The take away
message in this analysis is that even though the pollution effect of income and population density has signiﬁcant impact on average on a
speciﬁc municipality's own emissions trajectory, its signiﬁcant indirect consequences on other municipalities cannot be ignored.  The
total effect of these impacts robustly conﬁrms the presence of the
EKC hypothesis for six of the emission types considered in this
paper, the only exception being CO.  As the squared income term in
the CO equation is not statistically signiﬁcant, it is neither obvious
to conclude that the environmental pollution effects of economic development on adjacent municipalities is due to spatial feedback, nor
can the EKC be conﬁrmed to hold for this particular pollutant.  Thus
the presupposition that high income countries such as Sweden has
and can grow out of pollution in the presence of spatial
connectivity is to a reasonable extent evident in this study's context. 
From the turning point calculation based on the total effect estimates
of income, we ﬁnd that given the average real income per capita of
about 17,597SEK (≈2202 USD) (from Table 1).  Based on the income
turning point calculations in Table 4, all the emissions (SO2, NOX,
PM2. 5, PM10 and TSP) with the exception of CO2 emissions are at the
decreasing phase of the EKC relationship.  The current average real
income per capita is greater than the turning points of these emissions. 
This suggests that current level of economic development and/or
technological advancement is sufﬁcient to bring about a decrease in
these emissions.  In the case of CO2, the calculated turning point of
3053 USD is greater than the current average real income per capita,
meaning that the current level of economic development and technological advancement is not enough to bring about a reduction in CO2. 
This implies investment in technology with economic growth potential
will eventually result in a reduction in CO2.  Given the average real
income per capita, the income turning point of CO2 and income growth
rate of 1. 3%, it will take about 25 years (i. e.  around 2038)12 from the end
of the sample data (i. e.  2013) for economic development and or technological advancement to bring about a reduction in CO2 emissions. 
4. 2.  Robustness. 
To provide further validation of the baseline empirical estimates
(i. e.  SDM), sensitivity analyses was carried out and presented below. 
Results for the additional robustness checks can be found in the
supplementary (online) appendix to the paper. 
The ﬁrst check relates to the choice of adjacency spatial weight matrix. 
We checked whether the baseline results, and hence our conclusions,
would deviate substantially if N10-nearest neighbours were chosen.  This
is an important exercise given that many unresolved arguments persist
in the empirical spatial econometrics literature that the choice of weight
matrix and/or number of neighbours assigned could affect parameter
estimates.  Here, we extend the number of neighbours to 50 and 10013
but report results for only the former since the outcomes were fairly
comparable.  Results for the 50-nearest neighbours in the supplementary
appendix conﬁrm the conclusions regarding the EKC for the air pollutants. 
The only exception here is that the income variables in the speciﬁcation
for CO2 loses statistical signiﬁcance whereas the reverse was observed
for the baseline estimates. 
Second, the debate of whether absolute or relative spatial weight
matrix is appropriate in this empirical setting is checked.  Row standardization of spatial weight matrices which is often done in applied work is
not without criticism.  Row normalization has been shown to lead to
misspeciﬁcation, especially for inverse distance weight matrices
(Kelejian and Prucha, 2010).  This is because row standardization will
likely distort the relative spatial connection between locations/units
and distort interpretation of the spatial clustering index (Anselin,
1988.  Elhorst, 2001.  Aldstadt, 2010).  Furthermore, normalization
imply both remote and central municipalities will have the same pollution effect,
independent of relative locations.  As argued in
Neumayer and Plumber (2012), the question of whether or not to
row standardize is a matter of theory.  However, given that no such
universal theory presently exists to guide empirical work, we
experimented with a non-row standardized spatial weight matrix
based on 10-nearest neighbours as in the baseline.  While the results
show, to a signiﬁcant degree, that the coefﬁcient estimates of the
row-standardized and non-standardized weight matrices are similar
in terms of magnitude, sign and signiﬁcance, differences in magnitudes for the indirect impact estimates are apparent.  The coefﬁcients
of the indirect impact using non-standardized weight matrix are
about two times smaller in magnitude compared to the baseline estimates.  Also noteworthy is that the values of the spatial correlation
parameter (ρ) reduce in magnitude by the factor 10 (i. e.  number of
selected nearest-neighbours).  Overall, however, the main conclusions from our main results still hold. 
Additional checks for sensitivity of baseline results to alternative
speciﬁcation of the spatial weight matrix were undertaken.  Using the
inverse distance weight matrix, our results are qualitatively and quantitatively quite similar to the baseline.  Ultimately, the conclusion that an
EKC hypothesis exists for almost all14 the pollutant emissions was
reafﬁrmed. 
Finally, further assessment of the EKC for higher-order polynomial speciﬁcation of the income variable was made.  Cubic speciﬁcation
for each pollutant shows that signiﬁcant inverted N-shaped relationship with income exists.  That is, air pollution levels are increasing
over a local extremum, but falling over a global extremum.  While
these results are interesting and quite unexpected, there is need
for further investigation into what could be driving this pattern.  Perhaps a fully non-parametric analysis could provide further insight
into the “true” nature of the pollution-income nexus from a spatiotemporal perspective, an extension beyond the scope and focus of
this paper. 
<Conclusion> Conclusions. 
The proposition that pollution is an example of a negative externality is largely agreed in the environmental and resource economics
literature.  Even more important is the fact that these spillovers are likely
to be spatial in nature (LeSage and Pace, 2009).  Recent examples,
including spatial diffusion of point source air pollution on property
values lend credence to this fact (see Anselin and LeGallo, 2006. 
Anselin and Lozano-Gracia, 2008).  In this vein and following recent
advances in spatial econometrics as well as emerging studies on the
environmental Kuznets curve (EKC), we make a case for relevance of
spatial spillovers in the context of the EKC for seven important
emissions in Sweden – carbon dioxide (CO2), sulfur dioxide (SO2),
nitrogen oxides (NOX), carbon monoxide (CO), particulate matter
(PM2. 5 and PM10) and total suspended particulate (TSP). 
Using a panel data on the seven emissions, income and population density for all 290 municipalities in Sweden over the period
2005–2013, we estimated a nested spatial Durbin model (SDM) as
our point of departure to test the EKC for each pollutant in the presence of potential spatial interaction(s).  Prior to estimating the SDM,
which was favoured over alternative spatial model speciﬁcations, we
run a battery of spatial autocorrelation or dependence tests (global
and local) on each of the emissions data individually and within a
multivariate OLS regression framework.  In each case, we ﬁnd significant spatial dependence in the data and models independent of spatial weight matrix used.  Also, a univariate but interesting analysis of
all emissions showed signiﬁcant spatial clustering and or hot-cold
spots across municipalities in Sweden.  The implication is that either
high emitting municipalities tend to cluster together (and vice
versa), or that there are outliers/spatial dispersion (such as high
emitting areas surrounded by low emitting regions and vice versa)
in the emissions space.  Put together, these evidences point to the potential beneﬁts of spatial modelling of the EKC for these pollutants
and the consequences of ignoring it. 
Our estimates point to the direction of an EKC for all but one of
the seven emissions.  Even though CO emissions follow a typical
EKC curvature, the income estimates were insigniﬁcant in the SDM,
hence we cannot conclude with certainty whether the EKC holds
for it.  The results also show that the pollution effect of income and
population density goes beyond the boundaries of a particular municipality, but signiﬁcantly impacts indirectly on neighbours' emissions.  Nonetheless, we ﬁnd evidence to support the EKC for the
selected pollutants, and that the argument that some countries
such as Sweden can grow out of pollution is largely upheld for CO2,
SO2, NOX, PM2. 5, PM10, TSP and potentially CO.  We admit that the
time span of the data used in this paper is not historically long
enough to fully accommodate this view as done elsewhere in the literature (see e. g.  Lindmark, 2002). 
The results obtained in this paper might have important policy
implications.  The traditional view that pollution effects of economic
development have only local ramiﬁcations is rather farfetched. 
Empirical results in this paper show the importance of considering
the actions and inactions related to economic activities beyond a
municipality's administrative borders.  This implies that policies on
regional growth and development fashioned in oblivion of growth
policies in all other (or closer) municipalities may likely not yield
the intended dividends, especially in the ﬁght against pollution.  Indeed, cooperation and strategic interaction between municipalities,
and to some extent county administration boards in Sweden, in
implementing environmental policies as regards pollution control
(e. g. 