 1.  Introduction  Competition for CEO talent has increased over the past few decades.  As described in Frydman and Jenter (2010) and  Murphy (2013) , ﬁrms now regularly hire outsiders as CEOs instead of internal candidates, competing with other ﬁrms or  poaching their CEOs, aided by compensation consultants and executive placement ﬁrms that create a market for CEOs and  make compensation packages easier to compare.   What effects does such competition for CEO talent have.  How does it affect the compensation contracts that ﬁrms and  CEOs sign, the incentive power of those contracts, and the value that ﬁrms and CEOs create.  The aim of this paper is  to analyze the effects of introducing competition in a setting with realistic informational frictions, in order to understand  how these frictions and the forces of competition jointly determine the outcome.  We show that the ascent of competition  increases the incentive power of CEO compensation contracts.  This mitigates ineﬃciencies from low-powered incentive contracts that arise when ﬁrms do not compete, but it also introduces new ineﬃciencies caused by excessively high-powered  incentive compensation.  Which setup generates larger ineﬃciencies depends on the informational frictions.   We incorporate the following informational frictions in our model.  Firms are uncertain whether a CEO has high or low  talent.  they cannot observe a CEO’s decisions.  a CEO can misreport her performance.  and the long-term ﬁrm value is a noisy  measure of how much value a CEO added.  We are particularly interested in the role of misreporting in our results.  We show  that if misreporting is not possible, then competition for talent does not cause any ineﬃciencies and thus always increases  the value that is created.  If misreporting is possible, however, the contracts that competing ﬁrms offer to CEO candidates  include excessively high-powered incentive compensation, leading to ineﬃciently high effort and aggressive misreporting,  thereby causing ineﬃciencies that can outweigh the ineﬃciencies that competition mitigates.   Note that many ﬁrms offer signiﬁcant incentive compensation to non-CEO top-level executives.  In industries in which  this is common and in which non-CEO executives are able to signiﬁcantly affect their ﬁrm’s true and reported performance,  our results extend to this set of executives.   The ineﬃciencies that arise under competition are different from those that arise without competition, because their  causes are different.  In the absence of competition, a ﬁrm maximizes its proﬁt by offering a contract with incentive compensation that is ineﬃciently low-powered at low performance levels (a contract with the well-known “no distortion at  the top” feature).  The ﬁrm’s goal is to offer low compensation to a high-talent CEO, without reducing her effort incentives.   By reducing the incentive power at low performance levels, the ﬁrm can make it unattractive for a high-talent CEO to act  as if she had low talent, exert low effort and generate poor performance.  But the ﬁrm’s proﬁt is reduced if the CEO has  low talent, because of the low-powered incentives at low performance levels (a low-talent CEO is expected to generate low  performance).  The ﬁrm trades off reduced compensation against lost proﬁts, a trade-off that depends on the informational  frictions.  In particular, the possibility of misreporting exacerbates the ineﬃciency.  But misreporting is not the driver of the  ineﬃciency.  The ﬁrm’s proﬁt-maximizing contract is ineﬃcient even if misreporting is impossible.   Under competition for talent, the rivalry between ﬁrms forces them to offer contracts under which each CEO’s expected  compensation equals the value she creates — a ﬁrm’s proﬁt must be zero in equilibrium, because if it was not, a rival ﬁrm  1 This rivalry complicates the contract  could design a slightly more generous contract and hire a CEO candidate instead.   design problem.  The contract must offer a high-talent CEO a large expected compensation, since having high talent makes  a CEO more productive.  but such high compensation should not induce a low-talent CEO to act as if she had high talent,  misreport aggressively, earn a large compensation and cause a loss to the ﬁrm.  Firms can prevent such mimicking behavior  by making strong use of performance pay.  A low-talent CEO beneﬁts less from higher performance pay, since she is less  productive, so acting as if she had high talent becomes less attractive.  However, achieving this requires an excessively highpowered incentive contract, leading to excessive effort and misreporting by a high-talent CEO, thereby causing eﬃciency  losses.   Competition for talent thus causes new ineﬃciencies that are very different from those arising in the absence of competition.  Excessive incentive power at high performance levels replaces ineﬃciently low incentive power at low performance  levels.  and ineﬃciencies caused by proﬁt maximization are replaced by ineﬃciencies that arise out of necessity, because  ﬁrms are unable to hire a CEO without them.   By comparing the contracts, decisions and payoffs in the two setups (without and with competition for CEO talent), we  can analyze the effects of introducing competition for talent.  For all talent levels and performance levels, we obtain the  following results.  First, expected CEO compensation increases, because the rivalry between ﬁrms leads to more generous  compensation packages.  Second, the incentive power (pay-performance sensitivity) increases, because competition eliminates a ﬁrm’s ability to offer ineﬃciently low-powered incentives at low performance levels while also requiring excessively  high-powered incentives at high performance levels.  Third, CEO effort increases, in response to the more powerful incentive  compensation.  Fourth, misreporting increases, also in response to the more powerful incentive compensation.  These are important results in light of corresponding changes observed between the years 1980 and 20 0 0.  The size and incentive power  of compensation increased (see Frydman and Jenter, 2010 or Murphy, 2013 ), and there was an increase in misreporting (see  Bergstresser and Philippon, 2006.  Burns and Kedia, 2006 , and Cohen et al. , 2008 ). The ascent of competition for talent during this period may have contributed to all these changes.  Furthermore, these changes are not necessarily evidence of a  worsening in corporate governance ( Bebchuk and Fried, 2003, 2004 ).   While these effects of introducing competition for talent are unambiguous, the consequences for eﬃciency (value or  surplus creation) can be positive or negative.  Both setups (with and without competition) generate ineﬃciencies, but with  different causes and magnitudes.  Which eﬃciency loss is more signiﬁcant under what circumstances is not immediately  obvious.   Competition generates a higher surplus than the single-ﬁrm setup if the informational frictions are not too large.  If ( i )  misreporting is suﬃciently diﬃcult.  ( ii ) a ﬁrm’s long-term performance is a moderately noisy measure of how much value  a CEO’s added.  or ( iii ) the CEO’s risk aversion is low.  Under these conditions, the equilibrium contracts under competition  include only relatively small distortions.  Consequently, the ineﬃciencies are smaller than in the setup without competition,  where proﬁt maximization leads to distortions even if the informational frictions are small.  This implies that economies  or industries with the following characteristics beneﬁt from the ascent of competition for talent.  ( i ) If strict disclosure  regulations and active investors make misreporting diﬃcult.  ( ii ) if CEOs need to make decisions that will be key to their  ﬁrm’s performance over many years, such as responding to import threats, technological change, or new regulations, and  the value-added of those decisions can be misreported in the short run but becomes observable in the long run.  or ( iii ) if  CEOs have high net worth and are thus able to diversify compensation risk (this makes compensation linked to the longterm value of the ﬁrm a more effective contracting tool).   In the extreme case, if misreporting is prohibitively costly, competition for talent leads to equilibrium contracts that are  eﬃcient, while the contracts offered in the single-ﬁrm setup remain distorted and thus generate less surplus.  The ascent  of competition for talent then eliminates ineﬃciencies without causing any new ones and thus unambiguously generates  welfare gains.   But the ascent of competition for talent may also cause a reduction in the value created.  This can happen if there are  signiﬁcant diﬃculties in linking compensation to performance.  If the cost of misreporting is low, the CEO’s risk aversion  is high, and long-term performance is a noisy measure of true performance.  Under these conditions, large eﬃciency losses  arise in both setups, but they are larger under competition for talent.  The excessive effort and misreporting induced in  the competitive equilibrium from a high-talent CEO cause eﬃciency losses that outweigh those caused without competition  (where the ineﬃciency is less relevant by comparison, because it affects a less productive low-talent CEO).  For example,  consider an industry in which ﬁrms have operations that are diﬃcult for outsiders to analyze (say, because accounting rules  and regulations offer executives much leeway in their ﬁnancial reporting) and furthermore, the CEOs’ ability to diversify  risk is limited because their net worths consist mostly of equity stakes in their ﬁrms.  Our model predicts that in such an  industry, the ascent of competition leads to eﬃciency losses.   Another situation in which the ascent of competition causes eﬃciency losses is when CEO talent is dispersed (has high  cross-sectional variation), that is, if a low-talent CEO’s effort is much less productive than a high-talent CEO’s effort.  The  reason is that without competition, eﬃciency losses arise if the CEO has low talent, while eﬃciency losses arise under  competition if a high-talent CEO is hired.  If a low-talent CEO is much less productive than a high-talent CEO, then the  ineﬃciencies caused without competition are less signiﬁcant in absolute terms.   A similar intuition applies if the probability of hiring a low-talent CEO is small, that is, if most CEOs are “above-average” and only few have low talent.  In the single-ﬁrm setup, the eﬃciency loss is small, because it is realized in the unlikely  event that a low-talent CEO is hired.  Under competition for talent, in contrast, the eﬃciency loss is large, because there is a  distortion if a (more likely) high-talent CEO is hired.   The contribution of our paper is to shed light on how informational frictions determine whether competition for talent leads to eﬃciency gains or eﬃciency losses, focusing in particular on the role of misreporting.  Since the various elements of our model (competition for talent and the informational frictions) have been analyzed separately in various  strands of the literature, we discuss our paper’s relation to the literature separately in Section 2 .  The rest of the paper is  structured as follows.  Section 3 presents the model and describes the eﬃcient (value-maximizing) contracts.  Section 4 discusses the optimal contracts in a setup with one ﬁrm.  Section 5 characterizes the optimal contracts if ﬁrms compete for  CEO talent.  Section 6 discusses the effects of introducing com petition.  Section 7 explores possible extensions of the model.   Section 8 concludes.  All proofs and the derivations of some important equations are relegated to the Internet Appendix .   2.  Literature  Our contribution is to study how informational frictions determine whether the ascent of competition for talent leads to  eﬃciency gains or eﬃciency losses.  Various strands of the literature study the building blocks of our model (competition  for talent, and the informational frictions), but not in one comprehensive model.  We show that it is important to analyze a  comprehensive model.  If misreporting is impossible, competition leads to an eﬃcient outcome, whereas if misreporting is  easy, the ascent of competition leads to eﬃciency losses.   Some of the existing work analyzes the role of informational frictions in isolation.  CEO talent is studied in Kaplan et al.   (2012).  Albuquerque et al.  (2013).  Beyer et al.  (2014) , and Guay et al.  (2014) .  Unobservable effort has been the workhorse  model of the principal-agent literature since Holmstrom, 1979 .  And there is a large literature on misreporting that studies  both earnings management and large-scale cases of fraud (cases like Enron, Tyco International, Adelphia, Peregrine Systems  or WorldCom).  We focus on earnings management, because it is more common ( Burgstahler and Dichev, 1997.  Bergstresser  and Philippon, 2006.  Kothari et al. , 2009.  Dichev et al. , 2013 ).  Some work studies how incentive compensation affects misreporting ( Stein, 1989.  Fischer and Verrecchia, 20 0 0.  Kirschenheiter and Melumad, 20 02 ) or how compensation should be  structured if ﬁrms anticipate some misreporting ( Dye, 1988.  Liang, 20 0 0.  Sankar and Subramanyam, 20 01.  Goldman and  Slezak, 2006.  Drymiotes and Hemmer, 2013.  Beyer et al. , 2014.  Dutta and Fan, 2014 ).  The model in Beyer et al.  (2014) is  similar to the single-ﬁrm setup in our paper, as it incorporates unobservable talent, unobservable effort, and misreporting.   None of these papers consider the role of competition for talent.   The effects of competition for talent have been analyzed in settings with few or none of the informational frictions  that we include in our model.  Frictionless labor markets are analyzed in Lucas (1978).  Rosen (1981) , and Terviö (2008) ,  who predict that more talented CEOs earn higher rents.  Gabaix and Landier (2008) additionally assume that CEO talent is  more productive in larger ﬁrms, which leads to more talented CEOs being employed by larger ﬁrms and earning higher  rents.  (We abstract from ﬁrm size in our model, but we explain in Section 7 how it could be integrated. ) Edmans et al. ,  2009 add an effort-choice problem to the Gabaix and Landier (2008) model.  Competition generates eﬃcient outcomes in all  of these models, a result we also obtain if we do not allow for misreporting.  This shows the importance of incorporating  the possibility of misreporting in the analysis.   Unobservable talent creates an adverse selection problem in our model.  Competitive equilibria under adverse selection  were ﬁrst analyzed in Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) .  There are technical similarities between their results and ours.  First,  because of competition, ﬁrms must break even irrespective of a CEO’s level of talent (without competition, it is suﬃcient to  break even on average ).  second, because of that, the equilibrium contract does not depend on the distribution of talent.  and  third, an equilibrium may not exist if the probability of facing one particular type is too high.  We go beyond their model by  incorporating both an effort choice problem and misreporting.   Some work incorporates both adverse selection and moral hazard (but not the possibility of misreporting) in models of  competition and also predicts that competition can lead to equilibrium contracts with excessive incentive power.   In Biglaiser and Mezzetti (1993) , ﬁrms compete for workers whose ability and effort are not observable.   Their focus is on the ﬁrms’ technologies, some of which have decreasing average returns to worker ability.  This asymmetry can lead  to equilibria in which ﬁrms with such decreasing returns hire low-ability workers and induce excessive effort, which is  feasible because those ﬁrms enjoy market power in the low-ability segment of the labor market.  This result is different  from ours since excessive effort is induced from low-talent employees, not high-talent employees, and since this is driven  by technological advantages enjoyed by some but not all ﬁrms.   Bénabou et al.  (2016) consider an agent who must choose two types of effort, the ﬁrst of which is not contractable and  is exerted only because of an “intrinsic” motivation, whereas the second can be incentivized.  In terms of disutility, the two  types of effort are substitutes.  Exerting more of one type makes it more costly at the margin to exert the other.  Competition for unobservable talent leads to contracts that over-incentivize the contractable effort.  Our setup does not depend on  unobservable “intrinsic” motivation.  A CEO provides effort only if there are ﬁnancial incentives to do so.  Furthermore, our  model incorporates a CEO’s ability to misreport her performance.  This also allows us to distinguish short-term compensation  (based on the reported performance) from long-term compensation (based on the realized ﬁrm value) and to capture the  intuition that if a CEO misreports her performance, the realized long-term performance is more likely to be disappointing.   Finally, Bijlsma et al.  (2012) show that ﬁnancial institutions competing to hire traders of unknown talent offer equilibrium  contracts with excessively strong incentives to take risk.  There is no risk choice in our model, while there is no misreporting  or effort choice in their model.   <Middle> Model.  There are N ≥2 firms seeking to hire a CEO.  There is one CEO candidate, and the firms offer com pensation contracts to attract her.  4 The sequence of events is the following.  First, the manager privately observes her talent (productivity), measured by τ∈ { τ , τh } , with τ < τh and probabilities p h ∈ (0 , 1) and p  = 1 −p h .  Next, the firms simultaneously offer contracts to the manager, who can accept at most one of them.  Once hired, the CEO chooses an action L ∈ R + (most easily interpreted as effort), which cannot be observed by the firms.  The choice of L affects the future value of the firm, y ≡τL + ε, where ε ∼N(0 , σ2 ) is a random variable.  The future value y increases in both effort L and talent τ, with a multiplicative effect, i. e. , effort is more productive at the margin if a CEO is more talented.  That is not a necessary assumption for our results, but it seems reasonable to assume that “talent”raises marginal productivity, and doing so yields intuitive results.  5 A model with additive effects (in- stead of multiplicative effects) would be easier to analyze, and it would generate some of our results, but other results would be implausible given our application.  For example, efficient contracts would include incentive compensation whose pay-performance sensitivity is constant for all performance levels, i. e. , it would effectively ignore talent.  Noise εis added to τL because the realized future value of the firm depends on variables that are outside the CEO’s control.  Denote the expected future value, the firm’s “performance”, by q ≡E[ y ] = τL .  After choosing an action L , but before εis realized, the CEO can report the firm’s performance, but her report r can be different from the true performance q .  Finally, after εis realized, the CEO receives a transfer w (r, y ) , based on the report r and the realized value y as stipulated in the contract.  The firms (and their shareholders) are risk neutral, and the profit from hiring the CEO is y −w .  The firms design contracts that maximize their expected profits, anticipating the equilibrium decisions of the CEO (if hired).  The CEO is risk-averse, and given a contract w , her pay off is this.  The CEO’s payoffis increasing in her expected compensation E[ w ] , but being risk averse, she bears disutility ρ2 V ar (w ) if compensation is uncertain.  Effort L causes disutility g 2 L 2 .  Finally, the CEO suffers disutility c 2 (r −q ) 2 if she misreports perfor- mance (i. e. , r  = q ).  This assumption captures the idea that misreporting is costly, and that the marginal cost of misreporting is increasing in the extent of misreporting.  6 The assumptions that the costs of effort and misreporting are quadratic are obviously not essential, but they simplify the exposition and analysis.  If the CEO candidate rejects all contracts, her expected payoffis normalized to zero.  If her reservation payoffwas type- dependent, the derivation of the optimal contract would be more complicated, and the results would depend qualitatively on the curvature of the relation between types and reservation payoffs.  see Lewis and Sappington (1989), Maggi (1995b) , and Jullien (20 0 0) .  By endogenizing the reservation payoffin our competition setup, we avoid this fragility, and we link the reservation payoffto the nature of competition instead of imposing it exogenously.  In order to maintain tractability, we restrict the contract to being affine, i. e. , w (r, y ) = α+ βr + δy , where αis compen- sation that is fixed, βmeasures the sensitivity of the CEO’s compensation to her reported performance r , and δmeasures the sensitivity to the realized value of the firm.  Linear incentive contracts are a standard assumption in the literature.  If we dropped the assumption that the firm’s long-term realized value can be used to provide incentives (say, if σor ρwere unbounded), we could let the firms design optimal nonlinear contracts.  That would yield very similar results.  7 When designing contracts, the firms face several frictions.  A CEO’s talent τis not observable, and her effort L and per- formance q are also unobservable.  This gives rise to adverse selection and moral hazard problems.  The firms have access to imperfect contracting tools only.  The realized future value is verifiable, but linking compensation to it causes disutility to the risk-averse CEO.  The short-term performance report is verifiable, but the CEO can misreport the performance.  As is standard in the literature, we let firms offer menus of contracts and the CEO candidate accepts one of them.  The firms may offer separating menus of contracts, or pooling contracts.  In a separating equilibrium, different contracts are designed for different talent levels, and the CEO, who knows her talent, chooses the contract intended for her talent level.  This is without loss of generality, and a menu of separating contracts can be converted into a non-linear incentive scheme with different pay-performance sensitivities at different performance levels (reported and realized).  A contract w (r, y ) = α+ βr + δy can be written as w = α+ ˆ βr + ˆ δy −ξ(r −y ) , where ˆ β= β+ ξand ˆ δ= δ−ξ.  The term ξ(r −y ) resembles a “clawback”provision, which some firms are adding to their executive compensation contracts.  If the realized future value y is below the reported performance r , some past bonuses must be returned.  It does more than that, since it also rewards the CEO if the realized performance is above the reported performance.  Adding a separate clawback term does not give a contract more power, and it does not change any of the decisions, since the only contractable variables remain the report r and the realized value y .  Using similar arguments we could also make the cost of misreporting depend on (r −y ) instead of (r −q ) , without changing any results (for details, see the Internet Appendix ).  We assume that c is common knowledge and identical across firms, capturing the quality of the accounting and auditing rules, the usefulness of disclosure requirements and other regulations, the legal rights of directors and minority shareholders when dealing with CEOs, and the effectiveness of the market for corporate control and the legal system.  In Section 7 , we explain how we could generalize the model by allowing for firm-specific values of c .  We abstract from type-dependent costs of manipulation, which can complicate the analysis (separation is harder if a high-talent CEO has a higher cost of manipulation, and easier otherwise).  Implicitly, we are assuming that differences in CEO talent are more significant than differences in the propensity to manipulate performance measures, given an economy’s accounting rules, etc.  3. 1.  Effort and reporting choices  Given a contract w , the CEO’s expected payoff is (after substituting).  The first-order conditions (with respect to L and r ) yield the optimal values of L and r.  Intuitively, the optimal effort level L increases in the compensation that is linked to either the reported performance (higher β) or the realized future value of the firm (higher δ).  Effort L increases the expected future value q , and linking compensation to y = q + εnaturally induces effort, since y is a mean-preserving spread of q .  Contracting on y is costly however, since the CEO is risk averse.  Compensation for reported performance has two effects.  First, it leads to misreporting.  r(τ, w ) > τL (τ, w ) if and only if βc > 0 .  Second, it increases effort.  While misreporting is possible, it is increasingly costly at the margin, and at some level of misreporting effort becomes an equally attractive way to increase reported performance.  Note that due to the informational asymmetries, some extent of misreporting is unavoidable, and it is anticipated by the firms in equilibrium.  The incentive to exert effort depends on the sum of δand β.  We can thus define the strength of incentives ϕ(w ) = β+ δ.  We can further define the surplus generated by a contract and the corresponding optimal CEO decisions.  The first term is the expected future value of the firm.  the second term is the CEO’s disutility from having to bear risk.  the third term is the CEO’s disutility from exerting effort.  and the fourth term is the CEO’s disutility from misreporting the firm’s performance.  Substituting L (τ, w ) and r(τ, w ) using (1) and (2) , and rearranging, we obtain.  We can define an indirect utility function for the CEO, given a contract w.  Substituting L (τ, w ) and r(τ, w ) using (1) and (2) , and rearranging, we obtain.  The firm’s expected profit, conditional on hiring a CEO with talent τ, is.  Substituting L (τ, w ) and r(τ, w ) using (1) and (2) , and rearranging.  3. 2.  Participation and incentive constraints A separating equilibrium consists of a menu of two contracts w h = (αh , βh , δh ) and w  = (α , β , δ ) , such that a high- talent CEO prefers w h to w  and a low-talent CEO prefers w  to w h .  The participation constraints are (using (5) ).  The incentive constraints are (for details, see the Internet Appendix ).  This immediately implies that in any separating contract, the high-talent participation constraint (8) is not binding if the high-talent incentive constraint (10) and the low-talent participation constraint (9) are satisfied.  3. 3.  Surplus-maximizing eﬃcient contracts  As a benchmark, we describe the contracts that a benevolent planner would design for the firms.  A benevolent planner’s goal is to maximize the expected surplus, under the constraints imposed by the informational asymmetries.  Specifically, the benevolent planner cannot observe τor L , so all she can do is to design compensation contracts w i = (αi , βi , δi ) (for i = , h ) that maximize the surplus, knowing that the effort level and the report are then determined by (1) and (2) . 