 Introduction One of the best-established stylized facts in the decision-making literature is that individuals are over-optimistic about future outcomes (e. g. , Weinstein, 1980).  Over-optimism is related to overconﬁdence but is distinct. 1 Over-optimism creates an upward bias in the mean of the distribution while overconﬁdence creates an upward bias in its precision.  Importantly, prior analytical work also suggests the possibility that over-optimism can increase ﬁrm performance (e. g. , Hackbarth, 2008), but little empirical work exists on this topic.  We investigate this issue empirically.  We ﬁrst note that individuals are over-optimistic in general, and particularly so regarding the effect of their own actions (we call this phenomenon “static over-optimism”).  In addition, managers may suffer from a biased attribution of causality after a series of good performances that leads them to under-estimate the role of random noise and over-attribute successes to their own actions (we call this phenomenon “dynamic overconﬁdence”).  The combination of these two phenomena leads to an increase in over-optimism after a series of successes (we call this phenomenon “dynamic over-optimism”).  optimistic managerial actions (or beliefs) receive an increasingly disproportionate weight in the overall estimation of a project's success.  Thus, our ﬁrst hypothesis posits that the degree of managerial over-optimism should increase after a series of successes.  This miscalibration in managerial prediction may encourage managers to exert greater effort, as they expect this effort to pay-off with a greater likelihood.  Naturally, this additional effort should have a positive effect on ﬁrm performance.  Hence, our second hypothesis conjectures that ﬁrm performance should increase following a series of successes, even if the increase remains below the level expected by an over-optimistic manager.  We note that our hypotheses can be motivated in an economic framework in which individuals are Bayesian.  For example, Van den Steen (2004) proposes a model in which a representative agent is endowed with priors.  In the most basic setting, a manager can choose from a menu of actions.  For each action, the manager's prior over the likelihood of success equals the true probability plus a (non-invertible) random error.  The manager optimally chooses the action for which her prior is highest, which is also the action whose probability of success the manager is most likely to over-estimate ex post.  This generates the static over-optimism we discuss above.  This framework also allows for a Bayesian but biased attribution of performance that yields a form of dynamic overconﬁdence.  Combined with static over-optimism, this phenomenon generates the dynamic over-optimism that is the core of our ﬁrst hypothesis.  Our second hypothesis relies on the idea that over-optimism can elicit higher effort from management.  As noted in Van den Steen (2004) this emerges naturally if the payoff is increasing in effort when the action is successful.  Our empirical ﬁndings are consistent with our analytical framework and support the presence of dynamic overoptimism.  First, we show that managers who experienced more frequent successes in the recent past, subsequently issue more optimistic forecasts.  Further analysis reveals that they also exercise stock options later (Malmendier and Tate, 2005.  Campbell et al. , 2011) and issue earnings releases with a more optimistic tone (based on textual analysis).  Importantly, these results hold in speciﬁcations with manager ﬁxed effects.  By showing that over-optimism has an endogenous and dynamic component, our results suggest that, at least to a certain extent, some managers are made (rather than just born) overoptimistic.  Second, and importantly, we show that the over-optimism we document can improve ﬁrm performance and that managers appear to exert greater effort to meet their own over-optimistic forecasts.  Speciﬁcally, ﬁrm accounting performance and quarterly market return increase as the degree of managerial over-optimism increases.  In contrast, measures of accruals or real earnings management are not affected by this over-optimism.  These results suggest that the increase in ﬁrm performance is genuine.  They also suggest that managers, being over-optimistic regarding the likelihood of meeting the expectations they set, do not feel the need to manage earnings in order to reach their forecasts.  Third, using comparative statics, we show that our empirical ﬁndings are consistent with our economic framework, which predicts that overoptimism increases with ﬂexibility in decision-making and with the diffusion of priors, and decreases with managerial experience.  Van den Steen (2004) notes these comparative statics empirically distinguish this framework from others.  Lastly, we perform a path analysis.  Results demonstrate a series of structural links that go from past performance to overconﬁdence, from overconﬁdence to over-optimism, from over-optimism to effort, and from effort to performance.  This chain of links is consistent with our overall framework.  We contribute to the literature in several ways.  First, we show that over-optimism can increase ﬁrm performance.  Although prior analytical work suggests this possibility (e. g. , Benabou and Tirole, 2002.  Compte and Postlewaite, 2004.  Van den Steen, 2004.  Hackbarth, 2008.  Gervais et al. , 2011), little empirical work exists on this topic.  Second, we present evidence consistent with the comparative statics and ancillary predictions of the economic over-optimism framework.  Lastly, we empirically distinguish between overconﬁdence and over-optimism.  The importance of this distinction has been noted by prior literature.  For example, Moore and Healy (2008) explain (p.  503) “[t]he ﬁrst problem with overconﬁdence research is that the most popular research paradigm confounds overestimation and overprecision. ” There is now an established literature on overconﬁdence in managerial behavior (see Glaser and Weber, 2010 for a review), yet much less is known about over-optimism in this context. 2 The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows.  In Section 2, we discuss our hypothesis development and our empirical design.  In Section 3, we present our samples and descriptive statistics.  In Section 4, we provide our main empirical results and additional evidence consistent with our economic framework.  In Section 5, we discuss different robustness checks.  Section 6 concludes.  2.  Hypothesis development and empirical design.  2. 1.  Hypothesis development.  As early as Savage (1954), economics has traditionally assumed that people begin the decision-making process with subjective beliefs over the different possible states of the world and use a Bayesian approach to update these beliefs as they receive additional information.  Under such a framework, some individuals hold unbiased beliefs that typically converge toward the true parameter as more signals are received.  However, this view has been challenged as numerous systematic biases have been suggested. 3 In particular, individuals have been shown to be over-optimistic and overconﬁdent.  These two biases are similar but distinct.  Over-optimism involves an excessive belief that future events will be positive, while overconﬁdence involves placing too much weight on the accuracy of private information and an excessive belief in one's own skills.  For example, Weinstein (1980) notes in his seminal study on over-optimism that people believe negative events are less likely to happen to them than to others whereas positive events are more likely to happen to them than to others.  More recently, the literature has started to integrate the notion of over-optimism in formal economic frameworks.  For example, Van den Steen (2004) proposes a model in which Bayesian individuals are endowed with a menu of actions that will lead to either a successful outcome or an unsuccessful outcome.  The manager who selects actions has a prior with respect to the likelihood of whether a given action will be successful.  If, for exogenous reasons, managers sometimes overestimate and sometimes underestimate the probability of an action's success (relative to other individuals such as analysts or relative to the true underlying probability) and select the action for which they estimate the highest perceived probability of success, then they are more likely to select actions that overstate the probability of success the most.  They will therefore be over-optimistic about the success of the actions they take.  This mechanism is reminiscent of the winner's curse (i. e. , the winner of an auction in which bidders have incomplete information is the bidder who has the most optimistic estimate of the auctioned item's value).  Under this framework, the random variation in priors together with systematic choices leads to systematic bias for a representative agent. 4 Moore and Healy (2008) provide an alternative model in which Bayesian individuals can rationally overestimate their chance of success for difﬁcult tasks while Benoit and Dubra (2011) show how a majority of Bayesian individuals rationally believe they have greater skills than the majority of the population.  More than static over-optimism, the subject of our interest is dynamic over-optimism.  A fairly recent empirical literature investigates the possibility that overconﬁdence (and managerial overconﬁdence in particular) is a dynamic phenomenon (e. g. , Hilary and Hsu, 2011).  Research on dynamic over-optimism is more limited although the dynamic aspect can be incorporated in an economic framework.  For example, Van den Steen's (2004) model leads to biased attribution of causality.  In particular, the manager will rationally underestimate the role of exogenous factors in the case of success and overestimate their role in the case of failure.  In the case of success, this biased attribution will lead the manager to gradually put more weight on the expected effect of her own actions (for which the prior distribution is optimistically biased) and less weight on the effect of random noise (for which the prior distribution is not similarly biased, at least on average).  This change in weights will lead the manager to experience a gradual increase in overall over-optimism even though the perceived probability of success for each individual action does not change over time.  Rabin and Schrag (1999) and Gervais and Odean (2001) provide alternative theoretical economic rationalizations for the existence of dynamic overconﬁdence.  Based on this discussion, our ﬁrst hypothesis is that.  H1.  A representative individual becomes dynamically over-optimistic following a series of successes.  We then turn our attention to the effect of over-optimism on the ﬁrm's welfare.  Economic theory suggests that managers should work harder if effort complements the likelihood of success (e. g. , Van den Steen, 2004).  For example, suppose the strictly positive payoff is increasing in effort in the case of success and is zero in the case of failure.  Further assume that the cost of effort is increasing and strictly convex.  The amount of effort is increasing in the perceived probability of success.  the greater the expected probability, the greater the effort.  This could be a situation in which proﬁts are increasing with the effort to produce, ﬁnance, market, or protect a product but disappear if the product is unsuccessful.  For example, the ﬁrm could decide to engage in litigation more or less aggressively to protect a technology.  The litigation effort would naturally be a function of the perceived likelihood of technological success but would not affect this likelihood. 5 To the extent that this effort increases ﬁrm performance, we expect an increase in ﬁrm performance after a series of successes, even if the increase is not sufﬁcient to reach the level predicted in the forecast.  Based on this discussion, our second hypothesis is that.  H2.  The ﬁrm's performance should gradually improve as managers become more over-optimistic.  <Middle> Empirical design.  To test these predictions, we focus on managerial forecasts of ﬁrm quarterly earnings.  In doing so we obtain a measure of managerial expectations about future ﬁrm performance that we can benchmark against both common expectations at the time of issuance (proxied by analyst forecasts) and subsequent realizations.  We decompose the public forecast F into two components, namely, a best estimate of the realization privately observed by the manager and a reporting bias, where X is the realized earnings for ﬁrm-manager pair i in period t, F(X) is the manager's public forecast of X, E(X) is the manager's private expectation of X, and b is the manager's reporting bias.  Following Bamber et al.  (2010) and Hilary et al.  (2014), we assume that the reporting bias is constant for each ﬁrm-forecaster pair.  Empirically, the reporting bias is typically negative, which can be explained by the desire of the manager to meet or beat her own forecast more easily.  We further assume that the manager's private expectation is a combination of personal and public expectations regarding the results of the action, a, chosen by the manager.  The combination of the two takes the form, where Em(a) represents the manager's personal expectation (formed independently of the public signal), Ep(a) represents the public expectation, and α represents the weight that the manager places on her personal expectation.  We next assume that the public expectation of the action taken by the manager is well calibrated (i. e. , Ep(a) is equal to the unbiased expected value of a, â).  As discussed before, we expect the manager to be over-optimistic with respect to the effect of her actions (i. e. , the manager's personal expectation of a, Em(a), is greater than â).  For convenience, we also initially assume that this degree of static over-optimism, ψi (i. e. , Em(a)i âi), remains constant over time for a given ﬁrm-manager.  The fact that individuals are on average over-optimistic is consistent with the literature (e. g. , among many others, Weinstein, 1980.  Graham et al. , 2013).  For example, Graham et al.  (2013) ﬁnd that 80% of CEOs in their survey display a “very optimistic” personality.  Scheier and Carver (1985) and Scheier et al.  (1994), suggest that while the degree of optimistic bias may vary from one setting to the next, dispositional optimism is a psychological characteristic that lies at the core of an individual's outlook on life in general.  Puri and Robinson (2007) provide a review of the dispositional optimism literature in the context of ﬁnancial decisions.  The overall bias in the management forecast publicly released by the manager, Bi,t, is equal to αi,t ψiþbi.  It is thus impossible to estimate the average sign of the overall bias without knowing at least approximate values of the three parameters.  This makes cross-sectional predictions difﬁcult.  However, as previously discussed, we expect that positive outcomes will make the manager more overconﬁdent with respect to the effect of her actions.  In other words, α is increasing with past successes and the overall bias is relatively more positive after a series of successes.  This expectation yields timeseries predictions that we can test.  More speciﬁcally, to test our ﬁrst hypothesis that managers become dynamically over-optimistic after a series of successes, we estimate the following model, where Optim is a vector of over-optimism measures.  Optim_MFD measures the signed management earnings forecast deviation from the prevailing consensus.  We deﬁne this variable as the management forecast minus the pre-existing consensus analyst forecast divided by the absolute value of pre-existing consensus analyst forecast (Kothari et al. , 2009).  We deﬁne the consensus forecast as the median analyst earnings forecast 30 days prior to the issuance of the management forecast.  Optim_MFP measures the signed management forecast deviation from the consensus forecast after the management forecast date.  We deﬁne this variable as the management forecast minus the consensus analyst forecast after the management forecast date (prior to the earnings realization) divided by the absolute value of consensus analyst forecast.  Optim_MFD and Optim_MFP differ in how we construct the consensus analyst forecast.  We treat Optim_MFD and Optim_MFP as our main over-optimism measures because in our framework managerial over-optimism is modeled relative to public expectations regarding future earnings.  As a robustness check, we consider two other proxies that are directly correlated with the degree of over-optimism.  Optim_Option is a binary variable that takes the value of one if the CEO is over-optimistic based on her option portfolio and zero otherwise.  We deﬁne a CEO as over-optimistic if she holds exercisable stock options that are more than 67% in the money (i. e. , the stock price exceeds the exercise price by more than 67%, Malmendier and Tate, 2005).  If a CEO is classiﬁed as over-optimistic in a given year, the CEO retains this type going forward unless she exhibits the opposite behavior according to the measure.  That is, we allow for the possibility that an over-optimistic CEO becomes unbiased if her exercisable options become no more than 67% in the money at least twice in the sample period (Campbell et al. , 2011). 7 Finally, we consider Optim_PR, a measure of over-optimism based on textual analysis of the ﬁrms’ press releases (the appendix details the construction of this variable).  MBSTR, the streak of recent successes, is our key independent variable.  It counts the number of consecutive successes that CEO i enjoyed in the four quarters before the current forecast was announced.  For example, if the streak of recent successes is 1, 0, 0, and 1 (counting backward from quarters t 1 to t 4), then MBSTR equals one.  If the streak is 1, 1, 0, and 1 (counting backward from quarters t 1 to t 4), then MBSTR equals two. 8 Initially, we deﬁne a success as an earnings realization that is equal to or above the manager's expectation (i. e. , the mid-point of a range forecast or the forecast for a point estimate), but the sensitivity analysis reported in Section 5. 1 shows that our results are not affected when we use multiple alternative proxies to deﬁne success.  Our key prediction is that β1 should be positive in Model (3).  Xk represents a vector of k control variables suggested by prior literature.  Size is the log of market value of equity at the beginning of the quarter (Baginski and Hassell, 1997).  We control for growth opportunities by including Book-to-Market, which is the book value of equity divided by the market value of equity at the beginning of the quarter (Bamber and Cheon, 1998).  Leverage is the ratio of book value of total liabilities to total assets at the beginning of the quarter (Fombrun and Shanley, 1990.  Malmendier et al. , 2011).  StdEarn is the standard deviation of the quarterly ratio of net income over assets over at least six of the preceding eight quarters (Armor and Taylor, 2002).  RetVolt is the standard deviation of the monthly stock return over eight quarters before the beginning of the forecasted quarter (Armor and Taylor, 2002).  Coverage is the log of the number of analysts covering the ﬁrm in a given quarter (Hilary and Hsu, 2011).  Inst Ownership represents the percentage of shares owned by institutional investors at the beginning of the quarter (Ajinkya et al. , 2005).  Horizon is the forecast horizon, measured as the log of the number of days between the management forecast date and the end of the forecasted ﬁscal period (Johnson et al. , 2001).  Loss is an indicator variable that takes a value of one if reported net income is negative, and zero otherwise (Hilary and Hsu, 2011).  Tenure is the number of years for which CEO i has held her position.  ChgGDP is the seasonally adjusted quarterly Gross Domestic Product (GDP) percentage growth from Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). 9 All continuous variables are winsorized at the 1% level.  Finally, we include CEO ﬁxed effects.  To test our second hypothesis that ﬁrm performance increases after a series of successes because managers become more optimistic, we estimate the following models.  ROA is deﬁned as operating income divided by total assets at the beginning of the quarter, where operating income is earnings excluding special or non-recurring items such as gain or loss from asset sales, asset write-downs or write-offs.  MBSTR, Optim, and Xk are deﬁned previously after Model (3).  Again, we include CEO ﬁxed effects.  We predict that β2 should be positive in both Models (4a) and (4b).  2. 3.  Estimation procedure.  We employ a panel (CEO-speciﬁc ﬁxed-effect) technique to estimate the equations.  The manager ﬁxed-effect regression is particularly suitable for testing our hypotheses, which focus on the short-term dynamics of managers’ forecasts, as it eliminates cross-sectional variation in the means of the variables while leaving the time-series dynamics of these forecasts intact.  This approach allows us to treat over-optimism as a time-varying variable whereas most of the prior empirical literature has treated over-optimism as a ﬁxed or at least slow moving characteristic.  The use of manager ﬁxed effects also provides a natural control for omitted variables.  For example, constant differences in managerial skill levels, prediction bias, or constant ﬁrm characteristics such as industry classiﬁcation are all controlled for.  Our approach provides a direct estimate of the change in over-optimism and reduces the need for multiple robustness checks.  In our main speciﬁcations, we employ CEO ﬁxed effects.  This approach implicitly assumes that CEOs play a signiﬁcant role in the issuance of forecasts and that forecasts are important to them, an assumption that is consistent with prior literature.  For example, Bamber et al.  (2010) report that CEOs have statistically and economically signiﬁcant ﬁxed effects on various management forecast characteristics (including forecast frequency, precision, news, and error).  In our study, untabulated F-tests also indicate that CEO ﬁxed effects are jointly signiﬁcant in our ordinary least squares speciﬁcations (the p-value is less than 0. 01 in all cases).  Finally, the standard errors are calculated according to the procedure outlined in Cameron et al.  (2011) and are groupwise heteroskedasticity-consistent (i. e. , adjusted simultaneously for heteroskedasticity and the clustering of observations by CEO and year).  3.  Sample and descriptive statistics.  3. 1.  Sample.  Accounting data come from Compustat's quarterly data ﬁles, and stock price and return data come from the daily ﬁles of the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP).  We obtain CEO information from the ExecuComp database, which limits our sample to S&P 1,500 ﬁrms.  We drop ﬁrms for which we are unable to obtain information such as the name of the CEO or the dates of her tenure.  We obtain management earnings forecast data from the FirstCall database.  To increase data consistency, we focus on quarterly predictions and exclude forecasts made after the end of the ﬁscal period (i. e. , pre-announcements). 10 We include only the ﬁrst forecast made by a given manager on or immediately after the previous earnings announcement, but before the end of the forecasted ﬁscal period because earlier predictions may be drawn from a different distribution of forecasts. 11 Our sample only includes point and range forecasts, that is, we exclude qualitative and one-sided directional forecasts that do not provide precise numerical values of earnings per share (Anilowski et al. , 2007.  Ciconte et al. , 2014). 12 We also require that managers issue at least ﬁve forecasts (four in the previous eight quarters plus one in the current quarter) and that the same CEO manage the ﬁrm at the time that these forecasts were made.  Chuk et al.  (2013) document the presence of several problems with the FirstCall CIG database, but these are mitigated by both the time series and cross-sectional characteristics of our sample.  First, Chuk et al.  (2013) indicate that the problems in the FirstCall database are concentrated in the pre-1998 period.  To address this issue, we start our sample period in 1998.  We end our sampling period in 2010 when FirstCall stops coverage.  Second, we require at least ﬁve management forecasts for each CEO – it is unlikely that CIG omits a given ﬁrm that issues a series of forecasts.  Our sample period thus covers the years 1998 to 2010, which include the enactment of regulations such as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and Regulation Fair Disclosure.  These sampling criteria yield 9,163 management forecasts.  We match the forecast data with the corresponding records of FirstCall reported earnings.  3. 2.  Descriptive statistics.  We report descriptive statistics in Table 1.  The mean and median values for the different dependent variables are reasonably close to each other, suggesting that skewness is not a major issue in our setting.  We report univariate correlations in Table 2.  We report both Pearson and Spearman correlations.  Since we focus on times-series properties, we “demean” the variables by CEO-ﬁrm in Table 2 to remove the cross-sectional aspect of the pairwise correlations.  Our ﬁrst hypothesis suggests a positive correlation between recent past successes and over-optimism. 13 We ﬁnd that the correlation between MBSTR and each of Optim_MFD, Optim_MFP, Optim_Option, and Optim_PR is positive.  Our second hypothesis predicts a positive relation between over-optimism and performance.  Here too, the univariate correlations between ROA and each of MBSTR, Optim_MFD, Optim_MFP, Optim_Option, and Optim_PR are all signiﬁcantly positive.  The univariate correlations among the control variables are relatively small suggesting that multi-collinearity is not an issue in our setting.  The fact that Pearson and Spearman correlations generally lead to similar results suggests that non-linearity concerns are not salient in our setting.  4.  Main empirical results.  4. 1.  Dynamic over-optimism.  We next test our ﬁrst hypothesis.  The empirical results for the estimation of Model (3) are reported in Table 3.  The ﬁrst column indicates that MBSTR is signiﬁcantly associated with the degree of over-optimism relative to the prevailing consensus forecast (Optim_MFD) with a z-statistic equal to 7. 00.  In the second column, we obtain similar results when we consider the degree of over-optimism relative to the consensus forecast after the management forecast (Optim_MFP) with a z-statistic of 3. 15.  Untabulated results indicate that our conclusions are not affected if we use Optim_MFE (management forecast minus realized earnings divided by the absolute value of realized earnings) as alternative measure of over-optimism (the untabulated z-statistic equals 1. 89).  In other words, the increase in over-optimism does not merely and unbiasedly reﬂect good news about the economic situation of the ﬁrm.  In the third column, we use the option-based measure of over-optimism (Optim_Option).  Results indicate that MBSTR is signiﬁcantly associated with this measure with a z-statistic equal to 2. 15.  Finally, in the fourth column, we use the measure of over-optimism based on press releases’ text (Optim_PR).  Results indicate that MBSTR is signiﬁcantly associated with this measure with a z-statistic equal to 2. 28. 14 We note that it could be argued there is a mechanical relationship between past forecast over-optimism and contemporaneous forecast over-optimism if the error process is mean-reverting (Gong et al. , 2011).  Using Optim_Option and Optim_PR largely mitigates this concern.  The economic effects of MBSTR on Optim_MFD, Optim_MFP, and Optim_PR are approximately 53 percent, 151 percent, and 119 percent (respectively) of the magnitude of the effect of Book-to-Market. 15 The effect of increasing MBSTR from 0 to 4 on the binary dependent variable, Optim_Option, is 13 percent.  An alternative way to estimate the incremental informativeness of our variable is to rely on the Bayesian Information Criteria (BIC).  The decrease in BIC caused by the inclusion of MBSTR varies from 2. 17 to 76. 29 across the four columns in Table 3.  The conventional threshold to decide whether a variable is informationally useful is 2 and the conventional threshold for a strong improvement is 6 (Kass and Raftery, 1995).  The smaller change in BIC is for our measure based on textual analysis, perhaps because of the noise in estimating this variable.  Overall, these results are consistent with our ﬁrst hypothesis that individuals become dynamically over-optimistic following a series of successes.  Directing attention to the control variables, we do not observe a robust pattern across the four columns.  However, Book-to-Market, Loss and Inst Ownership are generally negative while ChgGDP is generally positive.  We next test our second hypothesis and report the results from Model (4) in Table 4.  Those results conﬁrm that the ﬁrm's performance improves as managers become more optimistic.  In the ﬁrst column, MBSTR is positively correlated with the measure of performance with a z-statistic of 4. 90.  The economic effect of MBSTR on ROA is 12 percent the size of the Book-toMarket effect.  The positive coefﬁcient associated with MBSTR is consistent with the presence of complementary effort to optimism increasing ﬁrm performance.  The second and third columns show that our conclusions also hold if we use Optim_MFD as a treatment variable (z-statistic is 13. 30) or Optim_MFP (z-statistic is 7. 43). 16 When we consider Optim_Option and Optim_PR in the next two columns, the results are consistent with those presented in Table 2 and both variables have a positive effect on ROA (the respective z-statistics are 5. 48 and 2. 57).  Our results show that the decrease in BIC by the inclusion of MBSTR or Optim ranges from 4 to 422, suggesting that over-optimism materially decreases the unexplained variation in ROA (Kass and Raftery, 1995).  Our results hold if we use alternative dependent variables in a series of untabulated analyses.  Speciﬁcally, our conclusions are similar if we deﬁne ROA as the ratio of net income (instead of operating income) to total assets (the z-statistics range from 1. 83 to 9. 31), use the change in ROA (seasonally adjusted) instead of the levels, or use a binary variable equal to one if earnings are greater than prior-quarter earnings (seasonally adjusted) and zero otherwise. 17 Turning our attention to the control variables, we ﬁnd that ﬁrms with high book-to-market, high leverage, negative earnings, shorter tenure, and weaker increase in GDP exhibit lower growth in proﬁtability.  In essence, these results, combined with those in the prior section, suggest that a dynamically over-optimistic manager delivers earnings that are below her expectations but above what an unbiased manager would deliver in a similar environment.  4. 3.  Comparative statics.  We next investigate some comparative statics that are suggested by our analytical framework.  Van den Steen (2004, p.  1142) notes that these comparative statics are consistent with an economic framework that focuses on the agent's choice of action instead of on the agent's mental process.  First, Van den Steen (2004) notes an agent's over-optimism increases in the number of distinct alternatives and in her ﬂexibility in decision-making.  To empirically investigate this possibility, we calculate an indicator variable, High Flexibility.  The variable is equal to one if a ﬁrm has no debt covenants (based on data from Dealscan, Nini et al. , 2009) and has its Kaplan-Zingales (1997) Index below the sample median, and zero otherwise.  We expect that managers facing more debt covenants and greater ﬁnancial constraints have fewer alternatives.  We partition the sample using this indicator variable.  Second, we consider prior dispersion.  As Van den Steen (2004) notes, over-optimism increases in the mean-preserving spread of the distribution of priors.  Intuitively, noise will increase with more disagreement with respect to the success of different actions.  We proxy for this disagreement by calculating the dispersion in analyst forecasts (e. g. , Diether et al. , 2002) and stock return volatility (Scheinkman and Xiong, 2003).  Analyst forecast dispersion is the standard deviation of analyst forecasts 30 days prior to the issuance of a management forecast divided by the absolute value of pre-existing analyst consensus.  Stock return volatility (RetVolt) is as deﬁned in Section 2. 