
Vehicles are a major source of pollution in most countries.  In
Canada, for instance, light duty vehicles generated 82 million tonnes
of greenhouse gases, approximately 12% of the country’s total emissions (Canada, 2015).  Vehicles also produce other pollutants that
adversely affect human health and well-being.  These including nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, and particulate matter among others. 
Pollution from cars and trucks is often viewed as the archetypal
economic externality.  the costs associated with emissions accrue
to society but are not fully borne privately by drivers.  Reducing transportation-related gasoline consumption has, unsurprisingly,
become a focus of policy makers. 
An expanding array of policies have targeted vehicular emissions in Canada (Antweiler and Gulati, 2013).  Several provinces
have offered rebates for the purchase of fuel eﬃcient vehicles such
as hybrid-electric or electric vehicles (Chandra, 2010).  Ontario and
the federal government used a system of taxes and rebates based
on fuel economy (Rivers Name, 2017.  Sallee and Slemrod, 2012). 
British Columbia, Alberta, Ontario, and Quebec apply a carbon price
as a disincentive on the consumption of fossil fuels (Antweiler
and Gulati, 2016.  Rivers Name, 2015), and similar carbon prices
are required across all provinces by 2018 under the Pan-Canadian
Framework on Green Growth and Climate Change.  The federal government has provided a tax credit to encourage commuting by
public transport rather than private vehicle (Rivers and Plumptre,
2016.  Chandler, 2014) and recently adopted new vehicle greenhouse gas intensity regulations requiring manufacturers to achieve
speciﬁc targets for ﬂeet-wide emissions per kilometre. 1 The optimal stringency of each of these programs depends, at least to some
degree, on the responsiveness of the fuel economy of vehicles to the
price of gasoline.  Policy makers therefore require reliable estimates
of key elasticities relating to the choice of and use of the vehicle
stock in response to gasoline prices and other policies.  Yet, despite
the breadth of attempts to address externalities from automobile
usage, little is known about how gasoline prices actually inﬂuence consumer decision-making with respect to new vehicle fuel
economy. 
We estimate the elasticity of new vehicle fuel eﬃciency with
respect to gasoline price by exploiting a rich dataset covering
gasoline prices, vehicle registrations, vehicle fuel economy, and
demographic variables at the neighborhood level in 42 Canadian
cities from 2000 to 2010.  Our data and econometric models enable us
to credibly control for unobserved time-varying and cross-sectional
variables that may otherwise bias estimates of the elasticity. 