 Introduction Corporate takeovers have lon g been considered a governance mechanism that can help reduce management entrenchment and improve productive efficiency of management (e. g. , Grossman and Hart, 1980.  Fama, 1980.  Jensen and Ruback, 1983.  Scharfstein, 1988, Jensen, 1993). 1 Consequently, firms that have antitakeover provisions (henceforth ATPs) in place are often considered to be relatively inefficient.  Consistent with the perceived inefficiency of ATPs, a stream of research finds that high ATP firms have lower accounting performance, lower Tobin's Q, and lower reinvestment rates, relative to low ATP firms (e. g. , Gompers, Ishii and Metrick, 2003.  Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2003.  Bebchuk and Cohen, 2005.  Bebchuk, Cohen and Ferrell, 2009.  Cohen and Wang, 2013).  However, despite negative portrayals in much of the archival research and popular opinion, ATPs remain prevalent among the S&P 500 companies, with about 60% of these firms having staggered boards and poison pills in place.  These provisions are also common in the charters of initial public offerings (Daines, 2001.  Daines and Klausner, 2001).  If ATPs unambiguously lead to inefficiencies, the question arises as to why market forces have not eliminated their use over time.  In this paper we attempt to address this disconnect by exploring the potential role of ATPs in long-term value creation.  We identify a set of firms focused on long-term growth (innovative firms) that are most likely to benefit from ATPs and use an exogenous event to isolate the benefit. 2 We suggest that while the threat of corporate takeovers can curb managerial inefficiencies, it can also create incentives for myopic behavior by managers.  Fear of takeover and the associated employment risk may cause managers to take actions that are focused on maximizing short-term price rather than long-term value.  Jensen (2005) states that “when numbers are manipulated to tell the market what they want to hear … and when real operating decisions that would maximize value are compromised to meet market expectations, real long-term value is being destroyed. ”.  Stein (1988) argues that ATPs can help managers pursue long-term goals more effectively by insulating them from short-term market pressures.  The reasoning is that capital market pressures, including the threat of takeovers and the associated employment risk, can cause management to behave myopically, shun projects that may carry a higher risk of early failures, and focus on maximizing short-term price (Holmstrom, 1989).  Manso (2011) proposes a similar argument for managerial protection as a means of encouraging innovation.  Rather than taking a one-size-fits-all view of ATPs and estimating their average effect on all firms, we explore a setting where such provisions can be beneficial to investors. 3 We use a number of alternative designs to explore the effect of anti-takeover protection on innovative and non-innovative firms.  Our primary research design is to explore the effects of a state law change in Delaware that significantly increased the takeover costs of firms incorporated there.  Bebchuk and Cohen (2005), Low (2009), and Atanassov (2013) discuss how the implementation of state law change in Delaware in 1995 made it easier for firms to use certain takeover defenses such as poison pills to block hostile takeovers.  We examine the effect of this exogenous event on a firm's Tobin's Q.  Using a difference-in-difference approach, we examine the effect of the regime change on innovative firms incorporated in Delaware and compare it to the effect on other firms.  We find that after the change in state law, Delaware-based innovative firms enjoyed a significant improvement in their Tobin's Q compared to both Delaware-based non-innovative firms and non-Delaware-based innovative firms.  Given that the state law change was particularly relevant to firms with poison pills and staggered boards in place, we explore whether its effect is stronger for firms with above-average protection.  Using data obtained from the Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC), we partition the sample into protected and unprotected firms using three alternative measures of takeover protection.  presence or absence of poison pills (PPILL), presence or absence of staggered boards (SB) and above/below median value of the entrenchment index (EINDEX) proposed by Bebchuk et al.  (2009). 4 Using these three measures, we compare the effects of the Delaware law change for protected and innovative (PI) firms relative to the other groups.  We find that Delaware-based PI firms experience a statistically and economically significant improvement in their Tobin's Q subsequent to the state law change.  This improvement is greater than those experienced by all other Delawarebased firms, including the unprotected and innovative (UPI) firms and the protected and non-innovative (PNI) firms.  We perform additional analyses using an event study design around the dates on which the court rulings were announced.  The first date is January 11, 1995 when the Supreme Court of Delaware allowed Unitrin Inc.  to use both a poison pill and share repurchases to fend off a hostile takeover bid from American General Corp.  The second is December 4 1995, when the U. S.  District Court for the District of Delaware denied Moore Corp.  Ltd. ’s motion against the use of poison pills as an antitakeover mechanism by Wallace Computer Services Inc.  Using these two dates as our focal points, we examine 2-day and 4-day cumulative abnormal returns subsequent to the ruling dates for PI and UPI firms.  The results show that PI firms experience greater cumulative abnormal returns subsequent to the rulings than UPI firms do, and these results are statistically significant for PPILL- and EINDEX-based measures of protection.  In order to rule out the alternative explanation that PI firms outperform UPI firms in general and not just on the state law change dates, we bootstrap the empirical distribution of the difference between cumulative abnormal returns of PI and UPI firms around other dates.  Our results do not support the alternative hypothesis.  Overall, the results of our tests based on the state law change events are consistent with the idea that takeover protection can benefit a set of firms, and that markets seem to understand this benefit.  Therefore, while some firm managers can certainly use takeover protection to reap private benefits, others can use the protection to maximize long-term goals of shareholders more effectively.  We conduct additional analyses to compare Tobin's Q of PI and UPI firms in a cross-sectional setting.  Prior to this comparison, however, we employ a propensity score matching sample methodology to pair PI firms with UPI firms based on firm characteristics.  This helps to reduce the likelihood that the results of a cross-sectional analysis are driven by other omitted factors.  We find that PI firms’ Tobin's Q exceeds that of the UPI firms by an economically and statistically significant level.  This finding further supports our primary finding that ATPs can be beneficial to firms with a long-term focus.  Our results so far provide evidence that PI firms outperform UPI firms.  We attempt to identify empirical evidence on a possible mechanism for this.  Stein (1988) suggests that protected firms would be less susceptible to short-term market pressures, so we explore whether PI firms are less likely than UPI firms to engage in harmful real earnings management when faced with the pressure to meet or beat analyst forecasts.  Using an aggregate measure of real earnings management along the lines of Roychoudhury (2006) and Cohen et al.  (2015), we find that PI firms are less likely than UPI firms to engage in value-destroying activities, such as cutting investment in R&D and advertising expenditures, or boosting profit through overproduction, in order to meet or narrowly beat analysts’ earnings expectations.  Our paper contributes to the existing research in several important ways.  First, we provide empirical evidence that some firms use takeover protection to enhance performance and that stock market participants understand this benefit and price these firms accordingly.  This is in contrast to much of the earlier research that explores the average effects of ATPs on all firms and documents a negative association between ATPs and firm performance.  The finding that ATPs are beneficial for a group of innovative firms helps explain the persistence of these provisions and provides an explanation for the puzzling finding that many IPO firms, including ones backed by venture capitalists, either have ATPs in place at the time of the IPO or institute them soon thereafter. 5 Second, while much of the prior work linking ATPs to firm performance uses either a crosssectional research design or examines an endogenous event (such as management's decision to de-stagger the board), we use the exogenous event of state law change in Delaware to examine how firm performance is affected by innovation and pre-existing ATPs.  This setting allows us to address many of the endogeneity concerns that plague the other studies and provides us with a richer setting to tease out the effect of takeover protection.  Finally, by using multiple measures of ATPs and by conducting numerous tests using both an event-study approach and a cross-sectional design, we provide a comprehensive body of evidence in support of the beneficial role of ATPs, while reducing the risk that our findings are an artifact of a particular variable or research design choice.  The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 discusses the prior literature on the effects of ATPs, Section 3 describes the data, Section 4 discusses the research design and results of the primary tests using state law changes, Section 5 reports the results of additional analyses, Section 6 reports some sensitivity analyses, and Section 7 concludes the paper.  2.  Literature survey.  Theoretical literature on takeover defenses provides two longstanding views of the effects of ATPs.  One view, which stems from the seminal works of Fama (1980), Grossman and Hart (1980) and Jensen (1993), is that managers who are protected from takeover threats tend to shirk, and to engage in activities that are not necessarily in the best interests of shareholders.  this reduces shareholder wealth and operating efficiency.  Therefore, by removing the takeover threats, ATPs can lead to management entrenchment and inefficiency.  An alternative view is that takeover pressures can cause management to get overly focused on short-term goals, thereby neglecting projects that yield benefits over the long-term.  Holmstrom (1989) argues that market pressures can cause management to focus on short-term projects and neglect potentially value-enhancing long-term projects.  Stein (1988) develops a setting in which information asymmetry between managers and investors about the profitability of innovative long-term projects leads investors to undervalue firms that make long-term investments, exposing these firms to a greater threat of takeover.  In this setting, the existence of ATPs helps reduce management's incentive to choose projects that yield quicker returns in the short term.  Shleifer and Vishny (1990) raise similar concerns about takeover threats tempering innovation and growth.  Finally, Manso (2011) develops an analytical model showing that some degree of protection of management is helpful in motivating innovation.  It is significant to note that much of the early empirical work recognizes and discusses the pros and cons of ATPs as identified in theoretical literature and discussed in this paper.  However, much of the recent work highlights the negative theoretical underpinnings of ATPs.  Early work addressing this debate includes Linn and McConnell (1983), Jarrell and Poulsen (1987), Szewczyk and Tsetsekos (1992), and Melbrouek et al.  (1990).  Using an event study, Linn and McConnell (1983) find a positive reaction to the adoption of ATPs, while Jarrell and Poulsen (1987) find the announcement of various antitakeover amendments to have an insignificant effect on share prices, on average.  In an interesting early natural experiment study in this area, Szewczyk and Tsetsekos (1992) find that the passage of a 1990 Pennsylvania Senate bill, which reduced shareholders’ ability to challenge management through the proxy process, resulted in a decrease in shareholder value.  However, this study was limited to 56 firms and did not partition firms based on their likelihood of benefiting from ATPs.  Using a sample of 203 firms, Meulbroek et al.  (1990) attempt to directly test Stein's (1988) conclusion that ATPs can reduce myopic behavior.  They find results counter to expectations and consistent with the entrenchment hypothesis.  More recent studies using bigger samples and longer periods of coverage generally highlight the negative effects of ATPs.  Gompers et al.  (2003) document that firms with relatively greater number of ATPs in place have lower firm value and stock returns.  This is consistent with ATPs reducing the effectiveness of one form of monitoring mechanism, resulting in managerial inefficiencies.  Bebchuk et al.  (2009) come to similar conclusions using a selected subset of the ATPs reported in the IRRC.  Focusing on staggered boards only, Bebchuk and Cohen (2005) find a negative association between the presence of staggered boards and firm value.  It is important to note that all of these studies use a cross-sectional research design and examine the average effect of ATPs without considering the effects of ATPs across various subgroups.  One paper that does explore the effects of ATPs across different types of firms is Falaye (2007b).  Like Bebchuk and Cohen (2005), he uses a cross-sectional approach to examine the effect of staggered boards on firm value (Tobin's Q), and finds a negative association between the two.  Furthermore, he finds that this negative association continues to hold for firms with positive R&D.  Using the same research design as Falaye (2007b), we are able to replicate the results in that paper.  However, the cross-sectional approach suffers from significant endogeneity concerns, which can be addressed by using a natural experiment (as we do in this paper).  Using the state law change approach significantly alters Faleye's results and conclusions.  Furthermore, given our intent to identify firms that have a longer-term focus than their peers, we use partitions based on industry-adjusted R&D (rather than positive or negative R&D).  We find that these two design changes help explain why our results differ from his.  While much of the empirical work in this area provides evidence consistent with the entrenchment view of ATPs, some recent papers question the robustness of these findings.  In the context of staggered boards, Cremers et al.  (2014) find that in a time-series setting, firms that adopt staggered boards experience improvements in firm value, whereas firms that destagger their boards experience deterioration in value.  Ge et al.  (2014) examine firms that de-stagger their boards and find a number of negative effects, including a reduction in ROA and a decrease in R&D investments.  Larcker et al.  (2011) examine the market reaction to a broad set of recent legislative and regulatory events related to corporate governance regulation, and observe a negative relation between the market reaction to regulation increasing shareholder rights and the presence of staggered boards.  While recognizing that this finding is counter to prior work, they do not delve into the potential reasons for this finding. 6 Our work contributes to this literature in two key ways.  First, in contrast to much of the earlier research that explores cross-sectional differences or endogenous events (such as management's decision to change the board structure), our primary tests use an exogenous event of state law change to avoid long-standing concerns about endogeneity in governance studies.  Second, our study explicitly focuses on identifying whether ATPs are beneficial to a sub-sample of firms in the market, rather than tackle the broader question of whether ATPs are harmful or beneficial on average.  <Middle> Data.  Our initial sample consists of all firms with information on the ATP measures for the years 1990–2007 available in the Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC) database.  IRRC provides data on 24 anti-takeover provisions over this period, including information on corporate charter provisions such as poison pills and classified boards.  Bebchuk et al.  (2009) find that of the 24 ATPs, six have the strongest anti-takeover impact.  staggered boards, limits to shareholder bylaw amendments, poison pills, golden parachutes, and supermajority requirements for mergers and charter amendments.  They create an index (EINDEX) which is the number of these six provisions a firm has in place as their proposed measure of ATP.  We use this as one of our measures of ATP.  The 1995 state law change is primarily related to the use of poison pills.  In addition, a stream of research has focused special attention on staggered boards (e. g. , Bebchuk et al. , 2002.  Bebchuk and Cohen, 2005.  Bebchuk et al. , 2009.  Cohen and Wang, 2013) as an important anti-takeover provision.  We therefore use two separate indicator variables, PPILL and SB, to capture the effects of poison pills and staggered boards, respectively.  Beginning in 1998, the IRRC started providing information on ATPs every alternate year.  In some cases prior to this period, data were missing for two consecutive years.  Therefore, information on the measures is available only for the years where IRRC data are available.  Following most of the prior studies using these measures, we replace data in missing years with the last available year's information (e. g. , Gompers et al. , 2003.  Core et al. , 2006).  This helps us increase the sample size considerably but can also introduce noise to the extent that the indices change over this period.  However, research indicates that these indices are relatively stable over time (e. g. , Gompers et al. , 2003), suggesting the error resulting from this assumption may not be extreme. 7 We measure managerial long-term focus (innovation) based on R&D expenditure deflated by net sales (RND). 8 Our initial population consists of non-financial firms with available IRRC data and identifiable GVKEYs.  Depending on the nature of the tests being run, we apply various other screens to the initial sample, the final usable sample varies from test to test.  We describe these specific screens in each of the relevant sections.  4.  Tobin's Q and stock returns surrounding state law changes.  We use a number of alternative research designs to explore the link between takeover defenses and long-term focus of the firm.  Our primary set of tests, which we discuss in this section, uses the state law change in Delaware as a natural experimental setting to explore 1) the effects of ATPs on value creation, and 2) how the stock market reacts to the state law change.  We discuss the results of additional cross-sectional analyses in Section 5.  4. 1.  Tobin's Q surrounding state law change.  In 1995 there was a significant change in the takeover regime in Delaware, brought about by a number of court rulings that legitimized the use of poison pills and staggered boards to protect firms from hostile takeovers bids.  Before 1995, a target company seeking to fend off a hostile takeover needed to demonstrate that the takeover bid presented a threat, and that the defense used by the company was proportional to the threat (Unocal Corp v.  Mesa Petroleum Co.  (493 A. 2d 946, Del.  1985)).  Furthermore, the targets’ right to use a poison pill was not absolute, and any use of the pill was subject to judicial oversight. 9 The Delaware Supreme Court's ruling in Unitrin v.  American General Corp (651 A. 2d 1361, Del.  1995) in 1995 changed this environment by relaxing the conditions under which hostile bids were considered threats as well as by limiting the scope of judicial scrutiny.  The court indicated that a board's reasonable perception of threat is sufficient to establish the existence of a threat.  Therefore, the Unitrin ruling is considered to have increased management's power to “just say no” to hostile takeover bids.  A second 1995 ruling, in the case of Moore Corp.  Ltd.  v.  Wallace Computer Services, Inc.  (898F.  Supp.  D.  Del.  1995), further affirmed the boards’ use of poison pills to defend themselves against hostile takeovers. 10 Thus, the changes initiated by these events in Delaware in 1995 provide us a unique setting of an exogenous shock to firms’ takeover defense environment.  Focusing on this exogenous state law event allows us to address endogeneity concerns that may arise when firms are partitioned based on takeover defenses.  We follow prior research to identify 1995 as the year of the takeover regime change in Delaware (e. g. , Low 2009).  The period after the regime change is captured by the dummy AFT that takes the value 1 for the years 1996 and later.  0 otherwise (1995 is dropped from the analysis). 11 In order to keep the same number of years for the before and after periods, we use data up to year 2000 for this part of the analysis.  Our sample selection screens are shown in panel A of Table 1.  Starting from the sample of all non-financial firms with IRRC data for the periods 1990–1994 and 1996–2000 (10,934 observations), we lose 1,050 observations due to missing data on financial variables.  We further require the sample firms to be present in year 1994 before the Delaware court rulings occurred in 1995 in order to ensure that they have experienced the change in the anti-takeover environment.  Our final sample for this set of tests has 7,923 firm-years observations.  Summary statistics of the key variables used in the regression analyses are reported in panel A of Table 1.  To mitigate the effect of outliers, we winsorize the top and bottom 1% of all continuous variables.  About 58% of firms have poison pills, and 60% have staggered boards in place.  On average, firms have an EINDEX of 2. 3.  The average market value of the companies is $5 billion (median of $0. 99 billion).  The average market value is higher than the Compustat population because IRRC collects takeover defense information only for larger firms.  However, there is significant variation in market value across the sample, as indicated by the standard deviation of almost $19 billion.  On average, capital expenditures are about 7% of total assets.  about 21% of total assets are supported by borrowings. 