
The Nordic electricity market was liberalized in the late 90’s to
increase competition and create incentive to invest in new generation capacity and modernize existing production.  At the same time,
the liberalization reduced the barriers on import and export between
countries, allowing for more eﬃcient use of many power production
technologies. 
Currently, the Nordic market covers the countries in the Nordic
and Baltic regions, i. e.  Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Estonia,
Latvia and Lithuania. 
It is divided into 17 bidding areas with individual area prices based on local supply and demand.  Furthermore, an overall market price for electricity, referred to as the system
price, is determined for contractual purposes.  This price is based
on aggregated supply and demand and disregards transmission constraints between bidding areas.  In contrast, the bidding areas are
established to avoid congestion in the system.  The area price and the
local load are, therefore, highly correlated.  It is important to account
for this market design in the derivation of hedging strategies. 
In this paper we study the hedging problem of a Nordic
distribution company that has agreed to deliver electricity to customers at a ﬁxed price.  The company has to buy electricity in the
spot market, but knows neither the future electricity demand of the
customers nor the future market price of electricity.  As trades in the
spot market are settled at the area price, the distributor is thereby
exposed to both volume risk and area price risk.  To mitigate risk,
the company can lock in part of its proﬁt by buying ﬁnancial contracts on electricity, in advance and at a ﬁxed price.  In the Nordic
electricity market, however, ﬁnancial contracts are settled against
the system price and not the area price.  With signiﬁcant differences
between the system price and the area price, especially for periods with high load, this introduces considerable basis risk.  Basis risk
may be managed using forward contracts on the price difference. 
Nevertheless, only monthly contracts are available.  As a result, the
distribution company cannot completely eliminate risk from ﬁxed
price agreements.  In spite of this, in 2010 more than 50% of contracts
for electricity were based on ﬁxed price agreements in the Nordic
market and in EU 60% of contracts were ﬁxed price agreements. 1 This
paper contributes to the literature by developing a joint model for
the area price, the system price and the load, accounting for both
cross-correlations and auto-correlations, and by suggesting strategies for hedging in the presence of local volume risk.  In addition to
using base load and peak load contracts for hedging, we study the
impact of including contracts for difference.  Furthermore, since the
proﬁt distribution is asymmetrical, we complement the traditional
variance-based approach by using a one-sided measure of risk in the
hedging problem.  We benchmark against the strategy that ignores
correlation and hedges at the expected load, as is common practice
in the industry. 
The importance of accounting for correlation between electricity
price and load has already been demonstrated in the existing literature.  As an example, Bessembinder and Lemmon (2002) develop
an equilibrium-based market model and ﬁnd that correlation has a
substantial impact on the optimal hedging strategies in a forward
market.  Closer to our work is Oum Name (2006), who consider a
load serving entity and study the inﬂuence of correlation on the
residual risk following optimal hedging.  The authors derive analytical solutions to the hedging problem for speciﬁc utility functions
and approximate these solutions by call options to compensate for
the lack of contracts to hedge volume risk.  Their results likewise
show that correlation has a signiﬁcant impact on the payoff structure as well as on the hedging strategy.  Whereas these references
use a single-period setting, we include multiple periods and thereby
capture the basis risk that arises as contracts cover an entire month. 
This makes our hedging strategies applicable to the Nordic Market. 
An example of using a more advanced electricity price model
for hedging is provided by Coulon Name (2013), who develop a
three-factor model with load-based regime switching to model the
electricity market of Texas.  The authors study variations of daily
payoffs, using spark spreads or call options and considering a single day and one-dimensional hedging. 