 It is widely accepted that the CEOs of large banks have incentives to implement business policies that increase their organizations’ exposure to risks ( Cohen et al. , 2014.  Ellul and Yerramilli, 2013.  Gandhi and Lustig, 2015 ).  These business policies  are motivated by the highly levered nature of banks that provides CEOs with risk-taking incentives given the convexity of  their stock and option holdings.   While shareholders are not against executives taking risks, because equity is an out-of-the-money call option whose  value is increasing with risk ( Acharya and Ryan, 2016.  Jensen and Meckling, 1976 ), they do not have a preference for risks  that can be detrimental to the survival of the bank ( Stulz, 2015 ).  A bank’s growing exposure to tail risks, measuring the  possibility of suffering extremely large losses, could be dangerous for the organization ( Cordella and Yeyati, 2003.  Ellul and  Yerramilli, 2013.  Hellmann et al. , 20 0 0.  Keeley, 1990.  Park and Peristiani, 20 07 ).  While an exposure to tail risks tends to  reward shareholders with positive returns in many scenarios, it can also be associated with a small probability of extremely  large losses that undermine a bank’s longer-term survival ( Cohen et al. , 2014.  Ellul and Yerramilli, 2013.  Thanassoulis, 2013 ).   The purpose of this paper is to understand whether increases in tail risk are associated with an increased likelihood of  a forced CEO turnover in large banks.  To this end, we present the ﬁrst cross-country study of CEO turnovers in the banking  industry based on a sample of 261 large banks selected from 46 countries for the period 2004–2013.   Whether any link exists between tail risk and the likelihood of a CEO turnover in large banks lacks empirical evidence.   This is particularly unfortunate given that dismissal is potentially an important mechanism to discipline CEOs by bank boards  and reduce the chances that they overly expose their banks to extreme risks.  In fact, dismissal might lead not only to the loss  of current employment but also the loss of unvested equity-based compensation ( Dahiya and Yermack, 2008 ) and reduced  future career opportunities ( Brickley et al. , 1999 ).   Our analysis is guided by conventional theoretical models proposed for non-ﬁnancial ﬁrms where boards employ performance, volatility and other signals to evaluate CEO choices ( Bushman et al. , 2010.  Gibbons and Murphy, 1990.  Holmstrom,  1982.  Jenter and Kannan, 2015 ).  When these signals indicate bad outcomes for the corporation that are imputable to a lack  of CEO ability or effort in the decision making, the dismissal of the CEO is a likely consequence.  Along these lines, we argue that tail risk conveys different and additional signals, as compared to stock performance and volatility, of possible bad  outcomes for the bank that can be related to CEO choices.   An increasing exposure to tail risks, making a bank more vulnerable to events that can lead to extremely large losses and  to a ﬁnancial distress ( Ellul and Yerramilli, 2013 ), signals that the bank might ﬁnd it more diﬃcult and costly to conduct its  business ( Stulz, 2015 ).  For instance, increases in tail risks lead to additional costs for shareholders related to the monitoring  role of bank creditors and regulators.  Both creditors and regulators do not beneﬁt from the upside gains deriving from bank  risk-taking while they bear the cost of the downside.  It follows that especially in the presence of a growing tail risk exposure,  creditors can signiﬁcantly increase the risk-premium charged on bank debts and reduce the amount of available funds for  the bank ( Flannery, 2001.  Schaeck et al. 