
Environmental management as a source of competitive advantage
continues to be studied by many researchers from a resource-based perspective.  The seminal studies by Hart (1995), Hart and Ahuja (1996),
Russo and Fouts (1997), Judge and Douglas (1998), Sharma and
Vredenburg (1998) and Hart and Dowell (2011) provide theoretical
support for abundant empirical literature that does not always conﬁrm
the “it pays to be green” hypothesis.  Indeed, studies on whether investment in environmental protection generates a positive economic performance in ﬁrms continue to feed the controversy (Wagner Name,
2002; Cainelli Name, 2013; Fujii Name, 2013; Trumpp and Guenther,Two signiﬁcant justiﬁcations can be presented to attempt to clarify
this controversy.  The ﬁrst is related to the design of environmental
strategy.  Environmental strategy can be designed in different ways,
and the chosen design conditions the possibility of obtaining positive
economic results.  Russo and Fouts (1997) were some of the ﬁrst authors
to underline the economic consequences of a compliance strategy, relative to a go-beyond-compliance strategy.  Since then, studies by Klassen
and Whybark (1999), Christmann (2000), King and Lenox (2002),
Gonzalez-Benito and Gonzalez-Benito (2005), Aragón-Correa Name
(2008), Guenster Name (2011), Sambasivan Name (2013) or Ghisetti
and Rennings (2014) provide empirical evidence that the largely preventive (versus corrective) nature and the proactivity of action taken (deﬁned as the tendency to anticipate and go beyond mere regulatory
compliance and normal industry standards) determines the likelihood
of said action having a positive effect on economic performance. 
The second argument that can justify mixed results in the study of
the win-win hypothesis is related to the conditions and factors accompanying the implementation of environmental strategy.  The idea that
the relationship between environmental and economic performance
depends on situational factors and external or internal conditions has
been highlighted by many authors, such as Christmann (2000),
Wagner and Schaltegger (2003), Cainelli Name (2013), Antonioli Name
(2014), Amores-Salvadó Name (2015) and Mazzanti Name (2016). 
This study empirically analyzes the economic consequences of environmental protection in ﬁrms and considers how the above two factors
can condition the sign of this relationship.  As a ﬁrst precaution, we have
deﬁned our object of study, environmental strategy, by considering
whether it has been designed proactively.  In fact, we have not studied
the economic consequences of environmental protection in the broad
sense but those of environmental proactivity.  With this purpose and
based on the deﬁnitions proposed by authors such as Sharma and
Vredenburg (1998), Aragón-Correa and Sharma (2003), Buysse and
Verbeke (2003) and Murillo Name (2008), we interpret environmental
proactivity as the ﬁrm's tendency to voluntarily apply environmental
protection measures, largely based on prevention, to anticipate environmental protection requirements, and to go beyond regulatory compliance and the measures generally adopted in industry.  Secondly, we
are interested in the conditions that concur and complement or hinder
the implementation of environmental proactivity and that can condition the possibility of obtaining economic results. 
The objective of this study is to analyze if the economic consequences of environmental proactivity in ﬁrms are better when the
ﬁrms are also proactive in technological innovation and if this
additional advantage is sustainable in dynamic environments. 
Therefore, we investigate the possibility of positive complementarities between environmental and technological proactivity, and the
stability and usefulness of these complementarities in dynamic
environments. 
The idea that spending resources on environmental protection generates complementarities with other resources (especially innovation
and organizational change) is rooted in the literature (Wagner, 2007;
Antonioli Name, 2013, 2014; Gilli Name, 2014; Mazzanti Name, 2016 for
a review).  The effect of these complementarities on business results
has been less studied, especially regarding the economic results of
ﬁrms.  In addition, most of the studies of how complementarities affect
economic results (Christmann, 2000; Hall and Wagner, 2012;
Hottenrott Name, 2012; Antonioli Name, 2014; Amores-Salvadó Name,
2015; Rivera-Torres Name, 2015) use subjective measures based on information obtained from surveys and/or place less importance on the
environmental strategy's degree of proactivity. 
In this research, we delve deeper into the study of complementarities arising from the implementation of a proactive environmental
strategy.  We analyze the effect of these complementarities on the
company's ability to obtain medium- and long-term economic results
and analyze whether such an advantage is sustainable in dynamic environments.  The conclusions obtained reinforce the interpretation of environmental proactivity as a dynamic capacity. 
Some of this paper's additional contributions to the previous literature on the topic are, ﬁrstly, a persuasive and objective measurement
of the ﬁrm's efforts regarding both environmental protection and innovation in general, which considers the mean investment efforts made by
industry ﬁrms to calculate the degree of environmental and technological proactivity.  Unlike most previous studies, we particularly emphasize the proactivity concept in both environmental and technological
areas.  Secondly, this study is based on an objective measurement of economic results, which considers the ﬁrm's capability to generate returns
in the medium and long term. 
The application of panel data econometrics to the estimation of coefﬁcients is another distinctive aspect of this study.  This method enables
the estimation to incorporate the speciﬁc effects of each ﬁrm (for instance, effects related to expertise, culture or resources and capabilities)
that have an impact on its performance, but are not measured by the regressors in the model. 
This study is divided into six sections.  The second and third review
the related literature and present the theoretical arguments for characterizing environmental proactivity as a dynamic capability, which enables a sustainable advantage to be taken of complementarities with
other resources related to the innovation.  The fourth describes the samples, the variables used and the methodology.  The ﬁfth presents the
results, and the last section summarizes and discusses the main conclusions arising from this research. 
2.  Environmental Proactivity and Innovation as Complementary Resources: The Dynamic Capabilities Perspective. 
In some seminal papers that deﬁne the Porter hypothesis, Porter
(1991), Porter and Van der Linde (1995a, b), Esty and Porter (1998),
and others establish arguments against the traditional view that there
is a trade-off between environmental and ﬁnancial results and maintain
that environmental regulations generate stimuli for innovation in the
process of searching for less polluting and more efﬁcient production
methods capable of generating competitive advantages.  Hart (1995) refers to these arguments from the natural resource-based view of the
ﬁrm and argues that environmental management capabilities improve
environmental performance while providing competitive advantages
through cost reductions, anticipating competitors and improving stakeholder relations.  These arguments were further supported and extended in multiple studies identifying the resources and capabilities related
to environmental protection that help to create competitive advantages
(Russo and Fouts, 1997; Sharma and Vredenburg, 1998; Bansal, 2005;
Walls Name, 2008). 
Twenty years after the Porter hypothesis, however, the results found
in the empirical literature that has studied this win-win perspective are
contradictory and suggest that the relationship between environmental
and economic performance is not as clear as it would appear. 1 The possibility of complementarities between resources spent on environmental protection and other internal resources is an aspect scarcely
considered in the empirical literature that can explain the lack of consensus about the relationship between environmental and economic
performance (Cainelli Name, 2013; Amores-Salvadó Name, 2015).  In this
regard, Cainelli Name (2013) maintain that an argument that challenges
the conventional pessimistic view of a trade-off between environmental
and economic performance resides in complementarities and economies of scale and scope, which might lead to situations where environmental
investment generates greater positive economic results. 
Possibly inﬂuenced by the Porter hypothesis, most of the literature on
complementarities between environmental resources and other types
of resources focuses on those related to either technological or organizational innovation (such as Christmann, 2000; Hottenrott Name, 2012;
Antonioli Name, 2014; Amores-Salvadó Name, 2015; Rivera-Torres Name,
2015). 2 One of the ﬁrst works in this respect is by Christmann (2000),
who highlights the important role of a company's existing resources
and capabilities for innovation.  In her research, from data collected
from a sample of US chemical ﬁrms, Christmann (2000) ﬁnds evidence
that capabilities for process innovation and implementation are complementary assets that moderate the relationship between process-focused environmental practices and cost advantages.  Christmann
(2000) focuses on pollution prevention technologies, which, unlike pollution control technologies, have to be integrated in the production process and involve signiﬁcant changes in production processes and
practices.  Based on this argument, Christmann (2000) suggests and empirically shows that successful implementation of pollution prevention
technologies requires the ﬁrm to be able to innovate and make changes
to its production process.  Without these capabilities, the expected advantage of cost savings from process-focused prevention pollution practices is not guaranteed. 
Hall and Wagner (2012) also analyze the role of innovation activities
for the link between sustainable management and economic and environmental performance.  Based on a sample of ﬁrms from Germany
and the Netherlands, these authors conﬁrm that environmental strategy
generates a variety of results (both environmental and economic) depending on the type and level of innovation pursued in the ﬁrm. 
Antonioli Name (2014) also analyze whether environmental innovations are complementary with other techno-organizational innovations
in a sample of ﬁrms in north-east Italy.  They empirically ﬁnd that ﬁrms
that jointly adopt environmental innovations and other innovations related to the organization of production (teamwork, quality circle, etc. )
tend to improve productivity performances.  These results are consistent
with those previously found by Hottenrott Name (2012) from German
ﬁrm-level data.  In their study, they ﬁnd empirical support for the complementarity between green technologies and organizational change. 
In Spain, Rivera-Torres Name (2015) obtain empirical results from a
sample of ﬁrms in north-east Spain that show that pro-environmental
change improves short- to medium-term economic performance both
directly and indirectly.  These authors show that pro-environmental
changes are complemented by changes in organizational design (communication, incentives and employee relations) representing improvements in coordination and motivation systems.  These improvements
have a positive impact on economic results and they, therefore, represent an indirect beneﬁt of pro-environmental change. 
The advantages of a proactive environmental strategy, which complements technological proactivity, can be understood from a dynamic
capabilities perspective.  Teece Name (1997: 516) deﬁne dynamic capabilities as “the ﬁrm's ability to integrate, build, and reconﬁgure internal
and external competences to address rapidly changing environments”. 
The dynamic capability approach has studied such adaptation processes, concluding that ﬁrms capable of rapidly reconﬁguring and accommodating their resources and skills are more likely to obtain
sustainable competitive advantages and greater returns than their competitors (Teece Name, 1997; Eisenhardt and Martin, 2000).  Following
Aragón-Correa and Sharma (2003), this study interprets environmental
proactivity as a dynamic capability that gives rise to the generation of
sustainable competitive advantages.  Unlike reactive environmental
strategies based on compliance, proactive strategies, based on the anticipation and early adoption of environmental practices, involve the adaptation and reconﬁguration abilities that Eisenhardt and Martin (2000)
associated with dynamic capabilities.  Anticipation of requirements
guarantees more in-depth knowledge, experience and ﬂexibility to accommodate new green preventive technologies in production processes
and to ﬁnd ways to complement them with other resources.  Early adoption of environmental practices leaves room for the analysis, experimentation, and reconﬁguration necessary for adequate adaptation to
internal and external circumstances.  Taking advantage of complementarities with technological proactivity is far more likely under these proactive circumstances.  The company has a greater margin and ﬂexibility
to use its advanced technological knowledge in the design of new forms
of more ecological production based on preventing pollution.  Similarly,
environmental innovation will improve the company's general knowledge, know-how and operational skills in a way that is difﬁcult to imitate.  Improving the company's performance is far more likely when
the ﬁrm is both environmentally and technologically proactive.  The
ability to integrate, build, and reconﬁgure internal and external skills attributed to dynamic capabilities (Teece Name, 1997; Eisenhardt and
Martin, 2000) is expected more when both types of resources are implemented together.  The combination of environmental proactivity with
technological proactivity represents a more valuable, harder to imitate,
capability.  Environmental proactivity thus meets the deﬁnition of dynamic capability established by Grifﬁth and Harvey (2001): The
creation of difﬁcult-to-imitate combinations of resources, including effective coordination of inter-organizational relationships, on a global
basis that can provide ﬁrms with a competitive advantage. 
In this context of dynamic capabilities, we propose that there are
complementarities between resources spent on environmental
proactivity and resources spent on technological proactivity that improve the positive economic effects of environmental protection. 
We thus propose the following hypothesis:
H1.  “The greater the ﬁrm's degree of technological proactivity, the greater
the improvement in ﬁnancial performance arising from environmental
proactivity”. 
3.  Sustainable Complementarities of Environmental Proactivity: A
Contingent Approach. 
In the study of the economic consequences of environmental
proactivity, several authors have underlined the moderating effect of
external situational factors.  Aragón-Correa and Sharma (2003), based
on the contingency theory developed by Lawrence and Lorsch (1967),
justify interest in considering these moderating effects.  According to
the contingency theory, organizations' success largely depends on
their ability to adapt their structure and strategy to their type of situation or external context.  This conclusion guided research attempting
to conﬁrm the win-win perspective in the study of the moderating effects of factors such as industry growth (Russo and Fouts, 1997), uncertainty, complexity and muniﬁcence (Aragón-Correa and Sharma, 2003),
the degree of strictness of environmental requirements (Filbeck and
Gorman, 2004; Aguilera-Caracuel and Ortiz-de-Mandojana, 2013), the
presence of green external economic incentives (Clemens, 2006) and
the ﬁnancial crisis (Fujii Name, 2016). 
Consideration of external contingencies is especially relevant in the
dynamic capabilities approach.  The interpretation of dynamic capabilities as generators of sustainable competitive advantages in rapidly
changing environments ﬁnds broad consensus in the literature (Teece
Name, 1997; Eisenhardt and Martin, 2000; Zahra and George, 2002;
Wang and Ahmed, 2007).  According to this perspective, the ability to
adapt is a fundamental success factor in environments characterized
by change, where uncertainty is high and predicting future scenarios
is complicated. 
Zahra Name (2006) propose that potential gain from dynamic capabilities is greater in dynamic environments.  They justify that the ﬁrm
rarely needs to change substantive capabilities when the market or
technological environment is stable.  In this stability, economic performance may be harmed if the company expends signiﬁcant resources
to develop change capabilities.  However, in a highly volatile environment, businesses often need changes in substantive capabilities.  The
economic consequences of dynamic capabilities may be greater in this
situation.  Based on these arguments, Zahra Name (2006) establish that
the potential value of dynamic capabilities is moderated by the dynamism of the external environment. 
In the context of our research, certain aspects related to the uncertainty of the environment could moderate the economic beneﬁts from
complementarities between environmental and technological
proactivity.  Analyzing the possible moderation of some of these aspects
is useful for our interpretation of environmental proactivity as a dynamic capability that facilitates a competitive advantage in turbulent environments.  We consider two of these aspects with the objective of
evaluating whether, as predicted by the dynamic capabilities approach,
the beneﬁts of using complementarities between environmental and
technological proactivity are sustainable, and even greater, in highly
volatile environments.  The ﬁrst is the global ﬁnancial crisis that began
in 2008 (economic recession in Spain started in the third quarter of
2008 and lasted until the end of 2013).  The second is regulatory pressure from the European Union Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) on
ﬁrms generating greenhouse gases.  This regulatory tool became effective in Spain in 2005, applying considerable pressure and uncertainty
on ﬁrms to adapt their production processes. 3 The signiﬁcance, pressure
and uncertainty generated by these two phenomena are adequate to
study the sustainability of the competitive advantage of environmental
proactivity in dynamic environments.  Through the ﬁrst we can analyze
the economic consequences of complementarities in two periods of time
with varying dynamism.  Through the second we can analyze the economic consequences of complementarities in two groups of companies
subjected to varying dynamism.  These effects are considered through
the following two hypotheses:
H2A.  “The economic beneﬁt from the complementarities between environmental and technological proactivity is greater during the period of ﬁnancial crisis”. 
H2B.  “The economic beneﬁt from the complementarities between environmental and technological proactivity is greater in EU ETS ﬁrms than in nonEU ETS ﬁrms”. 
<Middle> Research Design. 
This section describes the information sources, the sample, the design
of the variables and the methodology used in the empirical analysis. 
4. 1.  Data Collection and Sample. 
The variable proposed to measure environmental proactivity in
ﬁrms is based on the relative investment effort (compared with mean
effort in the sector) of each ﬁrm in the last few years to improve environmental results.  In this context, secondary information sources are
scarce; in Spain, only listed ﬁrms are required to systematically publish
information on environmental investment in their annual reports. 
The publication of such data has been compulsory in Spain since the
resolution of the Institute of Accounting and Auditing (Instituto de
Contabilidad y Auditoría de Cuentas) dated 25 March 2002. 4 This resolution
distinguishes environmental expenses, which are classiﬁed as operating
costs and must be included in the proﬁt and loss account, from environmental investments, deﬁned as “elements added to the organization's
long-term assets, the primary purpose of which is to minimize environmental impact and protect the environment, including the reduction or
elimination of future pollution arising from the organization's operations”
(ICAC Resolution of 25 March 2002.  Article ﬁve). 
The sample was selected from ﬁrms listed on the Madrid Stock Exchange Continuous Market during the 2005–2012 period to obtain annual environmental investment data.  The most important Spanish
ﬁrms are listed on this market, and it represents 99. 3% of the traded volume in the Spanish Stock Market.  We only selected ﬁrms from industrial
sectors, due to the smaller environmental impact of others (such as ﬁnancial services, real estate, telecommunications and tourism). 5 We
then excluded ﬁrms that did not provide information about
environmental investment in their annual reports. 6 The ﬁnal database
used for the analysis is a panel with observations for 42 listed industrial
ﬁrms for each year in the 2005–2012 period.  They represent around 75%
of all listed Spanish industrial ﬁrms in the considered period.  The ﬁnal
sample therefore comprises a panel of 336 observations. 
The information required to calculate both the dependent and independent variables in the model was obtained from the annual reports
published by the ﬁrms registered in the CNMV (Comisión Nacional del
Mercado de Valores, the Spanish Securities Commission), from the SABI
(Sistema de Análisis de Balances Ibéricos, Analysis System of Iberian
Statements of Financial Position) database and from the Madrid Stock
Exchange database. 
4. 2.  Variable Definitions. 
The information required to calculate both the dependent and independent
variables in the model was obtained from the annual reports
published by the firms registered in the CNMV (Comisión Nacional del
Mercado de Valores, the Spanish Securities Commission), from the SABI
(Sistema de Análisis de Balances Ibéricos, Analysis System of Iberian
Statements of Financial Position) database and from the Madrid Stock
Exchange database. 
4. 2. 1.  Independent Variables. 
The model has three principal independent variables: The ﬁrm's Environmental Proactivity Index (EPIit), the ﬁrm's Technological Proactivity
Index (TPIit) and the interaction between them (EPIit × TPIit), the aim
of which is to analyze whether there are complementarities between
these variables. 
4. 2. 1. 1.  Environmental Proactivity Index (EPI).  As shown in the previous
section, the literature establishes that an environmentally proactive
ﬁrm is one that can implement advanced environmental protection
strategies, which go beyond legal requirements and normal industry
standards. 
Most of the reviewed studies try to diagnose this capability from primary information obtained through interviews or surveys, classifying
ﬁrms based on qualitative aspects describing environmental practices
(for example, Aragón-Correa, 1998; Sharma and Vredenburg, 1998;
Henriques and Sadorsky, 1999; Aragón-Correa and Sharma, 2003;
Gonzalez-Benito and Gonzalez-Benito, 2005; Murillo Name, 2008;
Sambasivan Name, 2013). 
The main advantage is that this considers the multidimensional nature of environmental proactivity.  However, it also has some disadvantages (subjective perception of the interviewed individuals, lack of
consensus regarding qualitative aspects that determine whether a
ﬁrm should be classiﬁed in one environmental category or another
and, ﬁnally, information obtained from surveys is not exempt from selection or common method bias). 
Considering all these aspects, this study proposes a continuous and
objective measure calculated from objective secondary information:
Firms' investment in pollution control and prevention technologies. 
This study considers that measuring proactivity involves verifying
that ﬁrms make an environmental protection effort above and beyond
practices required by law or the market that are regularly adopted by
ﬁrms in the sector.  Therefore, it proposes an environmental proactivity
measure called the Environmental Proactivity Index (EPI), which enables
a comparison of the environmental proactivity of ﬁrms of varying sizes
from a range of sectors. 
The Environmental Proactivity Index (EPIit) of ﬁrm i during year t is
deﬁned where ETCit is the environmental technology capital accumulated by
ﬁrm i in ﬁve years to the period t; Sizeit is the ﬁrm's turnover in period
ratio is the environmental investment effort of ﬁrm i in period
t; the ETCitt (EIEit); and EIEs is the mean environmental investment effort of the
sector to which ﬁrm i belongs. 
This study assumes that a ﬁrm's Environmental Technology Capital
(ETCit) is a direct function of the environmental technology capital accumulated by the ﬁrm in previous periods, not simply the environmental
investment in the last period.  The environmental technology innovation
process is thus seen as producing intangible assets that can be accumulated.  We use the method proposed by Pakes and Schankeman (1984)
to calculate technological capital stock.  A ﬁrm's ETCit is calculated
using a stock measure constructed from a formulation of depreciated
sums of the environmental investments made in the last few periods,
using Koyck lags,
where P is the number of years before the current year in which environmental investments affected the stock of Environmental Technology
Capital (ETC).  Following the approach of Hirschey and Weygandt
(1985) for R&D investments, the useful life of investments in environmental technology is considered to be ﬁve years; δ is the depreciation
rate, which is set at a constant rate of 20%, as recommended by
Henderson and Cockburn (1994)7 for R&D investments; and Environmental Investmenti,t − p is environmental investment in a speciﬁc year. 
Furthermore, the ETCit variable was normalized by each ﬁrm's turnover in each year considered in the panel (Sizeit).  Given the economies
of scale in R&D activities (Schumpeter, 1961) and the lower risk involved in such activities in ﬁrms with greater resources (Hitt Name,
1991), it is believed that size is directly related to innovation (Hitt Name, 1991).  A positive relationship has also been suggested between
size and environmental investment (Arora and Cason, 1995). 
mental Investment Effort: EIEit ¼ ETCit
This correction gives rise to a new variable, referred to as Environ-Environmental
Investment Effort. 
Finally, the possible effect of sector on a ﬁrm's environmental involvement is considered, subtracting mean sectoral Environmental Investment Effort (EIEs) from the previous variable.  This correction also
enables us to measure the extent to which ﬁrms go beyond regular practices in the sector, giving rise to the Environmental Proactivity Index: EPIit. 
4. 2. 1. 2.  Technological Proactivity Index (TPI).  The Technological Proactivity
Index (TPIit) of firmi during year t is defined as:TPIit ¼ TCit−TIEswhere
TCit is the Technological Capital accumulated by firm i in the last few
years, calculated using the Koyck lags method.  Size is the firm's turnover in period t; the
Size ratio is the Technological Investment Effort of firm i in period t
(TIEit); and TIEs is the mean Technological Investment Effort ðTIEit ¼ TCit
Size of the sector to which firm i belongs. 