 Empirical research on conditional conservatism documents a piecewise linear relation between earnings and stock returns and often attributes this pattern to a more timely recognition of bad news than good news (e. g. , Basu, 1997).  However, we argue that a similar asymmetric relation can arise from a fundamentally different source—cost stickiness.  Cost stickiness refers to the asymmetric response of costs to sales increases versus decreases, which is a widely documented finding in the research on cost behavior (e. g. , Anderson et al. , 2003).  We show that cost stickiness can be mistaken for conditional conservatism in standard models, distorting inferences about both the average level of conservatism and the extent of cross-sectional variation in conservatism.  To reduce the likelihood of spurious inference, we develop new empirical tests that separate conservatism from the confounding effect of sticky costs.  Conditional conservatism implies that bad news (the usual proxy for which is negative stock returns) is recognized in earnings more quickly and more fully than good news (measured by positive returns).  Therefore, the contemporaneous association between earnings and stock returns should be stronger for negative returns than for positive returns (Basu, 1997).  Numerous studies find results consistent with this prediction and infer the presence of conditional conservatism (e. g. , Pope and Walker, 1999.  Ball et al. , 2000.  Watts, 2003b.  Ball et al. , 2013a).  The research on sticky costs documents an asymmetric behavior of costs and attributes it to operational decisions by managers who face adjustment costs, such as severance payments to dismissed workers and disposal costs for property, plant, and equipment (e. g. , Anderson et al. , 2003).  To avoid adjustment costs, managers retain some unused resources when sales fall.  By contrast, when sales rise, managers have to add sufficient resources to meet the demand.  Because of this operational asymmetry, costs are “sticky” on average—they rise more in response to sales increases than they fall for sales decreases.  The cost asymmetry implies that, on average, earnings respond more to sales decreases than to sales increases.  Because sales changes and concurrent stock returns are positively correlated, cost stickiness leads to an asymmetric relation between earnings and stock returns, which is stronger for negative returns than for positive returns.  Therefore, the standard estimates of asymmetric timeliness are likely biased upwards on average when sticky costs are prevalent.  Further, because cost stickiness varies systematically (e. g. , Weiss, 2010), it leads to variation in the bias, which is likely to distort inferences about the extent of cross-sectional variation in conservatism.  To control for this confounding effect, we incorporate cost stickiness in standard conservatism models.  We use data for publicly traded US firms from 1987 to 2007 to examine the confounding effect of cost stickiness in the Basu (1997), Ball et al.  (2013b), and Collins et al.  (2014) models. 1 Controlling for the asymmetric effect of sales changes reveals an average bias in conservatism estimates of more than 25%.  Further tests confirm that the confounding asymmetry for sales changes is consistent with manifestations of cost stickiness and is distinct from conservatism.  Thus, the upward bias in the standard conservatism measures arises because the measures mistake cost stickiness for conditional conservatism.  We also find that controlling for the variation in cost stickiness has a large impact on estimates of the variation in conservatism. 