 Introduction This paper examines whether the quality of mergers and acquisitions (M&As) is higher when the acquiring firm and target firm share the same external auditor. 1 Our intuition is that the acquisition process often involves considerable uncertainty, including information asymmetry between bidders and targets regarding their operations, financial health, risk and prospects as well as uncertainty related to post-acquisition operational synergies.  This uncertainty can negatively impact M&A quality by reducing managers' ability to identify the most profitable investment projects (Goodman et al. , 2014).  We argue that when an acquirer and target share a common auditor, the auditor can help reduce uncertainty along several dimensions.  First, auditors accumulate a considerable amount of information about their clients through conducting their audit procedures and through informal discussions with top management, allowing them to be helpful as information intermediaries both before the M&A (e. g. , identifying potential merger counterparties and assisting with due diligence) and after the M&A (e. g. , integrating accounting systems and internal controls).  Second, since each audit firm has its own unique style of interpreting and implementing accounting rules (Kothari et al. , 2010), firms represented by a common auditor are likely to have more comparable financial statements (Francis et al. , 2014), which leads to a reduction in uncertainty (De Franco et al. , 2011).  That is, a merging firm can better understand the assumptions and choices underlying accounting numbers in financial statements from other firms that share the same auditor.  In turn, this leads to a better understanding (i. e. , reduced uncertainty) of those firms' economics, as compared to those of firms using different auditors.  Finally, common auditors may be more likely to limit misreporting that asymmetrically benefits one party over the other.  Prior research indicates that acquirers (Louis, 2004.  Gong et al. , 2008) and targets (Anilowski et al. , 2009) manage earnings before M&As.  Thus, auditors that audit both the acquirer and target face greater litigation risk, as the common auditor may be sued for earnings management undertaken by either party.  Moreover, common auditors likely face greater scrutiny by stakeholders, given the potential for conflicts of interest.  As Agrawal et al.  (2013) show, deals with common M&A advisors attract securities class action lawsuits with greater frequency than deals with separate advisors.  Thus, a common auditor has arguably higher incentives to limit misreporting ex ante, leading to reduced uncertainty regarding the accuracy of the reported numbers.  By reducing uncertainty during the M&A process, common auditors can help firms allocate capital more efficiently, resulting in higher quality acquisitions.  To test whether common auditors are associated with higher quality M&As, we use a sample of 1971 U. S.  acquisitions between 1988 and 2010, where both the acquirer and the target are public firms and the acquirer obtains complete control of the target after the acquisition.  To capture M&A quality, we use the acquisition announcement return following a large body of research (e. g. , Asquith et al. , 1983.  Bradley et al. , 1988.  Cai and Sevilir, 2012.  Agrawal et al. , 2013.  Goodman et al. ,We find that M&As involving firms with a common auditor are of higher quality than M&As involving firms with different auditors. 2 Further, we test and find that the common-auditor effect is stronger when there is greater preacquisition uncertainty, proxied by targets with higher growth, more volatility, greater research and development (R&D) intensity, and larger bid–ask spreads.  Our results are robust to the inclusion of numerous control variables for auditor, firm and deal characteristics, the merging firms' previous business relationships and geographical proximity, the existence of shared M&A advisors and/or directors, and additional testing to address endogeneity concerns related to auditor selection.  Collectively, these results are consistent with common auditors reducing uncertainty during the M&A process, which leads to higher quality M&As.  To get a sense of the economic magnitude of the common auditor effect, consider that the announcement period abnormal returns are 1. 064% points higher in common-auditor deals than those in non-common-auditor deals.  Given that the average market capitalization of an acquirer (target) in our sample is $8. 99 billion ($870 million), this difference in announcement returns translates into an increase in the combined firm's market capitalization of $104. 9 million. 3 We then examine the three mechanisms (discussed above) through which common auditors reduce M&A uncertainty.  (1) discussions with the M&A parties, (2) financial statement comparability, and (3) limited misreporting.  With respect to the first mechanism, we employ two different empirical approaches.  First, we show that the common-auditor effect is larger when the acquirer and target use the same local office of the common auditor, as the auditor can more easily facilitate discussions between these clients if they are all in the same location.  Second, we show that there is an increased probability of an M&A for firms with a common auditor, as the auditor can both better match clients interested in engaging in M&A deals and reduce uncertainties throughout the process that might otherwise derail the deal.  To explore the second mechanism, i. e. , financial statement comparability, we examine whether firms in common-auditor deals have more comparable financial statements than do firms in non-common-auditor deals.  Using differences in yearspecific total accruals (Francis et al. , 2014) and the covariance of earnings across time (Barth et al. , 2012.  De Franco et al. , 2011.  Lang et al. , 2010) as proxies for comparability, we find that acquirers and targets with common auditors have more comparable financial statements than do those with different auditors.  We also find less misreporting for common-auditor mergers, the third mechanism, using performance-matched abnormal accruals (Kothari et al. , 2005) and financial statement restatements (Bens et al. , 2012) as proxies for misreporting.  Combined, these results support our inferences that common auditors reduce uncertainty in the M&A process by improving (public and private) communication channels.  Finally, we examine whether the common-auditor effect is mitigated after the Sarbanes–Oxley Act (SOX).  Section 201 of SOX prohibits auditors from engaging in non-audit services, such as M&A advisory and consulting services.  To the extent auditors were engaged in non-audit services before SOX and common auditors used these services to help their clients engage in better acquisitions, the common-auditor effect should be mitigated post-SOX.  However, we find that the common-auditor effect remains after SOX.  This result suggests that the role of common auditors in reducing uncertainty is unlikely driven by non-audit function communications.  An important caveat to our findings is that, despite all our empirical analyses, discussions between auditors and their clients are unobservable.  Thus, we cannot directly speak to the amount or type of information provided by common auditors during M&As.  Given that American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) Rule 301 prohibits disclosure of confidential information without consent from the client, if auditor discussions do indeed contain relevant private information, it should be approved by the appropriate parties.  that said, we recognize that there is potential for conflicts of interest to arise.  We leave this for future research and regulators to determine. 4 Our study makes several important contributions.  First, we add to the literature that examines the role of auditors in M&As.  Prior studies generally examine the roles of acquirer auditors and target auditors separately.  For example, Louis (2005) studies the role of acquirer auditors in M&A transactions and finds higher acquisition announcement returns for nonBig 4 firms, while other studies find that targets with Big 4 auditors are more likely to get acquired (Xie et al. , 2013) and have greater acquisition synergy and higher acquirer announcement returns (Golubov et al. , 2012).  In this study, we consider both acquirer auditors and target auditors in examining how sharing an auditor influences acquisition performance, providing new insights into the role of auditors in M&As.  Second, our paper contributes to the emerging literature on the real effects of accounting and auditing.  In particular, prior research finds that accounting information facilitates more efficient corporate investment by reducing agency problems caused by information asymmetry (e. g. , Biddle et al. , 2009.  Biddle and Hilary, 2006), by providing peer firms with more information (e. g. , Badertscher et al. , 2013), and by providing information to managers within the firm (Shroff, 2014.  McNichols and Stubben, 2008).  In addition, Kausar et al.  (2014) show that firms' choice to obtain an audit helps lower information asymmetry and leads to more efficient investment.  We contribute to this line of research by showing that common auditors reduce uncertainty in the M&A process, and thus improve M&A quality.  Third, we contribute to the large literature examining the effect of sharing an agent on economic outcomes.  For example, the economics literature analyzes the use of a common agent as a way for competitors to achieve implicit collusion (e. g. , Bernheim and Whinston, 1985.  Gal-Or, 1985, 1986.  Vives, 1990).  In this setting, a common agent behaves passively and information transfers among competitors can be widely observed.  In contrast, Villas-Boas (1994) and Gardiner et al.  (2007) consider a setting where a common agent can act strategically, and examine conflicts that arise from sharing the same advertising agency and sharing the same real estate agent.  More closely related to our study, Agrawal et al.  (2013) examine the role of common investment bank advisors in M&As, and find that such deals are somewhat better for acquirers than they are for targets.  Similarly, Cai and Sevilir (2012) find that board connections favor the acquirer, but the manner of benefit is a function of the type of board connection.  We contribute to this literature by providing evidence on the impact of sharing an auditor on M&A outcomes as well as the mechanisms through which these outcomes manifest.  Finally, our study complements concurrent work by Dhaliwal et al.  (2015), who also examine the role of common auditors in M&A transactions.  Our study delves into the mechanisms through which common auditors affect M&A outcomes.  We find evidence consistent with the common auditor resolving information uncertainty between the parties in the transaction.  Dhaliwal et al.  (2015) examine whether one party reaps greater benefits from the deals and find evidence consistent with the acquirer capturing the benefits, as indicated by higher acquirer event returns.  In addition, Dhaliwal et al. 's study suggests that target firm shareholders may be worse off because target event returns and deal premiums are lower.  While Dhaliwal et al. 's wealth transfer result is certainly interesting, we find that the overall combined announcement return is positive.  We caution, however, that the studies use somewhat different samples and tests, and thus the results cannot be fully interpreted together.  We leave it to future research to further examine the various aspects and consequences of a common auditor in M&A transactions.  The rest of this paper is organized as follows.  In Section 2, we discuss the M&A process as well as how a common auditor can help reduce uncertainties in that process.  Section 3 describes the sample selection process, and Section 4 details the research design and empirical results.  We present additional analyses in Section 5 and conclude in Section 6.  2.  Motivation Mergers and acquisitions represent significant corporate events that involve a thorough and dynamic process that can vary from several months to several years to complete.  In general, the M&A process starts with the identification of potential target candidates, which is a function of the firm's strategic objectives and requires some preliminary screening of the candidates.  After a candidate is chosen, the firm engages in a lengthy due diligence process, which includes developing an extensive understanding of the target value as a stand-alone business as well as the value of potential synergies (Copeland et al. , 2000).  As GE Capital (2012) indicates, “Due diligence is not a courtship, a negotiation, or an inquisition.  it's a fact-finding mission…[y]our business review of the target becomes a true audit, aimed at gaining a thorough understanding of the target's operations, assets, liabilities, and outlook.  Your due diligence team will be looking to confirm the target's representations, validate its valuation, probe any legal, regulatory and compliance concerns, and affirm expected synergies and integration plans. ” After obtaining considerable information through the due diligence phase, negotiations begin between the acquirer and target regarding the acquisition price, the deal structure, etc.  When the negotiations are done and the deal is complete, the firms enter the final phase—the integration of the two firms.  There are numerous factors for the acquiring firm to consider during the integration phase, such as the development and articulation of the vision for the new entity to employees and other stakeholders, legal and tax issues, human resource issues (e. g. , employee retention/severance), and fixed asset allocations.  Further, underlying all of these factors is the integration of the accounting information systems to capture these economic changes.  As becomes apparent through the above discussion of the M&A process, each phase contains significant uncertainty.  From identifying merger partners to conducting due diligence to valuing and negotiating the deal to post-M&A integration, managers face uncertainty throughout the process and its negative impact on firm value.  In particular, extant research indicates that uncertainty negatively affects acquirer announcement returns and post-acquisition performance (McNichols and Stubben, 2015.  Erickson et al. , 2012) and that having more firm-specific target information helps improve acquirer returns and the expected value of combined firms (Martin and Shalev, 2009).  Given that M&As are typically large and important corporate transactions, managerial incentives are strong to combat adverse selection inherent in the identification and valuation of potential deals.  As a result, firms often turn to investment bankers to serve as advisors during the M&A process.  Consistent with uncertainty driving firms' decisions to retain M&A advisors, Servaes and Zenner (1996) find that acquirers hire advisors when the deals are more complex and when the acquirer lacks prior acquisition experience.  Investment banks can help match acquirers with targets, advise acquirers on target valuation, and/or counsel firms in negotiating the deal price and structure (Goodman et al. , 2014).  While firms hire investment banks to reduce uncertainty in an attempt to make better investment decisions, we argue that auditors can also serve to reduce uncertainty in the M&A process, even though they are not explicitly retained by firms to do so.  In particular, auditors that audit both the acquirer and target (i. e. , common auditors) can reduce M&A uncertainty through several channels.  The first, and arguably most important, channel is the direct communication of information between the common auditor and the acquirers and targets, which can happen throughout the M&A process.  As indicated to us in a private conversation with a Big 4 accounting partner, auditors often introduce their clients as potential acquisition partners.  Thus, the auditor can facilitate discussions at the initial stage of the M&A process.  Auditors can also provide considerable value during the due diligence phase, which includes assessing the target firm's financial health, risks, prospects, etc.  After all, many of these assessments (or similar assessments) are made by the auditor during an audit, so they can assist by providing both structure to the due diligence processes/analyses and insights into the target based on their extensive knowledge of the firm.  In fact, further discussion with the Big 4 partner revealed that, with the consent of clients, audit team members of the acquirer and the target often exchange information. 5 These discussions can be very useful in appropriately valuing firms, and thus in negotiating the deal.  The transfer of information between common-auditor clients continues even after the M&A as well.  For example, common auditors can help integrate accounting information systems and internal control systems following deal completion, which is a nontrivial task that is vital to the success of the M&A.  Since common auditors are familiar with these systems for both the acquiring firm and the target firm, they can more efficiently amalgamate the systems to better capture the firm's economics.  Erickson et al.  (2012) report increases in uncertainty after M&As, which contributes to acquirers' post-acquisition wealth losses.  Common auditors can help reduce this uncertainty by assisting with the integration of the accounting information systems to better capture the underlying economics of the firm.  The second channel through which common auditors can reduce uncertainty is via financial statement comparability.  Kothari et al.  (2010) argue that each accounting firm has its own unique set of internal working rules that guide and standardize the audit firm's application of accounting and auditing standards. 6 Francis et al.  (2014) argue that because these systematic differences exist across audit firms, financial statements are more similar for firms with a common auditor than they are for firms with different auditors.  In addition, clients often seek guidance from their auditors when preparing financial reports, which further contributes to increased comparability of financial statements across firms with a common auditor. 7 Consistent with common auditors influencing comparability between firms' financial statements, Francis et al.  (2014) provide evidence that firms audited by the same auditor have more comparable earnings than firms audited by different auditors.  By enhancing financial statement comparability, common auditors indirectly provide their clients information that other (non-client) firms may not be able to efficiently obtain.  In particular, a client firm can better understand the assumptions and accounting choices underlying the financial statement numbers of other client firms.  In turn, this knowledge leads to a reduction in uncertainty regarding those firms' economics.  The third channel through which common auditors can reduce M&A uncertainty is by limiting financial statement misreporting.  Erickson and Wang (1999) find that acquirers boost earnings prior to stock-for-stock acquisitions in an effort to increase their stock price and reduce the number of shares issued in exchange.  Louis (2004) and Gong et al.  (2008) confirm these findings and show that the long-term post-acquisition underperformance of stock-for-stock acquirers and post-acquisition lawsuits can be attributed to pre-acquisition abnormal accruals.  Anilowski et al.  (2009) find that targets also engage in earnings management and sell via auctions to avoid the risk of detection.  The authors also find that such deals result in higher wealth gains to target shareholders.  Given the incentives for both acquirers and targets to manage earnings before M&As, auditors that audit both the acquirer and target face greater litigation risk, as the common auditor may be sued for earnings management undertaken by either party.  Moreover, common auditors likely face greater scrutiny by stakeholders, given their role as a common agent with the opportunity for conflicts of interest.  As Agrawal et al.  (2013) document, deals with common M&A advisors attract securities class action lawsuits with greater frequency than deals with separate advisors.  To the extent common auditors face greater litigation (and potentially reputational) risk, they have greater incentives to limit misreporting that asymmetrically benefits one party over the other, resulting in more transparent financial information and reduced uncertainty. 