
The nexus between environmental quality (e. g.  pollution) and
economic development has received much focus for many decades. 
The main objective of this paper is to empirically investigate the
pollution and income relationship across all Swedish municipalities
from a spatial econometric perspective.  Our approach is motivated by
recent but growing literature emphasizing the importance of the spatial
dimension on this link and the implications of ignoring it (e. g.  Burnett
Name, 2013a, 2013b). 
The emissions and income nexus is often modelled within the
framework of the so-called environmental Kuznets curve (EKC)
hypothesis, which posits an inverted U-shaped relationship between
emissions and income, a curvature likely explained by technological
progress and changes in preferences from income growth.  The EKC literature is replete with empirical modelling of different environmental
quality indicators.  The evidence for many pollutants can however be
best described as mixed.  Grossman and Krueger (1991, 1993, 1995)
were among the ﬁrst authors to empirically examine the EKC hypothesis.  In their papers, Grossman and Krueger found the existence of an
inverted U-shaped relationship between air quality (SO2 emission
and “smoke”) and economic growth (per capita GDP).  The inverted
U-shaped relationship implied that the two pollutants' concentration
increased at lower per capita income levels but decreased with
GDP growth at higher levels of income after a certain trajectory. 
Selden and Song (1994) corroborated Grossman and Krueger (1991)
after considering four air pollutants (suspended particulate matter,
sulfur dioxide, oxides of nitrogen and carbon monoxide) and per capita
GDP1 relationship. 
The EKC literature is associated with several criticisms (see Stern,
2004.  Kijima Name, 2010.  Kaika and Zervas, 2013 for EKC survey). 
Criticisms of the EKC have centered among others on poor econometric
applications, limited single country studies using long historical
time series data, lack of theoretical insights/foundation, neglect of
leakage of dirty production from developed to developing countries
(e. g.  Stern, 2002.  Dinda, 2004).  However, this paper focuses on only
one but important incipient criticism.  It relates to biased and inconsistent EKC estimates arising from model misspeciﬁcation due to omission
of spatial interaction effects in emissions data if signiﬁcantly present
(e. g.  Rupasingha Name, 2004.  Maddison, 2006.  Burnett Name, 2013a,
2013b.  Aklin, 2016).  Failure to capture spatial interactions in the data,
if signiﬁcantly present, might bias the estimated results which might
affect policy inferences. 
It is in regard to this criticism and the need for a detailed within
country study that this paper derives its motivation.  Utilizing
advances in geographic information systems (GIS) and spatial
econometrics in applied settings, we model the pollution-income relationship for the following emissions.  carbon dioxide (CO2), sulfur
dioxide (SO2), nitrogen oxides (NOX), carbon monoxide (CO), particulate matter (PM2. 5 and PM10) and total suspended particulates
(TSP).  Even though selection of these emissions is not guided by
any formal criteria, we have reason to believe their importance in
the Swedish environmental policy/code is not in doubt.  CO2 emissions continue to be one of the major components of greenhouse
gases (GHGs) locally and globally which contributes signiﬁcantly to
climate change.  In Sweden, CO2 emissions are based on use of
different classes of fossil fuels such as coal, gas, and oil products. 
Emissions from transportation are considered a major source of concern in Sweden.  The other pollutants are also important sources driving air quality in Sweden and feature prominently in all reports of the
Swedish Environmental Protection Agency and other environmental
agencies (see e. g.  Gustafsson and Kindbom, 2014.  SEPA, 2016).  SO2
emissions from road trafﬁc, shipping and heating from industrial and
other sources are still a major concern even though emission levels
have been reducing in the last two decades or so.  Indeed particulates,
CO and the other emissions have been established to impact adversely
on human health, mortality and related effects besides generally worsening air quality in a particular area (e. g.  Henschel Name, 2013.  Caiazzo
Name, 2013). 
Guided by the spatial nature of emissions, we tested for spatial
effects and estimated a spatial Durbin model (SDM) to capture this
potential spillover in order to correctly analyze the EKC for the
selected emissions.  Spatial effects could operate in our setting
through many channels.  Spatial correlation could occur because
neighbouring municipalities might share similar economic/business
activities, pollution cycles and some meteorological (natural) attributes such as direction and average speed of the wind, precipitation,
relative atmospheric humidity, transportation and spatially correlated unobservables (or omitted variables) that drive pollution levels. 
Other channels could arise through strategic interaction between
municipalities' emissions targets (policy), cooperation in air quality
monitoring and control, transportation linkages among others. 
While some of these variables are difﬁcult to measure and were not
available to us, we believe, and it has been shown in the literature,
that air pollution levels are likely to be spatially correlated.  We
fully utilize the potential beneﬁts from an empirical model speciﬁcation that is able to capture the impact of emission levels not only in
adjacent municipalities on own emissions but also how spillover in
economic activities could affect neighbouring pollution levels.  The
modelling is undertaken in all 290 municipalities for the period
2005–2013.  We ﬁnd evidence in support of the EKC for CO2, SO2,
NOX, PM2. 5, PM10, TSP and potentially CO in the presence of signiﬁcant spatial spillovers. 
Our contribution to the literature is twofold.  First, we contribute
to the relatively small but growing EKC in-country literature for several emissions from a spatial perspective.  Secondly, ﬁndings hold
promise for public policy coordination considerations as far as pollution control in Sweden is concerned.  Understanding the dynamics of
geographical distribution of emission sources can effectively aid mitigation policies as well as inﬂuencing economic activities (Zhao Name,The remainder of the paper proceeds according to the following
structure.  Section 2 discusses related literature.  Details of the
empirical spatial econometric models as well as data issues
are covered in Section 3.  Section 4 presents the empirics and discussion of the results.  We conclude in Section 5 with some brief
remarks. 
2.  Related literature. 
In this section, a brief survey of the EKC literature as it relates to this
paper is undertaken.  Following the initial inﬂuential work by Grossman
and Krueger (1991, 1993, 1995) and Selden and Song (1994), studies on
the pollution-income nexus have grown substantially.  Many studies
since these seminal papers have modelled the EKC hypothesis by
regressing either air or water quality on income per capita (e. g.  Stern
and Common, 2001.  Stern, 2002).  Other papers have motivated
inclusion of covariates beside income to avert the omitted variable
bias problem associated with some studies.  Variables such as population
density, social capital (e. g.  trust), average years of education, income
inequality among other demographic, economic and related variables
have been controlled for (see e. g.  Selden and Song, 1994.  Grossman
and Krueger, 1995.  Carson Name, 1997). 
Grossman and Krueger (1995) failed to ﬁnd evidence to the effect
that environmental quality decreases steadily with economic
growth.  The new evidence was that economic growth induces an initial environmental deterioration followed by a subsequent phase of
improvement.  They ﬁnd the turning points for most pollutants in
their study to be US$8000 per capita income.  Millimet Name (2003)
on the other hand considered both the standard parametric framework as well as a ﬂexible semi-parametric alternative to test for
the EKC hypothesis for U. S.  state-level SO2 and NOx.  They ﬁnd overwhelming evidence to reject the parametric approach.  Paudel Name
(2005) also estimated parametric and semi-parametric models to
test the EKC for Louisiana in the U. S.  The parametric model showed
turning points within $10,241–$12,993, $6636–$13,877 and
$6467–$12,758 for nitrogen (N), phosphorous (P) and dissolved oxygen (DO), respectively. 
Lindmark (2002) emphasized the need for further studies of the
EKC from a historical perspective and consideration of the EKC
framework as a special case of structural analyses for Sweden.  Similar theme and approach runs through the few Swedish studies on the
EKC for CO2 and SO2 (Kriström, 2000.  Kander and Lindmark, 2004. 
Kriström and Lundgren, 2005.  Johansson and Kriström, 2007).  Giving further impetus to the income distribution argument in the
EKC, Brännlund and Ghalwash (2008) on the other hand analyzed
the pollution and income nexus at the Swedish household level
for CO2, SO2 and NOX.  All the Swedish cases pointed toward a
conﬁrmation of the EKC hypothesis for the emissions considered. 
Given the aggregated time series nature and focus of the above studies, there was no possibility to consider spatial effects in their
estimations. 
Despite exponential growth in the EKC literature, there is no uniform
consensus from the empirics to conﬁrm the EKC stylized facts, at
least for some emissions indicators.  Perman and Stern (2003) tested
the EKC hypothesis on a panel data for sulfur emissions and GDP
for 74 countries.  They ﬁnd sulfur emissions to be a convex function
of income, casting doubt on the general applicability of the hypothesized nexus.  The conclusion was that the EKC is quite a problematic
concept, at least for sulfur emissions. 2 Copeland and Taylor's (2004)
statement summarizes the difﬁculties associated with the general
applicability of the EKC, “…our review of both the theoretical and empirical literature work on the EKC leads us to be skeptical about the existence
of a simple and predictable relationship between pollution and per capita
income”. 
Finally, the growing recognition of modelling the EKC for different
emissions in both spatial and temporal contexts has led to the growth
in a new strand of empirical work, at least over the last decade.  These
studies typically look for and analyze spatial patterns or clusters in
pollution data using GIS and spatial statistical tools.  Consequently, the
EKC is then estimated via spatial error (SEM), spatial lag (SAR), spatial
simultaneous autoregressive (SAC/SARAR) or spatial Durbin (SDM)
models using cross-sectional or panel data.  The idea of the spatial
modelling framework is to relax the assumption of independence
between cross-sections/geographic units (e. g.  locations) often invoked
in non-spatial econometric models.  Rupasingha Name (2004) and
Maddison (2006) were among a few to have motivated a shift from
traditional EKC models to include spatial extensions.  They found
signiﬁcant spatial correlation exist in many pollutants thus casting
doubt on the reliability of non-spatial estimates.  Since these evidences,
subsequent analysts have become more careful to at least test for spatial
effects and modelled pollutants using variant spatial econometric
models if signiﬁcant effects are found (see Burnett Name, 2013a,
2013b.  Georgiev and Mihaylov, 2015.  Hao Name, 2016.  Liu Name,
2017).  Among more recent studies, Aklin (2016) examined the
pollution (CO2 emissions) diffusion and trade nexus using a global
database.  The pollution haven hypothesis was then tested with
an EKC speciﬁcation where spatial effects was found to signiﬁcantly
drive this phenomenon.  Our paper is situated within this class of
studies. 
<Middle> Methodology, estimation strategy and data. 
3. 1.  Tests for spatial dependence. 
As a ﬁrst step, we test for spatial autocorrelation in the individual
emissions data.  We apply two tests - the classical global Moran's I3
and Geary's C(Moran, 1948.  Geary, 1954).  The two global measures
of spatial dependence of a series are strongly linked, but the
detection test based on Moran's I statistic is suggested to be more robust and powerful than the Geary's C (Dubé and Legros, 2014). 
Anselin (1995) has shown that Moran's I statistic is more
robust against the form of the spatial weight matrix utilized. 
The tests are global in the sense that it is a spatial dependence measure that describes the overall spatial relationship across all
municipalities. 
Further, we undertake exploratory spatial data analysis (ESDA) to
detect spatial regimes in the emissions data.  Localized version of
Moran's I test for spatial autocorrelation, which measures the extent
to which high and low values are clustered together is utilized.  Unlike
global Moran's I which is a global index representing the entire
geographic area under study, the local indicator of spatial association
(LISA) or local Moran's Ii considers spatial variations in the study areas
locally.  It describes the heterogeneity of spatial association across
different geographic units within the areas under investigation.  We
implement this with the Moran scatterplot (Anselin, 1995, 1996) to
facilitate the detection of spatial clusters in the emissions data.  The
Moran scatter diagram plots the spatial lag of standardized per capita
emissions against the original values.  The values are then distributed
into four quadrants to depict spatial clustering.  The four different
quadrants of the scatterplot correspond to the four types of local spatial
association between a region and its neighbours.  The four quadrants
depict HH clustering (quadrant 1) which means municipalities
with high emissions are associated with neighbours with similar
emission levels (reverse is LL) and LH (quadrant 2) suggests low
emitting municipalities are surrounded by municipalities with high
emissions (reverse is HL).  Quadrants HH and LL indicates positive
spatial autocorrelation whereas LH and HL show negative spatial
autocorrelation. 
Finally, we use cluster and signiﬁcance maps to depict the local
Moran's Ii for detection of spatial clustering and hot spots (Gertis-Ord
∗) in all emissions data.  All these tests are used in order to reach robustconclusion on whether or not spatial modelling of the pollution-income
hypothesis is indeed appropriate. 
3. 2.  Econometric method and estimation strategy. 
Following the conventional approach in the applied spatial
econometric literature, we begin our speciﬁcation with a non-spatial
ordinary least squares (OLS) regression model as our benchmark
(see Elhorst, 2010.  LeSage and Pace, 2009).  We then test the possibility
of extension of the baseline model to include spatial interaction effects. 
The non-spatial benchmark speciﬁcation is given by Eq. 
Using an appropriate spatial weight matrix, Eq.  (1) is subjected to a
classical Lagrange multiplier (LM) (Anselin, 1988) and robust-LM
(RLM) tests4 proposed by Anselin Name (1996).  These tests are conducted on the residuals of the estimated OLS model.  A rejection of the OLS
model in favour of either the spatial lag (SAR) or spatial error (SEM)
models or both would suggest a spatial Durbin model (SDM) should
be estimated (see LeSage and Pace, 2009.  Elhorst, 2010 for more
technical details). 
Eq.  (1) ignores possible spatial dependence in the pollutionincome (EKC) nexus.  However, since the recent literature (e. g. 
Aklin, 2016) have found emissions, income and population/population density among other variables to exhibit signiﬁcant spatial dependence, we extend Eq.  (1) to include spatial interaction effects
speciﬁed, where y5 is an n × 1 vector of dependent variables (lnCO2pc, lnSO2pc,
lnNOxpc, lnCOpc, lnPM2. 5pc, lnPM10pc, lnTSPpc) for each unit of the
sample i = 1, …n, ιn is an n × K vector of ones for the constant term
parameter α, β and θ are a K × 1 vector of parameters associated
with the N × K matrix of explanatory variables X (i.  e.  lnIncomepc,
(lnIncomepc)2 and lnPopdens) and the spatially explicit counterparts. 
ln is the natural logarithmic operator and the variables lncrpc and
Popdens denote real income per capita (and its squared term) and
population density, respectively.  The variables ρ and λ denote the
spatial autoregressive (or lag) and spatial autocorrelation coefﬁcients, respectively.  while Wy and WX represents the endogenous
and exogenous spatial interaction effects among the outcome and
explanatory variables, respectively.  The disturbance terms are denoted by the vector ε = (ε1, …, εn)T where εi is assumed to be independently and identically distributed (i. i. d. ) for all i with mean zero
and variance σ 2. 
The variable W is an n× n matrix that characterizes the degree
of spatial dependence/connectedness of the spatial units within the
sample.  This matrix has all its diagonal elements equal zero since a
municipality cannot be its own neighbour.  Estimation of Eq.  (2) and
any variants of it requires construction/speciﬁcation of an appropriate
spatial weight matrix.  This is a key step in applied spatial econometrics but the choice/selection of a spatial weight matrix is not guided
by any known economic theory, thus becoming a discretionary (or
arbitrary) decision of the analyst (see Leenders, 2002.  Elhorst,
2010).  The spatial weight matrix, W, in its simplest form is deﬁned
as a ﬁrst-order contiguity matrix consisting of zeros along the principal diagonal (since a municipality cannot be its own neighbour) and
elements wij elsewhere, where wij = 1 if i and j are neighbours and
wij = 0 otherwise.  An alternative speciﬁcation of the spatial weight
matrix is based on the distance between municipality centroids
(inverse or squared inverse distance) with and without distance
cut-off point.  In this paper, the spatial weight matrix W used in the
main empirical estimations is deﬁned as a k-nearest neighbours of
every municipality in the sample (here 10-nearest neighbours).  In
applied spatial econometric work, the weight is standardized such
that the sum of the elements in each row equals one (i. e.  row standardization).  That is, row standardization ensures that relative, and
not absolute distance, matters (Ezcurra and Rios, 2015).  The worry
expressed by some practitioners that coefﬁcient estimates are sensitive to the choice of spatial weight matrix has been quelled recently
by LeSage and Pace (2014a, 2014b) and described as a myth rather
than reality. 