 1.  Introduction 1. 1.  No Net Loss.  Environmental policies and legislation that incorporate a ‘no net loss’ (NNL) of biodiversity objective have been widely adopted over recent decades (Maron et al. , 2016).  The theoretical assumption underlying all approaches to NNL is that if the negative biodiversity impacts associated with economic development are quantiﬁed, and commensurate biodiversity gains correspondingly achieved through additional conservation interventions, then losses and gains can be summed to demonstrate a neutral net outcome for nature (Bull et al. , 2013a).  Normally, when seeking NNL, it is required that the impacts predicted to occur as a result of a given development project are mitigated through a sequential ‘mitigation hierarchy’ of preferred measures.  A widespread framing of the mitigation hierarchy is ‘avoid, minimize, remediate, offset’ i. e.  predicted impacts are ﬁrst avoided or minimized wherever possible, then remediated immediately if they are only temporary, and ﬁnally, all residual predicted impacts are compensated for through biodiversity offsets (Gardner et al. , 2013.  Bull et al. , 2016).  The most controversial component of the mitigation hierarchy is biodiversity offsetting (Apostolopoulou and Adams, 2017.  Maron et al. , 2016).  Biodiversity offsets (henceforth, offsets) involve the implementation of conservation actions, such as habitat creation, that provide quantiﬁed biodiversity gains which would not have been achieved otherwise – thereby fully and demonstrably compensating for any unavoidable impacts from the associated development project.  Out of this simple premise, a large body of theoretical literature has emerged, detailing what form and magnitude the biodiversity gains that constitute offsets must take in order to ensure that the overarching NNL objective is met (Calvet et al. , 2015).  Widely held theoretical principles of good practice for biodiversity offsetting include that.  offset gains should be realised in close proximity to development losses (Pilgrim et al. , 2013).  gains must be larger than losses by some factor, to account for restoration uncertainties and other considerations (Moilanen et al. , 2009).  and, NNL should be explicitly calculated against some counterfactual capturing background biodiversity trends (Bull et al. , 2014).  The ﬁrst of these principles, the proximity requirement, can also be interpreted as meaning ‘functional’ proximity e. g.  a wetland offset being implemented in the same watershed as the development for which it compensates.  In the case of either spatial or functional proximity, the assumed preference for proximity means that offsets in different countries to the associated development have not widely been countenanced.  Environmental policies involving trade-offs can be difﬁcult to implement if local stakeholders do not view the trades favourably (Daw et al. , 2015).  Furthermore, in addition to technical requirements, the amount of ecological compensation necessary to achieve NNL is thought to require consideration as to what local stakeholders are willing to accept (Bull et al. , 2017).  For both reasons, the potential perception of biodiversity offsets held by laypeople should be an important consideration in NNL policy development.  Survey methods have previously been employed to understand perspectives on the effectiveness of offsetting as a process from those involved in NNL trades (Coggan et al. , 2013.  Vaissière and Levrel, 2015), and to understand perceived offset needs from other local stakeholders (Burton et al. , 2016.  Kermagoret et al. , 2016).  However, to date, there has been no study that determines whether, or to what extent, basic principles underlying NNL are generally intuitive to those with little prior experience of the concept.  Consequently, in this article, we focus upon stated choices for biodiversity compensation requirements from survey participants who are not NNL experts, and compare this with the logic underlying offsetting.  In particular, we are interested in the application of NNL in a trans-boundary conservation context, how much compensation participants consider necessary, and how this amount is inﬂuenced by different background biodiversity trends.  1. 2.  Trans-boundary Biodiversity Conservation.  Nature conservation is always challenging across socio-political boundaries, and interventions must be designed in such a way as to acknowledge differences in societal values (Dallimer and Strange, 2015).  It has been shown that people are generally willing to contribute more towards conservation in their own country than elsewhere (Dallimer et al. , 2015).  That ﬁnding has been replicated for NNL by Burton et al.  (2016), who show that offsets implemented to compensate for development impacts are more acceptable the closer they are to the development site, and can become unacceptable if proposed for implementation in another country.  We should therefore not be surprised if the public is less likely to accept NNL policies when the outcome of the policy is trans-boundary conservation interventions, and indeed, such an idea is controversial (Žydelis et al. , 2009).  But it has been shown that trans-boundary offsets might be necessary to achieve NNL in the case of some highly mobile biodiversity conservation targets e. g.  migratory species (Wilcox and Donlan, 2007.  Bull et al. , 2013b).  Therefore, it is important to clarify whether there are any conditions under which trans-boundary offsets might be considered acceptable, and by1. 3.  Multipliers and Counterfactuals.  A fundamental component of NNL is deciding to what extent ‘multipliers’ are necessary.  Multipliers are factors applied to predicted losses, to determine how large gains must be in order to ensure that NNL is achieved once restoration uncertainties and other technical considerations are accounted for (Pilgrim and Ekstrom, 2014).  Beyond such standard uses, multipliers could feasibly be employed to incorporate social considerations such as human risk aversion into NNL schemes (Bull et al. , 2017).  However, there has been no previous empirical study that surveys people's perceptions as to how large a multiplier they would instinctively deem reasonable.  Accounting purely for ecological considerations and time preferences, it is considered that achieving NNL always requires multipliers to be greater than or equal to unity, and often in the tens or hundreds (Moilanen et al. , 2009.  Overton et al. , 2012.  Laitila et al. , 2014).  Achieving NNL also requires an understanding of the background biodiversity trends in the policy region, as these then act as one counterfactual against which any losses and gains can be evaluated.  That is to say, biodiversity gains realised under NNL policy do not necessarily have to be absolute gains, but rather, gains against what would have happened in the absence of the NNL policy (Ferraro and Pattanayak, 2006.  Bull et al. , 2014.  Maron et al. , 2015).  So, if the background biodiversity trend providing the counterfactual for evaluation is one of decline, then a smaller absolute conservation gain can be considered to have achieved NNL than the case in which the trend is for stability (so-called ‘averted losses’.  Maron et al. , 2015).  Counterfactuals are not a straightforward concept, and no one has yet explored how the layperson might vary their stated compensation requirements under different counterfactual biodiversity change scenarios.  1. 4.  Non-expert Perception of No Net Loss.  Here, we use the results of an international study conducted across three countries (Denmark, Ghana, and Spain) to explore perceptions of what might constitute NNL on the part of certain ‘non-experts’.  We consider an NNL expert to be someone who has either published peerreviewed literature on NNL, or who has speciﬁcally worked on delivering NNL projects on the ground.  Anyone else, including experienced or even highly educated ecologists, is unlikely to have much technical understanding of delivering NNL.  Since our survey respondent group was almost entirely undergraduate students (see Sections 2, 3), we assume likely to have included very few, if any, NNL experts.  Consequently, we did not expect participants to consider compensation requirements for NNL on technical grounds.  Rather, the survey was employed to elicit stated choices as to the amount of ecological gains considered appropriate to compensate for development impacts (from which we could calculate the implicit multiplier), where these should be implemented, and the inﬂuence upon offset requirements of different background habitat trends (i. e.  counterfactual scenarios).  In the survey itself, we made no mention of the phrases “biodiversity offset” or “no net loss” to avoid priming participants, as such phrases can be highly loaded (e. g.  Apostolopoulou and Adams, 2017.  Bull et al. , 2016).  The survey left open to participants the possibility of proposing offsets in different countries, allowing us to consider whether and when trans-boundary offsets might be deemed reasonable.  The main scenarios investigated were those in which losses and gains were achieved in terms of forest cover (an important habitat for nature conservation activities).  We also included a scenario in which forest creation could provide incidental beneﬁts for a migratory bird species, allowing us to consider how conservation preferences might change if offset gains explicitly beneﬁtted more than one component of biodiversity and therefore had greater conservation value.  Finally, we link the elicited conservation offsets to preferences of risk, trust, collaboration, and other beliefs of the participants about the other countries named in the survey.  Given the context discussed throughout Section 1, our hypotheses are that.  1.  Participants will on average overwhelmingly prefer compensation (in the form of absolute area of proposed forest creation) in their own country, rather than abroad.  2.  Proposed multipliers, constituting an average gain. loss ratio in forest area, will be equal to or greater than unity, for losses and gains within the participant's own country.  3.  Participants will require equal or less compensation if the background trend in forest habitat cover trend is one of decline, than if it is stable or increasing.  and, 4.  Participants will require less compensation if forest creation provide incidental beneﬁts for other components of biodiversity.  <Middle> Materials and Methods.  2. 1.  Survey Methodology.  We designed and implemented a survey simultaneously at universities in Denmark, Spain and Ghana, as part of a broader series of economic experiments conducted in these countries from April to May 2016.  The inclusion of these three countries in our study was arbitrary and based upon the availability of experimental resources, rather than due to the countries having any speciﬁc type of NNL policy framework.  Although Denmark and Spain are covered by European Directives featuring an NNL objective, none of the three countries are considered to have well-established offset policies (Maron et al. , 2016).  This was beneﬁcial from our perspective.  our focus here was not upon the ﬁner details of NNL legislation, but upon general perceptions of what constitutes sufﬁcient biodiversity compensation from respondents with little prior experience of NNL policy.  Survey participants in Denmark and Spain were recruited at random using the ORSEE software (a web-based online recruitment system, containing a database of students voluntarily willing to participate in economic experiments and surveys.  Greiner, 2015) whilst voluntary participants in Ghana were recruited using ﬂyers and in-class advertisements.  All survey participants signed a consent form (Appendix A).  These experiments were conducted at the University of Copenhagen (Denmark), Pompeu Fabra University (Spain), and the University of Ghana (Ghana).  All participants were undergraduate students from these universities, and they were all national citizens of the country for which they were answering the survey.  Whilst the use of student respondents in economic experiments could feasibly deliver ﬁndings that generally representative (Exadaktylos et al. , 2013), we consider our results here to relate to students as a subset of NNL non-experts only.  The survey questionnaire was originally written in English, translated to Danish and Spanish and then retranslated back to English, as is standard (Buchan et al. , 2002).  Anonymity for each survey participant is ensured.  names were not collected, and participants were known only by Subject ID numbers.  When answering the survey, participants in Denmark and Spain were divided by a partition, whilst participants in Ghana sat with two seats between them.  Individuals conducting the surveys were nationals of the country they were assigned to, but all were trained in survey protocols together in Denmark.  In total, we conducted 20 survey sessions in each country.  Each survey session had 12 participants each.  The relevant components of the survey forms were not completed by 7 participants in Denmark, by 5 participants in Spain, and by 17 participants in Ghana.  One limitation of our method was that a speciﬁc opt-out question was not included, although those who did not complete our survey were assumed to have opted out.  This left a total of 691 (of a maximum possible 720) survey participants who did not opt out.  233 from Denmark, 235 from Spain and 223 fromThe survey was composed of demographic questions (Appendix A), questions on beliefs and perceptions (Appendix B), and a stated preference survey to elicit respondent preferences for biodiversity offset requirements given a development scenario under NNL policy (Appendix C).  In the questionnaire for beliefs and perceptions, we solicited participant beliefs regarding themselves, individuals with nationalities similar to theirs, and individuals with nationalities different to theirs.  We measured risk, like/dislike, trust, cooperativeness, care for nature, desire for environmental conservation, desire to protect the habitat of migratory birds, wealth, and whether others care for the participant and the participant's country.  All metrics were measured on a Likert Scale, from 1 to 10 for individual risk preferences and from 1 to 4 for everything else.  2. 2.  Scenarios.  We outlined a hypothetical scenario in which a road development was planned, involving the clearance of 100 ha of existing forest in the participants' own country.  We then asked what area of biodiversity compensation (in this case, the creation of a new area of forest) participants would consider reasonable, as compensation for the impacts of the road.  There was no constraint upon in which of the three countries the compensatory forest could be planted, nor upon how large an area of compensation could be selected.  Whilst, as discussed, we avoided priming the participants with controversial phrases such as “biodiversity offset”, we did specify that developers were required to plant at least 100 ha of new forest, ensuring that the survey implied an overall NNL objective.  This same question was asked to each respondent for four different scenarios.  In the ﬁrst, forest habitat in all countries was considered stable in condition over time.  In the second scenario, forest cover was decreasing in the participant's own country, and stable or increasing in the other two countries.  The third scenario reﬂected the actual situation in the three countries with regards to current trends in forest cover (increasing in Denmark and Spain, decreasing in Ghana).  Finally, we asked participants to respond to the ﬁrst scenario again, but this time they were told that blackcap Sylvia atricapilla populations would also be impacted by the development, and beneﬁts to blackcaps would be larger (per hectare of new forest created) in Africa than in Europe.  Blackcaps were chosen for the study despite being of low conservation concern, because they met our criteria of being.  migratory birds.  present across all three countries.  and, dependent upon forest habitat.  The proposed scenario that the beneﬁts of conservation action for blackcaps would be larger in Africa than Europe was purely hypothetical, but participants were not informed that this was the case.  The four scenarios are summarized below.  Scenario 1.  forest cover stable in all three countries.  Scenario 2.  forest cover decreasing in the participant's country, but stable or increasing in the other two countries.  Scenario 3.  forest cover increasing in Denmark and Spain, decreasing in Ghana.  Scenario 4.  as for Scenario 1.  In addition, blackcap populations would beneﬁt more from forest creation in Ghana than in Spain and Denmark.  Scenario 1 was used to test Hypotheses 1 and 2, Scenarios 2 and 3 were used to test Hypothesis 3, and Scenario 4 was used to test Hypothesis 4 (see Section 1).  2. 3.  Test Statistics.  We analysed all data using two standard data analysis techniques.  Student's t-test and ordinary least squares (OLS) regression (note that throughout Section 2. 3, we draw from Wooldridge, 2002.  Moffat, 2016).  The Student's t-test is a commonly used technique for testing a hypothesis concerning the difference between sample means.  It determines a probability that two populations are the same with respect to the variable being tested.  In our case, ‘populations’ are countries of origin, and the test variable is the amount of reforestation an individual required to offset forest loss.  Our data satisfy the assumptions underlying the Student's t-test.  (1) the scale is continuous and ordinal.  (2) data were collected from a randomly selected portion of the student population in the surveyed universities.  (3) by the central limit theorem and given that the sample sizes in each our three countries are N50, our means approach a normal distribution regardless of the distribution of the population.  and, (4) our dataset is reasonably large, containing 200+ observations per population.  We ran the OLS regression in order to identify the magnitude and direction of the above effect, and determine whether this remained consistent when controlling for possibly confounding socio-demographic factors.  An OLS regression describes the linear relationship between the dependent variable (hectares of forest) and the independent variable (country of origin).  Whilst the only assumption needed to obtain an estimator in OLS regression is (1) for explanatory variables not to be perfectly collinear with one another, there are four other assumptions that make the OLS estimator the best linear unbiased estimator.  (2) linearity in parameters.  (3) random sampling of observations.  (4) conditional mean is zero.  and, (5) homoskedasticity.  Our data satisfy all 5 assumptions.  None of our dependent variables are perfectly collinear with our independent variables.  If they were, our coefﬁcient would be 1 and we would not have been able to derive standard errors and pvalues.  Since we thought it likely that our errors were heteroskedastic given the sample size, we used robust standard errors.  3.  Results.  All survey participants were at least 18 years of age at the time of the survey.  Average participant age in Denmark was 24 (max = 53).  average participant age in Spain was 21 (max = 56).  and average participant age in Ghana was 22, (max = 29).  46%, 34% and 73% of our participants in Denmark, Spain and Ghana, respectively, were males.  Most participants were unmarried, with no children.  Risk aversion can be linked to the desire for nature conservation (Hummel et al. , 2009) and rejection of offsetting (Bull et al. , 2017), so we noted propensity for risk-taking among participants.  On average, we found that participants in Ghana were more willing to take risks compared to participants in Denmark and Spain, and this level of risktaking was correlated with their desire to conserve the environment.  We also found a statistically signiﬁcant bias for participants liking individuals from their own nationalities, believing that individuals from their own nationality were more cooperative, and that individuals from their own nationality were less likely to protect the habitats of migratory birds.  Interestingly, only 25. 8% of Danes, but 56. 6% of Spaniards, and 46. 6% of Ghanaians thought that Danes cared more for nature.  Spanish participants trusted Danes the most, whilst the other two nationalities trusted individuals from their own nationalities more.  We included questions on perception of national wealth, since we considered it likely that perceived relative national wealth would strongly inﬂuence a participant's likelihood to support nature conservation activities in another country.  Perceptions of wealth corresponded to each country's per capita gross domestic product.  Danes believed that they are wealthier than Spaniards and Ghanaians.  Spaniards and Ghanaians believed that the Danes are wealthier than them.  Both Spaniards and Ghanaians also believed that Spaniards were wealthier than Ghanaians.  These perceptions of wealth were statistically signiﬁcant.  A summary of these statistics can be found in Appendix E.  3. 1.  Patriotic Conservation.  Under Scenario 1, participants on average required the greatest area of forest creation in their own country, as a biodiversity offset for the hypothetical road development (Table 1).  This preference for seemingly patriotic conservation was statistically signiﬁcant.  Columns (1), (3) and (5) of Table 2 show that Danish participants tended to allocate 34–40 ha more forest creation in Denmark compared to Spain and Ghana, Spanish participants tended to allocate 24 ha more of forest creation in Spain compared to Denmark and Ghana, and Ghanaian participants tended to allocate 95 ha more of forest creation in Ghana compared to Denmark and Spain.  Even after controlling for gender, risk preferences, and perceptions of trust, cooperativeness, care for nature and migratory birds, and wealth, we consistently found these results, with higher magnitudes for Denmark and Spain and lower magnitude for Ghana (see Columns (2), (4) and (6) of Table 2).  However, participants proposed a substantial proportion of the overall compensation they proposed in other countries – which suggests that, whilst there is clear evidence of patriotic conservation, we can reject Hypothesis 1 (Section 1).  3. 2.  Size of Implied Multipliers.  Unexpectedly, participants in Denmark and Spain required b100 ha of forest to be planted on average in their own respective country i. e.  an implicit national multiplier b 1. 0 (Table 1).  This was not the case for Ghanaian participants, who required almost twice the area of forest to be recreated in Ghana alone.  As such, we can reject Hypothesis 2 for Danish and Spanish participants, but not Ghanaian participants.  Moving on to total compensation for the road development summed across all three countries, the average response in all three countries was always to require N100 ha of forest (as suggested by the survey guidelines), i. e.  on average, participants implicitly required a NNL multiplier N 1. 0 to be applied to development losses (t-test.  Denmark, p b 0. 001.  Spain, p b 0. 0001.  Ghana, p b 0. 0001).  The multipliers varied by country and by Scenario (Table 3).  Participants in Denmark required signiﬁcantly more forest creation across all countries if forest cover in Denmark was declining (Scenarios 1 and 2), but not if cover was declining elsewhere (Scenario 3).  They also required signiﬁcantly more forest creation if it had co-beneﬁts for blackcaps (Scenario 4).  Participants in Ghana required the greatest area of forest creation, although with almost no signiﬁcant variation between scenarios (Scenarios 1, 2 and 4).  Curiously, although Scenarios 2 and 3 were identical from the Ghanaian participant's perspective, in Scenario 3 participants in Ghana required a signiﬁcantly smaller multiplier overall.  The Spanish participants were the most consistent, requiring significantly more forest creation when forest area was declining at home or abroad (Scenarios 2 and 3) and when there were co-beneﬁts for blackcaps (Scenario 4), compared to the base case (Scenario 1).  3. 3.  Compensation Requirements Against Different Counterfactuals.  In all three countries, participants required a greater area of forest creation on average as offsets for road development in their own country under Scenario 2 than under Scenario 1.  That is, if forest in their own country was declining (it was clearly speciﬁed that forest cover “will disappear within a few decades” in the participants' country), the participants considered the compensation requirement to be greater.  Table 2 shows regressions results for Scenario 2.  In Columns (7), (9) and (11), we see statistically signiﬁcant effects for own-country allocations.  In Denmark, the marginal effect was 116. 69 ha.  in Spain, the marginal effect was 95. 32 ha.  and in Ghana, the marginal effect was 88. 92 ha.  All three coefﬁcients were higher than the coefﬁcients for the same variable under Scenario 1.  Participants in Spain reacted particularly strongly to the change in background trend.  In fact, when we ran t-tests on own-country contributions between Scenario 1 and 2, we found that own-country contributions in Scenario 2 were statistically signiﬁcantly higher for Denmark and Spain (Denmark, p b 0. 0001.  Spain, p b 0. 0001.  Ghana, p = 0. 4768).  Under Scenario 3, in which background trends in Denmark and Spain were for forest cover to be increasing, participants in those countries correspondingly chose a smaller area of forest creation in their own country (Fig.  1).  In fact, Columns (15) and (16) of Table 2 show that although own-country allocation in Spain remains positive, it was no longer statistically signiﬁcant.  Allocations to Ghana, which had been statistically insigniﬁcant or signiﬁcantly lower for our Danish and Spanish population in Scenarios 1 and 2, had now become higher and statistically signiﬁcant.  In Ghana, there was no signiﬁcant difference concerning the area of forest creation considered necessary in Ghana itself between Scenario 1 and 2 (t-Test.  Scenario 1 N Scenario 2, p = 0. 5232.  Scenario 1 b Scenario 2, p = 0. 4768), but much closer agreement among Ghanaian participants on requirements for Scenario 2 (i. e.  a lower standard error).  However, under Scenario 3, the Ghanaians proposed signiﬁcantly less forest compensation within Ghana (where forest cover was decreasing) and signiﬁcantly more in Denmark and Spain (where cover was increasing) (Fig.  1).  In Ghana, the area of forest creation considered necessary in Ghana itself was higher in Scenario 2 than in Scenario 3 (t-Test.  p = 0. 0583).  Ghanaians also allocated less forest in Scenario 3 compared to Scenario 2 in both Denmark and Spain.  This decrease was statistically signiﬁcant for Denmark (t-Test.  p = 0. 0239) but not for Spain (t-Test.  p = 0. 2022).  In combination, these results suggest that we can reject Hypothesis 3 for Denmark and Ghana, but not necessarily for Spain.  3. 4.  Co-beneﬁts for Blackcaps.  Under Scenario 4, where the beneﬁts to blackcap populations from new forests were said to be greater in Africa than Europe (Appendix A), the focus upon blackcaps in Ghana results in responses similar to those under Scenario 3 (Fig.  1).  All countries allocate forest compensation in Ghana, but to a lesser degree than the marginal allocations in Scenario 3.  The Danish average allocation to Ghana of 97. 8 ha of forest under Scenario 3 decreased to 82. 5 ha under Scenario 4 (t-Test.  p = 0. 0907).  We saw a similar trend for Spain.  Average forest allocation to Ghana declined from 147. 6 ha in Scenario 3 to 120. 3 ha in Scenario 4 (t-Test.  p = 0. 0710).  In Ghana, average own-country allocation increased from an average of 159. 7 ha to 165. 2 ha.  This increase was not statistically signiﬁcantly different, but allows us to reject Hypothesis 4.  <Conclusion> Discussion.  4. 1.  Multiplier Values Implied by Participants.  Theoretical development of multipliers necessary to achieve NNL ﬁnd that multipliers in the tens or hundreds might be necessary to achieve NNL on development projects (Moilanen et al. , 2009.  Laitila et al. , 2014).  More recently, it has been proposed that these analyses do not allow for multipliers that incorporate sufﬁcient social or ethical considerations, which would result in multipliers being even larger (Bull et al. , 2017).  At the same time, there is evidence that multipliers are rarely larger than ten in practice (Gibbons et al. , 2015.  Bull et al. , 2017).  Here, we effectively showed that participants would implicitly deem overall multipliers between one and four to be reasonable, on average (Table 1).  These multipliers were sometimes constituted of multipliers less than one in their own country (i. e.  the country in which the development itself occurred).  The effective national multiplier varied widely across countries, as those in Ghana required almost twice as much forest to be created by way of compensation (implicitly, offsets) within their own country than the area removed for development (i. e.  a multiplier approaching two).  It had been expected that a multiplier equal to unity or greater would be required for forest creation within country, by most participants.  We do not consider our ﬁndings to suggest that small multipliers are generally acceptable.  Again, since participants had not speciﬁcally been trained in NNL policies, they would not be expected to consider compensation requirements for NNL on technical grounds (e. g.  Moilanen et al. , 2009), and the multipliers implied here are likely more related to social considerations (Bull et al. , 2017).  Rather, the ﬁndings should provide a note of caution.  When low multipliers are deemed reasonable by untrained stakeholders, then there may be little resistance to the size of proposed compensation dropping that low during the planning negotiation process, even if technical considerations necessitate larger multipliers for NNL.  If such concerns had been articulated to respondents, higher multipliers may well have been speciﬁed.  Multipliers were generally higher (i. e.  more forest creation was proposed) for both Danish and Spanish participants when forest creation would have co-beneﬁts for blackcap populations, than the multipliers implied in the base case (Scenario 1).  Existing NNL theory might suggest that if the conservation value of gains were higher than losses, due to multiple beneﬁts, then less forest creation would be required to deliver NNL.  However, this ﬁnding suggests that those participants required more forest creation.  Whilst the latter is logical from the perspective of seeking nature conservation gains, it is not logical from the perspective of compensating for negative impacts (the objective of NNL policy).  NNL policy principles apparently do not necessarily entirely map onto stakeholder intuition regarding necessary compensation for impacts.  4. 2.  Biodiversity Offset Requirements Against Different Counterfactuals Knowledge of background trends signiﬁcantly inﬂuences perceptions of the amount of compensation required under NNL trades.  This ﬁnding provides additional empirical justiﬁcation for counterfactuals to be better integrated into the development of NNL policy, echoing previous calls in the literature (Gordon et al. , 2011.  Bull et al. , 2014.  Maron et al. , 2015).  Participants tended to be supportive of forest conservation (Appendix D), and their responses here suggest they would be willing to accept at least some offsetting into other countries.  Under these assumptions, if forest cover in a participant's own country were declining, and it was known that the forest would disappear in the near future (Scenario 2), then it would have arguably been logical to propose more compensation in other countries (where forests were safeguarded) than at home, as per our hypotheses.  Otherwise, biodiversity compensation might have no positive outcomes in the long term.  However, this is not what was seen in the results for Denmark, Spain and Ghana.  Instead, all three groups of participants chose substantially more compensation within their own country when it was disappearing.  Equally, if forest cover in participants' countries were stable or increasing (as was the case for Denmark and Spain, under Scenario 3), then one might logically expect a greater proportion of forest creation efforts to be directed within their own country than in Scenario 1, as those created forests would, again, be better safeguarded.  But participants required the opposite i. e.  less forest creation in their own country as compared to Scenario 1.  Furthermore, participants reacted less strongly (in terms of the change in proposed forest creation) if forest cover in their own country was increasing than if it was decreasing.  It is not immediately clear why people who support nature conservation would want to create more of a declining habitat that was going to disappear in any case, than if it was stable.  There are at least two plausible explanations.  (i) participants did not take the logical step (which we did not mention when outlining the hypothetical scenarios in the survey) that planting more forest might be futile if all forest was disappearing in that country.  and (ii) nature conservation is judged in terms of relative actions based upon trends of loss and gain, rather than in terms of absolute outcomes.  In the case of explanation (i), this would suggest in turn that people understand the importance of counterfactuals as we have shown, but do not necessarily intuitively grasp the conservation implications.  In the case of explanation (ii), this would be consistent with conservation being seen as a product of risk aversion (e. g.  Hummel et al. , 2009), and that people weight biodiversity losses more highly than gains (Bull and Maron, 2016).  This explanation would potentially also offer a new perspective upon ‘shifting baseline syndrome’ (Pauly, 1995.  Papworth et al. , 2009).  that is, if conservation outcomes are judged relative to an individual's personal baseline, it may not matter to them how much information they have about wider absolute trends.  These two explanations are not necessarily exclusive, but further research would be needed to establish whether either was valid here.  Nonetheless, the fact that NNL policy logic (with regards to compensation requirements under different counterfactual scenarios) is at odds with the compensation needs under those scenarios as perceived by participants, similarly to the point concerning multipliers, suggests that the rationale behind NNL policy is not entirely intuitive.  Either way, there are potentially deep implications for the way NNL trades are designed.  4. 3.  Trans-boundary Trades in Biodiversity.  The results support ﬁndings in the existing literature that people exhibit a degree of patriotism when it comes to biodiversity compensation, and are more likely to seek investment in conservation in their own country than in others (Dallimer et al. , 2015.  Burton et al. , 2016).  This ﬁnding is not novel, but the fact that it agrees with previous ﬁndings in the literature provides some conﬁdence in relation to the more unexpected results obtained during our survey.  For instance, there have been almost no suggestions in the literature that NNL policies could enable trade of biodiversity losses and gains across international borders, with the possible exception of measures related to highly mobile or migratory species (Wilcox and Donlan, 2007.  Bull et al. , 2013b).  Indeed, it is often assumed by policymakers that this would be deemed unpalatable.  Conversely, our participants readily proposed compensation in other countries, even when not proposing sufﬁcient compensation to fully replace the forest habitat lost in their own (Table 1.  Fig.  1).  This ﬁnding does not necessarily suggest that international trades in biodiversity can be deemed acceptable, especially when others have found the opposite (Burton et al. , 2016).  rather, it suggests that policymakers should not assume international trades to be out of the question.  In the only comparable study in the literature, Burton et al.  (2016) conversely found that their survey participants were generally unwilling to countenance offsets abroad.  The crucial difference in our study is perhaps that forest creation in other countries was proposed alongside compensation nationally, meaning the offset was a mixture of national and international conservation activities (‘direct’ and ‘indirect’, respectively, to follow NNL terminology used by Burton et al. , 2016).  This discrepancy in ﬁndings could be due to other factors too.  for instance, we allowed participants to propose compensation measures themselves with no constraints, and we did not use the term ‘offset’ (which can be a strongly value-laden term.  e. g.  Apostolopoulou and Adams, 2017).  Finally, again, participants proposed substantially more forest creation abroad if doing so would also result in beneﬁts for blackcaps.  Note that we did not specify in the survey whether those populations of blackcaps beneﬁtting in Ghana were the same as those migrating back into Europe.  This ﬁnding, building upon research which has shown that public stakeholders are variously supportive of offsetting dependent upon the type of biodiversity gains (Kermagoret et al. , 2016), presents another condition under which stakeholders might consider trans-jurisdictional biodiversity trades acceptable under NNL policy.  Previously, the idea of trading species or species habitat losses for far distant commensurate gains (e. g. 