
In a number of developing countries, biogas has been promoted as a
renewable, cleaner and cheaper energy source, especially for cooking, as
compared to alternatives such as ﬁrewood and kerosene.  For instance,
countries such as China and India have a long history of promoting biogas.  However, it is only in the last twenty ﬁve years that household
level biogas programmes, which promote construction of digesters or
tanks which convert organic waste into biogas, have spread across the
globe. 1 According to Rakotojaona (2013), N250,000 digesters have
been installed in Nepal since 1992 and about 125,000 in Vietnam in
2003.  Other Asian countries with household biogas programmes include
Cambodia and Bangladesh which launched their biogas programmes in
2006 and most recently, Pakistan and Indonesia in 2009. 2
In the Indonesian context, while a majority of the population has
access to electricity for lighting, biomass, mainly wood, remains an
important energy source for cooking (see Table 1).  At the national
level, in 2011, for 40% of Indonesian households, ﬁrewood was
their primary cooking fuel, while in East Java, 43% of households
relied mainly on ﬁrewood for cooking and about 52% used liqueﬁed
petroleum gas (LPG).  The substantial use of LPG is relatively new
and is a consequence of the country's large-scale kerosene to LPG
conversion programme (2007–2012) which was motivated by a
desire to reduce the budgetary burden of the kerosene subsidy. 3
Despite the conversion programme and other reforms which have
reduced the subsidy burden, the growth in energy demand
combined with declining domestic production and an increase in
fuel imports continues to ensure that subsidies for oil-based fuels
remain a large burden on the budget (see Asian Development
Bank, 2015; International Institute for Sustainable Development,At the same time as attempting to reduce the subsidy burden
through the conversion programme the government passed a
number of decrees and acts which recognized the importance of
promoting and developing alternative energy sources and technologies, both from an environmental and a budgetary perspective
(see SNV, 2009).  Speciﬁcally, a presidential decree (No. 5/2006) on
National Energy Policy released in January 2006 stated the
government's goal of ensuring security of energy supply by reducing the share of oil-based fuels in the country's energy mix from
51% in 2006 to 20% in 2025, primarily by increasing the share of renewable energy. 
Speciﬁcally with regard to biogas, mainly due to the widespread
availability of ﬁrewood and heavy subsidies for kerosene, its use in
Indonesia has been limited.  However, since 2005, following the
reduction of kerosene subsidies and consistent with the National
Energy Policy of reducing reliance on oil-based fuels, various institutions and organizations began developing activities to disseminate
manure fed biogas digesters.  By the end of 2009, through ﬁfteen
initiatives about 6000 digesters had been installed for domestic
use (SNV, 2009).  To consolidate these scattered efforts and to
boost the spread of biogas, in 2009, the Indonesian government
launched a Household Biogas Program (Programme Biogas Rumah –
BIRU).  The key objective of the programme was to install 8000 digesters by 2012 in rural dairy farming households located in eight
provinces.  The focus of the program was on East Java.  The program
operates through dairy cooperatives and is voluntary.  Dairy farmers
who fulﬁl eligibility conditions such as ownership of at least two
cows and who have an established record of delivering milk to a
cooperative are offered a chance to purchase a digester.  An innovative aspect of the BIRU program is its co-operation with international companies, which makes it easier for dairy farmers to accessSimilar to biogas programs in other countries, the expectation is that
the use of biogas will generate immediate beneﬁts by reducing the use
of traditional fuels and energy-related expenditures, as well as lead to
time-savings due to a reduction in time spent gathering wood. 
Longer-term beneﬁts include enhanced agricultural productivity due
to the use of bio-slurry, a by-product of biogas production which may
be used as a fertiliser,
improvements in indoor air quality and
subsequent health beneﬁts.  Despite these expectations and the large
number of initiatives in a number of Asian and African countries (see
Rakotojaona, 2013; Hessen, 2014), credible evidence on the actual
impacts of such household biogas programs on short-term outcomes
such as use of traditional fuels and energy-related expenditures as
well on longer-term outcomes such as agricultural productivity and
health outcomes is limited.  The bulk of the evidence is based on either
before-after comparisons or single-period comparisons between
households with and without a digester. 
For instance, based on a before-after comparison of a sample of
461 biogas users in Nepal, Katuwal and Bohara (2009) report a
53% reduction in the use of ﬁrewood and an 81% reduction in
the time spent collecting ﬁrewood.  Employing a similar approach
but working with a sample of only 12 users, Garfí Name (2012) report a 50 to 60% reduction in the use of ﬁrewood.  Despite these
effects, the lack of a control group hampers the credibility of the
analysis. 
Alternatively, based on single-period comparisons between 615
biogas users and 740 non-users drawn from 133 villages, a study of
India's National Biogas Development Project (Program Evaluation
Organisation, 2002) found that a majority of digesters (55%) were not
operational.  Nevertheless, user households reduced their monthly
consumption of ﬁrewood by 10 kg.  Based on data from three villages
in Western China in 2006 (239 households; 183 users and 56 nonusers), Groenendaal and Gehua (2010) concluded that despite working
with a sample of relatively long-term digester users the many beneﬁts
attributed to the use of digesters had only partly been realized, if at
all.  For most of the outcomes there were no statistically signiﬁcant
differences between users and non-users.  In both these studies the
approach used to determine the control group was not clear and
assessments were based on differences in means, without controlling
for variables which might inﬂuence both uptake of digesters and
outcomes. 5
A perhaps more rigorous assessment of the effect of a biogas initiative, Rwanda's National Domestic Biogas Program (NDBP), is provided
by Bedi Name (2015).  While their study also uses cross-section data
and compares outcomes for users and non-users, the non-users were
selected from a list of “potential applicants” that is, those who had
shown an interest in purchasing a digester and at the same time the
non-users needed to fulﬁl the most important eligibility condition to
become a user, that is, own at least two cows.  Their multivariate
analysis showed that owning a digester was associated with a 31 to
32% reduction in annual energy expenditure and a ﬁve kilogram or
34% reduction in daily consumption of ﬁrewood.  At the same time
they reported that about 10% of the supposedly completed digesters
were producing no gas, and that the cost of installing a digester was prohibitive leading to a large gap between the number of digesters that
were expected to be set up (15,000) and the number that were actually
installed (1800). 
The aim of this paper, which focuses on dairy farmers in East Java, is
to examine the impact of Indonesia's Household Biogas Program (BIRU)
on two main outcomes, that is, fuel use - whether access to digesters
leads to reductions in the use of an oil-based fuel - liqueﬁed petroleum
gas and the use of a traditional fuel - wood, and whether it leads to a
decline in energy-related expenditure.  In order to assess the viability
of the intervention we provide an exploratory payback analysis. 
Methodologically, the paper extends the literature by using multiple
evaluation strategies and providing estimates based on both crosssection and panel data.  In doing so, we attempt to place the literature
on the effects of household biogas initiatives on a stronger empirical
footing. 
The paper is structured as follows.  Section 2 contains a description of
the program.  Section 3 outlines the empirical approach, Section 4 lays
out the sampling strategy and discusses the data and descriptive
statistics.  Section 5 discusses the ﬁndings and presents a payback analysis while Section 6 concludes. 
2.  Indonesia's household biogas program – Key features. 
In 2008, the Government of Indonesia in co-operation with the
Government of the Netherlands commissioned a feasibility study.  The
study highlighted that the climatic conditions, especially high
temperatures throughout the year and availability of water, provided
a favourable environment for the production of biogas.  The report
pegged the number of potential digesters users at more than one million
dairy farming households in Java and Bali, where zero grazing is widely
practised (SNV, 2009). 6
In 2009, as a consequence of the feasibility study, Indonesia
launched a Household Biogas Program (BIRU). 7 BIRU's overall objective
is to disseminate domestic digesters in order to create a local, sustainable energy alternative.  The program set itself a target of installing
8000 family sized (plant sizes of 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12 m3) digesters in
eight Indonesian provinces (East Java, DIY Yogyakarta, Central Java,
West Java, Bali, West Nusa Tenggara, South Sulawesi and Lampung)
by the end of 2012.  Although the programme had a slow start, it soon
picked up momentum.  By May 2011 the target for 2011 had already
been achieved, with over 2700 installed digesters and over 900
applicants awaiting construction of a digester.  By the end of 2012, it
had met its target of disseminating about 8000 biogas digesters (see
Table A. 1).  The BIRU program focuses mainly on East Java (62% of all
digesters), followed by Lombok/Bali (17%), West Java (10%) and Central
Java (9. 6%) (see Table A. 2). 
BIRU carries out its work through intermediaries or so-called,
Construction Partner Organizations (CPOs) and biogas supervisors. 
Typically, the CPOs are co-operative organizations or local NGOs.  In
Java, dairy co-operatives are key partners in the BIRU programme and
help disseminate the biogas concept among dairy farmers.  The CPOs
raise awareness about biogas among their members in their regular
meetings or in special gatherings explicitly for the purpose of discussing
this issue.  If members show interest, the CPO carries out a farm eligibility assessment, which is based on criteria such as having at least two
cows, a positive cash ﬂow from milk revenues supplied to the cooperative, and a farmer's debt history.  In addition, the CPO veriﬁes
whether the farm plot is large enough to install a digester.  If a farmer
qualiﬁes, ﬁnancial arrangements are negotiated with the help of the
CPO, and subsequently masons trained by BIRU are deployed to
construct the digesters. 8 After the digester has been installed, the
mason ﬁles a completion report, and BIRU carries out quality control
checks.  BIRU trains dairy farmers on the proper usage of digesters. 
They receive a user manual and a mason is present during initial plant
feeding.  BIRU guarantees an after sale service of two years. 9
Depending on the size, the cost of a digester lies between €450 and
€700.  Regardless of the digester size, BIRU provides a ﬂat subsidy of
€160 (Table 2).  The remainder is paid by the farmer, usually through a
loan obtained from credit schemes offered by the cooperative.  The
repayment instalments are ﬁnanced by deductions from payments the
farmer receives for the delivery of milk.  Interest rates differ across
cooperatives, depending on the source of the loan.  A range of partners
have made resources available for the credit schemes, and while there
are no interest charges on 2 to 3 year loans provided by Nestlé, an
international food company, other partners such as Rabobank or Bank
Syariah Mandiri (BSM) charge interest rates of 8 to 11% with repayment
periods of 3 to 5 years. 
<Middle> Identifying the impact of digesters. 
Our main aim is to identify the extent to which changes in the main
outcomes of interest - in this case, fuel use and energy expenditure may
be attributed to the BIRU programme.  To identify these effects, the
evaluation relies on both cross-section and panel data and a comparison
between farm households with (treatment group) and without (control
group) a digester.  There are two main empirical concerns with regard to
attribution.  First, the program is voluntary and households need to take
the initiative to apply for a digester and second, conditional on application, program beneﬁciaries are not selected at random but need to fulﬁl
eligibility conditions such as ownership of at least two cows and a
regular record of delivering milk to a cooperative.  Due to these two
aspects – self-selection into the program and the imposition of eligibility
conditions – it is quite likely that those who apply and obtain a digester
are systematically different from those who do not.  Hence, comparisons
between households who have a digester and those who don't, without
accounting for potential differences in factors that determine selection
into the program are unlikely to yield credible estimates. 10
To account for the challenges highlighted in the preceding paragraph
and to deliver credible estimates, the study relies on two different
evaluation approaches, that is, difference-in-differences (DID) estimation and a pipeline comparison design, both of which we combine with
propensity score matching (PSM).  For the DID analysis we rely on
baseline (2011) and follow-up (2012) data on the same set of dairy
farmers.  We compare outcomes for farming households (h) who
acquired a digester through BIRU between baseline and follow-up with
outcomes for farming households (h) who did not obtain a digester between 2011 and 2012.  The differences in outcomes (yht), over time (t),
that is, between baseline and follow-up and between BIRU participants
(D2012=1) and non-participants (D2012=0), may be interpreted as the
causal effect of the BIRU biogas digesters.  The DID estimates may be written as this. 
The causal interpretation is based on the (parallel trends) assumption
that changes in outcomes recorded for the control group are similar to
the changes in outcomes that would have been observed for the BIRU
participants had they not had a biogas digester installed.  By comparing
differences in trends across treatment and control groups, rather than
differences in levels, this approach eliminates time-invariant unobserved
differences such as the latent ability and productivity of farmers which
may have a bearing on digester uptake and outcomes.  In order to
enhance the credibility of the basic DID analysis and to ensure comparability of the treatment and control group in terms of observed characteristics we combine the basic DID analysis with propensity score matching. 
Using this approach, each unit in the participant group is matched to an
observationally similar unit from the non-participant group.  This procedure implies that the control group is re-weighted such that it appears
identical to the treatment group in terms of observed characteristics. 
Subsequently, DID analysis/pipeline comparison is conducted on the
treated units and the matched controls. 11
While the combination of PSM and DID allows us to control for
differences in observed characteristics between the treatment and
control groups as well as to control for time-invariant differences in
unobserved characteristics that may be correlated with programme
uptake and outcomes, the credibility of the estimates is based on the
validity of the parallel trends assumption.  The main threat to this
assumption is if participation in – or targeting of – the BIRU program
is determined by shocks to the outcome variables (for example, poverty
and social safety net programs), or if inherent unobserved differences
between treatment and control groups induce different outcome
trajectories in the absence of the program.  There are several reasons
why the nature of the BIRU program is likely to reduce these threats. 
First, participation in the BIRU program is not driven by shocks or
unexpected events.  Rather, these are long-term investment decisions
by farm households, with assistance from BIRU CPOs.  Second, the
analysis focuses on a relatively homogeneous group of farmers who
operate in a similar production and institutional context and it is
unlikely that time-varying shocks have different effects on outcomes
across the treatment and control group. 
Nevertheless, in addition to the difference-in-difference analysis we
also consider a cross-section based pipeline comparison approach.  This
method exploits a particular feature of the BIRU program, which is that
the program was rolled out gradually over a 4-year period.  This means
that during the baseline survey, some farmers without a digester had
already applied for a digester and were awaiting delivery.  That is, in
2011 they were in the pipeline to be treated in 2012.  These farmers
can be readily identiﬁed in the survey waves as the new users of biogas
digesters in 2012.  To implement the pipeline evaluation design we use
these digester applicants or future users as a control group in the
baseline year and compare them with farmers that were already
participating in the BIRU program in 2011.  The pipeline comparison
estimates may be written as this. 
This approach addresses potential bias due to eligibility or selfselection as both the groups have shown a desire to purchase a digester. 
In addition, this approach does not rely on the parallel trends assumption.  However, the cross-sectional pipeline comparison introduces
other problems.  For example, there may be systematic differences
between early and late adopters of an innovative technology, a problem
that difference-in-difference analysis can deal with more effectively. 
Thus, while this approach is not a substitute for the difference-indifference analysis, it does provide an alternative evaluation methodology that allows us to evaluate the robustness of the results.  Similar to
the difference-in-difference analysis, we combine the cross-section
based pipeline comparison approach with propensity score matching
in order to enhance comparability of the treatment and control groups. 
To enhance clarity, Table 3 summarises the choice of treatment and
control groups for the different evaluation strategies.  For the differencein-difference evaluation, two groups of households are compared.  First,
the treatment group consists of households that did not have a biogas
digester in 2011 but did have one in 2012.  We refer to them as new
users in the subsequent sections.  Second, the control group consists of
farm households with comparable features (e. g.  members of a cooperative, reside in the same villages, same number of productive cows) but
those who have never obtained a biogas digester.  We refer to them as
never users in the following.  For the cross-sectional pipeline comparison
approach, a second treatment group is deﬁned as consisting of
households who were already using biogas digesters, whom we refer
to as always users.  In this approach, the new users (i. e. , the ﬁrst
treatment group) serve as a cross-sectional control group. 
4.  Sampling strategy and the data. 
4. 1.  Sampling. 
The evaluation is based on two survey rounds of the same
households conducted in May-June 2011 and May-June 2012 in East
Java province.  In addition, qualitative information was acquired using
focus group discussions and key informant interviews.  East Java was
chosen as at the time of the ﬁrst survey it contained N75% of the
digesters installed through the BIRU program.  In 2011, the BIRU
program was active in 9 rural districts in East Java and involved 11
CPOs.  Given budgetary considerations the overall sample size was set
at 700 households, consisting of 250 applicants (new users), 350 nonapplicant households (the potential never users) and 100 households
with a digester (always users). 12
Dairy farmers participating in the CPOs/cooperatives covered by the
BIRU program form the natural sampling frame from which to draw
treatment and control groups.  Accordingly the ﬁrst step in the sampling
procedure involved the selection of CPOs to be included in the survey. 
Two CPOs were dropped as they only had a small number of installed
digesters which left us with 9 CPOs. 
In the second step we obtained a list of applicants, non-applicants
and current users from each of the 9 CPOs.  The list included 497
applicants, 18,321 non-applicants who satisﬁed certain conditions and
2086 current users.  We began by drawing a random sample of 250
applicants.  The distribution of the sample across CPOs was based on the
relative share of the applicants in each CPO.  Turning to the nonapplicants, in order to serve as suitable controls, non-applicants had to
comply with three conditions.  They had to have at least one productive
cow, had to regularly supply milk to the cooperative and should not
already own a digester provided through a different program.  From
the set of 18,321 potential controls, 344 were randomly selected.  Finally,
101 users were randomly drawn from the set of existing users.  In the
case of both non-applicants and existing users, the distribution of the
sample across each CPO was proportional to the underlying distribution
of the population. 13 A total of 695 households were surveyed at
baseline. 
In 2012, we attempted to survey the same households.  We were
unable to locate 18 households at follow-up.  Our statistical assessment
shows that there is no systematic difference between those who
remained in the sample and those who dropped out. 14 A potentially
more serious sampling problem is non-compliance with user status. 
After accounting for attrition, of the 245 applicants who were expected
to obtain digesters in 2012, 61 had their applications rejected by BIRU
and remained in the never user category. 