
Prior research (e. g.  Biddle Name, 2009) hypothesizes and finds that accounting quality improves investment efficiency. 
They identify a conditional negative (positive) association between accounting quality and investment for firms operating in
settings prone to overinvestment (underinvestment).  We extend this line of research, similarly hypothesizing and finding a
conditional negative (positive) association between conservatism and investment for firms operating in settings prone to
overinvestment (underinvestment).  We also find that more conservative firms in settings prone to underinvestment issue
more debt and invest in more prudent projects, and that the investment and financing effects of conservatism are more
pronounced in the presence of greater information asymmetries. 
Accounting conservatism imposes more stringent verifiability requirements for the recognition of economic gains
relative to losses (Basu, 1997; Watts, 2003).  This results in earnings that capture difficult-to-verify economic losses more
quickly than gains and generates a downward bias in the value of net assets.  The literature shows that conservatism
improves investment efficiency by reducing managerial overinvestment (Francis and Martin, 2010; Bushman Name, 2011). 
We explore the related issue of when conservatism can increase investment in situations where firms are more prone to
underinvestment. 
Prior research provides evidence that conservatism (1) discourages managerial selection of projects with negative net
present value (NPV) and triggers the early abandonment of poorly performing projects (Ball, 2001; Ball and Shivakumar,
2005) and (2) creates incentives to discard positive-NPV but high-risk projects (Leuz, 2001; Roychowdhury, 2010; Bushman
Name, 2011). 
We predict that conservatism also mitigates underinvestment among firms facing financing difficulties.  These firms
likely suffer from related problems such as the risk of insolvency and low profitability.  For them, the costs associated with
negative-NPV investments—or overly risky positive-NPV investments—are high.  Both debt- and equityholders are reluctant
to grant new capital to such firms (Jensen and Meckling, 1976; Myers, 1977).  Conservatism can help to alleviate agency
problems and thus mitigate financing constraints for these firms. 
Investors likely fear that financially constrained firms may tumble into insolvency if their projects fail.  In these situations,
we expect conservative accounting to facilitate access to additional debt for new investments, as it encourages prudent
investments that can increase firm value without exacerbating financial risk.  In contrast, conservatism is less likely to
alleviate shareholders' reluctance to provide additional financing.  Dispersed shareholders are less capable of ensuring that
firms maintain conservative accounting policies and undertake prudent investments.  Furthermore, shareholders, when they
provide financing, may prefer risky projects that can transfer wealth to them from debtholders.  Conservative reporting
discourages managers from engaging in this kind of conduct because of the timely recognition of losses.  Overall, these
arguments lead to the prediction that conservatism facilitates additional debt for financially constrained firms seeking to
invest but does not necessarily facilitate their access to additional equity. 
We also expect conservatism to help to limit overinvestment problems.  Overinvestment is likely to pervade firms that
have a high investment capacity.  In these firms, managers are more able to pursue projects that have a negative NPV but
generate private benefits for them.  Conservatism, by imposing timely reporting of losses, makes such self-interested
decisions apparent sooner, enabling stakeholders to discipline managers, if necessary, and deterring such conduct in the
future.  We predict these roles of conservatism hold not only for acquisitions, as illustrated by Francis and Martin (2010), but
also for more opaque investments such as capital expenditures and research and development (R&D). 1
Finally, we predict that conservatism affects differently future profitability and its volatility depending on whether the
firm is in a setting prone to over- or underinvestment.  In settings prone to overinvestment (i. e. , in firms with a high
investment capacity), conservatism leads to better project selection and earlier abandonment of loss-making projects,
increasing the future return on assets (ROA).  However, this may not always be true in firms prone to underinvestment (i. e. ,
those with a low investment capacity).  For these firms, conservatism instead facilitates the access to additional funding,
particularly for low-risk and less volatile projects that do not necessarily generate a higher rate of return than existing ones. 
Using a large US sample for the period 1990–2007, we follow the method of Biddle Name (2009) and test these
predictions on the association between accounting conservatism and firm investment, financing, and performance.  In our
main tests, we use the firm-level measure of conservative reporting—timely loss recognition—proposed by Khan and Watts
(2009).  Our results are robust to the use of alternative proxies based on Callen Name (2010) and Givoly and Hayn (2000).  We
incorporate in our tests measures of financial reporting quality to ensure that we isolate the incremental economic
consequences of conservatism.  The analysis yields several key findings. 
First, more conservative firms invest more and issue more debt than less conservative ones in settings where
underinvestment is more likely.  We also show that conservatism is associated with lower overinvestment not only for
acquisitions but also for more opaque investments, such as capital expenditures and R&D.  Finally, we show that the
association between conservatism and accounting profitability, as measured by the future ROA, is conditional on whether
the firm is prone to over- or underinvestment.  For firms prone to overinvestment, conservatism is associated with a higher
ROA.  However, for firms prone to underinvestment, conservatism is associated with less volatile investments that do not
necessarily lead to a higher ROA. 
Our results contribute to the literature in several ways.  First, we extend the growing literature on the links between
accounting quality and investment efficiency. 2 We show that, among firms prone to underinvest, those with more
conservative accounting invest more (in less profitable but more prudent projects) and issue more debt.  This suggests that
conservatism encourages low-risk, positive-NPV investments and that these new investments are financed with new debt. 
This is consistent with conservatism limiting debt-equity conflicts.  Our finding that conservatism mitigates
underinvestment in financially constrained firms is novel, as prior research focuses only on the role of conservatism in
reducing overinvestment (Francis and Martin, 2010; Bushman Name, 2011). 
We also contribute to the stream of literature on the links between accounting quality and financing (e. g. , Balakrishnan
Name, 2014).  Prior work shows that conservatism can lead to a lower cost of debt (Ahmed Name, 2002; Zhang 2008;
Wittenberg-Moerman, 2008).  We provide evidence of an association between conservatism and new debt issuances for
financially constrained firms.  This finding complements the related analytical evidence provided by Göx and Wagenhofer
(2009), who show that conditional conservatism is the optimal accounting policy for financially constrained firms seeking to
issue debt.  Our evidence also complements the work of Beatty Name (2010).  Their work on the role accounting quality in
facilitating investment focuses on access to private versus public debt.  We examine debt versus equity. 
We also expand the evidence on the role of conservatism in mitigating the overinvestment problems documented
in Francis and Martin (2010).  We show that conservatism, in overinvestment scenarios, is also associated with
reduced investment in more opaque investments, such as R&D and capital expenditures, where outsider monitoring is
less likely to affect investment outcomes.  We also add to their findings by showing that the investment-related effects
of conservatism affect performance differently depending on whether the firm is over- or underinvesting.  While prior
research finds that the investment effects of improved accounting quality lead to greater profitability (Hope and
Thomas, 2008; Francis and Martin, 2010), we find that this is true only in settings prone to overinvestment.  In settings
prone to underinvestment, conservatism is associated with investment in prudent projects and therefore does not
lead to a higher ROA. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 discusses the expected association between conservatism
and investment and financing.  Section 3 contains the research design.  Section 4 describes the sample and discusses the
main empirical results.  Sections 5 and 6 contain additional analyses and robustness checks, and Section 7 concludes. 
2.  Conservatism, investment and ﬁnancing: development of hypotheses. 
We make two major predictions: (1) conservatism is associated with increased investment in firms prone to underinvest,
and (2) conservatism reduces overinvestment problems in firms prone to overinvest.  These predictions lead to two further
hypotheses about the role of debt- and equityholders in alleviating investment constraints. 
Our study builds on the literature linking financing and investment decisions.  In their seminal work, Modigliani and
Miller (1958) argue that financing and investment decisions are separate in perfect capital markets.  However, a large stream
of literature subsequently shows that information frictions drive linkages between financing and investment decisions
(Myers, 1977, 1984; Childs Name, 2005).  In line with this literature and similar to the work of Balakrishnan Name (2014), we
assume that information frictions can affect financing and investment and that financial reporting can help to decrease
these frictions. 
Biddle Name (2009) argue that firms constrained in their ability to make new investments are probably characterized by
having low cash balances and high leverage.  These firms might even suffer from such related problems as low profitability
and the risk of insolvency.  Both debt- and equityholders are unlikely to finance these firms, as the costs associated with
negative-NPV projects or with positive-NPV but high-risk investments are high, particularly when information asymmetry
is also high.  We predict that conservative reporting can mitigate these constraints.  By imposing timely loss recognition and
delayed gain recognition, conservatism makes poor investment decisions apparent in earnings sooner.  This lowers
managerial incentives to invest in negative-NPV projects and prompts the early abandonment of poorly performing
projects (Ball, 2001; Ball and Shivakumar, 2005). 