1.  Introduction  Following a series of accounting scandals in the early 20 0 0s (e. g. , Enron and WorldCom), capital market participants  questioned how auditors and regulators failed to identify the misreporting.  However, in a comprehensive examination of  fraud cases from 1996 to 2004, Dyck et al.  (2010) ﬁnd that a ﬁrm’s employees identify and reveal fraud more often (17%  of the time) than both auditors (10%) and the corporate ﬁnance division of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)  (7%).  Given that employees provide ex-post discipline of ﬁnancial reporting by helping uncover fraud after it has occurred,  a natural question is whether employees are able to impose ex-ante discipline on ﬁnancial reporting before violations take We examine whether the quality of a ﬁrm’s workforce is associated with ﬁnancial reporting quality.  We proxy for the  quality of a ﬁrm’s workforce in two ways.  (1) the average education level of the workforce in the Metropolitan Statistical  Area (MSA) where the ﬁrm is headquartered, and (2) the average education level of the workforce across all MSAs mentioned  2 Using these measures, we examine two broad research questions.  First, are highly educated  in the ﬁrm’s Form 10-K ﬁling.   employees associated with improved mandatory disclosure quality.  Second, are highly educated employees associated with  improved voluntary disclosure quality.   Prior research examines whether executive (i. e. , CEO and CFO) characteristics contribute to ﬁnancial reporting quality  ( Aier et al. , 2005.  Bamber et al. , 2010.  Dyreng et al. , 2010.  Ge et al. , 2011.  Demerjian et al. , 2013 ).  However, the literature  largely ignores whether characteristics of the ﬁrm’s entire workforce are associated with ﬁnancial reporting outcomes.  Because a ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial data originate far from the C-suite, we argue that the ﬁrm’s entire workforce plays an important  role in shaping the quality of a ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial reporting.  Furthermore, while lawmakers and regulators have traditionally  focused on other ﬁrm monitors (i. e. , investors, board of directors, the SEC, auditors, and corporate executives) to improve  reporting quality, we examine whether a high-quality workforce is associated with better reporting outcomes.   High-quality employees can improve their ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial reporting environment in at least two ways.  First, they can  provide superior information as inputs to executives’ reporting choices.  Second, high-quality employees can identify and  uncover intentional ﬁnancial misreporting, perhaps even before it develops into a larger misreporting event.  Our proxy for  high-quality employees, the education level of the ﬁrm’s workforce, is associated with both channels through which employees can improve ﬁnancial reporting.  First, more educated employees provide their superiors with higher-quality inputs  (i. e. , fewer errors), resulting in higher-quality reporting outcomes ( Merchant and Rockness, 1994.  O’ Fallon and Butterﬁeld,  2005 ).  Second, highly educated employees are more likely to recognize when a transaction appears abnormal, elevating con3 Consistent with this point,  cerns to management before it becomes a more serious misstatement ( Glaeser and Saks, 2006 ).   Call et al.  (2016) ﬁnd that executives grant more stock options to rank and ﬁle employees during periods of misreporting in  an effort to discourage whistleblowing, suggesting that executives engaged in misconduct believe their employees have the  ability to uncover information that would bring ﬁnancial misconduct to light.   We ﬁnd signiﬁcant variation in education levels throughout the United States.   4 Speciﬁcally, the highest education levels  are in Boston, Silicon Valley, and several cities that are home to large public universities (e. g. , Iowa City, IA, Columbia, MO,  Madison, WI), suggesting that ﬁrms with operations in these areas employ more highly educated employees with greater  ability to improve ﬁnancial reporting quality.  On the other hand, Dallas, Los Angeles, and Las Vegas are in MSAs that are  among the bottom half of workforce education, suggesting that ﬁrms with operations in these areas often rely on employees  with less ability to improve reporting quality.   We ﬁrst examine the association between education levels and three attributes of mandatory reporting quality—the quality of the ﬁrm’s accruals, the propensity of the ﬁrm to report an internal control weakness, and the likelihood the ﬁrm  restates its ﬁnancial statements ( Dechow and Dichev, 2002.  Hennes et al. 