
Buy-side analysts play an important role in equity markets because their research directly impacts the investing decisions of portfolio managers (Cheng Name, 2006; Frey and Herbst, 2014; Rebello and Wei, 2014).  These analysts usually work
for an investment ﬁrm (e. g. , mutual fund, hedge fund, pension fund), and they perform their research activities exclusively
for the ﬁrm that employs them.  In contrast to sell-side analysts whose stock recommendations are distributed widely to
their clients and who often receive coverage in the business press, buy-side analysts' stock recommendations are not
available to anyone outside their own ﬁrm.  Thus, although buy-side analysts are much closer than sell-side analysts to the
ultimate investing decision, they are rarely the subject of academic research.  The purpose of this study is to expand our
understanding of the activities of buy-side analysts and their role in the capital markets. 
We survey 344 buy-side equity analysts employed by 181 institutional investment ﬁrms and conduct 16 detailed followup interviews on a wide range of topics.  We examine the factors that determine their compensation, their motivation to
issue proﬁtable stock recommendations, the inputs to their stock recommendations, the frequency and value of their
interactions with company management, and their assessments of ﬁnancial reporting quality.  Further, because buy-side
analysts are an important consumer of sell-side research, we examine the nature and frequency of their interactions with
sell-side analysts and the attributes of sell-side analysts they ﬁnd most important. 
One important takeaway of our paper relates to the role of sell-side analysts in buy-side research.  Speciﬁcally, although we
ﬁnd that buy-side analysts have strong ﬁnancial incentives to produce proﬁtable stock recommendations, fewer than 3% of
them indicate sell-side stock recommendations are a very useful input for their own stock recommendations.  Nevertheless, we
ﬁnd that sell-side analysts add value to buy-side analysts in other ways.  For example, buy-side analysts typically follow more
companies spread across more industries than do sell-side analysts, so they often rely on the sell side to quickly get up to speed
on a particular industry.  Further, buy-side analysts indicate that industry knowledge is the most useful input to their stock
recommendations, which are the primary determinants of their compensation.  Our ﬁndings help explain why institutional
investors consistently rate industry knowledge so highly in Institutional Investor's (II) annual rankings of sell-side services. 
Relatedly, buy-side analysts indicate that private communication with senior management is an important input into
their stock recommendations, and that sell-side analysts play a pivotal role in facilitating access to management.  Collectively, our ﬁndings suggest buy-side analysts rely on sell-side analysts for raw information (e. g. , industry knowledge) and
access to company management, which help inform their own stock recommendations; however, buy-side analysts do not
look to sell-side analysts when translating this information into their own stock recommendations. 
Despite prior research suggesting that sell-side analysts employed by large brokerages have more resources (Clement,
1999; Clement and Tse, 2003; Hong and Kubik, 2003), and that II All-Stars are superior sell-side analysts (Asquith Name,
2005; Leone and Wu, 2007; Stickel, 1992), fewer than 3% of the buy-side analysts say brokerage size and All-Star status are
important attributes of sell-side analysts when deciding whether to use information they provide.  In contrast, sell-side
analysts' experience following a company and the frequency of their communication with senior management are the two
most important determinants of buy-side analysts' decisions to use information sell-side analysts provide. 
Concerns that ﬁnancial reports lack timeliness and suffer from information overload have grown in recent years (White,
2013).  Despite these concerns, nearly half (48%) of the buy-side analysts indicate that the recent 10-K or 10-Q report is very
useful for determining their stock recommendations.  These ﬁnancial reports are more useful to them than quarterly conference calls, management earnings guidance, and recent earnings performance.  Buy-side analysts also believe the most
important attribute of high-quality earnings is that earnings are backed by operating cash ﬂows.  When we asked about “red
ﬂags” of management effort to intentionally misrepresent ﬁnancial results, many “red ﬂags” identiﬁed by prior research
received strong support, including internal control weaknesses and weak corporate governance, suggesting buy-side analysts are concerned about the integrity of ﬁnancial reports. 
We make several contributions to the literature.  Prior research documents that buy-side analysts play an important role
in institutional investment decisions (Cheng Name, 2006; Crawford Name, 2014; Frey and Herbst, 2014; Rebello and Wei,
2014).  However, the determinants of buy-side analysts' stock recommendations remain unclear, so our ﬁndings represent an
important step forward for the literature.  Further, institutional ownership has grown from around 5% of U. S.  equities in 1945
to over 67% in 2010 (Blume and Keim, 2012); thus, buy-side analysts play an increasingly important role in equity markets. 
We also add to the literature's limited understanding of the working relationship between buy-side and sell-side analysts. 
Lastly, because buy-side analysts have strong incentives to identify attributes of high-quality earnings and “red ﬂags” of
misreporting, their views about the value of ﬁnancial statements and the determinants of ﬁnancial reporting quality bring
important insights to the literature (Nelson and Skinner, 2013). 
<Middle> Subject pool, survey design and delivery, interviews, and cross-sectional analyses. 
2. 1.  Subject pool. 
We used Thomson One to identify our subject pool of buy-side equity analysts. 1 For each ﬁrm in the S&P 100 index as of
September 10, 2012, we identiﬁed the 100 institutional investment ﬁrms with the largest percentage ownership as of March
31, 2013.  This included a total of 450 institutional investment ﬁrms, and we collected contact information for all buy-side
equity analysts afﬁliated with these ﬁrms in Thomson One. 2 We restricted our sample to analysts located in the United
States or Canada to mitigate any language-related difﬁculties for our survey participants.  In total, our subject pool includes
4,865 buy-side analysts employed by 450 institutional investment ﬁrms that are the 100 largest shareholders of at least one
of the S&P 100. 
For each investment ﬁrm identiﬁed by our selection process, we captured all buy-side analysts listed in Thomson One,
not just those covering companies in the S&P 100.  The investment ﬁrms in our subject pool exhibit considerable variation in
size. 3 Further, these investment ﬁrms do not invest only in large-cap stocks like the S&P 100. 4
2. 2.  Survey design and delivery. 
We designed a survey to answer fundamental questions about the activities of buy-side analysts and the determinants of
their stock recommendations.  In doing so, we wanted to shed light on the interactions of buy-side analysts with other
capital market participants who are more commonly the subject of academic research, namely sell-side analysts and
company management.  After compiling an initial list of questions, several buy-side analysts reviewed our survey and
suggested additional questions they deemed relevant for a buy-side audience.  After several iterations, we piloted our survey
with buy-side analysts who helped us gain information about the reasonableness and presentation of our questions, the
functionality of the online survey platform, and the time required to complete the survey.  The collective feedback we
received helped us reduce the possibility that we asked unimportant questions, failed to ask fundamental questions, or
designed a survey requiring too much time to complete. 
Our survey contained 15 questions, many with multiple parts, followed by demographic questions.  To reduce the burden
on analysts, we grouped the 15 questions into three broad categories that we presented sequentially. 5 The ﬁrst category
consists of four questions about buy-side analysts' interactions with and their assessment of sell-side analysts.  The second
category has seven questions about buy-side analysts' interactions with company management and their portfolio managers, the inputs to their stock recommendations, and the determinants of their compensation.  The ﬁnal category is
comprised of four questions about buy-side analysts' views of ﬁnancial reporting, including signs that ﬁnancial results have
been misrepresented and evidence of high-quality earnings.  Within each category, we randomized the order in which we
presented the questions.  Except when the options had a natural sequence (e. g. , Never, Once a year, Twice a year), we
randomized the order in which we presented each question's options. 6 After asking the 15 survey questions, we asked the
analysts to provide demographic information. 
We used qualtrics. com to deliver the survey via email on September 17, 2013.  We sent reminder emails to analysts who
had not completed the survey on September 26 and October 9, and we closed the survey on October 15, four weeks after our
original invitation. 7 To encourage participation, we told our subjects we would donate $10,000 multiplied by the response
rate to our survey, and that we would allocate the total donation among four charities from which we allowed the analysts
to choose. 
We informed analysts that their responses would be held in strict conﬁdence, that no individual response would be
reported, and that the survey should take less than 15 minutes to complete. 8 We received a total of 344 responses for a
response rate of 7. 1%, with a completed survey from at least one analyst at 181 different investment ﬁrms (40% of the
investment ﬁrms in our subject pool).  Our response rate is similar to that of other ﬁnance and accounting surveys administered via email. 9
2. 3.  Interviews. 
We asked analysts to provide their phone number if they were willing to be contacted for follow-up interviews.  Fiftyseven analysts volunteered for an interview, and we conducted one-on-one phone interviews with 16 analysts in order to
obtain additional insights beyond those contained within the responses to the survey. 10 Prior to conducting the interviews,
we created a list of questions we knew we wanted to ask; others were follow-up questions based on the aggregated survey
results.  Due to time constraints, we did not ask each question on our list to every analyst; however, over the course of the
interviews, multiple analysts addressed each question.  We used a semi-structured interview protocol, wherein we asked
open-ended questions and allowed the analysts to elaborate as they saw ﬁt.  We sought to interview a diverse set of analysts
that reﬂected the demographic characteristics of our full sample; so we interviewed male and female analysts, analysts with
varying levels of experience on both the buy side and sell side, analysts with different investment horizons, and those
employed by institutions of various sizes. 11,12 Consistent with the recommendations of Malsch and Salterio (2016), we
stopped interviewing additional analysts when we felt each successive interview was simply reinforcing the same ideas and
themes other analysts had already shared. 
2. 4.  Cross-sectional analyses. 
We explore cross-sectional variation in survey responses based on analyst demographic information and other characteristics.  While the existing literature on buy-side analysts is limited, there is a long literature about the effects of various
attributes of sell-side analysts on sell-side research, including the number of industries and ﬁrms covered (Clement, 1999),
gender (Fang and Huang, 2015; Kumar, 2010), experience (Mikhail Name, 2003), and employer size (Clement and Tse, 2005). 
We examine how these and other demographic characteristics affect the views and practices of buy-side analysts. 
For each survey question, we regress analysts' responses (which usually range from 0 to 6) on 15 characteristics, as
follows, where Survey Response is the analyst's response to the survey question being examined.  We formally deﬁne the independent
variables in the Appendix A. 
We obtain values of the ﬁrst 13 independent variables (HF, Horizon, N_Ind, N_Firms, Age, Gender, Acct, MBA, CFA, BS_Exp,
SS_Exp, Tenure, and Size) from the demographic questions we posed in the survey (see Table 1).  These characteristics
represent analysts who work for hedge funds (HF), the analyst's investment horizon (Horizon), the number of industries
(N_Ind) and ﬁrms (N_Firms) the analyst follows, the analyst's age (Age), gender (Gender), education (Acct, MBA), professional
certiﬁcation (CFA), and years of experience on the buy side (BS_Exp) and sell side (SS_Exp), tenure with employer (Tenure)
and size of employer (Size).  The ﬁnal two variables (SS_Contact and CEO_Contact) are based on each analyst's response to the
survey questions about the frequency of their private communication with sell-side analysts and CEOs/CFOs, respectively. 
For brevity, we do not tabulate the results of our cross-sectional analyses.  We also limit our discussion of cross-sectional
ﬁndings in the following sections to those that are signiﬁcant at the 5% level or better, brieﬂy summarizing the ﬁndings we
consider most interesting.  Detailed results from all cross-sectional analyses are available in an online Appendix A. 
3.  Empirical results, interview responses, and cross-sectional ﬁndings. 
After presenting demographic characteristics of the survey respondents, we present survey results organized into four
sections.  These sections address (i) the incentives buy-side analysts face and the determinants of their stock recommendations; (ii) their interactions with sell-side analysts; (iii) their interactions with company management; and (iv) their
assessments of ﬁnancial reporting quality.  Collectively, our ﬁndings facilitate a better understanding of the factors that
inﬂuence buy-side analysts' research. 
Most tables have four columns.  Column 1 presents the average ratings in descending order.  We also test whether the
average rating for a given item exceeds the average rating of the other items listed below it in the table, and in Column 2, we
report the rows corresponding to a signiﬁcant difference at the 5% level, based on Bonferroni–Holm-adjusted p-values. 
Columns 3 and 4 report the percentage of respondents who rate each item near the top (5 or 6) and bottom (0 or 1) of the 7point scale, respectively. 
3. 1.  Demographics (Table1). 
The participating analysts have diverse backgrounds.  Table 1 reveals that nearly 60% are employed by mutual funds, and
18% are employed by hedge funds.  None of our survey respondents works for a retail brokerage ﬁrm, and very few work for
endowments, foundations or insurance ﬁrms.  More than 80% have an investment horizon of over one year, and 27% have an
investment horizon of over three years. 14 The most commonly reported “primary” industries are ﬁnancials (18%), industrials
(18%), consumer discretionary (15%), information technology (14%) and energy (12%). 
Nearly 80% of buy-side analysts cover more than one industry and over a third cover at least four industries.  The median
analyst covers between 26 and 50 ﬁrms, and 15% cover more than 100 ﬁrms.  Most analysts are in their thirties, and an
overwhelming majority (89%) are male.  About 58% have an MBA degree and 56% have the CFA certiﬁcation.  More than half
have at least seven years of experience as a buy-side analyst, and about 30% have experience as a sell-side analyst.  The
median length of service with their current employer is 4–6 years, and the median size of their employer is 11–25 buy-side
analysts. 
For comparative purposes, we highlight some of the main differences between the buy-side analysts we survey and the
sell-side analysts Brown Name (2015) surveyed.  Buy-side analysts have a broader focus, whereas sell-side analysts are more
specialized.  For example, approximately 80% (50%) of buy-side (sell-side) analysts follow two or more industries, and
approximately 72% (9%) follow more than 25 companies.  Buy-side analysts are better trained in accounting and ﬁnance than
sell-side analysts, and they are more likely to have an MBA degree (58% versus 45%) and/or a CFA certiﬁcation (56% versus3. 2.  Incentives and determinants of stock recommendations. 
Buy-side analysts provide stock recommendations to their portfolio managers, and these stock recommendations are an
important basis for institutional investment decisions (Cheng Name, 2006; Frey and Herbst, 2014; Rebello and Wei, 2014). 
Given the role of buy-side stock recommendations in institutions' resource allocation decisions, along with the economic
signiﬁcance of institutional holdings, we seek to better understand the incentives buy-side analysts face when issuing their
stock recommendations, their motivation for making proﬁtable stock recommendations, and the information they use when
generating these recommendations. 
3. 2. 1.  How important are the following to your compensation.  (Table 2). 
Buy-side analysts' stock recommendations are the single most important determinant of their compensation, suggesting
their primary goal is to help their portfolio managers generate alpha.  Nearly 83% of respondents say their stock recommendations are very important to their compensation, whereas only 3% say they are not important.  This ﬁnding underscores
a fundamental difference between buy-side and sell-side analysts: while 83% of buy-side analysts indicate their stock
recommendations are a very important determinant of their compensation, only 35% of sell-side analysts say the same
about their own stock recommendations (Brown Name, 2015).  This ﬁnding highlights the notion that sell-side analysts have
comparatively weak ﬁnancial incentives to produce proﬁtable stock recommendations. 16
In our interviews, one analyst said, “Alpha is 90% or maybe 80% of [compensation].  The rest would be a relatively small
portion.  For example, operating as a cohesive team is important. ” Another analyst underscored the importance of stock
recommendations by saying, “Alpha is it.  That's it. ” Finally, a different analyst said, “I know it (alpha) well and track it daily. ”
Relationships with senior management of the companies they cover is the least important determinant of buy-side
analysts' compensation.  This result is in stark contrast to the importance of relationships with management to sell-side
compensation (Brown Name, 2015).  And in contrast to the importance of their stock recommendations, twice as many buyside analysts say their earnings forecasts are not important for their compensation as say they are very important for this
purpose. 
3. 2. 2.  How important are the following in motivating you to make proﬁtable stock recommendations.  (Table 3). 
Because their stock recommendations are such an important determinant of buy-side analysts' compensation (Table 2), it
is not surprising that their most important motivation for making proﬁtable stock recommendations is their compensation
(69% say this is a very important motivation).  Most respondents say job security is a very important motivator (53%), while
only 24% say the same about job mobility. 
Only 25% of respondents say the size of their portfolio manager's investment in the company is a very important
motivation for issuing proﬁtable stock recommendations.  One analyst shed light on this issue: “If [your investment thesis] is
liked and everyone thinks it's a good idea, it gets approved and then multiple portfolios and multiple portfolio managers get
to buy it. 