
1. 1.  The problem. 
A popular product sold by energy companies to medium-to-large
customers is one where an unspeciﬁed amount of power can be
bought at a ﬁxed price during a certain time-interval.  We call this a
ﬁxed price, unspeciﬁed consumption contract or simply a ﬁxed price
agreement.  The business-to-business electricity market in Denmark
in 2014 was 23. 1 TWh, about MEUR 800 million in monetary terms. 
60% was sold as ﬁxed price agreements in some form. 
Having entered into the ﬁxed price agreement, the energy
company must asses and manage the risks associated with the
obligations of the contract.  This is challenging for several reasons.  If
the seller faced only the risk from price-ﬂuctuations, he could simply buy forward contracts to set up a full, perfect hedge.  However,
with a criterion function that takes into account both (expected)
gains and losses, this is expensive if forward-prices are typically
above expected future spot-prices.  This so-called contango is the
norm in Nordic power markets, as demonstrated by both Botterud
Name (2002) and our analysis in Section 5. 1. 
Another complicating factor is quantity risk.  If the consumer’s
quantity choice were all-or-nothing, the contract would have payoff akin to call options.  Handling that would require modelling the
price randomness of the electricity market which has several characteristics that are different from standard ﬁnancial markets such
as stocks and exchange rates.  But the consumer has more ﬂexibility
and because energy demand is created by physical use, her choice
will not be all-or-nothing.  Demand will be positively correlated with
the price as high demand drives up the price.  For the contract seller
that creates what in other areas of ﬁnance would be known as
wrong-way risk.  He will have to deliver a lot of energy for a ﬁxed
price when buying it in the spot market is expensive. 
In this paper, we will deal with these risks with a joint model of
spot-price and consumption load. 
1. 2.  Previous work, related literature. 
The non-storability of electricity is a key complicating factor in
energy markets.  It makes physical hedging inoperable and it causes
highly volatile spot-markets with structural price jumps, see for
instance Benth Name (2008).  As a consequence, the problem of
joint quantity and price risk on electricity markets is commonly
studied in the literature and it stresses the importance of incorporating price–quantity correlation into the models.  For an example,
Bessembinder and Lemmon (2002) consider an equilibrium market
model for which the correlation has a signiﬁcant impact on optimal hedging strategies in forward markets.  Their model has been
extended by, for instance, Willems and Morbee (2010) who study the
effect of including options onto the market. 