 1.  Introduction About $2 billion of petroleum are traded daily, making petroleum the single largest item in the balance of payment and exchange between countries (Tordo etal. , 2011).  Economies are susceptible to oil supply and price volatility as a result of their strong dependence on oil-based products (Cuñado and Pérez de Gracia, 2003.  Jiménez-Rodríguez and Sánchez, 2005).  This is probably the reason for state interventions in the industry, in the form of National Oil Companies (NOCs).  State ownership of oil companies started in 1914 when the British government acquired a controlling stake in the Anglo-Persian Oil Company, now British Petroleum (BP), setting a precedent for the many state-owned oil companies to follow in other countries (Wolf, 2009).  Since 1991, countries that possess NOCs have held nearly 90% of global crude oil reserves (Eller etal. , 2011).  Various governments have seen the oil industry far important to be left in the hands of private International Oil Companies (IOCs) as direct state control over its resources is a strong indicator of national sovereignty (Mommer, 2002).  State ownership in this industry is at the heart of debates on state interventionism, asset nationalization and deregulation policies in the oil industry.  This notwithstanding, to some researchers direct state intervention is seen as a major cause of inefﬁciency in this industry (Kashani, 2005a, 2005b).  The issue of state ownership versus private ownership of oil companies has become the overarching theme of most efﬁciency-related studies in the industry.  Indeed, Al-Obaidan and Scully (1992), Eller etal.  (2011), Ike and Lee (2014), Wolf (2009), and Sueyoshi and Goto (2012) have all provided empirical evidence on the differences in the efﬁciency of state controlled oil companies and privately controlled ones.  Although, these studies mostly favour private ownership, the debate is not dwindling since high energy prices, asset nationalization policy and economic success of some NOCs have re-ignited calls for more state involvement (Wolf, 2009).  There is therefore the need to reconsider how state ﬁrms can be more productive, and stay relevant in this volatile industry, compared to their private counterparts.  Empirical evidence show that one way ﬁrms (both private and state) can improve efﬁciency is through multinational operations (Greene etal. , 2009.  Li, 2008).  A multinational ﬁrm is one that owns and operates income generating assets in more than one country.  A ﬁrm that operates in a single country is a local ﬁrm.  Petroleum ﬁrms are among the largest multinationals internationally (Al-Obaidan and Scully, 1995).  Royal Dutch Shell, Sinopec, China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC) and Exxon Mobil are among the top six global ﬁrms on Fortune Magazine's 2016 global 500 company ranking (Fortune Magazine, 2017).  Even some of the NOCs, who are usually expected to only operate in their home countries, have multinational operations.  For example CNPC, a company with 100% state ownership (Energy Intelligence, 2013), has oil and gas operations in 29 countries around the world (CNPC, 2014).  CNPC is an example of a state-owned multinational oil company (MNOC).  For ﬁrms like Exxon Mobil, Chevron and Total, they are privately-owned multinationals (MIOCs).  Indeed, from the theoretical arguments of both the eclectic paradigm (Dunning, 1977) and portfolio diversiﬁcation theory (Markowitz, 1952), multinational operations bring some gains to a ﬁrm's operation in the form of efﬁciency (Al-Obaidan and Scully, 1995).  Though this view that multinational operation improves ﬁrm performance, is quite predominant in theory, more empirical testing of this view in the petroleum industry is needed.  From the evidence gathered, only Al-Obaidan and Scully (1995) have explored performance differences between multinationals and locals in efﬁciency assessment in the oil industry.  However, their study does not consider efﬁciency differences between state-owned multinational companies and privately-owned multinational companies.  Their study also does not consider whether going multinational can make a state ﬁrm more efﬁcient in its operations.  As more and more NOCs consider becoming multinational in their operations, it is important to examine whether such international operation is offsetting the empirically documented inefﬁciencies from state control.  For foreign policy and economic purposes, there is a growing presence of state-owned enterprises in global markets (Bass and Chakrabarty, 2014).  The policy of state-owned enterprises in the international context, even in the oil and gas industry, stems from their desire to gain foreign resources to satisfy both shortterm and long term needs of the home country.  Though this internationalization policy of state ﬁrms is on a massive scale, it is important to note that this is a relatively new phenomenon (Cuervo-Cazurra etal. , 2014) which raises questions on its effectiveness in improving productivity.  The contributions of this study are relevant to both literature and policy.  It contributes to the existing body of knowledge on the efﬁciency differences between state and privately-owned oil companies by introducing and testing the multinational dimension of the ownership debate.  We provide empirical answers on whether multinationalism or internationalization policies of state-owned oil companies provide a viable opportunity for state oil companies to remain relevant in the international oil industry.  We do this by relying on Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA), a nonparametric frontier approach, which is able to estimate efﬁciency of ﬁrms with very few assumptions and has a more ﬂexible production structure (Bogetoft and Otto, 2011).  It can also handle multiple inputs and outputs and can decompose efﬁciency into several factors thereby tracking the sources of inefﬁciencies.  Bootstrapping techniques by Simar and Wilson (1998, 1999, 2000), are also employed to address the ﬂaws of the DEA technique, including outlying observations, its inability to adequately handle statistical noise and its general deterministic nature.  This provides a robust and empirically sound basis for analysis.  The rest of the study is structured as follows.  ﬁrst, we provide some theoretical and empirical review on multinationalism, ownership and efﬁciency.  This is then followed by model and data descriptions from which empirical ﬁndings are provided and conclusions2.  Literature review.  2. 1.  Ownership and ﬁrm performance.  Performance differences between state and privately-owned enterprises have interested academics for some time now.  Theoretical underpinnings of the ownership debate in the international oil industry can be grounded on property rights and agency theories (Al-Obaidan and Scully, 1992.  Eller etal. , 2011.  Wolf, 2009).  Property rights theory is attributable to early works of Coase (1960), Alchian (1965) and Demsetz (1964).  Property rights can be seen as the rights of individuals to use some resources supported by the force of etiquette and formal legally enacted laws supported by state powers of violence and punishment (Alchian, 1965).  State property rights involve inferior governance quality compared to private ownership (Shleifer, 1998), and hence, public enterprises should perform less efﬁciently compared to private enterprises.  For Jensen and Meckling (1976) agency theory of the ﬁrm, an agency relationship arises between two or more parties when one party (the agent) acts for or on behalf of another party (the principal), in a domain of decision problems (Eisenhardt, 1989).  Companies with more private ownership are more likely to have less serious agency problems as compared to state ﬁrms (Ding etal. , 2007).  Therefore, government involvement is the key reason for the inefﬁciency of state-owned enterprises.  Empirically, Al-Obaidan and Scully (1992) have revealed that although private oil ﬁrms (IOCs) are better at converting inputs into outputs (productive efﬁciency), there is little difference in how state(NOCs) and private ﬁrms manage the size of operation (scale efﬁciency).  For Eller etal.  (2011), NOCs are among the least efﬁcient ﬁrms, probably because such NOCs are forced to subsidize fuel for domestic consumption and also employ a larger workforce not necessary for purely commercial objectives.  Similarly, Ike and Lee (2014) observed that IOCs have higher performance.  However, their study provides new insights that even among the NOCs, OPEC NOCs are among the worst performers.  This is not surprising since Wolf (2009) had earlier discovered that the impact of both state ownership and OPEC membership is signiﬁcantly negative in upstream production.  This was attributable to production quota policy of OPEC members having negative inﬂuence on ﬁrm performance.  Finally, although Sueyoshi and Goto (2012) have also contributed to this debate, their paper was more conceptual than empirical.  2. 2.  Multinational operation and ﬁrm performance.  The multinational concept in efﬁciency assessment of oil ﬁrms can be based on two main theoretical arguments- portfolio diversiﬁcation theory (Markowitz, 1952) and eclectic paradigm of international production (Dunning, 1977). International diversiﬁcation or multinational operation is expected to increase ﬁrm efﬁciency and proﬁtability because it can result in economies of scale, provide better and ﬂexible access to resources and allow for more learning (Hennart, 2007).  Multinational business operation also allows ﬁrms to exploit competitive advantages that are not available to domestic ﬁrms (Thomas and Eden, 2004).  This perspective to multinational operation views product and process diversiﬁcation across boundaries as having the potential to improve the risks and return performance of investors by investing in assets (countries) whose returns (economies) are uncorrelated (Annavarjula and Beldona, 2000.  Hennart, 2007).  Therefore, it is expected that ﬁrms that have operations in several countries that are not economically integrated, would enjoy higher productivities as compared to ﬁrms with less geographically diversiﬁed portfolios.  Consequently, it is expected that, multinational oil companies would outperform localized oil ﬁrms.  This is because, such diversiﬁed oil companies are expected to better diversify their countryspeciﬁc market risks by operating in uncorrelated foreign markets.  Multinational activities in the oil industry have attracted empirical interest of Al-Obaidan and Scully (1995), Cuervo-Cazurra etal.  (2014)and Kim and Mahoney (2005).  Yet the study by Al-Obaidan and Scully (1995) has been the only study seen from literature reviewed that comprehensively links multinational operation with efﬁciency in the oil industry.  Kim and Mahoney (2005), for example, merely used the oil and gas industry as the background to explaining the theoretical principles in property rights, transaction cost and agency theories without providing a concrete link to efﬁciency.  It is important to note that, Ike and Lee (2014) have given some thought to multinational (international) operations in their work.  They however only considered it as a mere control variable with little substance to their empirical arguments.  Al-Obaidan and Scully found that whereas locals outperform multinationals when it comes to economic efﬁciency, multinationals have higher scale efﬁciencies than local ﬁrms probably because multinationals are able to spread investment costs over a large number of ﬁrms.  In their view, multinationals enjoy a more stable stream of returns in investment over time, because they enjoy a lower business risk.  <Middle> Methodology.  3. 1.  DEA estimation approach.  Models for the assessment of frontier efﬁciency and productivity of decision making units (DMUs) begun with the prominent works of Debreu (1951), Koopmans (1951) and Shephard (1953).  Efﬁciency in a multiple-input, multiple-output framework, involves obtaining the maximum outputs from a given set of inputs, or minimizing inputs required to produce current output levels (Banker etal. , 1984).  This can be estimated using parametric (econometric) or nonparametric (mathematical programming) approaches (Coelli etal. , 2005).  DEA, developed by Charnes etal.  (1978) based on the work byFarrell (1957) and extended by Banker etal.  (1984), is a nonparametric frontier technique that employs mathematical programming to evaluate the relative efﬁciency of similar DMUs that use multiple inputs to generate multiple outputs, relative to a “best-practice” frontier that envelopes these observed DMUs (Cooper etal. , 2011).  To understand the model, let us consider the case where n oil companies produce snon-negative outputs (denoted by this.  Then, the production possibility set (input-output combination set) can be deﬁned as this.  Now, assuming no output can be produced without inputs, ray unboundedness (constant returns to scale- CRS), monotonicity (strong free disposability) and convexity assumptions (Banker and Thrall, 1992), Charnes etal. , 1978 deﬁned inefﬁciency as the minimum ratio of weighted inputs to weighted outputs of a ﬁrm 0, given that the inefﬁciency ratios of similar ﬁrms are more than or equal to 1.  This is deﬁned as dual converts the problem into a maximization problem which is easier to understand.  Therefore, the output-oriented Farrell (1957) technical efﬁciency score, φ0(x,y), of a given ﬁrm under CRS, can be computed by solving the equivalent linear programing problem, where φ0(x,y) is the output-oriented efﬁciency score that measures the proportional increment in the output of a DMU necessary to be efﬁcient given the level of input.  Note that φ0(x,y)=1 if the ﬁrm is efﬁcient.  Note also that this model is formulated using CRS assumption which assumes all ﬁrms to be operating at the same size (scale).  It can be reformulated on a variable returns to scale assumption by adding a third constraint N λj =1 to the model. This assumes differences in the sizes ofﬁrms.  A ratio of the CRS efﬁciency and the VRS efﬁciency is the scale efﬁciency which measures how closely the ﬁrm is operating to the most optimal scale.  A DMU is inefﬁcient when φ N1.  Notice here that the output-oriented Farrell efﬁciency score is N1 for inefﬁcient ﬁrms since it measures the ratio of expected output to current output.  The inverse of this is the Shepard distance function, which expresses the outputoriented efﬁciency in the more common sense from 0 to 1, where 1 represents an efﬁcient ﬁrm.  3. 2.  Test of returns to scale in nonparametric DEA.  It is important to test for the returns to scale of the underlying technology since diverse returns to scale axiom can bring about diverse conclusions (Camanho and Dyson, 2004.  Dyson etal. , 2001.  Ray and Desli, 1997).  Färe and Grosskopf (1985) earlier proposed an approach for determining the nature of returns to scale but it lacked statistical grounding.  Banker (1996) later proposed a semi-parametric returns to scale test that uses the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (Simar and Wilson, 2002).  We employ the bootstrapped test approach of Simar and Wilson (2002, 2011) to determine the presence of scale economies.  This is based on the hypothesis.  Simar and Wilson (2002) proposed a nonparametric test of returns to scale efﬁciency (S) based on bootstrapping and using some test statistics.  The test statistic can be estimated using the mean of ratios ð^S1Þ and ratio of meansð^S2Þ deﬁned in Eqs. (6) and (7) respectively as.  Here, the ur and vi are unknown variable weights to be determined by the optimal solution.  This model deﬁned in (2) is a nonlinear programming function which can be linearized as this.  The denominator of Eq. (2) has been normalized as the ﬁrst constraint of Eq. (3), while the numerator is minimized.  The second constraint in (3) requires one for each ﬁrm j, however, in a typical realworld problem where several ﬁrms are in the sample, this will be difﬁcult to formulate.  Therefore, the dual form of this model is easier to conceptualize.  Note also that, model (3) is an output oriented model.  The j are the technical efﬁciency scores estimated using the CRS and VRS assumptions respectively.  If H0 is true ðx.  yÞ for all DMUs (j=1,2,…,n) and S=1 otherwise S b1.  Consequently, the null hypothesis will be rejected when ^S is signiﬁcantly less than unity.  Simar and Wilson (2011) also deﬁned here, another test statistic of mean of ratios less unity which is expressed as this.  In order to statistically test these, critical values or p-values must be estimated.  However, since the distribution of the ^S under the H0 is unknown, bootstrapping method is employed to obtain the appropriate critical values.  In literature, few studies pursue this test of CRS versus VRS (Mahlberg and Url, 2010.  Simar and Wilson, 2002.  Tortosa-Ausina et al. , 2012).  The method of Simar and Wilson (2002) evaluates the scale efﬁciency of the entire sample, what they called “global” returns to scale.  In addition to testing the nature of scale assumption, this test provides justiﬁcation for whether evaluating scale efﬁciency of ﬁrms is important.  3. 3.  Bootstrap bias correction.  DEA estimates are biased and are affected by the uncertainty resulting from sample variations (Gitto and Mancuso, 2012).  Measuring such efﬁciency scores relies on relative efﬁciency since the true production frontier is unknown (Simar and Wilson, 2000).  Since these estimates are point estimates, traditional DEA scores also lack statistical properties for inference (Simar and Wilson, 2000).  This is because the frontier model used in computing the efﬁciency scores is nonparametric (maximum likelihood estimate) and assumes no particular functional form (Simar and Wilson, 2007).  Consequently, the DEA estimate is deterministic and has no account for measurement error.  These scores in their original forms are invalid for conventional statistical inferences since there is unknown serial correlations and dependencies among the estimated efﬁciencies (Hawdon, 2003.  Simar and Wilson, 2007).  The solution to these problems is the use of the bootstrapping technique in DEA assessment proposed by Simar and Wilson (1998).  In its simplest form, the bootstrap algorithm involves a computer intensive process of randomly selecting thousands of pseudo samples (using simple random sampling with replacement) from an observed set of sample data.  The aim is to obtain the statistical properties of such efﬁciency scores.  The underlying principle is to approximate the sampling distribution of the true unknown score ð^φ jðx.  yÞÞ of φj(x,y) (the original estimated score), through a data generation process to obtain the bootstrap estimate. The bootstrap bias estimate of the original score φj(x,y) can be estimated as this.  Once a set of bootstrap estimates φb.  From this, the bias-corrected estimator of the true index can be estimated as this, where B is the number of bootstrap samples which must be large (i. e.  B→∞).  Simar and Wilson (2007) recommend the use of 2000 bootstrap samples.  Bias correction introduces some additional noise that leads to the standard errors of the bias corrected estimates being larger than that of the original score (Simar and Wilson, 2000).  As such, Simar and Wilson (1998, 1999) postulate that, bias correction can be made if the sample variance of the bootstrap score is less than a third of the squared bootstrap bias estimates of the original scores. In this study, DEA estimates are further enhanced with the use of bootstrap approach which provides a useful ability to examine the statistical properties of efﬁciency scores generated through the frontier (Assaf etal. , 2010).  Therefore, to obtain the statistical properties of efﬁciency scores, the bootstrap approach must generally be combined with DEA estimation.  This corrects the biases in the original estimations and provides statistical basis for drawing inferences.  Technical details on the DEA bootstrap method and the algorithm can be adequately gained by reference to Simar and Wilson (1998, 2000).  3. 4.  Testing the distribution and density of efﬁciency estimators of different groups.  Some nonparametric statistical signiﬁcance tests have been suggested to test the differences between efﬁciency distributions.  These include Welch's mean test, Mann-WhitneyU test, Wilcoxon-signedrank test, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, Kruskal-Wallis and Friedman tests (Banker and Natarajan, 2011.  Banker, 1993.  Banker, 1996).  Note these tests have their parametric equivalents such as t-tests and ANOVA tests.  But we adopt a more all-inclusive test of equality of efﬁciency distributions, the bootstrap-based Simar–Zelenyuk-adaptedLi test (Fan and Ullah, 1999.  Li, 1996, 1999.  Pagan and Ullah, 1999.  Simar and Zelenyuk, 2006).  This nonparametric test compares the equality of unknown distributions of DEA-based efﬁciency estimates using kernel density estimations.  In the empirical literature, very few studies have tested for the densities or distributions of efﬁciency estimates (Balaguer-Coll etal. , 2010.  Chowdhury etal. , 2014.  Epure etal. , 2011.  Hadad etal. , 2012.  Hall etal. , 2012.  Kenjegalieva etal. , 2009.  Kerstens and Van de Woestyne, 2014.  Kravtsova, 2008.  Kumar and Russell, 2002.  Murillo-Melchor et al. , 2010.  Pastor and Tortosa-Ausina, 2008.  Zafra-Gómez etal. , 2010.  Zelenyuk and Zheka, 2006).  Unlike the classical nonparametric statistical test (e. g.  Mann-Whitney U test), the Simar–Zelenyuk-adapted-Li test is effective for both dependent and independent samples.  Again, given the unobserved nature of true efﬁciency estimates, the classical nonparametric statistical tests suggested by Banker (1996) do not have accurate size and hence have incorrect pvalues(Kenjegalieva etal. , 2009.  Simar and Wilson, 2002).  Besides, the test does not compare or test for medians or mean differences but rather relates the whole efﬁciency distributions (Epure etal. , 2011).  It can be applied to test for differences between groups, alternative models and different input-output speciﬁcations.  However, it has not been empirically applied within the context of comparing efﬁciencies in the oil and gas industry.  To determine potential differences in efﬁciency estimates under different ownership groups and under different operation types, we test the following hypotheses.  The null says that the density of efﬁciency estimates is the same between the two groups, implying that the two groups perform similarly.  The alternative says that the distribution of efﬁciency estimates are different between the two groups.  The left and righthand sides of the equal to sign are the probability distributions whilst the terms in the brackets are the efﬁciency scores.  The test statistic we use to test the hypotheses is the Simar–Zelenyuk-adapted-Li test (Kenjegalieva etal. , 2009.  Simar and Zelenyuk,where K is a suitable kernel function, h is the bandwidth, window width or smoothing parameter which is computed using the plugin method of Sheather and Jones (1991).  If λn ¼ nG1 =nG2 and we assume λn →λ as nG1 → ∞ where (0, ∞) is a constant, the limiting distribution of Eq. (13) is normally distributed implying that the integrated squared error is the basis for building the statistic on which the test hinges on, which is generally written as this.  But since some of the DEA efﬁciency scores can be one, leading to spurious mass at unity, the Silverman (1986) reﬂection method is employed to smooth the efﬁciency estimates equal to 1.  (Simar and Zelenyuk, 2006).  The smoothing is estimated as this.  3. 5.  Modeling inputs and outputs.  DEA efﬁciency scores are sensitive to the quality of inputs and outputs used in the model (Coelli etal. , 2005.  Dyson etal. , 2001).  It is important to clearly deﬁne the inputs and outputs that are used in the study.  This is because appropriate selection of inputs and outputs ensures validity of efﬁciency estimates (Barros and Assaf, 2009).  Three inputs and two outputs are selected in the measurement model.  These are presented in Table1.  Selection of these inputs and outputs are based on literature since previous productivity and efﬁciency studies in the international oil industry have validated the choice of these.  Oil and gas production, the end products of drilling activities, have been widely used as appropriate measures of upstream production activities.  Physical production is the main driver of revenue and hence proﬁts (Wolf, 2009).  Therefore, maximizing production levels is an indication of better performance.  All oil and gas producing ﬁrms have a goal of maximizing their oil and gas production to meet the growing demands, especially as oil and gas prices are determined by the market.  Firms can directly regulate output quantities, not the prices of their products.  Therefore, production, as measured in barrels and cubic feet, are appropriate measures of not only managerial choice using best practice technology by a ﬁrm, but also, that of the entire market.  The use of revenue as the measure of output may be preferred, since crude oil and gas production measured in quantities do not capture the effects of forcing NOCs to subsidize domestic energy prices (Eller etal. , 2011).  However, using revenue biases the efﬁciencies of NOCs as they are subject to home-country pricing regulations.  It is also important to note that oil and gas outputs measured in quantity are more likely to be correctly measured and reported, as compared to ﬁnancial revenue ﬁgure by most companies (Ike and Lee, 2014).  Therefore, whereas oil outputs are measured in millions of barrels, natural gas outputs are measured in billion cubic feet.  The inputs used in this study include oil reserves, gas reserves and number of employees.  Reserves represent quantities of liquids or hydrocarbons which have been proven, with reasonable certainty, by analysis of geoscience and engineering as commercially recoverable from known reservoirs under deﬁned economic conditions, operation methods and government regulation (OPEC, 2013).  Upstream reserves are important components of the total assets of oil companies (Eller etal. , 2011.  Wolf, 2009).  Oil and gas reserves are used as the main input proxy for material inputs necessary for producing oil and gas respectively.  Proved reserves are used since they are the most certain oil and gas resource category recoverable (EIA, 2014).  Labour is an important factor in microeconomic theory of production.  It is an essential element in generating outputs.  It is a major constituent of the total expenditure of many enterprises (Coelli etal. , 2005).  In this study, the widely used number of employees in the oil industry is used, instead of the alternative value of wages and salaries paid during the accounting year.  This is because the number of employees is not biased by wage differentials across countries as well as the possibility of wages and salaries reported in a year containing some amount carried forward from previous years (Coelli etal. , 2005).  4.  Data.  Data on the 50 ﬁrms each year on Energy Intelligence's Petroleum Intelligence Weekly ranking from 2000 to 2010 is used for this study.  It is composed of state (i. e.  NOCs) and privately (i. e.  IOCs) controlled ﬁrms which are further separated on locational basis.  These include.  ﬁrms that operate in more than one country (multinationals) and those who operate in only one country (locals).  This data has wide geographic coverage, sampling ﬁrms headquartered in all 6 continents of the world which is another cross-country contribution of this study.  In all, two outputs and three inputs are selected based on frontier efﬁciency literature in the oil industry. 