
The dependence of smallholder farmers on forest resources for their
sustenance and livelihoods is a major driver of deforestation and degradation of forest resources in tropical countries (Amare Name, 2012.  FAO,
2007).  African nations lead the global list of countries with the highest
deforestation rates (Naoto, 2006).  Forest degradation in Ethiopia is primarily being caused by human activities (Reusing, 1998.  Teketay Name,
2010) and has led to considerable habitat fragmentation (Wilcove Name,
1986), a decreasing population (Laurance Name, 2006) and extinction of
indigenous plant and animal species (Wright and Muller-Landau,
2006), as well as a decline in provision of soil protection, water conservation and favourable microclimate services (Aerts Name, 2011).  Forest
degradation is most pronounced in the highlands of the Amhara region,
where natural forests and sacred groves have continuously been
overexploited during past decades.  The deforestation has led to high
runoff resulting in degraded landscapes, decreasing crop and livestock
productivity, sedimentation of water bodies, increased food insecurity
and increasingly high loss of the resource base and the attached ecosystem services (Amare Name, 2016.  Bongers Name, 2006.  Aerts Name, 2016). 
Zege peninsula, which is located in the Amhara Regional State, is one
of the remnants of dry Afromontane forest patches in Ethiopia.  This forest has considerable religious, economic and ecological importance as it
attracts local and international pilgrims, serves as a source of livelihood
for local communities, and is rich in biodiversity (Alelign Name, 2007. 
Teklehaymanot and Giday, 2007).  However, recent studies have
shown that unsustainable wood extraction and marketing of wood
products by local populations have increased (Teklehaymanot and
Giday, 2007.  Alelign Name, 2011) thereby contributing to the degradation of the forest ecosystem and the nearby Lake Tana (Amare Name,
2012.  Amare Name, 2017).  This, in turn, has led to reduced livelihood options, economic and habitat losses, threatened biodiversity, undermined
the valuable services provided by biological diversity and increased the
risk of climate change. 
In order to reverse this trend, innovative approaches are required
that integrate environmental conservation objectives and livelihood improvements for the local communities (Alelign Name, 2011).  A more detailed understanding of the link between forests and local livelihoods
enables the promotion of more sustainable management practices
while maintaining acceptable levels of utilization (Shaanker Name,
2004.  Lepetu and Oladele, 2009).  Hence, investigating the dependence
of local communities on their forest resources is vital to devise appropriate forest management and conservation strategies. 
There is no shortage of studies that investigate how socio-economic
household characteristics and local institutions affect deforestation, forest degradation and conservation (e. g. , Adhikari Name, 2004.  Faham Name, 2008.  Bembridge and Tarlton, 1990.  Lepetu and Oladele, 2009. 
Lockwood Name, 2010.  Manyatsi and Hlophe, 2010.  Amare Name, 2016. 
Mowo Name, 2016).  However, these studies are highly speciﬁc to location and context (Kaimowitz and Angelsen, 1998.  Clark Name, 2008). 
Therefore, little consensus exists with regard to which drivers inﬂuence
deforestation and forest degradation on a generalized and abstract level
(Vadez Name, 2005.  Indarto and Mutaqin, 2016).  Local case studies (e. g. ,
Adhikari Name, 2004.  McElwee, 2008.  Inoni, 2009.  Lepetu and Oladele,
2009) are thus considered to provide reliable and useful accounts of
these processes and their causes and dynamics (Kaimowitz and
Angelsen, 1998).  Hence, in order to determine the extent of deforestation and forest degradation at the Zege peninsula and to identify the factors inducing these processes, a detailed local-level study is needed. 
Such a study could also serve as an initial step toward formulating policies conducive for an equitable and sustainable management of forest
resources (Lepetu and Oladele, 2009). 
The following socio-demographic variables have been reported in the
literature as being correlated with household wood extraction.  education
(e. g. , Ricardo Name, 1998.  Baba Name, 2015) or years of schooling of the
household head (Inoni, 2009), age of the household head, dependency
ratio (Rahut Name, 2016), male gender (Eneji Name, 2015) and household
size (Inoni, 2009.  Knight and Rosa, 2012).  Lack of employment opportunities (Manyatsi and Hlophe, 2010.  Usman Name, 2016) was positively
while income from paid wages, total land size and income from farming
(Bwalya, 2013) were negatively correlated with income from forest products (McElwee, 2008).  Extension services (Adugna, 2008), remittances
and credit (Berhanu, 2003) enabled engagement of famers in more
remunerable activities and reduced wood extraction.  Dysfunctional
local institutions increased the likelihood of deforestation (Lockwood Name, 2010.  Mowo Name, 2016).  However, the set of variables included in
these analyses varied, and the direction and strength of these relationships have not always been consistent in the literature.  Moreover, most
of these studies fail to differentiate conceptually distinct mechanisms
and motivations of smallholder-driven deforestation and forest degradation.  With the current study we, therefore, aim to undertake a comprehensive empirical assessment of the factors driving deforestation and
forest degradation by smallholders at the Zege peninsula. 
The objectives of this study are (i) to explore the economic dependence of rural populations in the study area on wood products and their
contribution to household cash income.  (ii) to identify the primary motivations of smallholders to extract forest products.  and (iii) to assess the
effectiveness of local forest management traditions.  We have used wood
extraction by smallholders as a proximate measure for deforestation
and forest degradation.  Compared to traditional land use and forest inventory-based attempts to operationalize deforestation and forest degradation, this approach has the advantage of directly linking these processes
to livelihood activities and household-level indicators of well-being
(Indarto and Mutaqin, 2016).  Furthermore, we have used the term
wood rather than fuel wood in our study since wood biomass is used
for various purposes in addition to household energy in the study area. 