 1.  Introduction The notion of ecosystem services has been accompanied by valuation methods to identify human preferences and priorities concerning nature.  Valuation studies are believed to draw decision makers' attention to the goods and services provided by natural processes (Laurans and Mermet, 2014).  Following the popularity of valuation the scientiﬁc practice of evaluating the goodness of nature - the questions of value and valuing - the process through which people assign value to objects - have gained increasing attention in literature.  Also critical perspectives have emerged.  The critics of utilitarian welfare economics have argued that the richness of what is acknowledged as good or valuable is missed in the existing monetary accounts of nature values (Polishchuk and Rauschmayer, 2012).  Monetary values, as revealed and stated preferences of self-regarding, narrowly rational individuals, are not considered to sufﬁciently reﬂect social importance (Laurans et al. , 2013.  Parks and Gowdy, 2013).  Assigning only economic value to ecosystem services is argued to make the multiplicity and nuances of human-nature relationships invisible by reducing the dimensions of importance, worth and meaning (Kosoy and Corbera, 2010.  Bowker, 2005).  In reality, the critics argue, things, beings and places matter to people for different and often incommensurable reasons (Maris, 2014).  As a response, non-monetary valuation methods have been developed to enlarge the value categories taken into account from purely economic to social and cultural values (e. g.  Tengberg et al. , 2012.  Kelemen et al. , 2014).  Often based on qualitative approaches, these methods broaden the type of information regarded as evidence of nature's significance to humans.  In addition, deliberative valuation methods move beyond individual values and address values as collective outcomes (e. g.  Maynard et al. , 2015.  Parks and Gowdy, 2013).  Despite the broadening scope, the debate has largely remained ignorant of the nature of valuing as a dynamical and situated process.  Human preferences are never set in stone but constantly transforming (Parks and Gowdy, 2013.  Gomez-Baggethun et al. , 2010).  Mapping environmental values at a particular moment, valuation studies pay little attention to how human preferences emerge from place and time speciﬁc, historical and political relations and events (Ernstson and Sörlin, 2013.  Bieling, 2014).  From this perspective, non-monetary valuation methods are problematic, too.  They address a broadened set of value categories but maintain the tendency to map values as static reﬂections of human preferences.  Polishchuk and Rauschmayer (2012) take a step forward by emphasizing the need to analyze factors inﬂuencing people's ability to gain beneﬁts from ecosystems.  Maynard et al.  (2015), in turn, point out the importance of identifying which actors value ecosystem services and beneﬁt from nature.  These approaches do not merely argue for the complexity of social processes through which nature values emerge.  Knowledge about social dynamics, power relations and accessibility inﬂuencing human preferences is essential for understanding the relevance of valuation studies and their results.  This article adds up to the debate by discussing the open-endedness of valuing from a pragmatist perspective.  We argue that the turn to the pragmatist approach in social sciences, pointing out the importance of practices and activities rather than opinions and perceptions in organizing social life, offers a fruitful starting point for understanding the emergence and transformation of environmental values.  The pragmatist perspective suggests that value judgments - be it taste, norms, appreciations, preferences, goods or respect - always come into being through everyday activities and particular situations (Heuts and Mol, 2013.  Muniesa, 2012.  Moor and Lury, 2011).  It assumes that values are practiced and performed rather than inherent characteristics of natural elements and functions.  Following this, the analytical focus is directed at how values emerge from practical ways of relating to species, ecosystems and their functions.  We introduce the pragmatist approach and its methodological orientation in the following section.  We then present empirical ﬁndings from three case studies demonstrating how values emerge from reallife valuing processes.  1) restoration of natural springs in Finland, 2) protection of the bearded vulture (Gypaetus barbatus) in the Vanoise National Park in the French Alps, and 3) management of urban biodiversity in the parks of the city of Grenoble in France.  The cases render visible three commonplace ways of relating to nature.  domestication, inheriting, and community building.  While the importance of this kind of relations has to a certain extent been underlined in literature, they have so far been largely neglected in valuation studies.  Paying attention to mundane activities enables to address social and temporal dimensions as well as speciﬁc modes of valuing leading to the outcomes that can be grasped by valuation studies.  Our ﬁndings lead us to discuss the importance and implications of the pragmatist perspective for nature conservation and point out its relevance for understanding the mechanisms that make governance of ecosystem services effective - or2.  Valuing in Practice.  In much of the current literature values have been presented as a cognitive phenomenon rather than as emerging from practical ways of living in and engaging with the world (Milton, 2002.  Polishchuk and Rauschmayer, 2012).  Although economic valuation methods operationalize also non-verbal ways of appreciating, for example, measure preferences in terms of costs, they still focus on the outcomes of valuing processes.  Pragmatist theories, in turn, can explain how values are enacted through everyday practices (Muniesa, 2012.  Moor and Lury, 2011.  Heuts and Mol, 2013).  Rather than characteristics that something has, or meanings depending on social positions and interests, values are “understood in the sense of a process, a form of mediation, of something that happens in practice, something that is done to something else, and so forth.  value is deﬁnitely not something that something just has” (Muniesa, 2012, pp.  32).  Hence, “the good is not something to pass a judgment on, in general terms and from the outside, but something to do” (Mol et al. , 2010, pp. 13).  Pragmatist ideas originate in Dewey's philosophy and discussion on the subjectivity of values.  To overcome the subject–object dualism, Dewey suggested that values emerge from practical situations (Dewey, 1915.  cited by Muniesa, 2012).  Following this, pragmatism calls analytical attention for the activities through which particular aspects of nature become signiﬁcant and relevant for people.  In this regard, from social constructionism which assumes that social groups have different views about nature based on their ways of framing it and emphasizing different qualities of its worth.  Pragmatism underlines that it is different ways of engaging with natural elements that make people care about them - or not.  the pragmatist perspective also stands out Drawing on the pragmatist approach, Jeannette Pols (2005) has demonstrated how patients' appreciations are formed in social interaction between other patients and professionals in mental health care.  She analyses the patients' preferences as emerging from particular relations and situations rather than as reﬂecting individual opinions.  The situations include the material environment that organizes the patients' lives and affects their preferences by enabling or constraining certain subject positions.  For instance, social activities may be preferred in a hospital ward with rather than without safe and comfortable corners.  Human preferences are thus a provisional outcome of particular ways of relating to other people and the materialities of everyday life.  Along these lines, Heuts and Mol (2013) suggest paying attention to the different modes of valuing, relevant to different practices of engaging with natural elements.  In particular, they discuss the difference between evaluation, classifying things as valuable, and valorizing, the activity of making something valuable, for instance by taking care of it.  Valuation studies often focus on the former, rating beneﬁts that people gain from nature although improving may be a crucial aspect of ecosystem services.  Thirdly, Heuts and Mol highlight respect as a mode of valuing.  Respect resembles the so called intrinsic value of nature, often discussed in regards to nature conservation.  However, by analyzing what makes a good tomato, Heuts and Mol remind that there are also more mundane forms of admiration and esteem, highly relevant to the practices of engaging with natural elements, such as the attention to the tomatoes' ﬂavor and appearance.  <Middle> Case Studies, Materials and Methods.  Inspired by the pragmatist approach we analyze how people are invited to engage with natural elements in new ways and to recognize their value.  Finnish landowners encouraged to restore natural springs destroyed by construction or forestry operations.  national park rangers monitoring and protecting the bearded vultures which have been reintroduced in the Alps over the last decades.  and Grenoble's gardeners persuaded to attend to insects as part of efforts to make urban green spaces more biodiversity-friendly.  We study how these elements become valued and demonstrate the importance of practice-based relations with nature as contributing to changing appreciations.  This enables us to explore the current limits and scope for improvement of ecosystem service approach which also aims at making nature more relevant in the society.  3. 1.  Restoration of Natural Springs as Key Habitats in Finland In Finland, technological change (tap water, refrigerators) as well as changing rural livelihoods (dwindling small scale farming) have decreased the use value of natural springs as regular source of water for households and farm animals, or as sites for cooling milk and other foods.  They are currently used as spare source of water or as water source in less equipped free-time residences.  Also sporadic use takes place when working, hunting, picking up berries or hiking in forest.  While the use value of natural springs and the value of natural processes maintaining the availability of clean water have diminished, many springs have been destroyed in forestry operations or due to construction work during the past decades.  Since the mid-1990s, springs have, however, been identiﬁed as key habitats in forest ecosystems.  They have been protected by the Forest Act1 and become a target of volunteer restoration activities.  Our research material about the restoration of natural springs was collected as part of a research project on forest biodiversity protection in Finland (Peltola and Tuomisaari, 2015.  Peltola, 2016).  We interviewed landowners voluntarily participating in two Eastern Finnish restoration projects and invited also non-landowners to share stories and memories about springs.  In addition, we discussed with the restoration project staff and attended a ﬁeld excursion while they were collecting data about the spring habitats.  This array of materials allowed us to capture and share a variety of practices and activities related to the springs.  3. 2.  Protection of the Bearded Vulture in the French Alps While the populations of vultures have dramatically decreased in India (van Dooren, 2011), they are currently rising in some European countries and notably in France.  The bearded vulture, a bone-eater eradicated due to hunting and poisoning campaigns in France in the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century, has been reintroduced in the Alps over the last decades.  It is slowly recovering in several mountain ranges, including the Vanoise range.  Despite the reintroduction programs, the populations remain vulnerable and sparse.  Therefore, intensive monitoring of breeding pairs is carried out by the staff of protected areas.  In Vanoise, the national park rangers spend a substantial part of their professional and personal time looking for and watching the vultures and trying to prevent speedriders from disturbing the birds at nest.  The Vanoise national park is surrounded by a large number of extensive ski resorts (Mauz, 2013), and the development of extreme sports threatens the reproduction process which takes place in winter.  For this study, we analyzed research material collected by one of the authors over the last twenty years on the social importance of iconic wild species (Mauz, 2002).  The material did not speciﬁcally concern the bearded vulture but this species was regularly and increasingly spontaneously mentioned by the informants.  In 2013 and 2014, the same author accompanied the Vanoise national park ﬁeld staff observing the vultures in winter and summer.  The ﬁeld notes enabled us to document how the rangers were affected by the vultures, for instance, how they reacted on discovering that a breeding pair has managed or failed to raise their young.  3. 3.  Managing Urban Biodiversity in the Parks and Gardens of Grenoble Like in many other cities (about Berlin, see Lachmund, 2013, and about Geneva, see Ernwein, 2015), the management of public green spaces in Grenoble has considerably changed over the last decades for both economic and ecological reasons.  Among other changes, the use of pesticides has been abandoned and replaced by predator insects.  A few beehives have also been introduced in several parks.  More recently, the city's gardeners have been strongly encouraged to shift their attention to insects that are not directly related to plant health, such as butterﬂies.  Courses have been organized to teach the gardeners to identify the butterﬂy species that they could come across in Grenoble (Arpin et al. , 2015).  We used semi-directed interviews with the gardeners involved in the courses, and with their trainers, to study how the changes have been received.  We relied on the advice of the person responsible for encouraging the gardeners to become interested in insects to choose gardeners with different levels of interest in the process.  In addition, we accompanied the gardeners twice when they were learning to spot and recognize insect species.  3. 4.  Analyzing the Practices and Processes of Valuing Following the pragmatist approach to valuing, our analytical attention bears on the accounts of speciﬁc activities, habits, routines and experiences of working or living with natural springs, vultures and insects.  Instead of asking our informants about their generic preferences, we analyze observed situations or narratives of situations in which people show their preferences and appreciations.  Hence, we follow Pols (2005) in investigating how people “enact appreciations” together and by being and living in particular ways.  This includes identiﬁcation of how their preferences are inﬂuenced by their practical relations to natural elements.  Doing such pragmatic analysis requires special attention to the research materials and methods of collecting them (Table 1).  Interviews and written narratives may allow capturing practical ways of relating with natural elements, provided they invite informants to give concrete and precise examples of their encounters with the natural elements in question.  Accompanying the informants while they are relating to these elements is, however, an even more effective way to grasp valuing in practice.  Observing social and material situations enables sharing the activities involved in valuing, access to non-verbal ways of valuing and enriched verbal expressions of nature values, as performing an activity may bring ideas and memories to the informants' mind.  Analyzing the practical relations with nature, we discovered three complementary ways of relating that seemed to be particularly crucial to how people came to value the natural elements.  First, they inserted these elements into their lives, domesticating them as it were.  Second, they mobilized them to become or remain connected to past generations and communities.  And third, they weaved together their relationships with these elements and their relationships with other people, building a complex community mixing humans and non-humans.  While presenting and analyzing these three ways of relating - domestication, inheriting and community building - we sought to identify different modes of valuing at work.  We were not primarily interested in how people evaluated the natural elements but rather in the verbal and non-verbal ways in which they attended to, showed respect towards and cared for these elements.  Dedication to particular activities or natural elements, emotional attachments as well as habits and routines indicate appreciations and respect towards natural elements, and make them signiﬁcant to people.  4.  How Natural Elements Come to Matter 4. 1.  Domestication Our informants often designated the natural elements they value as their own - not because of some property or use right, but because they are connected with and deeply affected by them.  For instance, Vanoise National Park rangers frequently talked about “their” vultures.  Bearded vultures have been back in the Alps only for some thirty years, and much less in Vanoise where the vultures were not originally reintroduced.  Our interviews revealed that the experience with and commitment to birds in general were important in identifying the roles and subjectivities of the rangers, and thus to their motivations.  The rangers had previous experience of watching other raptors, such as eagles.  Vultures were sufﬁciently new to make them intriguing without their monitoring asking too much effort from them as they were already experienced bird watchers.  Watching the vultures and searching their nesting places soon became part of their everyday preoccupations.  The possibility to draw on previous observation skills helped the rangers domesticate the newcomer.  The term domestication usually refers to control or mastery exerted over animals or plants, and involves a sense of familiarity (for a discussion of domestication, see Ingold, 1994).  While control and mastery are present but rather weak in our case examples, the sense of familiarity appears very clearly.  It is acquired by establishing a close and affectionate relationship with natural elements.  In that sense, domestication is not restricted to domestic animals and plants.  wild animals, insects and places can also be looked after and cared for, and become part of the everyday lives of people.  In this process, people learn to know them well enough to anticipate their reactions, behavior or evolution in a reasonable number of situations.  In other words, domestication also affects people, making them attuned to the natural elements (see Lorimer, 2008).  The importance of domestication in valuing processes can also be identiﬁed in the case of the gardeners who had received very little information on insects during their initial training.  Their attuning to insects was much slower and more difﬁcult than in the vulture case as working with insects was entirely new to the gardeners.  However, some of them could draw on past experiences that helped them integrate insects into their professional practice and more generally into their lives.  The personal history of a gardener who was one of the most involved in learning the new management practices is particularly telling.  He had bred exotic insects (tarantulas, praying mantis, etc. ) at home since his childhood.  Consequently, he had learned basic knowledge about insects as well as speciﬁc knowledge about insect behavior, moves and how to handle them.  In other words, he had become attuned to insect ways of living.  The interest of the city's park and garden department in insects enabled him to pursue his own long-standing interest.  Several other gardeners gradually learned to detect insects and identify some of them, sometimes painstakingly, and started paying attention to them beyond their professional activities.  One of them explained that he had spent much time during his holidays looking for and identifying butterﬂies, honing his newly acquired observation skills.  Familiarity with and getting used to the species can lead to respect towards them and inﬂuence how they are evaluated and judged (Milton, 2002).  When a species or any other natural element is entirely new - or represent the “other”, as insects often do (Lorimer, 2015) - or when there is no previous experience or habit to fuel a sense of familiarity, it takes much effort and time to include them into one's life, and be able to value them.  The springs brought up the habitual dimension of domestication.  Our attention was caught by the numerous narratives of visiting a spring when passing by without obvious need or drinking water without real thirst.  The value of the spring did not seem to stem from its use value as a water source, and not even from its recreational value, often taken into account in valuation studies as a public good provided by protected areas (e. g.  Brander et al. , 2007).  It was rather related to the collective habitual use of space and people's everyday place-making.  People made the springs as their own by regularly visiting them.  They also left drinking cups by the spring or made traditional ‘lippi’ cups from birch bark (Fig.  1).  The sense of attachment and place-making were not reduced to owning a spring.  The informants often mentioned the cups they have seen by springs, acknowledging the fact that someone pays visits to the spring.  Similarly, a path leading to a spring was appreciated as a sign that it was known to, and perhaps important for somebody.  The better the path, the more highly the spring was talked about.  As Pols (2008) reminds, habits may be a form of expressing appreciation or preferences.  Unlike value judgments, appreciations may be expressed through non-verbal means, such as leaving and cultivating signs of human presence.  4. 2.  Inheriting In addition to a sense of familiarity and attachment, our materials also suggest that natural elements are valued as carriers of personal and collective memories.  Landowner's husband.  It was a very good spring.  When the wells in the village dried out [people] took their household water from this spring.  Landowner (born 1940).  And also for the cattle.  Landowner's husband.  And for the cattle.  If there were dry years, the spring still worked well.  And when we realized the value of the spring we marked it with red tapes, at a distance of 40 m.  Every tree was marked so that it would be saved [while the surrounding forest area was drained].  But then… when the excavators came… they made the ditches… they did not notice it.  Landowner.  You know how they-.  Landowner's husband.  They did not notice the spring or the markings.  And we were terriﬁed and could only note.  “Ok, the spring is gone”.  Landowner.  They had made a ditch too close to the spring.  Landowner's husband.  They had to make a deep ditch to maintain a stronger current.  They dug below the ground water level.  And so it happened.  And now [my wife] can tell what a grief followed.  And then she started searching for possibilities to restore it. ” In this quote, the importance of the spring as a water source for previous generations had led the current owner to make an effort to protect the spring.  The value of the spring, also demonstrated by the grief experienced when it was destroyed, rose from the feeling of dependency and experience of water scarcity, even though not one's own.  The resilience it used to provide to the community made it valuable.  The story also highlights the solidarity between the community members.  you could use someone else's spring if needed.  Protecting a spring appears as a means of maintaining the memory of past ways of life and generations, and of remaining attached to them and to a speciﬁc culture of preserving and sharing important natural resources.  The goodness of natural elements can thus be evaluated on a time line (Heuts and Mol, 2013).  In the above example this took place through inheriting appreciations rather than because of direct beneﬁts enjoyed by the owners.  Barry and Smith (2008) suggest that the experience of the living connection with the past is a crucial motivation for conservation.  They argue that understanding co-evolutionary processes between human intentional activities and natural processes may offer compelling motivation to preserve the environment.  Hence, the protection of landscapes bearing marks of previous human transformation may be easier to justify than ‘wilderness’ which is lacking such obvious connection with the past.  Milton (2002), however, reminds that sometimes natural things are valued just because they have been created by natural processes and not humans.  Nevertheless, it is often the knowledge about collective appreciations that make things matter to people.  The history of nature conservation clearly added to the value of the vultures.  The bearded vulture belongs to those few species that disappeared from the Alps and are slowly recovering by dint of intensive efforts.  It demonstrates the possibility to counteract apparently irreversible trends and acts as a positive symbol for conservationist movements.  The slow increase in the number of birds is held as a success story in the otherwise somber history of nature protection.  The rangers also regard it as an indicator of the quality and importance of their work.  Caring for the vultures and seeking to favor their expansion over the Alps is a way of continuing the task started by previous nature conservationists and inscribing oneself in the tradition of nature conservation.  While the historical continuum of conservation efforts increased the value of vultures, inheriting clearly plays a role in how this species is nowadays appreciated.  The case of public gardens also shows the importance of history and experience of the past, but by contrast.  The promoters of new management principles have to counteract previous management values and practices, for instance, by giving written and oral explanations to visitors.  “We often have problems with families who have lost a loved one and ﬁnd it difﬁcult to cope with our new management practices.  [Graveyards] used to be clean, well-tended, well organized, but there was no life.  We try to persuade people not to ﬁnd themselves in inert, dead places.  Churchyards are dead enough to avoid having even more death.  We also have explanatory boards, small leaﬂets, so we communicate on that” (a gardener).  Indeed, the inhabitants of Grenoble were used to well-tended lawns and the new aspect of parks and especially churchyards after the abandonment of pesticides was criticized.  The presence of high weeds in churchyards was seen as a sign of neglect and disrespect towards the dead.  Inherited appreciations may thus inﬂuence present preferences and choices negatively.  breaking conventions made it harder for residents and gardeners to appreciate the green spaces.  Eventually this example also points out how such tensions can be dealt with by raising the possibility to evoke, discuss and enact new ideas and values, such as the “liveliness” of graveyards.  4. 3.  Community Building For a dozen years, an insect specialist has come twice a year in Grenoble to teach the volunteering gardeners to detect and identify insects.  External to the department in charge of managing the parks, she cannot be suspected of hiding economic motivations behind ecological ones.  Her teaching skills and kindness are much appreciated by the gardeners.  More recently, teaching sessions about butterﬂies have also been set up.  All sessions essentially take place outdoors and are punctuated by jokes and small games (“Those who see legs on my left, those who see no legs on my right, and the winner is. . . ”).  Some gardeners just look for insects that they bring to the rest of the group while others seek to identify them.  Learning to spot, handle, name and value the insects is clearly a collective undertaking.  Emulation, game and humor play an important role in reassuring the gardeners who were at ﬁrst scared of being lost in the huge, confusing or even creepy world of insects.  Valuing is no spontaneous, “natural” activity.  it is learned through social activities, and it takes time.  Values are also maintained through long-term social relationships.  As Pols (2005) emphasizes, people's perspectives are not characteristics of individuals but co-produced in social interactions and through the materialities of the situations in which those interactions take place.  In this sense, becoming interested in or willing to attribute value to insects is a collaborative undertaking.  The insect specialist can be seen as a facilitator of situations in which certain perspectives, feelings, and desires are enabled.  Social interactions were also essential in the Vanoise National Park, where the breeding pairs of vultures sometimes make their nests in places that are accessible to skiers, speed riders and kite surfers.  Scared by sudden or noisy intrusions, the birds may leave their nests, jeopardizing the nesting as the egg's temperature drops very quickly.  Therefore, the rangers dedicate a lot of time to informing tourism professionals about the nests, seeking to convince them to avoid these places.  For example, they put signs indicating the presence of the birds and ask the skiers to respect the birds by modifying their trajectories (Fig.  2).  In the winter of 2013, the rangers spotted ski tracks very close to a nest they had been watching since the beginning of the breeding season.  We accompanied them as they observed the nest through their telescope to check whether the birds were still sitting on the egg.  The rangers were clearly very tense.  Not a word was uttered until they could see one bird at the nest and be sure that the egg was safe.  The example points out the importance of sharing experiences in ﬁnding out Fig.  2.  A sign inviting skiers to respect the nesting vultures in the French Alps.  about people's appreciations beyond carrying out interviews.  In this case, silence was more telling than words to express the value of the vultures to the rangers.  Affects that are not articulated but shown through gestures or behaviors may help to capture respect for nature (for an example in another context see Pols, 2008).  The rangers soon found out that the uncaring skier was somebody they had met and informed about the nesting site.  This deeply upset the ranger who had shared the information as it meant that she had failed to convince the skier of the value of the birds - and of her work.  Ultimately, she interpreted the incident as a sign of the park's failure to build a community of people concerned with the birds.  The next winter, the rangers from another part of the park convinced the skiers to avoid a nest that was very close to a speed-riding spot.  They were obviously happy that a new vulture was born but also that their interaction with tourism professionals and skiers had led to this success.  These anecdotes suggest that human relations to the vultures cannot be disentangled from relations between humans.  Community building has been addressed in general as an important aspect of environmental stewardship and willingness to take care of nature (Barry and Smith, 2008.  Singh, 2013).  It underlines that what people come to think as valuable in nature can result from respect towards other people's appreciations.  If the ski instructors respect the rangers' commitment and appreciations, they are more likely to avoid disturbing the animals, even if they do not value the birds as such.  Indirect relations with natural elements may thus play a crucial role in how nature is taken into account in everyday life.  Skiing deliberately close to a vulture's nest reﬂects low respect and appreciation not only towards the animals but also towards those who care for them.  The spring case also proves the power of community building.  Inspired by our research, one of the interviewees had contacted a friend and persuaded him to go searching for a forgotten spring.  The informant was planning to restore the spring, get it included in the ofﬁcial databases and notify the landowner to prevent the spring from being destroyed during future forestry operations.  Our research on and dedication to springs strengthened the value of springs in his eyes - to the extent that he was ready to take voluntary actions and persuade others to pay attention to springs.  Another example of the collective nature of valuing concerns the efforts to keep natural springs pleasant for other people to visit.  Several informants in our study explained that they often clear the dirt and fallen leaves away.  In her study on community forestry, Singh (2013) pointed out that the mundane practices of care, such as gathering and patrolling in the forest, potentially strengthen affective ties between people and the forest.  The everyday routines of care also intensiﬁed the interaction between the members of the local community and transformed their ways of living the forest.  Barry and Smith (2008) take the idea even further and emphasize that fostering social ties is essential to environmental stewardship and that community building takes place through acts of keeping the environment livable for the community.  Hence, ordinary tasks can be seen as a form of collective labor.  “Collecting garbage, removing snow, tending gardens and other green spaces, monitoring air quality, and maintaining energy-efﬁcient housing” are means of both nurturing the social relations and caring for the environment, and can be “embraced as the ordinary activities of citizenship” (pp.  580).  5.  Tensions and Overlaps Between Modes of Valuing The three ways of engaging with natural elements we identiﬁed domestication, inheriting and community building - are probably commonplace and likely to be found in other empirical cases.  Other forms of engaging can probably be found when the scope of everyday practices relating to nature is extended for research.  The ones that proved to be signiﬁcant in our case studies inﬂuenced valuing processes to various extents, and sometimes negatively.  They also involved various modes of valuing.  In addition to verbal value judgments, which are generally at the heart of valuation methods, appreciations were expressed in the form of dedication to particular activities or natural elements.  Furthermore, people admired the natural elements and sought to improve them.  These modes of valuing - evaluation, respect, and valorization were, however, unequally present and interfered with each other in complex ways.  In the churchyards of Grenoble the adoption of new management practices by the gardeners has caused the most vivid tensions.  The aesthetic value of the weeds thriving in the churchyards after abandoning pesticides was mainly negative for both the visitors and the gardeners.  Yet, the latter explain that an important “visual effort” has enabled them to “tolerate” the presence of weeds.  But even if they ﬁnd it difﬁcult to value the beauty of the weeds, some gardeners argue that respecting and caring for the dead can be reconciled with respect and care for the weeds and insects that are crucial to biodiversity.  They see the arrival of weeds and insects as a way of improving the value of churchyards by introducing life into an otherwise “dead” place.  Tensions between modes of valuing also appear in the spring restoration case.  In the following written memory, valorizing appears as the dominant mode of valuing.  “Close to my childhood home there is a spring in the middle of the forest.  That spring offered comfort and calmness to me.  For decades, since my childhood, I've tended the spring with love.  I've cleared the mosses and dirt away.  I've cleared the creek and made it ripple and gurgle and bubble again.  The forest around the spring has been clear cut, but the spring keeps on bubbling. ” [woman - age unknown].  The woman's nurturing of the place has made it precious to her and the value has remained despite the changes in the surrounding environment that seemingly decreased the aesthetic or recreational value of the spring and the possibility to enjoy and admire it (Fig.  3).  Similarly to the story about vultures and to explaining churchyard management practices to visitors, this implies that natural elements are valued not just because of their qualities or beneﬁts but for the history and process of their creation, maintenance and protection (see also Milton, 2002), as well as the time and effort invested.  However, the tending of springs in the form of removing the debris may be in contradiction with the goals of restoration, for example, maintaining microbial processes in the water.  Several informants mentioned how their idea of a good spring had been contrasted with the objectives of the restoration project, which in fact is another form of adding value to the springs.  One of the interviewees even admitted that he had improved the ﬂow in the trickle draining the spring after the restoration project had stanched the ﬂow.  Another landowner, however, told us she had learned to respect her spring in a new way after the restoration project.  because the spring had stopped having any use value for her as a water source, it could as well be left alone and admired as such.  The different modes of valuing also introduce different temporalities.  While evaluation and judging are focused on present values, valorization is future-oriented (Heuts and Mol, 2013).  Respect, in particular, can bring in the historical timeline and esteem of something that was important in the past.  The temporal dimension of valuing can be systematically included in research on nature values at least by three strategies.  First, asking about habits and routines can reveal how people take care for natural elements, aiming to improve their future value.  Second, long term studies show the evolution of appreciations.  In the case of the bearded vulture, for example, interviews carried out over a long time span enabled us to learn how the species was gradually domesticated by the rangers.  Third, asking informants to tell narratives about past encounters and relationships with natural elements enables to study how these relationships evolved over time.  We employed this strategy in both the spring and insect cases.  <Conclusion> Conclusions.  Environmental valuation methods designed to inform conservation policies are mainly focused on what people do or do not value.  However, we argue that understanding how people come to value what they value is just as important.  Making sense of valuing processes enables to better acknowledge the various motivations and sources for preferences, and hence, to understand why people are willing to protect some aspects of nature - or why they are not.  Such an understanding helps to interpret the outcomes of valuation studies and evaluate their relevance to conservation.  Understanding real-life motivations and behaviors is fundamental to the effectiveness of the concept of ecosystem services, promoted as an approach to induce sustainable behavior (Parks and Gowdy, 2013.  Vatn, 2010.  Hiedanpää and Bromley, 2014.  Muraldian and Rival, 2012).  The pragmatist approach is in line with the critique emphasizing the need to understand better the factors allowing people to value particular elements or functions in nature.  It suggests that such factors can be explored by analyzing everyday activities and the modes of valuing Fig.  3.  According to the Finnish forestry regulations, natural springs are deﬁned as “valuable natural objects” which should be left untouched during forestry operations to protect the biological value of these habitats.  A natural spring with a buffer zone of standing trees can be left in the middle of a clear cut area as in this picture.  Photo.  Taru Peltola.  T.  Peltola, I.  Arpin / Ecological Economics 142 (2017) 12–20inherent in these activities.  Importantly, pragmatism helps to understand how preferences and motivations emerge and change in relation to everyday activities - and how their transformation can be encouraged.  Fair and efﬁcient policies build on people's motivations and reasons for valuing their environments rather than downplay them.  Taking valuing processes, not just their outcomes, into account has several other beneﬁts and implications.  First, the pragmatist approach reminds that people do not value nature in general but those natural elements - species, individual animals, habitats, landscape or places - that they encounter, domesticate and learn to relate with in their everyday life.  Values are embedded in speciﬁc relationships between people and their environment.  These relationships are not only direct but also indirect as our empirical examples about collective and inherited appreciations pointed out.  Nevertheless, the relations need to be explored to understand the provisional outcomes of the valuing processes.  Second, abandoning the idea that values are held by individuals or social groups independently from concrete situations enables a more dynamic perspective on values.  Instead of mapping static values, pragmatism encourages the exploration of how the activities affecting value formation overlap and inﬂuence each other, and what kind of synergies, tensions and contradictions emerge as a consequence.  A clear example of this is the signiﬁcance of inheriting.  Natural elements can be valued because of their common history with humans.  However, traditions and traditional ways of relating to nature can also become the source of devaluing some aspects of nature.  In the latter case, breaking the tradition may help to bring change, whereas in the former case, cherishing tradition may be the key for success in preserving natureThe pragmatist approach demonstrates the possibility to enhance people's motivations to protect species and habitats by inventing and experimenting new ways of engaging with natural elements, as illustrated by the pesticide-free management of Grenoble's churchyards.  Instead of making decisions based on current appreciations, the pragmatist perspective can help to identify ways to alter the relationship with natural elements, and hence the appreciations and preferences of people.  Third, the pragmatist perspective enables to discuss the politics and performativity of valuation methods (see also Asdal and Marres, 2014), and their limits and potential to inform environmental governance.  Valuation studies have been argued to neglect the fact that values do not exist independently from valuation techniques but rather get formed, at least in part, during valuation process (Parks and Gowdy, 2013.  Moor and Lury, 2011.  Muniesa, 2012).  The pragmatist perspective, while encouraging the use of methodologies that are sensitive to reallife valuing processes, can help to understand how the methods used may affect the outcomes.  Our own study demonstrated the importance of social dimensions of valuing, including the dedication of the authors to speciﬁc topics.  Finally, the pragmatist perspective enables a two-directional analysis of the interactions between humanity and nature, avoiding the simplistic idea of humans as mere users of the beneﬁts that ecosystems provide (see Bieling, 2014).  What is considered valuable and worth preserving in nature may be the result of human labor and human-induced transformations (Bowker, 2005.  Barry and Smith, 2008).  Acknowledging humans as active agents in the complex ecosystem dynamics, the pragmatist approach to valuing helps to question the dualism between nature and culture that has been widely criticized (Latour, 1993 [1991].  Descola, 2013 [2005].  Ingold, 1994).  It enables to respond to one of the challenges of nature conservation.  how to take into account not only the natural elements but also the practical relations with them that matter to people.  Acknowledgements We are grateful to all our informants who shared insights about their relations to natural springs, vultures and insects.  The work was supported by the Academy of Finland (grants 133451, 1331183).  Material collection for the spring case was done by Tuuli Paajanen at the Finnish Environment Institute.  Veli Lyytikäinen offered valuable insights about natural spring habitats and Kaisa Lindell from the Finnish Forest Centre not only gave the inspiration for this case study but helped us to collectReferences Arpin, I. , Mounet, C. , Geoffroy, D. , 2015.  Inventaires naturalistes et rééducation de l’attention.  Le cas des jardiniers de Grenoble.  Etudes rurales 195, 89–107.  Asdal, K. , Marres, N. , 2014.  Performing environmental change.  the politics of social science methods.  Environ Plan A 46, 2055–2064.  Barry, J. , Smith, K. , 2008.  Landscape, politics, labour and identity.  stewardship and the contribution of green political theory.  Landsc.  Res.  33 (5), 565–585.  Bieling, C. , 2014.  Cultural ecosystem services as revealed through short stories from residents of the Swabian Albs.  Ecosyst.  Serv.  8, 207–215.  Bowker, G. C. , 2005.  Time, money and biodiversity.  In.  Kelly, J. D. , Jauregui, B. , Mitchell, S. T. , Walton, J.  (Eds. ), Global Assemblages.  Technology, Politics, and Ethics as Anthropological Problems.  Blackwell, Malden, MA, pp.  107–123.  Brander, L. M. , Beukering van, P. , Cesar, H. S. J. , 2007.  The recreational value of coral reefs.  a meta-analysis.  Ecol.  Econ.  63, 209–218.  Descola, P. , 2013.  [2005].  Beyond Nature and Culture.  The University of Chicago Press.  Dewey, J. , 1915.  The logic of judgments of practise (part I).  J.  Philos.  Psychol.  Sci.  Methods 12 (19), 505–523.  van Dooren, T. , 2011.  Vultures and their people in India.  equity and entanglement in a time of extinctions.  Aust.  Humanit.  Rev.  Ernstson, H. , Sörlin, S. , 2013.  Ecosystem services as technology of globalization.  on articulating values in urban nature.  Ecol.  Econ.  86, 274–284.  Ernwein, M. , 2015.  Jardiner la ville néolibérale.  La fabrique urbaine de la nature.  Thèse en Sciences économiques et sociales, mention géographie, Genève.  Gomez-Baggethun, E. , deGroot, R. , Lomas, P. L. , Montes, C. , 2010.  The history of ecosystem services in economic theory and practice.  from early notions to markets and payment schemes.  Ecol.  Econ.  69, 1209–1218.  Heuts, F. , Mol, A. , 2013.  What is a good tomato.  A case of valuing in practice.  Valuation Stud.  1 (2), 125–146.  Hiedanpää, J. , Bromley, D. W. , 2014.  Payments for ecosystem services.  durable habits, dubious nudges, and doubtful efﬁcacy.  J.  Inst.  Econ.  10 (2), 175–195.  Ingold, T. , 1994.  From trust to domination.  an alternative history of human-animal relations.  In.  Manning, A. , Serpell, J.  (Eds. ), Animals and Human Society.  Changing Perspectives.  1–22.  Routledge, London.  Kelemen, E. , García-Llorente, M. , Pataki, G. , Martín-López, B. , Gómez-Baggethun, E. , 2014.  Non-monetary techniques for the valuation of ecosystem service.  In.  Potschin, M. , Jax, K.  (Eds. ), OpenNESS Reference Book.  EC FP7 Grant Agreement no.  308428 Available via.  www. openness-project. eu/library/reference-book.  Kosoy, N. , Corbera, E. , 2010.  Payments for ecosystem services as commodity fetishism.  Ecol.  Econ.  69, 1228–1236.  Lachmund, J. , 2013.  Greening Berlin.  The Co-production of Science, Politics, and Urban Nature.  The MIT Press, Cambrige (MA), London.  Latour, B. , 1993.  [1991] We Have Never Been Modern.  Harvard University Press.  Laurans, Y. , Mermet, L. , 2014.  Ecosystem services economic valuation, decision-support system or advocacy.  Ecosyst. 