 
Following a series of accounting scandals in the early 20 0 0s (e. g. , Enron and WorldCom), capital market participants 
questioned how auditors and regulators failed to identify the misreporting.  However, in a comprehensive examination of 
fraud cases from 1996 to 2004, Dyck Name (2010) ﬁnd that a ﬁrm’s employees identify and reveal fraud more often (17% 
of the time) than both auditors (10%) and the corporate ﬁnance division of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 
(7%).  Given that employees provide ex-post discipline of ﬁnancial reporting by helping uncover fraud after it has occurred, 
a natural question is whether employees are able to impose ex-ante discipline on ﬁnancial reporting before violations take We examine whether the quality of a ﬁrm’s workforce is associated with ﬁnancial reporting quality.  We proxy for the 
quality of a ﬁrm’s workforce in two ways: (1) the average education level of the workforce in the Metropolitan Statistical 
Area (MSA) where the ﬁrm is headquartered, and (2) the average education level of the workforce across all MSAs mentioned 
2 Using these measures, we examine two broad research questions.  First, are highly educated 
in the ﬁrm’s Form 10-K ﬁling.  
employees associated with improved mandatory disclosure quality.  Second, are highly educated employees associated with 
improved voluntary disclosure quality.  
Prior research examines whether executive (i. e. , CEO and CFO) characteristics contribute to ﬁnancial reporting quality 
( Aier Name, 2005; Bamber Name, 2010; Dyreng Name, 2010; Ge Name, 2011; Demerjian Name, 2013 ).  However, the literature 
largely ignores whether characteristics of the ﬁrm’s entire workforce are associated with ﬁnancial reporting outcomes.  Because a ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial data originate far from the C-suite, we argue that the ﬁrm’s entire workforce plays an important 
role in shaping the quality of a ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial reporting.  Furthermore, while lawmakers and regulators have traditionally 
focused on other ﬁrm monitors (i. e. , investors, board of directors, the SEC, auditors, and corporate executives) to improve 
reporting quality, we examine whether a high-quality workforce is associated with better reporting outcomes.  
High-quality employees can improve their ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial reporting environment in at least two ways.  First, they can 
provide superior information as inputs to executives’ reporting choices.  Second, high-quality employees can identify and 
uncover intentional ﬁnancial misreporting, perhaps even before it develops into a larger misreporting event.  Our proxy for 
high-quality employees, the education level of the ﬁrm’s workforce, is associated with both channels through which employees can improve ﬁnancial reporting.  First, more educated employees provide their superiors with higher-quality inputs 
(i. e. , fewer errors), resulting in higher-quality reporting outcomes ( Merchant and Rockness, 1994; O’ Fallon and Butterﬁeld, 
2005 ).  Second, highly educated employees are more likely to recognize when a transaction appears abnormal, elevating con3 Consistent with this point, 
cerns to management before it becomes a more serious misstatement ( Glaeser and Saks, 2006 ).  
Call Name (2016) ﬁnd that executives grant more stock options to rank and ﬁle employees during periods of misreporting in 
an effort to discourage whistleblowing, suggesting that executives engaged in misconduct believe their employees have the 
ability to uncover information that would bring ﬁnancial misconduct to light.  
We ﬁnd signiﬁcant variation in education levels throughout the United States.  
4 Speciﬁcally, the highest education levels 
are in Boston, Silicon Valley, and several cities that are home to large public universities (e. g. , Iowa City, IA, Columbia, MO, 
Madison, WI), suggesting that ﬁrms with operations in these areas employ more highly educated employees with greater 
ability to improve ﬁnancial reporting quality.  On the other hand, Dallas, Los Angeles, and Las Vegas are in MSAs that are 
among the bottom half of workforce education, suggesting that ﬁrms with operations in these areas often rely on employees 
with less ability to improve reporting quality.  
We ﬁrst examine the association between education levels and three attributes of mandatory reporting quality—the quality of the ﬁrm’s accruals, the propensity of the ﬁrm to report an internal control weakness, and the likelihood the ﬁrm 
restates its ﬁnancial statements ( Dechow and Dichev, 2002; Hennes Name, 2008; McGuire Name, 2012 ).  After controlling 
for several MSA-level attributes (i. e. , macroeconomic indicators, microeconomic indicators, and location speciﬁc monitoring 
variables), we ﬁnd that the average education level of a ﬁrm’s workforce is positively associated with accruals quality, negatively associated with the likelihood that the ﬁrm reports an internal control weakness, and negatively associated with 
the likelihood that the ﬁrm restates its ﬁnancial statements.  These ﬁndings suggest that ﬁrms with high-quality employees 
exhibit superior mandatory disclosure quality.  
Next, we examine whether these ﬁndings extend to the ﬁrm’s voluntary reporting quality—namely, the quality of management earnings forecasts.  These forecasts differ from mandatory disclosures in that they are “forward-looking” (rather 
than “backward-looking”) and are not subject to an external audit.  As a result, there is more discretion afforded to managers 
when making voluntary disclosure choices, and the impact of high-quality employees on the quality of these disclosures is 
unclear.  Consistent with our results related to mandatory disclosures, we ﬁnd that the average education level of a ﬁrm’s 
workforce is positively associated with the frequency and horizon of management forecasts, and is negatively associated 
with absolute forecast errors, forecast bias, and forecast range.  These ﬁndings suggest that employee quality is positively 
associated with voluntary disclosure quality.  
In additional analyses, we ﬁnd strong support for the notion that employee quality at the ﬁrm’s headquarters is associated with reporting outcomes, with relatively weaker support for the role of employees at non-headquarter locations.  
Further, although only a very limited number of ﬁrms in our sample changed their headquarters location during our sample 
period, we ﬁnd that changes in the education level in the headquarters location for these ﬁrms (i. e. , moving from a less 
educated MSA to a more educated MSA) is generally positively associated with changes in both mandatory and voluntary 
disclosure reporting quality.  We therefore conclude that our main ﬁndings are primarily driven by the quality of employees at the ﬁrm’s headquarters, suggesting that aggregating and summarizing accounting data from across the ﬁrm plays a 
unique role in the ﬁrm’s reporting outcomes.  However, we note that we measure the education level of non-headquarter 
employees with considerable error, which may contribute to our relatively weaker results for these employees.  Therefore, 
our ﬁndings should not be interpreted to suggest that employees at non-headquarter locations are irrelevant to ﬁnancial reporting outcomes.  
Our study contributes to the literature on ﬁnancial misreporting and corporate governance.  Recent research suggests that 
employees play a role in monitoring the ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial reporting.  For example, Bowen Name (2010) ﬁnd that employee 
whistleblowing events are associated with negative stock price reactions, future earnings restatements, subsequent lawsuits, 
and poor future ﬁrm performance.  Similarly, Dyck Name (2010) ﬁnd that employees detect and reveal 17% of frauds, exceeding the rate of auditors (10%) and regulators (7%). 