 
Various business and political leaders in the United States have expressed concerns that the U. S.  system of taxing multinationals effectively subsidizes foreign takeovers ( White, 2014 ; Hatch, 2014 ).  Prior research on mergers and acquisitions 
(M&A) demonstrates how variation in tax rates ( Scholes and Wolfson, 1990, Arulampalam Name, 2010 ) and in tax systems 
( Huizinga and Voget, 2009 ; Feld Name, 2016 ) impact the market for corporate control.  As a result, ﬁrms under a worldwide 
tax system are tax-disadvantaged acquirers .  Furthering this line of inquiry, we posit that ﬁrms under a worldwide tax system 
are also tax-favored targets of foreign acquirers.  We ﬁnd that U. S.  ﬁrms with locked-out earnings are tax-favored to foreign 
acquirers (or equivalently tax-disfavored to U. S.  acquirers).  
Foreign earnings “lockout” results when ﬁrms avoid or delay foreign earnings repatriation.  Under the U. S.  worldwide tax 
system, taxes owing to the U. S.  government on the earnings of foreign subsidiaries are deferred until those earnings are 
repatriated to the U. S.  Consequently, ﬁrms’ repatriation decisions are sensitive to the level of repatriation taxes ( Desai et 
al. , 2001; Hines and Hubbard, 1990 ) and tax incentives lead to higher overseas cash holdings ( Foley Name, 2007 ).  Hanlon 
Name (2015) and Edwards Name (2016) demonstrate that ﬁrms use “trapped cash” to make suboptimal foreign investments, 
increasing total lockout.  A foreign acquirer may be able to free a target’s foreign subsidiaries’ locked-out earnings from the 
U. S.  worldwide tax system using “out-from-under” strategies, utilizing trapped cash elsewhere and liquidating suboptimal 
foreign investments so the proceeds may be more eﬃciently redeployed.  
To test this hypothesized relation between tax lockout in target U. S.  ﬁrms and the nationality of acquirers – foreign 
versus U. S.  – we use a sample of 4611 majority acquisitions of U. S.  public company target ﬁrms from 1995 to 2010.  We 
measure lockout using the hand-collected balance of permanently reinvested earnings (PRE) reported in the tax footnote.  
Employing a probit model, we observe a positive association between the target ﬁrm’s level of PRE and the probability that 
the acquirer is foreign.  The effect is economically signiﬁcant: a standard deviation increase in PRE is associated with a 12% 
relative increase in the likelihood that an acquirer is foreign.  These ﬁndings suggest that potential U. S. -based acquirers of 
U. S.  targets with trapped cash and suboptimal foreign investments are losing out to foreign acquirers.  
Building upon these initial ﬁndings and improving identiﬁcation of our main hypothesized effect, we posit that foreign 
acquirers of U. S.  target ﬁrms with higher levels of tax lockout are more likely to be residents of countries that use territorial 
tax systems.  In a territorial system, foreign earnings are subject to low or no home country tax, thereby eliminating the 
lockout effect.  Categorizing acquisitions according to acquirer tax systems, we observe a signiﬁcant association between 
our lockout measures and foreign acquisitions occurring under the territorial (as opposed to worldwide) tax regime.  
In an additional test we exploit an exogenous change in the tax system for a subset of acquirers: during our sample 
period, ﬁve OECD countries switched from worldwide to territorial tax systems.  As it is unlikely that switching tax systems 
increased incentives to acquire U. S.  ﬁrms with higher levels of tax lockout for reasons other than taxation (e. g. , general 
preference for targets with greater foreign activity or higher proﬁtability), this test allows for stronger causal identiﬁcation.  
Taken together, these tests provide strong evidence that the relationship between a target’s level of locked-out earnings and 
the likelihood of an acquirer being foreign is concentrated in acquiring ﬁrms that operate under territorial tax systems.  
Our ﬁndings suggest that U. S.  potential acquirers of U. S.  target ﬁrms with greater levels of locked-out earnings are losing 
out to foreign acquirers.  These results speak directly to the current U. S.  policy debate on repatriation taxes as well as the 
broader issue of the relative merits of territorial versus worldwide (with deferral) taxation systems.  These ﬁndings are also 
relevant to those countries considering a transition between worldwide and territorial tax systems, as notably undertaken 
by the U. K.  and Japan.  Likewise, this examination of the relationship of tax systems, lockout, and foreign acquisitions of U. S.  
target ﬁrms highlights a facet of the current worldwide tax system and may serve to inform its adjustment or alteration.  
The subsequent section of this paper provides institutional information and discusses prior literature.  Section 3 describes 
the hypotheses.  Section 4 details the sample selection and research design.  Section 5 presents our ﬁndings.  Section 6 discusses additional analyses.  Section 7 concludes.  
2.  Institutional background and prior literature 
2. 1.  U. S.  tax and accounting treatment of foreign earnings 
The U. S.  taxes its multinational corporations on a worldwide basis.  For a single legal entity, worldwide earnings are taxed 
immediately in the period earned.  For ﬁrms comprised of multiple legal entities, however, U. S.  taxation of income earned 
in foreign subsidiaries is typically deferred until repatriation.  This U. S.  tax is reduced by foreign tax credits associated with 
foreign taxes paid on foreign earnings.  This calculation is complicated by foreign operations in multiple jurisdictions, but 
the residual tax due is approximately equal to any excess of the U. S.  tax rate over the weighted average rate of the foreign 
jurisdictions.  Given the option of deferral and the high U. S.  corporate tax rate, there is a potential policy concern that foreign 
investment by U. S.  multinationals is ineﬃciently subsidized, so that ﬁrms are induced to reinvest their earnings abroad even 
when the potential returns are lower than those available domestically, effectively “locking out” these earnings.  
Under U. S.  Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, the expectation future U. S.  tax payments associated with foreign 
earnings requires ﬁrms to record a deferred tax expense and the related deferred tax liability.  However, Accounting Standards Codiﬁcation 740 allows an exception to this rule, called the Indeﬁnite Reversal Exception.  If management has the 
intent and ability to indeﬁnitely reinvest the earnings of a foreign subsidiary, the permanently reinvested earnings (PRE) 
designation is invoked, whereby the company avoids recognizing the deferred tax expense.  This designation must be supported by speciﬁc plans for future ﬁnancing and investment, or be accompanied by an assertion of intent to distribute the 
earnings in a tax-free liquidation.  
2. 2.  Prior literature 
Theoretical models, such as those in Hartman (1985) and Scholes Name (2014) , show that repatriation decisions are 
chieﬂy driven by differences in marginal after-tax rates of return, in the foreign jurisdiction relative to the U. S.  In these 
models, the repatriation tax itself is irrelevant, since the foreign earnings are already “trapped” and must eventually face 
the repatriation tax; it does not matter if the ﬁrm can defer this tax burden – the present value of taxes due is the same 
whether paid immediately or in the future.  Of course, these results might not be obtained in a richer model.  For example, 
if the repatriation tax is not constant over time, then a ﬁrm will delay repatriations until periods with low tax rates, even 
at the cost of lower after-tax foreign returns ( De Waegenaere and Sansing, 2008 ).  Tax-induced lockout effect is exacerbated 
by the accounting designation of foreign earnings as PRE and multinationals’ desire to maintain higher book income by 
avoiding the deferred tax expense on foreign earnings.  This arises because an actual repatriation would force the immediate 
recognition of the related domestic tax expense, which, in the case of PRE, by deﬁnition, had not yet been recognized.  In 
fact, Graham Name (2011) survey tax executives and ﬁnd that these two parallel effects are equally important in driving 
ﬁrms’ initial foreign location and subsequent repatriation and reinvestment decisions.  
This study contributes to the literature on the role of the frictions created by the system of worldwide taxation on crossborder M&A. 