
The literature on oil and commodity markets during the last
decade has shown the importance to identify and understand the
causes and consequences of commodity price shocks.  Some of the
key insights (Kilian, 2008a) are that (i) most commodity prices
are endogenous with respect to the global business cycle, and (ii)
demand shocks cause delayed and sustained price movements while
supply shocks have small and transitory effects.  Whereas disentangling the supply and demand components in a structural model is
now common in the empirical literature to understand commodity price dynamics (especially for crude oil price), some important
concerns are missing regarding the effect of second-order moments
(especially the one related to uncertainty). 
So far, the previous literature is indeed silent on the effects of
macroeconomic uncertainty on the volatility of commodity prices. 
This issue is nevertheless worthy of investigation since the impact
of uncertainty on the global economy has been widely documented. 
For instance, theories of investment under uncertainty explain
why under irreversibility condition or ﬁxed costs, uncertainty over
future returns reduces current investment, hiring, and consumption
through an “option value to wait”. 1 The starting point is that at a
micro level, uncertainty may diminish the willingness of ﬁrms to
commit resources to irreversible investment and the readiness of
consumers to spend or allocate their earning and wages.  It follows
that micro-level uncertainty may be transmitted to the macro level
because uncertainty about the return to investment at a micro level
may create cyclical ﬂuctuations in aggregate investment at a macro
level (see Bernanke, 1983). 2 The crucial point here is that there is
no reason why such mechanism at both micro and macro levels
should not be extended to commodity markets.  Indeed, at a micro
level, commodity ﬁrms in several sectors (especially in oil industry)
are confronted to high costs and should be impacted by uncertainty
about returns to investment.  Similarly, at a macro level, as prices are
related to global supply and demand conditions, uncertainty about
macroeconomic aggregates should also affect commodity prices. 
In the wake of the literature about the origins of commodity price
movements, the aim of this paper is to investigate the impact of
uncertainty on commodity price returns and volatility.  Regarding the
previous literature, the bulk of the studies have looked at the reverse
relationship and highlighted the signiﬁcance of uncertainty in oil
prices in explaining economic ﬂuctuations and in exacerbating asymmetry in the oil price-economic activity nexus. 3 All of them suggest
that oil price uncertainty impacts output, investment, and consumption in the U. S.  and G-7 countries in an asymmetric way.  While
providing interesting results, these studies suffer from an important
drawback since it is well known that the effect of uncertainty in
the oil price—and commodity prices in general—on the macroeconomy should be small, by construction of the underlying economic
models.  As argued by Kilian (2014), energy is indeed not necessarily a key component of the cash ﬂow of investment projects, making
the effect of oil price uncertainty on output not plausible.  It follows
that looking at the reverse transmission from macroeconomic uncertainty to the volatility of commodity prices is more relevant with
regard to the modern view of the endogenous component of prices. 
As stressed above, this question has not been widely addressed in
the literature.  Some limited exceptions can, however, be mentioned. 
First, regarding theoretical papers, (i) Pindyck (1980) discusses the
implications of uncertainty associated with oil demand and reserves
on the oil price behavior.  (ii) Litzenberger and Rabinowitz (1995)
analyze backwardation behavior in oil futures contracts.  and (iii)
Alquist and Kilian (2010) allow for endogenous convenience yield
and endogenous inventories, and stress that it is uncertainty about
the shortfall of supply relative to demand that matters.  Second,
among empirical papers, one may refer to (i) Kilian (2009) and Kilian
and Murphy (2014) who design as a precautionary demand shock
a shock that reﬂects shifts in uncertainty and treat macroeconomic
uncertainty as unobserved.  and (ii) Van Robays (2013) who investigates whether observed macroeconomic uncertainty changes the
responsiveness of the oil price to shocks in oil demand and supply. 
Our paper extends this literature on the relationship between
macroeconomic uncertainty and commodity prices in several ways. 
Speciﬁcally, we address this question by examining the inﬂuence of
macroeconomic uncertainty on a large panel of commodity markets. 
More precisely, we consider four groups of 19 raw materials (energy,
precious metals, agriculture, and industry) to investigate whether
the impact of macroeconomic uncertainty on commodity prices differs depending on the type of market.  In addition, with uncertainty
evolving through time, we account for this feature by assessing its
impact at various horizons—namely short-, medium-, and long-run
horizons—to test whether its effect varies according to its maturity. 
From a theoretical viewpoint, ﬂuctuations in uncertainty may indeed
have different impacts through time on the economy (Bloom, 2014),
with usually two negative channels in the short run (the real option
and risk aversion/risk premium effects4) and two positive channels
in the long run (the growth option and Oi-Hartman-Abel effects5). 6
Turning to methodological issues, our contribution is threefold.  First,
we retain a nonlinear structural threshold vector autoregressive
(TVAR) speciﬁcation that allows us to identify different uncertainty
states, and we investigate whether the impact of uncertainty varies
according to its level and variability.  Second, because macroeconomic uncertainty is unobservable, assessing its effect on commodity
markets obviously requires us to ﬁnd an adequate proxy.  To this
end, we rely on Jurado Name (2015) and consider a robust approach
to measuring macroeconomic uncertainty.  The retained proxy uses
a wide range of monthly macroeconomic and ﬁnancial indicators
and is based on the underlying idea of a link between uncertainty
and predictability.  In this sense, we go further than the previous
literature—particularly compared with Van Robays’s (2013) paper,
which is the closest to ours—which generally relies on dispersion
measures such as conditional volatility (e. g.  conditional variance of
world industrial production growth or of U. S.  GDP growth estimated
from a GARCH(1,1) process) or the VXO index of Bloom (2009).  As
we will see, an important drawback in using GARCH-type models
to proxy uncertainty is that they are inherently backward-looking,
whereas investors’ expectations tend to be forward-looking.  More
generally, and thanks to a detailed robustness analysis, we show that
the choice of the uncertainty measure is crucial to avoid erroneously
attributing to uncertainty ﬂuctuations that are actually predictable. 
Third, for the sake of completeness, we also investigate how macroeconomic uncertainty can generate uncertainty in commodity prices,
looking at second-order moments transfer.  To this end, we construct
a robust proxy of commodity market uncertainty based on macroeconomic uncertainty, and provide a historical decomposition that
allows us to determine the contribution of macroeconomic uncertainty to commodity price uncertainty.  For the speciﬁc case of oil,
we further disentangle supply and demand components of oil price
uncertainty to assess their respective contribution during periods of
uncertainty in the market. 
The central message of the paper is that most of commodity
price returns are affected by macroeconomic uncertainty, the effect
being more important for commodities that are strongly related
to the global business cycle (such as oil, agricultural, and industrial markets).  Then, in addition to traditional supply and demand
shocks, macroeconomic uncertainty constitutes another key channel
through which economic fundamentals may impact commodity
prices.  Maturity seems to matter depending on the commodity type. 
long-run uncertainty having more effect on agricultural and industrial cumulative price dynamics, while other markets being more
sensitive to short-run impacts.  Furthermore, our new commodity
price uncertainty indicator shows for most considered series a transfer from macroeconomic uncertainty to price uncertainty during
the 2007–09 great recession period.  It further reveals that volatility
and uncertainty in prices are disconnected.  It is especially the case
for oil as we ﬁnd that most important shocks that occurred in the
1990s and the beginning of the 2000s that lead to price volatility
do not generate systematic price uncertainty, meaning that most of
these movements were predictable at this period and emphasizing
the relevance of our uncertainty measure in linking uncertainty to
predictability rather than to volatility. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 presents
the uncertainty measure and discusses the corresponding theoretical
framework.  Section 3 addresses methodological issues by presenting
the TVAR speciﬁcation as well as our data.  Section 4 displays the
results regarding the impact of macroeconomic uncertainty on commodity markets.  Section 5 is devoted to the link between macroeconomic uncertainty and the uncertainty of each commodity market,
and disentangles the respective contribution of supply and demand
shocks to oil price uncertainty.  Section 6 provides some robustness
checks regarding the choice of both the macroeconomic uncertainty
measure and our measure of price uncertainty.  Finally, Section 7
concludes the paper. 
2.  Uncertainty measure. 
2. 1.  Measuring macroeconomic uncertainty. 
Measuring uncertainty and examining its impact on market
dynamics is a challenging question for economists because no
objective measure exists.  Although in a general sense uncertainty is deﬁned as the conditional volatility of an unforecastable
disturbance,7 the empirical literature to date has usually relied on
proxies.  The most common measures used are the implied or realized
volatility of stock market returns, the cross-sectional dispersion of
ﬁrm proﬁts, stock returns, or productivity, and the cross-sectional
dispersion of survey-based forecasts.  However, their adequacy to
correctly proxy uncertainty is questionable, and such measures are
even misspeciﬁed with regard to the theoretical notion of uncertainty, as highlighted by Jurado Name (2015).  Indeed, stock market
volatility, cross-sectional dispersion in stock returns and ﬁrm proﬁts
can vary over time due to several factors—such as risk aversion, the
leverage effect, and heterogeneity between ﬁrms—even if there is no
signiﬁcant change in uncertainty.  In other words, ﬂuctuations that
are actually predictable can be erroneously attributed to uncertainty,
putting forward the importance of distinguishing between uncertainty in a series and its conditional volatility.  Speciﬁcally, properly
measuring uncertainty requires to remove the forecastable component of the considered series before computing the conditional
volatility.  In this sense, uncertainty in a series is not equivalent to
the conditional volatility of the raw series.  Another important characteristic of Jurado Name’s (2015) approach is that macroeconomic
uncertainty is deﬁned as the common variation in uncertainty across
many series rather than uncertainty related to any single series.  This
is in line with the uncertainty-based business cycle theories which
implicitly assume a common variation in uncertainty across a large
number of series. 
Accordingly, to provide a consistent measure of macroeconomic
uncertainty, we follow the deﬁnition of Jurado Name (2015) by linking
uncertainty to predictability.  Speciﬁcally, the h-period-ahead uncertainty in the variable yjt ∈ Yt =
is deﬁned as the
conditional volatility Uy
jt(h) of the purely unforecastable component
of the future value of the series. 
See Bloom (2009), Bloom Name (2010), Fernández-Villaverde Name (2011), Bloom
Name (2012), Gilchrist Name (2014), andBaker Name (2015) among others. 
where j = 1, .  .  .  , Ny, E(. | Jt) is the conditional expectation of the considered variable and Jt denotes the information set available at time
t.  Uncertainty related to the variable yjt+h is therefore deﬁned as the
expectation of the squared error forecast.  Aggregating over j individual uncertainty measures Uy
jt(h) equally weighted by wj leads to the
following expression of aggregate or macroeconomic uncertainty. 
As discussed by Jurado Name (2015), the estimation of Eqs.  (1) and
(2) requires three fundamental steps.  The ﬁrst step is to replace the
conditional expectation E[yjt+h| Jt] in Eq.  (1) by a forecast in order
to compute forecast errors.  It is a crucial step since the forecastable
component should be then removed from the conditional volatility computation.  To do so, an as rich as possible predictive model
based on factors from a large set of N predictors {Xit}, i = 1, .  .  .  , N, is
considered, taking the following approximated form. 
Xit = KF(cid. 3)
where Ft is a rf × 1 vector of latent common factors, KF
i is the vector of latent factor loadings, and eX
it is a vector of idiosyncratic errors
which allows for some cross-sectional correlations.  To account for
time-varying omitted-information bias, Jurado Name (2015) further
include estimated factors, as well as nonlinear functions of these factors in the forecasting model through a diffusion forecast index.  The
second step consists of (i) deﬁning the h-step-ahead forecast error
(cid. 14), and (ii) estimating the related conditional volatility, namely E
.  To account for time-varying
volatility in the errors of the predictor variables, E
is recursively multistep-ahead computed for h > 1. 8 In the third,
ﬁnal step, macroeconomic uncertainty Uy
t (h) is constructed from the
individual uncertainty measures Uy
jt(h) through an equally-weighted
average. 
Using large datasets on economic activity, Jurado Name (2015)
provide two types of uncertainty measures that are as free as possible from both the restrictions of theoretical models and/or dependencies on a handful of economic indicators.  The ﬁrst one is the
“common macroeconomic uncertainty” based on the information
contained in hundreds of primarily macroeconomic and ﬁnancial
monthly indicators,9 and the second one is the “common microeconomic uncertainty” based on 155 quarterly ﬁrm-level observations
on proﬁt growth normalized by sales. 10 In addition, with the proposed measures deﬁned for different values of h, they allow us
to investigate uncertainty transmission in commodity markets for
distinct maturities. 
2. 2.  Endogenous and exogenous components of uncertainty. 
One important issue when investigating the impact of macroeconomic uncertainty on commodity prices is to understand the
intrinsic nature of uncertainty with respect to prices.  In other words,
it is important to disentangle the endogenous and exogenous components of macroeconomic uncertainty (i. e. , whether macroeconomic
uncertainty is demand-driven or supply-driven with respect to
commodity prices).  Since 1974, the price of oil—as the price of
other commodities—has become endogenous with respect to global
macroeconomic conditions (see Alquist Name, 2013).  Since then,
the empirical literature has provided overwhelming evidence that
commodity prices have been driven by global demand shocks. 11 As
pointed out by Barsky and Kilian (2002), the 1973–74 episode of dramatic surge in the price of oil and industrial commodities is the most
striking example where the price increase was explained for 25% by
exogenous events and for 75% by shifts in the demand side.  With the
predominant role of ﬂow demand on prices, another important channel of transmission is the role of expectations in the physical market
(see among others, Kilian, 2009.  Alquist and Kilian, 2010.  andKilian,
2014).  The underlying idea is that anyone who expects the price to
increase in the future will be prompted to store oil now for future
use leading to a shock from the demand of oil inventories.  Kilian and
Murphy (2014) demonstrate that shifts in expectations through oil
inventories have played an important role during the oil price surge
in 1979 and 1990, and the price collapse in 1986. 12
The aggregate speciﬁcation of our proxy has the particularity to
be “global”, accounting for a lot of information regarding uncertainty
in the supply and demand channels.  While it is quite diﬃcult in this
framework to identify the proportion of unanticipated demand or
supply, some reasonable assumptions about the effect of demand and
supply shocks on prices may give us some insight about the mechanisms behind the relationship between macroeconomic uncertainty
and commodity prices.  In our analysis, we follow the dominant view
about the endogenous nature of commodity prices with respect to
macroeconomic conditions, considering the aggregate demand channel as a primary source of price ﬂuctuations (see Mabro, 1998.  Barsky
and Kilian, 2002, 2004 .  Kilian, 2008a.  and Hamilton, 2009).  In line
with the previous literature, we therefore assume that exogenous
events coming from the supply channel—such as cartel decisions,
oil embargoes or the effects of political uncertainty from the Middle East—are secondary, being mainly an indirect consequence of
the macroeconomic environment.  By construction, our approach
accounts for both channels, the demand channel being a direct effect
of macroeconomic aggregate and the supply channel an indirect effect
of macroeconomic conditions on exogenous events.  In other words,
our macroeconomic uncertainty proxy primarily reﬂects uncertainty
about the demand side. 13
2. 3.  Backward-looking vs.  forward-looking uncertainty. 
As previously discussed, it is quite diﬃcult to approximate uncertainty because it is not observable.  One important issue regarding
usual proxies based on conditional volatility is that they are
often backward-looking, whereas investors’ expectations tend to be
forward-looking (Kilian and Vigfusson, 2011).  As an illustrative purpose, Fig.  1 provides a comparison between three uncertainty proxies. 
Speciﬁcally, the green line is the conditional volatility estimated from
a one-month GARCH(1,1) process for the U. S.  GDP growth,14 the blue
line is the VXO stock market volatility index of Bloom (2009), and the
red line is the common macroeconomic uncertainty proxy of Jurado
Name (2015).  the gray bands corresponding to the NBER recession
dates.  Looking at the recent ﬁnancial crisis, all proxies identify this
episode as an important source of macroeconomic uncertainty since
a peak occurred for each series around 2008.  However, some systematic differences regarding the identiﬁed macroeconomic uncertainty
periods can be highlighted.  The measure based on the GARCH speciﬁcation starts to peak in January 2009, while the VXO index begins
to peak in May 2008.  The implied volatility proxy is therefore more
forward-looking than the one based on the conditional variance. 
Meanwhile, the proxy developed by Jurado Name (2015) peaks in
June 2007, pointing out that it is the most forward-looking measure. 
Moreover, comparing periods of uncertainty for each proxy with
NBER recession dates (December 2007–June 2009), we ﬁnd that
both GARCH and VXO proxies are too backward-looking, while the
macroeconomic uncertainty proxy we use peaks just few months
before the starting date of the recession.  In other words, our retained
measure of macroeconomic uncertainty that accounts for forwardlooking behavior of agents (whatever the maturity considered) is
the most appropriate one, and other approaches usually erroneously
attribute to uncertainty ﬂuctuations that are actually predictable. 
Jurado Name (2015) have further documented that shocks to macroeconomic uncertainty lead to an increase in the VXO index, the reverse
effect being not veriﬁed. 
The concept of uncertainty is basically related to the perception of agents about potential future evolutions.  Together with the
notion of time variability, it implies that different horizons lead
to distinct perceptions of uncertainty, and thus disparate economic
behaviors.  As shown by Jurado Name (2015), uncertainty is generally higher for medium- and long-run maturities (respectively 3
and 12 months) than for short-run horizons (1 month).  In addition,
the relative importance of macroeconomic uncertainty in the total
uncertainty (i. e. , uncertainty accounting for all series) grows as the
forecast horizon increases.  Accounting for the maturity is thus of
great importance to fully apprehend the impact of uncertainty on
macroeconomic dynamics.  As shown by Jurado Name (2015), uncertainty shocks with shorter uncertainty horizons tend to be associated
with a larger fraction of the forecast error variance in aggregates than
those with longer uncertainty horizons. 
In the context of commodity prices and especially oil prices, the
discussion is of primary importance.  The ongoing debate in the literature about the effect of maturity has been mainly oriented toward
the consequences of oil price uncertainty on economic activity.  Kilian
and Vigfusson (2011) provide an interesting comparison between
the long-run theoretical uncertainty measure of Bernanke (1983)
and Pindyck (1991), and the empirical short-run uncertainty proxy
of Elder and Serletis (2010). 