 1.  Introduction Being “green” has become much easier for households with the evolution of technology, such as electric vehicles (EVs) and solar photovoltaic (PV) panels.  These technologies allow consumers to maintain a traditional lifestyle while also reducing their environmental impact by reducing fossil-fuel consumption either on the electricity grid or from internal combustion vehicles.  Governments recognize the environmental beneﬁts of these technologies and thus have implemented myriad policies to spur their deployment.  However, the question remains as to what degree these technologies improve environmental outcomes as they depend on multiple complex factors including the time- and location-speciﬁc emission characteristics of the electricity generation displaced by solar PV or consumed by EVs.  For example, an EV's environmental impact will depend on when and where the customer charges it.  Similarly, the environmental impact of a household's solar PV system will vary depending on the type of generation from the electricity grid that is displaced.  The temporal and spatial variation of these technologies' environmental impacts means that households can inﬂuence the magnitude of environmental beneﬁts by engaging in certain behaviors associated with these technologies.  Utilizing household energy consumption and generation data from the Mueller residential neighborhood in Austin, TX and hourly generation data for the Texas electricity grid, we analyze how household solar PV and EV utilization patterns impact the CO2 emissions and water consumption associated with consuming electricity from the grid.  We then explore how the use of these technologies can be adjusted to maximize environmental beneﬁts and whether these optimizing actions are indeed being taken.  Though several papers have investigated the environmental and electric system impacts of EVs (see Hadley and Tsvetkova, 2009.  Doucette and McCulloch, 2011.  Holland et al. , 2016.  Huo et al. , 2015.  Rangaraju et al. , 2015) or solar PV (Spiegel et al. , 2000.  Connors et al. , 2004.  Sivaraman and Keoleian, 2010.  Zhai et al. , 2012), our paper's detailed, hourly household level dataset on energy consumption, PV generation, and EV charging ﬁlls several gaps in the literature.  First, it allows us to identify hourly environmental impacts from actual charging patterns and identify whether households are charging during environmentally friendly times of day.  Second, we are able to estimate the magnitude and existence of a solar rebound effect, and whether this rebound effect varies with EV ownership.  Third, we can identify whether households are making environmentally optimal decisions with respect to these technologies.  Though many engineering papers have been written on how to maximize solar capture through panel tilt and orientation (see for example Li and Lam, 2007.  Zhao et al. , 2010.  Lave and Kleissl, 2011.  Hong et al. , 2014), to the best of our knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst paper to estimate the environmental impact of solar panel orientation based on the marginal emissions proﬁle of the system.  Our use of a marginal (rather than average) emissions analysis also allows us to more accurately measure the environmental impact of the timing of charging and distributed generation.  Thus, our detailed dataset and carefully constructed emissions analysis contributes a robust and disaggregated analysis to the growing literature on the environmental impacts of green technologies.  2.  Environmental impacts of electricity.  2. 1.  Emissions and water consumption of electricity generation.  Generating electricity causes many types of environmental impacts.  In the United States, electricity is predominantly generated through the combustion of fossil fuels (EIA, 2016a).  Fossil fuel ﬁred electricity generators emit many local air pollutants, such as NOx, SO2, and particulate matter, causing air quality effects in adjacent areas.  These generators are also a signiﬁcant source of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.  Nationally, electricity generation is responsible for almost 40% of annual US CO2 emissions (EIA, 2016b).  Fossil fuel based electricity generation is also a water intensive process.  In 2015 over 1 trillion gallons of water were consumed for cooling during the production of electricity in the United States (EIA, 2015).  Fig.  1 shows how many gallons of water are used in Texas for each MWh of electricity generated by generation source.  renewables only utilize a negligible amount of water in producing electricity.  Generally, power plants withdraw water from a nearby surface source (e. g.  river, lake, or coastal water).  Most of the water is returned to the body of water.  however, some may evaporate or otherwise not be returned to its original source.  This water is considered to be consumed.  Thus, the water impacts of electricity generation can be measured by both the withdrawal and consumption of water.  These two water impacts are very different, and each type of generator may withdraw and consume a different amount of water.  For example, natural gas combustion turbine generators do not require water for cooling, whereas natural gas or coal steam turbine generators must use large amounts of water to condense steam and thus have greater water withdrawal and consumption levels.  Withdrawing large quantities of water is problematic for two reasons.  it displaces water for other uses, such as drinking, and the water that is returned to nature may be heated, causing local concerns in terms of water quality.  However, for purposes of this article, we reduce the scope of our analysis to the amount of water consumed, rather than withdrawn. 1 It is also important to note that most generators do not pay for using this water, due to its extraction from a body of water rather than using piped water.  Thus, there exists a negative externality associated with water extraction and consumption for electricity generation that is currently unpriced.  2. 2.  The time- and location-varying environmental impacts of grid electricity consumption.  While the environmental impacts of electricity generation are fairly straightforward in terms of emissions and water consumption, the environmental impacts attributable to electricity consumption are more complex particularly when electricity is consumed from an electric grid with multiple generators.  An electric grid must be coordinated by a balancing authority (e. g.  independent system operator or regional transmission operator) to match electric supply and demand in real time.  To keep generation costs low, the balancing authority will generally dispatch the generators with the lowest marginal cost ﬁrst. 