
Aquaculture is a rapidly growing industry that has become a major
supplier of ﬁsh and shellﬁsh to the global market (FAO, 2014).  Concern
about the environmental effects of aquaculture is also growing.  The production of shrimp and salmon, two of the most lucrative and widely
traded aquaculture products, is responsible for a range of environmental
impacts due to the off-site effects of disease transmission, waste discharge, escapees, the use of chemicals and drugs, and the consumption
of ﬁshmeal and ﬁsh oil (Naylor Name, 1998).  The most important of the
environmental externalities of salmon farming is the transmission of
sea lice to wild ﬁsh stocks (Asche Name, 2009.  Taranger Name, 2015. 
Lafferty Name, 2015). 
In this paper we focus on a particular disease externality of coastal
salmon farms— the effect of sea lice on wild ﬁsh stocks.  This effect has
been debated extensively.  Researchers agree that sea lice are one of
many factors that affect wild stock levels.  However, there is disagreement about the size of the effect.  Some argue that lice are not instrumental in wild stock population decline (Marty Name, 2010).  Others
claim that where salmon net-pens provide ideal conditions for sea
lice, they are the primary threat to vulnerable migrating wild juveniles
(Krkošek Name, 2006, 2007).  In both Norway and Canada, sea lice are argued to be a major threat to the sustainability of marine aquaculture and
the viability of wild ﬁsheries, and are subject to strict regulations. 
The generic problem in the management of wildlife disease externalities of aquaculture is the regulation of transmission risks due to contact between infected farmed stocks and susceptible wild stocks
(Conrad and Rondeau, 2015.  Fischer Name, 2015, 2016).  The mitigation
of disease risk requires reduction in either the infection rate of farmed
stocks or contact between farmed and wild stocks.  In the case of marine
salmon aquaculture, the infection rate of farmed ﬁsh may be reduced by
chemical controls.  Since farmed ﬁsh stocks have a reservoir-host effect
on disease transmission, this also affects disease transmission to wild
ﬁsh stocks. 
From a social perspective, salmon farmers should ideally take account of the costs incurred by wild capture ﬁsheries when deciding
how much in-farm disease control to apply.  Nor is the disease of wild
salmon the only off-site effect to consider.  It may, for instance, change
the structure and distribution of other species within the system
(Burge Name, 2014).  Since disease is an external cost of salmon production, however, it will not be considered in the absence of regulatory,
property-rights, or tax-based initiatives by a ﬁshery authority. 
This study focuses on the optimal management of sea lice externalities between salmon aquaculture and wild salmon ﬁsheries that run
in both directions.  Sea lice are native ectoparasite copepods, common
on wild adult salmon.  The salmon louse (L.  salmonis) has a free-living
phase and a parasitic phase in its approximately 2-month life cycle
(Frazer, 2009).  Once attached to salmon, lice feed on mucous, blood,
and skin which causes both morbidity and mortality of salmon
(Costello, 2006).  When wild stocks migrate to a fresh water environment in the fall for spawning, lice from wild stocks disperse into ﬁsh
farms located on the migration route of wild stocks and infest the
farmed ﬁsh.  If not treated in the farms, the lice grow rapidly and reinfest wild juveniles when they emigrate into marine environment in
the early summer.  Although the disease problem associated with ﬁsh
farms is widely recognized, there are few estimates of the ecological
and economic impacts on both farmed and wild ﬁsheries.  One estimate
is that sea lice may cost the salmon industry US$480 million a year or 6%
of product value (Costello, 2009).  Currently, salmon farms control lice
with in-food chemical such as emamectin benzoate (SLICE) with high
efﬁcacy to control all stages of sea lice (Stone Name, 2000), and with
cleaner ﬁsh such as wrasse or lumpﬁsh.  These controls have different
cost effectiveness (Liu and Bjelland, 2014), also sea lice may develop resistance to SLICE (McEwan Name, 2015). 
To analyze this problem we develop a bioeconomic model that incorporates epidemiological, ecological, and economic elements.  As in
prior studies of wildlife disease management that employ an optimal
control framework (Gramig Name, 2009.  Horan Name, 2010), we treat
the level of disease control as endogenous.  Speciﬁcally, we integrate
sea lice population dynamics in an economic model of salmon production to determine the optimal control policy—ﬁrst from the perspective
of salmon aquaculture producer, and then from the perspective of a
joint ﬁsheries manager.  By taking account of the complex relationship
between sea lice populations in farmed and wild ﬁsheries, we are able
to assess the economic impact of salmon aquaculture on the wild ﬁshery
due to sea lice transmission.  While our model is calibrated on the pink
salmon ﬁshery in Paciﬁc Canada, our approach can readily be applied
to the management of the disease effects of aquaculture on wild ﬁsheries more generally. 
The structure of the paper is as follows.  Section 2 describes various
components of sea lice-salmon interactions in aquaculture.  Section 3
presents a bioeconomic model of farmed and wild ﬁsheries.  The main
results and the outcome of numerical simulations are presented in
Section 4.  This is followed by sensitivity analysis provided in Section 5. 
Finally, Section 6 discusses the results and draws conclusions. 
<Middle> A Model of Sea Lice-salmon Interactions in Aquaculture. 
2. 1.  Sea Lice Dynamics. 
We consider a coastal area in which an Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar)
farm (or a coordinated aquaculture industry consisting of many farms)
is connected by the free-living stage of sea lice transmission with wild
pink salmon stocks when they migrate into or out of spawning rivers. 
The farm manager releases salmon smolts (Ff,0) into ﬁsh farms just before wild adults head home for spawning.  Fish farmers either employ
batch harvesting at ﬁxed intervals to target speciﬁc markets, or employ
graded harvesting during the whole grow-out season.  Aquaculture
salmon production has a production cycle between 1. 5 and 2. 5 years
(Asche Name, 2009).  In this study we assume that production involves
ﬁxed interval batch harvesting-all ﬁsh are harvested 24 months after
being released. 
We divide sea lice growth into a free-living copepodite phase and
an adult lice phase.  Sea lice cannot survive in a fresh water environment.  Due to the relatively brief spawning migration (August and
September) of wild pink salmon from marine environment to fresh
water environment, gravid lice from homecoming wild adult stocks
would infest farmed stocks by spreading copepodite produced by
gravid lice (Lw , t).  Copepodites have a probability of ρ to attach to
farmed (Ff , t) or wild (Fw , t) hosts if present in coastal waters.  They
then survive to adult lice stage with probability ψt depending on
environmental factors, such as salinity and water temperature
(Tucker Name, 2000).  Settlement success ψt is assumed to be periodically forced, and takes the form. 
This simple sinusoidal function generates a 12 month periodicity to
infections, t = 1, 2…12, and has a seasonal force impact coefﬁcient of
ε2 and a base settlement success of ε1. 
When migrating wild juveniles pass by ﬁsh farms close to wild migratory routes from May to July they are subject to lice infestation. 
Wild juveniles are vulnerable because of their small size, and also because that they are subject to the environmental stress caused by the
transition from fresh water to marine environment.  We assume that
the chemical treatment ut, if applied, kills both adult sea lice and
copepodites on farmed ﬁsh.  The mortality rate associated with chemical
treatment for copepodites and adult sea lice is denoted by k and z,
respectively. 
2. 2.  A Well-mixed Coastal Environment. 
The hydrodynamic environment is one of the main factors affecting
the dynamics of sea lice transmission (Adams Name, 2012).  Two different
environments are considered here.  First, we consider a coastal environment in which copepodites are well-mixed (Ashander Name, 2012), implying that copepodite density is the same across the whole area
including the farm system.  In what follows, subscript f denotes farmed
stock, subscript w denotes wild stock, and subscript t denotes time
(measured in months).  If Xt denotes total copepodite abundance in
the coastal area at time t, and Lf,t denotes lice abundance in the farm,
then a discrete model for sea lice dynamics in farm is this. 
The dynamics of copepodite and lice populations are described by
Eqs. 