 1.  Introduction Aquaculture is a rapidly growing industry that has become a major supplier of ﬁsh and shellﬁsh to the global market (FAO, 2014).  Concern about the environmental effects of aquaculture is also growing.  The production of shrimp and salmon, two of the most lucrative and widely traded aquaculture products, is responsible for a range of environmental impacts due to the off-site effects of disease transmission, waste discharge, escapees, the use of chemicals and drugs, and the consumption of ﬁshmeal and ﬁsh oil (Naylor et al. , 1998).  The most important of the environmental externalities of salmon farming is the transmission of sea lice to wild ﬁsh stocks (Asche et al. , 2009.  Taranger et al. , 2015.  Lafferty et al. , 2015).  In this paper we focus on a particular disease externality of coastal salmon farms— the effect of sea lice on wild ﬁsh stocks.  This effect has been debated extensively.  Researchers agree that sea lice are one of many factors that affect wild stock levels.  However, there is disagreement about the size of the effect.  Some argue that lice are not instrumental in wild stock population decline (Marty et al. , 2010).  Others claim that where salmon net-pens provide ideal conditions for sea lice, they are the primary threat to vulnerable migrating wild juveniles (Krkošek et al. , 2006, 2007).  In both Norway and Canada, sea lice are argued to be a major threat to the sustainability of marine aquaculture and the viability of wild ﬁsheries, and are subject to strict regulations.  The generic problem in the management of wildlife disease externalities of aquaculture is the regulation of transmission risks due to contact between infected farmed stocks and susceptible wild stocks (Conrad and Rondeau, 2015.  Fischer et al. , 2015, 2016).  The mitigation of disease risk requires reduction in either the infection rate of farmed stocks or contact between farmed and wild stocks.  In the case of marine salmon aquaculture, the infection rate of farmed ﬁsh may be reduced by chemical controls.  Since farmed ﬁsh stocks have a reservoir-host effect on disease transmission, this also affects disease transmission to wild ﬁsh stocks.  From a social perspective, salmon farmers should ideally take account of the costs incurred by wild capture ﬁsheries when deciding how much in-farm disease control to apply.  Nor is the disease of wild salmon the only off-site effect to consider.  It may, for instance, change the structure and distribution of other species within the system (Burge et al. , 2014).  Since disease is an external cost of salmon production, however, it will not be considered in the absence of regulatory, property-rights, or tax-based initiatives by a ﬁshery authority.  This study focuses on the optimal management of sea lice externalities between salmon aquaculture and wild salmon ﬁsheries that run in both directions.  Sea lice are native ectoparasite copepods, common on wild adult salmon.  The salmon louse (L.  salmonis) has a free-living phase and a parasitic phase in its approximately 2-month life cycle (Frazer, 2009).  Once attached to salmon, lice feed on mucous, blood, and skin which causes both morbidity and mortality of salmon (Costello, 2006).  When wild stocks migrate to a fresh water environment in the fall for spawning, lice from wild stocks disperse into ﬁsh farms located on the migration route of wild stocks and infest the farmed ﬁsh.  If not treated in the farms, the lice grow rapidly and reinfest wild juveniles when they emigrate into marine environment in the early summer.  Although the disease problem associated with ﬁsh farms is widely recognized, there are few estimates of the ecological and economic impacts on both farmed and wild ﬁsheries.  One estimate is that sea lice may cost the salmon industry US$480 million a year or 6% of product value (Costello, 2009).  Currently, salmon farms control lice with in-food chemical such as emamectin benzoate (SLICE) with high efﬁcacy to control all stages of sea lice (Stone et al. , 2000), and with cleaner ﬁsh such as wrasse or lumpﬁsh.  These controls have different cost effectiveness (Liu and Bjelland, 2014), also sea lice may develop resistance to SLICE (McEwan et al. , 2015).  To analyze this problem we develop a bioeconomic model that incorporates epidemiological, ecological, and economic elements.  As in prior studies of wildlife disease management that employ an optimal control framework (Gramig et al. , 2009.  Horan et al. , 2010), we treat the level of disease control as endogenous.  Speciﬁcally, we integrate sea lice population dynamics in an economic model of salmon production to determine the optimal control policy—ﬁrst from the perspective of salmon aquaculture producer, and then from the perspective of a joint ﬁsheries manager.  By taking account of the complex relationship between sea lice populations in farmed and wild ﬁsheries, we are able to assess the economic impact of salmon aquaculture on the wild ﬁshery due to sea lice transmission.  While our model is calibrated on the pink salmon ﬁshery in Paciﬁc Canada, our approach can readily be applied to the management of the disease effects of aquaculture on wild ﬁsheries more generally.  The structure of the paper is as follows.  Section 2 describes various components of sea lice-salmon interactions in aquaculture.  Section 3 presents a bioeconomic model of farmed and wild ﬁsheries.  The main results and the outcome of numerical simulations are presented in Section 4.  This is followed by sensitivity analysis provided in Section 5.  Finally, Section 6 discusses the results and draws conclusions.  <Middle> A Model of Sea Lice-salmon Interactions in Aquaculture.  2. 1.  Sea Lice Dynamics.  We consider a coastal area in which an Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) farm (or a coordinated aquaculture industry consisting of many farms) is connected by the free-living stage of sea lice transmission with wild pink salmon stocks when they migrate into or out of spawning rivers.  The farm manager releases salmon smolts (Ff,0) into ﬁsh farms just before wild adults head home for spawning.  Fish farmers either employ batch harvesting at ﬁxed intervals to target speciﬁc markets, or employ graded harvesting during the whole grow-out season.  Aquaculture salmon production has a production cycle between 1. 5 and 2. 5 years (Asche et al. , 2009).  In this study we assume that production involves ﬁxed interval batch harvesting-all ﬁsh are harvested 24 months after being released.  We divide sea lice growth into a free-living copepodite phase and an adult lice phase.  Sea lice cannot survive in a fresh water environment.  Due to the relatively brief spawning migration (August and September) of wild pink salmon from marine environment to fresh water environment, gravid lice from homecoming wild adult stocks would infest farmed stocks by spreading copepodite produced by gravid lice (Lw , t).  Copepodites have a probability of ρ to attach to farmed (Ff , t) or wild (Fw , t) hosts if present in coastal waters.  They then survive to adult lice stage with probability ψt depending on environmental factors, such as salinity and water temperature (Tucker et al. , 2000).  Settlement success ψt is assumed to be periodically forced, and takes the form.  This simple sinusoidal function generates a 12 month periodicity to infections, t = 1, 2…12, and has a seasonal force impact coefﬁcient of ε2 and a base settlement success of ε1.  When migrating wild juveniles pass by ﬁsh farms close to wild migratory routes from May to July they are subject to lice infestation.  Wild juveniles are vulnerable because of their small size, and also because that they are subject to the environmental stress caused by the transition from fresh water to marine environment.  We assume that the chemical treatment ut, if applied, kills both adult sea lice and copepodites on farmed ﬁsh.  The mortality rate associated with chemical treatment for copepodites and adult sea lice is denoted by k and z, respectively.  2. 2.  A Well-mixed Coastal Environment.  The hydrodynamic environment is one of the main factors affecting the dynamics of sea lice transmission (Adams et al. , 2012).  Two different environments are considered here.  First, we consider a coastal environment in which copepodites are well-mixed (Ashander et al. , 2012), implying that copepodite density is the same across the whole area including the farm system.  In what follows, subscript f denotes farmed stock, subscript w denotes wild stock, and subscript t denotes time (measured in months).  If Xt denotes total copepodite abundance in the coastal area at time t, and Lf,t denotes lice abundance in the farm, then a discrete model for sea lice dynamics in farm is this.  The dynamics of copepodite and lice populations are described by Eqs.  (2) and (3).  They are similar to a discrete-time version of the canonical Anderson-May host parasite model (Anderson and May, 1978).  Eq.  (2) describes the dynamics of copepodites in the coastal area.  The ﬁrst term on the right hand side (RHS) is the number of copepodites produced by lice on farmed Lf,t and gravid lice Lw,t which is equal to zero when there are no adult wild stocks in the coastal area.  Copepodite production is taken to be at the constant rate, λ.  Fw,t denotes the abundance of wild juveniles at the end of month t.  The second term has three components.  The ﬁrst component, Xt(1−ρ(Ff,t+Fw,t)), is total copepodite abundance after dispersal and attachment to ﬁsh host.  Copepodites are assumed to attach to hosts at the rate ρ.  The second component is the surviving proportion after natural mortality of ξ and the third component is copepodite mortality due to chemical treatment, fc(ut−2,ut−1,ut), the control being included in feed.  Copepodite transmission between farmed and wild ﬁsh only happens during the spawning migration of wild adults and the emigration of juvenile wild stocks.  Because sea lice cannot survive in a fresh water environment we assume that in this well-mixed system copepodites do not attach to wild spawning adults.  However, wild juveniles will be infested when they migrate into the ocean.  Eq.  (3) gives the total lice abundance in the farm at the beginning of each time unit (month) as the sum of the newly mature adults and the lice remaining from last period after natural mortality and the effects of chemical control.  The ﬁrst term on the RHS of Eq.  (3) is the number of copepodites attached to hosts that become adult, the survival rate being ψt.  The second term on the RHS is the number of lice remaining from last period.  There are four components in this term.  The ﬁrst component is the total lice number at the beginning of the period, the second component (1 − v) is the proportion surviving after natural mortality v.  The third one is the proportional change in the lice due to mortality between Ff,t+1 and Ff,t.  We assume that if 10% of ﬁsh are killed, 10% of adult lice will also be killed.  If all ﬁsh are harvested, then all lice will be killed in the process.  The last component, fl(ut −2,ut− 1, ut), is the lice kill function due to chemical treatment.  The efﬁcacy of chemical treatment varies depending on sea location, lice genetics, and water temperature (Stone et al. , 1999).  Here we assume that chemical treatment is effective for a three-month period, during which it kills both lice and copepodites (Gustafson et al. , 2006).  Since the efﬁcacy of treatment decreases over time, the chemical-induced mortality functions are assumed to take the form fl(ut− 2, ut −1,ut) =(1 −kut)(1 −0. 8kut −1)(1 −0. 6kut −2) and fc(ut−2,ut−1,ut)=(1−zut)(1−0. 8zut−1)(1−0. 6zut−2), respectively.  As a ﬁrst approximation, we assume that ﬁsh killed by lice do not have any economic value, but that infested live ﬁsh fetch the same price as un-infested ﬁsh.  That is, the effect of sea lice is only evident through mortality, not other sub-lethal effects.  In reality, sea lice can also reduce ﬁsh growth and feed conversion rates (Costello, 2006.  Mustafa et al. , 2001)—though the literature provides little information on these effects.  The impact of sea lice on farmed salmon is modeled as this where Ff,t denotes Atlantic salmon abundance in the farm at the end of month t.  After harvest, farms are fallowed for a short time to kill existing lice.  Farmers then release the same amount of juveniles Ff,0 into their farms.  The grow-out rotation is not therefore affected by lice and is assumed to be constant.  df is the sea lice-induced mortality rate for farmed Atlantic salmon,1 and Lf,t is adult sea lice abundance at the farm at time t.  Wild salmon juveniles (Fw,t) are free of lice infestation in the river environment but are subject to re-infestation from the ﬁsh farm when migrating into marine environment from May to July.  The number of lice at month t is the sum of new adults developed from copepodites attached to hosts, and the remaining lice from last period.  The lice (Lw,t+1) dynamics in a well-mixed system is modeled as this.  Offshore lice dynamics are not modeled here.  Instead, the effect of lice on adult wild ﬁsh stocks offshore is incorporated in a constant natural mortality rate.  2. 3.  A Distance-dispersal Environment.  We also consider a distance-dispersal environment where transmission is captured by modifying the model described previously.  Three features of the resulting compartmental model are.  1) constant transmission rates (d1,d2) between farmed and wild ﬁsheries, with d1 indicating copepodite transmission from wild spawning stocks to farmed salmon stocks and d2 indicating copepodite transmission from farm stocks to wild juveniles.  2) unidirectional drift—copepodites that leave the salmon farm do not return.  and 3) limited cross infection—lice produced by wild salmon mostly infect other wild salmon, and lice produced by farmed salmon mostly affect other farmed salmon.  Copepodite dynamics in farm are given by this where It= Aug,Sep is indicator function with a value of 1 during homeriver migrating period, August and September, and 0 at other months.  Adult lice dynamics for the farm and wild ﬁshery dynamics are the same as those described by Eqs.  (3) and (5).  By contrast, copepodite dynamics in the wild are given by this.  2. 4.  Wild Pink Salmon Dynamics.  To model wild salmon dynamics we consider one of the most commonly infected wild salmon—Pink salmon (O.  gorbuscha).  Pink salmon are the smallest salmon found in North America.  They are also the least valued of commercially exploited salmon species.  Wild spawning salmon home-migrate from August to September.  The wild juveniles remain in the river environment from October until the following April.  They then move into in-shore waters from May to July, before migrating to the ocean and remain there from August until the next July.  Pink salmon have a two-year life cycle, including an even and odd-numbered year run.  These two runs are reproductively isolated.  The spatial separation between adult and juvenile salmon due to migration prevents louse transfer between odd- and even-numbered year runs (Krkošek et al. , 2007).  We assume that the odd-numbered run dominates, with an initial escapement level of S0, as compared to 0. 5S0 for even-numbered year runs.  Let Sn denote the escapement level of wild stocks in year n.  This escapement level becomes spawning stock, which has a concave-down fry production function following a Ricker relationship F1 , n +1 =Sn exp (γ− Sn/b), where F1 , n+ 1 is the number of fry in the next generation (n + 1), γ is the population growth rate.  b determines the density dependent mortality rate, and is related to the carrying capacity of the system.  The breeding stock dies after spawning.  A natural mortality rate m applies to juvenile wild salmon in fresh water, therefore the population of surviving wild juveniles before migrating into the inshore area is (1−m)F1,n+1.  When wild pink juveniles migrate into the inshore area from May to July, they are subjected to lice infestation from ﬁsh farms.  For every farmed salmon grow-out cycle, 24 months, there are 2 copepodite infestations from wild stocks, i. e. , in even and oddnumbered runs, and 2 lice infestations from farmed to wild stocks.  The wild juvenile mortality rate induced by sea lice infestation is modeled using the Ricker equation (Krkošek et al. , 2007.  Marty et al. , 2010) on a monthly time scale in accordance with time scale of the farmed ﬁshery and lice dynamics.  The damage expð−dwLwt=Ft. nÞ, where Ft,n function takes the form Ftþ1. n ¼ Ft. n is t-month old juveniles abundance of generation n, and dw is the mortality rate induced by sea lice population Lwt attached to wild juveniles (Ft,n).  It follows that the wild juvenile population prior to migrating into the open ocean from the inshore area would be this.  Wild salmon ﬁsheries differ from salmon aquaculture in terms of management objectives, institutional structure and regulations.  Whereas the management objective for salmon aquaculture is to maximize private proﬁt, the goal of wild salmon management typically focuses on a broader set of social objectives.  Wild ﬁshery managers limit (cap) harvest in the wild capture ﬁshery so as to ensure escapement spawning targets that protect future harvest (Liu et al. , 2011).  We assume that the regulatory authority chooses ﬁshing effort level by license limitation, and that each year a constant harvest proportion α is applied.  Therefore, the total allowable catch (TACn+1) for each run is this.  3.  A Bioeconomic Model of Farmed and Wild Fisheries.  In each 24-month grow-out season, the salmon farmer feeds Atlantic salmon to weight Wf then instantaneously harvests all ﬁsh at the beginning of the last period, at a cost Cf per unit of weight.  The farmer is assumed to target a speciﬁc market, and sells the ﬁsh at a ﬁxed price Pf per kilogram.  An adult Atlantic salmon weighs about 7 kg, fetches a price of $6. 5/kg (marineharvest. com).  By comparison, an adult wild pink salmon weighs about 1. 4 kg, and fetches a price of $0. 36/kg (adfg. alaska. gov).  Due to the proximity of wild migratory routes to the ﬁsh farms, sea lice infestation between wild and farmed ﬁsh cannot be prevented.  Each period the producer has to decide whether or not to apply chemical treatment (ut) to his farm.  Note that Revie et al.  (2005) predicts the impact of varying treatment interventions with sea lice compartments model.  Our object here is to investigate optimal control strategies on salmon farms given the infection risk from wild salmon.  We assume that farmers manage ﬁsh farms optimally with respect to other inputs than chemical treatment, and their disease control decision is separable from other productive inputs. 2 Farmed Atlantic salmon weight growth is modeled as a polynotime wf , t = a1t2 − a2t3, where t1 = 1 , .  .  .  , 24, mial function of a1 = 0. 0397 , a2 = 0. 00112 calibrated from Asche and Bjorndal (2012).  Weight growth requires a certain quantity of food.  For a given conversion ratio (fcon) between food and ﬁsh weight gain, the quantity of feed for each time step.  3. 1.  The Private Producer's Problem.  We ﬁrst solve the disease control problem from the private producer's perspective, assuming a single farm and separating disease control from all other management actions.  Given a discount rate δ, feeding cost Cfeed per kilo, and louse treatment cost of ctreatment, the problem for the aquaculture producer is to maximize the present value of the stream of aquaculture revenue, net of control and feeding cost, Vp, by choosing a treatment policy.  The control ut is a binary choice variable, ut∈[0,1].  We model it long enough (40 grow-out seasons, or 80 years, or 960 months) for the steady-state equilibrium to be reached.  We model ﬁsh production on a rotational scale (j) due to the batch nature of harvest, but a Monthly scale (t) for chemical treatment—since the farmer has to make disease control decisions every month.  Given the weight difference term, wf ,2 − wf ,1 =wf, j∗24+ 2 −wf, j∗24 + 1, j = 1, …40, is determined exogenously.  Lice have no impact on weight gain.  As with all ﬁnite time horizon problems, we expect to see a departure from the steady state toward the end of the horizon (EpanchinNiell and Wilen, 2012).  To deal with this problem, we follow the logic of Epanchin-Niell and Wilen (2012), and set a terminal value to lock in the steady state equilibrium once it is reached after 40 rotations (80 years).  This terminal value, the last term in Eq.  (9), is the present value of the steady state harvest net of control costs from year 81 to inﬁnity.  Since the system reaches a steady state at rotation year 40, we are able to use the value at the 40th rotation to calculate terminal value.  Let TVPp= (Pf− Cf)WfFf, 40 represent the proﬁt from harvesting at the end of the 40th rotation, and TVCp ¼ ∑960 936ððw f . tþ1−w f . tÞf concfeed F f . t þ utctreatmentÞ represent the cost of feeding and treatment during the 40th rotation (from month 936 to month 960) under privately optimal control.  The terminal value is then this.  3. 2.  The Joint Fisheries Manager's Problem.  In contrast to the private ﬁshery manager, the joint ﬁsheries manager has to consider the effect that aquaculture has on the commercial wild salmon ﬁshery.  The harvest function for the wild capture ﬁshery is assumed to take the form hn=Fw,n(1−e−qEn), which represents the discrete-time version of the Schaefer-Gordon harvest function in year n, where Fw,n is the total number (not biomass weight) of wild adult ﬁsh in year n, q is the catchability coefﬁcient and En is ﬁshing effort in year n.  Substituting hn=TACn, and assuming that the unit cost per ﬁshing effort is cw, total annual cost (TC) in year n thus is T.  Assuming an adult pink salmon weight of ww at harvest and price of pw, the joint ﬁsheries problem is to maximize the net present value VJ from farmed and wild ﬁsheries, net of feeding, control and harvesting cost over time.  The last term of Eq.  (10), SJ(Ff,40,Fw,40), is the scrap value of the state variables after 40 rotations (80 years),ð 1 1þδÞ24 j−1ðTVP J−TVC J þ TVW JÞ .  We also let TVPJ =(Pf− Cf)WfFf ,40 represent harvesting proﬁt for the 40th rotation, and let TVC J ¼ ∑960ððw f . tþ1−w f . tÞf concfeed F f . t þ utctreatmentÞ represent feed and control costs during the 40th rotation under joint control (note that the time interval in TVCJ is one month).  TVW J ¼ ðTAC79 þ TAC80Þwwpw− 2cw1−α, represents proﬁt from harvesting wild ﬁshery in years 79 (odd1 numbered year run) and 80 (even-numbered year run).  Together, these two years correspond to the 40th rotation for ﬁsh farming operations.  n denotes a yearly time scale (as before) as wild salmon are harvested every year.  Since it takes into consideration both sea lice externality that the ﬁsh farms impose on the wild ﬁshery, and the externality imposed on ﬁsh farms by the migrating copepodites produced by gravid lice from wild spawning stock, the solution to the joint ﬁsheries manager's problem will differ from the private producer's problem.  Theoretically, the private producer controls lice up to the point where the marginal value of the damage inﬂicted on the farm is equal to the marginal cost of applying chemical treatment to control lice.  In the rest of this study, we will refer “jointly optimal control” to the case where the lice externality on wild ﬁshery is taken into consideration by the joint ﬁsheries manager.  However, we should bear in mind that the only control variable is the chemical treatment to control sea lice on the salmon farm, and the wild ﬁshery is regulated through a ﬁxed proportional harvest policy.  “Quasioptimized” might be a more accurate term to describe our model.  4.  Results.  4. 1.  Numerical Results.  Given the complex nature of this integer non-linear, non-convex optimal control problem, closed form solutions for the value function and optimal control policy do not exist.  Furthermore, multiple locally optimal solutions may occur.  Therefore, we rely upon numerical methods to solve the problem.  We run simulations ﬁrst under the well-mixed environment and then distance-dispersal environment.  The commercial Premium Solver Platform (multi-starting point) was used to approximate the solution with Branch and Bound method.  The values for all parameters are provided in Table 1.  Some of the parameters are taken directly from the literature, and some are calibrated for this study.  None of the parameters adopted are empirically estimated.  4. 2.  The Well-mixed Coastal Environment.  The frequency and timing of chemical treatment determines the effect of the chemical control on species and disease alike.  The binary control policies applied by the private producer and the joint ﬁsheries manager in the ﬁrst four ﬁsh farm grow-out seasons (the ﬁrst 8 years) are different.  After 8 years, the treatment strategy for odd and evennumbered year runs are the same as in year 7 and 8.  Therefore, we are able to use the ﬁrst four grow-out seasons to summarize and characterize the differences in control policy between the private producer and the joint ﬁsheries manager (Fig.  1).  Fig.  1 is a schedule for the private producer and joint ﬁsheries manager to apply chemical treatment to salmon farm, gray indicating chemical treatment and white indicating no treatment in a particular month.  We deﬁne a biological year as the period from the beginning of spawning stock migration (August) to the last month the wild juvenile is in the fresh water environment (July).  Therefore, the odd-numbered biological year corresponds to odd-numbered year run, and the evennumbered biological year corresponds to even-numbered year run.  We assume that the odd-numbered year run is the ﬁrst to be subject to lice infection.  In the ﬁrst biological year, the private producer applies chemical treatment from August to October, then from May to July.  From the third biological year on, the chemical control for the oddnumbered biological year will be repeated, applying chemical control from August to November, then from June to July.  The treatment policy for even-numbered year run is the same for all periods.  Chemicals are applied only from August to December.  The joint ﬁsheries manager's problem, on the other hand, requires that chemical controls be applied from August to December, and then from June to July for oddnumbered year run in the ﬁrst year.  From years 3 on for the oddnumber year run, chemical control will be applied from August to November, and then from June to July.  The treatment policy under jointly optimal control for even-numbered year run lasts from August to December—the same as that from privately optimal control.  In summary, the private producer applies less effort to control lice than the joint ﬁsheries manager because private producer focuses only on farm proﬁts, while joint ﬁsheries manager has to consider the disease externality on the wild ﬁshery as well.  Feedback from the chemical treatment under jointly optimal control leads to a more abundant spawning wild stock than that under privately optimal control, hence more lice will disperse into a farm, leading to more control by the joint ﬁsheries manager.  Since the joint ﬁsheries manager's control policy decreases louse numbers, more wild ﬁsh survive the period they spend in coastal areas, more wild stocks are available for harvest, resulting greater net beneﬁts in the wild ﬁshery.  The treatment policy by the ﬁsh farmer deviates from that of the joint ﬁsheries manager only in the early years.  One reason for the deviation is that sea lice control in the early stages has a greater impact on the total net present value than control at later stages, partly due to the effect of discounting.  Since the control exercised by the ﬁsh farmer happens during the spawning stock migration period, it does reduce at least part of the external cost of aquaculture.  The binary nature of control also helps the alignment of the ﬁsh farmer's and joint ﬁsheries manager's objectives.  The consequences of the private producer's control policy are illustrated in Fig.  2.  The peak level for adult sea lice abundance occurs when wild spawning stocks migrate back to the natal river.  The peak level corresponding to odd-year runs falls to a very low level then climbs back up, while the peak level corresponding to even-year runs decreases until it levels off as the wild population approaches a steady state.  The difference in treatment policy between odd and evennumbered years generates an oscillating pattern of sea lice infestation.  Intuitively, all else equal, a reduction in wild spawning stocks implies less infection risk to farmed salmon stocks, and hence less infection risk to wild juvenile stocks in the next year.  Since wild juvenile salmon mortality falls, this increases the abundance of wild adults in the ocean, resulting in a high spawning stock, high infestation risk to farm, and high infection rates of wild juvenile stocks, and therefore fewer adults and a smaller wild spawning stock in the following year.  This oscillation pattern between the peak level of adult sea lice abundance associated with odd and even-numbered year runs also manifests itself for wild pink salmon harvesting levels, illustrated in Fig.  2c.  The oscillating pattern is also present in the joint ﬁsheries management problem.  The trajectory, on the other hand, is quite different.  The adult sea lice abundance levels corresponding to odd and evennumbered year runs both decrease smoothly (Fig.  2b).  This corresponds to a relatively smooth path for wild ﬁshery harvesting level (Fig.  2d), which is in stark contrast to wild salmon harvesting level under privately optimal lice control.  Table 2 shows the net present value (NPV) and the steady state wild ﬁshery harvesting and wild spawning stock levels under jointly and privately optimal disease controls.  The difference between total NPV under these two control strategies is not large (approximately 0. 6% of total NPV under joint ﬁsheries management).  In other words, the externality generated by ﬁsh farms is quite small.  This is because of the low price and small size of Pink salmon ($0. 36/kg and 1. 43 kg) relative to farmed Atlantic salmon ($6. 5/kg and 7. 3 kg).  The steady state harvesting and spawning stock levels are approximately the same under both approaches because of the ﬁxed proportional harvest regulation on the part of wild ﬁshery.  4. 3.  The Distance-dispersal Environment.  In a distance-dispersal environment, privately optimal disease control is applied from August to November, then from June to July for the odd-numbered year run, and from August to November for evennumbered year run (Fig.  3).  The control strategy for odd- and evennumbered year runs is repeated.  Jointly optimal control requires more disease control than privately optimal control.  In the ﬁrst year it extends from August to December, then from the next June to July for the oddnumbered year run.  Once again, the control strategy for odd- and even-numbered year runs is repeated from the third year on, with odd- and even-numbered year runs seeing chemical treatment starting from August to November, then from June to July.  Sea lice levels and harvests are very similar under privately and jointly optimal control for both farmed and wild ﬁsheries (Fig.  4).  Both produce a slow decrease in the peak level of adult sea lice in the farm and in the number of wild pink salmon harvested.  This is in sharp contrast to the well-mixed coastal environment.  Table 3 shows the net present value (NPV) and the steady state wild ﬁshery harvesting and wild spawning stock levels under jointly and privately optimal disease controls.  The difference between total NPV under these two control strategies is not signiﬁcant (0. 012% of total NPV under joint ﬁsheries management), and the externality is $0. 03 million versus $1. 6 million in the well-mixed coastal environment.  This is expected due to the encounter-dilution effect imbedded in our model for the well-mixed coastal environment.  In the distance-dispersal environment, there are higher wild harvesting and stock levels in the odd-numbered year run, but lower in the even-numbered year run.  Due to the very low value of the distance-dispersal externality, we report only results for the well-mixed coastal environment in the following.  5.  Sensitivity Analysis.  5. 1.  The Effect of Sea Lice-induced Mortality Rate on Wild Fishery.  The previous results are based on the assumption that wild ﬁshery is subject to an intermediate level of sea lice-induced mortality rate.  The effect of sea lice on the decreasing wild salmonid has triggered intense debate (Marty et al. , 2010.  Krkošek et al. , 2007).  Therefore we tested the impact of optimal disease control policies of variation in the sea lice –induced mortality rate (dw) on wild salmon stocks.  Fig.  5a shows the effect of lice control in farm on the wild ﬁshery harvesting level when we introduce different levels of sea liceinduced mortality rate on wild stock, while keeping other parameters at their base value.  The greater the effect of lice on wild ﬁshery, the greater the variation between odd- and even-numbered year harvests of wild ﬁsh induced by the joint control policy.  On a separate note, we also found similar oscillation pattern but less variation in a distance-dispersal environment when investigated the effect of different sea lice-induced mortality rates on wild5. 2.  The Effect of Wild Salmon Prices.  We also conducted sensitivity analysis to investigate the effect of wild salmon price on optimal disease control in ﬁsh farms.  Ideally a variable price should be applied to reﬂect the fact that commodity prices may be sensitive to total supply.  Farmed and wild caught salmon compete in the same market, and estimation of demand requires data for all marketed salmon species (Asche et al. , 1999).  The price of wild salmon would be expected to vary both with the species involved.  In 2015 the ex-vessel price of pink salmon was around one half the price of chum salmon, one third the price of coho salmon, and one tenth the price of Chinook salmon (Alaska Department of Fish and Game, 2016).  A second potential reason for variation in the price of wild salmon is willingnessto-pay for non-marketed ecosystem services associated with wild salmon.  Therefore, we conducted sensitivity analysis based on different ﬁxed price levels.  Fig.  5b also shows the effect of optimal control of sea lice in farms on the harvesting level in wild ﬁshery when the unit price of wild stock is $0. 36/kg, $3. 6/kg and $5. 4/kg while keeping other parameters at their base values.  The greater the value of the disease externality the stronger the control program required in the salmon farms, and the lower the difference between odd- and even-numbered year harvests of wild ﬁsh.  <Conclusion> Discussion.  Salmon aquaculture is one of the fastest growing industries worldwide (FAO, 2014).  Salmon farming production surpassed wild caught salmon production in late 1990s, and has now become an economic driver for many regional economies.  It has also become a major source of environmental impacts.  At the top of the list of environmental impacts are sea lice transmission between salmon farms and the nearby wild ﬁsheries where sea lice can be predictable and controllable in farms, but farms have no incentive to eradicate sea lice and still provide an externality.  This is similar to the problem created by California Abalone farmers who keep a more tolerant stock by managing water temperature on farms but provide a potent reservoir with greater chance of externality (Lafferty and Ben-Horin, 2013).  Current regulations are often not adequate to mitigate externality such as this (Lafferty and Ben-Horin, 2013).  We show that two types of environments (a wellmixed environment versus a distance-dispersal environment) would determine the underling sea lice transmission dynamics, hence providing different insights into the economic management of sea lice.  Indeed, the interaction between pathogens and stocks and impact of pathogens on aquatic animals depends on the nature of transmission (Murray, 2009), reﬂected by surrounding hydrodynamic environment (Adams et al. , 2012).  We ﬁnd that the externality generated by the marine aquaculture is not signiﬁcant, but the externality value investigated in a wellmixed coastal environment is greater than that in a distance-dispersal environment.  We also show that in a well-mixed environment the steady state trajectories for wild salmon stocks are different under privately and jointly optimal management strategies, but similar in a distance-dispersal environment.  Both privately and jointly control regimes approach the same steady state harvesting and spawning stock levels due to the sole control variable of chemical application and the ﬁxed proportional harvest regulation.  However, we ﬁnd that the variability in wild salmon stocks between odd- and even-numbered year runs is highly sensitive to the effect of lice on the wild ﬁshery, and the price of wild pink salmon.  When the mortality rate of wild stocks induced by the sea lice is high, the optimal disease control policy forces considerable year-to-year variation in wild stocks.  As the mortality rate of wild stocks induced by the sea lice falls, the year-to-year variation in wild stocks also falls.  We also ﬁnd that where susceptible wild pink stocks are of low commercial value, control regimes result in signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations in wild stocks.  By contrast, where susceptible wild stocks are of high commercial value, control regimes generate more stable wild populations.  An interesting implication of this result is that the main effect of a decrease in the effect of lice on wild ﬁsh stocks (or an increase in the value of wild ﬁshery) is not an increase in the steady state level of wild populations but increase in the temporal stability of those stocks. 