 It is widely accepted that the CEOs of large banks have incentives to implement business policies that increase their organizations’ exposure to risks ( Cohen et al. , 2014.  Ellul and Yerramilli, 2013.  Gandhi and Lustig, 2015 ).  These business policies  are motivated by the highly levered nature of banks that provides CEOs with risk-taking incentives given the convexity of  their stock and option holdings.   While shareholders are not against executives taking risks, because equity is an out-of-the-money call option whose  value is increasing with risk ( Acharya and Ryan, 2016.  Jensen and Meckling, 1976 ), they do not have a preference for risks  that can be detrimental to the survival of the bank ( Stulz, 2015 ).  A bank’s growing exposure to tail risks, measuring the  possibility of suffering extremely large losses, could be dangerous for the organization ( Cordella and Yeyati, 2003.  Ellul and  Yerramilli, 2013.  Hellmann et al. , 20 0 0.  Keeley, 1990.  Park and Peristiani, 20 07 ).  While an exposure to tail risks tends to  reward shareholders with positive returns in many scenarios, it can also be associated with a small probability of extremely  large losses that undermine a bank’s longer-term survival ( Cohen et al. , 2014.  Ellul and Yerramilli, 2013.  Thanassoulis, 2013 ).   The purpose of this paper is to understand whether increases in tail risk are associated with an increased likelihood of  a forced CEO turnover in large banks.  To this end, we present the ﬁrst cross-country study of CEO turnovers in the banking  industry based on a sample of 261 large banks selected from 46 countries for the period 2004–2013.   Whether any link exists between tail risk and the likelihood of a CEO turnover in large banks lacks empirical evidence.   This is particularly unfortunate given that dismissal is potentially an important mechanism to discipline CEOs by bank boards  and reduce the chances that they overly expose their banks to extreme risks.  In fact, dismissal might lead not only to the loss  of current employment but also the loss of unvested equity-based compensation ( Dahiya and Yermack, 2008 ) and reduced  future career opportunities ( Brickley et al. , 1999 ).   Our analysis is guided by conventional theoretical models proposed for non-ﬁnancial ﬁrms where boards employ performance, volatility and other signals to evaluate CEO choices ( Bushman et al. , 2010.  Gibbons and Murphy, 1990.  Holmstrom,  1982.  Jenter and Kannan, 2015 ).  When these signals indicate bad outcomes for the corporation that are imputable to a lack  of CEO ability or effort in the decision making, the dismissal of the CEO is a likely consequence.  Along these lines, we argue that tail risk conveys different and additional signals, as compared to stock performance and volatility, of possible bad  outcomes for the bank that can be related to CEO choices.   An increasing exposure to tail risks, making a bank more vulnerable to events that can lead to extremely large losses and  to a ﬁnancial distress ( Ellul and Yerramilli, 2013 ), signals that the bank might ﬁnd it more diﬃcult and costly to conduct its  business ( Stulz, 2015 ).  For instance, increases in tail risks lead to additional costs for shareholders related to the monitoring  role of bank creditors and regulators.  Both creditors and regulators do not beneﬁt from the upside gains deriving from bank  risk-taking while they bear the cost of the downside.  It follows that especially in the presence of a growing tail risk exposure,  creditors can signiﬁcantly increase the risk-premium charged on bank debts and reduce the amount of available funds for  the bank ( Flannery, 2001.  Schaeck et al. , 2011.  Stulz, 2015 ).  At the same time, regulators might more closely monitor banks  and offer negative signals on their ﬁnancial health with the consequence of reducing share prices and further increasing  borrowing costs ( Berger and Davies, 1998.  DeYoung et al. , 2001.  Slovin et al. , 1999 ).   In our study we follow Ellul and Yerramilli (2013) and Van Bekkum (2016) and use Expected Shortfall ( ES ) as our primary  measure of bank tail risk.  ES quantiﬁes the downside of bank risk in the form of extremely large negative stock returns.  ES  is, therefore, a particularly appropriate signal that a bank is overly exposed to extreme risks that are detrimental to bank  value.  Furthermore, following studies that investigate the role of volatility in CEO dismissal in non-ﬁnancial corporations  ( Bushman et al. , 2010 ), we build our analysis on the distinction between idiosyncratic and systematic tail risk, with the  former being seen as more directly linked to managerial choices.   By focusing on tail risk, our work is related to the stream of research that emphasizes the importance of going beyond  the investigations of (average) stock returns and proﬁtability in order to explain forced CEO turnovers in corporations (see,  for instance, Brickley, 2003 ).  This type of investigation is the focus of earlier studies on CEO turnovers in the banking industry (see Hubbard and Palia, 1995 ).  Furthermore, our paper extends and complements the analysis conducted on small US  community banks by Schaeck et al.  (2011) where the authors show that an increase in bank default risk (measured by the  accounting Z-score) raises the likelihood of a forced CEO turnover due to the disciplinary role played by shareholders.   Differently from the existing studies, we show the importance of accounting for tail risk in examining the decision to  remove a CEO by the boards of large banks.  We ﬁnd a positive relationship between idiosyncratic tail risk and forced (but not  voluntary) CEO turnover, and we document that the ﬁring decision is not, in general, related to an exposure to systematic  tail risk.  Furthermore, we show that our result is not related to idiosyncratic tail risk capturing a poor performance effect  or simply an idiosyncratic volatility effect, as in the model proposed by Bushman et al.  (2010) , and holds under different  empirical settings, including changes in the way we compute bank tail risk.   A key consequence of the above results is that the importance of idiosyncratic tail risk for the ﬁring decision should  depend on the banking market structure as the evaluation of CEO choices is argued to be more diﬃcult in more concentrated  (less competitive) industries ( DeFond and Park, 1999.  Fee et al. 