
The trade-off between risk and return is a fundamental issue in asset
pricing theory, which has been given much attention by researchers,
market investors and analysts.  In general, investors require a larger
expected return from a security that is riskier.  However, after decades
of controversy, no consensus exists among researchers on the relation
between risk and return across time.  Recently, the volatility implied
from options prices is commonly considered as the best volatility
forecast and risk measure (Mencia and Sentana, 2013).  Thus, interest
in the relations between return and implied volatility has increased to
provide new evidence to this debate. 
During the 2008 global ﬁnancial crisis, a new implied volatility index
(OVX) in the crude oil market was launched by the Chicago Board
Options Exchange (CBOE).  the index can measure the market's
expectation of the 30-day volatility of crude oil prices by applying
the well-known CBOE Volatility Index methodology to options on
the United States Oil Fund (Liu Name, 2013).  This index is the ﬁrst
commodity-based implied volatility index.  research on its relations
with oil price returns will help investors further improve their trading
decisions and will contribute, as well, to the development of energy
ﬁnance, which is what the current study hopes to achieve. 
Previous empirical literature has been focused on the relations
between returns and historical volatility in ﬁnancial markets (Leὁn
Name, 2007.  Wu and Lee, 2015.  Chang, 2016), while there is few research
in energy market.  Recently, return–implied volatility relationship has
been received extensive attention in traditional ﬁnancial markets, in
which the stock market implied volatility index (VIX) is widely investigated (Sarwar, 2012.  Basher and Sadorsky, 2016).  Although much
research has been done, no consistent conclusion on positive relations
(Fleming Name, 1995.  Giot, 2005.  Guo and Whitelaw, 2006) or negative
relations (Dash and Moran, 2005.  Tanha and Dempsey, 2015) has been
achieved.  Furthermore, the conclusion in the stock market cannot be
simply applied to OVX because of the more complicated structure of
crude oil options (Ji and Fan, 2016). 
Research on OVX in the crude oil market has been a research hotspot
in the ﬁeld of energy ﬁnance.  Existing research has focused on three
aspects.  Firstly, the predictive ability of the implied volatility index in
the oil market is investigated (Szakmary Name, 2003.  Agnolucci, 2009. 
Lux Name, 2016).  Secondly, the spillover effect of the implied volatility
indexes between oil and ﬁnancial markets is explored (Liu Name, 2013. 
Maghyereh Name, 2016.  Bouri Name, 2017).  Thirdly, the interdependence
between oil price returns and the implied volatility index is investigated. 
Only three studies have attempted to answer this problem.  Aboura and
Chevallier (2013) applied the OLS regression model and found that the
inverse leverage effect is the dominant effect that drove the WTI crude
oil prices from 2007 to 2011.  Agbeyegbe (2015) used OLS regression to
ﬁnd regular feedback and leverage effects between oil price returns
and OVX changes, as well as employed the quantile regression copula
method to ﬁnd a negative relationship between contemporaneous OVX
and oil returns.  Ji and Fan (2016) utilised the time-varying parameter
GARCH model and regression analysis to verify the role of OVX as a
gauge of investor fear instead of risk preference. 
The aforementioned studies mainly focus on a linear relationship,
but little information on non-linear dependence and the risk spillovers
between OVX and oil price returns is provided.  Although the quantile
regression copula method was used by Agbeyegbe (2015), only a static
relationship was explored.  The non-linear time-varying dependence
between OVX and oil price return is therefore investigated further
from the perspective of risk spillover to extend the current literature. 
This non-linear dependence can help investors predict well the market
risk and improve their portfolio strategy and hedging effectiveness. 
The principal contributions of this study are as follows.  Firstly,
six time-varying mixed copula models (TVMC) are constructed by
selecting four copulas.  Secondly, the VaR for oil price returns conditional
on OVX, as well as the CoVaR for oil price returns conditional on
the VaR for OVX, are estimated on the basis of the TVMC models. 
Then, the dynamic and asymmetric risk spillover effects between oil
price returns and OVX are explored.  Third, the Kendall coefﬁcients are
calculated on the basis of the TVMC model with the use of the Monte
Carlo simulation method, which can show the dynamic dependence
structure between oil price returns and OVX.  Fourth, structural change
test of dependence proposed by Dias and Embrechts (2009) is introduced for division of subsamples and to investigate the robustness of
our ﬁndings.  Finally, Brent is selected for comparison of the results
with WTI. 
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows.  Section 2 introduces our methodology of TVMC and the measure of VaR and CoVaR. 
Section 3 presents the data and empirical results.  Finally, Section 4
concludes the paper. 
<Middle> Methodology. 
This section mainly models the risk spillover and the dynamic and asymmetric dependence between oil price returns and OVX.  The modelling
process is divided into three parts.  Firstly, the upside and downside VaRs for oil price returns conditional on OVX, as well as the CoVaR for WTI returns
conditional on the VaR of OVX, are measured to explore the risk spillover of OVX to WTI returns.  Secondly, four copulas that can ﬁt negative dependence are selected to construct six TVMC.  Then, the VaR and CoVaR measured above can be estimated.  The Monte Carlo simulation method is also
used to compute the Kendall coefﬁcient on the basis of the TVMC model, which can measure the dynamic dependence between WTI returns and
OVX.  Finally, structural change test for dependence is further introduced to detect the jump characteristics of dependence and conﬁrm the robustness
of our analysis. 
2. 1.  Measurement of VaR and CoVaR. 
2. 1. 1.  VaR. 
VaR is a most common measure of market risk used by ﬁnancial institutions due to its simplicity of calculation.  Intuitively, the α%-VaR is deﬁned
as the worst loss over a target horizon that will not be exceeded with a given level of conﬁdence 1 − α (Jorion, 2007).  In this section, we measure the
upside and downside risks for oil price returns using the VaR for short and long position, respectively. 
Let rt be the log return of the underlying asset at time t, and given tail probability α, the VaR of a long ﬁnancial position is related to the lower tail of
long)=α, whereas the VaR of a short ﬁnancial position is related to the upper tail of the return's distribution,
short.  If the
D is the αth quantile of the return's distribution, whereas the upside risk
the return's distribution, i. e.  Pr(rt≤ −VaRα,t
i. e.  Pr(rt≥VaRα,t
distribution of crude oil return rt is continuous, the downside risk VaRα,tshort)=α.  Thus, we deﬁne the unconditional market downside risk VaRα,t
U is the (1−α)th quantile of the return's distribution, i. e. 
Since ﬁnancial time series may have the characteristics of autocorrelation and conditional heteroscedasticity, we employ ARMA-GARCH-t class
model to construct their marginal distribution at time t conditional on observations through time t−1, Fi,t(∙| F t−1), i=1,2, as follows. 
Through the distribution of standardised residual, we can obtain the conditional distribution of variable ri,t, i. 