 1.  Introduction There is an ongoing debate about the role of oil and gold in hedging equity portfolios, which has become topical since the ﬁnancial crisis and the subsequent ﬂuctuations in the prices of these assets.  In the literature, the role of oil and gold as hedges is not universally accepted, and it seems to depend on geopolitical, economic, as well as other idiosyncratic factors.  This topic is of particular interest for oil-exporting countries, which are usually rich in these assets.  However, most of the literature has focused on developed countries (Baur and McDermott, 2010.  Hood and Malik, 2013.  Choi and Hammoudeh, 2010.  Creti et al. , 2013.  Ciner et al. , 2013), while developing countries have only recently started receiving further attention (Basher and Sadorsky, 2016).  Using data from the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries1 from January 2004 to May 2016, this paper employs a dynamic conditional correlation model (DCC-GARCH) to ﬁrst examine the shock transmissions between the equity markets and the two commodities, and then evaluate the hedging opportunities arising from including crude oil and gold in equity portfolios.  Our paper is the ﬁrst to consider the dynamic relationships between oil, gold and equities in the GCC countries, therefore further contributing to the debate.  Examining the interconnectedness between oil, gold and equities is of great importance for GCC countries, as they are net exporters of oil, while they hold gold reserves to secure against US dollar ﬂuctuations, which is the trading currency for both commodities.  At the same time, GCC countries hold about 1. 3% of the world's gold reserves, hence our study may also be of interest to local monetary authorities. 2 Finally, given the absence of a derivatives market for GCC stocks, traditionally used for hedging, it is important for GCC investors to ﬁnd alternative risk management options.  In light of the above, this paper examines the interconnectedness between the GCC exchanges and oil and gold, as well as the usefulness of the two commodities in hedging GCC-based equity portfolios.  The period considered, which spans from January 2004 to May 2016, is rich in events, as it begins with the post-Iraqi war era, and covers the ﬁnancial crisis, the historic peak of gold prices in 2010 and the subsequent fall, as well as the recent oil crisis which began in June 2014.  During the ﬁnancial crisis, the price of oil fell signiﬁcantly, but the rising price of gold balanced the negative effects of the crisis.  in fact, the GCC countries experienced signiﬁcant economic growth during that period, despite the slowdown in the global economy.  The recent crises in the gold and oil markets, though, led to a substantial revenue slowdown for GCC oil exporters, while central bank reserves were also affected negatively.  This adds to the on-going political turbulence in the Middle East, which creates more investment uncertainty, and therefore makes the topic in hand an interesting case to examine.  Our study contributes to the growing literature in energy ﬁnance, that includes studies such as Arouri and Nguyen (2010), Baur and McDermott (2010), Choi and Hammoudeh (2010), Filis et al.  (2011), Arouri et al.  (2011), Awartani and Maghyereh (2013), Awartani et al.  (2013), Ciner et al.  (2013), Creti et al.  (2013), Guesmi and Fattoum (2014), Hoang et al.  (2015), Basher and Sadorsky (2016).  Most of these studies examine the dynamic correlations between oil and equities, while only a few studies consider additional commodities, such as Mensi et al.  (2013, 2015).  We estimate return and volatility spillovers using the dynamic conditional correlation, general autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity (DCC-GARCH) model of Engle (2002).  For the returns equation, we use a VAR speciﬁcation that endogenously accounts for structural breaks, while we follow the multivariate GARCH approach of Ling and McAleer (2003) to model volatility.  The DCCs between GCC equities and the two commodities are then used to compute dynamic hedge ratios and portfolio weights.  Our results reveal signiﬁcant return and volatility transmissions from oil to equities, highlighting the link between oil production and corporate cash ﬂows in GCC economies, whereas the inﬂuence of gold on equities appears insigniﬁcant and negligible.  In the opposite direction, we do not ﬁnd convincing evidence that the GCC stock markets can inﬂuence the two commodity markets, which we attribute to the relatively small capitalisation of the exchanges.  Our analysis of dynamic correlations and dynamic hedge ratios indicates that, although the two commodities are cheap hedges, and in contrast to previous studies, they cannot be considered as good ones due to their weak dynamic correlations with equities.  We therefore conclude that oil and gold can instead be used for portfolio diversiﬁcation, which is an important result for GCC equity holders, given that the local exchanges list relatively few corporations from a narrow selection of sectors.  The rest of this paper is structured as follows.  Section 2 provides a contextual background about the GCC stock markets.  Section 3 reviews the relevant literature.  Section 3 analyses the empirical methods followed.  Section 4 presents the data used in this study.  Section 5 discusses the empirical ﬁndings, while Section 5 concludes the paper.  2.  The GCC stock markets.  The GCC was established on 11 November 1981, and it includes six countries.  Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the UAE.  GCC countries are important players in the global oil market, as that they possess 47% of veriﬁed oil reserves and they produce 23. 7% of crude oil.  Saudi Arabia is the second largest crude oil producer in the world, producing on average 13% of crude oil.  The contributions for the rest GCC countries are 3. 6% for Kuwait, 1. 3% for Oman, 1. 9% for Qatar, and 3. 9% for UAE.  Bahrain is the smallest producer with an average output of 50 thousand barrels a day (0. 06%). 3 As reported in Table 1, oil revenues contribute signiﬁcantly to the economic and business p. 162).  Note that the maximum foreign ownership in an Omani can range up to 100% in the free zones.  Foreign ownership in certain countries, such as Saudi Arabia, is restricted to GCC nationals.  activities of the region, as they range from 15% of GDP in Bahrain to 53% of GDP in Kuwait.  Table 1 also shows that one of the main contributions of oil is through the trade balance, since fuel exports account from 42. 5% of total merchandise value in UAE up to 89. 1% in Kuwait.  These indicators suggest that corporate cash ﬂows and economic output can be very sensitive to oil price ﬂuctuations.  Moreover, companies which are directly related to oil production, occupy a considerable proportion of the total capitalisation of the equity indices of the GCC stock exchanges, with the exception of the Kuwaiti market which is dominated by ﬁnancial services.  However, oil and gas in the bloc are produced by national companies and therefore the proportion of the energy sector that is represented in stock exchanges is not necessarily high.  For instance, Saudi Arabia lists only four traded companies which comprise b2% of the total traded capital in the market. 4 Corporate cash ﬂows can be also indirectly related to oil price ﬂuctuations, given the heavy dependence of the region on oil.  Khandelwal et al.  (2016) explain that this dependence may be channelled through the supply chain for companies for which oil comprises a signiﬁcant proportion of their variable costs, or through the close links of ﬁnancial services with the oil industry in the region.  Moreover, given that oil revenues are the main source of government funding,5 ﬁscal spending, which in turn is channelled to a great extent to the private sector, effectively depends on oil ﬂuctuations.  Saudi Arabia is the leading exchange in the bloc in terms of size, years of operation and liquidity, as implied by the turnover ratio (Table 1).  The smallest and least liquid market is Bahrain, while the Omani stock market is also relatively illiquid.  Moreover, compared to other major emerging markets, GCC exchanges are small and less liquid, while their capitalisation accounts for 0. 8% of global capitalization.  Despite the recent modernisation efforts, GCC stock markets suffer from several structural and regulatory deﬁciencies, which, combined with the political uncertainty in the area, create a challenging corporate environment.  GCC markets are segmented with signiﬁcant restrictions on capital mobility and foreign ownership (Table 1), especially when compared to other developed and emerging economies.  Moreover, there are structural weaknesses in supervision, corporate governance, and reporting standards, creating issues in terms of the transparency and reliability of information.  In addition to this, the participation of institutional investors is relatively small, which has been argued to be a contributing factor to noise trading.  Finally, the number of listed companies and sectors is small, limiting the breadth of options for diversiﬁcation (sector breadth).  3.  Literature review.  The literature on the links between oil, gold and equities is rich and offers various interpretations about the shock transmission mechanisms between these assets.  Oil prices have been shown to have predictive power for stocks, especially in developed countries (Driesprong et al. , 2008), while they are commonly cited in the literature to adversely inﬂuence stock prices.  Oil price ﬂuctuations alter production costs (Arouri and Nguyen, 2010), and they therefore affect corporate cash ﬂows and ﬁrm proﬁtability, which is then reﬂected on stock prices (Jones and Kaul, 1996).  Indirect effects are also important as oil prices traditionally correlate negatively with real economic activity (Mork et al. , 1994), while empirical evidence seems to support this claim (Nandha and Faff, 2008). 6 For example, increasing oil prices can reduce disposable income, increase precautionary savings, and, therefore, reduce consumption demand overall (Edelstein and Kilian, 2009).  At the same time, due to the fact that oil and capital are complements, the rising production costs can also lead to reduced output and cost-push inﬂation (Berndt and Wood, 1979).  In addition, oil price volatility can introduce uncertainty in all sectors of the economy (Ferderer, 1996), negatively affecting ﬁrm investments (Henriques and Sadorsky, 2011).  Finally, reallocation effects can also explain the negative correlation between the two assets, as capital and labour may migrate to sectors that are less exposed to a crisis (Hamilton, 1988).  In fact, the indirect effects can be severe if the economy depends heavily on oil, as Khandelwal et al.  (2016) show for GCC countries.  However, oil prices can be also driven by aggregate demand factors during the expansion phase of the business cycle, and therefore a positive association may be observed with stock prices as ﬁrms enjoy greater proﬁtability and growth (Park and Ratti, 2008). 7 The nature of the relationship of equities with gold is quite different compared to oil, as gold is a competing asset for stocks, given that a fraction of total demand for gold relates to investment.  Gold, being a precious metal, is a store of value, therefore serving as a hedge against inﬂation (Jastram, 1977.  Jaffe, 1989.  Ghosh et al. , 2004).  In fact, in the presence of structural breaks, the role of gold as an inﬂation hedge appears more signiﬁcant (Worthington and Pahlavani, 2007).  However, Hoang et al.  (2016) ﬁnd that gold is an inﬂation hedge in the short run for the UK, USA and India, but not for China, Japan and France. 8 Gold has been also thought traditionally to serve as a hedge against stock price ﬂuctuations during crisis periods (that is, a safe haven), a ﬁnding which is mostly conﬁrmed for developed countries.  Baur and McDermott (2010) investigate this relationship from 1979 to 2009 and ﬁnd that gold is both a hedge and a safe haven for European and with the US dollar, but not for Australia, Canada, Japan and BRICS countries. 