 Introduction Understanding the forces that shape financial reporting outcomes is an important goal in accounting research.  A large prior literature provides evidence on how financial reporting choices are affected by explicit and implicit contracts.  Explicit debt contracts with firms’ creditors (Watts and Zimmerman, 1986.  DeFond and Jiambalvo, 1994.  Dichev and Skinner, 2002), and compensation contracts with firms’ executives (Healy, 1985), have been shown to influence financial reporting choices.  Implicit contracts with equity investors as reflected in these investors’ expectations have also been shown to influence financial reporting choices (Graham et al. , 2005.  Badertscher et al. , 2012).  Relatively less attention has been devoted however to understanding the potential influence of implicit contracts between firms and rank and file employees.  Firms sell employees a package of explicit and implicit claims, with explicit claims expressed through explicit employment contracts and implicit claims expressed through promises about long-run working conditions and employment and advancement opportunities (Cornell and Shapiro, 1987).  The value of the ongoing implicit claims depends on employee expectations about the firm’s future financial conditions (Bowen et al. , 1995).  Firms have an incentive to maximize the value of the package of explicit and implicit claims they offer by maximizing employees’ perceived value of the ongoing implicit claims, and this incentive is a potentially important determinant of corporate financial and reporting policies (Bowen et al. , 1995.  Agrawal and Matsa, 2013).  In this paper we provide new evidence on whether and how financial reporting choices are affected by the implicit claims of rank and file employees.  The prior literature has suggested two ways in which rank and file employees can potentially affect financial reporting.  The first is in the context of union negotiations.  The hypothesis posited in the literature is that firms are expected to manage earnings downwards in the short-run during union negotiations in order to justify resistance to union calls for enhanced pay and benefits.  This hypothesis predicts firm behavior when shareholder-employee conflicts of interest are pronounced and employees are unionized, and empirical tests of the hypothesis appear to yield mixed results (Liberty and Zimmerman, 1986.  DeAngelo and DeAngelo, 1991.  D’Souza et al. , 2001.  Comprix and Muller 2011.  Bova et al. , 2015).  The second hypothesis posited in the literature, which is the focus of this paper, is that firms are expected to make longrun earnings-increasing choices in order to project financial security, as this reduces the cost of employee hiring and retention in competitive labor markets.  The hypothesis is predicted to hold more generally when shareholder-employee conflicts of interest are not salient, and the hypothesis is not conditioned on the presence of labor unions.  This idea is advanced in a number of papers in the accounting literature.  Bowen et al.  (1995), Burgstahler and Dichev (1997), Matsumoto (2002), and Cheng and Warfield (2005), among others, argue that firms manage their financial statements to make them appear rosier in order to improve their implicit terms of trade with various stakeholders including employees, and Graham et al.  (2005) report consistent evidence from a survey of CFOs.  As in the prior literature, by long-run earnings-increasing choices (or “long-run earnings management”) we mean management of cumulative earnings over an extended period that results in a sustained wedge between ‘true’ and reported cumulative earnings.  Cumulative earnings can potentially be managed through a combination of long-run income increasing choices such as depreciation, inventory, and bad debt recognition policies, and short-run accrual and real-earningsmanagement choices when the wedge is in jeopardy.  In particular, the upward management of cumulative earnings does not require upward earnings management in every single reporting period, which makes it relatively more challenging to detect empirically.  Bowen et al.  (1995) provide one test of the long-run-earnings management hypothesis by examining whether firms with high labor intensity are more likely to adopt long-run income-increasing accounting policies, and find supportive results.  In this paper we adopt a potentially more powerful approach by testing for changes in earnings management around an exogenous shock to employees’ cost of unemployment.  A large labor economics literature documents that employees bear substantial costs of involuntary unemployment (e. g. , Gibbons and Katz, 1991.  Gruber, 1997).  Employees therefore care about the financial security of their employer (Brown and Matsa, 2013), and one way they assess this is through their employer’s earnings performance (e. g. , Burgstahler and Dichev, 1997.  Matsumoto, 2002.  Cheng and Warfield, 2005.  Graham et al. , 2005).  Firms bear at least two costs of exposing workers to unemployment risk.  First, firms bear ex ante costs of compensating employees for the level of employment risk that exists at the initiation of employment.  These “compensating differentials” are substantial and can take the form of higher wages and benefits, and better working conditions (Smith, 1976.  Abowd and Ashenfelter, 1981.  Topel, 1984.  Hamermesh and Wolfe, 1990).  The economic significance of compensating wage differentials is suggested by empirical estimates that it is up to 14% of wages (Abowd and Ashenfelter, 1981), and that up to 41% of interindustry variation in wages is explained by unemployment risk (Li, 1986.  Hamermesh and Wolfe, 1990).  Second, firms bear substantial turnover costs as employees seek more stable employment, and heightened search costs as potential employees shy away (Brown and Matsa, 2013), if there are significant increases in unemployment risk.  We expect firms try to mitigate these costs by managing long-run earnings in order to manage employee perceptions of unemployment risk.  This implies firms’ long-run-earnings management incentives change when employees’ unemployment risk changes.  Employees’ unemployment risk (and the firm’s cost of exposing employees to unemployment risk) is increasing in (i) the unemployment probability, (ii) employee risk aversion, and (iii) costs borne by workers during unemployment (Agrawal and Matsa, 2013).  Our research design exploits exogenous shocks to employees’ unemployment risk through a decrease in the costs borne by workers during unemployment.  This follows Agrawal and Matsa (2013) who show that the same exogenous shock affects firms’ financial policies through increased leverage.  State-level unemployment insurance (UI) programs are intended to lower employees’ unemployment costs by providing temporary income when they are involuntarily unemployed and actively seeking new employment, and UI has been shown to have economically significant effects on employee behavior and aggregate labor supply (Topel, 1984.  Meyer, 1990, 1995).  An increase in UI benefits decreases employees’ cost of separation from, and likely therefore their dependence on, their employers.  When employees are better insured against unemployment we expect they are relatively less sensitive to their employers’ financial performance.  This observation forms the basis for the empirical tests.  for firms in a given U. S.  state, we examine discretionary earnings decreases around large state-level increases in UI benefits as these state-level changes are relatively exogenous to the firm.  One way to view this is that cumulative or long-run earnings management results in a ‘bloated’ balance sheet.  Managers likely look for opportune moments to partially clean up the bloat, and as long as one determinant of this bloat is managing employee perceptions of unemployment risk, we expect a reduction in bloat (or partial unwinding of prior upward earnings management) when there is a reduction in unemployment risk.  As such, we are effectively testing changes in balance sheet bloat, rather than levels of bloat in the cross-section, which allows a relatively more powerful test of the hypothesis.  The empirical tests employ a difference-in-differences design by examining earnings management measures before versus after an exogenous increase in UI benefits, for treatment firms versus control firms.  The treatment firms are those headquartered in states with a large increase (410%) in maximum UI benefits, while control firms are those headquartered in matched neighboring states without an increase in benefits.  We find no differences in macroeconomic conditions between treatment and control states as indicated by state-level GDP growth, unemployment rates, stock returns and stock return volatilities of firms headquartered in those states, and UI payroll taxes.  Of the four earnings management measures employed, one is a model-implied estimate of abnormal accruals, while three are model-free measures.  The abnormal accrual estimate is from the Dechow and Dichev (2002) model, and results are robust to a variety of other models.  The model-free measures are special items, write downs, and net income-reducing restatements.  Across all earnings management measures, results suggest significant unwinding of prior upward earnings management for treatment firms relative to control firms in the year following an increase in UI benefits.  This suggests firms are relatively more likely to partially unwind prior upward earnings management when employees are better insured against unemployment, consistent with the main hypothesis.  A battery of further tests examining alternative specifications, and the potential influence of state-level political forces and unobserved economic conditions, indicate robustness of the main result.  A number of cross-sectional predictions are tested.  We expect upward earnings management is more likely at firms where employees’ perceptions of unemployment risk are relatively more important, such as firms that are more labor intensive, have higher layoff propensity, and employ relatively more low-wage workers.  Therefore, we expect relatively greater unwinding of earnings management at these firms following an increase in unemployment benefits.  Further, we expect partial unwinding is less likely at firms with other strong incentives to maintain the upward earnings management, such as firms that need to tap the capital markets, meet or beat earnings expectations, avoid debt covenant violations, or inflate executive compensation.  These tests yield significant and consistent results.  The evidence in this paper contributes to the accounting literature by providing new evidence on the role of employee perceptions in shaping financial reporting choices.  The evidence suggests that managing employees’ perception of unemployment risk is one determinant of firms’ long-run-earnings management.  The prior accounting literature has largely examined the influence of organized labor unions negotiating explicit contracts.  In contrast, the evidence here sheds light more generally on the role of rank and file employees and their implicit contract with employers.  The results contribute to the literature on the determinants of financial reporting choices, and further our understanding of the role therein of a key factor of production.  In what follows, Section 2 describes the hypotheses.  Section 3 describes the data.  Section 4 presents the main results.  Section 5 describes cross-sectional tests.  and Section 6 concludes.  2.  Hypothesis development.  An extensive literature in labor economics supports the idea that workers bear substantial costs of becoming involuntarily unemployed, including significant decreases in consumption (Gruber, 1997) and difficulty in finding another wage-equivalent job (Farber, 2005.  Gibbons and Katz, 1991).  As such, employees care deeply about unemployment risk.  Firms in turn bear significant costs of exposing workers to unemployment risk, including compensating wage differentials (Abowd and Ashenfelter, 1981.  Topel, 1984.  Hamermesh and Wolfe, 1990), turnover costs as employees seek more stable employment, and heightened search costs as potential employees shy away (Brown and Matsa, 2013).  Reported earnings are useful for employees to assess the likelihood of becoming involuntarily unemployed.  This implicit use of accounting numbers likely creates ongoing incentives to manage earnings upward, as recognized in a number of prior papers including Bowen et al.  (1995).  Burgstahler and Dichev (1997) argue that lowering transactions cost with stakeholders such as employees is one incentive for upward earnings management.  Matsumoto (2002) and Cheng and Warfield (2005) hypothesize and find that one incentive for firms to avoid negative earnings surprises stems from the implicit claims of employees as proxied by labor intensity.  Choudhary et al.  (2009) hypothesize and find that labor intensity is one incentive for firms to manage income even absent cash flow effects.  Zechman (2010) hypothesizes that employees’ implicit claims also present an incentive for balance sheet management.  Finally, Graham et al.  (2005) indicate a significant majority of surveyed CFOs agree that managing earnings to manage stakeholder perception is descriptive of actual practice.  Employees do not necessarily have to be direct consumers of financial statements in order for their perceptions to be shaped by reported earnings.  As long as earnings are part of the public information set used by the media, analysts, ratings agencies and other parties to generate forecasts and reports, and employees are consumers of these forecasts, reports and news, reported earnings can shape employee perceptions of unemployment risk.  2. 1.  The U. S.  Unemployment Insurance (UI) System.  The UI system provides temporary income to eligible workers who are involuntarily unemployed and actively seeking new employment, in order to mitigate the loss of income from unemployment.  The basic framework for insurance provisions under the joint federal-state system is common across all states, though individual states have the autonomy to set the program’s parameters.  Who is eligible, the duration of benefits, and the amount of weekly unemployment benefits paid.  A state’s benefit formula typically calculates the earnings realized by a worker in four of the last five quarters and seeks to replace approximately half of those wages through weekly payments, subject to minimum and maximum bounds.  Much of the interstate and intertemporal variation in UI benefits stems from changes to the maximum bounds, and the elasticity of actual compensation payments to maximum total benefits is approximately one (Agrawal and Matsa, 2013.  Hsu et al. , 2013).  The maximum bound of benefits therefore effectively captures the generosity of UI benefits, and is inversely related to workers’ consumption loss during unemployment.  State-level changes in maximum total UI benefits are motivated by both state-level macroeconomic conditions and political forces.  Since these underlying macroeconomic conditions could also be associated with the financial reporting outcomes examined here, our empirical tests ensure that treatment and control states have similar economic conditions.  This is analogous to achieving covariate balance under a propensity score matching method.  The other determinant of changes in the maximum bound, political forces, is considered in Section 4. 2.  States finance their UI programs through payroll taxes levied on employers.  The firm-level effective tax rates are tailored to the unemployment history of the individual firm through a method referred to as experience rating, and states have the authority to set their own state-level experience rating scheme.  Firms with a recent history of layoffs have higher effective unemployment tax rates under this system.  We address in two ways any potential concern that changes in UI payroll tax rates concurrent with changes in maximum total UI benefits explain the financial reporting outcomes examined here.  First, we examine UI payroll taxes paid around the event year, and find no changes either for treatment or control states.  Second, the regressions control for UI payroll taxes.  2. 2.  Hypotheses.  The primary hypothesis is that firms have an incentive to manage long-run-earnings upward in order to manage employee perceptions of unemployment risk, and therefore that changes in unemployment risk are expected to be associated with changes in earnings management incentives.  As such, we expect to empirically observe a partial reversal of prior upward earnings management following an increase in state-level UI benefits, where the earnings management reversal is expected to manifest in negative discretionary accruals, special items, write downs, and income-reducing restatements.  As noted in the prior literature, there are a number of incentives to manage earnings upward, including incentives stemming from the need to tap capital markets, meet or beat earnings expectations, avoid debt covenant violations, and inflate executive compensation.  These incentives are likely episodic, while the incentive to manage employee perceptions of unemployment risk is likely ongoing.  For example, it is unlikely that a firm taps the capital markets every year, is on the cusp of meeting or beating analyst forecasts every period (it might meet or beat comfortably in many periods), is in danger of violating a debt covenant every period, or that the incremental compensation payoff from earnings management is equally strong every period (the payoff could be non-linear in earnings as in Healy (1985)).  In contrast, firms have ongoing needs to retain and attract talent, which implies that the unemployment risk incentive is long-run and therefore less likely to be irrelevant for managerial actions.  Our hypothesis is about the incremental effect on earnings management of the unemployment risk incentive, and the tests control for other earnings management incentives.  A number of cross-sectional predictions are tested.  Firms with high labor intensity are likely more vulnerable to employee perception of employment security than firms with low labor intensity, and are therefore more likely to manage earnings upward on an ongoing basis.  As such, we expect a larger reversal of prior upward earnings management at more labor-intensive firms following an increase in UI benefits.  Reported earnings are likely more important to employees’ perception of unemployment risk at firms with higher layoff propensity.  Such firms likely have greater incentive to manage earnings upward in order to minimize their own costs of exposing workers to unemployment risk.  As such we expect a larger reversal of prior upward earnings management at firms with high layoff propensity, following an increase in UI benefits.  Low-wage workers are likely to benefit relatively more from an increase in UI benefits since they have lower savings at the time of job loss (Browning and Crossley, 2001.  Bloemen and Stancanelli, 2005).  As such, increases in UI benefits likely affect relatively more the earnings management incentives of firms with a higher fraction of low wage workers.  We therefore expect such firms to have a larger reversal of prior upward earnings management following an increase in UI benefits.  Finally, when other upward earnings management incentives are strong (weak), an increase in UI benefits is less (more) likely to lead to partial unwinding of prior upward earnings management.  As such, we expect a significant (insignificant) partial unwinding of prior upward earnings management when incentives to tap capital markets, meet or beat earnings expectations, avoid debt covenant violations, and inflate executive compensation, are weak (strong).  <Middle> Data.  We employ a matched sample for testing, where the sample is developed as follows.  First, state-years with increases in the upper bound of unemployment benefits exceeding 10% (“the event”) are identified, yielding 128 such state-years.  The 10% cutoff lies at the 85th percentile of the distribution of annual changes in the upper bound of unemployment benefits, and allows us to balance the magnitude of the change versus sample size considerations.  Results are robust to using other cutoffs such as 5% or 15% increases in the upper bound of unemployment benefits.  Second, each event-year is matched to at least one adjacent state that does not experience a large increase in maximum unemployment benefits in the same year and the prior year.  This yields 290 matching state-years for the 128 event-years, since some states are matched to more than one state in a given year.  Table 1 shows the sample of 128 event-years between 1976 and 2010 with an increase in maximum total benefits exceeding 10%, and without a large increase in unemployment benefits in the pre-event year.  As the table shows, event-years are not clustered in any particular state.  The economic significance of the Treatment effect (the reduction in employees’ unemployment risk resulting from a 10% increase in unemployment benefits) is suggested by two sets of evidence.  First, the evidence in Agrawal and Matsa (2013) suggests a 10% increase in unemployment benefits leads to a 0. 5 percentage point increase in financial leverage (debt/ assets), which appears economically significant.  Second, we calibrate the dollar magnitude of implied wage savings as a result of the reduction in unemployment risk from a 10% increase in unemployment benefits (derivation details are presented in Appendix A).  The analysis suggests the reduction in employees' unemployment risk resulting from a 10% increase in unemployment benefits is, ceteris paribus, associated with an implied wage reduction of 8% of earnings for Treatment sample firms.  This appears to be an economically meaningful shock for firms.  The tests use data from all firms headquartered in these state-years.  Financial statement and stock price data are sourced from Compustat and CRSP, restatement data from Audit Analytics, analyst forecasts from IBES, debt covenant data is from Dealscan, executive compensation data is from Execucomp, unemployment benefit data from the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics, and state-level GDP growth data from the Census Bureau.  Political condition variables are obtained from the U. S.  Bureau of the Census Statistical Abstracts.  The final sample is from 1992 to 2010, which is the longest period for which we have all necessary data for the empirical tests. 1 All variable definitions are presented in Appendix B.  Compustat reports a firm’s current rather than historical headquarter location, and ignoring this source of measurement error could introduce bias.  To remedy this we extract historical headquarter locations from other data sources.  For the period between 1992 and 1995, we locate a firm’s headquarter by searching Compact Disclosure.  For each year from 1996 onwards, we search each firm’s 10-K report via EDGAR for its headquarter address.  Overall, Compustat’s reported current location is different from the historical location for 17% of firm-year observations.  3. 1.  Earnings management measures.  The main tests use two broad categories of earnings management measures.  model-implied estimates of abnormal accruals, and model-free measures.  The accrual model is the Dechow-Dichev (2002) model as modified in McNichols (2002).  Following Ball and Shivakumar (2006) this model is estimated for each three-digit SIC industry with more than 30 observations (we exclude financials and utilities in estimating the accruals models) as follows, where t indexes the year.  Accruals is income before extraordinary items minus operating cash flows.  CFO is operating cash flows.  ΔSales is the change in sales.  and PPE is the end of year property, plant and equipment.  All variables are scaled by lagged total assets.  The residual from eq.  (1) is the first measure of earnings management (Abnormal accruals).  Results are robust to estimation by industry-year, and the use of three other accrual models.  (i) the modified cross-sectional Jones (1991) model of Dechow et al.  (1995) as used in Dechow et al.  (2003) and Cohen et al.  (2008).  (ii) the performance-matched approach in Kothari et al.  (2005).  and (iii) the piecewise-linear model from Ball and Shivakumar (2006).  The three model-free measures of earnings management are special items (Special items), total write down (Write down) and an indicator equal to one for firms that have income-reducing restatements (Restatement).  The data for write downs and restatements are available for 2000–2010 only.  4.  Empirical tests and results.  In this section we test the hypothesis that prior upward earnings management reverses around large unemployment benefit increases.  Section 4. 1 examines the primary relation (Hypothesis 1), while Section 4. 2 describes tests intended to enhance identification and test robustness.  4. 1.  Earnings management reversal around large unemployment benefit changes.  We begin by examining macroeconomic conditions in the treatment and control samples in order to shed light on whether differences in the underlying macroeconomic conditions, rather than differences in treatment, have an effect on the outcome of interest.  Table 2 shows means of state-level macroeconomic indicators in the event-year and pre- event-year in both the treatment and control samples, along with a test of differences.  The macroeconomic indicators include statelevel GDP growth and unemployment rates, stock returns and stock return volatilities of all firms headquartered in these states as summary indicators of state-level economic conditions, and UI payroll taxes calculated as the average UI tax rate multiplied by average taxable wages in each state.  The last column of Table 2 shows a test of differences across the treatment and control samples in macroeconomic changes between the event-year and pre- event-year.  As that column shows, treatment and control samples differ only in the change in maximum unemployment benefits between the event-year and pre- event-year.  This suggests underlying macroeconomic conditions are unlikely to explain differences in examined outcomes across the treatment and control samples.  The subsequent tests are conducted on firm-year observations, where the firms are those headquartered in treatment and control states.  Table 3 shows descriptive statistics for the 8,272 firm-years in the sample.  The mean of Abnormal accruals is  0. 022, the mean of Special items is  1% of assets, mean Write down is  0. 1% of assets, and 4. 1% of firm-years report income-reducing restatements.  Benefit equals the log of maximum total unemployment benefits, and is calculated as the product of the maximum weekly benefit amount and the maximum duration allowed.  The mean and standard deviation of Benefit are 9. 094 and 0. 328, respectively, close to values reported in Agrawal and Matsa (2013).  The regression specification takes the form, where DepVar is the dependent variable that equals any one of the four earnings management measures described earlier.  “i” indexes the firm, “t” indexes the year, and “j” indexes the jth control for j42.  The panel regressions include firm- and year-fixed effects, and standard errors are clustered by state (Petersen, 2009).  The inclusion of firm- and year-fixed effects represents a generalization of the difference-in-differences design that allows causal inference in a regression setting (Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2003.  Angrist and Pischke, 2009.  Armstrong et al. , 2012).  The controls include lagged dependent variables2.  other earnings management incentives including the need to tap capital markets in the future, meet or beat analyst expectations, avoid debt covenant violations, and inflate executive compensation.  firm characteristics such as total assets, operating cash flows, asset growth, leverage, and cash flow volatility that are likely associated with the dependent variables (Myers et al. , 2003.  Ashbaugh et al. , 2003.  Butler et al. , 2004).  as well as state-level macroeconomic indicators such as GDP growth, unemployment rate, stock returns and stocks return volatilities of firms headquartered in the state, and UI payroll taxes.  Panel A of Table 4 shows coefficients, and t-statistics in parentheses, from pooled regression estimation of Eq.  (1).  The dependent variable in each specification is indicated in the column header.  The primary independent variable of interest is Benefit, and given the inclusion of firm fixed effects in the regression, results can be interpreted as showing that an increase in Benefit significantly predicts changes in the dependent variable.  As the table shows, an increase in Benefit significantly predicts a reduction in Abnormal accruals (two-tailed p-valueo0. 05), more negative Special items (two-tailed p-valueo0. 05) and Write downs (two-tailed p-valueo0. 01), and an increased likelihood of income-reducing Restatements (two-tailed p-valueo0. 01).  In terms of economic significance, Table 4 suggests a 10% increase in Benefit predicts a change in. 3 (i) Abnormal accruals of –0. 0012, which is 4% of earnings (given the mean ROA of 3% for our treatment sample firms).  (ii) Special items of  0. 0005, which is 1. 7% of earnings.  (iii) Write down of  0. 0002, which is 0. 7% of earnings.  (iv) Restatement probability of 1. 17 percentage points, which is about a 29% increase from the mean probability of incomereducing Restatements.  The firm-specific independent variables in Table 4 are motivated by the prior literature (Myers et al. , 2003.  Ashbaugh et al. , 2003.  Butler et al. , 2004), and the signs of their coefficients are consistent with the prior literature.  In particular, the signs of the coefficients of other earnings management incentives are consistent with expectation, providing some comfort about proxy validity and regression specification.  When the Tap capital market, Meet or beat, Tight covenant, and Compensation incentives are stronger, generally abnormal accruals are higher, special items and write downs are lower in magnitude (less negative), and the probability of income-reducing restatements is lower (considering both Panels A and B).  In an untabulated falsification test we examine whether non- income-reducing restatements, which constitute 0. 8% of all firm-years and 16. 3% of the restatement firm-years in our sample, are higher following an increase in unemployment benefits.  We re-estimate the regression specification in Panel A with non- income-reducing restatements as the dependent variable, and find the coefficient of Benefit is insignificant (t-statistic¼0. 26) as expected.  Panel B of Table 4 shows results when a more ‘traditional’ difference-in-differences specification is estimated.  Treat is an indicator equal to 1 for the treatment sample, and zero otherwise, while Post is an indicator equal to 1 in the year following the increase in unemployment benefits, and zero otherwise.  The main independent variable of interest is Treat Post, and it loads significantly negatively in all specifications consistent with the result in Panel A.  Collectively the results in Panels A and B of Table 4 are consistent with the hypothesis that firms manage earnings upward in order to manage employee perceptions of unemployment risk, and this incentive is incremental to other known earnings management incentives.  4. 2.  Further tests.  In this section we describe a number of tests intended to enhance identification and examine robustness.  Given the large number of dependent variables examined above, all subsequent results are tabulated using Abnormal accruals as the dependent variable.  4. 2. 1.  Extended windows around the event.  The main tests in Table 4 compare observations for years t and tþ1 for firms in treatment and control states.  We next examine robustness with respect to expanded windows around the event, ensuring that these windows do not contain other large changes in Benefit (so each window only contains one event for a given treatment state).  As shown in Panel A of Table 5, Benefit loads significantly negatively in samples of three years (two-tailed p-value o0. 10), and five years (twotailed p-value o0. 10), around the event year, indicating robustness of the main result in Table 4.  4. 2. 2.  All states, all years.  The main tests use a matched sample approach and therefore only include firms in treatment and control states.  An alternative as in Agrawal and Matsa (2013) is to estimate a pooled regression across all available states and years, without matching treatment state-years to control state-years.  As shown in Panel B of Table 5, results are robust to this test approach as Benefit loads significantly negatively (two-tailed p-value o0. 10).  4. 2. 3.  State-level political forces and discretionary accruals.  Benefit changes can be associated with political conditions (Agrawal and Matsa, 2013), and political conditions can influence discretionary accruals (Jones, 1991.  Ramanna and Roychowdhury, 2010).  To ensure that the effect of Benefit is not due to omitted political forces in the main tests, we control for state-level political conditions in a number of ways.  First, gubernatorial election years could be associated with downward earnings management in order to avoid public scrutiny and becoming a political scapegoat, if the election involves economic issues that would adversely affect businesses.  Downward earnings management could also assist affiliated politicians hoping to unseat incumbents, since being able to point to lower profitability of area businesses likely helps political contenders challenge the economic record of incumbents.  As such we entertain these possibilities4 by controlling for gubernatorial elections held in the year of the observed decrease in discretionary accruals (‘Election year’).  Second, these issues are likely more pronounced when the race is tightly contested, and so we entertain this possibility by controlling for the margin of victory in the election outcome (‘Election year tight margin’).  Third, Democrats are often perceived to be less business-friendly than Republicans, so unseating a Democrat incumbent and helping a more business-friendly challenger could be an incentive for downward earnings management.  As such we entertain this possibility by controlling for election years in which the incumbent is a Democrat governor (‘Election year Democrat governor’).  Fourth, if Democrats control both legislative houses, they are likely able to pass their policies more easily, which could provide a greater incentive for businesses to assist more business-friendly challengers in winning the (state) executive branch.  As such we entertain this possibility by controlling for election years in which Democrats hold the majority of seats in both houses (‘Election year Democrat both houses’).  The results are shown in Panel C of Table 5.  The main variable of interest in this study, Benefit, loads significantly in all specifications consistent with the hypothesis.  4. 2. 4.  Correlated omitted state-level economic conditions.  A potential concern is that unobserved state and regional economic conditions that are correlated with Benefit subsume its relation with the reporting outcomes examined in the main tests.  We address this concern in three ways.  First, the research design in the main tests matches firms in treatment states with firms in contiguous states, thereby minimizing regional economic differences across firms.  Second, if unobserved state-level economic conditions have some persistence, they are likely to muddy the relation between lagged unemployment benefit changes and downward earnings management.  In the first column of results in Table 6, we add Benefittþ 1 and Benefittþ 2, but observe that only Benefitt continues to load significantly (two-tailed pvalueo0. 