 1.  Introduction The link between competition and innovation has been a very active topic in industrial organization.  It goes back to the indirect debate between Arrow (1962) and Schumpeter (1942) centering around the so-called Schumpeterian hypothesis, which brieﬂy stated says that one should expect to observe an inverse relationship between innovation and the intensity of competition or market structure.  On the one hand, there are several arguments supporting the view that possession of market power should result in greater innovative activities (Schumpeter, 1942).  First, market power may be extendable to new products, for example, through a dominant ﬁrm’s command over channels of distribution, and so on.  With the ability to extend market power to new products, an incumbent monopolist should ﬁnd innovation more attractive.  Second, there may be a need to ﬁnance innovation internally, which puts ﬁrms with market power at an advantage since these ﬁrms may have supernormal proﬁts.  Third, ﬁrms with current market power typically have more resources and thus are more likely to hire the most innovative people.  Of course the third argument is related to the imperfect capital market argument underlying the second reason.  On the other hand, there are arguments for the opposite view, supporting the view that a monopolist can have reduced incentives to innovate.  Arrow (1962) shows that a competitor can proﬁt more than a monopolist from innovation, and the monopolist may be slower in replacing it with a superior product or process than a newcomer.  This is because the ﬁrm realising monopoly proﬁts on its current product calculates the proﬁt from innovation as the difference between its current proﬁts and the proﬁts it could realise from the new product, whereas the competitor regards the proﬁts from the new product as the gain.  As such, the larger current monopoly proﬁts are, the less incentive the monopolist has to innovate.  Moreover, a monopolist may regard additional leisure as superior to additional proﬁts.  This may be due to the lack of active competitive forces and thus generates an x-ineﬃciency effect.  The lively debate on the relationship between competition and innovation in the industrial organization literature is still open and systematically predicts a monotone relationship in either direction between competition and innovation. 1 In clear contrast, Aghion et al.  (2005) provide evidence of an inverted-U relationship between innovation and competition.  Their theoretical explanation is based on a neo-Schumpeterian endogenous growth model (Aghion et al. , 1997), in which both technological leaders and followers in any industry can innovate, and innovations occur as a step-by-step process. 2 Innovation incentives depend upon the difference between postinnovation and pre-innovation rents of incumbent ﬁrms.  In this case, more competition may foster innovation and growth, because it may reduce a ﬁrm’s pre-innovation rents by more than it reduces its post-innovation rents.  One aspect that, to the best of our knowledge, has not been considered is the relationship between competition and innovation in a polluting (or energy intensive) industry where R&D investment aims to reduce the environmental footprint of production.  This is the purpose of the present paper.  In particular, we bring together the debate on the relationship between competition and innovation with the environmental economics debate on the optimal policy for pollution control, concentrating on one policy instrument, an emission tax.  Currently the main three major inﬂuences on ﬁrms’ R&D investment are a focus on cleaner technologies, demand for renewable or sustainable energy and climate change,3 and they are further fuelled by environmental regulation and international agreements on climate change and the like. 4 In this context, “green” R&D can be seen as a tool that ﬁrms can use to improve the cost imposed on them by environmental regulation.  We verify the presence of an inverted-U relationship between competition and innovation in a microeconomic setting of oligopolistic competition where production is polluting and innovation results in reducing emissions (abatement or, “green” R&D).  Given the presence of Pigouvian (emission) taxation, reducing pollution would reduce production costs. 5 We present an n-ﬁrm oligopoly model where ﬁrms compete in quantities and decide their investment in “green” R&D, and where spillovers in R&D are present.  We establish the link between competition and “green” innovation through the variation of aggregate investment in R&D according to the number of ﬁrms in the industry.  a greater number of ﬁrms in the industry proxies increased competition and a concomitant reduction in market power (Sutton, 1998). 6 We show that the relationship between competition and “green” R&D is represented by an inverted-U and that this result is driven mainly by the presence of R&D spillovers (appropriability problem).  The results obtained by Aghion et al.  (2005) are thus conﬁrmed in a microeconomic framework where innovation has the aim of abating polluting emissions.  The paper is also related to the literature on organisational structure of environmental R&D (e. g. , Scott, 1996.  Chiou and Hu, 2001.  Petrakis and Poyago-Theotoky, 2002.  Sandonís and Mariel, 2004.  Poyago-Theotoky, 2007.  Golombek and Hoel, 2008).  With this literature, we share the assumption of R&D efforts being directed not towards process or product enhancement, but directed towards emission reduction of harmful pollutants.  The analysis in the paper is close to Poyago-Theotoky (2007), who examines the issue of R&D cooperation versus competition in a polluting industry where two ﬁrms operate and endogenous taxation is set by a time-consistent regulator.  Compared to Poyago-Theotoky (2007), we set aside the R&D cooperation issue.  instead we consider an oligopoly rather than a duopoly, and we focus on the case in which the regulator is able to commit credibly to the setting of the environmental policy instrument.  Finally, we assume that abatement is of the end-of-pipe variant.  Finally, the paper is related to the literature of innovation and market structure.  Hausman and MacKie-Mason (1988) argued that the actions of monopolies with regard to third-degree price discrimination, may lead to social welfare improvement due to opening new markets, achieving economies of scale and higher eﬃciency and, importantly, increasing net social welfare.  Geroski (1990) shows that innovating may be a way to obtain market power, in particular he ﬁnds that innovation increases the degree of competition in markets.  This leads to a fall in market concentration over time and eventually to the emergence of very few and large ﬁrms.  Therefore ﬁrms innovate with the aim to become incumbents.  Etro (2004) shows that the innovative process is naturally connected to the persistence of monopolies.  Their investment in research and development would be beneﬁcial to society as they advance new technologies.  Our paper contributes to this strand by focussing on innovation with “green” features.  The remainder of the paper is organised as follows.  In Section 2 we present the model, in Section 3 we carry out the analysis and establish the results and in Section 4 we provide concluding remarks.  Proofs of propositions are in the Appendix.  <Middle> The model.  Consider an oligopoly market with n identical proﬁt-maximising ﬁrms competing à la Cournot-Nash.  Firms supply a homogeneous good, with market demand given by p = a − Q.  a is a positive constant parameter measuring the reservation price (alternatively, it is ameasure of the size of the market) and Q = i=1 qi is total industry output, i = 1, .  .  .  , n.  Production generates pollution, which is taxed at the emission tax rate t, while ﬁrm i can reduce its tax burden by undertaking environmental (“green”) R&D, zi, to reduce its emissions.  The cost function for ﬁrm i is additive separable and is given by c (qi, zi) = cqi + cz2 i /2, where c is the unit cost of production, a > c, andc > 0 is a parameter capturing the eﬃciency of the R&D R&D, z(t) =t /c.  Evidently, ﬁrms respond to an increase in the emission tax by increasing their “green” R&D.  Notice also that the emission tax acts as an incentive for ﬁrms undertaking abatement, as in the absence of emission taxation there would be no “green” R&D.  Aggregate R&D is therefore.  Clearly, total R&D increases monotonically with the number of ﬁrms for a ﬁxed emission tax.  Hence, if taxation were exogenous, we obtain a clear-cut Arrowian result.  Increased competition (higher n) leads to an increase in aggregate R&D (innovation).  In the ﬁrst stage, the regulator sets the emission tax so as to maximise social welfare, deﬁned as total surplus minus production costs, R&D costs and environmental damages.  Substituting the ﬁrm’s output q(t) and R&D effort, z(t) into the above expression we obtain total welfare as a function of the emission tax.  From the ﬁrst-order condition of Eq.  (4) we obtain the optimal emission tax  where b ∈ [0, 1] represents R&D spillovers, i. e.  there are spillovers in environmental R&D in that a ﬁrm beneﬁts not only from its own R&D effort but also from its rivals’ effort by an amount b. 9 We denote aggregate R&D as Z = i=1 zi and the total R&D expenditure as cZ2/2.  Hence, ﬁrm i(cid. 5)s proﬁt is pi = pqi − c (qi, zi) − tei (qi, zi) , with emission taxation a linear function of net emissions.  Total emissionsi=1 ei (qi, zi), and the damage function is a quadratic function of emissions, D = dE2, where d is a parameter capturing the steepness of marginal damages or, the degree of convexity of the damage function.  To guarantee interior solutions in what follows we assume d > (1/2n) (see also, Petrakis and Xepapadeas (2001) and Poyago-Theotoky (2007)).  This implies that environmental damages are not insigniﬁcant for the economy.  In the sequel we consider the case where the regulator precommits to the level of environmental policy, i. e. , the emission tax.  In particular, we examine a three-stage game where.  in stage one, the regulator sets the emission tax so as to maximise social welfare, in stage two, ﬁrms invest in “green” R&D and in stage three market competition occurs. 10 The equilibrium solution concept is perfect subgame equilibrium with backward induction.  3.  Analysis and results.  3. 1.  Derivation of equilibrium.  In the last stage, the market competition stage, ﬁrm i chooses output to maximise proﬁts where t is the tax per unit of emissions and q−i = j(cid. 3)=iqj is the total output of its rivals, taken by ﬁrm i as given.  From the ﬁrstorder condition, a − 2qi − q−i − c − t = 0, and by symmetry (i. e.  q1 = q2 = . . .  = qn ≡ q) we obtain per-ﬁrm equilibrium output.  where, for notational simplicity we set m = a − c, and m measures market size.  Notice that the equilibrium output does not depend on abatement directly, but it is affected by it through taxation.  with output decreasing in the emission tax and the number of ﬁrms, ceteris paribus.  The associated proﬁt is then this.  In the second stage, ﬁrm i chooses “green” R&D (abatement effort) to maximize proﬁts (Eq.  (2)), taking as given its rivals’ aggregate abatement effort.  From the relevant ﬁrst-order condition, t − czi = 0, and by symmetry (z1 = z2 = .  .  .  = zn ≡ z) we obtain the equilibrium by substituting Eqs.  (5), (6) and (7), into Eqs.  (2) and (3).  3. 2.  Comparative statics.  In this section, we examine how the equilibrium values react to changes in the parameters.  n (intensity of competition), c (eﬃciency/diﬃculty of innovation), b (degree of spillovers) and d (severity of environmental damage).  We proceed by summarising our ﬁndings in the following propositions (proofs are relegated in the Appendix).  Proposition 1 (EFFECT OF d).  The optimal emission tax t in the severity of environmental damage d.  ∗ is increasing That the emission tax is increasing in the severity of environmental damages is entirely expected.  Indeed the emission tax is the only policy tool to address a number of market failures.  the environmental externality distortion, the output market distortion associated with imperfect competition, the innovation/abatement distortion and the appropriability problem (knowledge-public good distortion) associated with the R&D spillover.  Thus the higher the damages the higher the emission tax, ceteris paribus, as it is addressing the environmental externality. 