
Behavioral research indicates that arbitrary differences in contextual
information can lead to preference changes in otherwise identical
choice tasks (Tversky and Kahneman, 1986), contrary to the principle
of ‘invariance’ proposed by Neumann and Morgenstern (1947).  These
empirical observations have given rise to the concepts of ‘framing’ and
‘framing effects’ which are deﬁned as “subtle alterations in the statement or presentation of judgment and choice problems and […] changes in decision outcomes resulting from these alterations” (Iyengar,
1994, p.  11).  Building on the pioneering work of Tversky and
Kahneman (1981), a large body of research in psychology and behavioral economics has advanced the knowledge base on framing and developed typologies of different framing effects (Levin Name, 2002; Levin Name, 1998).  A parallel stream of literature in policy research, most notably
driven by Druckman (2001), has applied insights from framing theory
in the ﬁelds of policy design (e. g.  Madrian, 2014) and policy implementation, particularly regarding the communication of policy measures
(Chong and Druckman, 2007a; Klar Name, 2013). 
Consistent with literature on individual differences (e. g.  LeBoeuf and
Shaﬁr, 2003; Smith and Levin, 1996), policy researchers have shown
that the strength of framing effects depends on various moderating factors; in particular political orientation (Chong and Druckman, 2012;
Faricy and Ellis, 2014).  The concept of political orientation is typically
structured along a uni-dimensional model from liberal to conservative
or from right-wing to left-wing (Jost Name, 2003), or along a two-dimensional model encompassing a social and an economic dimension (e. g. 
Duckitt, 2001; Feldman and Johnston, 2014; Jost Name, 2009;
Zumbrunnen and Gangl, 2008).  Despite an increasing amount of research on the impact of political orientation on policy framing effects,
empirical evidence in the ﬁeld of environmental policy, while growing,
is still in its early stages.  This research gap seems surprising, given that
the inﬂuence of political orientation could be particularly relevant to
framing effects related to environmental policy instruments, which
are often subject to ideological public discourses (Bornstein and Lanz,
2008; Söderbaum, 1999).  Drawing on the theory of motivated
reasoning (Slothuus and De Vreese, 2010; Taber Name, 2009; Taber Name,
2001), this paper contributes to the few existing studies (e. g.  Hardisty Name, 2010) by analyzing whether the impact of frames in both policy design and communication is contingent on political orientation.  To the
authors' knowledge, this paper ranks among the ﬁrst analyses of the inﬂuence of political orientation on framing effects in environmentalIn addition, this paper makes a contribution to existing literature by
analyzing how political orientation inﬂuences the stability of framing
effects over time.  Despite some pioneering longitudinal studies on framing effects (Druckman Name, 2012), research on the inﬂuence of political
orientation on the stability of framing effects in the ﬁeld of environmental policy is scant.  Given that many environmental policy programs require political commitments over longer time horizons, it is important
to understand the temporal dynamics of policy evaluation. 
The empirical part of this paper consists of three independent but
closely related experiments in the context of a residential energy conservation program.  In contrast to many previous studies in the ﬁeld of policy
framing effects that rely on student samples (e. g.  Faricy and Ellis, 2014),
the experiments described herein strive to create a more realistic choice
setting.  To do so, both potential beneﬁciaries of a speciﬁc policy measure
and a broader population are surveyed, given that policies need not only
to be favorably evaluated by the general population but also to be effective at inﬂuencing potential beneﬁciaries to favor their uptake. 
In the ﬁrst experiment, the delivery mechanism for a government
beneﬁt for an energy conservation measure is described as either a
‘tax rebate’ or a ‘subsidy’.  The experiment analyzes how political orientation moderates the impact of the framing of the delivery mechanism
on the perceived importance of the beneﬁt among potential beneﬁciaries.  In the second experiment, the frames of a policy program for energy conservation measures highlight either economic or environmental
aspects of the policy.  The experiment analyzes how citizens' political
orientation moderates the impact of each of the frames on their policy
evaluations.  The third experiment investigates whether the framing effect induced by the second experiment diminishes after reasoning about
government spending and, if so, whether political orientation inﬂuences
the degree of change in opinion over time. 
Overall, this paper contributes to knowledge about an important
issue in environmental policy: the built environment, which
includes residential, industrial and commercial buildings, is responsible for approximately 40% of total global energy consumption and
30% of global greenhouse gas emissions (Sbci, 2009).  Given the environmental impact of energy consumption, reducing the energy demand of buildings is one of the key objectives in contemporary
environmental policy (BFE, 2013b).  To increase the effectiveness of
the communication of sustainable energy policy, it is important to
understand whether and how people react (a) to different delivery
mechanisms of a government beneﬁt and (b) to different communication frames.  The ﬁndings of this study can help policy makers design better ‘tailored’ messages, similar to customer segmentation
strategies in business and marketing. 
2.  Theory and Hypotheses. 
2. 1.  Political Orientation and Framing Effects. 
group (Kahan, 2013).  A closely related stream of literature suggests
that motivated reasoning can lead to belief polarization, a process by
which individuals with diverging prior beliefs update their opinions in
opposite directions when presented with the same information (Cook
and Lewandowsky, 2016).  Some pioneering studies demonstrate an interplay between the mechanisms of motivated reasoning and framing
effects; in particular, frames on politically contentious issues can activate political predispositions and thus induce individuals to interpret
messages from the perspective of their pre-existing political beliefs
(e. g.  Hart and Nisbet, 2012; Slothuus and De Vreese, 2010).  Extending
these studies, the current work assesses how political orientation moderates the inﬂuence of framing effects on policy evaluations among both
potential beneﬁciaries and the public.  In particular, the authors analyze
how frames related to the policy delivery mechanism inﬂuence policy
uptake in the former and how communication frames affect policy support in the latter. 
2. 1. 1.  Framing of Policy Delivery Mechanism. 
To reduce energy consumption and its adverse environmental
impacts, many countries have introduced different policy support
measures such as direct payments or tax rebates for building owners
who engage in energy conservation (International Energy Agency,
2013).  Research suggests that the perception of such policy beneﬁts
among potential recipients is contingent on the description of their
delivery mechanisms (Epley and Gneezy, 2007; Epley Name, 2006;
Faricy and Ellis, 2014).  Epley Name (2006), for instance, show that a
tax rebate framed as ‘bonus income’ is more likely to be spent than
‘withheld income’, because the former is perceived as a gain in wealth
while the latter is considered a returned loss.  Based on the utility function proposed by Kahneman and Tversky (1979), they suggest that
recipients evaluate a beneﬁt comparatively rather than absolutely, and
thus changes to the status quo are perceived as either gains or losses
against a given reference point.  Similarly, Lozza Name (2010) show
that not only the likelihood of saving but also the perceived importance
of a ﬁscal bonus is signiﬁcantly lower when the beneﬁt is framed as a
‘bonus’ (gain) rather than a ‘tax rebate’ (loss reduction). 
While these prior studies have analyzed only the average framing
effect, the theory of motivated reasoning raises the question whether
the perception of frames related to policy delivery mechanisms
depends on citizens' political orientation.  Hardisty Name (2010), for
example, ﬁnd that using the label ‘tax’ instead of ‘offset’ for a carbon
dioxide surcharge signiﬁcantly alters how favorably the surcharge is
perceived among Republicans, but not Democrats.  In a similar vein,
the current paper argues that afﬁliates of tax-averse political parties
acting as ‘motivated reasoners’ attach higher subjective value to
a beneﬁt framed as a ‘tax rebate’ rather than a ‘subsidy’.  In contrast,
we expect that the beneﬁt frame will not make any difference for afﬁliates of other parties.  This hypothesis is based on prior policy research that shows that right-wing political parties are more
skeptical of direct public spending but hold more favorable attitudes
toward tax rebates than left-wing parties (Faricy and Ellis, 2014). 
H1.  The party identiﬁcation of policy beneﬁciaries moderates the impact of framing on the perceived importance of a government beneﬁt. 
To understand how political orientation moderates the impact of
framing effects on policy evaluation, the theory of ‘motivated reasoning’
provides a helpful framework.  According to Kunda (1990), the basic
premise of ‘motivated reasoning’ claims that individuals are subject to
selective information processing, which drives them to reach conclusions that defend their preconceptions.  Researchers suggest a close relationship between ‘motivated reasoning’ and political opinion formation
(Taber Name, 2009; Taber and Lodge, 2006; Taber Name, 2001), demonstrating that citizens interpret policy-related information in a way that
is consistent with the dominant beliefs of their ideological afﬁnity
2. 1. 2.  Framing in Policy Communication. 
‘Frames in communication’, which refer to a particular perspective
highlighted by a speaker (e. g.  a politician), play a crucial role in public
discourse and can inﬂuence support for policies (Chong and
Druckman, 2007b).  While the conventional communication frame in
the area of environmental policy focuses mainly on environmental beneﬁts, other possible communication frames include economic considerations (Scrase and Ockwell, 2010) and health beneﬁts (Bernauer and
McGrath, 2016).  Bernauer and McGrath (2016) ﬁnd that shifting communication frames for climate change policy from environmental to
alternative considerations does not signiﬁcantly change support for climate policy, whereas other authors suggest that the effect depends on
the frame recipients' political orientation.  Lockwood (2011), for example, ﬁnds that conservative voters in the UK react less favorably to energy efﬁciency policy than afﬁliates of other political groups if the
communication frame focuses on addressing the historical responsibility for addressing climate change.  Using simulated news stories, Hart
and Nisbet (2012) ﬁnd that readers' political partisanship moderates
the inﬂuence of social distance cues on identiﬁcation with victims of climate change, which leads to a ‘boomerang’ effect among Republicans. 
Petrovic Name (2014) show that a communication frame centered on
health beneﬁts is more likely to induce attitude change among US conservatives than a frame focused on climate change and that the opposite
effect occurs among liberals. 
Building on these studies, the current paper assesses how political
orientation moderates the impact of two communication frames – one
focused on environmental beneﬁts and the other on economic beneﬁts
– on public support for an energy conservation program.  This research
focuses on the economic dimension of political orientation, in particular
citizens' endorsement of free market liberalism, which is characterized
by the concept of economic individualism and markets with minimal
government intervention (Heywood, 2012).  The rationale for centering
on the concept of market liberalism is grounded in prior research demonstrating a potential ideological conﬂict between endorsement of free
markets and environmental policy instruments, which often require active government intervention (Bell, 2002; De-Shalit, 1995; Heath and
Gifford, 2006; Kahan, 2010).  Drawing on the theory of motivated reasoning, we argue that support for a policy will increase among supporters of free market liberalism when the communication frame
shifts from environmental to economic beneﬁts, which resonate more
strongly with their pre-existing ideology.  In contrast, we expect that
the communication frame will not make any difference for supporters
of economic interventionism, given that environmental policy instruments are not per se inconsistent with their political identiﬁcationH2.  Support for free market liberalism moderates the inﬂuence of a
frame in communication on public support for environmental policy. 
2. 2.  Temporal Dynamics of Framing Effects. 
While most empirical research has focused on examining framing effects
at a single point, a question of practical relevance is whether the effects
of communication frames persist over time.  Changes in public
opinion that occur under mixed, often controversial discourse are particularly
relevant for environmental policy, given that the related challenges
are inherently characterized by a focus on long-term development and
inter-generational justice (Klauer Name, 2013).  Two separate but
interlinked considerations are relevant for understanding the temporal
dynamics of framing effects.  First, the impact of framing effects is generally
expected to decay over time (Chong and Druckman, 2010; De Vreese,
2004; Gerber Name, 2007; Tewksbury Name, 2000).  Second, as the impact
of earlier communication frames fades, subsequent messages may inﬂuence opinion formation because of the recency effect; that is, the latest
available information may be awarded a disproportionate amount of
weight (Chong and Druckman, 2010).  In this context, Chong and
Druckman (2012, p.  2) deﬁne a counter-frame as “a frame that opposes
an earlier effective frame” and demonstrate that the decay rate of the
initial frame after the presentation of a counter-frame varies, depending
on the recipient's mode of information processing and attitude strength. 
However, in contrast to the ‘captive’ situation of a lab experiment, in
which participants are only exposed to speciﬁc frames and counterframes, most citizens engage in informal information searches or
discussions with family, friends and other peers before forming their
opinions (Walsh, 2004).  In this regard, Druckman and Nelson (2003)
ﬁnd that participation in a mixed discussion, in which the other
discussion participants have previously been exposed to a different
frame, reverses the initial bias induced by a ‘framed’ article.  In contrast,
engaging in an ‘unmixed’ discussion (with individuals who have been
exposed to the same frame) has no moderating inﬂuence on the framingExtending prior literature, we again draw on the theory of motivated
reasoning to analyze whether the respondents' political orientation
moderates the impact of mixed arguments on the decay of the initial
frame.  Druckman Name (2012), for instance, show that framing effects
persist over time when respondents are allowed to select subsequent
information themselves and thus engage in directional information
search caused by motivated reasoning.  Depending on whether an initial
frame on energy conservation expenditure is consistent with the respondents' support for free market liberalism, we expect that a mixed
discussion about government spending will lead to either reinforcement or reversal of the framing effect.  Exposing citizens to a mixed discussion with different ideological viewpoints may motivate them to
update their opinions in a way that is more closely aligned with their
original beliefs.  We therefore hypothesize:
H3.  The political orientation of beneﬁciaries inﬂuences the degree
of preference change that occurs after cognitive deliberation about
government expenditure. 
<Middle> Overview of Experiments. 
While most empirical research has focused on examining framing effects at a single point, a question of practical relevance is whether the effects of communication frames persist over time.  Changes in public
opinion that occur under mixed, often controversial discourse are particularly relevant for environmental policy, given that the related challenges
are inherently characterized by a focus on long-term development and
inter-generational justice (Klauer Name, 2013).  Two separate but
interlinked considerations are relevant for understanding the temporal
dynamics of framing effects.  First, the impact of framing effects is generally expected to decay over time (Chong and Druckman, 2010; De Vreese,
We conducted three online experiments which analyzed the impact
of political orientation on framing effects related to environmental policy.  Experiment 1 analyzed how party identiﬁcation moderates the
change in the perceived importance of a government beneﬁt for energy
saving home improvements when it is framed as a ‘tax rebate’ instead of
a ‘subsidy’.  The ﬁrst experiment investigated the impact of policy framing effects from the perspective of homeowners as potential beneﬁciaries of the government beneﬁt in question.  Experiment 2 analyzed
whether support for free market liberalism moderates the inﬂuence of
program targeted at residential energy conservation.  Fig.  1 graphically
displays the models tested in experiments 1 and 2.  Following this, experiment 3 investigated if cognitive deliberation about government
spending after reading a ‘framed’ text reverses the original framing effect, and if so, whether the degree of preference change depends on political orientation.  Data for the second and third experiment were drawn
from the general Swiss population to facilitate the analysis of policy
evaluation among the population (i. e.  both beneﬁciaries and non-beneﬁciaries of the government beneﬁt). 
3. 1.  Experiment 1. 
The ﬁrst experiment investigated the inﬂuence of party identiﬁcation on the perception of changes in the labeling of a government
beneﬁt's delivery mechanism.  For the purpose of eliciting the preferences of beneﬁciaries, we put signiﬁcant effort into creating a neutral decision environment which did not solely focus on government beneﬁts
or political orientation.  Previous research has shown that direct questions about (politically) sensitive issues can lead respondents to mask
their true preferences and provide socially desirable answers (Fisher,
1993).  For this reason, we conducted a choice-based conjoint (CBC) experiment, which is an indirect way of eliciting preferences (Heinzle and
Wüstenhagen, 2012). 
3. 1. 1.  Methodology and Experimental Procedure. 
3. 1. 1. 1.  Object of Investigation.  Many countries such as Switzerland have
implemented government-sponsored beneﬁt schemes to promote
the uptake of residential energy conservation and efﬁciency measures. 
In Switzerland, both tax rebates and direct subsidies are offered
to homeowners in several cantons (regions) to incentivize energy saving home improvements (BFE, 2013a).  All participants were told that
the main objective of the study was to elicit their opinions about residential energy efﬁciency retroﬁts (which are eligible for government
support). 
3. 1. 1. 2.  Experimental Design.  Choice experiments are an indirect method of
eliciting individual preferences by observing participants' choices during a
number of choice tasks in which they are forced to make trade-offs between different attributes (Green and Srinivasan, 1990).  We created two
experimental designs, which were exactly identical except for how government beneﬁts were labeled.  All participants were randomly sorted
into an experimental group using a computer-based selection system. 
The key manipulation was that in one experimental group the government
support scheme was labeled a ‘subsidy’, while in the other group it was
framed as ‘tax rebate’.  This allowed us to trace back the different preferences of the groups to the manipulated framing of the government beneﬁt. 