 Introduction A growing body of research considers the role of sentiment in financial decisions.  In common usage, the term sentiment refers to feelings or beliefs about a situation, state of affairs, or event.  Applied in the finance and accounting literature, however, the term sentiment more narrowly depicts beliefs that are unjustified based on available information (e. g. , Baker and Wurgler, 2007).  While evidence indicates economic data justify the majority of beliefs about the state of the economy (e. g. , Lemmon and Portniaguina, 2006), research shows that sentiment has meaningful effects in both asset pricing and corporate decision-making settings.  For example, Baker and Wurgler (2006) find sentiment is associated with return reversals in stocks that are difficult to value and arbitrage, though the effects are less evident in highly competitive and liquid markets where investors can arbitrage away security mispricing and discipline the potential effects of psychological biases.  Importantly, corporate decision making settings lack an easily accessible arbitrage mechanism to discipline biased decisions, increasing the likelihood that sentiment will affect individual decisions, especially in settings of high uncertainty (Bloomfield, 2010).  Consequently, behavioral forces acting on individuals have the ability to influence the behavior of institutions in predictable ways.  Indeed, prior research indicates that sentiment affects analysts’ estimates (Clement et al. , 2011.  Hribar and McInnis, 2012), institutional investors’ portfolio allocations (Cornell et al. , 2014), and managers’ pro-forma earnings disclosures (Brown et al. , 2012).  In this study, we investigate whether managerial sentiment – managers’ unjustified beliefs about future firm outcomes – is associated with errors in accrual estimates.  Accrual estimates require managerial judgment and estimation about expected future realizations.  The inherent uncertainty in future outcomes allows for both strategic discretion and unintentional errors in accrual estimates.  Consistent with the aforementioned research showing that decisions of sophisticated individuals exhibit sentiment in settings of uncertainty, we posit that managerial sentiment may lead to errors in accrual estimates, where managers’ over (under) optimism results in accrual estimates that are too low (high).  To study our research question, we examine bank managers’ estimates of the loan loss provision.  In the banking setting, managerial beliefs that are unjustifiably optimistic (pessimistic) could lead to under (over) estimation of future charge-offs and thus a negative association between managerial sentiment and the loan loss provision.  The loan loss provision is a particularly well-suited accrual for detecting the potential effect of sentiment on accrual estimates for three reasons.  First, the loan loss provision is the most significant and economically important accrual in the banking industry.  Second, available data on loan accounts allow us to observe the economic realization (i. e. , charge-offs) to which the provision relates, and thus to evaluate the accuracy of loan loss provision estimates.  Third, regulators require banks to file call reports, enabling us to collect private bank financial statement data and use a private bank sample to rule out some of the alternative explanations for our results that are based on capital market incentives.  Our primary tests use measures of managerial sentiment derived from the Duke University/CFO Magazine Business Outlook Survey, which surveys managers’ levels of optimism about their firms’ future prospects.  Using the aggregate survey data, we examine both the unadjusted quarterly measure of average managerial optimism from the survey (‘raw beliefs’), and the residual from a regression of the quarterly measure of average managerial optimism on an inclusive set of macroeconomic variables (which more directly captures unexplained beliefs or ‘sentiment’).  The second measure follows directly from sentiment reflecting managers’ beliefs unjustified by available information.  Regressing the raw measure of beliefs on macroeconomic factors allows us to separate the justified or rational component of the survey responses, from the unjustified or sentiment component.  We first examine the association between managerial sentiment and the loan loss provision.  If managerial sentiment affects the loan loss provision, then variation in the provision should be negatively associated with managerial sentiment, after controlling for other determinants of the provision.  Using quarterly data from 2002 to 2013 for publicly traded commercial banks, we find that both raw beliefs and the unexplained beliefs are negatively associated with loan loss provisions.  When measures of quarter t sentiment are higher, ceteris paribus, the loan loss provision estimated in quarter t is lower.  Consistent with prior research, we find that economic fundamentals are the primary driver of the loan loss provision.  However, we also show that managerial sentiment has a nontrivial effect on the provision.  On average, a one standard deviation change in sentiment is associated with a 1. 60% change in the loan loss provision, or a 1. 04% change in after-tax net income.  In addition, we find that for banks where the loan loss provision is more difficult to predict, a one standard deviation change in sentiment is associated with a 3. 60–4. 80% decrease in the loan loss provision, and a 2. 34–3. 12% change in after-tax net income. 1 We next consider whether accrual estimates made in periods of high (low) sentiment are too low (high) by examining future charge-offs as the realization of the accrual.  If managerial sentiment biases managers’ accrual estimates, then loan loss provisions estimated during periods of high sentiment should be associated with greater future charge-offs per dollar of provision compared to those estimated during periods of low sentiment.  We find that the ratio of future charge-offs to current loan loss provision is significantly higher when the provision is estimated in quarters when measures of sentiment are high.  Specifically, a one standard deviation increase in sentiment is associated with one-year ahead charge-offs that are 3. 25% higher per dollar of provision.  These magnitudes are comparable to the effects of earnings management incentives on the loan loss provision.  For example, a one standard deviation change in earnings before the provision (tier 1 capital ratio) results in a 3. 03% (6. 12%) increase in future charges-offs per dollar of provision. 2 Our result suggests that managerial sentiment is associated with biased accrual estimates and mitigates concerns that the result of the test of our first hypothesis simply signals managers’ rational responses to private or public information that is correlated with our measure of sentiment.  This test also helps us validate our decomposition of beliefs into justified and unjustified components.  Regardless of whether managers’ beliefs are justified or unjustified, either component should lead managers to adjust their loan loss provision.  Therefore, we expect both explained and unexplained beliefs to be associated with the provision.  In contrast, only unjustified beliefs should be associated with a change in future charge-offs relative to the current provision.  Thus, if our decomposition is effective, we should observe that the unexplained component of quarter t beliefs has a greater effect on the ratio of future charge-offs to quarter t provision than does the explained component.  Consistent with these expectations, we find that both the explained and unexplained components of beliefs are negatively associated with the loan loss provision, suggesting that both components explain variation in the provision.  Importantly, however, we find the effect of beliefs on the ratio of future charge-offs to the current provision is weakly significant (or insignificant) for the explained component, whereas it is highly significant for the unexplained component at both the one-quarter ahead and one-year ahead horizons.  These results are consistent with the unexplained component being a more direct measure of sentiment that leads to estimation error in the loan loss provision estimates.  Finally, to help rule out the concern that the bias in accrual estimates associated with managerial sentiment is strategic, we repeat our primary tests using a sample of private banks.  Simpson (2013) argues that during high sentiment periods, managers strategically bias accruals to induce a short-term increase in stock price or to meet overly optimistic analysts’ forecasts.  Our sample of private banks has neither analyst following nor the opportunity for managers to generate short-term stock price increases by strategically biasing accruals.  Thus, if our results are attributable to the strategic explanations in Simpson (2013), we should not observe similar findings among the private banks.  Here, we find the results of the private bank tests are consistent with the public bank results, suggesting that the bias in loan loss provisions is unlikely to be attributable to strategic accrual manipulation arising from incentives to temporarily increase stock price or meet analysts’ expectations.  We conduct a number of additional analyses to further examine the association between managerial sentiment and accrual estimates.  Consistent with theoretical and empirical work suggesting that the effects of sentiment and similar biases are greater in settings of higher uncertainty (e. g. , Hirshleifer, 2001.  Daniel et al. , 1998, 2002.  Baker and Wurgler, 2006.  Hribar and McInnis, 2012), we find the association between managerial sentiment and provision estimates is significantly larger when charge-offs are more difficult to predict.  We also find that the primary results are robust to excluding the financial crisis period.  Our study makes several contributions to the literature.  Within the financial reporting literature, prior work suggests that managers can identify and respond to mispricing generated by less than fully rational investors.  For example, Bergman and Roychowdhury (2008) and Seybert and Yang (2012) find evidence consistent with managers strategically responding to investor sentiment in their earnings forecasts.  We add to the growing body of evidence suggesting that psychological biases can also unduly influence corporate decisions (Baker and Wurgler, 2013.  Ben-David et al. , 2013) by showing that managerial sentiment affects accrual estimates.  Our results suggest that managers can be overly optimistic (pessimistic) in periods of high (low) sentiment for non-strategic reasons, especially when uncertainty is high.  In addition, our study contributes to the literature on earnings quality by providing evidence that managerial sentiment lowers earnings quality by generating bias in accrual estimates.  Our results suggest the magnitude of the sentiment-induced bias is economically meaningful, but also credible, given the presence of external auditors and regulators who monitor banks’ financial reports.  Given the central role that earnings quality plays in valuation and contracting decisions (e. g. , Penman and Sougiannis, 1998.  Watts and Zimmerman, 1978.  Lambert, 2001) and the fact that psychological biases are likely to affect accrual estimates in systematic and predictable ways, we believe the results of this study will be of interest to investors, standard setters, auditors, and regulators.  Finally, our study contributes to the research that identifies determinants of loan loss provisions and informs the standing debate over the accounting for credit losses (Bushman and Williams, 2012.  Bikker and Metzemakers, 2005.  Bouvatier and Lepetit, 2012.  Beatty and Liao, 2011).  Under FAS 114, current loan loss accounting uses an incurred loss model which specifies that for an expected loss to be accruable, a loss-causing event must have occurred by the date of the financial statements.  However, managers must still apply significant judgment in estimating the loss-causing events (and their impact) that have occurred up through the date of the financial statements (e. g. , Grant Thornton, 2012).  In June 2016 the FASB issued an Accounting Standards Update, effective beginning in 2018, requiring banks to record credit losses on loans based on expected losses (FASB, 2016).  While permitting managers to use more forward-looking models in provisioning for loan losses could be beneficial, these models require increased judgment and estimation from managers, which allows for greater estimation errors.  2.  Background and hypothesis development Considerable research in accounting examines the determinants and consequences of intentional accrual manipulation, which is generally assumed to reduce earnings quality (e. g. , Dechow et al. , 2010).  This research provides evidence consistent with firm-level attributes (e. g. , Dichev et al. , 2013.  Francis et al. , 2005), managerial incentives (Armstrong et al. , 2010), capital market incentives (e. g. , Ayers et al. , 2006.  Graham et al. , 2005.  Burgstalher and Dichev, 1997), and constraints— including governance features, auditors, regulators, and other external parties—affecting managers’ accrual decisions.  In contrast, relatively few studies consider the determinants and consequences of non-strategic errors in accrual estimates.  Examples of previously considered determinants of errors include objective difficulties in projecting future outcomes due to environmental uncertainty, management lapses, and clerical errors (Francis et al. , 2005.  Hennes et al. , 2008.  and Lev et al. , 2010).  Errors from these types of factors can generate noise in accruals.  Other possible sources of bias in accrual estimates relate to individual psychology.  While the evidence in social psychology on individual decision-making is vast, surprisingly little archival research considers whether these same forces generate bias in accrual estimates.  One possible source of errors that could result in biased accrual estimates is managerial sentiment.  Similar to the definition of investor sentiment used in prior literature (DeLong et al. , 1990.  Morck et al. , 1990.  Chan and Fong, 2004.  Baker and Wurgler, 2006, 2007.  Sabherwal et al. , 2011.  Simpson, 2013), we define managerial sentiment as managers’ beliefs about future firm outcomes that are not justified by the information available to them.  Although our definition of managerial sentiment is similar to the definition of investor sentiment used in prior literature, the two constructs are distinct, as investor sentiment is defined as investors’ unjustified beliefs about firm value, whereas managerial sentiment refers to managers’ unjustified beliefs about their firms’ financial prospects.  Two conditions are necessary for managerial sentiment to impair accrual estimates.  First, managers must be subject to sentiment.  that is, at times, some managers hold beliefs about future firm outcomes that are unjustified by the information available to them.  Second, the financial reporting process must provide sufficient latitude for accrual estimates to incorporate managers’ unjustified beliefs.  Thus, a priori, it is unclear whether managerial sentiment affects accrual estimates.  On the one hand, several studies suggest that managers are sophisticated individuals who are able to identify and exploit the incorrect beliefs of investors.  For example, prior research finds that managers identify and exploit investor sentiment in equity issuances (Baker and Wurgler, 2002), dividend payouts (Baker and Wurgler, 2004.  Li and Lie, 2006), investment (Gilchrist et al. , 2005.  Polk and Sapienza, 2008), and disclosures (e. g. , Bergman and Roychowdhury, 2008.  Brown et al. , 2012).  Simpson (2013) suggests that managers cater to investor sentiment via accrual manipulation and Hribar and Quinn (2013) use managers’ trading patterns to provide evidence that managers trade against and exploit investor sentiment for personal gain.  Taken together, these studies depict managers as sophisticated individuals who, rather than having incorrect beliefs themselves, recognize and take advantage of the incorrect beliefs of unsophisticated investors.  On the other hand, several recent studies suggest that sophisticated individuals are subject to sentiment.  Hribar and McInnis (2012) document a positive relation between sentiment and analyst forecasts for "difficult-to-value” firms, consistent with analysts being subject to sentiment.  Walther and Willis (2012) provide additional evidence that sentiment affects analyst forecasts.  Cornell et al.  (2014) find that when investor sentiment is high, institutional investors increase their holdings in “difficult-to-value” firms with low-quality accounting information, and sell-side stock analysts issue more favorable recommendations for the same firms.  Moreover, unlike investor sentiment where rational arbitrageurs can correct a mispriced stock, there is no arbitrage mechanism to correct a manager’s incorrect accrual assessment, although it should become apparent when the accrual reverses.  Of particular importance to our paper are several studies that provide evidence consistent with managerial sentiment influencing managers’ decisions in other settings.  Brown et al.  (2012) study the effects of investor sentiment on the disclosure of pro forma earnings and find that managers release higher pro forma earnings when sentiment is high.  Although they find evidence that managers identify periods of high investor sentiment and opportunistically report pro forma earnings to take advantage of investor sentiment, they also find some evidence suggesting that managers themselves are affected by sentiment.  In addition, Ben-David et al.  (2013) find that Chief Financial Officers (CFOs) are, on average, severely miscalibrated.  By showing that their miscalibration measure based on CFO forecasts of S&P 500 returns is highly correlated with their miscalibration measure based on CFOs’ own-firm projected returns, Ben-David et al.  (2013) shed new light on the biases in managers’ corporate forecasts and beliefs.  To investigate whether managerial sentiment is associated with accrual estimates, we consider the effect of sentiment on banks’ loan loss provisions.  We avoid using common measures of discretionary accruals in our study for two reasons.  First, many accruals are not estimates.  For example, there are changes in working capital accounts that constitute a substantial component of aggregate accruals that might reflect a relatively small amount of estimation (e. g.  purchases of inventory).  Thus, using a measure of discretionary aggregate accruals would reduce the power of our tests.  Second, by disaggregating total accruals and focusing on a specific accrual estimate, we can test our hypotheses using an account specific model of the accrual estimate, thereby avoiding some of the measurement issues associated with models of aggregated accruals (McNichols, 2000.  McNichols and Wilson, 1988.  Guidry et al. , 1999.  Leone and Rock, 2002).  We use banks’ loan loss provisions as our accrual estimate of interest for several reasons.  First, by definition, loan loss provisions represent managers’ estimates of incurred losses associated with banks’ loan assets.  Second, banks’ loan loss provisions are very important in terms of economic magnitude relative to other accruals.  For example, using a sample of banks from 2005 to 2012, Beatty and Liao (2014) find that the mean of the absolute value of the loan loss provision is 56% of the mean of the absolute value of total accruals.  Third, loan loss provisions reflect managers’ estimates of future loan chargeoffs.  Because banks are required to report loan charge-offs, we can use this data to evaluate the accuracy of managers’ loan loss estimates.  Finally, the banking industry allows us to use a sample of private banks to more directly address concerns and competing explanations related to managers’ capital market incentives.  Accounting for the loan loss provision is similar to the accounting for bad debt expense.  The loan loss reserve (or allowance) account is a contra asset account, which reduces banks’ recognizable receivables by the amount that bank managers expect to be unable to collect due to loss-causing events.  Managers increase the loan loss reserves through the loan loss provision with net loan charge-offs reducing the reserves as loans become uncollectible.  During our sample period, FAS 114 stipulates that banks reserve for loan losses using the incurred loss model, which requires that a loss in quarter t be provisioned for only when (1) information is available prior to the issuance of the quarter t financial statements that the asset (receivable) has been impaired (i. e.  a loss-causing event has occurred) and (2) the amount of the loss is reasonably estimable.  Because many loss-causing events may not be observed until well after the events have occurred (e. g. , a borrower’s loss of employment), managers use loss-estimation methodologies to infer the amount of loans that have likely been impaired.  The SEC (see Staff Accounting Bulletin No.  102, “Selected Loan Loss Allowance Methodology and Documentation Issues”) and bank regulatory agencies recommend that managers’ loss estimation methodologies incorporate numerous factors such as prevailing industry conditions, national and local economic and business trends, competition, legal and regulatory requirements, and the effects of changes in credit concentrations (e. g. , Grant Thornton, 2012).  Although these adjustment factors rationally affect managers' beliefs about loan losses, the discretion in estimating the effects of these factors on loan losses also provides a mechanism for sentiment to affect the provision.  We propose several hypotheses concerning the association between managerial sentiment and managers’ estimates of loan loss provisions. 3 If managerial sentiment affects the loan loss provision, then when managerial sentiment is high (low) (i. e. 