
Crude oil is widely considered to be one of the most important
commodities affecting global economic growth.  Estimates indicate
that the oil and gas drilling sector makes up about three percent of
global GDP, and imports of petroleum products account for about
forty percent of U. S.  trade deﬁcits. 1 Movements in crude prices have
been shown to signiﬁcantly impact the world economy at various
levels, from family budgets to corporate earnings and to the national
economy (cf.  Eika and Magnussen, 2000.  Kilian, 2009).  According
to IMF, a 10% increase in oil prices results in a 0. 2% drop in global
GDP.  Therefore, when oil prices reached a record high $145/bbl in
2008, and then began to drop sharply beginning 2014 and reaching a
low $29/bbl in early 2016, this resulted in signiﬁcant revenue shortfalls and economic stress on many energy exporting nations such
as Russia and Saudi Arabia.  On the other hand, the availability of
cheaper oil has been hailed as a potent economic stimulus to many
net oil importer countries such as China and India, while keeping
inﬂation under check. 
Given the central role of oil in the economy there is a great deal of
attention in the literature in forecasting crude prices.  According to a
recent Wall Street Journal article, “forecasting is always an inexact art,
particularly for oil, a global industry with wildly uneven data. . . it is a
crucial one, underpinning companies’ decisions about when to drill
and how much to hedge” and importantly, “market watchers get this
so wrong. ”
One of the most watched oil price forecast is from the US
Energy Information Administration (EIA), which formally constructs
monthly and quarterly forecasts of the price of crude oil at horizons up to two years. 3 Although EIA’s short-term forecasts help
inform corporate investment and guide resource deployment decisions, their forecasts are hard to replicate and sometimes not very
accurate.  The diﬃculty for replication is due to the lack of available detail information about the forecasting methodology.  There are
many examples of forecasting inaccuracy.  For instance, EIA reported
a price projection of about $28/bbl in 2010, yet the actual average
price for oil traded on the New York Mercantile Exchange in 2010
was $79. 61/bbl.  Ironically, right before the sharp fall of oil prices in
the middle of 2014, EIA raised its 2014 forecast on WTI crude-oil
prices to nearly $96/bbl. 4 In a letter defending the veracity of EIA
reports, Howard Gruenspecht, deputy administrator of the EIA, commented that, “EIA does not characterize any of its long run projection
scenarios as a forecast. ”5
Futures-based forecasts provide a market-based expectation of
oil prices.  Although in principle the futures market should be a good
predictor of future spot prices, this is not supported by empirical
evidence.  Alquist and Kilian (2010) document that oil futures prices
tend to be less accurate in the mean-squared prediction error sense
than a simple no-change forecast (which posit that oil prices will be
the same tomorrow as they are today). 
Various econometric approaches have been proposed to forecast oil prices. 