
A growing body of research considers the role of sentiment in financial decisions.  In common usage, the term sentiment
refers to feelings or beliefs about a situation, state of affairs, or event.  Applied in the finance and accounting literature,
however, the term sentiment more narrowly depicts beliefs that are unjustified based on available information (e. g. , Baker
and Wurgler, 2007).  While evidence indicates economic data justify the majority of beliefs about the state of the economy
(e. g. , Lemmon and Portniaguina, 2006), research shows that sentiment has meaningful effects in both asset pricing and
corporate decision-making settings.  For example, Baker and Wurgler (2006) find sentiment is associated with return reversals in stocks that are difficult to value and arbitrage, though the effects are less evident in highly competitive and liquid
markets where investors can arbitrage away security mispricing and discipline the potential effects of psychological biases. 
Importantly, corporate decision making settings lack an easily accessible arbitrage mechanism to discipline biased decisions,
increasing the likelihood that sentiment will affect individual decisions, especially in settings of high uncertainty (Bloomfield, 2010).  Consequently, behavioral forces acting on individuals have the ability to influence the behavior of institutions in
predictable ways.  Indeed, prior research indicates that sentiment affects analysts’ estimates (Clement Name, 2011; Hribar and
McInnis, 2012), institutional investors’ portfolio allocations (Cornell Name, 2014), and managers’ pro-forma earnings disclosures (Brown Name, 2012). 
In this study, we investigate whether managerial sentiment – managers’ unjustified beliefs about future firm outcomes – is
associated with errors in accrual estimates.  Accrual estimates require managerial judgment and estimation about expected
future realizations.  The inherent uncertainty in future outcomes allows for both strategic discretion and unintentional errors in
accrual estimates.  Consistent with the aforementioned research showing that decisions of sophisticated individuals exhibit
sentiment in settings of uncertainty, we posit that managerial sentiment may lead to errors in accrual estimates, where
managers’ over (under) optimism results in accrual estimates that are too low (high). 
To study our research question, we examine bank managers’ estimates of the loan loss provision.  In the banking setting,
managerial beliefs that are unjustifiably optimistic (pessimistic) could lead to under (over) estimation of future charge-offs
and thus a negative association between managerial sentiment and the loan loss provision.  The loan loss provision is a
particularly well-suited accrual for detecting the potential effect of sentiment on accrual estimates for three reasons.  First,
the loan loss provision is the most significant and economically important accrual in the banking industry.  Second, available
data on loan accounts allow us to observe the economic realization (i. e. , charge-offs) to which the provision relates, and thus
to evaluate the accuracy of loan loss provision estimates.  Third, regulators require banks to file call reports, enabling us to
collect private bank financial statement data and use a private bank sample to rule out some of the alternative explanations
for our results that are based on capital market incentives. 
Our primary tests use measures of managerial sentiment derived from the Duke University/CFO Magazine Business
Outlook Survey, which surveys managers’ levels of optimism about their firms’ future prospects.  Using the aggregate survey
data, we examine both the unadjusted quarterly measure of average managerial optimism from the survey (‘raw beliefs’),
and the residual from a regression of the quarterly measure of average managerial optimism on an inclusive set of macroeconomic variables (which more directly captures unexplained beliefs or ‘sentiment’).  The second measure follows directly from sentiment reflecting managers’ beliefs unjustified by available information.  Regressing the raw measure of
beliefs on macroeconomic factors allows us to separate the justified or rational component of the survey responses, from the
unjustified or sentiment component. 
We first examine the association between managerial sentiment and the loan loss provision.  If managerial sentiment
affects the loan loss provision, then variation in the provision should be negatively associated with managerial sentiment,
after controlling for other determinants of the provision.  Using quarterly data from 2002 to 2013 for publicly traded
commercial banks, we find that both raw beliefs and the unexplained beliefs are negatively associated with loan loss
provisions.  When measures of quarter t sentiment are higher, ceteris paribus, the loan loss provision estimated in quarter t is
lower.  Consistent with prior research, we find that economic fundamentals are the primary driver of the loan loss provision. 
However, we also show that managerial sentiment has a nontrivial effect on the provision.  On average, a one standard
deviation change in sentiment is associated with a 1. 60% change in the loan loss provision, or a 1. 04% change in after-tax net
income.  In addition, we find that for banks where the loan loss provision is more difficult to predict, a one standard deviation change in sentiment is associated with a 3. 60–4. 80% decrease in the loan loss provision, and a 2. 34–3. 12% change in
after-tax net income. 1
We next consider whether accrual estimates made in periods of high (low) sentiment are too low (high) by examining
future charge-offs as the realization of the accrual.  If managerial sentiment biases managers’ accrual estimates, then loan
loss provisions estimated during periods of high sentiment should be associated with greater future charge-offs per dollar of
provision compared to those estimated during periods of low sentiment.  We find that the ratio of future charge-offs to
current loan loss provision is significantly higher when the provision is estimated in quarters when measures of sentiment
are high.  Specifically, a one standard deviation increase in sentiment is associated with one-year ahead charge-offs that are
3. 25% higher per dollar of provision.  These magnitudes are comparable to the effects of earnings management incentives on
the loan loss provision.  For example, a one standard deviation change in earnings before the provision (tier 1 capital ratio)
results in a 3. 03% (6. 12%) increase in future charges-offs per dollar of provision. 2 Our result suggests that managerial sentiment is associated with biased accrual estimates and mitigates concerns that the result of the test of our first hypothesis
simply signals managers’ rational responses to private or public information that is correlated with our measure of
sentiment. 
This test also helps us validate our decomposition of beliefs into justified and unjustified components.  Regardless of
whether managers’ beliefs are justified or unjustified, either component should lead managers to adjust their loan loss
provision.  Therefore, we expect both explained and unexplained beliefs to be associated with the provision.  In contrast, only
unjustified beliefs should be associated with a change in future charge-offs relative to the current provision.  Thus, if our
decomposition is effective, we should observe that the unexplained component of quarter t beliefs has a greater effect on
the ratio of future charge-offs to quarter t provision than does the explained component.  Consistent with these expectations,
we find that both the explained and unexplained components of beliefs are negatively associated with the loan loss provision, suggesting that both components explain variation in the provision.  Importantly, however, we find the effect of
beliefs on the ratio of future charge-offs to the current provision is weakly significant (or insignificant) for the explained
component, whereas it is highly significant for the unexplained component at both the one-quarter ahead and one-year
ahead horizons.  These results are consistent with the unexplained component being a more direct measure of sentiment
that leads to estimation error in the loan loss provision estimates. 
Finally, to help rule out the concern that the bias in accrual estimates associated with managerial sentiment is strategic, we
repeat our primary tests using a sample of private banks.  Simpson (2013) argues that during high sentiment periods, managers
strategically bias accruals to induce a short-term increase in stock price or to meet overly optimistic analysts’ forecasts.  Our
sample of private banks has neither analyst following nor the opportunity for managers to generate short-term stock price
increases by strategically biasing accruals.  Thus, if our results are attributable to the strategic explanations in Simpson (2013),
we should not observe similar findings among the private banks.  Here, we find the results of the private bank tests are
consistent with the public bank results, suggesting that the bias in loan loss provisions is unlikely to be attributable to strategic
accrual manipulation arising from incentives to temporarily increase stock price or meet analysts’ expectations. 
We conduct a number of additional analyses to further examine the association between managerial sentiment and
accrual estimates. 