 1.  Introduction The rising anthropogenic CO2 emissions have led to irreversible global climate change, which has had widespread impacts on human and natural systems (IPCC 2014).  To mitigate the severe effects caused, international agreements on reducing emissions have been established, and regional/national policies have been implemented to cut emissions.  Tracking countries' emission performances and quantifying the driving forces of emissions are of great interest to policymakers since the two issues are important to evaluating effectiveness of policy measures.  In the literature, one of the analytical tools that have been applied to assess energy and emission performances is decomposition analysis.  Decomposition analysis, consisting mainly of index decomposition analysis (IDA) and structural decomposition analysis (SDA), is an accounting approach that distributes a change in an energy or emissionrelated aggregate to predeﬁned factors.  The decomposition results obtained offer insights on the driving forces behind the change, based on which policymakers can assess the effectiveness of relevant policy measures.  From an energy systems analysis viewpoint, IDA usually measures the effects of total activity level, activity structure and activity intensity on an aggregate.  SDA, which is built upon the input-output (I-O) model and deals with the overall economic system, can quantify the impacts of both the production-side and consumption-side factors on an aggregate.  IDA and SDA differ in methodological foundation, study scope, factors used in decomposition and policy implications derived (Su and Ang 2012.  Wang et al.  2017a).  A main advantage of SDA over IDA is that SDA can analyze demand-side effects and the impact of trade.  This study focuses on the SDA technique.  In SDA studies, the aggregate decomposed can be a quantity indicator, e. g.  total national energy consumption or emissions, or an intensity indicator, e. g.  the ratio of national emissions to GDP.  In the literature, both forms of indicators have been used to characterize energy or emission performance (Su and Ang 2012.  Wang et al.  2017a).  They have been used to assess performances with different focuses.  The intensity indicator, which is independent of the economic output size, has an efﬁciency connotation.  A foundation of SDA is I-O models.  I-O models can be classiﬁed as single-region I-O (SRIO) models and multi-region I-O (MRIO) models, based on which single-region SDA and multi-region SDA can be conducted respectively.  A difference between SRIO and MRIO models is that the latter capture the economic linkage between the regions studied in terms of trade and interregional feedback effects (Su and Ang 2011).  Arising from the difference between quantity and intensity indicators and that between single and multi-region I-O models, SDA modelling can be classiﬁed into four types.  They are the SR quantity approach (type I), SR intensity approach (type II), MR quantity approach (type III), and MR intensity approach (type IV).  Most existing studies belong to type I, i. e.  dealing with changes of a single country's energy use or emissions.  These studies pinpoint causes behind energy or emission changes in an economy.  The methodological and application issues have been extensively studied (Su and Ang 2012.  Wang et al.  2017a).  Type II studies are not as common but the number is growing.  For example, Fan and Xia (2012), Zeng et al.  (2014) and Zhang and Lahr (2014) study changes in China's energy intensity, and Zhang (2009), Xia et al.  (2015) and Su and Ang (2017) examine China's emission intensity changes.  The structural decomposition of a quantity indicator and that of an intensity indicator are fairly different (Su and Ang 2015).  Wang et al.  (2017b) resolve some methodological issues in multiplicative SDA of an intensity indicator in the single-region context.  Type III studies examine changes in regional or global energy use or emissions.  A growing number of studies with a focus on the energy/ emissions embodied in trade (EET) have been reported.  See, for example, Arto and Dietzenbacher (2014), Malik et al.  (2016), de Vries and Ferrarini (2017) and Jiang and Guan (2016) which study changes in global emissions, Lan et al.  (2016) which examine changes in global energy footprint, Brizga et al.  (2014), Su and Thomson (2016), and Duan and Jiang (2017) which investigate energy and emission changes of a country or region, Xu and Dietzenbacher (2014) which investigate changes in emissions embodied in global trade.  The surge in multiregion quantity studies is due to the availability of MRIO databases, e. g.  the World Input-Output Database (Timmer et al.  2015), Eora (Lenzen et al.  2013) and GTAP (Narayanan and Walmsley 2008).  With regard to type IV, to the best of our knowledge, no SDA study has so far been reported.  A reason is the complexity of modelling intensity indicators using multi-region I-O models.  Decomposing an intensity indicator in the multi-region context using SDA, however, is becoming increasingly relevant and potentially useful.  Intensity indicators have been widely used as a measure of energy or emission performance.  Countries such as China, India, Mexico and Singapore use the emission intensity indicator to deﬁne climate targets in the intended nationally determined contributions (INDCs) under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).  Based on INDCs submissions, countries setting targets using the emission intensity indicator cover nearly 40% of the global emissions in 2014. 1 This underscores the importance of intensity indicators in emission mitigation and climate debate.  Arising from this development, type IV SDA studies can be used to help countries to evaluate progress made in emission reduction and identify decarbonization pathways.  Since the intensity indicator is scale-free, it can be conveniently applied to compare countries in terms of performance, especially in a multi-country setting.  As is well known, multi-region SDA analysis captures the impacts of trade as well as individual regions' contribution on an aggregate indicator.  Globalization has boosted international trade and increased energy and emissions embodied in the trade ﬂow among countries.  As a result, EET has become a major component in energy use and emission accounting (Fernández-Amador et al.  2016).  It is reported to have accounted for 20% to 35% of global emissions during 2001–2007 (Sato 2014).  The ability of multi-region SDA analysis to quantify individual countries' impact on an aggregate offers insights on the spatial dimension, which helps to reveal the opportunities and direction for reducing the global aggregate intensity.  Due to the aforementioned reasons, type IV studies deserve special attention and this study is an attempt to ﬁll the gap. 2 Speciﬁcally, structural decomposition of aggregate intensity indicators at the global level is ﬁrst studied.  This is conducted at the ﬁnest disaggregation level captured in a MRIO table, i. e.  at the sectoral level within countries.  The results obtained reveal the impacts of driving forces on the global intensity indicator.  Within the multi-region framework, both the domestic and trade-related effects can be quantiﬁed.  As the global-level decomposition analysis masks intensity indicator changes at the country level, we further study decomposing country-level intensity indicators within the multi-region context.  The country-level decomposition analysis distinguishes between domestic and trade-related effects, as in the global decomposition analysis.  A complementary step is proposed to link changes in intensities at the country level and global level.  Some application issues of the proposed SDA models are discussed.  The results of applying the proposed methods to study changes in the global and country emission intensities during 2000–2009 using the World Input-Output Database (WIOD) are presented.  The policy implications are discussed.  The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 proposes SDA methodologies.  Section 3 describes the data used in this study.  Section 4 presents the empirical results and relevant policy implications.  Section 5 concludes.  <Middle> Methodology.  Multi-region environmentally extended I-O methodologies consist of two general types, i. e.  the emissions embodied in bilateral trade (EEBT) approach and the MRIO approach (Peters 2008).  A difference between them is that the MRIO approach fully accounts for the feedback effect embodied in international trade (Andrew et al.  2009).  Su and Ang (2011) examine the analytical difference and establish a linkage between the two approaches.  Recently, the MRIO approach has increasingly been applied in multi-region I-O analysis and in SDA since it allows trade-related energy/emissions to be computed.  A number of recently available multi-region databases further facilitate its application.  We adopt the MRIO approach in this study. 3 2. 1.  Modelling of Emissions and GDP.  Suppose N economies, each of which is further divided into R economic sectors, are under consideration.  The relationship between total output and ﬁnal demand of countries can be established using the MRIO approach, which is described in Appendix A.  Combining the I-O model with the emission multiplier yields the formulation of aggregate CO2 emissions as follows, where the superscripts r, s, and q denote countries, the subscripts i and j r is the emission intensity of sector i in country r deﬁned denote sectors, fi rs is the value added requireas the ratio of emissions to value added, Hij ment coefﬁcient representing the value added needed by sector i in country r to meet one unit of ﬁnal demand of sector j in country s, yj sq denotes sector j's ﬁnal demand that is exported from country s to country q.  Similarly, the aggregate GDP calculated from the production approach is formulated as.  Both the global and national emission intensities are generally of interest to policy makers.  Since they are fairly different in modelling and interpretation, we study them separately.  2. 2.  Global-level SDA.  Following Eqs.  (1) and (2), the global aggregate emission intensity is formulated as, where Y is the total global ﬁnal demand, Sj sq/ys denotes the ﬁnal demand structure of country s, and Us=ys/Y denotes the global geographic structure in terms of ﬁnal demand.  Given the data in year 0 and T, we can study both the arithmetic change and ratio change in AEI.  As stated in Wang et al.  (2017b), the multiplicative decomposition of the ratio change of an intensity indicator can be more conveniently interpreted, and may be of greater interest to policymakers.  In the sections that follow, we present only the multiplicative decomposition for illustration purposes.  Following the procedure in Su and Ang (2015), the ratio change in an aggregate emission intensity can be decomposed as, where Dint denotes the intensity effect, DH is the total production structure effect, DS is the demand structure effect within countries, DU is the geographic structure effect in terms of ﬁnal demand.  A value larger (smaller) than unity means that the change in this factor contributes to increase (decrease) the aggregate indicator (i. e.  AEI in this case).  By rewriting the item ∏ and other items in a similar manner, Eq.  (4) becomes.  Eq.  (5) will be referred to as Model 1.  It is a pure SDA formulation and directly captures the impacts of factors at the ﬁnest disaggregation level, i. e.  at the sectoral level within countries.  Four factors, i. e.  emission intensity, production structure and ﬁnal demand structure within and between countries, are responsible for a change in the global AEI.  The production structure effect (DH) and the demand structure within countries (DS) can be further classiﬁed by domestic effect and trade-related effects according to the destination of products.  Taking the production structure effect as an example,DM1 H measures the impact of all countries' domestic production technology on global quantiﬁes the impact of AEI, while DM1 exported intermediate production structure.  A change in global AEI can therefore be explained by six effects, as shown in Eq.  (5).  The sectoral results can be aggregated to the country level to reﬂect countries' impacts on the global AEI.  For example, country r's impact on the global AEI is given by Dint.  2. 3.  Country-level SDA.  The modelling of emissions and GDP of country r, i. e.  Cr and GDPr in Eqs.  (1) and (2), shows that the two aggregates are impacted by all economies' ﬁnal demand through trade.  Its emission intensity can be deﬁned as Ir=Cr/GDPr.  The ratio change in the national emission intensity between year 0 and year T can be decomposed as follows, where the subscript abroad denotes the effects related to all other countries in the dataset except for country r.  Eq.  (6) will be referred to as Model 2.  Similar to Model 1, the production structure effect can be distinguished by domestic and exports, i. e.  country r's domestic production structure effect (DH,d M2,r) and country r's exported production structureAs aforementioned, all countries' ﬁnal demand structure inﬂuences country r's emission intensity, as reﬂected by the term Ssq in Eq.  (3).  The overall demand structure effect can be divided into three components, i. e.  country r's domestic ﬁnal demand structure effect (DS,dcountry r's exported ﬁnal demand structure effect (DS,t M2 ,r) and other countries' ﬁnal demand structure effect (DS,abroad ).  The effect of geographic shift in terms of ﬁnal demand is similarly separated into two M2 , r) and components, namely country r's demand share effect (DU ,d other countries' demand share effect (DU,abroad ).  Eight effects are derived in Eq.  (6) to explain a change in country r's emission intensity.  It should be noted that Eq.  (6) focuses on the emission intensity at the country level.  It ignores the linkage between country intensity and global intensity.  To capture the linkage, we introduce a complementary step, which is given in Appendix B.  where the superscript (r) denotes effects related to country r's export, and the subscript d and t denote domestic and export related effects, respectively. 6 2. 4.  Application Issues Model 1 deals solely with the global emission intensity.  It directly decomposes a change in the intensity to the ﬁnest disaggregation level.  The emission intensities of individual countries are masked.  In contrast, emission intensity change is analyzed for individual countries in Model 2.  Eq.  (B. 4) in Appendix B is used to show the linkage between the global emission intensity and the emission intensities of individual countries.  The main advantage of Model 1 and Model 2, compared to the existing single-region SDA models and IDA models for intensity indicators, is the quantiﬁcation of the impacts of trade on emission intensities within a multi-region context.  The proposed SDA models distinguish domestic and export related effects for production structure and ﬁnal demand structure.  The country-level model further measures the impact on a particular country's emission intensity of the ﬁnal demand structure of all other countries.  Both Model 1 and Model 2 in the global multi-region I-O context can be easily adapted for application of the same nature.  For example, with the multi-region I-O tables for China, they can be applied to study China's emission intensity and its regional emission intensities, respectively.  Both the interregional and international trade for China can be accounted for in examining emission intensity changes.  Similarly, the proposed models can be applied to European Union with its member countries, or the United States with its individual states.  To implement the proposed models, a speciﬁc decomposition method is needed.  In the SDA literature, the most widely used multiplicative decomposition method is the (polar) D&L method (Dietzenbacher et al.  2000).  The logarithmic mean Divisia index (LMDI) technique, which has been widely used in IDA, has recently been introduced to SDA (de Boer 2008, 2009).  There are two pertinent issues in decomposition method selection.  First, the sub-aggregate decomposition, e. g.  decomposition at the country/sectoral level, is important since multiple sub-aggregates appear in a multi-region context.  The issue of sub-aggregate decomposition using the (polar) D&L method is resolved in Wang et al.  (2017b), while LMDI can readily give decomposition results at the sub-aggregate level.  Second, the robustness to zero/negative values is a desirable property as a large number of zero/negative values could appear in a multiregion I-O table (Wood and Lenzen 2006).  The multiplicative D&L method is robust to zero/negative values at the aggregate level but not at the sub-aggregate level decomposition.  The reason is that the logarithmic mean function, which is vulnerable to zero/negative values, is involved.  In this case, the procedures proposed in Ang and Liu (2007a, 2007b) can be applied to LMDI as well as the multiplicative D&L method to deal with zero/negative values.  The above suggest that either the (polar) D&L method or LMDI can be used in Model 1 and Model 2.  The relevant formulae are shown in Appendix C.  As pointed out in Wang et al.  (2017b), the sub-aggregate decomposition using the multiplicative D&L method becomes fairly complex in computation.  In contrast, LMDI is simpler in application and computation (Ang 2015).  The selection of a suitable decomposition method should also be based on the speciﬁc decomposition procedure used in a study.  A guide for selection is given in Wang et al.  (2017a).  3.  Data.  We use the global MRIO table and CO2 emission data in WIOD to study changes in global and national emission intensities. 7 The MRIO table in WIOD contains 40 major economies, and a “Rest of World” (RoW) region that represents the remaining world economies.  Each economy is divided into 35 economic sectors (see Appendix D).  In WIOD no constant-price data is available.  Instead, two versions of I-O tables are published, one in the current price and the other in the previous year's price.  With these two versions, SDA analysis for any two consecutive years can be conducted.  The results generated by multiplicative decomposition are given in indexes.  These results can be chained to explain changes in an aggregate indicator over time, e. g.  AEI2009/ AEI2000=(AEI2009/AEI2008)⋅(AEI2008/AEI2007)… ⋅(AEI2001/AEI2000).  As to the value added data, sectoral price indexes for the 40 economies are available.  Users can therefore obtain GDP data in constant price for further analysis while accounting for sectoral heterogeneity.  The annual data for sectoral CO2 emissions in the 41 economies are readily available in the WIOD database.  We select the time period 2000–2009 in this study.  A reason is that the base year in recent national climate targets, e. g.  INDCs, generally falls between 2000 and 2009.  This applies to the case of China, India, United States, Canada, etc.  Fig.  1(a) shows that the global emissions increased continuously from 2000 to 2008, followed by a slight dip in 2009.  From Fig.  1(b), the same pattern is found for the global GDP due to global ﬁnancial crisis during 2008–2009 period.  Changes in global emission intensity are shown in Fig.  1(c).  The yearly changes were erratic and the overall change from 2000 to 2009 was a decrease from 0. 661 to 0. 650 ton/103 US$. 8 The corresponding overall ratio change.  Results and Discussions.  4. 1.  Global Emission Intensity Change in 2000–2009.  Six effects are calculated using Model 1 to explain the ratio change in global emission intensity.  Fig.  2 shows the cumulative driving forces in 2000–2009 at the global level.  The sectoral intensity effect was the largest contributor to the decline in the global emission intensity, followed by the domestic production structure effect and domestic ﬁnal demand structure effect.  The results indicate that promoting sectoral emission efﬁciency has been the most important means to improve aggregate emission performance.  In contrast, the geographic shift effect in terms of ﬁnal demand was the key impediment to the reduction in the global emission intensity.  This development was caused by the drastic change in the ﬁnal demand share of global economies.  As shown in Fig.  3, the share of advanced economies in global ﬁnal demand decreased from 78. 4% in 2000 to 66. 5% in 2009. 9 The transfer of production from advanced economies to emerging economies where production is relatively more emission intensive drove up the global emission intensity.  Besides, the trade related effects, i. e.  the traded production technology effect (DH,tM1) and the traded ﬁnal demand structure effect (DS,t M1), marginally increased the global intensity.  Overall, these six effects led to a decrease in the global emission intensity of 1. 7%.  Arising from the plots in Fig.  1, we show the cumulative driving forces in three sub-periods, i. e.  2000–2001, 2001–2004 and 2004– 2009, in Fig.  2.  The contributions by country in each sub-period are given in Table E. 1 to Table E. 3 in Appendix E.  For period 2000–2001, the main driving factors of global emission intensity decrease were the emission intensity improvement in China and the production structure improvement in the United States (see Table E. 1 in Appendix E).  for period 2001–2004, the rising global emission intensity was due mainly to the deterioration of the production structure (both domestic and trade-related) in China and the geographic shift of ﬁnal demand to China, which offset the reduction caused by the emission intensity improvement in the United States (see Table E. 2 in Appendix E).  for period 2004–2009, the main contributors to the decrease of global emission intensity were the improvements in domestic production technology in both China and the United States, which offset the impact of the geographic shift of ﬁnal demand to China (see Table E. 3 in Appendix E).  Fig.  4 shows the annual decomposition results.  It is found that geographic shift of ﬁnal demand consistently drove up the global emission intensity.  A sudden drop occurred in 2008. 10 The domestic production technology and sectoral emission intensity within countries also recorded marked changes.  The sectoral emission intensity decreased in all years except 2006.  The abnormal rise in sectoral emission intensity in 2006 was caused mainly by China.  As pointed out earlier, the domestic and traded production technology effect deteriorated in 2001–2004.  After 2005, world countries' production technology generally improved.  The two remaining effects, i. e.  the domestic and traded demand structure effects (DS,dM1), were relatively stable for the whole period.  They also show similar changing patterns, particularly in the latter half of the decade when they gradually led to reductions in the global emission intensity.  Table E. 4 in Appendix E shows the cumulative driving forces in 2000–2009 at the country level.  It is found that a number of countries, particularly small economies in Europe, contributed marginally to the global emission intensity change.  This is due mainly to their small weight in both global emissions and global economy.  To present the results in a more compact way, we aggregate the 41 economies into 13 regions, as shown in Fig.  5.  Contributions of the 13 regions to the global emission intensity change are found to be mixed.  China and India drove up the global emission intensity, while the remaining economies, particularly the advanced countries, contributed to a reduction of the global emission intensity.  Not surprisingly, China recorded the strongest impact in increasing, while the United States and EU-27 showed the largest impact in reducing, the global intensity.  Geographic shift was the main source of the impact of the two emerging economies that raised the global emission intensity.  China's share in global ﬁnal demand in 2009 was more than twice that in 2000, and India also registered signiﬁcant growth in the ﬁnal demand share.  This is in line with the shift in international production that took place.  Moreover, the export structure, of both intermediates and ﬁnal demand, of the two emerging economies, has generally become more emission intensive.  This further indicates a shift in the production of emission intensive goods to the emerging economies.  All these effects contributed to deterioration in the global emission intensity, although the two countries registered remarkable improvements in their sectoral emission efﬁciency.  For economies contributing to reductions in the global intensity, improvements in sectoral emission efﬁciency was the main contributor.  It is followed by the domestic production structure effect and the domestic ﬁnal demand structure effect.  Basically the trade-related effects in the advanced economies, except for the product structure of exported ﬁnal demand in East Asia, Canada and EU-27, contributed to slight decreases in the global emission intensity.  This improvement was insufﬁcient to compensate for the trade-related effects originating from China and India.  4. 2.  Changes in Emission Intensity in Speciﬁc Countries.  Among those countries that have designed climate targets on the basis of CO2 emission intensity, China and India are the top two emitters.  They respectively accounted for 29. 6% and 6. 6% of the total global emissions in 2014.  They respectively plan to reduce emission intensity by 60%–65% and 33%–35% by 2030 below 2005 levels.  The trends of their emission intensities are expected to differ from those of advanced economies.  We analyze the emission intensity changes of China, India and the United States using Model 2.  4. 2. 1.  China.  From 2000 to 2009, China's aggregate emission intensity decreased from 2. 341 to 2. 088 ton/103 US$.  The relative change was AEICHN,2009/ AEICHN , 2000 =0. 89.  The data is consistent with that in IEA's statistics (IEA 2015).  Fig.  6(a) shows that all the eight effects, except the domestic and exported ﬁnal demand structure and exported intermediates structure, contributed to improvements in China's emission intensity.  Sectoral emission efﬁciency change was the major contributor, and the production structure became slightly less emission intensive.  Conversely, China's exports, particularly of the intermediates, and its domestic ﬁnal demand structure became more emission intensive.  Fig.  6(a) shows the cumulated driving forces in two time periods, i. e.  period I (2000–2005) which covers China's 10th ﬁve-year plan (FYP, 2001–2005) and period II (2005–2009) which starts from the base year in China's INDC.  In period I, China's emission intensity increased by 4. 7%, driven primarily by a more emission-intensive production structure and ﬁnal demand structure.  Fig.  7(a) shows that both the domestic and exported production structures as well as domestic ﬁnal demand structure continuously deteriorated.  The sectoral emission efﬁciency improved in all the years except in 2003.  Improved sectoral emission performance helped to reduce national emission intensity in period I.  In period II, China recorded a 14. 8% reduction in its aggregate emission intensity.  The progress made puts China on a promising trajectory toward its INDC climate targets.  This development was consistent with the general development in the period, when China implemented its 11th FYP which includes a binding target to reduce the national energy intensity by 20% in 2006–2010.  Fig.  6(a) shows that the production structure effect was the main driver behind the decreases in emission intensity, while domestic and exported ﬁnal demand structure became more emission intensive.  Sectoral emission efﬁciency further improved except in 2006, but at a slower rate compared to period I.  The ﬁndings are consistent with those reported in Zeng et al.  (2014) and Chang and Lahr (2016).  From period I to period II, China's overall production technology became greener and cleaner.  Besides, trade-related effects helped to reduce the overall emission intensity in period II.  Both regional and sectoral contributions to China's aggregate emission intensity change can be further quantiﬁed using Model 2.  Table 1 shows that all foreign regions contributed to China's aggregate emission intensity increases in period I.  In period II, on the contrary, only Brazil and Australia marginally helped to raise, while the remaining regions contributed to reduce, China's aggregate emission intensity.  The results can be used to shape targeted policy measures concerning trade.  From the sectoral perspective, Table 2 shows that the electricity sector (S17) contributed the most to the increases in the national emission intensity in period I whereas the sector recorded the most pronounced improvement in period II, particularly in 2007.  This was due to the country's efforts in shutting down small and inefﬁcient coal-ﬁred plants in 2007.  Besides, the agriculture sector (S1) and construction sector (S18) were the top contributors to increases in the national emission intensity in both periods.  This calls for actions to enhance emission performance in the two sectors.  4. 2. 2.  India.  India's aggregate emission intensity decreased from 1. 989 to 1. 769 ton/103 US$ in 2000–2009, giving an overall ratio change of AEIIND,2009/AEIIND,2000=0. 89.  Fig.  6(b) shows that sectoral emission efﬁciency improvement was the primary contributor to the decline, which was followed by the domestic production structure change.  This seems to indicate that India's overall production become generally cleaner.  On the other hand, the domestic ﬁnal demand structure became more emission intensive.  This is not unexpected since emerging countries generally have a high demand for energy/emission intensive goods (e. g.  steel, cement, etc. ) to support economic development.  The results are also consistent with those reported in Pal et al.  (2015).  Besides, exports helped to improve India's emission intensity by 3% during this period, which was due primarily to the exported intermediates becoming less emission intensive.  This is fairly different from the case of China.  Since India's INDC climate target is also indexed with respect to the 2005 emission intensity, intensity changes in two sub-periods as deﬁned earlier are studied.  In period I (2000–2005), India recorded a 12. 7% reduction in aggregate emission intensity.  This was driven mainly by improvements in production technology and sectoral emission efﬁciency, as shown in Fig.  6(b).  In period II (2005–2009), a slight increase in emission intensity of 1. 9% was observed.  Compared to the pre-2005 period, the sectoral emission efﬁciency improvement weakened due to the deteriorations in 2007 and 2008, while the domestic production technology largely worsened in 2009, as displayed in Fig.  7(b).  Also, the impact of trade on India's emission intensity deteriorated in period II.  The deterioration was caused mainly by the increasingly emission intensive trade with ROW, Turkey, Indonesia and Brazil, as shown in Table 1.  These results reveal that the development of India's aggregate emission intensity in the last decade was not encouraging.  Table 2 shows that, at the sectoral level, the electricity sector (S17) had a significant impact on reducing the national emission intensity in both periods, while the agriculture sector (S1), construction sector (S18), mining sector (S2) and real estate related sectors (S29&S22) were top contributors to increases in the national intensity.  The ﬁndings are consistent with those reported in Parikh et al.  (2009).  4. 2. 3.  United States.  United States' aggregate emission intensity decreased from 0. 481 to 0. 360 ton/103 US$ during 2000–2009, with a ratio change of AEIUS,2009/ AEIUS,2000=0. 75.  Fig.  6(c) shows that sectoral emission efﬁciency improvement was the largest contributor to emission intensity reduction, which is similar to China and India.  Both the production structure and ﬁnal demand structure became less emission intensive.  Traderelated effects helped to reduce the overall emission intensity, which is different from China and India.  Table 1 reveals that at the regional level, exports of the United States to all trade partners became less emission intensive.  This is consistent with the differences that were generally observed between advanced economies and emerging economies in trade-related emissions.  Fig.  6(c) shows that aggregate emission intensity changes in the United States and the driving forces in the two sub-periods were fairly stable.  This is different from the drastic changes observed in China and India.  On a yearly basis, sectoral emission efﬁciency and domestic production technology recorded the most signiﬁcant changes, followed by the domestic ﬁnal demand structure, as shown in Fig.  7(c).  As a result, the country's aggregate emission intensity decreased steadily over the study period, except in 2007.  At the sectoral level, Table 2 shows that service sectors contributed substantially to decreases in national emission intensity.  In particular, the electricity sector (S17) was the top contributor, while the construction sector (S18) was the worst performer.  <Conclusion> Discussions and Policy Implications.  Global emission intensity decreased marginally by 1. 7% in the 2000s.  The pace of the reduction may not be sufﬁcient to achieve the climate target set in the Paris Agreement.  The preceding analysis shows that some major economies, e. g.  China, India, Russia, EU and the United States, dominated the global emission intensity, and improvement in global intensity in the study period was hampered mainly by developments in developing countries such as China and India.  In addition, countries are found to differ in emission intensity level, the rate of intensity change and the underlying driving forces.  Some policy implications can be drawn from the results presented above with regard to lowering global and regional/national emission intensities.  The results of our study show that improving sectoral emission efﬁciency, which depends mainly on the adoption of advanced climate technologies, has been the most effective measure to reduce emission intensity.  The ﬁrst area that should be looked into is therefore to accelerate the development and transfer of climate technologies.  Developing efﬁcient technologies in various sectors, e. g.  power generation technologies (Ang and Su 2016), and adopting them are vital for enhancing global emission performance in the long run.  Besides, special attention should be paid to technology transfer to and diffusion of these technologies in low performing countries.  As pointed out earlier, major emerging economies (i. e.  China and India), which are growing in importance in global production and emissions, impeded the aggregate emission performance improvement.  It is also found that large differences existed between the advanced economies and the emerging economies in terms of emission performance.  For instance, the aggregate emission intensity of China in 2009 was roughly ﬁve times that of the United States, and the rate of intensity improvement in the United States was higher than that in China and India.  These differences show the importance of climate technology transfer from advanced economies to emerging economies.  A number of international mechanisms, such as the technology transfer framework under UNFCCC, have been established.  Yet more efforts on their implementation are needed.  The second area is about regulating emissions embodied in trade.  At present, climate policies at the national level usually focus merely on domestic production activities.  The varying degree of domestic regulations in different countries has inevitably led to carbon leakage.  The results of our study show that international trade, such as the exports of China, increased the global emission intensity.  Regulating emission performance of trade is therefore an area that may need to be given greater attention.  One of the possible policy measures is the border carbon adjustments, which has been under debate in a number of countries.  In the last decade, emission trading has also become an important mechanism to control the absolute emissions in a cost effective way.  The number of countries implementing or considering such market mechanism is increasing, including developing countries like China.  With the expansion of emission trading from regional to worldwide, it is expected to encourage the adoption of clean technologies and reduce the emissions embodied in trade.  The third area is to promote sustainable consumption.  Present climate policies in most countries concentrate mainly on the production side of an economy.  However, the demand side also affects emission intensity, as shown in the results above.  Comparisons of the developments in China and India to that in the United States further reveal the importance of decarbonizing ﬁnal demand structure to reduce emission intensity.  As a result, high priority should be given to demand-side policy measures aiming at promoting sustainable consumption, e. g.  offering economic incentives to low-carbon products.  At the same time, population policy, with a focus on the impact of ﬁnal demand, is another important factor to be considered.  5.  Conclusion.  The objective of this paper is to study the structural decomposition of aggregate CO2 emission intensity in a multi-region context.  Two SDA models are proposed, one is for the global emission intensity (Model 1) while the other is for single country's intensity (Model 2).  From an economic system viewpoint, both models are able to reveal the impacts of sectoral emission intensity, production structure and ﬁnal demand related factors.  As compared to the existing single-region models, the proposed models offer additional insights.  The global model can be used to quantify countries' impact, while measuring the effect of trade, on the global intensity.  The country level model reveals the impacts of trade and other countries on a particular economy's intensity change.  With trade becomes increasingly important in energy/emission accounting, the proposed models are useful for analyzing global/ national intensity changes.  The proposed methodologies can be generally applied to study various intensity indicators, such as energy consumption, material use, pollutants, with MRIO tables at various disaggregation levels.  We apply the proposed SDA models to examine aggregate CO2 emission intensity changes at the global and country levels.  It is found that from 2000 to 2009, geographic shift in ﬁnal demand and international trade hampered reductions in global emission intensity. 