
At the 21st Conference of the Parties (COP) under the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in Paris, the
parties agreed on an ambitious target to limit the increase in global
mean temperature to 1. 5–2. 0 °C.  Among other countries, Russia proposed a reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, and has submitted a pledge to the United Nations (UN), which proposes a 25–30%
reduction in Russia's GHG emissions by 2030 compared to 1990
(Carbon Brief, 2015).  At present, Russia is one of the world's largest producers of GHG emissions.  Russia's share of global GHG emissions
accounted for approximately 5% in 2012 (WRI, 2012).  In 2014, Russia's
GHG emissions without land use, land-use change and forestry were
nearly 30% below the 1990 level (UNFCCC, 2016).  This implies that
Russia would need a stricter climate policy to prevent any increase in
It is likely that Russia might not need any “standard” climate policy
instrument, such as a carbon tax or an emission trading system, to
achieve a substantial reduction in GHG emissions.  This is because, similar to many other economies, the Russian economy is distorted by preexisting subsidies imposed on domestic energy consumption.  For
example, Russia imposes high export taxes on crude oil, oil products,
and natural gas (Roskazna, 2015).  Furthermore, domestic gas prices
are regulated in Russia, and they remain substantially lower than export
netback prices (Gazprom, 2015).  Export taxes and the regulation of gas
prices operate as implicit subsidies to domestic consumers.  Economic
intuition suggests that the elimination of those pre-existing distortions
will make the energy market as well as the whole economy more efﬁcient.  Moreover, it will contribute to a reduction in GHG emissions
and stimulate investments in energy saving technologies. 
As a large consumer and exporter of fossil fuels, the Russian economy will certainly be affected by domestic and foreign climate policies,
while foreign economies might be affected by Russia's climate policy. 
In the course of anticipated reductions in the international demand for
fossil fuels, Russia would need to ﬁnd other revenue sources by developing a dynamic comparative advantage in the production of high valueadded, non-fossil fuel intensive commodities and services.  Recently, a
few publications addressed the economy-wide effects of Russia's energy
policy (e. g. , Heyndrickx Name, 2012.  Orlov, 2015a, 2015b).  Hypothetical
carbon taxation and prospects for a double dividend were analysed by
Orlov and Grethe (2012), Orlov Name (2013), and Orlov and Grethe
(2014).  However, these studies are hampered by several limitations. 
First, they are based on single-country models, which are unable to depict the response of other economies and terms-of-trade effects.  Second,
market inertias such as imperfect labour mobility and immobility of extant capital are not depicted.  Third, the studies do not show how the
Russian economy might be affected when other countries implement
stricter climate policies.  Fourth, the effects resulting from Russia's
climate policy on other economies were not analysed.  Our study aims
to shed light on these important political issues. 
The main objectives of this paper are to analyse the economy-wide
effects of international climate policy on the Russian economy as well
as the effects of Russia's climate policy on the European economies. 
Our analysis is based on a dynamic multi-region, multi-sector computable general equilibrium (CGE) model, a model for Global Responses
to Anthropogenic Changes in the Environment (GRACE) (Aaheim and
Rive, 2005), which has been calibrated using an electricity-detailed extension of Version 9 of the Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP9-Power)
database and its satellite database accounts for CO2 and non-CO2
emissions.  To improve the credibility of policy simulation results, we incorporated market inertias, such as imperfect sectoral labour mobility
and vintage capital.  Based on the GTAP9-Power database, the power
generation sector was disaggregated into ﬁve power generation
technologies. 
Economic analyses usually address the total welfare effects arising
from policy, and therefore, many CGE studies typically focus on welfare
effects.  However, competitiveness and income distribution effects are
also vital to policy-makers.  In our analysis, we neglect the issue of income distribution, but we address competitiveness by showing how climate policy in one country affects the economic activities in other
countries and regions.  The results from our analysis might be of interest,
not only for policy-makers, but also for private investors.  Although this
study focuses on Russia, the results might be of relevance to other
energy-exporting countries that also impose direct or indirect subsidies
on domestic consumption of fossil fuels.  It should be noted that many
developing countries have explicit or implicit subsidies on fossil fuel
consumption (OECD/IEA, 2015).  The remainder of the paper is
organised as follows.  Section 2 provides a brief description of the
model and database.  Section 3 discusses policy simulations.  Section 4
presents the results and discussion.  Section 5 concludes. 
<Middle> Database and model. 
2. 1.  Database. 
For our analysis, we use the GTAP9-Power database, which is an
electricity-detailed extension of Version 9 of the GTAP database
(Aguiar Name, 2016.  Peters, 2016).  The GTAP9-Power database depicts
the global economy in 2011 and provides data on 140 regions and 68
commodities.  We aggregated all regions into three regions.  Rest of the
World (RoW), the European Union 28 (EU) and Russia.  This analysis focuses
on Russia and the EU as this region is the main importer of fossil
fuels from Russia.  Further, to assess the economy-wide effects of
Russia's climate policy on the European economies, we disaggregated
the EU into 16 member countries. 1
All commodities and services are aggregated into one sector output
for each of 23 sectors.  The GTAP9-Power provides data on base- and
peak-load power generation.  The expected annual market effects of international
climate policy are not significantly affected by the division
into base- and peak-load generation.  Therefore, we aggregated all
base- and peak-load technologies but distinguish between gas-ﬁred,
coal-ﬁred, nuclear, hydro, and renewable power generations.  On the demand side, the output from all power technologies was aggregated into
electricity.  The GTAP9-Power database includes satellite databases on
energy and CO2 emissions, while the data on non-CO2 emissions are obtained from Version 9 of the GTAP database. 
We found some inconsistencies in the GTAP9-Power database,
which were corrected.  To balance the database, we adjusted the capital
account, which is residually built in GTAP and therefore very uncertain. 
According to the GTAP9-Power database, the export tax on gas in Russia
is more than 300%, whereas the export tax rate on natural gas has been
set to 30%, according to the Russian Tax Code.  Therefore, we reduced the
export tax rate on gas from Russia from 300% to 30% by increasing the
pre-tax value of Russia's gas exports.  The balancing of the database implies an increase in the capital cost in Russia's gas sector.  Furthermore,
the GTAP9-Power database depicts high sale taxes on gas consumption
in Russia, while in reality domestic gas prices are regulated, and they remain signiﬁcantly lower than export netback prices (Gazprom, 2015). 
This implies domestic consumers of gas are indirectly subsidised in
Russia via low consumer prices.  Another issue relates to output shares
of different power generation sub-sectors.  The World Energy Outlook
2013 (OECD/IEA, 2013) shows that the output shares of nuclear and
hydro power were 16% each in 2011, whereas in the GTAP9-Power database, these output shares are very low (Supplementary Material,
Table A2).  To correct for this, we adjusted the pre- and post-tax values
of domestic gas consumption in Russia as follows.  First, we eliminated
all consumption taxes on gas by increasing the pre-tax value of industrial gas consumption.  To balance the database, we increased the capital
cost in Russia's gas sector.  Then, we reduced the pre-tax values of domestic gas consumption in Russia by 62%.  The balancing of the database
in this case implied a reduction of the capital cost in Russia's gas sector,
and an increase in the capital cost in other sectors to compensate for decreased costs of gas consumption.  The balancing of the database in the
power generation sector implied an increase in their capital cost.  This
resulted in increased output from nuclear power and hydropower. 
Finally, we incorporated a domestic gas subsidy by increasing total production cost of gas via capital costs in Russia's gas sector.  The calculated
subsidy rate on domestic gas consumption in Russia accounts for 40%. 
For more details on the data adjustments and calculation of the domestic gas subsidy, see Supplementary Material, Appendix A. 
The values of export tax rates on crude oil and oil products depicted
in the GTAP9-Power are reasonable.  for example, the export tax rate on
crude oil accounts for 37% and for petroleum and coal products, it is 19%. 
Therefore, we maintain these initial tax rates reported in the GTAP
database. 
2. 