 1.  Introduction Freshwater availability in suﬃcient quality and quantity is one of the major challenges that society will face this century.  Freshwater represents just 2. 5% of Earth’s water and is increasingly threatened by human (economic) activity and climate change.  Many studies have conﬁrmed that water scarcity will increase signiﬁcantly over the coming decades and this will bring problems for food security, environmental sustainability, and economic development (Alcamo et al. , 2007.  Ercin and Hoekstra, 2012.  Hoekstra, 2014a,b).  The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reported that unabated climate change has the potential to strongly impact freshwater resources with wide ranging consequences for societies and ecosystems (Murray et al. , 2012.  Pachauri and Meyer, 2014).  At present about two-thirds of the global population presently live in conditions of severe water scarcity for at least 1 month of the year and half a billion people face severe water scarcity all year round (Mekonnen and Hoekstra, 2016).  Climate change is predicted to exacerbate water scarcity even further.  Hydrological cycles are predicted to undergo large changes and cause global shifts in precipitation patterns as well as increase the frequency and severity of extreme events (Bates and Kundzewicz, 2008).  Signiﬁcant regional differences exist across the globe leading to simultaneous increases and decreases in land-surface run-off depending on latitude, altitude, and other geographic factors.  In general, wet areas will tend to get wetter and dry areas will get dryer, leading to less reliable water availability (Kumar et al. , 2013).  While there is considerable uncertainty in modelled precipitation and evapotranspiration projections at high resolution, regional trends allow the comparison of different climate change scenarios over time.  The frequency of heavy precipitation over most areas is predicted to increase with the consequences of rain-generated ﬂoods potentially overwhelming existing infrastructure leaving little opportunity for water storage.  The likelihood of extreme droughts is also predicted to increase with a tendency for continental interiors to dry during the summer, especially in the sub-tropics and low and midlatitudes.  One recent example that has been attributed to global warming was the 2003 heat-wave in Europe (Schar et al. , 2004) contributing to annual precipitation deﬁcits of up to 300 mm and an estimated 30% drop in gross primary production of terrestrial ecosystems (Ciais et al. , 2005).  Events like this highlight the signiﬁcant impact that water scarcity can have on economic productivity.  Changes to the atmospheric water content, intensity of extremes, reduced snow cover, widespread melting of ice, changes in soil moisture and droughts are therefore predicted to exacerbate water scarcity problems in the 21st century (Bates and Kundzewicz, 2008) This analysis uses the latest scientiﬁc evidence for quantifying the likely effects of climate change on water scarcity across the globe under different climate change scenarios (i. e. , IPCC AR5).  However, there are other dynamic factors that must also be considered, these include economic growth, technological progress, national water endowment, structure of production (at sectoral level), international trade, and population growth.  This analysis captures the dynamic interaction of these different factors on water scarcity out to 2100.  While most of the existing literature has focused on the link between water scarcity and economic activity this work highlights the importance of considering water scarcity in the context of climate change.  The novelty introduced by the present study is given by the combination of two measures of water scarcity, which take into account the social needs (i. e. , providing enough water for social and economic requirements) and the physical constraints imposed by water availability, driven by climate change.  We assess the social and economic effects of water scarcity by country and by sector, applying a multi-regional input-output model (MRIO), extended with water intensity coeﬃcients.  It goes beyond the previous global water demand scenario studies because the MRIO approach allows the recovery of the whole supply-chain, both at national and global levels, and to calculate both the direct and indirect feedback effects due to inter-industrial linkages in the global economy, between now and 2100.  In the analysis that follows we disentangle these different effects and identify the main drivers of water scarcity over the next century.  Using four different climate change scenarios and data on global trading patterns we assess the respective social and economic effects of water scarcity by country and by sector.  We proceed with a multi-regional input-output model (MRIO) extended with water intensity coeﬃcients and calculate both direct and indirect water consumption between now and 2100.  We then apply sectoral production functions to describe the trade and production relationships for 35 sectors across all major OECD countries, their major trading partners and a selection of large emerging economies.  The main research questions we aim at answering include (i) what are the main drivers of water scarcity over this century. 