 Introduction Multinational entities (MNEs) face tax incentives to shift taxable income from high-tax jurisdictions to low-tax jurisdictions by strategically valuing intercompany transactions.  To mitigate tax-motivated transfer prices for goods, services, intellectual property, and debt, tax authorities require that transfer prices be “arm’s length,” or comparable to prices charged between independent enterprises (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 2010a).  Because arm’s length contractual prices are generally unobservable, MNEs often benchmark transfer prices by identifying a set of observable, economically comparable, and independent companies that use similar accounting standards to compare profit margins (PWC, 2006).  Specifically, taxpayers calculate the observable range of book profit rates reported by comparable firms and demonstrate that affiliate taxable profits are within this benchmark range (McKinley and Owsley, 2013).  Adoption across jurisdictions of a common set of accounting standards, such as International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), expands the set of potential benchmark firms and could allow MNEs more flexibility to support taxadvantaged transfer prices.  However, tax authorities could use a larger set of benchmarks to enforce tighter comparability standards, resulting in narrower profit ranges.  In this paper, I examine tax-motivated income shifting across jurisdictions following affiliate adoption of a common set of accounting standards for unconsolidated financial reporting.  Unconsolidated financial reporting provides separate entity accounts for each affiliate of a MNE group.  In contrast to the 2005 mandated use of IFRS for consolidated financial reporting in the European Union (EU), countries varied in mandating or permitting IFRS for unconsolidated financial reporting.  As of 2014, 14 of the 27 EU member states require IFRS for unconsolidated financial reporting for certain types of firms, nine countries allow IFRS for certain firms, and four countries do not allow IFRS.  This significant variation in unconsolidated IFRS reporting rules by country, year and entity type across the EU makes the EU a powerful setting to address whether unifying GAAP at the affiliate level increases MNE flexibility when selecting comparable companies to use in benchmarking transfer prices.  My study contributes to the literature by exploiting institutional details of intercompany transfer pricing to investigate a tax consequence of countries permitting or requiring IFRS for unconsolidated financial reporting.  I consider how an accounting change interacts with tax incentives to affect managerial behavior, thereby addressing an important new intersection between financial accounting and tax planning.  All EU member countries follow guidance published by the OECD for substantiating intercompany transfer prices. 1 These Transfer Pricing Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and Tax Administrations state that, for the purposes of benchmarking intercompany prices, an “important aspect of comparability is accounting consistency” (OECD, 2010a, p.  72).  Thus, holding economic comparability of potential benchmark firms constant, only those firms using similar accounting standards best meet the OECD definition of comparability for justifying arm’s length transfer prices (OECD, 2006). 2 Per private discussions with global transfer pricing professionals, tax authorities in the EU historically rejected potential benchmark firms that use different accounting standards (i. e. , foreign firms using local GAAP).  However, in the years following EU countries permitting or requiring IFRS for unconsolidated financial reporting, professionals observe that MNEs increasingly rely on multinational (e. g. , pan-European) sets of benchmark firms to justify intercompany prices (Gonnet et al. ,Permitted or mandated use of a common set of accounting standards in the EU expands the set of benchmark firms available to MNEs for substantiating transfer prices, potentially allowing MNEs to choose more favorable benchmarks that support a tax-advantaged transfer price.  For example, MNEs with an affiliate in a high-tax jurisdiction could “cherry-pick” among potential benchmark firms and select less profitable firms to substantiate low taxable profits for their high-tax affiliate.  MNE tax-motivated income shifting could therefore increase following affiliate adoption of IFRS due to increased opportunity to garner tax benefits.  However, tax-motivated income shifting may remain unchanged or even decrease following affiliate IFRS adoption due to limitations to expected benefits and/or increased costs.  First, tax authorities can also use a larger opportunity set of benchmark firms to challenge taxpayer-favored transfer prices upon audit, cherry-picking benchmarks that increase taxable income in their jurisdiction or enforcing stricter comparability criteria to reduce transfer pricing flexibility. 3 Second, increased financial statement transparency upon IFRS adoption could limit tax-motivated income shifting.  Finally, the significant costs associated with updating transfer pricing strategies and compliance reports could deter taxpayers from taking action.  Whether the equilibrium level of tax-motivated income shifting increases following affiliate adoption of IFRS is an empirical question hinging on the cost-benefit tradeoffs of MNEs and taxing authorities.  An EU Directive requires that MNE affiliates disclose unconsolidated, separate entity financial statements. 4 Between 2003 and 2007, many European MNE affiliates changed accounting methods as several EU member states first permitted or required IFRS for unconsolidated financial reports.  I use Bureau van Dijk’s Amadeus database, containing European unconsolidated financial and ownership information.  This unique database provides unconsolidated financial information required to estimate affiliate-level tax incentives and their effect on estimated affiliate-level taxable profits, neither of which can be measured using consolidated financial statements or reported segment information. 5 Amadeus also reports which financial reporting standards each affiliate uses and affiliate ownership linkages.  Thus, I can identify the effect of a common set of accounting standards on tax-motivated income shifting among affiliated firms within the same controlled group. 