 1.  Introduction The last decade has seen increasing application of efﬁciency frontier models taking the material1 balance principle (MBP) into account to measure ﬁrm and regional level environmental performance and obtain both environmental information and economic outcomes (Coelli et al. , 2007.  Hoang and Coelli, 2011.  Reinhard et al. , 2000).  The main acknowledged advantage of the MBP approach over other methods is that it is founded upon on the Law of the Conservation of Matter (Lauwers, 2009).  According to this law, pollutant emissions from production activities are considered waste residuals (Ayres, 1995.  Ayres and Kneese, 1969.  Pethig, 2006), and are measured as the balance between the potentially pollutant materials that enter the production system (nutrients from agricultural fertilizers, for example) and the materials that are transformed into ﬁnal goods (the nutrients that plants draw from the soil, for example).  From this perspective, it is of signiﬁcant importance to control the quantity and composition of inputs in the production process when dealing with the problem of environmental degradation, because the pollution generated in producing a given level of output will vary according to the quality and quantity of the inputs.  Following this logic, several authors (Lauwers, 2009.  Van Meensel et al. , 2010a.  Welch and Barnum, 2009) have shown that the integration of the MBP into efﬁciency models also has major implications for decision makers.  They show that a strategy for a more efﬁcient management of inputs to reduce pollution generation may provide “win-win” outcomes, that conciliate the economic interest of ﬁrms with the environmental concern of society.  For instance, reducing the overuse of inputs by improving technical efﬁciency has a twofold beneﬁt, since it reduces both production costs and environmental pressure.  Likewise, it is implicit in the MBP approach that part of the improvement in environmental allocative efﬁciency can be achieved while decreasing costs.  For example, Lauwers (2009) and Van Meensel et al.  (2010a, 2010b) measure environmental economic trade-offs in a sample of farms, and ﬁnd half the sample able to achieve simultaneous improvements in cost allocation efﬁciency and environmental efﬁciency, by changing the proportions of their input factors to combinations that are both more environmentally friendly and less costly.  Similarly, Welch and Barnum (2009), in a sample of electricity generation plants, ﬁnd some that are able to achieve joint cost and environmental beneﬁts, by moving from the technical efﬁciency point to the minimum cost point or to the point of lowest pollution.  Evidence obtained by Nguyen et al.  (2012) also suggests that there exists a positive economic–environmental trade-off path for allocative efﬁciency.  Despite this evidence, typical MBP measures of environmental allocative efﬁciency (Coelli et al. , 2007.  Nguyen et al. , 2012) do not integrate production costs.  just as cost-efﬁciency measures do not consider environmental pressure.  They compute the maximum potential reduction in environmental damage without considering cost and the maximum potential cost reduction irrespective of environmental performance.  In this paper, we propose to integrate cost and environmental pressure into two alternative measures of cross-constrained allocative efﬁciency.  We see this integration as beneﬁcial from two perspectives.  The ﬁrst advantage of the cost-constrained approach, is that the proposed environmental allocative efﬁciency measure will seek pollution reduction input recombination consistent both with continued production of given outputs and with a given cost.  This makes these measures particularly useful for assessing pollution-reduction potential in a setting where there is reluctance to compromise economic performance.  The second beneﬁt, from the environmentally-constrained perspective, is that the cost allocative efﬁciency measures will also show the maximum feasible improvement in cost allocative efﬁciency that can be obtained while maintaining given environmental standards.  The value added of the cross-constrained method is that it will also bring into the analysis feasible intermediate options for efﬁcient substitution of inputs between the minimum cost and the minimum pollutant material input that could potentially lead to environmental gains (economic gains) without detriment to the economic (environmental) outcome.  Moreover, by extending the standard MBP cost-environment efﬁciency model to include these measures, we are able to distinguish improvements in allocative efﬁciency that traditionally involve no detriment neither to the ﬁrm's cost performance nor its environmental performance (constrained measures) from those that involve a positive or negative trade-off.  In this way, it provides information for environmental planning strategies.  It allows a distinction between environmental objectives that could be achieved while safeguarding or improving economic competitiveness and policies that would restrict economic activity.  The standard MBP model of cost and environmental efﬁciency do not provide this information.  To integrate costs and environmental in cross-constrained efﬁciency measures, we apply the constrained multi-objective optimization method, which is extensively used to map efﬁcient solutions in multi-criteria analysis (Chankong and Haimes, 1983.  Haimes et al. , 1971.  Marler and Arora, 2004).  The advantage of this method is that it identiﬁes efﬁcient solutions without requiring ex ante speciﬁcation of a utility function.  Our work adapts the variation proposed by Mavrotas (2009) to ﬁnd the optimal pollutant material input-to-cost ratio.  The efﬁciency indices are computed from these optimal values.  To illustrate the usefulness of this method, we apply the efﬁciency measures to a sample of greenhouse horticultural farms in Spain.  In doing so, we focus on the environmental pressure exerted by the use of nitrogen fertilizers.  Our approach enables quantiﬁcation of the potential reduction in nitrogen input that can be achieved with no increase (and even a potential reduction) in costs, by improving both technical and allocative efﬁciency.  The paper is organized as follows.  In the next section, we describe the methodology.  Section 3 presents the sample description and empirical results, and the subsequent sections contain a discussion of the results and the conclusions to be drawn from them.  <Middle> Methodology.  In this section we reproduce the standard MBP joint cost and environmental efﬁciency model (Coelli et al. , 2007) and extend it to include some new cross-constrained allocative efﬁciency indicators.  Our costconstrained environmental allocative efﬁciency indexes are computed with given outputs and given costs.  The environment-constrained cost allocative efﬁciency indicator is determined analogously.  Finally, a decomposition of allocative efﬁciency makes a distinction between environmental (cost) allocative efﬁciency gains involving no economic (environmental) trade-off and those resulting in a cost increase (environmental degradation).  2. 1.  Standard MBP Cost and Environmental Efﬁciency ModelConsider a set of ﬁrms that use N inputs, x Є R+ N to produce M outputs M using a technology that may be represented by the feasible production as.  Assume that the production technology satisﬁes the standard axioms (Shephard, 1970), including convexity and free disposability of inputs and outputs.  The production activity also generates z Є R+ S pollutant emissions as by-products, and by the material balance equation.  where a and b are (N × S, M × S) vectors of constant coefﬁcients, which represent the units of particular material compound or substance zs contained in the input and in the output (it can be any particular material or a chemical element or compound as for example nitrogen, sulfur, carbon, etc. ).  The possibility exists that some inputs and outputs may contain a zero amount of substance zs.  For the sake of clarity, we consider that there is only one pollutant emission, s = 1, and are thus able to remove the subindex s. 2 The standard MBP cost and environmental efﬁciency model present two separate overall cost (CE) and overall environmental (EE) efﬁciency measures.  These measures are decomposed into a common measure of technical efﬁciency (TE) and two independent measures of allocative efﬁciency.  cost allocative efﬁciency (CAE) and environmental allocative efﬁciency (EAE).  In this section, we adhere very closely to the format used in Coelli et al.  (2007), where the output y is ﬁxed, and overall cost and overall environmental efﬁciency is referred to the minimum feasible cost and the minimum feasible amount of contaminants materials from inputs (material input), respectively.  See Appendix A for details of the Coelli et al.  (2007) speciﬁcation.  Here, we will comment only on the measures that constitute the basis of our own approach.  Let us illustrate the efﬁciency measures mentioned so far with a simple diagram.  Fig.  1 depicts the very simple case of a technology involving two inputs, x1 and x2, the isoquant or frontier of technical efﬁciency, the isocost line, which shows all combinations of inputs that cost the same total amount, w′x, and the iso-material line which shows all combinations of inputs that contain the same quantity of material or potential pollutant substances, a′x. 3 This diagram shows four decision making units.  the least-cost unit, C*, the least-polluting unit, E*, and two inefﬁcient units, I and I′.  The TE of I is given by the quotient of Ot/OI.  its CE is given by the Oc/OI.  and its environmental efﬁciency, EE, is given by Oe/OI.  Its cost allocative efﬁciency (CAE) is given by Oc/Ot.  and its environmental allocative efﬁciency (EAE) is given by Oe/Ot.  The efﬁciency measures for unit I′ could be shown analogously.  However, there is an important difference between I and I′.  The I technically efﬁcient peer, t, lies on the portion of the isoquant between C* and E* that is considered efﬁcient.  At this point, it is worth specifying that the efﬁciency criterion used in this paper is similar in concept to that used by Shephard (1970) and Tone and Tsutsui (2010) to deﬁne technological efﬁciency, but applied to cost- environmental efﬁciency.  We will consider a production unit to be efﬁcient if within the input vectors of the feasible production set that yield at least its output rate there is no other allocation that is equally or less costly or equally or less pollutant, with one magnitude strictly smaller.  Conversely, we consider a unit to be weakly efﬁcient when there is no other feasible production alternative that can achieve the same or a greater amount of output simultaneously incurring strictly lower costs and causing strictly less environmental pressure.  Having made this caveat, it can be seen, meanwhile, that unit I′ is projected by technical efﬁciency to t′, which is not allocative efﬁcient.  There are several movements from t′ that would improve its efﬁciency.  For example, t′ can move to C*, thus simultaneously reducing its costs and its material input.  Also, t′ can move to t thereby reducing environmental pressure without increasing costs (we assume that t and t′ have the same cost), and move from t to E* facing an environmentaleconomic trade-off.  Therefore, as illustrated by Fig.  1, the MBP approach shows that improvements in technical efﬁciency generate both economic and environmental beneﬁts (Lauwers, 2009).  Allocative efﬁciency indicators, however, do not relate cost and environmental pressure.  They show the maximum feasible cost reduction, irrespective of environmental outcomes or the maximum feasible reduction in material input, irrespective of economic outcomes.  MBP cost environment trade-off analysis, meanwhile, computes joint environmental and cost allocative efﬁciency gains, as could be achieved by moving from t′ to C* in Fig.  1 (Lauwers, 2009. 