
The auditor's report is the primary channel through which auditors communicate with financial statement users
information discovered during the auditing process.  Financial analysts and regulators have criticized the existing auditor's
reporting model as having little communicative value, and additional disclosures have been proposed to enhance the value
of the audit report (Church Name, 2008; PCAOB, 2013). 1 Under the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) requirement
and Generally Accepted Auditing Standards (GAAS), the auditor's reporting options are to issue either an unqualified opinion
or an unqualified opinion with explanatory language, commonly called a modified audit opinion (MAO). 2 This inclusion of
discretionary explanatory language, such as citing a lack of accounting consistency, emphasizing a material uncertainty, or
expressing a going concern (GC) opinion, is the only difference between a standard clean opinion and an MAO. 3 In fact, an
MAO is the sole way for auditors to communicate audit-specific information to outsiders. 4 There is still debate, however,
about the extent to which the auditor's report communicates relevant information to financial statement users (Church
Name, 2008; DeFond and Zhang, 2014).  In this study, we empirically investigate the relevance of MAOs in private debt
contracting. 
A large portion of the prior research that studied modified opinions focuses on the market reaction to the auditor's report
and provides evidence that equity investors react negatively to the issuance of a nonstandard opinion, especially to a GC
opinion (e. g.  Loudder Name, 1992; Fleak and Wilson, 1994; Menon and Williams, 2010).  We investigate the relevance of
auditor reporting from the perspective of debtholders for several reasons.  First, accounting information is often a direct
input in debt contracting; for example, debt covenants may rely on accounting numbers to monitor firm performance.  If an
MAO indicates low financial reporting quality, lenders will change the relative use of accounting-based covenants and
general covenants in loans issued after MAOs.  Second, debt contracts provide multi-dimensional information about
borrowers; loan contracts allow us to investigate the effects of audit opinions on both price and non-price costs of debt,
including loan covenants, loan size, loan maturity, and collateral requirements.  Finally, debtholders, whose payoffs are
concave in relation to firm value, demand a timely shift of control rights in order to discipline managers in the case of poor
firm performance (Dewatripont and Tirole, 1994; Ball Name, 2008).  This implies that debtholders should react to information
in MAOs for both pricing and monitoring purposes, because MAOs are likely to communicate negative news about clients’
financial reporting quality and credit worthiness.  Thus, examining lenders’ responses to MAOs can enhance our
understanding of the usefulness of auditor reporting. 
Lenders are likely to find the audit report relevant and useful in two ways.  First, through the audit opinion and associated
explanatory language, the auditor communicates information about the quality of financial reports for debt contracting
purposes.  The relevance of MAOs in debt contracting depends on the severity of the auditor's concern as expressed in the
explanatory language.  Second, MAOs communicate private information about clients’ credit risk to lenders that is not
available elsewhere.  Therefore, we expect the relevance of MAOs to lenders varies with the risks conveyed in the MAO. 
To analyze the relevance of MAOs in debt contracting, we first categorize audit opinions into clean and modified
opinions.  If an MAO indicates low financial reporting quality and potential credit risk, we predict that loans issued to firms
after an MAO will be associated with a higher cost of debt, reflected across different contract terms.  To examine the
incremental relevance of explanatory language, we classify MAOs into two general types, which we further partition into
four groups by their cause: Inconsistency opinions are caused by an Accounting Change or a Restatement; and Inadequacy
opinions are caused by Material Uncertainty or a GC Opinion. 5 MAOs issued because of an accounting Inconsistency alert
financial statement users about the incomparability of data contained in the financial statements.  MAOs issued for
Inadequacy reasons express auditors’ more serious concerns about the quality of the financial statements because of
unrecognized losses or risk.  Material uncertainty concerns are related to the resolution of future economically relevant
unknowns (e. g. , contingent liabilities, litigation risk, and business uncertainty), and GC opinions indicate that a key
assumption of the accounting model is violated (i. e. , that the firm will continue as a going concern for at least one year).  The
severity of the auditor's concern is greater in Inadequacy opinions than in Inconsistency opinions.  Among the four types of
MAOs, GC opinions require the most auditor judgment and, therefore, are likely to convey more of auditors’ private
information than other types of MAOs. 6
We find that loans initiated after MAOs have higher loan spreads (on average, 17 basis points higher) compared to loans
initiated after clean opinions, controlling for other determinants of the interest rate.  In addition, the effects of MAOs on loan
spreads vary significantly depending on the type of explanatory language.  The loan spread effect increases from 0 basis
points after an Accounting Change to 25, 49, and 107 basis points, on average, after Restatement, Material Uncertainty, and GC
Opinions, respectively.  These results support our prediction that interest rates increase after an MAO and that the effect
varies with the type of MAO. 
We also find that lenders decrease the use of financial covenants and increase the use of general covenants in loans
initiated after an MAO.  Specifically, lenders decrease the use of financial covenants by 3. 8% and increase the use of general
covenants (such as restrictions on dividend payouts or on the uses of borrowed funds) by 4. 2%, on average, after an MAO. 
Again, the relevance of an MAO depends on the type of modification.  We find that Inconsistency MAOs have a smaller, but
still significant, effect on the use of financial and general covenants than do Inadequacy MAOs.  Within Inadequacy MAOs,
Material Uncertainty opinions are associated with an average increase of 18. 2% in the use of general covenants but have no
effect on the use of financial covenants.  In contrast, GC opinions are associated with an average decrease of 9. 1% in the
number of included financial covenants and an average increase of 12. 3% in the number of included general covenants.  The
results from the debt covenant tests suggest that MAOs convey relevant information to lenders and that the use of the
financial reports in debt contracting varies with the type of concern expressed by the auditor in the MAO. 
We provide further evidence on the relevance of MAOs on other loan terms including loan size, the likelihood of
requiring collateral, and loan maturity.  Consistent with our predictions, we find that lenders reduce loan sizes and increase
the likelihood of requiring collateral following an MAO.  The results on loan maturity show a significant decrease in loan
maturities after a GC opinion, which is consistent with GC opinions communicating the auditor's information about the
client's credit risk to lenders.  The overall decrease in loan term favorability and the variation of the effects of MAOs suggest
that MAOs communicate information useful to lenders in negotiating debt contracts. 
Following our main empirical analysis, we perform two separate analyses on our sample of observations with GC
opinions.  First, following Menon and Williams (2010), we classify GC opinions as being related to firm performance,
financing concerns, or other issues and investigate the effects of each type of GC opinion on the loan contract terms
previously tested.  We find that each type of GC opinion has a unique effect on loan spread and other loan terms; this finding
reinforces the usefulness of information provided in the auditor's report. 
Second, we test whether GC opinions communicate private information about a client's credit risk that is not available
elsewhere.  We do so by matching firms with GC opinions to similar firms based on the determinants of receiving a GC
opinion using variables from prior studies (DeFond Name, 2002), but that received clean opinions in their audit reports.  If GC
opinions simply capture the probability of
financial distress or bankruptcy, as predicted by publically observable
information, they should have no incremental effect on loan contract terms in the matched-sample specifications.  We
find, however, that GC opinions continue to have a significant effect on all of the loans terms examined except financial
covenants.  Overall, these results are consistent with a GC opinion communicating the auditor’ private information regarding
the client's credit risk to lenders. 
It stands to reason that managers of firms preparing to secure financing are likely to be in contact with potential lenders
preceding a loan issuance, but we are unable to directly control for information that managers privately provide to lenders.  To
alleviate the concern that our empirical results regarding the association between MAOs and loan terms may pick up
unobservable public and private communication channels, we include a new indicator variable, Before_MAO, that takes a value
of 1 if a loan is issued in the 12 months preceding an MAO, and zero otherwise.  If the private information conveyed by the
auditor is actually preempted elsewhere (by managers communicating to lenders or other public information) before an MAO,
then we would expect a significant coefficient on this new variable.  In tests of each of the contract terms we investigate,
however, Before_MAO is insignificant, which provides further support that our results capture the effects of audit opinions. 
Our study makes several contributions to the existing literature.  First, our study investigates the usefulness of the audit
report to lenders in debt contracting by incorporating the auditor's explanatory language.  The empirical results provide
evidence that MAOs are informative to lenders in negotiating loan agreements, but more importantly, that the different types
of MAOs communicate different concerns to lenders about financial reporting quality and credit risk.  While prior studies show
that the voluntary use of auditing or the employment of Big N auditors is associated with a lower cost of debt (Fortin and
Pittman, 2007; Lennox and Pittman, 2011; Minnis, 2011), we provide evidence on the incremental value of audit reporting to
lenders.  For regulators, our empirical results may be useful in informing the current debate on regulatory initiatives to include
disclosures of “critical audit matters” in the audit report (PCAOB, 2013; DeFond and Zhang, 2014). 
Second, our study is related to the literature on the role of financial reporting quality in debt contracting.  Bharath Name
(2008) provided evidence that the quality of a borrower's accounting information can affect their access to the private
versus public debt market and the included loan terms.  Costello and Wittenberg-Moerman (2011) documented that lenders
alter debt contracts when a borrower reports an internal control weakness.  These studies, however, do not address the
specific role of the audit report within financial reporting.  Our study provides empirical evidence that audit opinions are
incrementally informative to lenders in the private debt market. 
Lastly, our empirical results on the usefulness of GC opinions in debt contracting contribute to the vast auditing literature
on GC opinions.  Prior studies report evidence that GC opinions are useful in predicting subsequent bankruptcies and are
associated with negative stock market reactions (Hopwood Name, 1989; Raghunandan and Rama, 1995; Chen and Church,
1996; Menon and Williams, 2010; Kaplan and Williams, 2013), but these studies examine the relevance of GC opinions
independent of other MAOs.  Our empirical results on the effect of GC opinions on various loan terms, relative to the effect of
other MAOs, shed light on the unique value of the auditor's information that is not available in the financial statements or
through other channels accessible to sophisticated lenders (Mutchler, 1985; Menon and Schwartz, 1987). 
In the next section we develop our hypotheses.  We describe the sample selection procedures and variables used in this
study in Section 3.  Section 4 presents the main empirical results, and Section 5 presents the results of additional analyses.  A
summary and conclusions are provided in Section 6. 
2.  Background and hypothesis development. 
As capital providers, lenders are interested in ensuring the timely repayment of the loan and interest that are claims on
the borrower's future cash flow and assets.  When contemplating a potential loan recipient, banks and other lenders analyze
the risk of default, estimate the market value and liquidation values of assets, and evaluate the management's character and
ability (Tirole, 2007).  If lenders decide to initiate a loan after the credit analysis, they negotiate the price and non-price
terms of the debt contract, which compensate them for risk and allow them to monitor the borrower's performance over the
life of the loan. 
Audited financial statements provide important information to lenders for evaluating the borrower's credit worthiness and
default risk (e. g. , Beaver, 1966; Altman, 1968; Ohlson, 1980), and auditors play an important role in this process. 7 The audit
report is the primary means by which the auditor communicates to users their degree of assurance that the financial
statements reflect the firm's economic activities.  To arrive at an opinion, the auditor amasses a large body of evidence and
offers insights into the estimates and assumptions underlying the financial reports prepared by managers.  The auditor uses
explanatory language in the audit report to communicate material concerns discovered during the auditing process that may
be relevant to users.  These include Inconsistency concerns, arising from an accounting change or restatement, and Inadequacy
concerns, relating to material uncertainty or an outright GC opinion.  The severity of the auditor's concern is reflected in the
content of explanatory language included in the report, which is useful to lenders when negotiating debt agreements. 
Since Inconsistency opinions refer to accounting changes or restatements that are usually disclosed in the notes of financial
reports, they may not be incrementally informative to lenders.  Auditors, however, have some discretion in whether to include
these items, rather than being required to include them in the audit report as a form of mechanical compliance with
accounting standards. 8 In addition, Inconsistency opinions may turn a lender's attention to the issue of incomparable
information in financial statements when contemplating a debt contract. 9 Prior work (Czerney Name, 2013) provides evidence
that explanatory language mentioning accounting changes and restatements is associated with a higher probability of
subsequent misstatements.  Graham Name (2008) find that earnings restatements are associated with increases in price and
non-price costs of debt, which is consistent with financial restatements leading to higher information uncertainty. 10 These
studies suggest that Inconsistency opinions may still affect the direct or indirect cost of debt. 
Another reason that audit opinions may be relevant in debt contracting is through auditors’ communication of private
information about a borrower's credit risk and financial health.  For lenders, Inadequacy opinions (especially GC opinions) are
particularly relevant because they convey an auditor's judgment about potential losses or default risks that might not be
reflected elsewhere in the financial report.  Therefore, the effect of MAOs related to Inadequacy opinions should be greater
than the effect of Inconsistency opinions.  With respect to GC opinions, prior studies find that these opinions are associated
with a higher probability of bankruptcy (Mutchler, 1985; Menon and Schwartz, 1987; Hopwood Name, 1989; Raghunandan
and Rama, 1995; Mutchler Name, 1997).  These findings are consistent with the effectiveness of SAS 59 which provides
guidance to auditors in evaluating a client's ability to continue as a going concern.  We predict that the effect of GC opinions
on price and non-price loan terms will be greater than the effects of the other MAO opinions. 11
If MAOs communicate relevant information about the quality of financial reports or about a client's credit risk, then
lenders should respond with higher interest rates to reflect borrowers’ greater credit risk and the additional costs of
monitoring using alternative mechanisms.  Furthermore, we predict that the effect on interest rates varies with the severity
of issues identified in the MAO.  This leads to our first empirical hypothesis, stated as follows:
H1.  Compared with loans issued in the year after a clean opinion, loans in the year after an MAO have higher loan spreads.  In
addition, the effect on spread is greater for GC opinions than for other MAO types. 
The monitoring of a borrower's behavior through debt covenants to mitigate agency conflicts between shareholders and
debtholders is an important part of debt contracting (Jensen and Meckling, 1976; Smith and Warner, 1979).  In the case of
covenant violation, control rights can be transferred quickly to lenders.  Accounting information and financial ratios are
widely used to monitor borrowers’ performance in debt covenants.  A pre-condition for using financial covenants is the
assurance that the accounting information reflects the borrower's actual performance. 
If accounting numbers are of questionable quality, lenders may use general covenants that do not rely on accounting
information.  General covenants often specify events that would require the borrower to pay down the balance of their loan,
whether dividends may be paid, or the allowed uses of borrowed funds.  If lenders view an MAO as decreasing the value of
including financial covenants, then they may compensate by increasing the number of general covenants.  Alternatively, if
financial and general covenants are independent in purpose, the optimal number (and type) of included general covenants
may already be included and no change will be observed. 
The implications of an MAO for debt covenants vary by the type of modified opinion.  If Inconsistency opinions are
indicators of a high likelihood of subsequent misstatements, then financial covenants become less effective as a monitoring
tool (Czerney Name, 2013).  Further, the effects of Inadequacy opinions on covenant choices should be stronger than the
effects of Inconsistency opinions, because Inadequacy MAOs convey an auditor's greater concern regarding potential losses or
default risk not reflected in financial statements.  In particular, GC opinions may indicate that a basic assumption of the
accounting model (i. e.  that the firm will persist as a going concern) is violated, undermining the usefulness of the financial
statements to lenders as an effective monitoring tool.  To protect their investments, lenders will identify alternative
measures for liquidation values of assets.  We expect the effect on the use of debt covenants in loan contracts to be strongest
for GC opinions. 
Stated in the alternative form, our second hypothesis is
H2.  Compared with loans issued in the year after a clean opinion, loans issued in the year after an MAO are associated with a
decrease in the number of financial covenants and/or an increase in the number of general covenants.  In addition, the effect of GC
opinions is stronger than those of other MAO types. 
To assess the total effect on the contract design of an MAO, it is important to consider the many different contract
provisions from which lenders can choose (Gigler Name, 2009).  Up to this point, we have considered only the use of spread
and covenants in contract design.  In reality, lenders also consider other loan terms to protect themselves.  We consider the
effects of an MAO on three additional contracting terms: loan size, the requirement of collateral, and the maturity of the
loan.  If lenders view an MAO as a disclosure event that communicates a negative signal about the borrower's financial
reporting quality and credit risk, we predict that lenders will be more likely to reduce loan size, require collateral, and
shorten the loan maturity after an MAO. 
As before, the relevant effects should vary for different types of MAOs.  Therefore, we expect that Inadequacy MAOs have a
greater effect on these loan terms than Inconsistency MAOs.  Economic theory on credit rationing (see, e. g. , Jaffee and Russell,
1976; Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981) proposes that loan size is not a linear function of the signaled default risk, because credit risk
may increase if the loan size can only finance riskier small projects.  As a result, rather than reducing the loan size, lenders
may simply deny the loan application after an MAO, especially after a GC opinion.  Similar to loan size, Diamond's (1991)
theory suggests that debt maturity is a non-monotonic function of a firm's default risk, with low risk firms obtaining both
short- and long-term debt, while high risk firms are forced to borrow at maturities shorter than they desire because of the
moral hazard of asset substitution.  Finally, we expect GC opinions to have a stronger effect than the other three types of
MAOs on the likelihood of a loan requiring collateral. 
Stated in the alternative form, we predict that
H3.  Compared with loans issued in the year after a clean opinion, loans issued in the year after an MAO are smaller in size, more
likely to require collateral, and shorter in maturity.  In addition, the effect of GC opinions is larger than those of other MAO types. 
<Middle> Research design and sample selection. 
3. 1.  Research design. 
To examine the relevance of audit opinions in debt contracting, we select those firms with at least one MAO in our
sample period so that we can isolate the effects attributable to MAOs.  We perform empirical tests of the effect of an MAO on
the contract terms of loans issued in the year after an MAO by estimating the following model,
where Loan Term is a variable representing the specific contracting terms of the loan agreement that we investigate
including: interest spread, number of financial covenants, number of general covenants, loan size, whether or not a loan
requiring collateral, and maturity length of a loan.  MAO is an indicator variable equal to one if the loan is initiated in the year
after the borrower receives an MAO, and zero otherwise.  To examine whether there is any lingering effect on contract terms
for loans initiated beyond the first year after an MAO, we include After_MAO to capture any continuing effect of an MAO after
a borrower receives a clean opinion.  After_MAO is an indicator variable equal to one if a firm currently has a clean opinion
but had an MAO in at least one of the previous three years, and zero otherwise.  We expect MAO to have a positive (β1) effect
on loan spread, use of general covenants, and likelihood of requiring collateral, but a negative (β1) effect on the use of
financial covenants, loan size, and maturity length.  To investigate the differential effects of different types of MAOs on debt
contracts, we replace the generic MAO with the types of MAOs. 
We first examine the relevance of MAOs for loan spreads after controlling for the other known determinants of interest rates. 
We control for firm size, because small firms have greater information asymmetry and higher default risk (Pittman and Fortin,
2004; Bharath Name, 2007).  We control for loan size, because larger loans are priced at lower interest rates (Booth, 1992; Beatty
Name, 2002).  We include a number of controls related to financial distress found in the prior literature: Z-score, market-to-book,
leverage, cash flow volatility, tangibility, and credit and term spreads (Graham Name, 2008).  We include a measure of abnormal
accruals which have been shown to affect interest rates (Bharath Name, 2008), as well as, a control for revolvers, because these loans
have a lower loan spread than term loans (Zhang, 2008).  Institutional loans, relative to bank loans, have a higher loan spread
because of the higher information symmetry with the borrower.  We control for the existence of performance pricing provisions,
because they reduce adverse selection and moral hazard costs for lenders (Asquith Name, 2005).  We also control for the number of
lenders in the loan.  A larger number of participants in the loan syndicate indicate a higher quality borrower and less information
asymmetry between syndicate participants.  Last, we control for other contracting devices available to lenders: loan maturity,
collateral, number of financial covenants, loan purpose, and year fixed effects. 12 To mitigate the influence of outliers, we winsorize
all continuous variables at the top and bottom 1% of their respective distributions.  We also adjust standard errors using two-way
firm and year clusters in all regressions. 
To test H2 we include a similar set of control variables in testing the effects of MAOs on the use of financial and general
covenants.  In these empirical models, we include loan interest rate as a control variable, because agency theory on debt
covenants predicts a negative relation between loan spread and the use of covenants (Jensen and Meckling, 1976; Smith and
Warner, 1979).  We select other control variables similar to those in prior studies on the determinants of covenants in debt
contracting (Beatty Name, 2002; Sufi, 2007; Graham Name, 2008; Costello and Wittenberg-Moerman, 2011).  In testing H3, we
follow a similar procedure to include control variables when we examine the effects of MAOs on loan size, likelihood of
requiring collateral, and loan maturity. 
3. 2.  Data sources and sample selection. 
We obtain data on MAOs in audit reports from COMPUSTAT (variable name AUOP) for the period from 1992 to 2009. 13
We match our MAO sample with public firms in the Dealscan database, which contains contractual terms such as interest
rate, size, collateral requirement, and covenants, of loans issued in the United States. 14 To be included in our sample, we
require borrowers to obtain a loan during the window just after an MAO (in either the year of MAO or within the three years
following the first clean opinion after an MAO) and outside of the MAO window (either before the MAO or more than three
years after the first clean opinion following an MAO).  This requirement is to ensure that our results are not attributable to
differences between MAO and non-MAO borrowers.  After eliminating observations with missing data needed in our
analyses, our final sample includes 8473 loans issued to 5377 borrowers during the 1992–2009 period. 15
To classify MAOs based on the stated reasons for modification, we read the explanatory paragraph section of the audit
report for each MAO identified above from the borrower's 10-K on EDGAR or LexisNexis.  Following Butler Name (2004), we
classify the reason for each MAO into one of two broad categories: Inconsistency and Inadequacy. 16 Inconsistency MAOs refer
to a lack of consistency according to GAAP accounting principles (AU Section 508), and we break down Inconsistency into
Accounting Change and Restatement depending on whether the auditor mentions accounting changes or restatements in the
explanatory paragraph. 17 Likewise, we decompose Inadequacy MAOs into two types: Material Uncertainty and GC Opinion. 