
1. 1.  The problem. 
A popular product sold by energy companies to medium-to-large
customers is one where an unspeciﬁed amount of power can be
bought at a ﬁxed price during a certain time-interval.  We call this a
ﬁxed price, unspeciﬁed consumption contract or simply a ﬁxed price
agreement.  The business-to-business electricity market in Denmark
in 2014 was 23. 1 TWh, about MEUR 800 million in monetary terms. 
60% was sold as ﬁxed price agreements in some form. 
Having entered into the ﬁxed price agreement, the energy
company must asses and manage the risks associated with the
obligations of the contract.  This is challenging for several reasons.  If
the seller faced only the risk from price-ﬂuctuations, he could simply buy forward contracts to set up a full, perfect hedge.  However,
with a criterion function that takes into account both (expected)
gains and losses, this is expensive if forward-prices are typically
above expected future spot-prices.  This so-called contango is the
norm in Nordic power markets, as demonstrated by both Botterud
Name (2002) and our analysis in Section 5. 1. 
Another complicating factor is quantity risk.  If the consumer’s
quantity choice were all-or-nothing, the contract would have payoff akin to call options.  Handling that would require modelling the
price randomness of the electricity market which has several characteristics that are different from standard ﬁnancial markets such
as stocks and exchange rates.  But the consumer has more ﬂexibility
and because energy demand is created by physical use, her choice
will not be all-or-nothing.  Demand will be positively correlated with
the price as high demand drives up the price.  For the contract seller
that creates what in other areas of ﬁnance would be known as
wrong-way risk.  He will have to deliver a lot of energy for a ﬁxed
price when buying it in the spot market is expensive. 
In this paper, we will deal with these risks with a joint model of
spot-price and consumption load. 
1. 2.  Previous work, related literature. 
The non-storability of electricity is a key complicating factor in
energy markets.  It makes physical hedging inoperable and it causes
highly volatile spot-markets with structural price jumps, see for
instance Benth Name (2008).  As a consequence, the problem of
joint quantity and price risk on electricity markets is commonly
studied in the literature and it stresses the importance of incorporating price–quantity correlation into the models.  For an example,
Bessembinder and Lemmon (2002) consider an equilibrium market
model for which the correlation has a signiﬁcant impact on optimal hedging strategies in forward markets.  Their model has been
extended by, for instance, Willems and Morbee (2010) who study the
effect of including options onto the market.  From the retailer’s perspective with an exogenously given spot and forward market, Oum
Name (2006) use utility maximisation to derive optimal hedge strategies that exploit the correlation to manage price–quantity risk in a
single period setting.  As another example, Boroumand Name (2015)
address the problem of price–quantity risk on an intra-day scale and
demonstrate with a simulation approach that intra-day hedging outperforms daily and longer term portfolios.  We also take the retailer’s
perspective and model the spot-price/consumption-load correlation
with a bivariate model where both the spot and load have temporal dependency.  Based on that model, we set out to hedge the
price–quantity risk of a ﬁxed price agreement with forward contracts.  In relation to our approach, Coulon Name (2013) develop an
intricate three-factor model and consider hedging strategies based
on options that are priced with closed form expressions.  In contrast,
we do not consider the problem of pricing derivatives under our
model, but concentrate on a operational hedging approach based on
exogenously given market forward-price data. 
1. 3.  Structure, contributions, and ﬁndings. 
The rest of the paper is organised as follows.  In Section 2, we formulate a dynamic model for electricity spot-price and consumptionload — a two-dimensional Gaussian Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model with
a seasonality component.  In Section 3, we analyse expected loss
minimisation.  Looking speciﬁcally at static hedging strategies with
forward contracts, a main contribution of the paper is the derivation
of explicit formulas for optimal hedge portfolios based on three different loss functions.  the square, the exponential, and the “hockey
stick”.  the two latter based on asymmetric risk measures appear
new.  Section 4 is an empirical study of the hedging performance
based on publicly available consumption, spot- and forward-prices
from the Nordic region.  The empirical results demonstrate substantial beneﬁts for the derived asymmetric hedges over the common
industry benchmark that uses a position in forward contracts equal
to the expected load.  It should be noted that unlike many sources
in the literature, the hedge experiments in this paper truly test outof-sample performance.  The hedge portfolio constructed at, say, time
t uses only information about state-variables and model parameters
that was truly available at time t.  Section 5 investigates the robustness of the results.  First, we test if forward-prices add information
that can be easily exploited in the hedge constructions.  We ﬁnd this
not to be the case.  Second, we consider a model extension with jumps
(or spikes) in which we derive optimal hedges and implement these. 
We ﬁnd little to no empirical improvement over the original hedge
performance.  Section 6 concludes and describes directions for future
research. 
<Middle> The electricity price and consumption model. 
Our approach will be to model jointly the electricity spot price
and the consumption load with a continuous stochastic process.  Both
the price and the load exhibit seasonal patterns – the time of the day,
day of the week and climatological season naturally effect the spot
price and consumption, see Benth Name (2008) and Haugom (2011) –
and we will ﬁt deterministic periodic functions to capture this
seasonality.  The residual price and load will then be modelled with
a stationary process and we conveniently choose the continuous
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process for this purpose. 1
2. 1.  The bivariate Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process. 
The bivariate mean-reverting Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process
(Xt, Yt)t≥0 is given by the solution to the stochastic differential
equation,
where jx, jy, s x, s y are positive parameters, hx, hy ∈ R and the
Brownian motions W(1), W(2) are correlated with qw ∈ [−1, 1].  The
standard trick of multiplying by integrating factors, i. e.  using the
Ito formula on e−jxtX(t) and e−jytY(t), gives us the more explicit
expressions, from which we see that the univariate covariance functions are here,
and that the cross-covariance function is this,
where we have deﬁned the parameters. 
From Eq.  (1) it also follow that (X, Y) is a Gaussian process, in
particular the conditional distribution is bivariate normal (BVN) and
given by this,
with mean vector and covariance matrix. 
2. 2.  Parameter estimation. 
2. 3.  The seasonal Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model. 
With observed data we refer to a set of observations made at n+1
time-points t0, .  .  .  , tn with Di = ti − ti−1 denoting the spacings of the
time grid.  An observed path x = (x0, .  .  .  , xn) of the process (Xt)t≥0
is a set of observations where xi is the observed value of Xti for i =
0, .  .  .  , n.  From Eq.  (2) we write the log-likelihood for the observed
path x of the univariate Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process as a function of
the parameters x = (j, h, s)
where 0 is the normal density function, here with (conditional) mean
li+1|i = xie−jDi+1 + h(1 − e−jDi+1 ) and variance s 2
t+1|i = s 2(1 −
e−2jDi+1 )/(2j).  The decomposition of the density comes from the fact
that X is a Markov process.  since the Markov property gives that
f(xi+1|xi, .  .  .  , x0) =f (xi+1|xi) for the conditional density, we can write
f (x0, .  .  .  , xn) = f (xn|xn−1) .  .  .  f (x1|x0)f (x0). 
The maximum likelihood estimate 
x is the argument that maximizes the log-likelihood
which may be obtained by a numerical optimiser. 2 Calculating the
observed information matrix by numerical differentiation at estimated values gives an estimatedstandard error of the j(cid. 5)th parameter as
xx and ˆ
denotes element i, j of the inverse matrix of A.  Further, if ˆare univariate estimates from two observed paths x and y,
gives an estimator of qw where ˆq(x, y) is the sample correlation
coeﬃcient between x and y. 
A bivariate observation (x, y)
from the bivariate OrnsteinUhlenbeck process with parameters xxy = (jx, hx, s x, jy, hy, s y, qw)
yields the log-likelihood from Eq 
where li+1|i ≡ lti+Di|ti
and Si+1|i ≡ Sti+Di|ti are the conditional
mean vector and covariance matrix given in the previous section. 
Here 02 denotes the bivariate normal density and the maximum
likelihood estimate ˆxxy may be obtained by numerical optimisation along with estimated standard errors from the numerically
calculated information matrix. 
Since the price and consumption of electricity exhibit seasonal behaviours, we will work with a model for the spot-price S
and consumption-load L as given by so-called seasonal OrnsteinUhlenbeck model,
where (˜S, ˜L) follows a bivariate Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process while
HS(t) andH L(t) are deterministic seasonality functions of time. 