 1.  Introduction There is no general consensus among policy makers, development practitioners and academicians on how to disseminate goods that have both private and public beneﬁts if the markets fail to generate a substantial penetration of the product (Bensch and Peters, 2012).  One example which this paper has focused is clean and energy efﬁcient technologies such as the improved cookstoves (ICS).  Improved stoves are stoves that are designed to improve energy efﬁciency, remove smoke from the ☆ We gratefully thank the editor, associate editor and anonymous referees for their helpful comments and suggestions on the preliminary draft of this paper, according to which the content was improved.  We would also like to thank Gunther Bensch, Abebe Damte, Mark Jeuland, Subhrendu Pattanayak, Peter Jörg and participants at the ﬁrst SETI workshop at Duke University, Duke, USA, participants at the tenth Environment for Development Initiative annual meeting at Pucon, Chile, and seminar participants at the EDRI seminar series for the useful comments on earlier versions of the paper.  Financial support from the Norwegian Embassy at Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (Sida) through the Environmental Economics Unit at the University of Gothenburg, Sweden is gratefully acknowledged.  All errors and omissions remain the sole responsibility of the authors.  indoor living space, or lessen the drudgery of cooking duties (Köhlin et al. , 2011).  Energy efﬁcient technologies are technologies or appliances that reduce the amount of energy required to provide products and services.  Despite the health, economic and climate beneﬁt of improved cookstoves, demand for them is surprisingly low in the rural areas of many less-developed countries.  Most nongovernmental organizations that are involved in the dissemination of improved stoves reject the option of distributing them for free (Martin et al. , 2011), while others argued that if liquidity and credit constrained people have high valuation for an item, it is more likely that these people will use goods/items that are distributed with subsidy.  Screening and sunk cost effects are two concepts that are related to peoples' valuation of a product, the price they pay, and usage of the product.  The screening effect is observed when households with a higher willingness to pay are also more likely to use the product, while the sunk cost effect occurs when people who paid a higher price for an item are more likely to use it, i. e. , if an investment has already been made, people are more likely to use it because they don't want to appear wasteful.  In this paper, using a randomized experiment in rural Ethiopia, we studied whether price incentives (sunk cost and screening effects) matter for the waiting time to start using the improved stove.  The study is based on free distribution of improved stoves to 150 households in six villages and 150 households from six other villages that paid a positive price.  Among households that paid a positive price, their willingness to pay (WTP), or valuation of the stove, was tested using the Becker-DeGroot-Marschak bidding method (Becker et al. , 1964).  When we compare those who received the stove for free with those who paid for it, we ﬁnd no evidence of a sunk cost effect.  However, the screening or valuation effect, measured as WTP, is signiﬁcant.  The previous empirical evidences on these effects are inconsistent.  Arkes and Blumer (1985) tested whether higher prices (higher sunk cost) lead to higher usage of a product or a theater ticket.  The authors found that those who paid the regular price for the ticket used the tickets more often than those with a discounted price.  Similarly, Moon (2001) ﬁnd that the higher the sunk costs, the greater the willingness of the decision maker to invest further.  Though the above empirical evidence is in other contexts, they suggest positive relationship between price paid andAshraf et al.  (2010) do not ﬁnd an evidence of a sunk cost effect in Zambia in the use of a water puriﬁcation product but they ﬁnd an evidence for the screening effect.  Bensch and Peters (2012), studying a free distribution of improved cookstoves in Senegal found a high rate of usage of the technology.  Beyene et al.  (2015) also found a high rate of usage of the freely distributed improved stove in rural Ethiopia.  Tarozzi et al.  (2014) tested existence of a sunk cost effect in using malaria bed nets, compared those that are freely distribution and those with a positive price.  They ﬁnd that those who received the nets for free use it even more intensively than those who paid a positive price.  Cohen and Dupas (2010) also studying malaria bed nets do not ﬁnd a difference in adoption behavior between households who a paid price and those who got it for free.  These ﬁndings weigh against the concept of sunk cost effect and also against the belief of non-government organizations that usage intensity increases if people pay a positive price. 