
About $2 billion of petroleum are traded daily, making petroleum
the single largest item in the balance of payment and exchange between
countries (Tordo etal. , 2011).  Economies are susceptible to oil supply
and price volatility as a result of their strong dependence on oil-based
products (Cuñado and Pérez de Gracia, 2003.  Jiménez-Rodríguez and
Sánchez, 2005).  This is probably the reason for state interventions in
the industry, in the form of National Oil Companies (NOCs).  State ownership of oil companies started in 1914 when the British government acquired a controlling stake in the Anglo-Persian Oil Company, now
British Petroleum (BP), setting a precedent for the many state-owned
oil companies to follow in other countries (Wolf, 2009).  Since 1991,
countries that possess NOCs have held nearly 90% of global crude oil reserves (Eller etal. , 2011).  Various governments have seen the oil industry far important to be left in the hands of private International Oil
Companies (IOCs) as direct state control over its resources is a strong indicator of national sovereignty (Mommer, 2002).  State ownership in
this industry is at the heart of debates on state interventionism, asset
nationalization and deregulation policies in the oil industry.  This notwithstanding, to some researchers direct state intervention is seen as
a major cause of inefﬁciency in this industry (Kashani, 2005a, 2005b). 
The issue of state ownership versus private ownership of oil companies
has become the overarching theme of most efﬁciency-related studies in
the industry.  Indeed, Al-Obaidan and Scully (1992), Eller etal.  (2011),
Ike and Lee (2014), Wolf (2009), and Sueyoshi and Goto (2012) have
all provided empirical evidence on the differences in the efﬁciency of
state controlled oil companies and privately controlled ones. 
Although, these studies mostly favour private ownership, the debate
is not dwindling since high energy prices, asset nationalization policy
and economic success of some NOCs have re-ignited calls for more
state involvement (Wolf, 2009).  There is therefore the need to reconsider how state ﬁrms can be more productive, and stay relevant in this volatile industry, compared to their private counterparts.  Empirical
evidence show that one way ﬁrms (both private and state) can improve
efﬁciency is through multinational operations (Greene etal. , 2009.  Li,
2008).  A multinational ﬁrm is one that owns and operates income generating assets in more than one country.  A ﬁrm that operates in a single
country is a local ﬁrm.  Petroleum ﬁrms are among the largest multinationals internationally (Al-Obaidan and Scully, 1995).  Royal Dutch
Shell, Sinopec, China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC) and
Exxon Mobil are among the top six global ﬁrms on Fortune Magazine's
2016 global 500 company ranking (Fortune Magazine, 2017).  Even
some of the NOCs, who are usually expected to only operate in their
home countries, have multinational operations.  For example CNPC, a
company with 100% state ownership (Energy Intelligence, 2013), has
oil and gas operations in 29 countries around the world (CNPC, 2014). 
CNPC is an example of a state-owned multinational oil company
(MNOC).  For ﬁrms like Exxon Mobil, Chevron and Total, they are
privately-owned multinationals (MIOCs).  Indeed, from the theoretical
arguments of both the eclectic paradigm (Dunning, 1977) and portfolio
diversiﬁcation theory (Markowitz, 1952), multinational operations
bring some gains to a ﬁrm's operation in the form of efﬁciency
(Al-Obaidan and Scully, 1995). 
Though this view that multinational operation improves ﬁrm performance, is quite predominant in theory, more empirical testing of this
view in the petroleum industry is needed.  From the evidence gathered,
only Al-Obaidan and Scully (1995) have explored performance differences between multinationals and locals in efﬁciency assessment in
the oil industry.  However, their study does not consider efﬁciency
differences between state-owned multinational companies and
privately-owned multinational companies.  Their study also does not
consider whether going multinational can make a state ﬁrm more efﬁcient in its operations.  As more and more NOCs consider becoming multinational in their operations, it is important to examine whether such
international operation is offsetting the empirically documented inefﬁciencies from state control.  For foreign policy and economic purposes,
there is a growing presence of state-owned enterprises in global markets (Bass and Chakrabarty, 2014).  The policy of state-owned enterprises in the international context, even in the oil and gas industry,
stems from their desire to gain foreign resources to satisfy both shortterm and long term needs of the home country.  Though this internationalization policy of state ﬁrms is on a massive scale, it is important to note
that this is a relatively new phenomenon (Cuervo-Cazurra etal. , 2014)
which raises questions on its effectiveness in improving productivity. 
The contributions of this study are relevant to both literature and
policy.  It contributes to the existing body of knowledge on the efﬁciency
differences between state and privately-owned oil companies by introducing and testing the multinational dimension of the ownership
debate.  We provide empirical answers on whether multinationalism
or internationalization policies of state-owned oil companies provide a
viable opportunity for state oil companies to remain relevant in the international oil industry.  We do this by relying on Data Envelopment
Analysis (DEA), a nonparametric frontier approach, which is able to estimate efﬁciency of ﬁrms with very few assumptions and has a more
ﬂexible production structure (Bogetoft and Otto, 2011).  It can also handle multiple inputs and outputs and can decompose efﬁciency into several factors thereby tracking the sources of inefﬁciencies.  Bootstrapping
techniques by Simar and Wilson (1998, 1999, 2000), are also employed
to address the ﬂaws of the DEA technique, including outlying observations, its inability to adequately handle statistical noise and its general
deterministic nature.  This provides a robust and empirically sound
basis for analysis.  The rest of the study is structured as follows.  ﬁrst,
we provide some theoretical and empirical review on multinationalism,
ownership and efﬁciency.  This is then followed by model and data descriptions from which empirical ﬁndings are provided and conclusions2.  Literature review. 
2. 1.  Ownership and ﬁrm performance. 
Performance differences between state and privately-owned enterprises have interested academics for some time now.  Theoretical underpinnings of the ownership debate in the international oil industry can
be grounded on property rights and agency theories (Al-Obaidan and
Scully, 1992.  Eller etal. , 2011.  Wolf, 2009).  Property rights theory is attributable to early works of Coase (1960), Alchian (1965) and Demsetz
(1964).  Property rights can be seen as the rights of individuals to use
some resources supported by the force of etiquette and formal legally
enacted laws supported by state powers of violence and punishment
(Alchian, 1965).  State property rights involve inferior governance quality
compared to private ownership (Shleifer, 1998), and hence, public enterprises should perform less efﬁciently compared to private enterprises.  For
Jensen and Meckling (1976) agency theory of the ﬁrm, an agency relationship arises between two or more parties when one party (the
agent) acts for or on behalf of another party (the principal), in a domain
of decision problems (Eisenhardt, 1989).  Companies with more private
ownership are more likely to have less serious agency problems as compared to state ﬁrms (Ding etal. , 2007).  Therefore, government involvement is the key reason for the inefﬁciency of state-owned enterprises. 
Empirically, Al-Obaidan and Scully (1992) have revealed that
although private oil ﬁrms (IOCs) are better at converting inputs into outputs (productive efﬁciency), there is little difference in how state(NOCs)
and private ﬁrms manage the size of operation (scale efﬁciency).  For
Eller etal.  (2011), NOCs are among the least efﬁcient ﬁrms, probably because such NOCs are forced to subsidize fuel for domestic consumption
and also employ a larger workforce not necessary for purely commercial
objectives.  Similarly, Ike and Lee (2014) observed that IOCs have higher
performance.  However, their study provides new insights that even
among the NOCs, OPEC NOCs are among the worst performers.  This is
not surprising since Wolf (2009) had earlier discovered that the impact
of both state ownership and OPEC membership is signiﬁcantly negative
in upstream production.  This was attributable to production quota policy
of OPEC members having negative inﬂuence on ﬁrm performance. 
Finally, although Sueyoshi and Goto (2012) have also contributed to
this debate, their paper was more conceptual than empirical. 
2. 2.  Multinational operation and ﬁrm performance. 
The multinational concept in efﬁciency assessment of oil ﬁrms can be
based on two main theoretical arguments- portfolio diversiﬁcation theory (Markowitz, 1952) and eclectic paradigm of international production
(Dunning, 1977). International diversiﬁcation or multinational operation
is expected to increase ﬁrm efﬁciency and proﬁtability because it can result in economies of scale, provide better and ﬂexible access to resources
and allow for more learning (Hennart, 2007). 