
Many countries subsidise the production and consumption of fossil
fuels.  Most subsidies are given downstream, to reduce the cost of consuming fossil fuels (Coady Name, 2016).  While these subsidies beneﬁt
fuel consumers, at least in the short run, they also have a number of
negative effects (IEA, 2014).  First, they contribute to ﬁscal imbalances
and thus crowd out other government spending.  Second, subsidies
stimulate excessive fossil fuel consumption contributing to increased
emissions of harmful pollution such as CO2.  Finally, in the long run
low oil prices encourage the development of energy-intensive industries and discourage development of renewable technologies.  Despite
the negative effects, it has proven difﬁcult to remove fossil fuel subsidies.  In many countries fossil fuel subsidies were originally introduced
to improve consumer welfare, and proposals to remove such subsidies
could result in citizen protests.  We ﬁnd, however, that the biggest
subsidisers may increase their welfare by removing their oil subsidies. 
The reason is that subsidy removal allows these countries to shift oil
from the domestic market to the international market where prices
are higher. 
The biggest fossil fuel subsidisers are also major producers and exporters of oil and gas.  In fact, the heaviest fossil fuel subsidisers are the
OPEC countries, mostly located in the Middle-East and North-Africa
(MENA) region.  Public spending on subsidies – estimated as the gap between international and domestic prices – is, on average, much higher
in the oil exporting MENA region than in other countries.  In particular,
there are extensive subsidies in the transport sector.  According to
IMF (2014), subsidies to gasoline and diesel in the MENA countries
amounted to almost 4% of the regional GDP in 2012.  Oil products used
in the transport sector are also subsidised to a certain degree in other
Non-OECD countries. 
Price control is often a key element in fossil fuel subsidies.  However,
subsidies can also include cash transfers directly to consumers, as well
as tax exemptions and rebates.  Assessing the magnitude of fossil fuels
subsidies in all its forms is a task challenged by poor data quality, limited
data availability and lack of data comparability (Ellis, 2010).  Like many
other studies, we use the price-gap method, calculating the combined
effect of reducing the wedge between domestic and international
(reference) prices (Koplow, 2009).  The reference price on goods that
are traded on the international market, like oil, is usually the international
or border price adjusted for market exchange rates, transport and
distributional costs, and country speciﬁc taxes and tariffs.  As we focus on
price-gap subsidies in the transport sector, we can apply a consistent and
uniform dataset as in GIZ (2014) (formerly GTZ), which lists the retail
prices of diesel and gasoline in 174 countries, and assess the effects of
subsidy reforms. 1
The oil price fall in late 2014 has presented countries with a unique
opportunity to phase out fossil fuel consumption subsidies, since the
wedge between the global and domestic regulated prices has been reduced.  As a result, consumers would be less hurt by subsidy removal,
at least in the short run.  In addition, the recent drop in the oil price
has reduced government incomes in OPEC countries, and removal of
fossil fuel subsidies would help improve ﬁscal balances.  Several OPEC
countries have recently reduced (implicit) subsidies on gasoline and
diesel, including Angola, UAE, Saudi-Arabia, Iran, Kuwait, Qatar and
Venezuela (IEA, 2016a.  Bloomberg, 2016).  According to IEA (2016b)
this has slowed consumption and increased the potential for export. 
Other countries outside OPEC, such as India, have also started similar
price reforms on gasoline and diesel (IEA, 2016a). 
This paper analyses how removal of oil consumption subsidies in the
transport sectors might affect oil consumption and production in major
geographic regions in the world.  The transport sector currently accounts
for 54% of the world's fuel liquid consumption, and the share is expected
to increase towards 2040 (IEA, 2014).  We focus on subsidy removal primarily in OPEC countries, but also to a certain extent in other countries. 
We also consider a situation where all subsidising countries introduce
moderate fuel taxes.  We compare the welfare effects of these policies
for different regions, distinguishing between effects on consumers, producers and the government.  To analyse these effects, we use a numerical
model of the international oil market called Petro2 (Aune Name, 2017). 
The model incorporates dynamic behavior by oil producers and distinguishes between competitive producers and producers with market
power.  The model is described in more detail below. 
Our analysis suggests that OPEC countries may achieve signiﬁcant
welfare gains by removing the oil subsidies in their transport sector. 
On the one hand, OPEC consumers experience a loss due to the higher
consumer prices.  There is also a producer surplus loss following a
lower world market oil price.  On the other hand, removing oil subsidies
involves a huge transfer from oil consumers to the government (or to oil
producers, depending on who is in fact paying the subsidies), such that
the losses from reduced subsidies are dominated by government gains. 
The reason is that subsidy removal reduces OPEC oil consumption, and
this oil can be sold in the global oil market at signiﬁcantly higher prices. 
In other words, the willingness to pay for oil is higher in the global oil
market than within OPEC (before subsidies are removed).  Further, we
ﬁnd that when all countries remove oil subsidies in the transport sector,
the global welfare gains increase.  However, our analysis suggests that
this leads to lower welfare gains for OPEC as the value of their oil resources deteriorates due to lower oil prices. 
Although subsidy removal may be proﬁtable for OPEC, it could have
some feedback effects in the oil market that are worth studying.  One
feedback mechanism is leakage, i. e. , reduced demand for oil in the transport sector in OPEC may lead to lower oil prices and correspondingly
higher consumption in other countries (Felder and Rutherford, 1993. 
Böhringer Name, 2014).  Another feedback mechanism is related to the
“green paradox” (Sinn, 2008.  van der Ploeg and Withagen, 2012), that
is, fossil fuel suppliers might ﬁnd it proﬁtable to accelerate extraction if
they foresee reduced demand in the future, for example due to gradual
phasing out of subsidies, more stringent climate policies etc.  The two
feedback mechanisms are related to each other, and both are highly dependent on the price responsiveness of demand and supply in the energy
markets.  The more price responsive demand is relative to supply, the bigger the leakage effects.  The green paradox effect depends heavily on the
timing of the subsidy removal, but also on the price responsiveness. 
Two characteristics of the oil market may be of particular importance when we study the feedback mechanisms of subsidy removal,
namely market power and intertemporal behavior.  There is little consensus in the literature regarding OPEC's behavior in the oil market,
except that most studies reject the hypothesis of competitive behavior
(see e. g.  Smith, 2005.  Hansen and Lindholt, 2008.  Kaufmann Name,
2008.  Huntington Name, 2013.  Nakov and Nuño, 2013.  Boug Name,
2016).  We present a model where we assume Cournot behavior
meaning that a core of countries within OPEC takes Non-OPEC's and
OPEC-Non Core's extraction path as given, but maximizes joint proﬁts
taking into account the price responsiveness on the demand side. 
Similar assumptions have been made in earlier simulation models of
the oil market (e. g. , Salant, 1982.  Berg Name, 1997, 2002.  Aune Name,
2010.  Okullo Name, 2015).  However, none of these studies analyse the
effects of phasing out subsidies. 
Another potentially important feature is the fact that oil is an exhaustible resource, i. e. , extraction of oil has intertemporal effects as it reduces available resources in the future (Hotelling, 1931).  This is taken
into account in our model, as oil producers are forward-looking and
maximize their net present value of oil extraction.  This dynamic feature
is important for the “green paradox” effect. 
Many studies have analysed different effects of reducing fossil fuel subsidies.  Ellis (2010) surveys ﬁve studies that examine the effect of reducing
subsidies on fossil fuels.  All studies ﬁnd welfare increase in the subsidising
countries.  Burniaux and Chateau (2014) analyse a phase-out of fossil fuel
subsidies using a general equilibrium model, ﬁnding that such a subsidy
reform will reduce GHG-emissions and improve welfare for the world as
a whole, although some regions will experience reduced welfare.  The
above-mentioned studies do not consider impacts on the global oil market.  Other studies (Larsen and Shah, 1992.  Salehi-Isfahani, 1996.  Gurer
and Ban, 2000) use oil supply and demand elasticities to study the effects
of fuel subsidy removal on the subsidising country's welfare.  We have only
found one study that focuses on the effects of fuel subsidy removal on the
global oil market, i. e. , Balke Name (2015).  They ﬁnd that subsidy removal
in 24 oil-producing countries generally is welfare enhancing for both oilimporting and oil-exporting countries.  Their model is based on competitive behavior and static modeling of oil supply, which means that they
cannot include transition dynamics like in our study. 
The paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 describes the Petro2
model, Section 3 presents the policy scenarios analysed, the approach
used in the analysis of welfare effects, and results from the numerical
model.  Section 4 concludes. 
<Middle> Model description. 
Petro2 is a dynamic simulation model that permits the analysis of
policy changes or other external shocks to the market (e. g. , shifts in
cost or oil reserve levels) on oil markets.  The model has previously
been used in Aune Name (2017), who study the effects of fuel efﬁciency improvements in the oil market.  The main outputs from the
model are oil prices and production/consumption in different regions
and sectors, both in the short and long run.  Petro2 has seven regions. 
Western Europe, United States, Rest of OECD, China, Russia, OPEC
and Rest of World.  We further distinguish between six end-users
within each region with greater detail among transport sectors, and
one transformation sector.  Each sector in each region demands oil,
natural gas, electricity, coal, biomass and biofuel.  The time path of the oil
price (and thus oil product prices) is endogenous, whereas the prices of
the other (non-oil) energy goods are exogenous (based on price
projections from the IEA, 2013).  In this study we focus on oil in the
transport sectors.  On the supply side OPEC is divided into OPEC-Core
(Saudi-Arabia, Kuwait, UAE and Qatar) and OPEC-Non Core, assuming
that only OPEC-Core exerts market power.  The supply of oil in all regions is modeled intertemporally, meaning that oil producers maximize
the net present value of current and future extraction.  The global oil
market clears in each period, i. e. , total oil supply from all regions equals
total demand over all regions.  The time period in the model is one year,
and the base year is 2007.  Appendix A provides a formal description and
also presents sources of data. 
The model is solved in GAMS (Brooke Name, 1996), using MCP (Mixed Complementarity Problem). 
2. 1.  Demand. 
Demand is divided into one transformation sector (power generation)
and six end-user sectors.  industry, household, road and rail transport,
domestic/international aviation and domestic shipping, international
shipping, and other sectors.  The model has six energy goods.  oil
(aggregate of different oil products), gas, electricity, coal, biomass and
biofuels for transport.  The road and rail transport sector, for instance,
demands oil, gas, electricity and biofuels.  Demand for energy goods is
basically derived from the demand for energy services.  Hence, we assume that every region and sector demands an energy aggregate,
which may be thought of as an energy service, modeled as a Constant
Elasticity of Substitution (CES)-aggregate of the various energy goods. 
The price of this energy aggregate (in a sector in a region) is assumed
to be the weighted CES-aggregate of the prices of these energy goods,
where the initial budget shares are weights.  The model speciﬁes the
long-term demands for the energy aggregate as log-linear functions of
population, income (GDP) per capita, and price of the energy aggregate. 
The direct price elasticities are constant as we use log-linear demand
functions for the energy aggregate.  Demand for a speciﬁc energy good
in a sector and region is a function of the initial budget share, the demand for the energy aggregate as well as the end-user price of the energy aggregate relative to the end-user price of the speciﬁc energy
good.  The substitution elasticities determine how fast the demand for
an energy good responds to changes in relative prices. 
All energy goods are bought at regional product prices.  The end-user
prices include costs of transportation, distribution and reﬁning in addition to existing taxes/subsidies.  End-user prices and regional product
prices are linked as follows.  The end-user price of a given fuel in a
given sector and region is equal to the regional producer price of the
fuel (node price) plus costs of transportation, distribution and reﬁning
in addition to existing taxes/subsidies. 
GIZ (former GTZ) gathers information on the actual diesel and gasoline prices in N170 countries worldwide.  To estimate the size of oil consumption subsidies in various countries they construct an average
benchmark retail price of diesel and gasoline, which includes industry
margin, VAT/sales tax, and a 10 US-cents road tax. 3 These prices are
considered benchmarks for a non-subsidised road transport policy.  If
the actual fuel prices are below these benchmarks, the country is
subsidising consumption.  To estimate the size of subsidies in a demand
region in the model, we construct an average diesel and gasoline price,
which is weighted by the consumption in each country in that region.  In
2007, the fuel prices in OPEC were 18% and 26% of the benchmark prices
for diesel and gasoline, respectively. 
2. 2.  Oil supply. 
Production allocation over time is important for the suppliers, since
oil is an exhaustible resource.  Extracting one more unit today will affect
a supplier's costs or access to oil resources in the future.  Hence, a rational producer will not only consider the current price or market condition before choosing the current optimal oil supply.  We therefore
model the supply of oil intertemporally with the producers maximizing
the present value of their oil wealth.  A market interest rate of 10% is
used as a (real) discount rate in all regions except for OPEC, which has
a rate of 5%.  Oil production in OPEC is more government-controlled
than in most other regions.  The oil extraction is also to a larger extent
than in Non-OPEC countries undertaken by state-owned companies. 
For these reasons, we assume a lower interest rate for OPEC than
for Non-OPEC countries.  Further, OPEC governments have a high dependence on oil, which is likely to remain for years to come.  Thus, OPEC may
attach more weight to long-term income than most other producers. 
This assumption is conﬁrmed by estimation of the property-rights
model in e. g.  Marks and Swan (1988). 
To analyse the importance of market power, the international oil
market is modeled as a market with a cartel (corresponding to OPECCore) and seven competitive fringe producers (i. e. , the Non-OPEC regions plus OPEC-Non Core).  The fringe producers always consider the
oil price path as given, while the cartel regards the price as a function
of its supply.  Hence, the marginal revenue for the fringe is equal to the
price, whereas for the cartel, marginal revenue is in general less than
the price.  Both the fringe producers and the cartel take the supply of
all other producers as given when deciding their own production proﬁle
(Salant, 1976).  Hence, we have a Nash-Cournot model with one Cournot
producer and a competitive fringe. 
The initial cost level of the different producer groups differs,
reﬂecting among other things that extraction costs in OPEC countries
generally are lower than in the rest of the world.  The cost functions of
both the cartel and the fringe are assumed to be increasing functions
of cumulative production, i. e. , costs increase due to depletion of the oil
resources.  The scarcity rent of a producer then reﬂects that extracting
one more unit today increases costs tomorrow.  Hence, we focus on
economic exhaustion rather than physical exhaustion.  Unit costs are
reduced by a constant rate each year due to technological change,
independent of production.  This means that over time unit costs may
be reduced or increased, depending on the production rate (depletion
vs.  technology effect, cf.  Lindholt, 2015). 
We assume that it is costly to alter production in the initial years
for the fringe producers.  This is modeled as increasing marginal costs
also within a period (in addition to costs increasing in accumulated
production).  Hence, output from the fringe producers is quite rigid initially, but the effect is gradually reduced over time.  We check the robustness of this assumption in the sensitivity analysis.  This initial
inﬂexibility is not modeled for the OPEC-Core producers as they have
generally more spare capacity and lower capital costs (see Appendix A). 
In equilibrium, the price in each period for the fringe producers must
be equal to the marginal costs plus the scarcity rent.  The latter is equal to
the shadow costs associated with cumulative production, i. e. , the alternative cost of producing one more unit today (as it increases future
costs).  Similarly, for the cartel OPEC-Core the oil price must be equal
to the marginal costs plus the scarcity rent as well as the cartel rent. 
3.  The effects of oil subsidy removal in transport sectors. 
As subsidies are removed, consumer prices rise in previously
subsidising countries.  Consumers in these countries will buy less oil,
and this will put a downward pressure on the global oil price.  So,
while removal of oil subsidies reduces oil consumption in some regions,
oil consumption will likely increase elsewhere.  Below we explore the oil
market effects of three scenarios for oil subsidy removal.  We also estimate the welfare changes following subsidy removal for consumers,
producers and the government for the OPEC-Core countries.  A brief
sensitivity analysis with respect to the calibration of important Petro2
parameters is provided in Appendix B. 
3. 1.  Policy scenarios. 
We consider three policy scenarios for fossil fuel subsidies removal in
the transport sector (including household private transportation), see
Table 1, and compare the effects for the oil market and for the welfare
in different countries.  In the ﬁrst scenario, subsidies are removed only
in OPEC countries, while in the second scenario subsidies are removed
in other countries, too. 