
Accounting research has long shown that managers face pressure to meet earnings benchmarks and that they react to
this pressure by manipulating accruals and real activities when their firm is at risk of missing benchmarks (e. g. , Dechow
Name 2010, §5. 5).  Survey evidence suggests that, in order to meet benchmarks, managers prefer taking real actions over
manipulating accruals (Graham Name, 2005).  Empirical studies provide strong evidence for real activities management (e. g. 
Roychowdhury, 2006; Cohen Name, 2008).  Importantly, real activities management is difficult for investors to detect in the
short run (Kothari Name, 2016) but potentially has negative consequences for firms’ long-run performance (e. g. , Bhojraj Name,
2009; Cohen and Zarowin, 2010).  In this study, we provide evidence of a previously undocumented consequence of real
activities management to meet earnings benchmarks – compromises in workplace safety.  In particular, we show that
benchmark beating is associated with higher workplace injuries and that the strength of this association varies with employee workloads and discretionary expenses that include safety-related expenditures. 
Earnings benchmarks can relate to workplace safety in at least two ways.  First, if managers believe that the firm may
miss expectations under the ordinary course of business, they may increase employees’ workloads or pressure them to work
faster.  In response, employees can compromise safety by overexerting themselves or by circumventing safety procedures
that slow the flow of work.  Second, managers may cut explicit and implicit safety costs, such as the costs of maintaining
equipment and training employees, in their attempts to report higher earnings.  Along these lines, Graham Name (2005)
report that some CFOs admit to cutting maintenance spending in order to meet earnings benchmarks.  To the extent
managers take such actions, workplace safety will deteriorate when firms struggle to meet expectations. 
We examine whether firms suspected of managing earnings to meet expectations exhibit higher workplace injury rates
than other firms.  We follow prior research on earnings management and define firms that meet or just beat expectations as
suspect firms (e. g. , Burgstahler and Dichev, 1997; Degeorge Name, 1999).  Using establishment-level (e. g. , store or factory)
injury data from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) for the 2002–2011 period, we find that about
one in every 24 employees is injured in firms that meet or just beat analyst earnings forecasts, compared to about one in 27
in firms that miss or comfortably beat forecasts.  In multivariate analyses, where we control for a variety of establishmentand firm-level characteristics as well as establishment (or firm) and year fixed effects to account for unobservable factors,
we find that the association between benchmark beating and injury rates remains statistically and economically significant. 
For example, controlling for other factors, injury rates are five to fifteen percent higher in periods where a firm meets or just
beats analyst forecasts than in other periods. 
We provide evidence that the relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety likely stems from two types of
real actions that managers take: high workloads and cuts to safety-related expenditures.  We utilize production per employee and revenue per employee as measures of employee workloads, and abnormal discretionary expenses per employee
to gauge cuts to safety-related expenditures.  We find that injury rates are more strongly associated with production per
employee in firms that meet or just beat forecasts.  We also find evidence that injury rates are higher when firms that meet
or just beat forecasts have abnormally low per-employee discretionary expenditures. 1 Taken together, the evidence suggests
that both pressure to increase worker productivity and cuts to safety-related expenditures contribute to the relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety. 
We use three settings to examine cross-sectional variation in the relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety. 
First, we find that the relation is weaker in industries with high union membership.  This is consistent with unions’ aim to ensure
reasonable workloads, work speed, and safety (Kaufman, 2005).  It is also consistent with the findings in the literature that,
compared to non-union workers, union workers are less likely to perceive that taking risks is a part of their job (Gillen Name, 2002),
and unionization leads to fewer workplace injuries (Morantz, 2013).  Consistent with unions’ goal of workplace safety, our evidence
suggests that unions mitigate the extent to which pressure to meet earnings expectations translates into reduced safety. 
Second, we find a weaker relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety when workers’ compensation insurance
premiums are more sensitive to injury claims.  Workers’ compensation insurance is a state-mandated program and its premiums
are primarily determined by state requirements.  Insurance premiums depend, in part, on a multiplier based on the employer's
workplace safety record.  A given change in the multiplier thus has a greater dollar impact on premiums when the baseline
insurance premium is higher.  We test and find that the association between benchmark beating and workplace safety is weaker in
establishments that are located in states where each additional injury has a higher impact on workers’ compensation premium. 
Third, we utilize government contracting as an incentive for keeping safer work environments.  Government contracts
typically include terms that prohibit bids from firms deemed to have unsafe work environments.  Consistent with the
government contractors’ heightened focus on safety, we find that the relation between benchmark beating and workplace
safety is weaker for firms that do more business with the government. 
In our main analyses, we focus on analyst forecasts as our measure of earnings expectations since prior research indicates
that meeting analyst forecasts is a more important benchmark than meeting prior year's earnings or avoiding losses (Dechow Name, 2003), and that the market perceives missing analyst forecasts as a more negative signal than a decrease in yearover-year earnings (Brown and Caylor, 2005).  In additional tests, we replicate our primary analyses for the zero-earnings
and zero-earnings-change benchmarks.  We find higher injury rates in suspect firm-years identified by zero-earningschanges, but not for zero-earnings.  This may be because after the passage of Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) in 2002, the zeroearnings discontinuity, and to a lesser extent discontinuity around prior year's earnings, have dissipated whereas the discontinuity around analyst forecasts remain (Gilliam Name, 2015). 
Our study is related to the literature studying the forms and consequences of earnings management via real activities.  Extant
research finds that managers cut research and development (e. g. , Baber Name, 1991), advertising (e. g. , Cohen Name, 2010), selling,
administrative and general expenditures, and engage in over-production (e. g. , Roychowdhury, 2006) in order to meet earnings
benchmarks, and that such activities potentially negatively affect a firm's long-run operating performance (e. g. , Bhojraj Name, 2009;
Cohen and Zarowin, 2010).  Our study adds to this literature by documenting a novel and potentially opaque consequence of
managing earnings via real activities – compromises in workplace safety.  Our findings highlight that costs of real activities
management can accrue not only in monetary terms but also in terms of employee health.  The effects we document may represent the “tip of the iceberg” in terms of the overall employee health since OSHA collects data on only relatively serious and
physical injuries/illnesses such as those that require hospitalization, days away from work, or job transfers.  Additionally, in the
light of recent findings that investors face greater difficulty in detecting earnings management via real activities (Kothari Name,
2016), our results suggest that timely disclosures about workplace safety can serve as signals to investors of certain forms of real
activities management.  While some firms are considering providing such disclosures (e. g. , Silverman, 2016), these disclosures are
typically not available to investors on a timely basis and in a systematic manner. 
We also contribute to the literature on workplace safety and firms’ financial condition.  Cohn and Wardlaw (2016) predict
and find that workplace injury rates are associated with high leverage and with negative cash flow shocks.  In a study of the
operational performance of restaurant chains in Florida, Bernstein, and Sheen (2016) find that restaurants become safer and
cleaner following private equity buyouts.  We focus on managerial attention to earnings targets and find that it diminishes
managers’ focus on workplace safety.  Also related to our study, Rose (1990) finds a link between the safety of airline customers and the overall financial health of airlines, and Matsa (2011) finds that in the supermarket industry, competition
increases service quality.  Unlike Rose (1990) and Matsa (2011), we focus on employee safety rather than service/product
quality, and earnings benchmarks rather than the overall financial health of the firm.  Prior studies also find that accidents
and absences are associated with high capacity and labor utilization (See survey by Pouliakas and Theodossiou (2013)).  The
stronger association we document between production per employee and injury rates in suspect firm-years relative to nonsuspect firm-years is consistent with an association between workplace safety and high labor utilization. 
Our findings do not speak to the magnitude of net welfare effects of compromises in workplace safety on firms or
employees.  The socially optimal injury rate likely exceeds zero, and such compromises could overall be desirable if the
benefits exceed the costs.  Nevertheless, the negative impact of such compromises on employee health represents a cost for
the firms to the extent that it results in higher wage demands, fines, litigation, increased insurance premiums, and negative
publicity, and a cost to employees in the form of pain, lost wages, and, in extreme cases, death. 
2.  Background. 
2. 1.  Safety regulation and incentives for workplace safety. 
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulates workplace safety for most private sector employers
in the United States.  Exceptions include employers subject to safety regulation from other federal agencies, such as the Mine
Safety and Health Administration and the Federal Aviation Administration.  OSHA promulgates standards including equipment safety, communication of hazards, and training programs. 2 It also regulates compliance by investigating worksites and
employee complaints (Kniesner and Leeth, 2014). 
From a regulatory perspective, OSHA faces a risk reduction mandate rather than a cost-versus-benefit mandate (Viscusi
1996a, 1996b).  In 2010, companies spent between $52 and $66 billion complying with OSHA regulations (Kniesner and
Leeth, 2014), which amounts to between four and five percent of the $1351 billion domestic corporate profits in 2010 per the
U. S.  Bureau of Economic Analysis.  This excludes indirect costs, such as the impact of safety measures on the speed of
workflow.  Estimates of costs of OSHA regulations per life saved range from $100,000 for respiratory protection, to $78 billion
for the regulation of formaldehyde (Viscusi, 2007, Table 2, in 2002 dollars). 3
Company incentives for safety stem from the costs of regulatory noncompliance, such as litigation, workers’ compensation
premiums, and wage demands, and from the impact of safety on future revenues, investor/public perceptions, and the ability to
attract and retain skilled employees.  OSHA enforces safety regulations by making regular inspections and investigating worker
complaints.  Penalties for noncompliance range from citations and fines, which tend to be small, to jail time and court-ordered
shutdown for extreme violations (Kniesner and Leeth, 2014).  Injury/illness frequency and severity is also used as a key input in the
calculation of workers’ compensation insurance premiums.  According to the Liberty Mutual Workplace Safety Index, businesses’
total direct workers’ compensation costs– insurance, claims, and claims processing – for the top ten injury types amounted to
$59. 58 billion in 2014.  Additionally, companies can face wage differentials to compensate employees for injury and illness risk
(Wei, 2007; Viscusi, 2010), and injuries can impede firms’ ability to win contracts that explicitly specify a minimum acceptable
safety record as a prequalification condition. 4 For example, the U. S.  Army evaluates bidders’ safety practices in the pre-award
phase and can disqualify bidders due to poor workplace safety (e. g. , U. S.  Army, 2012, §4). 
Workplace safety can also influence a firm's market value through its effect on public and investor perceptions.  The
frequency of injuries/illnesses is informative about operational risks and the likelihood of major accidents, but is not disclosed in a timely manner. ,5,6 Anecdotal evidence also suggests that investors request additional timely disclosures about
workplace safety following major accidents that draw media attention (e. g.  Tait 2010; Coetzee and Van Staden, 2011). 7
Relatedly, in two separate field studies, Longsteeth and Rosenbloom (1973) and Spicer (1978) find that institutional investors
and bankers consider social responsibility disclosures in investment decisions.  In a more recent empirical work, Albuquerque Name (2015) show that firms with better corporate social responsibility ratings, which incorporates employee safety
and rights, experience higher valuations.  Consistent with an impact of employee safety on firm valuation, some firms (e. g. ,
American Electric Power) use employee safety as an input in the calculation of executive compensation. 
Workplace safety also affects employers via its impacts on employers’ ability to attract skilled workers and on employees’
demands for compensation.  Employees with high risk tolerance and low skills self-select into inherently riskier occupations
(Hwang Name, 1992; DeLeire and Levy, 2004; Orrenius and Zavodny, 2009).  While employees demand higher pay for riskier
occupations (Thaler and Rosen, 1976; Viscusi, 1978), risk-tolerant employees demand relatively low incremental pay as
compensation for risk (Viscusi and Hersch 2001).  The latter result is intuitive because, conditional on having to pay a wage
premium for workplace hazards, employers will find the premium less costly for risk-tolerant employees. 
While employees can potentially pass some of the anticipated costs to employers via demands for higher wages, and pass
ex post costs to employers via litigation or insurance, prior research provides evidence that employees and their families still
bear significant costs of injuries.  In addition to deaths or permanent severe disabilities, which perhaps no compensation can
cover, studies find that workers who had temporary injuries experience significant earnings losses in the years following
injuries (Boden and Galizzi, 1999; Boden, 2005) and are more likely to be contacted by collection agencies (Keogh Name,
2000).  Galizzi and Zagorsky (2009) track 9186 employees from 1985 to 2000 and find that employees who spent time away
from work due to workplace injuries have dramatically lower wealth and consumption.  Higher injury rates are also associated with lower job satisfaction and higher turnover intent (e. g.  Danna and Griffin, 1999; McCaughey Name, 2013). 
2. 2.  The OSHA Data Initiative (ODI). 
Under the OSHA Data Initiative Program (ODI), which was active from 1996 through 2011, OSHA surveyed private-sector
establishments to obtain data on reportable work-related injuries and acute illnesses attributable to work-related activities
that occurred during the prior year. 8 An establishment corresponds to a distinct physical location, such as an individual
factory or store. 9 In addition to injury and illness data, the survey contains a unique identifier for each establishment and
information about the establishment's name, location, number of employees, number of hours worked, and variables indicating unusual events, such as shutdowns, strikes, and natural disasters. 
Each year OSHA surveys approximately 80,000 private-sector establishments.  All establishments under OSHA jurisdiction with 11 or more employees are required to keep records of injuries and illnesses unless OSHA exempts the industry due
to a past history of low accident rates.  The survey covers primarily larger establishments (typically 40 or more employees)
from industries that OSHA classifies as high-hazard, which we list in Appendix B.  Appendix B also lists the industries that
OSHA deems low-hazard and exempt from ODI.  The sample selection is designed to ensure that each establishment in the
potential data collection universe is surveyed at least once during a three-year cycle.  OSHA uses random sampling method
to choose establishments, but establishments that had high injury rates or failed to respond in the prior year are more likely
to be surveyed again.  ODI data become publicly available about two years after the year for which safety data are recorded. 
OSHA does not give advance notice to establishments that must submit data for the survey, and all covered establishments must have the data ready for the event that they are included in the survey population.  OSHA enforces accurate data
collection via audits and fines for detected failure to comply with recordkeeping requirements (See, for example, OSHA
Directive 00–1 (CPL2)).  Nevertheless, there could be some degree of underreporting of incidents.  A summary of the 1996 to
1998 audits indicate that about 20% of establishments had recordkeeping errors, to which OSHA responded in 2001 with
revised guidelines and practices to improve the recordkeeping (Federal Register number 66:5916-6135). 
<Middle> Research design. 
We conduct our analysis using establishment-level data from the ODI survey.  Our dependent variable is the count of
injuries, and we accordingly use a count model to estimate the relation between employee safety and the pressure to meet
earnings benchmarks.  Based on Burgstahler and Dichev (1997)’s findings on earnings management, we measure periods of
pressure to meet benchmarks (Suspect) as firm-years that meet or just beat their earnings benchmarks.  Prior literature
provides evidence consistent with investors viewing analyst forecasts as a more important benchmark than prior years’
earnings and zero earnings (e. g. , Dechow Name, 2003; Brown and Caylor, 2005; Gilliam Name, 2015).  Accordingly, we focus on
analyst forecasts as the primary earnings benchmark, and Suspect equals one if an earnings surprise is between zero and two
cents, and zero otherwise.  In Section 7 we also report results from additional tests that use prior year's earnings, and zeroearnings as earnings benchmarks. 
In our main analyses, we estimate the following model for establishment i in year t,
where for a Poisson model, which permits establishment-level fixed effects but also imposes the assumption that the injury rates’
for a negative binomial model, which does not permit establishment-level fixed effects, and
variance equals its mean (Cameron and Trivedi, 2015). 10 Establishment-level fixed effects, which subsume higher order (e. g. ,
firm or industry) fixed effects, allow us to control for unobservable factors affecting the rate of injuries/illnesses in a given
establishment, and allow us to interpret the coefficient on Suspect as the injury rates relative to the establishments’ typical
injury rates.  Establishment-level
fixed effects have the drawback of requiring at least two observations for each
establishment. 
To control for various firm characteristics that may affect workplace safety, the regressions include the natural logarithm
of beginning total assets (Ln(Assets)), the beginning-of-year ratio of total short- and long-term debt to total assets (Leverage),
the beginning-of-year ratio of net property, plant and equipment to total assets (PPE/Assets), current period sales divided by
beginning total assets (Turnover), current period capital expenditures divided by beginning total assets (CapEx/Assets), and
the beginning-of-year ratio of market value of assets to book value of assets (M/B).  We measure market value of assets as the
sum of market value of equity, book value of total liabilities, and liquidation value of preferred stock minus deferred tax
liabilities.  Appendix C provides detailed variable definitions. 
We also include several establishment-level variables available from the OSHA dataset to control for establishmentspecific factors that may affect the number of cases.  We include the number of annual hours worked by an average employee in the establishment (HoursPerEmployee) because work hours can be associated with injury rates. 11 In addition,
Suspect firms could attempt to keep costs down by extracting more work per employee, which necessitates controlling for
the average effect of hours per employee in our models.  We include an indicator variable for whether the establishment has
seasonal work (Seasonal) as a control for the higher rates of injury among temporary workers (Quinlan Name, 2001).  The
hours worked and seasonal indicator also serve as controls for employees’ overall experience level.  We also include the
following variables as controls: the average number of employees working in the establishment during the year (EstablishmentSize), and indicator variables for whether there was any strike/lockout (Strike), shutdown/layoffs (Shutdown), or a
natural disaster/adverse weather conditions affecting the establishment (NaturalDisaster).  We include these indicator
variables in order to control for the impact of unusual factors. 
4.  Data and summary statistics. 
4. 1.  Data. 
Our sample is comprised of establishments from the ODI that can be linked to firms in Compustat annual file for the
2002–2011 period.  We begin our sample period in 2002 because OSHA simplified and changed its recording criteria for
injuries and illnesses and the coverage of industries that year, and values for prior years are not comparable.  OSHA discontinued the ODI in 2011 due to funding cuts.  We manually match establishments from the ODI to firms in Compustat
based on names.  In particular, for each establishment name listed in ODI, we first search for a matching Compustat name.  If
the search does not produce any matches, we conduct additional searches through Hoovers, company/establishment
websites, and other online resources to identify whether the establishment matches with a subsidiary of a Compustat firm. 
Each firm in Compustat may have multiple establishments. 
We require observations in our sample to have valid values for the variables used in the main analyses reported in
Table 3.  We exclude financial firms and firms in regulated industries (SIC codes 6000–6999 and 4900–4999). 12 To align
financial data with the data on injuries and illnesses, which are measured over calendar years, we limit the sample to firms
that have December fiscal year ends.  We also require availability of analyst forecast data from I/B/E/S.  Based on these criteria,
our initial sample contains 42,327 establishment-years. 
From the initial sample, we eliminate 254 observations that list zero employees or do not include the number of employees.  A small number of observations exhibit extremely low or high hours worked per employee or extremely high
injury/illness rates, which are likely data errors.  For example, the highest and lowest number of hours worked per employee
are 2 million and 0, respectively.  Accordingly, we eliminate 613 observations for which hours worked per employee is at the
top or bottom half-percentile or the number of injury/illness cases at the top half-percentile.  Finally, we require that number
of employees in the sample establishments of a given firm represents at least five percent of the total number of employees
of that firm, as reported in Compustat.  This requirement further eliminates 6,110 observations.  Our conclusions are not
sensitive to the five percent cut-off, and remain similar if we use three percent or ten percent as the cut-off value. 13
The final sample includes 35,350 establishment-year observations from 868 unique firms that operate in industries
covered by the ODI and are represented in Compustat and I/B/E/S.  Untabulated analysis shows that the median establishment has two observations in our sample, with a maximum of ten for establishments that OSHA surveys each year and a
minimum of one for establishments that did not remain operational sufficiently long to be included in more than one of the
three-year survey cycles. 
4. 2.  Descriptive statistics
Table 1, Panel A provides summary statistics for establishment-level variables.  The average establishment in our sample
has 335 employees, and employees work an average of close to 2,000 hours per year.  Following OSHA's definition, we
calculate the number of illness/injury cases as the sum of injuries or illnesses that result in days away from work or in
transfers and other recordable cases.  The median number of cases per establishment is 7 and the average is 22.  Also based
on OSHA's definition, we calculate the total case rate (TCR) as the annualized number of cases per 100 employees. 14 The
median case rate implies that in an average establishment-year, an employee has 5. 7% probability of sustaining work-related
illnesses/injuries. 
Table 1, Panel B provides summary statistics for firm-level variables.  We winsorize all financial variables at the top and
bottom percentile.  The median firm has Ln(Assets) of about 8. 9, which indicates that the median firm is fairly large and has
total assets of about $7. 3 billion.  Leverage averages about 29 percent.  On average, property, plant and equipment (PP&E)
represents 35 percent of our sample firms’ assets.  Turnover averages $1. 25 of sales per dollar of beginning assets, and capital
expenditures average 5% of beginning assets.  The median firm in our sample has an asset market-to-book ratio of 1. 38 which
compares to 1. 31 in Cohn and Wardlaw (2016). 
Table 1, Panel C provides the Pearson (below diagonal) and Spearman (above diagonal) correlations between TCR and
accounting variables.  The correlations indicate that the case rates are higher in suspect firm-years, in capital-intensive firms
with more PP&E and higher capital expenditures, and in firms with high turnover.  Firm size, leverage, and market-to-book
ratios are also all positively associated with the case rate, although correlations are weaker for these variables.  As we explain
in Section 6. 1, we use industry union membership data from the Union Membership and Coverage Database as a proxy for
employees’ ability to protect their rights. 15 Industries with high unionization exhibit higher case rates, consistent with a
higher value of joining a union in more hazardous industries. 
Table 1, Panel D provides the distribution of observations by year.  Panel D shows that 2011 is underrepresented in our
sample.  This is because ODI was discontinued in 2011 and not all of the data for 2011 was available at the time we received
the data files from OSHA's Office of Statistical Analysis in late 2014.  Our findings are not sensitive to exclusion of 2011 from
our sample. 
We provide average establishment-level case rates by the parent firm's Fama-French industry classifications in Table 2,
along with the industry-level unionization rate.  We do not report case rates for the financial and regulated industries
because we exclude them from the sample.  The transportation and food products industries have the highest total case
rates, with over 11 percent of employees having an injury or illness in a given year.  The coal and tobacco products industries
have the lowest case rates. 16
5.  Relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety. 
5. 1.  Relation between meeting/beating expectations and injury/illness rates. 
We begin our analysis by visually inspecting the relation between total case rate and earnings surprises.  We define
earnings surprise using earnings per share and analyst forecast data from I/B/E/S, and calculate it as the difference between
the actual earnings per share and the average of all analysts’ latest forecast made within [-180, -4] day window prior to the
earnings announcement date, rounded to the nearest cent.  We define firms that are suspected of engaging in earnings
management as those that meet or beat expectations by two cents or less. 17
Fig.  1 presents the distribution of injury/illness case rates at the firm level by proximity to analysts’ earnings expectation
categories.  The figure shows that the distribution of injury/illness rates in suspect firm-years category (i. e. , meet/just-beat)
visibly differs from that in other categories.  For example, while about 46. 9% of firm-years in the meet/just-beat category
have low injury/illness rates, this figure is about 55. 6% for firms that comfortably beat and 51. 4% and 50. 6% for firms with
both small and large misses, respectively.  In turn, 26. 1% of firm-years in the meet/just-beat category have high injury/illness
rates, versus 20. 0–22. 5% for firms in other categories.  The median case rate in the meet/just-beat category is 4. 24 compared
to 3. 69 in the remaining categories.  Stated differently, about one in 24 employees in firm-years in meet/just-beat category
get injured compared to one in 27 in the other categories. 
Table 3 presents estimates from the model defined in Eq.  (1).  The first three columns report results of negative binomial
models and the last three columns report results of Poisson models.  The Poisson models have a smaller sample size because
the fixed effects estimation requires more than one observation per establishment.  The dependent variable is the number of
injuries/illnesses and the exposure variable is the number of hours worked.  Columns (3) and (6) report firm-level estimates
with firm and year fixed effects.  The other columns present establishment-level results with establishment-level fixed
effects.  In all models, we cluster standard errors at the firm level and include year fixed effects. 
Consistent with the positive univariate correlation between TCR and Suspect in Table 1, columns (1) and (4) of Table 3
show that, on average, firms that meet or just beat expectations have higher case rates.  The coefficient on Suspect is 0. 261 in
column (1) and 0. 117 in column (4).  Untabulated results indicate that establishment-level fixed effects account for most of
the difference in the coefficients.  In particular, estimating the negative binomial model using the sample for which the
Poisson models are estimated yields a coefficient of 0. 232 on Suspect, which is similar to that in column (1).  When we
exclude establishment-level fixed effects from the Poisson model and use the same sample as in column (1), the coefficient
on Suspect is 0. 252. 
Columns (2) and (5) include control variables, and in these models the coefficient on Suspect remains statistically significant at the 1% level.  To understand the economic size of the effect, we transform coefficients to incidence rates (eβgive the percentage increase in the expected injury/illness case count for suspect firm-years.  In the full models at the
establishment level, the coefficients on Suspect are 0. 142 and 0. 052 in columns (2) and (5), respectively, which translate to
the incidence rates of 0. 15 and 0. 05.  That is, in suspect firm-years, the case rates in establishments are higher by 5% – 15%
compared to non-suspect firm-years.  Firm-level analyses reported in columns (3) and (6) confirm the establishment-level
findings and we find similar coefficients on Suspect. 
In column (2) most of the control variables are statistically significant and, with the exception of Ln(Assets), the coefficients on variables from financial statements are in the same direction as those in Cohn and Wardlaw (2016).  In particular,
workplace injuries are positively associated with leverage, PP&E, and asset turnover, and are weakly or insignificantly associated with capital expenditures and market-to-book ratio.  Cohn and Wardlaw (2016) find an insignificant or negative
coefficient on asset size whereas we find a positive coefficient.  In column (5) these variables are largely insignificant. 18 This
could be an artifact of establishment-level fixed effects subsuming the variation in variables which are fairly sticky.  Column
(2) also shows a higher number of cases in establishments where employees work fewer hours, and in establishments that
employ more seasonal workers.  The significant coefficients on these variables are consistent with experienced workers
having fewer injuries.  Also consistent with our discussion in Section 3, the negative coefficient for hours per employee
suggest that accidents do not stem from more hours, per se, but from how employees allocate their effort during their hours
worked.  There are also more cases in establishments in which employees go on a strike. 
The results in Table 3 suggest that excluding the establishment or firm fixed effects may induce an upward bias in the
coefficient estimates on Suspect.  We therefore focus on the Poisson model with fixed effects for the remainder of the study. 
5. 2.  Evidence on the drivers of higher injury/illness rates in suspect firm-years
Manager efforts to boost earnings can either indirectly or directly impact worker safety.  Managers can indirectly, and
perhaps inadvertently, detract from safety by increasing workloads, hours, or the desired speed of work flow.  For example,
rushed employees may have more accidents, and increased workload and hours without additional rest and recovery time
can increase stress-related injuries.  Managers can also directly impact safety by cutting safety-related expenditures.  In this
section, we conduct analyses to shed light on the effect of these mechanisms on injuries in suspect firm-years. 
We test for evidence of a relation between employee safety in suspect firm-years and workloads using two measures –
production per employee and revenue per employee.  If high workloads contribute to the injuries in suspect firm-years, then
we expect a stronger positive relation between workloads and injuries in suspect firm-years compared to non-suspect firmyears.  We define production per employee (ProdperEmp) as the sum of cost of goods sold and change in inventory scaled by
the number of employees at the firm, and similarly define revenue per employee (RevperEmp) as the firm's total revenues
scaled by the number of employees.  The interaction between workloads and Suspect serves as a proxy for workload changes
related to meeting or beating expectations, as opposed to workload changes driven by longer-term considerations.  To the
extent suspect firms increase workloads in order to meet or beat expectations, we expect to observe a positive and significant coefficient on the interaction terms. 
Table 4 reports the results from this analysis.  Columns (1) and (3) report establishment-level regressions that include
establishment-level controls in addition to the firm-level controls.  Columns (2) and (4) report firm-level regressions.  We
find a positive relation on the interaction of ProdperEmp and Suspect.  The estimated coefficients indicate that a ten percent
increase in production per employee is associated with a roughly one percent increase in firm-level injuries/illnesses in
suspect firm-years relative to non-suspect firm-years. 19 The coefficient on the interaction term is insignificant when we
measure output as revenue per employee.  The weaker results using revenue per employee could be because revenue reflects
the mark-up on products in addition to the employee efforts. 
The coefficients on ProdperEmp and RevperEmp are insignificant and have fairly wide confidence intervals.  However, the
significant interaction term (ProdperEmp  Suspect) indicates that the relation between production and injury rates is more
positive in suspect firm-years compared to non-suspect firm-years.  In other words, the significant interaction indicates that
the confidence interval on ProdperEmp shifts to the right in suspect firm-years.  The insignificance of ProdperEmp could be
because high production levels in typical periods do not come at the expense of safety and injuries relate to random events
unrelated to production per employee. 
In order to test whether managers directly impact workplace safety in suspect firm-years by cutting safety expenditures,
we examine whether injuries tend to be more common among suspect firms that reduce their discretionary expenditures. 
An ideal test would measure safety-related expenditures, such as the costs of maintenance, training and oversight programs. 
However, companies do not separately report such expenditures, and these costs, which could add up to non-trivial
amounts, fall within selling, general, and administrative expenses (SG&A). 20 To gauge whether managers cut safety expenditures, we estimate abnormal discretionary expenses per employee (AbDiscExp) based on Roychowdhury (2006) where
we scale by beginning total employees rather than beginning total assets. 21 In particular, AbDiscExp is the residual from the
following model which is estimated for firm i in year t within each two-digit SIC code/year with at least 15 observations,
where SGA is the total selling, general, and administrative expenditures. 
To test cuts to safety expenditures explanation, we include the interaction of Suspect and AbDiscExp in Eq.  (1) and reestimate the model.  We predict that if higher injuries in suspect firm-years stem in part from cuts to safety-related expenditures, then, compared to the non-suspect firm years, the number of injuries in suspect firm-years will be more strongly
associated with cuts to these expenditures.  In other words, we expect the coefficient on the interaction between Suspect and
AbDiscExp to be negative and statistically significant. 
Table 5 reports the results from estimating the relation between injuries and abnormal expenses in suspect firm-years. 22
Column (1) reports establishment-level regression that includes establishment-level controls in addition to the firm-level
controls.  Column (2) reports firm-level regressions.  Both the establishment-level and firm-level regressions show a negative
coefficient for the interaction of Suspect and AbDiscExp.  That is, the relation between injuries and abnormal discretionary
expenditures is more negative in suspect firm-years.  This result is consistent with cuts to safety-related expenditures
playing a role in higher injuries in suspect firm-years relative to non-suspect firm-years. 
We acknowledge that, our findings on the interaction between Suspect and AbDiscExp could also result from the interaction term providing a superior gauge of overall earnings management efforts than Suspect and AbDiscExp individually.  For
example, in addition to maintenance and safety-related expenditures, AbDiscExp could capture earnings-motivated cuts to
other expenses in conjunction with changes to workloads.  To the extent this holds, our findings in Table 5 might reflect a
better detection of earnings management periods, as well as the effect of changes in safety-related expenditures. 
6.  Cross-sectional differences in the relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety. 
In this section we present cross-sectional tests of the relation between benchmark beating and workplace safety.  We
consider three factors that could affect managers’ flexibility and incentives to compromise worker safety.  First, we consider
unionization as a proxy for employees’ power to ensure safe work environments, even when the company faces pressure to
meet benchmarks.  Second, we consider costs of workers’ compensation insurance as a proxy for costs firms can face for
compromising workplace safety in order to meet or beat expectations.  Third, we consider government contracting as a
proxy for managers’ incentives to keep work environments safe as firms can be disqualified from bidding on government
contracts based on safety records and requirements. 23
6. 1.  Union membership. 
Organized labor likely diminishes the extent to which managers can alter workloads and processes in a way that
compromises safety since unions bargain over and participate in the enforcement of workloads and safety (Kaufman 2005). 
Unionized workers perceive less workplace risk (Gillen Name 2002) and tend to have fewer injuries (Morantz 2013).  We
examine whether unions diminish the association between workplace safety and benchmark beating. 
We use industry union membership data from the Union Membership and Coverage Database as our proxy for employees’ ability to protect their rights.  The database reports estimates of union membership by census industry codes with
an annual frequency based on data compiled from the Current Population Survey.  To identify whether an industry has high
or low union membership, we match census industry codes to two digit NAICS industry codes and then calculate average
union membership for each industry over 2003–2011 period using industry-years that have at least 200 households responding to the survey nationwide.  We exclude 2002 during which census industry definitions were different. 24 We then
merge this dataset with our establishment sample. 
The union membership among sample establishments varies from 1. 7% to 41. 7%.  We define high union membership
establishments as those that have union membership values above the top quartile.  If union membership limits managers’
ability to shirk on workplace safety to meet or beat expectations, then we expect to find weaker results in suspect firm-years
that are in high union membership category. 
Table 6, columns (1) and (2), report results from this analysis.  In both columns we find that the coefficient on the
interaction term is negative and significant.  The effect is also economically significant.  The establishment-level analysis
indicates that injury rates are lower by about 6. 4% in suspect firm-years when there is more union presence.  These results
support the conjecture that the association between workplace safety and benchmark beating diminishes with union
membership. 25 Overall, the results reported in columns (1) and (2) suggest that unions limit managers’ ability to shirk on
workplace safety in their attempts to meet or beat expectations. 
6. 2.  Workers’ compensation premiums. 
Workers’ compensation is a state-mandated insurance program that provides compensation to employees who suffer
from workplace injuries or illnesses.  Workers’ compensation systems are established by statutes in each state and each state
has different policies and coverage requirements.  As a result, the average workers’ compensation premium varies significantly across states, ranging from $0. 88 per $100 of payroll in North Dakota to $3. 