
China’s excess air pollution is widely known.  In 2014, for example,
annual ﬁne particulate (PM2. 5) levels in 31 Chinese major cities (4
province-level cities and 27 provincial capitals) were 23-124 μg/m3,
with a mean of 65 μg/m3, exceeding the World Health Organization
(WHO) guideline level of 10 μg/m3 by a factor of N6 (Nam,
forthcoming).  As demonstrated by a substantial body of the epidemiological literature, conventional air pollutants, such as PM2. 5, increase
health risks substantially (Dockery Name, 1989, 1992.  Dockery and
Pope, 1994).  Given its excessiveness, air pollution in China has posed
enormous and imminent threats to the public health of urban residents. 
Many impact studies motivated to increase public awareness of the
threats have used such epidemiological evidence to estimate pollution-induced socioeconomic burdens.  A conventional approach ﬁrst keeps
track of the morbidity and mortality cases that occur due to exposure
to excess pollution, applying concentration-response functions, drawn
from the epidemiological literature, to given pollution levels.  Each case
is then valuated in monetary terms, using market or surveyed data for
each health endpoint.  A substantial number of China-focused studies
have adopted this approach, and their estimated pollution-health costs
range from 3. 5 to 5. 9% of China’s historic gross domestic product (GDP)
(see Section 4. 2). 
One potential problem in the literature is a lack of dynamic thinking
in economic valuation.  Many available estimates for China are based on a
static application of the conventional approach mentioned above, considering only a single point in time.  However, the effects of pollutioncaused damage may remain in an economy for a long time (Nam Name,
2010).  Labor loss in one period, for example, reduces incomes and savings, which will then lead to less investment and growth in the future. 
Also, increased demand for medical services can hardly be met without
drawing resources from other sectors, distorting cross-industry resource
allocation.  Distorted resource allocation due to an external shock
(i. e. 