 1.  Introduction The rising anthropogenic CO2 emissions have led to irreversible global climate change, which has had widespread impacts on human and natural systems (IPCC 2014).  To mitigate the severe effects caused, international agreements on reducing emissions have been established, and regional/national policies have been implemented to cut emissions.  Tracking countries' emission performances and quantifying the driving forces of emissions are of great interest to policymakers since the two issues are important to evaluating effectiveness of policy measures.  In the literature, one of the analytical tools that have been applied to assess energy and emission performances is decomposition analysis.  Decomposition analysis, consisting mainly of index decomposition analysis (IDA) and structural decomposition analysis (SDA), is an accounting approach that distributes a change in an energy or emissionrelated aggregate to predeﬁned factors.  The decomposition results obtained offer insights on the driving forces behind the change, based on which policymakers can assess the effectiveness of relevant policy measures.  From an energy systems analysis viewpoint, IDA usually measures the effects of total activity level, activity structure and activity intensity on an aggregate.  SDA, which is built upon the input-output (I-O) model and deals with the overall economic system, can quantify the impacts of both the production-side and consumption-side factors on an aggregate.  IDA and SDA differ in methodological foundation, study scope, factors used in decomposition and policy implications derived (Su and Ang 2012.  Wang et al.  2017a).  A main advantage of SDA over IDA is that SDA can analyze demand-side effects and the impact of trade.  This study focuses on the SDA technique.  In SDA studies, the aggregate decomposed can be a quantity indicator, e. g.  total national energy consumption or emissions, or an intensity indicator, e. g.  the ratio of national emissions to GDP.  In the literature, both forms of indicators have been used to characterize energy or emission performance (Su and Ang 2012.  Wang et al.  2017a).  They have been used to assess performances with different focuses.  The intensity indicator, which is independent of the economic output size, has an efﬁciency connotation.  A foundation of SDA is I-O models.  I-O models can be classiﬁed as single-region I-O (SRIO) models and multi-region I-O (MRIO) models, based on which single-region SDA and multi-region SDA can be conducted respectively.  A difference between SRIO and MRIO models is that the latter capture the economic linkage between the regions studied in terms of trade and interregional feedback effects (Su and Ang 2011).  Arising from the difference between quantity and intensity indicators and that between single and multi-region I-O models, SDA modelling can be classiﬁed into four types.  They are the SR quantity approach (type I), SR intensity approach (type II), MR quantity approach (type III), and MR intensity approach (type IV).  Most existing studies belong to type I, i. e.  dealing with changes of a single country's energy use or emissions.  These studies pinpoint causes behind energy or emission changes in an economy.  The methodological and application issues have been extensively studied (Su and Ang 2012.  Wang et al.  2017a).  Type II studies are not as common but the number is growing.  For example, Fan and Xia (2012), Zeng et al.  (2014) and Zhang and Lahr (2014) study changes in China's energy intensity, and Zhang (2009), Xia et al.  (2015) and Su and Ang (2017) examine China's emission intensity changes.  The structural decomposition of a quantity indicator and that of an intensity indicator are fairly different (Su and Ang 2015).  Wang et al.  (2017b) resolve some methodological issues in multiplicative SDA of an intensity indicator in the single-region context.  Type III studies examine changes in regional or global energy use or emissions.  A growing number of studies with a focus on the energy/ emissions embodied in trade (EET) have been reported.  See, for example, Arto and Dietzenbacher (2014), Malik et al.  (2016), de Vries and Ferrarini (2017) and Jiang and Guan (2016) which study changes in global emissions, Lan et al.  (2016) which examine changes in global energy footprint, Brizga et al.  (2014), Su and Thomson (2016), and Duan and Jiang (2017) which investigate energy and emission changes of a country or region, Xu and Dietzenbacher (2014) which investigate changes in emissions embodied in global trade.  The surge in multiregion quantity studies is due to the availability of MRIO databases, e. g.  the World Input-Output Database (Timmer et al.  2015), Eora (Lenzen et al.  2013) and GTAP (Narayanan and Walmsley 2008).  With regard to type IV, to the best of our knowledge, no SDA study has so far been reported.  A reason is the complexity of modelling intensity indicators using multi-region I-O models.  Decomposing an intensity indicator in the multi-region context using SDA, however, is becoming increasingly relevant and potentially useful.  Intensity indicators have been widely used as a measure of energy or emission performance.  Countries such as China, India, Mexico and Singapore use the emission intensity indicator to deﬁne climate targets in the intended nationally determined contributions (INDCs) under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).  Based on INDCs submissions, countries setting targets using the emission intensity indicator cover nearly 40% of the global emissions in 2014. 1 This underscores the importance of intensity indicators in emission mitigation and climate debate.  Arising from this development, type IV SDA studies can be used to help countries to evaluate progress made in emission reduction and identify decarbonization pathways.  Since the intensity indicator is scale-free, it can be conveniently applied to compare countries in terms of performance, especially in a multi-country setting.  As is well known, multi-region SDA analysis captures the impacts of trade as well as individual regions' contribution on an aggregate indicator.  Globalization has boosted international trade and increased energy and emissions embodied in the trade ﬂow among countries.  As a result, EET has become a major component in energy use and emission accounting (Fernández-Amador et al.  2016).  It is reported to have accounted for 20% to 35% of global emissions during 2001–2007 (Sato 2014).  The ability of multi-region SDA analysis to quantify individual countries' impact on an aggregate offers insights on the spatial dimension, which helps to reveal the opportunities and direction for reducing the global aggregate intensity.  Due to the aforementioned reasons, type IV studies deserve special attention and this study is an attempt to ﬁll the gap. 2 Speciﬁcally, structural decomposition of aggregate intensity indicators at the global level is ﬁrst studied.  This is conducted at the ﬁnest disaggregation level captured in a MRIO table, i. e.  at the sectoral level within countries.  The results obtained reveal the impacts of driving forces on the global intensity indicator.  Within the multi-region framework, both the domestic and trade-related effects can be quantiﬁed.  As the global-level decomposition analysis masks intensity indicator changes at the country level, we further study decomposing country-level intensity indicators within the multi-region context.  The country-level decomposition analysis distinguishes between domestic and trade-related effects, as in the global decomposition analysis.  A complementary step is proposed to link changes in intensities at the country level and global level.  Some application issues of the proposed SDA models are discussed.  The results of applying the proposed methods to study changes in the global and country emission intensities during 2000–2009 using the World Input-Output Database (WIOD) are presented.  The policy implications are discussed.  The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 proposes SDA methodologies.  Section 3 describes the data used in this study.  Section 4 presents the empirical results and relevant policy implications.  Section 5 concludes.  <Middle> Methodology.  Multi-region environmentally extended I-O methodologies consist of two general types, i. e.  the emissions embodied in bilateral trade (EEBT) approach and the MRIO approach (Peters 2008).  A difference between them is that the MRIO approach fully accounts for the feedback effect embodied in international trade (Andrew et al.  2009).  Su and Ang (2011) examine the analytical difference and establish a linkage between the two approaches.  Recently, the MRIO approach has increasingly been applied in multi-region I-O analysis and in SDA since it allows trade-related energy/emissions to be computed.  A number of recently available multi-region databases further facilitate its application.  We adopt the MRIO approach in this study. 3 2. 1.  Modelling of Emissions and GDP.  Suppose N economies, each of which is further divided into R economic sectors, are under consideration.  The relationship between total output and ﬁnal demand of countries can be established using the MRIO approach, which is described in Appendix A.  Combining the I-O model with the emission multiplier yields the formulation of aggregate CO2 emissions as follows, where the superscripts r, s, and q denote countries, the subscripts i and j r is the emission intensity of sector i in country r deﬁned denote sectors, fi rs is the value added requireas the ratio of emissions to value added, Hij ment coefﬁcient representing the value added needed by sector i in country r to meet one unit of ﬁnal demand of sector j in country s, yj sq denotes sector j's ﬁnal demand that is exported from country s to country q.  Similarly, the aggregate GDP calculated from the production approach is formulated as.  Both the global and national emission intensities are generally of interest to policy makers.  Since they are fairly different in modelling and interpretation, we study them separately.  2. 2.  Global-level SDA.  Following Eqs.  (1) and (2), the global aggregate emission intensity is formulated as, where Y is the total global ﬁnal demand, Sj sq/ys denotes the ﬁnal demand structure of country s, and Us=ys/Y denotes the global geographic structure in terms of ﬁnal demand.  Given the data in year 0 and T, we can study both the arithmetic change and ratio change in AEI.  As stated in Wang et al.  (2017b), the multiplicative decomposition of the ratio change of an intensity indicator can be more conveniently interpreted, and may be of greater interest to policymakers.  In the sections that follow, we present only the multiplicative decomposition for illustration purposes.  Following the procedure in Su and Ang (2015), the ratio change in an aggregate emission intensity can be decomposed as, where Dint denotes the intensity effect, DH is the total production structure effect, DS is the demand structure effect within countries, DU is the geographic structure effect in terms of ﬁnal demand.  A value larger (smaller) than unity means that the change in this factor contributes to increase (decrease) the aggregate indicator (i. e.  AEI in this case).  By rewriting the item ∏ and other items in a similar manner, Eq.  (4) becomes.  Eq.  (5) will be referred to as Model 1.  It is a pure SDA formulation and directly captures the impacts of factors at the ﬁnest disaggregation level, i. e.  at the sectoral level within countries.  Four factors, i. e.  emission intensity, production structure and ﬁnal demand structure within and between countries, are responsible for a change in the global AEI.  The production structure effect (DH) and the demand structure within countries (DS) can be further classiﬁed by domestic effect and trade-related effects according to the destination of products.  Taking the production structure effect as an example,DM1 H measures the impact of all countries' domestic production technology on global quantiﬁes the impact of AEI, while DM1 exported intermediate production structure.  A change in global AEI can therefore be explained by six effects, as shown in Eq.  (5).  The sectoral results can be aggregated to the country level to reﬂect countries' impacts on the global AEI.  For example, country r's impact on the global AEI is given by Dint.  2. 3.  Country-level SDA.  The modelling of emissions and GDP of country r, i. e.  Cr and GDPr in Eqs.  (1) and (2), shows that the two aggregates are impacted by all economies' ﬁnal demand through trade.  Its emission intensity can be deﬁned as Ir=Cr/GDPr.  The ratio change in the national emission intensity between year 0 and year T can be decomposed as follows, where the subscript abroad denotes the effects related to all other countries in the dataset except for country r.  Eq.  (6) will be referred to as Model 2.  Similar to Model 1, the production structure effect can be distinguished by domestic and exports, i. e.  country r's domestic production structure effect (DH,d M2,r) and country r's exported production structureAs aforementioned, all countries' ﬁnal demand structure inﬂuences country r's emission intensity, as reﬂected by the term Ssq in Eq.  (3).  The overall demand structure effect can be divided into three components, i. e.  country r's domestic ﬁnal demand structure effect (DS,dcountry r's exported ﬁnal demand structure effect (DS,t M2 ,r) and other countries' ﬁnal demand structure effect (DS,abroad ).  The effect of geographic shift in terms of ﬁnal demand is similarly separated into two M2 , r) and components, namely country r's demand share effect (DU ,d other countries' demand share effect (DU,abroad ).  Eight effects are derived in Eq.  (6) to explain a change in country r's emission intensity.  It should be noted that Eq.  (6) focuses on the emission intensity at the country level.  It ignores the linkage between country intensity and global intensity.  To capture the linkage, we introduce a complementary step, which is given in Appendix B.  where the superscript (r) denotes effects related to country r's export, and the subscript d and t denote domestic and export related effects, respectively. 6 2. 4.  Application Issues Model 1 deals solely with the global emission intensity.  It directly decomposes a change in the intensity to the ﬁnest disaggregation level.  The emission intensities of individual countries are masked.  In contrast, emission intensity change is analyzed for individual countries in Model 2.  Eq.  (B. 4) in Appendix B is used to show the linkage between the global emission intensity and the emission intensities of individual countries.  The main advantage of Model 1 and Model 2, compared to the existing single-region SDA models and IDA models for intensity indicators, is the quantiﬁcation of the impacts of trade on emission intensities within a multi-region context.  The proposed SDA models distinguish domestic and export related effects for production structure and ﬁnal demand structure.  The country-level model further measures the impact on a particular country's emission intensity of the ﬁnal demand structure of all other countries.  Both Model 1 and Model 2 in the global multi-region I-O context can be easily adapted for application of the same nature. 