 1.  Introduction The price of crude oil declines by about 57%, from $102. 51 to $43. 58 between June 2014 and May 2016.  During that period, the CPI for airfare declines by about 12%.  This small decline is somewhat surprising.  jet fuel accounts for about 33% of average operating costs incurred by the airline industry (Berghofer and Lucey, 2014).  Consistent with this large percentage, industry analysts estimate that the reduction in oil prices will save US airlines about $20 billion in 2015 (New York Times, January 20, 2015).  The juxtaposition of a large cost saving and a relatively small price reduction is a topic for both academic researchers and policy enforcement.  From an academic perspective, airlines respond to changes in oil prices three ways.  (1) changing the energy efﬁciency of their operations (i. e.  changing the ﬂeet), (2) passing the cost increases (decreases) to passengers, and (3) hedging fuel costs (Morrell and Swan, 2006).  Of these, Berghofer and Lucey (2014) ﬁnd that hedging behavior and changes in ﬂeet diversity do not reduce exposure to the risk that is associated with changes in oil prices.  Furthermore, hedging may increase the risk premium and increase costs (Aabo and Simkins, 2005), perhaps by 1% of fuel costs (Rao, 1999).  Despite these costs, the accounting losses of hedging will be more than offset by lower fuel prices, such that US airlines will save $15 billion (New York Times, 2015).  Academic research suggests that the degree to which cost increases (decreases) are passed on to passengers may be inﬂuenced competition in the airline industry.  High levels of competition make it difﬁcult to raise ticket prices in response to rising prices for jet fuel (Carter and Simkins, 2004).  Consistent with this hypothesis, the Portuguese airline industry could not recover the full cost of higher fuel prices (Button et al. , 2011).  Recent research indicates that the intensity of competition among airlines is decreasing.  Concentration in the US airline industry increases between 2007 and 2009 (Johnston and Ozment, 2011).  The resultant reduction in competition may slow additions to capacity.  Robert Mann, a former airline executive states.  “The industry is full at these prices.  You can't stimulate additional revenue by cutting prices. ” Based on these concerns, in June 1015, the US Department of Justice opened an inquiry into whether the airline industry is colluding to limit seating.  Beyond a reduction in competition, the small effect (to date) of lower oil prices on airfares could be caused by asymmetric rates of adjustments in the relation among the price of crude oil, the price of jet fuel, and airfares.  If the price of jet fuel and/or airfares respond asymmetrically to changes in crude oil prices (or other components of the oil market), such that increases in crude oil prices are translated into higher prices for jet fuel and air travel faster than reductions in crude oil prices are translated into lower prices for jet fuel and air travel, the small decline in airfares as of June 2016 (the last month for which data are available) may be caused by an asymmetric rate of adjustment to lower prices for crude oil.  This hypothesis echoes an extensive literature on the relation between prices for crude oil and motor gasoline, which suggests that increases in crude oil prices translate into higher motor gasoline prices faster than lower crude oil prices translate into lower motor gasoline prices (e. g. 