 1.  Introduction The nexus between environmental quality (e. g.  pollution) and economic development has received much focus for many decades.  The main objective of this paper is to empirically investigate the pollution and income relationship across all Swedish municipalities from a spatial econometric perspective.  Our approach is motivated by recent but growing literature emphasizing the importance of the spatial dimension on this link and the implications of ignoring it (e. g.  Burnett et al. , 2013a, 2013b).  The emissions and income nexus is often modelled within the framework of the so-called environmental Kuznets curve (EKC) hypothesis, which posits an inverted U-shaped relationship between emissions and income, a curvature likely explained by technological progress and changes in preferences from income growth.  The EKC literature is replete with empirical modelling of different environmental quality indicators.  The evidence for many pollutants can however be best described as mixed.  Grossman and Krueger (1991, 1993, 1995) were among the ﬁrst authors to empirically examine the EKC hypothesis.  In their papers, Grossman and Krueger found the existence of an inverted U-shaped relationship between air quality (SO2 emission and “smoke”) and economic growth (per capita GDP).  The inverted U-shaped relationship implied that the two pollutants' concentration increased at lower per capita income levels but decreased with GDP growth at higher levels of income after a certain trajectory.  Selden and Song (1994) corroborated Grossman and Krueger (1991) after considering four air pollutants (suspended particulate matter, sulfur dioxide, oxides of nitrogen and carbon monoxide) and per capita GDP1 relationship.  The EKC literature is associated with several criticisms (see Stern, 2004.  Kijima et al. , 2010.  Kaika and Zervas, 2013 for EKC survey).  Criticisms of the EKC have centered among others on poor econometric applications, limited single country studies using long historical time series data, lack of theoretical insights/foundation, neglect of leakage of dirty production from developed to developing countries (e. g.  Stern, 2002.  Dinda, 2004).  However, this paper focuses on only one but important incipient criticism.  It relates to biased and inconsistent EKC estimates arising from model misspeciﬁcation due to omission of spatial interaction effects in emissions data if signiﬁcantly present (e. g.  Rupasingha et al. , 2004.  Maddison, 2006.  Burnett et al. , 2013a, 2013b.  Aklin, 2016).  Failure to capture spatial interactions in the data, if signiﬁcantly present, might bias the estimated results which might affect policy inferences.  It is in regard to this criticism and the need for a detailed within country study that this paper derives its motivation.  Utilizing advances in geographic information systems (GIS) and spatial econometrics in applied settings, we model the pollution-income relationship for the following emissions.  carbon dioxide (CO2), sulfur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen oxides (NOX), carbon monoxide (CO), particulate matter (PM2. 5 and PM10) and total suspended particulates (TSP).  Even though selection of these emissions is not guided by any formal criteria, we have reason to believe their importance in the Swedish environmental policy/code is not in doubt.  CO2 emissions continue to be one of the major components of greenhouse gases (GHGs) locally and globally which contributes signiﬁcantly to climate change.  In Sweden, CO2 emissions are based on use of different classes of fossil fuels such as coal, gas, and oil products.  Emissions from transportation are considered a major source of concern in Sweden.  The other pollutants are also important sources driving air quality in Sweden and feature prominently in all reports of the Swedish Environmental Protection Agency and other environmental agencies (see e. g.  Gustafsson and Kindbom, 2014.  SEPA, 2016).  SO2 emissions from road trafﬁc, shipping and heating from industrial and other sources are still a major concern even though emission levels have been reducing in the last two decades or so.  Indeed particulates, CO and the other emissions have been established to impact adversely on human health, mortality and related effects besides generally worsening air quality in a particular area (e. g.  Henschel et al. , 2013.  Caiazzo et al. , 2013).  Guided by the spatial nature of emissions, we tested for spatial effects and estimated a spatial Durbin model (SDM) to capture this potential spillover in order to correctly analyze the EKC for the selected emissions.  Spatial effects could operate in our setting through many channels.  Spatial correlation could occur because neighbouring municipalities might share similar economic/business activities, pollution cycles and some meteorological (natural) attributes such as direction and average speed of the wind, precipitation, relative atmospheric humidity, transportation and spatially correlated unobservables (or omitted variables) that drive pollution levels.  Other channels could arise through strategic interaction between municipalities' emissions targets (policy), cooperation in air quality monitoring and control, transportation linkages among others.  While some of these variables are difﬁcult to measure and were not available to us, we believe, and it has been shown in the literature, that air pollution levels are likely to be spatially correlated.  We fully utilize the potential beneﬁts from an empirical model speciﬁcation that is able to capture the impact of emission levels not only in adjacent municipalities on own emissions but also how spillover in economic activities could affect neighbouring pollution levels.  The modelling is undertaken in all 290 municipalities for the period 2005–2013.  We ﬁnd evidence in support of the EKC for CO2, SO2, NOX, PM2. 5, PM10, TSP and potentially CO in the presence of signiﬁcant spatial spillovers.  Our contribution to the literature is twofold.  First, we contribute to the relatively small but growing EKC in-country literature for several emissions from a spatial perspective.  Secondly, ﬁndings hold promise for public policy coordination considerations as far as pollution control in Sweden is concerned.  Understanding the dynamics of geographical distribution of emission sources can effectively aid mitigation policies as well as inﬂuencing economic activities (Zhao et al. ,The remainder of the paper proceeds according to the following structure.  Section 2 discusses related literature.  Details of the empirical spatial econometric models as well as data issues are covered in Section 3.  Section 4 presents the empirics and discussion of the results.  We conclude in Section 5 with some brief remarks.  2.  Related literature.  In this section, a brief survey of the EKC literature as it relates to this paper is undertaken.  Following the initial inﬂuential work by Grossman and Krueger (1991, 1993, 1995) and Selden and Song (1994), studies on the pollution-income nexus have grown substantially.  Many studies since these seminal papers have modelled the EKC hypothesis by regressing either air or water quality on income per capita (e. g.  Stern and Common, 2001.  Stern, 2002).  Other papers have motivated inclusion of covariates beside income to avert the omitted variable bias problem associated with some studies.  Variables such as population density, social capital (e. g.  trust), average years of education, income inequality among other demographic, economic and related variables have been controlled for (see e. g. 