1.  Introduction The dependence of smallholder farmers on forest resources for their sustenance and livelihoods is a major driver of deforestation and degradation of forest resources in tropical countries (Amare et al. , 2012.  FAO, 2007).  African nations lead the global list of countries with the highest deforestation rates (Naoto, 2006).  Forest degradation in Ethiopia is primarily being caused by human activities (Reusing, 1998.  Teketay et al. , 2010) and has led to considerable habitat fragmentation (Wilcove et al. , 1986), a decreasing population (Laurance et al. , 2006) and extinction of indigenous plant and animal species (Wright and Muller-Landau, 2006), as well as a decline in provision of soil protection, water conservation and favourable microclimate services (Aerts et al. , 2011).  Forest degradation is most pronounced in the highlands of the Amhara region, where natural forests and sacred groves have continuously been overexploited during past decades.  The deforestation has led to high runoff resulting in degraded landscapes, decreasing crop and livestock productivity, sedimentation of water bodies, increased food insecurity and increasingly high loss of the resource base and the attached ecosystem services (Amare et al. , 2016.  Bongers et al. , 2006.  Aerts et al. , 2016).  Zege peninsula, which is located in the Amhara Regional State, is one of the remnants of dry Afromontane forest patches in Ethiopia.  This forest has considerable religious, economic and ecological importance as it attracts local and international pilgrims, serves as a source of livelihood for local communities, and is rich in biodiversity (Alelign et al. , 2007.  Teklehaymanot and Giday, 2007).  However, recent studies have shown that unsustainable wood extraction and marketing of wood products by local populations have increased (Teklehaymanot and Giday, 2007.  Alelign et al. , 2011) thereby contributing to the degradation of the forest ecosystem and the nearby Lake Tana (Amare et al. , 2012.  Amare et al. , 2017).  This, in turn, has led to reduced livelihood options, economic and habitat losses, threatened biodiversity, undermined the valuable services provided by biological diversity and increased the risk of climate change.  In order to reverse this trend, innovative approaches are required that integrate environmental conservation objectives and livelihood improvements for the local communities (Alelign et al. , 2011).  A more detailed understanding of the link between forests and local livelihoods enables the promotion of more sustainable management practices while maintaining acceptable levels of utilization (Shaanker et al. , 2004.  Lepetu and Oladele, 2009).  Hence, investigating the dependence of local communities on their forest resources is vital to devise appropriate forest management and conservation strategies.  There is no shortage of studies that investigate how socio-economic household characteristics and local institutions affect deforestation, forest degradation and conservation (e. g. , Adhikari et al. , 2004.  Faham et al. , 2008.  Bembridge and Tarlton, 1990.  Lepetu and Oladele, 2009.  Lockwood et al. , 2010.  Manyatsi and Hlophe, 2010.  Amare et al. , 2016.  Mowo et al. , 2016).  However, these studies are highly speciﬁc to location and context (Kaimowitz and Angelsen, 1998.  Clark et al. , 2008).  Therefore, little consensus exists with regard to which drivers inﬂuence deforestation and forest degradation on a generalized and abstract level (Vadez et al. , 2005.  Indarto and Mutaqin, 2016).  Local case studies (e. g. , Adhikari et al. , 2004.  McElwee, 2008.  Inoni, 2009.  Lepetu and Oladele, 2009) are thus considered to provide reliable and useful accounts of these processes and their causes and dynamics (Kaimowitz and Angelsen, 1998).  Hence, in order to determine the extent of deforestation and forest degradation at the Zege peninsula and to identify the factors inducing these processes, a detailed local-level study is needed.  Such a study could also serve as an initial step toward formulating policies conducive for an equitable and sustainable management of forest resources (Lepetu and Oladele, 2009).  The following socio-demographic variables have been reported in the literature as being correlated with household wood extraction.  education (e. g. , Ricardo et al. , 1998.  Baba et al. , 2015) or years of schooling of the household head (Inoni, 2009), age of the household head, dependency ratio (Rahut et al. , 2016), male gender (Eneji et al. , 2015) and household size (Inoni, 2009.  Knight and Rosa, 2012).  Lack of employment opportunities (Manyatsi and Hlophe, 2010.  Usman et al. , 2016) was positively while income from paid wages, total land size and income from farming (Bwalya, 2013) were negatively correlated with income from forest products (McElwee, 2008).  Extension services (Adugna, 2008), remittances and credit (Berhanu, 2003) enabled engagement of famers in more remunerable activities and reduced wood extraction.  Dysfunctional local institutions increased the likelihood of deforestation (Lockwood et al. , 2010.  Mowo et al. , 2016).  However, the set of variables included in these analyses varied, and the direction and strength of these relationships have not always been consistent in the literature.  Moreover, most of these studies fail to differentiate conceptually distinct mechanisms and motivations of smallholder-driven deforestation and forest degradation.  With the current study we, therefore, aim to undertake a comprehensive empirical assessment of the factors driving deforestation and forest degradation by smallholders at the Zege peninsula.  The objectives of this study are (i) to explore the economic dependence of rural populations in the study area on wood products and their contribution to household cash income.  (ii) to identify the primary motivations of smallholders to extract forest products.  and (iii) to assess the effectiveness of local forest management traditions.  We have used wood extraction by smallholders as a proximate measure for deforestation and forest degradation.  Compared to traditional land use and forest inventory-based attempts to operationalize deforestation and forest degradation, this approach has the advantage of directly linking these processes to livelihood activities and household-level indicators of well-being (Indarto and Mutaqin, 2016).  Furthermore, we have used the term wood rather than fuel wood in our study since wood biomass is used for various purposes in addition to household energy in the study area.  This paper is novel with regard to the following aspects.  (i) we provide a detailed account of a speciﬁc forest management tradition in the study area that, as to the best of our knowledge, has not been presented yet elsewhere.  (ii) we apply the Heckman two-steps econometric model to analyse the drivers of wood extraction and to reveal the smallholders' motivations to exploit their forest resources.  and (iii) we propose to include livelihood options as a modiﬁer variable when assessing the relationship between education and gender on smallholder wood extraction.  2.  Conceptual Framework.  While large-scale commercial deforestation has become a major driving force of forest destruction in the Amazon and Indonesia since the 1980s, smallholders remain the primary agents of forest degradation and deforestation in most parts of South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa to date (Rudel et al. , 2009).  Agricultural expansion and wood extraction are among the main direct or proximate causes of smallholder-driven deforestation, and a variety of economic, political, historical, institutional, cultural, demographic and technological factors have been identiﬁed as its underlying causes of these processes (Chakravarty et al. , 2012.  Geist and Lambin, 2001).  Despite numerous studies on smallholder-driven deforestation and forest degradation, the conceptual understanding of their motivations to exploit their forest resources remains relatively vague.  The point of departure for our study is the empirical observation that smallholder farmers utilize and, at times, overexploit the forest driven by two fundamentally opposing motivations (cf.  Shackleton and Shackleton, 2007.  Wunder et al. , 2014), viz.  (1) the reliance on forest products as a safety net in absence of other sufﬁcient livelihood options, in times of food scarcity or income shortage (we label this motivation “wood extraction for need”).  and (2) the extraction of forest products to maximize household income when proﬁtable market opportunities for forest products exist despite the availability of sufﬁcient alternative, non-forest livelihood options (we label this motivation “wood extraction for greed”).  This conceptual distinction is supported by the observation that often speciﬁc socioeconomic strata are engaged in and linked to these opposing forms of forest utilization.  while the safety net function of forests and extraction of subsistence products is particularly important for the very poor and vulnerable parts of the rural population, forest use for cash income generation is more pronounced among better-off households and their absolute incomes from forest products are often larger (Angelsen et al. , 2014).  Yet, in practice this distinction is less neat, as forest exploitation by the vulnerable and the better-off rural households may occur in parallel, and many rural households in fact exploit forests for subsistence and income generation at the same time.  However, each of these two mechanisms of forest exploitation requires a particular and distinct set of responses to be redressed.  Separating these concepts analytically may, therefore, add to an improved understanding of the factors contributing to deforestation and forest degradation in a particular case, thereby facilitating the formulation of effective location-speciﬁc policy responses.  We use the Heckman two-steps model to investigate smallholder forest exploitation at the Zege peninsula.  The ﬁrst model equation identiﬁes the socio-economic determinants of the households' involvement in wood extraction.  We conceptualize this step to assess the overall dependency of villagers from the forest resources and to reveal incidences of need and greed based wood extraction, if present.  The second model equation uncovers the factors that determine the amount of annual household wood extraction from the forest, which we conceptualize to separate need from greed based forest exploitation.  <Middle> Materials and Methods.  3. 1.  The Study Area.  The study was conducted at Zege peninsula (°40′ to 11°43′N and 37°19′ to 37°21′E), located at the southern shores of Lake Tana (Alelign et al. , 2011).  The main land use type on the peninsula was coffee forest (1060 ha), with non-coffee forest land uses covering only 12. 5 ha.  The peninsula harbours seven old Ethiopian orthodox monasteries.  The average monthly temperature ranged from 11 °C to 27 °C, while the mean annual rainfall was 1659 mm with a bimodal distribution (Amare et al. , 2012).  The ofﬁcial population on the peninsula was 5143 people living in1285 households (ibid. ).  The remnant natural forests located at the peninsula have traditionally been considered as a sacred place and, therefore, have remained relatively unaffected by human exploitation in the past.  These forests have great conservation and biodiversity value, serve as sanctuaries for endangered plant and animal species and are indicator sites of the original ecological landscape (Teklehaymanot and Giday, 2007).  Alelign et al.  (2007) found 113 woody plant species of which 56% were trees, 33%shrubs and 11% lianas.  Most of the forest area has traditionally been used by local populations for cultivation of coffee.  It is believed that the monks who ﬁrst inhabited the peninsula provided coffee as the only income source for the local community and excommunicated ploughing, livestock production and wood extraction for the sake of protecting the spirituality of the peninsula (Amare et al. , 2012).  The production of non-timber forest products (NTFPs) has been the main customary source of livelihood at the peninsula for generations.  As customary owners of the forest, the community members harvested coffee, fruits (mango, lemon, papaya, banana, etc. ), and Rhamunus prinoides planted inside the natural forest.  Farming activities did not constitute a livelihood activity in the study area.  Since around the 1970s, wood extraction has increasingly been practiced by the community to supplement their livelihoods in the aftermath of two heavy storms that devastated the forest and led to a decline in NTFP production (Amare et al. , 2012).  Alelign et al.  (2007) found 341 coppiced or dead stumps/stems per ha and concluded that the forest was heavily exploited for wood extraction.  They also found very few mature trees in the forest and suggested that this would jeopardize the future regeneration of the forest as a whole.  Since around 2007, sheep fattening has been promoted by governmental extension agents as a resilience strategy in light of declining livelihoods, ignoring the religious ban of livestock on the peninsula.  Currently, the community in Zege is legally allowed to extract NTFPs and wood from the forest.  Apart from the religious ban of farming and livestock production there exist customary by-laws regulating felling of mature trees from the forest.  According to these by-laws, households are required to obtain upfront permission from the local forest enforcement committee, which consists of the kebele administrator, the Development Agent and three elected individuals from the community.  To obtain permission, households interested to cut trees must present a convincing reason, such as house construction or income needs.  Felling must be limited to mature and dying trees that do not re-grow.  There was no limitation on the amount of wood extraction, neither at the level of the entire community nor for individual households.  3. 2.  Sampling and Data Collection.  Zege peninsula was purposively selected for this study due to the available natural forest patch and current pressures on the forest resources caused by wood extraction.  A multi-stage sampling procedure was used to select sample households.  Simple random sampling and proportion-to-population-size methods were employed to select the respondents from two kebeles (Ura and Yiganda).  For the household survey, 120 respondents were selected representing 9. 3% of the total population.  The semi-structured survey questionnaire was modiﬁed after pretesting and administered to respondents in their local language.  Information was collected on (a) socio-demographic household characteristics, e. g. , sex, age, family size and assets owned.  (b) livelihoods, e. g. , income sources, involvement in coffee production and other livelihood activities, household wellbeing and risk.  (c) wood extraction, e. g. , amounts harvested and preferred tree products.  (d) support services available, e. g. , credit and extension.  (e) forest management conditions, e. g. , by-laws and their effectiveness and the respondents' opinions on forest management.  and (f) major problems, e. g. , diseases and market access.  Checklists used for Focus Group Discussions (FGDs) and key informant interviews contained general information on the forest-based livelihood activities and management interventions and were designed to elicit a range and depth of information on the overall conditions of the peninsula.  Also, non-participant observation was used to triangulate information obtained from interviews and discussions during the two months of ﬁeld research at the peninsula from January to March 2010.  The researchers observed the daily interactions within the community, as well as activities related to management, utilization and marketing of forest resources.  Due to the absence of recorded data an estimation procedure was used in combination with physical measurements to determine the actual annual household-level wood extraction.  During the FGDs it became clear that people could estimate the amount of wood extracted in reed boatloads very easily and with reasonable accuracy.  We determined the average weight of one load (Ogunkunle and Oladele, 2004) by weighing 12 randomly collected sun-dried loads piled at the farmers' backyards using a 50 kg spring balance.  The weight of wood loads intended for consumption and sale did not differ as conﬁrmed by 94. 17% of the households and observation.  The average weight of a regularly used wood load was 0. 34 tons.  Survey respondents were asked dichotomous choice questions of ‘yes’ or ‘no’ for wood extraction from the forest for various purposes including consumption, providing as gift to relatives and marketing.  Ultimately, the respondents were asked to estimate the approximate number of boat loads of wood extracted for each of these purposes during the previous year.  3. 3.  Data Analysis.  Content analysis, descriptive statistics and econometric modelling were used to analyse the data.  Paired t-test was used to establish significance levels for difference of means for continuous and categorical independent variables and participation in wood marketing, measured as a dichotomous response of ‘wood market participant’ and ‘non-participant’, respectively (McElwee, 2008.  Rahut et al. , 2016).  The analysis was organized on the concept that wood extraction occurs for two main reasons.  i. e. , consumption and marketing.  There is some non-random segment of the community engaged in wood extraction for marketing as a source of income.  Hence, a sample selection econometric model was used to analyse the factors that affect the households' participation in wood extraction and marketing using the Limdep7 NLogit software.  A non-random sample occurs since the sample is comprised of households who either extract wood for sale or do not extract for sale in addition to extraction for consumption.  To correct for the sample selection bias, the ﬁrst stage of Heckman analysis (Probit model) estimates the expected value of the error term that is included as additional variable in the second stage of the analysis (Hoffmann and Kassouf, 2005).  The model helps to reﬂect an individual's self-selection (Heckman, 1979.  Cameron and Trivedi, 2005) and avoids bias that could arise from the treatment of different groups having particular characteristics for making decision choices (Dettmann and Dimitri, 2009.  Maddala, 1983.  Rahut et al. , 2016).  The ﬁtness of the Heckman model was conﬁrmed from a signiﬁcant rho value (selection bias) obtained from the ﬁrst selection equation (Cameron and Trivedi, 2005.  Bärnighausen et al. , 2011).  Variance inﬂation factor (for continuous variables) and contingency coefﬁcient tests (for discrete variables) showed absence of multicollinearity among the independent variables used in the model (O'Brien, 2007).  Also, to avoid inﬂation of standard errors due to multicollinearity between the correction term and the included regressors, income from coffee was used in the Probit model but excluded from the regression equation.  <Conclusion> Results and Discussion.  4. 1.  Socioeconomic Characteristics of the Respondents.  The number of households who were involved in wood marketing as a source of income was signiﬁcantly greater than the number of nonparticipants.  There were signiﬁcant differences between both categories of households with regard to average age, average income from sheep fattening, land size, annual income from coffee, income from ﬁshing, amount of household wood consumption, total wood extracted, amount of remittance received and number of temporal out-migrant family members (Table 1).  Wood market non-participants were signiﬁcantly older, had higher numbers of out-migrant family members, owned larger land and gained signiﬁcantly higher income from coffee, livestock, ﬁshing and remittance.  Also, the non-participants consumed signiﬁcantly higher volumes of wood.  These ﬁndings suggest that primarily vulnerable and disadvantaged households were involved in wood extraction, which already points toward “wood extraction for need” being the predominant mechanism of smallholder-based forest exploitation in the study area.  Households that participated in wood marketing were signiﬁcantly better educated and harvested signiﬁcantly larger volumes of wood than the non-participants.  Generally, the households of Zege were severely constrained in their agricultural livelihood options as they lacked access to and ownership rights in land outside the forest area.  This made them entirely dependent on food purchases for their sustenance and their livelihoods very vulnerable and risky.  4. 2.  Household Annual Wood Harvest.  Wood extraction was conceived as the total annual amount of wood (sun-dried) harvested from live trees by a household for consumption, marketing or a gift to relatives.  On average, the total average annual wood extraction for consumption amounted to 0. 32 tons/capita, which is lower than household wood extraction (1. 14–1. 36 tons/capita) elsewhere in Africa (Bembridge and Tarlton, 1990).  However, compared to these reports we may have underestimated household wood consumption due to the fact that we did not include leaf and dry branch biomass in our estimates.  Total annual wood extraction in the study area amounted to 3969. 4 tons, translating to values greater than 3. 75 tons/ha ∗ yr−1.  Yet, recall problems and strategic answering behaviour by respondents were two potential error sources despite careful data triangulation.  According to the perception by the local community, the high regeneration rate in the forest more than compensated the annual amount of wood extraction.  However, estimates of annual increment for comparable tropical and sub-tropical dry montane forests typically range between 1. 45 and 2. 75 tons/ha ∗ yr−1(IPCC, 2016), which suggests that wood extraction in the study area cannot be considered sustainable.  From nonparticipant observation it was clearly visible that the forest system is heavily degraded as most big trees were cut and only small to medium trees and herbaceous plants dominated the forest.  Besides, natural trees species have been replaced by cash crops like Catha edulis and Eucalyptus globulus.  Evidence of unplanned and unsustainable forest exploitation in the area was also conﬁrmed by Alelign et al.  (2007).  4. 3.  Factors Affecting Wood Market Participation Age and education of the household heads were positively correlated with wood market participation.  Households with older heads were more likely to participate in wood marketing as a source of cash income by 24. 6% (Table 2).  From observation and FGDs we conﬁrmed that wood was frequently sold to middlemen by elder household heads as they were less likely to engage in other livelihood activities due to their labour limitations.  In contrast, McElwee (2008) and Rahut et al.  (2016) found a negative correlation between forest income or livelihood and age.  The main reason our ﬁnding diverged from established literature is the general lack of sufﬁcient income from other livelihood activities, such as NTFPs and farming.  This is in line with Manyatsi and Hlophe (2010) and Usman et al.  (2016) who suggested that extraction and sale of wood was related to lack of alternative income opportunities, and Bwalya (2013) who reported that households allocated less labour to wood extraction when returns from agriculture or other income sources increased, thereby lowering their dependence on forest activities.  Hence, we propose that age of household head and engagement in wood marketing are negatively correlated as long as there exist sufﬁcient income opportunities from other livelihood sources.  In situations where alternative livelihoods are limited, elder households seem to have less access to these alternative income sources, and the reverse holds true.  An increase in formal education by one year increased the engagement in wood marketing by 6. 56%.  This ﬁnding is in contrast to Adhikari et al.  (2004) who argued that fuelwood collection was increasingly unproﬁtable with increasing levels of education due to higher opportunity costs of labour.  and Rahut et al.  (2016) and Inoni (2009) who found a negative relationship between forest-based livelihood choices and years of schooling.  Our ﬁnding is also inconsistent with GebreEgziabher (2001) and Ricardo et al.  (1998) who found an inconsistent or insigniﬁcant relationship between wood biomass collection and education level of the household head.  However, other researchers found that the education level of the household head signiﬁcantly raised the probability of fuelwood collection (Babulo et al. , 2008.  Chhatre and Agrawal, 2008.  Damte and Koch, 2011).  As already discussed above, extraction and sale of wood in the study area was related to the absence of alternative income opportunities.  We, therefore, propose that the observed relationship is primarily an expression of a general lack of sufﬁcient alternative livelihoods for younger, better educated households.  With a higher level of education these villagers seem to be able to better and more intensively exploit existing livelihood options, such as extracting wood from the forest more productively, locating new markets and/or new customers and hence selling more wood than less educated villagers.  From observation and FGDs we conﬁrmed that attending high school was a common strategy for a relatively large number of young villagers in absence of lucrative employment opportunities or access to land.  Wood extraction from the community forest was the only viable livelihood option for these villagers after graduation.  This ﬁnding implies that, in order to reduce forest degradation and deforestation in the study area, more than education and awareness campaigns for sustainable forest management interventions are needed that improve the access of forest-dependent households to land resources and/or create sustainable livelihood alternatives, which are decoupled from primary production (cf.  Ricardo et al. , 1998.  Adugna, 2008).  Dependency ratio, income from ﬁshing and remittance were negatively and signiﬁcantly correlated with the households' market participation (Table 2).  As the dependency ratio of a household increases by one unit, there was a 3. 83% lower likelihood that the households will engage in wood marketing.  A similar result was recorded by Rahut et al.  (2016) who found a negative correlation between wood extraction and the number of family members below 15 years of age.  An increase in income from ﬁshing by 1 ETB reduced the probability of a household participating in wood marketing by 1. 1%.  This ﬁnding was in line with the literature (e. g. , Adhikari et al. , 2004.  Bwalya, 2013.  Baland et al. , 2007).  Further, the likelihood for a household to engage in wood marketing was reduced by 12. 47% if the household received cash remittance.  This ﬁnding was congruent with Brown et al.  (2006) who stated that economic support from siblings improved the households' participation in more remunerable activities and hence reduced their involvement in wood marketing.  Thus, the analysis conﬁrmed that forest exploitation by smallholders in the study area was primarily undertaken to secure their sustenance needs in absence of alternative livelihood options.  4. 4.  Factors Affecting the Amount of Annual Wood Extraction.  The amount of wood extracted from the forest by local communities was inﬂuenced by several factors (Table 3).  Male-headed households harvested 1. 04 tons more wood than female-headed households.  From observation and FGDs we conﬁrmed that women preferred to collect leaves and branches, which were abundantly available in the Zege forest, instead of heavy logs.  The result was in line with Bembridge and Tarlton (1990) who found that women extracted less wood from forests due to their other household commitments.  Eneji et al.  (2015) who found that women, compared to men, harvested more NTFPs and very little timber.  and Lepetu and Oladele (2009) who found evidence of decreased deforestation in areas where the household heads were mainly women.  However, Bembridge and Tarlton (1990) reported that women extracted more wood than men if engaged in alternative livelihood activities.  and Gebre-Egziabher (2001) found an insigniﬁcant impact of household head gender on the amount of wood biomass extraction.  Hence, we propose that the relationship between gender and volume of wood extraction is modiﬁed by the availability of alternative, more easy-to-collect biomass preferred by women, such as dead wood and leaves.  In line with an increased likelihood of wood market participation, the amount of wood extracted increased with an increasing level of formal education by 0. 94 tons.  As discussed above, this ﬁnding can be related to the absence of alternative income opportunities.  Additionally, more educated household heads may have been able to better exploit forest livelihood options, such as extracting wood from the forest more efﬁciently, managing a larger customer base and/or identifying new market opportunities more quickly than less educated villagers.  If a household member served in local decision-making positions, this household was likely to extract 0. 834 tons more wood than other households.  FGDs and key informant interviews conﬁrmed that some households extracted wood without permission from the forest enforcement committee due to kinship relations and bribing.  Even when caught harvesting wood illegally, these households were not ﬁned due to the protection received from their inﬂuential family members.  Similar evidence was reported by Adhikari et al.  (2004).  and deforestation and forest degradation was found to aggravate as a consequence (Lockwood et al. , 2010.  Mowo et al. , 2016).  Households engaged in apiculture were found to extract 0. 87 tons wood less annually compared to households, which did not practice beekeeping.  Similarly, households receiving remittance extracted 0. 881 tons wood less annually compared to households that did not receive such payments.  These ﬁndings are consistent with literature reporting that economic support and income reduced a household's propensity to engage in wood extraction for livelihoods (Berhanu, 2003).  The selectivity bias, expressed by the inverse Mills ratio, signiﬁcantly affected the households' total amount of wood extracted.  There were other unobserved factors (Cameron and Trivedi, 2005) that significantly contributed to the probability of wood market participation and increased the annual amount of wood harvested by 0. 771 tons.  Overall, the negative correlation of extraction volumes with apiculture and remittance and the increasing extraction by young, educated households again represented evidence of forest exploitation for need.  Simultaneously, these results also conﬁrmed incidences of greed-driven forest exploitation, as indicated by the increasing extraction volumes by inﬂuential persons and their relatives and, to some lesser extent, by maleheaded households.  4. 5.  The Effectiveness of Customary Forest Management.  Our results suggest that nepotism and corruption have signiﬁcantly contributed to the de-facto abandonment of the customary by-laws on forest management.  91. 7% of the respondents considered these bylaws as irrelevant, as they were either no longer convinced of the necessity of such rules, or the by-law had not affected their actions anymore.  Partiality and lack of fair enforcement of these rules were perceived as major shortcomings (38. 3% and 16. 7%, respectively).  This decreased the legitimacy of the regulations and reduced accountability and fairness among the community members (Lockwood et al. , 2010).  It was reported that community members cut big trees for income, disregarding the bylaws and claiming their right to harvest trees from their own land instead.  Also, reports on cutting parts of the trunks of big trees to enable their rapid drying to get the desired permission from the forest enforcement committee were conﬁrmed.  There were also reports of theft and illegal cutting of trees from land owned by other villagers attributed to aggravating livelihood stress.  Such instances increased conﬂict within the community and depleted trust and social capital.  4. 6.  Conclusion and Implications for the Management of the Zege Forest.  The results of this study conﬁrmed the hypothesis that forest exploitation was mainly driven by the smallholders' attempts to cater for their sustenance and livelihood needs.  Insufﬁcient income from non-forest livelihood activities was the main driver of deforestation and forest degradation in the study area.  We found evidence that this fact also mediated the relationship between age and wood extraction, as well as the relationship between the level of education and wood extraction.  Promoting formal or informal employment and livelihood diversiﬁcation in other sectors such as sustainable ﬁshing, ﬁsh farming or petty trade could further help to reduce the villagers' dependence on the forest, particularly of households with young, well-educated household heads.  However, there are clear limitations with regard to which type of alternative livelihood options should be introduced or promoted in the area, and how intensively these activities should be practiced – as witnessed, e. g. , by the detrimental effects that the governmental sheep husbandry promotion program had on the forest condition, and recent reports about the over exploitation and consequent depletion of Lake Tana's ﬁsh stock.  Improving infrastructure and facilitating market access will be essential to support local communities diversify their livelihoods.  The fact that remittances signiﬁcantly decreased wood extraction indicated that establishing a system of long-term credit could signiﬁcantly help reduce forest degradation.  Also, ecosystem services-based payments could be possible strategies to improve forest management, as they increase rural incomes and potentially support the accumulation of productive assets, while simultaneously linking these positive economic effects to keeping the ecological forest conditions intact.  The results of the study further clearly indicated that increasing the total income from NTFPs, such as coffee, R.  prinoides, honey and fruits, could be a strategy to reduce the amount of wood extraction from the forest.  Further work is required to investigate and promote the use of NTFPs including currently neglected wild edible plants such as Ficus sur, Ximenia american, Mimusops kummel or Syzygium guineense in local and international markets.  To more fully exploit the potential of these species for livelihood improvement and forest ‘conservation through use’ it is important to better understand aspects such as their current contribution to food security, nutrition and the household economy.  their ecology, reproduction and productive capacity.  the morphology and variability of these species along various environmental gradients as well as their domestication potential.  the physical and chemical characteristics of various plant compartments including the nutritive, medicinal and/or biochemical value of secondary plant compounds.  current and potential future products and uses, traditional processing technologies and potential improvements.  coordination, the distribution of rents and governance in value chains of these products.  and current and future market demand, customer segments and quality requirements.  Helping villagers to access markets and obtain market information, to improve their bargaining power toward other market participants, and to produce products that meet customer expectations and conform to deﬁned quality requirements could help to reduce wood extraction.  Simultaneously, we found some evidence of “wood extraction for greed” as represented by the fact that some part of total wood extraction in the Zege forest was attributed to the relatively better-off and inﬂuential households with more favourable access to resources and alternative livelihoods.  The facts that local elites and their relatives misuse their decisionmaking positions to extract more wood from the forest than other villagers and to do this partially illegally illustrate this point.  More stringent forest management and conservation rules and stricter rule enforcement are required to reduce greed-driven wood extraction.  For example, more exclusive regulations should be deﬁned that limit the group of authorized forest users to the truly vulnerable and needy villagers.  and penalties should be increased to discourage forest exploitation by those who do not actually need forest income for survival.  The results further demonstrated a number of equality concerns in the study area.  First, households headed by male farmers extracted more wood than female-headed households, and male farmers were generally involved in more remunerative activities in the locality than female farmers.  This suggests that female residents were systematically excluded from the beneﬁts of wood extraction for sale by current social norms and gender roles.  Female farmers were more often than not engaged in less remunerative livelihood activities such as local brewing.  Our results, therefore, point out the general necessity to further investigate the role of gender equality in the local community, and to address existing barriers that limit the economic involvement of women farmers.  Second, our data suggest that young villagers were severely disadvantages with regard to land and resource access, and hence, did typically not possess attractive non-forest livelihood choices, which made them highly dependent on wood extraction.  These ﬁnding points out the need to more clearly understand customary land tenure, inheritance and (re-)allocation mechanisms in the study area and to devise institutions that could guarantee a more equitable access to resources for the inhabitants of the Zege peninsula.  Our study also clearly demonstrates that the partiality in enforcement of customary forest management by-laws undermined the legitimacy of these regulations, weakened the position of the forest enforcement committee and contributed to an increasingly negligent attitude toward forest protection among the community members.  The fact that the by-laws have been more or less openly violated and sanctions have no longer been properly enforced seemed to have encouraged an increasing number of community members to extract unsustainable amounts of wood from the indigenous trees on their lands.  Thus, rather than exerting all their efforts and energy on developing alternative livelihood activities, villagers could resort to the more easily accessible option of exploiting their forest.  Halting or reversing degradation of the Zege forest by reducing wood extractions to sustainable levels would require the community to revive their customary forest management by-laws complemented by further regulations that reﬂect changing realities, as well as impartial leadership by local decision makers.  Finally, our study yields a conclusion with regard to the effectiveness of religious excommunications and customary rules for forest management. 