 1.  Introduction The link between competition and innovation has been a very active topic in industrial organization.  It goes back to the indirect debate between Arrow (1962) and Schumpeter (1942) centering around the so-called Schumpeterian hypothesis, which brieﬂy stated says that one should expect to observe an inverse relationship between innovation and the intensity of competition or market structure.  On the one hand, there are several arguments supporting the view that possession of market power should result in greater innovative activities (Schumpeter, 1942).  First, market power may be extendable to new products, for example, through a dominant ﬁrm’s command over channels of distribution, and so on.  With the ability to extend market power to new products, an incumbent monopolist should ﬁnd innovation more attractive.  Second, there may be a need to ﬁnance innovation internally, which puts ﬁrms with market power at an advantage since these ﬁrms may have supernormal proﬁts.  Third, ﬁrms with current market power typically have more resources and thus are more likely to hire the most innovative people.  Of course the third argument is related to the imperfect capital market argument underlying the second reason.  On the other hand, there are arguments for the opposite view, supporting the view that a monopolist can have reduced incentives to innovate.  Arrow (1962) shows that a competitor can proﬁt more than a monopolist from innovation, and the monopolist may be slower in replacing it with a superior product or process than a newcomer.  This is because the ﬁrm realising monopoly proﬁts on its current product calculates the proﬁt from innovation as the difference between its current proﬁts and the proﬁts it could realise from the new product, whereas the competitor regards the proﬁts from the new product as the gain.  As such, the larger current monopoly proﬁts are, the less incentive the monopolist has to innovate.  Moreover, a monopolist may regard additional leisure as superior to additional proﬁts.  This may be due to the lack of active competitive forces and thus generates an x-ineﬃciency effect.  The lively debate on the relationship between competition and innovation in the industrial organization literature is still open and systematically predicts a monotone relationship in either direction between competition and innovation. 1 In clear contrast, Aghion et al.  (2005) provide evidence of an inverted-U relationship between innovation and competition.  Their theoretical explanation is based on a neo-Schumpeterian endogenous growth model (Aghion et al. , 1997), in which both technological leaders and followers in any industry can innovate, and innovations occur as a step-by-step process. 2 Innovation incentives depend upon the difference between postinnovation and pre-innovation rents of incumbent ﬁrms.  In this case, more competition may foster innovation and growth, because it may reduce a ﬁrm’s pre-innovation rents by more than it reduces its post-innovation rents.  One aspect that, to the best of our knowledge, has not been considered is the relationship between competition and innovation in a polluting (or energy intensive) industry where R&D investment aims to reduce the environmental footprint of production.  This is the purpose of the present paper.  In particular, we bring together the debate on the relationship between competition and innovation with the environmental economics debate on the optimal policy for pollution control, concentrating on one policy instrument, an emission tax.  Currently the main three major inﬂuences on ﬁrms’ R&D investment are a focus on cleaner technologies, demand for renewable or sustainable energy and climate change,3 and they are further fuelled by environmental regulation and international agreements on climate change and the like. 4 In this context, “green” R&D can be seen as a tool that ﬁrms can use to improve the cost imposed on them by environmental regulation.  We verify the presence of an inverted-U relationship between competition and innovation in a microeconomic setting of oligopolistic competition where production is polluting and innovation results in reducing emissions (abatement or, “green” R&D).  Given the presence of Pigouvian (emission) taxation, reducing pollution would reduce production costs. 5 We present an n-ﬁrm oligopoly model where ﬁrms compete in quantities and decide their investment in “green” R&D, and where spillovers in R&D are present.  We establish the link between competition and “green” innovation through the variation of aggregate investment in R&D according to the number of ﬁrms in the industry.  a greater number of ﬁrms in the industry proxies increased competition and a concomitant reduction in market power (Sutton, 1998). 6 We show that the relationship between competition and “green” R&D is represented by an inverted-U and that this result is driven mainly by the presence of R&D spillovers (appropriability problem).  The results obtained by Aghion et al.  (2005) are thus conﬁrmed in a microeconomic framework where innovation has the aim of abating polluting emissions.  The paper is also related to the literature on organisational structure of environmental R&D (e. g. , Scott, 1996.  Chiou and Hu, 2001.  Petrakis and Poyago-Theotoky, 2002.  Sandonís and Mariel, 2004.  Poyago-Theotoky, 2007.  Golombek and Hoel, 2008).  With this literature, we share the assumption of R&D efforts being directed not towards process or product enhancement, but directed towards emission reduction of harmful pollutants.  The analysis in the paper is close to Poyago-Theotoky (2007), who examines the issue of R&D cooperation versus competition in a polluting industry where two ﬁrms operate and endogenous taxation is set by a time-consistent regulator.  Compared to Poyago-Theotoky (2007), we set aside the R&D cooperation issue.  instead we consider an oligopoly rather than a duopoly, and we focus on the case in which the regulator is able to commit credibly to the setting of the environmental policy instrument.  Finally, we assume that abatement is of the end-of-pipe variant.  Finally, the paper is related to the literature of innovation and market structure.  Hausman and MacKie-Mason (1988) argued that the actions of monopolies with regard to third-degree price discrimination, may lead to social welfare improvement due to opening new markets, achieving economies of scale and higher eﬃciency and, importantly, increasing net social welfare.  Geroski (1990) shows that innovating may be a way to obtain market power, in particular he ﬁnds that innovation increases the degree of competition in markets.  This leads to a fall in market concentration over time and eventually to the emergence of very few and large ﬁrms.  Therefore ﬁrms innovate with the aim to become incumbents.  Etro (2004) shows that the innovative process is naturally connected to the persistence of monopolies.  Their investment in research and development would be beneﬁcial to society as they advance new technologies.  Our paper contributes to this strand by focussing on innovation with “green” features.  The remainder of the paper is organised as follows.  In Section 2 we present the model, in Section 3 we carry out the analysis and establish the results and in Section 4 we provide concluding remarks.  Proofs of propositions are in the Appendix.  <Middle> The model.  Consider an oligopoly market with n identical proﬁt-maximising ﬁrms competing à la Cournot-Nash.  Firms supply a homogeneous good, with market demand given by p = a − Q.  a is a positive constant parameter measuring the reservation price (alternatively, it is ameasure of the size of the market) and Q = i=1 qi is total industry output, i = 1, .  . 