
OPEC has a fragile cartel structure.  It does not have a formal
enforcement mechanism in place (except for the occasional price war)
to incentivize its members to comply with their quota allocations
(Alhajji and Huettner, 2000).  As a result, non-compliance to the quota
has become a norm among OPEC members over the past decades. 
In every single quarter from 1993 to 2005, total OPEC production
exceeded the sum of its members’ quotas.  In this period, an OPEC
member over-produced its quota by an average of 6. 7%.  In this paper,
we provide a framework to explain such a persistent non-compliance
pattern based on strategic interactions among members inside OPEC. 
Quota violations vary signiﬁcantly among different countries.  For
example, Saudi Arabia’s overproduction averaged around 3. 2% from
1995 to 2007 but Qatar’s overproduction averaged around 18. 5% during the same period.  In extreme cases, some members overproduce
their quotas by a large margin.  For example, in the second quarter of 1998, OPEC requested that Qatar cut its production to reach a
quota of 384 thousand bpd due to falling oil prices, but Qatar kept its
production level at 670 thousand bpd–a 75% quota non-compliance. 
Another extreme example is Algeria who overproduced its quota by
more than 50% in 13 out of 24 quarters between 2002 and 2006. 
Moreover, as suggested by a large body of theoretical literature1, the
diﬃculty of supporting collusion varies with the economic state of
the market.  Based on these preliminary observations, we ask the following.  is non-compliance related to oil market conditions.  If so, is
it a pro-cyclical or a counter-cyclical behavior.  How does the degree
of non-compliance differ for smaller vs.  larger producers.  To what
extent does OPEC rely on the quota system. 
There are a number of prominent empirical studies on OPEC
behavior, but the majority of them focus on whether OPEC behaves
as a cartel or not, rather than analyzing the nature of quotas and
violations.  To name a few, Griﬃn (1985), tests the market-sharing
hypothesis by looking at the co-movement of each country’s production with that of the rest of OPEC.  He concludes that “OPEC is a looser
cartel” given that market sharing considerations only partially affect
production decisions.  Gülen (1996) uses a similar intuition to test
for parallel movements in members’ output levels. 