
In recent years, climate change has aroused worldwide attention,
and in-depth international discussions have been held to mitigate
climate change.  Since 2007, China has surpassed the US to become the
world's largest CO2 emitter, and thus becomes a focus of global efforts
to reduce CO2 emissions.  As one of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, China has always been
promoting the implementation of the Convention and fulﬁlling its obligations.  Chinese government committed to reduce CO2 emissions per
unit of gross domestic production (GDP) by 40–45% towards 2020 at
2009 Copenhagen Climate Change Conference and by 60–65% towards
2030 at 2015 Paris Climate Change Conference.  To achieve such
challenging emission-reduction targets, China has attempted to adopt
effective policy instruments, such as the deployment of renewable
energy, the establishment of national carbon emission trading market. 
China has experienced a signiﬁcant increase in CO2 emissions in the
past decades (Liu Name, 2015).  Large variations in the growth pattern of
China's CO2 emissions at the regional level exist due to uneven distribution of initial resource endowment, economic scale, industry structure,
development stage etc.  (Meng Name, 2016).  CO2 emissions per capita
and CO2 emissions per unit of GDP among China's 30 regions also vary
sharply (Shan Name, 2016).  Emission-reduction targets for each region
should be set in considering the characteristics of socio-economic
development (Wang Name, 2016).  Therefore, it is necessary to explore
the driving forces of the variations of national and regional CO2 emissions of China in order to set accurate emission-reduction targets and
take effective measures from the perspective of national and regionalThis study explores the changes of national and regional CO2
emissions using temporal decomposition analysis model, and analyzes
the differences of CO2 emissions between China's 30 regions and the national average using spatial decomposition analysis model.  In addition,
this study evaluates the potential of emission-reduction of China's 30
regions.  The study did not only contribute to the energy saving and
emission reduction of China's CO2 emissions but also provide some
targeted suggestion for emission-reduction at regional and sectoralThe remainder of this study is organized as follows.  Section 2 reviews some existing literature.  Section 3 presents the models including
temporal and spatial decomposition analysis models and data sources
used in this study, and the overview of the national and regional CO2
emissions in China.  Section 4 depicts the decomposition results and
evaluates the potential of emission-reduction in China's 30 regions. 
Section 5 details further discussion of the deep-rooted reasons of key
factors with larger effect on CO2 emissions and the future tendency of
contribution of key factors.  Section 6 shows conclusion of the analysis,
with summary and policy implications. 
2.  Literature review. 
Existing studies have been conducted to analyze the driving forces of
the variations of national and regional CO2 emissions from the perspective of temporal and spatial level. 
First, tracking changes of CO2 emissions and quantifying the driving forces of the changes over time have long been a focus area of
researchers and policymakers.  Intensive studies have analyzed the
CO2 emissions and the driving forces of the change of CO2 emissions
at national (Wu Name, 2005.  Jung Name, 2012.  Cortés-Borda Name,
2015.  Sumabat Name, 2016.  van Ruijven Name, 2016), regional (Liang
Name, 2007.  Geng Name, 2013.  Wang Name, 2017) and industrial
level (Lin and Moubarak, 2013.  Xu and Lin, 2016a.  Talbi, 2017) overSecond, growing interest among researchers in comparing regions in
terms of CO2 emissions emerges in recent years.  The comparison allows
variations among countries or regions to be revealed, the contributing
factors identiﬁed, and the scope for improvement better understood
(Ang Name, 2016).  Many studies on analyzing the differences in CO2
emissions among different countries (Sun, 2000a, 2000b.  Zhang and
Ang, 2001.  Bataille Name, 2007), regions (Feng Name, 2009.  Su and Ang,
2016.  Xu and Lin, 2016b.  Wang Name, 2016.  Xu Name, 2016), and a speciﬁc sector among regions (Cui and Li, 2015.  Xu and Lin, 2016a, 2016c. 
Long Name, 2016) have also been conducted.  Besides, some studies are
also involved in the spatio-temporal analysis on the differences in regional CO2 emissions in recent years (Huang and Meng, 2013.  Kim
and Dall'erba, 2014.  Chen and Yang, 2015.  Ang Name, 2016).  Existing
literatures on the spatial analysis mainly focus on the differences in
CO2 emissions among regions from the perspective of production or a
speciﬁc production sector, and less literature are involved in householdDecomposition analysis is usually used to analyze the variations in
energy usage and emissions (Ang, 2015).  The model can not only
identify the main driving forces of the variations in an aggregation but
also show the clearly quantitative results of to what extent the driving
forces affect the variations (Su and Ang, 2012, 2015).  The logistics
mean Division index (LMDI) model is a preferred index decomposition
analysis approach because of the advantages of path independence,
residue free, ability to handle zero values, and consistency in aggregation (Ang, 2004).  Previous studies mainly adopted LMDI model to
study the determinants of variations of an aggregate based on the data
collected chronologically at different points in time for a speciﬁc region,
such as Ang and Liu (2001), Wang Name (2005), Mairet and Decellas
(2009), Wang and Li (2016), Shao Name (2016), Lin and Ahmad
(2017).  Therefore, this study uses LMDI method to conduct a temporal
decomposition analysis of the changes of national and regional CO2
emissions of China. 
Ang Name (2015) proposed a multi-regional (M-R) spatial decomposition model, which can be used to analyze why the differences in CO2
emissions exist among countries or among different regions within a
country.  The model shows an advantage in reducing decomposition
cases, avoiding subjectivity in benchmark region selection, maintaining
the property of circularity, and providing valuable information in terms
of the potential of energy-saving and emission-reduction.  Therefore,
this study adopts the M-R spatial decomposition model to compare
the CO2 emission performance of China's 30 regions. 
This study explores the driving forces of the changes of national and
regional CO2 emissions using LMDI model, and investigates the driving
forces of the differences of CO2 emissions between China's 30 regions
and the national average using multi-regional M-R spatial decomposition analysis model.  Compared with the existing studies, the main contributions of this study are as follows.  (1) We carry out an in-depth
analysis to uncover the main driving forces of the changes of national
and regional CO2 emissions in China, and to analyze the dominant
driving forces of the differences in CO2 emissions among China's 30
regions.  The study provides deep insights into why and what degree
the key factors affect national and regional CO2 emissions of China
from the perspective of temporal and spatial dimensions, and offers
policymakers references to formulate and implement targeted mitigation policies at both national and regional level.  (2) The original M-R
spatial decomposition analysis model is improved in this study.  On
one hand, household sector is introduced into the M-R spatial decomposition model for the ﬁrst time, and thus this study quantiﬁes the effects
of urbanization, income improvement and population.  On the other
hand, economic output and economic structure are introduced into
the model in aspect of production sector. 