1.  Introduction  The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) oversight process involves a range of activities, from advice and monitoring to enforcement actions.  Enforcement actions have been studied in the prior literature to understand both their determinants and consequences.  A ﬁrm’s political connections (PC) in particular are hypothesized from capture theory (e. g. , Stigler,  1971 ) to bias downward the likelihood of enforcement actions and the magnitude of penalties, as politicians can interfere  2 Empirical  with SEC investigations, use budget allocations to control the SEC, or affect SEC oﬃcials’ careers ( Weingast, 1984 ).   evidence suggestive of SEC capture by politically connected ﬁrms is reported in Correia (2014) and Yu and Yu (2011) , who  ﬁnd a negative relation between ﬁrm PC and enforcement actions (which are pursued by the SEC’s Division of Enforcement  or DOE).   Interpreting the results in the prior literature as evidence of lax SEC oversight of PC ﬁrms is complicated by the fact that  SEC oversight involves more than enforcement actions.  In particular, the agency also routinely reviews ﬁrms’ SEC ﬁlings to  monitor and enhance ﬁrms’ compliance with disclosure and accounting regulation ( SEC, (2015b )).  SEC questions and concerns in the course of these reviews are communicated to ﬁrms through comment letters (CLs) that require response and  remediation.  In this paper, we examine the relation between ﬁrm PC and the likelihood of receiving CLs to shed fuller light  on the relation between corporate political connectedness and SEC oversight.   The CL review process is conducted by the SEC’s Division of Corporation Finance (DCF).  The volume of CLs is large, as  between 20% and 40% of U. S.  listed ﬁrms have received a CL in each year between 2005 and 2012.  In contrast, enforcement  actions are relatively infrequent.  CLs are issued on a variety of topics (e. g. , revenue recognition, goodwill impairment) depending on the nature of the SEC concern generated by its review.  The initial CL might request clariﬁcation and disclosure  of further information that leads to a sequence of “rounds” of communication between the SEC and the ﬁrm.  The CL process  concludes when the DCF is satisﬁed with compliance and issues a “no further comment” letter, or when the DCF refers the  matter to the SEC’s DOE.  CLs therefore are an important part of SEC oversight.  In this light, a number of recent studies have  investigated the determinants and consequences of CLs (e. g. , Cassell et al. , 2013.  Bozanic et al. , 2015.  Johnston and Petacchi  2014.  Dechow et al. , 2016 ).  These studies have not, however, examined the relation between ﬁrm PC and the likelihood of  receiving CLs.   SOX Section 408, paragraph (b), identiﬁes some ﬁrm characteristics (“factors”) for the SEC to consider in its CL reviews.   This guidance concludes by stating that “any other factors that the Commission may consider relevant” can also be used in  determining which ﬁrms are reviewed, suggesting that the SEC is given some discretion. 