
We examine acquisition outcomes when the same auditor audits the financial statements of both a bidder and a target
firm prior to an acquisition.  We hypothesize that shared auditors facilitate the flow of information between bidders and
targets, and that the benefits of such mitigated information asymmetry accrue primarily to the acquiring firm. 
External auditors have unique access to senior executives, participate in audit committee meetings, and have access to
board meeting minutes and general information about a firm in the conduct of their audits.  This access to senior executives
combined with information gathered during an audit provides auditors with an opportunity to discuss strategic initiatives
with their clients including, among others, the acquisition or disposition of assets.  Communication about such initiatives
may be in the form of “soft talk”.  Because auditors contract with a variety of companies, auditors have the potential to
become information intermediaries between prospective targets and acquirers, whether intentional or otherwise.  As shared
auditors are incentivized to align with the interests of larger clients, we anticipate a potential bias in favor of acquisitive
clients over target clients.  Hence, bidders that share an audit firm with a potential target could have an information
advantage relative to others in the process of bidding, and we anticipate that this advantage will manifest itself in an
increased likelihood of submitting a bid for a target. 
The impact of shared auditors likely extends beyond the point of bidding and target selection.  If shared-auditor bidders
have an informational advantage relative to competing bidders, bidders with shared auditors can leverage this advantage
into a better bargaining position with the target.  As other bidders have less information, they have less incentive to bid, thus
reducing bid competition.  With lower bid competition, an acquirer with a shared auditor has the opportunity to negotiate a
more favorable price for the target firm, thus reducing premiums paid. 
The opportunity for a shared auditor to become an information intermediary is likely increased if an acquirer and target
contract with the same auditor office.  This is due to a higher likelihood of overlap of audit personnel on client engagement
teams and increased informal contact between audit teams of the target and acquirer, i. e. , “water cooler” talk among
auditors in the same practice office.  Therefore, we expect the shared auditor effect on deal outcomes to be more pronounced
if the bidder and acquirer contract with the same auditor practice office. 
We anticipate that shared auditors may favor acquisitive clients over targets for at least two reasons.  First, an auditor's
long-term incentives (even within an auditor's practice office) are more closely aligned with those of their acquisitive
clients.  Our intuition follows that applied to shared investment bank advisors who are more likely to favor acquiring firms
when representing both a target and an acquirer in the same deal (Agrawal Name, 2013).  As audit firms and their practice
offices have an incentive to foster and maintain ongoing relationships with larger, more acquisitive clients, we anticipate
shared information at the auditor office level will benefit acquirers more so than targets.  Second, with a shared auditor,
target auditors may be more forthcoming in the due diligence process, as target auditors may be more willing to disclose
information to co-workers rather than auditors from another audit firm, especially when the information is concentrated
within an auditor's practice.  We hence anticipate that bidders that share auditor offices with their targets will gain superior
acquisition-related information about their targets and experience lower bid competition for those targets.  Both effects
would yield favorable transaction outcomes for acquirers. 
As sharing confidential information about target clients with acquirer clients appears to be a violation of conflict of
interest rules, we expect that higher (lower) quality auditors would be less (more) likely to act as information intermediaries
in merger and acquisition deals.  Further, as the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX) strengthened auditor independence rules
and increased awareness of auditor independence concerns, we expect the shared-auditor effect on M&A deals to be
stronger prior to SOX. 
Using data on public transactions from 1985 to 2010, we examine the impact of shared auditors on the outcomes of all
acquisitions and the subset of acquisitions between targets and acquirers who are audited by Big-N audit firms.  We find that
over this period approximately 26% of all acquisitions among clients of Big-N audit firms have a shared auditor.  The
substantial percentage of deals with shared auditors suggests that auditors facilitate acquisitions among client firms.  We
also find that deals with shared auditors have fewer bidders relative to deals without, consistent with increased bargaining
power for acquirers with shared auditors. 
We further find that premiums paid by acquirers in shared-auditor deals are nearly 4. 2% lower than deals in which the
target and acquirer have different auditors.  This finding is economically significant as it represents a reduction of 9. 2% in the
average premium of 45. 8%, or an average discount of $36 million U. S.  dollars in the purchase price. 1 We also find that
average announcement day returns are 1. 80% lower for targets and 0. 70% higher for acquirers in deals with shared auditors. 
We find that this shared-auditor effect on premiums, target returns, and deal completion rates is driven by deals with
shared-auditor offices as the shared-auditor effect increases nearly twofold (as compared to magnitudes noted above) if the
target and the acquirer are audited by the same auditor practice office. 2 This result is consistent with our expectation as the
opportunity to transfer information in violation of conflict of interest rules is stronger within an auditor's practice office,
likely due to the higher probability of auditor personnel overlap and opportunity for “water cooler” talk.  These results are
robust to controls for geographic distance between the target and acquirer, for the involvement of shared directors or of
shared advisors, as well as for other control variables that prior studies have shown to influence acquisition outcomes (Uysal
Name, 2008; Agrawal Name, 2013; Cai and Sevilir, 2012).  These results are also robust to concerns of endogeneity arising from
the potential endogenous choice of an auditor by the target and acquirer. 
We next examine whether this shared-auditor effect is less pronounced for auditors that are anticipated to be of higher
quality.  We measure auditor quality with two proxies following prior literature (see DeFond and Zhang, 2014, for an
extensive review).  First, we start with the size of the target.  We expect auditors would be more likely to cater to larger target
clients in the transaction process relative to smaller target clients as prior research has shown that auditors provide lower
audit quality to smaller clients (Reynolds and Francis, 2000).  Correspondingly, we anticipate shared auditors will be less
likely to favor an acquirer of a large target relative to a small target as large target managers are more likely to take
prominent roles at the acquirer following the acquisition.  Therefore, we expect the shared auditor effect to be less
pronounced for acquisitions of larger targets.  Second, as prior literature suggests longer tenured auditors provide higher
quality audits (e. g.  Myers Name, 2003), we anticipate longer tenured auditors will be less likely to favor acquirers at the
expense of target shareholders. 
We find the shared-auditor effect on deal outcomes is concentrated in deals with smaller targets consistent with shared
auditors being less willing to cater to acquirers of larger targets.  We also find that longer tenured auditors appear less likely
to cater to acquirers at the expense of target shareholders.  Again, these results are robust to controls for geographic
proximity, the presence of shared directors, and the presence of shared advisors.  Lastly, we find that the shared-auditor
effect is stronger in the pre-SOX period relative to the post-SOX period.  However, subsequent to SOX, deals with shared
auditor's offices still reduce deal premiums and target announcement returns in the subsample of deals within the Big-N. 
We interpret these findings to suggest that the impact of shared auditors (offices) on transaction outcomes is reduced, but
not eliminated, with the passage of SOX. 
Our study makes three contributions.  First, we provide evidence that acquirers benefit from sharing an auditor's office
with a target, largely at the expense of target shareholders, and this result appears concentrated in acquisitions of smaller
target clients.  Therefore, our result suggests that auditors frequently violate their duty to put the interests of their clients
ahead of their own in what appears to be a failure to protect confidential client information within their practice offices. 3
Consequently, while shared auditors may aid in deal identification, target shareholders appear to be are harmed in such
deals.  Therefore, these results suggest necessary changes in audit firm policies to safeguard confidential client information
within practice offices.  Further, audit clients should be aware of the risk of information leakage within auditor's practice
offices. 
This study contributes to the literature by providing evidence consistent with violations of conflict of interest rules by
auditors that benefit one client at the expense of another.  Prior research and regulator concerns regarding auditor's conflicts
of interests focus on an auditor's independence from a client and the effect of an independence breach on the quality of that
client's audit.  In contrast, our study documents a novel conflict of interest as it relates to the auditor's client portfolio and
suggests auditors benefit acquisitive clients at the expense of target clients.  The effect on audit quality of such clients is
unexamined in our work and is left for future research. 4
Second, our results also add to prior studies that show that auditors impact their clients beyond the scope of the auditing
relationship (e. g.  Louis, 2005; Beatty, 1989).  While prior work has exclusively focused on the effect of audit firm size (i. e.  BigN vs.  non-Big-N) on client outcomes, our findings shed light on the effect of shared auditors (offices) within the group of
Big-N auditors and their impact on client M&A outcomes. 
Third, by providing evidence that shared auditor offices impact the acquisition process and deal outcomes, this study
contributes to prior literature on information asymmetry and the form of payment, the probability of receiving a bid, the
contractual provisions in merger agreements, and the price reactions to merger and acquisition announcements.  This study
also contributes to the literature on shared intermediaries and their role in reducing information asymmetry in the
acquisition process. 5 The identified shared-auditor practice office effect on acquisition outcomes is one potential mechanism
to partially explain the geographic proximity effect on acquisition outcomes found in prior studies (e. g.  Uysal Name, 2008). 
Our study complements a concurrent paper by Cai Name (2014) who also examine the effect of shared auditors on
acquisitions.  Our study examines an auditor's conflict of interest in shared auditor transactions, while that study examines
overall acquisition quality of shared auditor deals.  Cai Name (2014) suggest that shared auditors reduce uncertainty in the
deal process which results in higher quality acquisitions.  Our results suggest that this benefit of uncertainty reduction
accrues to the acquiring firm and that this benefit is driven by deals that involve shared auditor offices.  As a caveat, our
study examines all acquisitions with greater than 50% change in control, while Cai Name (2014) examine only acquisitions
with a 100% change in control.  Therefore, given the differences in sample criteria, caution should be taken in making direct
comparisons of the results of these two studies.  However both studies, while using differing sample selection criteria,
suggest that shared auditors impact target identification and audit client M&A outcomes which is outside the scope of an
auditor–client relationship. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 discusses prior literature and hypothesis development. 
Section 3 describes our data, including statistics on the probability of a shared-auditor bid.  Section 4 provides our empirical
results on the effect of shared auditors on acquisition outcomes.  Section 5 provides supplementary analysis of the effect of
SOX on the relation between shared auditors and acquisition outcomes.  Section 6 addresses selection concerns in the
multivariate analysis.  Section 7 concludes. 
2.  Prior literature and hypothesis development. 
2. 1.  Prior related literature. 
Prior research shows that auditors influence merger and acquisition activity, even though they are not specifically
contracted to advise on acquisition decisions, unlike investment banks or transaction attorneys.  Specifically, smaller auditors
appear to provide greater service and advice to their acquisitive clients, and this advice translates into higher acquirer
announcement date returns (Louis, 2005).  Also, Big-N auditors of targets are associated with a higher likelihood of a firm
being acquired, higher bidder announcement returns and premiums paid, and lower target announcement returns (Bugeja,
2011; Niemi Name, 2012; Xie Name, 2013).  For private targets, valuation multiples are higher if they are audited by a Big-4
auditor (De Franco Name, 2011). 
These prior studies consistently use auditor size (i. e. , the separation between Big-N and non-Big-N auditors) to examine
the effect of auditors on acquisition outcomes.  In contrast, in this paper we focus on a complementary characteristic of audit
firms – the case in which the audit firm has been separately contracted by both the target and acquirer for audit services –
and its effect on deal outcomes.  Importantly, such focus permits us to exploit the heterogeneity in auditor choice between
target and acquirer within the group of Big-N-only acquisitions, heterogeneity that has been previously unexamined in the
merger and acquisition setting. 
Another literature focuses on the impact of shared advisors in the acquisition process.  Agrawal Name (2013) show that
deal outcomes favor acquiring firms and disfavor target firms in transactions in which both parties contract with the same
investment advisor.  The authors suggest that a likely cause for the observed effects is that a shared advisor anticipates future
fees from the acquirer, but does not anticipate such future income from the target.  Prior literature also finds that acquirers
have higher announcement returns and pay lower premiums if a director is on the board of both an acquirer and target,
which suggests that shared directors influence deal outcomes by sharing acquisition-relevant information that favors the
acquiring firm (Cai and Sevilir, 2012).  Overall, this literature shows that shared intermediaries can mitigate information
asymmetry between the parties and can influence acquisition outcomes. 
2. 2.  Hypothesis development. 
In the conduct of an audit, auditors have frequent confidential communications with senior management alongside
access to material private information about current corporate performance.  Furthermore, auditors review board meeting
minutes, participate in audit committee meetings, and gain an overall understanding of the condition and state of the
business during an audit.  Auditors are also required to evaluate the company's ability to continue as a going concern, which
entails an evaluation of anticipated future cash flows and operations for the company.  Further, auditors assess the intended
future use of assets when testing valuation assertions in the financial statements.  Although auditors are limited on the
services they can provide to audit clients for a fee, they are still incentivized to provide value to the client beyond the scope
of the audit to retain the client and associated fees. 
One way an auditor can create value is by providing information that is beneficial to management's overall information
set. 6 To the extent that clients of an auditor are looking to acquire or dispose of corporate assets, this information may be
shared in a relatively benign manner within the auditor's network of clients. 7 In the extreme, an individual audit partner
may have a pair of clients that are correspondingly looking to dispose and to acquire assets, in which case it would appear
infeasible for the auditor to not share confidential client information.  If shared auditors provide information that helps
bidder or target clients identify potential acquisition opportunities and reduce information asymmetry, we expect that
shared auditors increase the probability of an acquirer making a bid.  We state our first formal hypothesis below. 
Hypothesis 1.  Shared auditors increase the probability of a firm receiving a bid. 
Through the due diligence process the acquirer validates the offer price and the value of the target's assets (Skaife and
Wangerin, 2013).  This process includes gathering non-public information from the target to reduce information risk and to
reduce the risk of overpaying or otherwise entering into an unfavorable transaction. 8 We anticipate that a shared auditor
lowers information risk and improves acquisition outcomes for acquiring firms.  There are several reasons for such
anticipated effect.  If shared-auditor bidders have an informational advantage relative to other competing bidders, the
former can leverage this advantage into a better bargaining position with the target.  As other potential bidders have less
information, they are less likely to bid, thus reducing bid competition.  With lower bid competition, an acquirer with a
shared auditor has the opportunity to negotiate a more favorable price for the target firm, thus reducing premiums. 
Given the multi-year nature of auditor–client relationships, auditors of target firms may prefer acquisition bids to be
withdrawn rather than succeed as the acquisition of a target client results in the loss of future fees.  To the contrary, auditors
of acquirer firms have incentives for a client deal to complete, as the acquisition of a target will increase the size of the
acquiring firm, thereby increasing the reputation of the auditor for auditing larger firms and consequently incrementally
increasing audit fees. 9
In a setting in which both target and acquirer contract with the same auditor prior to an acquisition, a shared auditor is
likely to favor the acquiring client at the expense of the target client, to foster an ongoing relationship with the surviving
client after the acquisition.  This is consistent with the argument in Agrawal Name (2013) that shared advisors appear to favor
acquiring clients in an acquisition.  Further, target auditors may be more willing to share information about the target's
assets and liabilities when they audit both target and acquirer. 10 Such increased willingness to share information coupled
with incentives to favor the acquiring firm would increase the informational advantage of the acquirer. 11 Therefore, we
expect acquisition outcomes with shared auditors to favor acquiring firms.  We formally state our second hypothesis as
follows. 
Hypothesis 2.  Shared-auditor deals are more favorable to acquirers (as compared to targets) than non-shared-auditor deals. 
Audit firms are organized into local practice offices, and prior research has shown that individual auditor practice offices
have a significant impact on client outcomes. 12 More importantly, the auditor practice office is where information about
clients is concentrated, the auditor network is strongest, and the opportunity to share information about clients is likely
highest. 13 Further, local practice offices have a greater likelihood of overlapping personnel assigned to the audits of targets
and acquirers, which further facilitates the concentration and potential dissemination of information.  Therefore, we expect
the impact of shared auditors on the probability of receiving a bid (i. e. , Hypothesis 1) and on acquisition outcomes (i. e. ,
Hypothesis 2) to be stronger when both target and acquirer contract with the same practice office of the auditor.  This leads
us to our third hypothesis. 
Hypothesis 3.  The anticipated effects (as discussed in Hypotheses 1 and 2) of shared auditors in mergers and acquisitions
are more pronounced when targets and acquirers contract with the same practice office of an audit firm. 
If outcomes of shared-auditor deals favor the acquirer, then this would appear consistent with a violation of conflict of
interest rules by the auditor acting in favor of the acquiring client at the expense of target shareholders.  ex ante, we would
expect lower (higher) quality auditors to be more (less) likely to engage in behavior consistent with a potential conflict of
interest, or a potential violation of auditor independence standards.  Therefore, we anticipate the impact of shared auditors
on M&A outcomes to be more (less) pronounced when the auditor is expected to be of lower (higher) quality.  Our fourth
hypothesis is stated as follows. 
Hypothesis 4.  The effect of shared auditors on deal outcomes is more pronounced when targets and acquirers contract with
lower quality auditors relative to higher quality auditors. 
Lastly, the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX) reduced the set of services auditors are allowed to provide for a fee, and the
events leading to the passage of SOX put a renewed focus on auditor independence concerns.  Therefore, if sharing an auditor
leads to a conflict of interest rules violation, we would expect the merger outcomes to be less favorable to acquirers after
SOX was enacted relative to the period before the enactment.  Our final hypothesis is stated as follows. 
Hypothesis 5.  The effect of shared auditors on merger outcomes is less pronounced post-SOX enactment. 
<Middle> Data and summary statistics. 
3. 1.  Data. 
We obtain bids from Securities Data Corporation's Mergers and Acquisitions Database (SDC) from the beginning of 1985
to the end of 2010.  We limit the sample to economically meaningful bids on public targets from public bidders because we
require auditor, accounting, and stock price data for both bidders and targets.  Bidders must own less than 50% of the target
before the offer and seek to own more than 50% of the target at deal completion.  Deal size must be at least ten million
dollars, and targets must have book assets of at least five million dollars.  We eliminate deals with related parties including
repurchases, buybacks, and exchange offers, in addition to acquirers named as investor groups, shareholders, or creditors. 14
We require announcement return data for targets and acquirers from CRSP.  We augment our data in 2002–2010 with data
from Audit Analytics.  There are 3,294 deals meeting these restrictions and included in our final sample. 15
We define shared-auditor deals as those in which the target and bidder receive auditing services from the same auditor
for the fiscal year end immediately preceding the announcement of a bid.  Our primary proxy for shared-auditor bids, Shared
Auditor, is an indicator variable equal to one if Compustat (Audit Analytics for the period 2002–2010) reports that both the
target and acquirer receive audit services from the same auditor in the year prior to the bid.  We define Shared Auditor Office
as an indicator variable equal to one if the target and acquirer receive audit services from the same practice office of an audit
firm in the year immediately preceding a bid.  Auditor practice office data is machine readable in Audit Analytics only after
2001.  To examine the effect of auditor offices prior to SOX, we hand collect data on shared auditor offices for the period
1994–2001 by obtaining the Form 10-K filing for targets and acquirers from each sample bid and identifying which practice
office signed the audit opinion immediately prior to the deal announcement.  This analysis at the auditor practice level is
limited to deals beginning in 1994 as SEC 10-K filings are available electronically beginning in 1994.  We note that
approximately 15% of firms in our sample receive audit services from an auditor office that is not the local office.  This finding
is consistent with Choi Name (2012).  For a detailed list of all variable definitions see Table 1. 
3. 2.  Summary statistics and univariate analysis. 
Table 2, Panel A presents univariate statistics on the sample of bids.  We find approximately 24% of sample bids for the
period 1985–2010 have shared auditors, and in 6% of all bids between 1994 and 2010, targets and acquirers use the same
local practice office of an auditor. 
The univariate statistics in Table 2 are similar to previous studies on mergers and acquisitions.  Deal premiums average
approximately 46%, and targets receive on average announcement day returns of 21%, while bidders have announcement
returns close to zero ( 1%) (Betton Name, 2008).  The mean transaction value is about $1. 24 billion.  Tender offers make up
21% of the sample, and 29% of bids are all cash.  Approximately 3% of bids are hostile, and 83% of bids complete.  The average
number of bidders is 1. 13.  Consistent with prior studies, deal protection devices are common.  Termination fees average
$22. 75 million, and toeholds are used in 8% of bids.  The vast majority (87%) of bids have Big-N auditors for both the target
and acquirer (untabulated).  In Table 2, Panel B we tabulate descriptive statistics for the subsample of bids in which both the
target and acquirer are Big-N clients.  Descriptive statistics for the subsample of deals with clients of Big-N auditors are
similar to the descriptive statistics of the full sample (for example, 26% of this sample's bids for the period 1985–2010 have
shared auditors).  We note that we winsorize all continuous variables at the 1% and 99% levels to reduce the impact of
outliers. 
Table 3, Panel A compares univariate statistics for different-auditor, shared-auditor, and shared-auditor–office deals.  We
find shared-auditor deals are less likely to be tender offers (Tender Offer) or cash only deals (Cash Only Deal).  Shared-auditor
deals are more likely to have a shared director (Shared Director) and are more likely to be within-industry deals (Same 2-digit
SIC) relative to different-auditor deals.  We also find that premiums (Premium) are 5% lower, on average, in bids with shared
auditors and 14% lower when the target and acquirer share the same auditor office.  Target announcement returns (Target
Abnormal Return) are also 2% lower in shared-auditor bids.  Acquirer announcement returns (Acquirer Abnormal Return) are
marginally higher for shared-auditor bids, and deals are about 4% more likely to complete (Completed) with shared auditors. 
Shared auditors are also associated with lower bid competition ( of bidders), consistent with targets having lower bargaining
power in deals with shared auditors.  Overall, the univariate results suggest that, given a bid, acquirers benefit from sharedauditor deals at the expense of the target shareholders. 
Table 3, Panel B reports univariate statistics for the subset of within-industry deals partitioned into different-auditor,
shared-auditor, and shared-auditor–office deals.  We find that the results in this subsample of within-industry deals are
consistent with those reported in Panel A.  That is, premiums and target returns are lower in shared-auditor and sharedauditor–office deals relative to different-auditor deals.  Acquirer abnormal returns and deal completion rates are higher in
shared-auditor and shared-auditor–office deals relative to different-auditor deals. 
Table 3, Panel C reports the total number of deals, the number of deals with shared auditors, and the number of deals
with shared-auditor offices by year.  We note that in 1991, 32% of all deals were shared-auditor deals, which is noteworthy as
there were eight Big-N auditors, and in year 2009, 36. 8% of all deals were shared-auditor deals. 
3. 3.  Multivariate analysis of the probability of receiving a bid. 
To test Hypothesis 1 we model the probability of a firm receiving a bid using all Compustat firms.  We require Compustat
firms to have book assets of at least five million dollars in order to make the Compustat sample comparable to our SDC
sample.  We use probit regressions with the Compustat panel data to estimate the likelihood of a firm receiving a bid,
where F represents the standard normal distribution and X includes a proxy for auditor sharing and control variables.  The
dependent variable, Bid Received, is an indicator variable equal to one for a firm-year if SDC reports that a company received
at least one bid. 
We use two proxies to capture the extent to which a Compustat firm (a potential target) shares an auditor with other
Compustat firms (potential bidders).  First, we include the breadth of the audit network, Auditor Network.  We define Auditor
Network as the number of clients that an auditor has, divided by the total number of firms in the Compustat sample.  We
calculate this ratio for each auditor in each year.  If a firm retains an auditor with a large network, this firm, obviously, shares
an auditor with a large number of firms.  We create a similar proxy based on two-digit SIC industry classifications.  For each
year, we calculate each auditor's network in each industry, Auditor Industry Network. 16 If a firm retains an auditor with a
large industry network, then this firm shares an auditor with a relatively high number of other firms within the industry. 
The proxies for the potential to share an auditor are lagged by one year. 
We control for factors related to the probability of a firm receiving a bid following Palepu (1986).  If acquisitions provide a
disciplinary effect on target managers, we expect target managerial ineffectiveness to increase the probability of receiving a
bid.  We proxy for managerial effectiveness using the one-year abnormal return to the target in the year prior to receiving a
bid, Abnormal 1-Year Return.  Palepu (1986) predicts that financially constrained firms with high growth opportunities (and
vice versa) make good acquisition targets.  We construct a growth-resource “mismatch” indicator, GR Dummy, to proxy for
firms that have an imbalance between growth opportunities and financial resources.  GR Dummy is an indicator variable
equal to one if a company has (1) high growth, low liquidity, and high leverage, or (2) low growth, high liquidity, and low
leverage, with high (low) measured as above (below) the mean value of each variable.  Growth (Sales) is measured as the
three-year average rate of change in net sales.  We include proxies for financial constraints (Liquidity and Leverage), as
Ambrose and Megginson (1992) predict that illiquid and leveraged firms are more likely to be targets.  Because acquisition
activity clusters in time (Andrade Name, 2001), we include an indicator, Industry Bids, equal to one if there was a bid in the
two-digit SIC industry of the target in the past year.  Because smaller firms lack the resources to bid on the largest firms, we
control for target size with the book value of target assets, Asset Size.  We use the target market-to-book ratio, Market-toBook, and the price-to-earnings ratio, Price-to-Earnings, to control for the impact of target value on bidding activity as
relatively “cheaper” targets may be more likely to receive a bid.  Lastly, we include industry and year fixed effects to control
for time and industry variation in the probability of receiving a bid.  Details on variable construction are reported in Table 1. 
Table 4 presents the marginal effects of the probit regressions of the probability of a firm receiving a bid on the two
proxies for shared auditors.  In Model 1, we use Auditor Industry Network as a proxy for the magnitude of auditor sharing for
Compustat firms.  We find a positive and statistically significant marginal effect on the probability of a firm receiving a bid
(p-valueo0. 01).  The marginal effect estimate of Auditor Industry Network is economically significant at 4. 1%.  To demonstrate
the economic significance, a one standard deviation (i. e. , 0. 07) increase in the Auditor Industry Network of a company's audit
firm increases the probability of a firm receiving a bid by 0. 29% or 8. 33% (¼0. 29%/3. 48%) of the unconditional probability of
receiving a bid.  In Model 2, we use Auditor Network as a proxy for the presence of a shared auditor, and we again find a
positive and statistically significant marginal effect (p-valueo0. 01).  An increase of one standard deviation (i. e. , 0. 05) in the
auditor network of a company's auditor increases the probability of a firm receiving a bid by 0. 34% (¼0. 05  0. 068).  This
increase represents 9. 20% (0. 32%/3. 48%) of the unconditional probability of a firm receiving a bid.  Our proxy for auditor
sharing is obviously related to auditor size.  Larger, more reputable auditors may provide assurance to the acquirer on the
value of the target (Xie Name, 2013).  To address concerns that our results are driven by the largest audit firms (Big-N
auditors), in untabulated analysis, we include an indicator equal to one if a firm is audited by a Big-N auditor.  We find the
inferences from our above tests (Models 1 and 2) are unchanged when we control for presence of Big-N auditor. 
To further our analysis, we eliminate all non-Big-N audit clients and re-estimate Eq.  (1) on the subsample of companies
with a Big-N auditor.  Models 3 and 4 of Table 4 report the results.  We find that the marginal effects of Auditor Industry
Network (3. 0%) and Auditor Network (6. 8%) remain positive and statistically significant (p-valueo0. 01). 
Lastly, we partition our results into the pre- and post-Sarbanes Oxley Act periods to examine the effect of SOX on
auditors’ willingness to reduce information asymmetry between targets and bidders.  Models 5 and 6 in Table 4 report the
results.  For brevity, we report the results in the pre-SOX and post-SOX periods using Auditor Industry Network.  Results are
qualitatively and statistically similar to untabulated results using Auditor Network.  We find that the marginal effect of
the shared-auditor proxy (Auditor Industry Network) is positive (6. 5%) and statistically significant in the pre-SOX period
(p-valueo0. 01).  The marginal effect on Auditor Industry Network in the post-SOX period is also positive (2. 4%) and
statistically significant (p-valueo0. 05).  However; the magnitude is approximately 60% lower than the effect of the sharedauditor proxy in the pre-SOX period.  We find the coefficients (unreported) on Auditor Network and Auditor Industry Network
are significantly different at the 10% level in the pre- vs.  post-SOX period. 
Overall, we find that proxies for shared auditors are related to a higher probability of a firm receiving a bid.  These results
are consistent with Hypothesis 1, that acquirers use auditor information when making acquisition decisions.  This
information likely gives shared-auditor bidders an advantage over non-shared-auditor bidders. 
4.  Multivariate analysis of acquisition outcomes. 
We next measure the impact of shared auditors on acquisition outcomes including deal premiums, target abnormal
announcement day returns, acquirer abnormal announcement day returns, and deal completion rates. 
4. 1.  Deal premiums. 
We model the effect of shared auditors on deal premiums in the sample of announced bids as follows. 
Deal premium is the difference between the price offered in the bid and the target's trading price four weeks prior, as
calculated by SDC. 17 SDC's premium data does not cover all target firms in the sample (Officer, 2003).  We increase the
coverage of SDC's premium data by combining SDC's price per share data with CRSP prices twenty days prior to bid
announcement to maximize sample size.  If the first premium measure is missing, we use the alternative measure to fill in
missing observations.  Results are generally robust to different measures of deal premiums and to exclusion of deals that are
missing SDC premium data.  Premium data are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels to reduce the effect of outliers. 
We include indicator variables for the presence of shared auditors, as well as control variables that affect deal premiums. 
Same City is an indicator variable to control for geographic proximity of the target and acquirer as prior studies show that
closer geographic proximity between the target and acquirer reduces information asymmetry (Uysal Name, 2008). 18 Same
City equals one if SDC reports that the headquarters of the target and acquirer are in the same city, zero otherwise. 
Second, Shared Director is an indicator variable equal to one if a board member sits on the board of both the target and
acquirer in the acquisition, as prior studies show that shared directors are associated with deal outcomes and appear to be in
a position to share transaction-sensitive information with acquirers (Cai and Sevilir, 2012).  We combine data from several
sources to create Shared Director.  Specifically, if BoardEx, Compact Disclosure, Corporate Library, or RiskMetrics (formerly
IRRC) directors databases record the same name for a target director as an acquirer director, we classify the deal as a deal
with a shared director.  These datasets do not cover all publicly traded firms, and director data is missing for about half of the
sample bids included in the SDC sample.  We fill missing director data with predicted values in an attempt to maximize the
observations in the sample.  To predict shared directors we estimate a probit model predicting the probability that a bid has
a shared director using all observations with available director data.  Specifically, we include the deal and target firm
characteristics including relative size of the target to acquirer, the value of the transaction, the target market-to-book ratio,
the target ROA, the target stock price run-up, a toehold indicator, a same 2-digit SIC industry indicator, a tender offer
indicator, the target termination fee, the number of bidders, and a cash only deal indicator, as well as industry and year fixed
effects as predictors for the presence of a shared director.  The pseudo R-squared of 0. 