 1.  Introduction  Various business and political leaders in the United States have expressed concerns that the U. S.  system of taxing multinationals effectively subsidizes foreign takeovers ( White, 2014 .  Hatch, 2014 ).  Prior research on mergers and acquisitions  (M&A) demonstrates how variation in tax rates ( Scholes and Wolfson, 1990, Arulampalam et al. , 2010 ) and in tax systems  ( Huizinga and Voget, 2009 .  Feld et al. , 2016 ) impact the market for corporate control.  As a result, ﬁrms under a worldwide  tax system are tax-disadvantaged acquirers .  Furthering this line of inquiry, we posit that ﬁrms under a worldwide tax system  are also tax-favored targets of foreign acquirers.  We ﬁnd that U. S.  ﬁrms with locked-out earnings are tax-favored to foreign  acquirers (or equivalently tax-disfavored to U. S.  acquirers).   Foreign earnings “lockout” results when ﬁrms avoid or delay foreign earnings repatriation.  Under the U. S.  worldwide tax  system, taxes owing to the U. S.  government on the earnings of foreign subsidiaries are deferred until those earnings are  repatriated to the U. S.  Consequently, ﬁrms’ repatriation decisions are sensitive to the level of repatriation taxes ( Desai et  al. , 2001.  Hines and Hubbard, 1990 ) and tax incentives lead to higher overseas cash holdings ( Foley et al. , 2007 ).  Hanlon  et al.  (2015) and Edwards et al.  (2016) demonstrate that ﬁrms use “trapped cash” to make suboptimal foreign investments,  increasing total lockout.  A foreign acquirer may be able to free a target’s foreign subsidiaries’ locked-out earnings from the  U. S.  worldwide tax system using “out-from-under” strategies, utilizing trapped cash elsewhere and liquidating suboptimal  foreign investments so the proceeds may be more eﬃciently redeployed.   To test this hypothesized relation between tax lockout in target U. S.  ﬁrms and the nationality of acquirers – foreign  versus U. S.  – we use a sample of 4611 majority acquisitions of U. S.  public company target ﬁrms from 1995 to 2010.  We  measure lockout using the hand-collected balance of permanently reinvested earnings (PRE) reported in the tax footnote.   Employing a probit model, we observe a positive association between the target ﬁrm’s level of PRE and the probability that  the acquirer is foreign.  The effect is economically signiﬁcant.  a standard deviation increase in PRE is associated with a 12%  relative increase in the likelihood that an acquirer is foreign.  These ﬁndings suggest that potential U. S. -based acquirers of  U. S.  targets with trapped cash and suboptimal foreign investments are losing out to foreign acquirers.   Building upon these initial ﬁndings and improving identiﬁcation of our main hypothesized effect, we posit that foreign  acquirers of U. S.  target ﬁrms with higher levels of tax lockout are more likely to be residents of countries that use territorial  tax systems.  In a territorial system, foreign earnings are subject to low or no home country tax, thereby eliminating the  lockout effect.  Categorizing acquisitions according to acquirer tax systems, we observe a signiﬁcant association between  our lockout measures and foreign acquisitions occurring under the territorial (as opposed to worldwide) tax regime.   In an additional test we exploit an exogenous change in the tax system for a subset of acquirers.  during our sample  period, ﬁve OECD countries switched from worldwide to territorial tax systems.  As it is unlikely that switching tax systems  increased incentives to acquire U. S.  ﬁrms with higher levels of tax lockout for reasons other than taxation (e. g. , general  preference for targets with greater foreign activity or higher proﬁtability), this test allows for stronger causal identiﬁcation.   Taken together, these tests provide strong evidence that the relationship between a target’s level of locked-out earnings and  the likelihood of an acquirer being foreign is concentrated in acquiring ﬁrms that operate under territorial tax systems.   Our ﬁndings suggest that U. S.  potential acquirers of U. S.  target ﬁrms with greater levels of locked-out earnings are losing  out to foreign acquirers.  These results speak directly to the current U. S.  policy debate on repatriation taxes as well as the  broader issue of the relative merits of territorial versus worldwide (with deferral) taxation systems.  These ﬁndings are also  relevant to those countries considering a transition between worldwide and territorial tax systems, as notably undertaken  by the U. K.  and Japan.  Likewise, this examination of the relationship of tax systems, lockout, and foreign acquisitions of U. S.   target ﬁrms highlights a facet of the current worldwide tax system and may serve to inform its adjustment or alteration.   The subsequent section of this paper provides institutional information and discusses prior literature.  Section 3 describes  the hypotheses.  Section 4 details the sample selection and research design.  Section 5 presents our ﬁndings.  Section 6 discusses additional analyses.  Section 7 concludes.   2.  Institutional background and prior literature  2. 1.  U. S.  tax and accounting treatment of foreign earnings  The U. S.  taxes its multinational corporations on a worldwide basis.  For a single legal entity, worldwide earnings are taxed  immediately in the period earned.  For ﬁrms comprised of multiple legal entities, however, U. S.  taxation of income earned  in foreign subsidiaries is typically deferred until repatriation.  This U. S.  tax is reduced by foreign tax credits associated with  foreign taxes paid on foreign earnings.  This calculation is complicated by foreign operations in multiple jurisdictions, but  the residual tax due is approximately equal to any excess of the U. S.  tax rate over the weighted average rate of the foreign  jurisdictions.  Given the option of deferral and the high U. S.  corporate tax rate, there is a potential policy concern that foreign  investment by U. S.  multinationals is ineﬃciently subsidized, so that ﬁrms are induced to reinvest their earnings abroad even  when the potential returns are lower than those available domestically, effectively “locking out” these earnings.   Under U. S.  Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, the expectation future U. S.  tax payments associated with foreign  earnings requires ﬁrms to record a deferred tax expense and the related deferred tax liability.  However, Accounting Standards Codiﬁcation 740 allows an exception to this rule, called the Indeﬁnite Reversal Exception.  If management has the  intent and ability to indeﬁnitely reinvest the earnings of a foreign subsidiary, the permanently reinvested earnings (PRE)  designation is invoked, whereby the company avoids recognizing the deferred tax expense.  This designation must be supported by speciﬁc plans for future ﬁnancing and investment, or be accompanied by an assertion of intent to distribute the  earnings in a tax-free liquidation.   2. 2.  Prior literature  Theoretical models, such as those in Hartman (1985) and Scholes et al.  (2014) , show that repatriation decisions are  chieﬂy driven by differences in marginal after-tax rates of return, in the foreign jurisdiction relative to the U. S.  In these  models, the repatriation tax itself is irrelevant, since the foreign earnings are already “trapped” and must eventually face  the repatriation tax.  it does not matter if the ﬁrm can defer this tax burden – the present value of taxes due is the same  whether paid immediately or in the future.  Of course, these results might not be obtained in a richer model.  For example,  if the repatriation tax is not constant over time, then a ﬁrm will delay repatriations until periods with low tax rates, even  at the cost of lower after-tax foreign returns ( De Waegenaere and Sansing, 2008 ).  Tax-induced lockout effect is exacerbated  by the accounting designation of foreign earnings as PRE and multinationals’ desire to maintain higher book income by  avoiding the deferred tax expense on foreign earnings.  This arises because an actual repatriation would force the immediate  recognition of the related domestic tax expense, which, in the case of PRE, by deﬁnition, had not yet been recognized.  In  fact, Graham et al.  (2011) survey tax executives and ﬁnd that these two parallel effects are equally important in driving  ﬁrms’ initial foreign location and subsequent repatriation and reinvestment decisions.   This study contributes to the literature on the role of the frictions created by the system of worldwide taxation on crossborder M&A.  Until recently the majority of empirical studies examining cross-border acquisitions have not considered the  effect of U. S.  international tax rules (e. g. , Doukas and Travlos, 1988.  Moeller and Schlingemann, 2005.  Black et al. , 2007.  Dos  Santos et al. , 2008.  Ellis et al. , 2011.  Erel et al. , 2012 ).  More recently, researchers have begun to investigate the role of taxes  in cross-border M&A.  Using M&A as a proxy for foreign investment, Edwards et al.  (2016) and Hanlon et al.  (2015) document  that U. S.  ﬁrms with locked-out earnings or high levels of trapped cash make less proﬁtable cash acquisitions of foreign target  ﬁrms.  Our study differs from these studies as it examines the impact of the U. S.  tax system on the acquisition of speciﬁcally  U. S.  target ﬁrms.   Feld et al.  (2016) examine the role of an acquirer’s tax system type on outbound M&A.  Focusing on country-level acquirer  characteristics, they provide evidence that ﬁrms from territorial countries are less competitive in bidding on targets in low  tax countries.  Feld et al.  (2016) only include cross-border acquisitions in their sample and so are silent on the whether an  acquisition is cross-border or domestic.  In contrast to Feld et al.  (2016) , we examine how one ﬁrm-speciﬁc tax attribute, the  level of locked-out earnings, impacts the likelihood that a U. S.  ﬁrm (a high tax country resident) is the target of an inbound  foreign acquisition.  We observe that U. S.  acquirers are less likely to acquire certain U. S.  targets – those with higher levels  of locked-out earnings.  Our research setting is speciﬁc to the U. S.  and so has the advantage that it holds constant the tax  system and statutory tax rate faced by the target ﬁrms.   Huizinga and Voget (2009) ﬁnd that countries with high international double taxation attract smaller numbers of parent  ﬁrms, and the headquarters activities that come with them, following cross-border M&A.  In contrast to our study, Huizinga  and Voget (2009) take the ﬁrms involved in an M&A transaction, and their locations, as given and examine if the parent  location is selected in a tax eﬃcient manner.  We examine the prior step in the M&A process, speciﬁcally how the M&A  parties are paired.  Alternatively stated, we examine a potential cause of the speciﬁc pairing of ﬁrms, the lockout effect  created by the U. S.  tax system.  The ﬁndings of Huizinga and Voget (2009) imply that, given the pairings we document, the  parent of the combined ﬁrm is more likely to choose to locate outside of the U. S.  following the merger.   Finally, Bird (2017) ﬁnds that low-tax foreign bidders are more likely to acquire more proﬁtable U. S.  target ﬁrms relative  to high-tax domestic bidders, and that increases in a target ﬁrm’s tax shields lead to decreases in the probability of foreign  acquisition.  Where Bird (2017) examines the impact of target proﬁtability and existing tax deductions, attributes that vary  within both domestic only and multinational ﬁrms, on inbound foreign M&A activity, our study examines the impact of  foreign subsidiary earnings that are locked-out by the U. S.  worldwide system of taxing foreign subsidiary proﬁts on inbound  M&A activity.   3.  Hypothesis development  3. 1.  Worldwide taxation and inbound mergers and acquisitions  Given that U. S.  tax and ﬁnancial reporting systems lead U. S.  ﬁrms to hold more earnings overseas, these ﬁrms can become  attractive – that is, tax-favored – targets for foreign buyers.  First, accumulated locked-out earnings might appeal to foreign  acquirers because the takeover could help free the target’s foreign subsidiaries’ past earnings from the U. S.  worldwide tax  system.  Following an acquisition, it is possible for a foreign acquirer to access the existing stock of unrepatriated foreign  earnings in the foreign subsidiary, using what are known as “out-from-under” or “hopscotching” transactions.  Out-fromunder planning is highly fact-speciﬁc and different strategies are used depending on the attributes of the ﬁrms involved.   Kleinbard (2014) presents an example of this type of transaction, wherein a subsidiary with assets that the ﬁrm wishes  to “free” can lend previously trapped assets to the foreign parent and thus “hop” over the U. S.  The parent is then able to  use the assets as they wish (invest in other assets, repay debt, etc. ) without being liable for U. S.  taxation.  Prior to 2010,  a similar transaction was possible that used an exchange of assets of the U. S.  ﬁrm’s foreign subsidiary for shares in the  new foreign parent.  The transfer could be treated as a dividend from the foreign subsidiary to the foreign parent to the  extent of existing earnings and proﬁts.  The dividend did not incur U. S.  tax because it was from one foreign corporation (the  subsidiary) to another (the new foreign parent) and did not involve a U. S.  entity.   The past locked-out earnings of the target could be held as cash or other ﬁnancial assets.  these assets are fungible  and could readily be redeployed.  The past locked-out earnings of the target could also be held in operating assets as prior  research has documented evidence consistent with U. S.  multinationals using trapped cash to make suboptimal foreign investments ( Edwards et al. , 2016.  Hanlon et al. , 2015 ).  A foreign ﬁrm that acquires a U. S.  target with locked-out earnings  sub-optimally invested could liquidate those investments and redeploy the resources for a more useful purpose.   Accordingly, we propose the following hypothesis.   H1.  The likelihood of an acquirer being foreign is increasing in a target’s level of locked-out earnings.   Our hypothesis relates to the identity of the winning bidder.  We acknowledge that there are other ways to investigate  valuation differences in M&A – using information on prices or the identity of the winning bidder, for instance.  however,  using the valuation information embedded in price premiums causes several empirical diﬃculties.  We do not know what  process determines acquisition prices, which is key to understanding how valuations feed into the observed price.  For example, if a ﬁrst price auction is descriptive, the observed price tells us about that bidder’s valuation directly, ignoring issues  related to surplus sharing between the target and acquirer.  However, if a second price auction is descriptive, the relevant  valuation is that of the losing bidder.  This problem could be minimized if we could observe the other bids for the target.   however, in most cases even the identity of the other bidders is unknown, let alone their bids.  Accordingly, we use the identity of the winning bidder to infer valuation differences in a way that is robust to alternative price structures and does not  rely on observing losing bids.  Differences in the country of residence for different bidders will reveal these valuation differences as long as the M&A market has some element of eﬃciency – the probability of a bidder winning must be increasing  in its valuation.  This should hold on the margin even if bidders suffer from overconﬁdence or a predilection towards empire  building.   We note that several factors could mitigate or counteract our hypothesized effect.  First, a U. S. -based acquirer with suﬃcient proﬁtable overseas investment opportunities could access the trapped cash and suboptimal foreign investments of the  target and redeploy those resources itself.  Second, U. S.  acquirers could be anticipating a favorable change in the taxation  of foreign earnings, or could potentially use their own foreign tax credit carryforwards to shelter repatriations of acquired  locked-out funds.  Finally, during our sample period, U. S.  acquirers could potentially return foreign earnings and cash via  complex tax planning ( Martin et al. , 2015 ).   3. 2.  The acquirer tax system  As noted above, countries can tax the proﬁts of foreign subsidiaries using worldwide or territorial tax systems.  While  most large developed economies use territorial tax systems, some still use worldwide systems (e. 