 
We provide evidence on the effects of bank mergers and acquisitions (M&As) in the U. S.  on borrowers’ voluntary disclosure of ﬁrm-speciﬁc information to public ﬁnancial markets.  The past three decades have witnessed waves of consolidations 
through M&As in the U. S.  banking industry.  This trend has signiﬁcantly reduced the number of banking institutions, and a 
few large banks now hold the bulk of assets.  Researchers argue that the consolidation has fundamentally altered the nature 
of banks as ﬁnancial intermediaries, both directly by affecting how banks monitor and ﬁnance borrowers (e. g. , changing the 
type and nature of products and services banks offer), and indirectly by affecting borrowers’ demand for products and services from alternative (public) ﬁnancial markets.  Evidence on how bank mergers affect borrowers’ disclosure adds to our 
understanding of their consequences, and contributes to the growing literature that seeks to understand how ﬁrms’ incentive to produce and disseminate public information is affected by various institutional mechanisms in a country’s ﬁnancial 
markets (e. g. , Ball Name, 20 0 0; Leuz Name, 2003; Bushman Name, 2004 ).  Furthermore, to the extent that public information 
is a key determinant of the development of stock markets, such evidence can shed light on the interaction between public 
stock markets and bank markets ( Allen and Gale, 20 0 0; Levine, 2005 ).  
We posit that bank mergers affect borrowers’ incentive to disclose information publicly by affecting the monitoring and 
ﬁnancing services provided by banks.  Prior work, however, has not reached consensus on the speciﬁc nature and degree 
of the monitoring and ﬁnancing effects of bank mergers, especially for publicly listed borrowers.  Therefore, whether bank 
mergers can cause economically meaningful public information spillover through increased disclosure by borrowers is ex 
ante unclear and ultimately an empirical question.  
On the monitoring side, mergers can change borrowers’ disclosure incentives by changing the nature and extent of bank 
monitoring.  Traditional banking literature emphasizes the unique role played by banks because of their ability to produce 
soft, private information about their borrowers.  This ability allows banks to serve as delegated monitors for public capital 
providers who ﬁnd it diﬃcult to monitor ﬁrms for which much of the information is soft (e. g. , Diamond, 1984, 1991; Fama, 
1985 ).  Following bank mergers, borrowers’ incentive to disclose may increase or decrease depending on how mergers affect 
bank monitoring.  On one hand, mergers can alter the nature of bank monitoring from being more soft information based to 
being more hard information based, as mergers create more complex and hierarchical organizations that are less effective 
at collecting and processing soft information but may be more eﬃcient at processing hard information (e. g. , Stein, 2002; 
Berger Name, 2005 ).  This can lead to increased public disclosure by borrowers for two reasons.  First, merged banks themselves may rely more on hard information that can be eﬃciently collected through public disclosures ( Gormley Name, 2012 ).  
Second, to the extent that banks’ comparative advantage in monitoring primarily emanates from their ability to process soft 
information, public capital providers may rely less on bank monitoring after mergers and instead demand additional public 
disclosure to facilitate their own monitoring efforts.  On the other hand, to the extent that mergers discipline banks plagued 
by agency problems, monitoring effort may increase at banks that did not suﬃciently monitor their borrowers prior to the 
mergers.  This may increase the willingness of public capital providers to delegate the monitoring role to banks, reducing 
the public capital providers’ demand for public disclosure.  
On the ﬁnancing side, borrowers’ disclosure can change if mergers affect their access to bank credit.  Bank mergers are 
often motivated by eﬃciency gain considerations, and banks take actions and make changes in their operations to realize 
these gains.  While these changes may beneﬁt the merging banks, they are not necessarily welfare improving to all borrowers 
( Karceski Name, 2005; Berger Name, 1999; DeYoung Name, 2009 ).  Some borrowers may be adversely affected by these changes 
and might experience reduced credit availability.  For example, the merged entity may re-balance and re-optimize their portfolios to achieve better risk management.  When merged banks have signiﬁcant geographic overlap, they may reduce loans 
to some existing borrowers to reduce their exposure to the local area ( Amore Name, 2013 ).  Or, following the disciplinary 
acquisition of a poorly run bank, the merged entity may cut lending to borrowers who were beneﬁtting from ineﬃciently 
priced cheap loans from the acquired bank.  Reduced credit availability might prompt these borrowers to increase public 
disclosure to improve their access to alternative ﬁnancing sources ( Diamond and Verrecchia, 1991; Baiman and Verrecchia, 
1996 ).  At the same time, these changes may also beneﬁt some borrowers whose disclosure may decrease or remain unchanged.  Therefore, whether bank mergers can cause any meaningful public information spillover via the ﬁnancing channel 
is also an empirical question. 
Our analysis is based on a comprehensive sample of nearly 13,0 0 0 syndicated loan contracts where the lead lenders 
are commercial banks or bank holding companies and the borrowers are publicly traded companies in the U. S.  exchanges 
with ongoing lending relationships with their banks.  We use a difference-in-differences (DiD) design in which we compare 
changes in the disclosure of borrowers whose banks are involved in M&As during their contract periods to contemporaneous 
changes in the disclosure of borrowers whose banks are not involved in M&As.  
Using the incidence of conference calls as our main measure of disclosure, we ﬁnd that borrowers signiﬁcantly increase 
disclosure after their lending banks engage in M&As.  The disclosure increases are not concentrated in periods immediately 
after mergers; instead, they persist throughout post-merger periods.  These effects are robust to the inclusion of controls for 
known determinants of disclosure and to alternative measures of disclosure based on earnings forecasts.  
In cross-sectional analyses, we ﬁnd that the effects of bank mergers are stronger for borrowers who are more vulnerable 
to disruptions in banking services following mergers.  Speciﬁcally, the disclosure increases are larger for borrowers who are 
more reliant on the merging banks to ﬁnance their assets and who do not have alternative existing banking relationships.  
Consistent with the monitoring channel, we also ﬁnd that disclosure increases are larger when banks perform a stronger 
monitoring role (as proxied by the number of covenants in the borrowers’ existing covenants), when information about 
borrowers’ operations tends to be soft (as proxied by a composite score based on borrowers’ intangible assets and R&D 
expenditure), and when their banks’ pre-merger organizational structures are more suitable for soft-information monitoring 
(as proxied by the number of branches operated by the banks).  Finally, consistent with the ﬁnancing channel, we ﬁnd that 
the effects of mergers are stronger for borrowers when the merging banks have more correlated geographic exposures and 
thus are more likely to cut lending to their existing borrowers for risk diversiﬁcation purposes.  
We examine the sensitivity of our results to two alternative explanations.  The ﬁrst one is that changes in local economic 
conditions coinciding with bank mergers could be driving our results.  We conduct three analyses to address this concern.  
First, we show that our ﬁndings are robust to the inclusion of a comprehensive set of controls for location-level economic 
conditions.  Second, we ﬁnd that our results are robust to the inclusion of state-year or MSA-year interactive dummies that 
ﬂexibly absorb the effect of any time-varying local-level economic shocks.  Finally, our ﬁndings are also robust to estimating 
the DiD speciﬁcation on a propensity score matched sample in which each treatment borrower (affected by bank mergers) is 
matched to an economically similar control borrower (unaffected by bank mergers) from the same location.  These ﬁndings 
suggest that the disclosure increase is unlikely to be driven by changes in local economic conditions.  A second alternative 
explanation is that our results reﬂect the effect of poor ﬁnancial health of banks engaged in mergers.  We note that prior 
studies show that bank mergers in the U. S.  have largely been driven by regulatory, technological, and competitive changes, 
and most mergers involved healthy ﬁnancial institutions ( Pilloff, 2004 ).  In addition, we ﬁnd that the disclosure increase does 
not vary with proxies for bank performance and also manifests when banks are in good health prior to mergers.  
We also document two ﬁndings consistent with the premise that bank mergers cause disruptions in borrowers’ banking 
service.  First, we ﬁnd that relative to borrowers whose banks did not engage in M&A activities, borrowers of merged banks 
reduce their reliance on bank credit and increase their reliance on public bond ﬁnancing following mergers.  Second, we 
document signiﬁcant negative stock price reactions to borrowers upon the announcement of their bank mergers.  Collectively, 
these ﬁndings are consistent with the interpretation that the disclosure increase reﬂects borrowers’ response to disruptions 
in banking services caused by mergers at their existing lending banks.  
Our study contributes to the literature on bank mergers.  Merger waves over the last three decades have fundamentally 
altered the nature of banks as ﬁnancial intermediaries in the U. S. , and a growing literature seeks to understand the economic consequences of this development.  Our study is the ﬁrst to explore the consequences of this change for the public 
information environment in the banking market.  Our results suggest that banking consolidation prompts borrowers to increase transparency to improve access to alternative ﬁnancing sources and to meet the informational demands of capital 
providers in a changed monitoring environment in which both public capital providers and banks rely more on public, hard 
information for monitoring purposes.  The large number of bank mergers in the U. S.  over the last three decades suggests 
that our ﬁndings can shed light on the over-time increases in voluntary disclosure by U. S.  public companies ( Bushee Name, 
2004 ).  More generally, because the availability of public information affects the ability of stock markets to allocate resources 
eﬃciently, our ﬁnding of a spillover effect from bank mergers also improves our understanding of the channels through 
which ﬁnancial markets affect resource allocation in the economy, and informs the debate on bank- versus market-based 
ﬁnancial systems ( Allen and Gale, 20 0 0 ; Levine, 20 05 ).  While our main focus is on the consequences for the public information environment, our ﬁndings on borrowers’ ﬁnancing changes around mergers add to our understanding of how U. S.  
bank mergers affect bank credit supply to publicly listed borrowers.  
Our study also contributes to recent research establishing the importance of banking relations on ﬁrms’ public information disclosure behaviors.  Lo (2014) ﬁnds that borrowers increase disclosure following deterioration in their banks’ ﬁnancial 
health, consistent with the hypothesis that ﬁrms increase disclosure to facilitate access to public ﬁnancing when continued 
access to bank ﬁnancing is under threat.  Vashishtha (2014) ﬁnds that borrowers reduce disclosure after covenant violations; 
he concludes that reduced disclosure reﬂects a delegation of monitoring to banks by shareholders who consequently demand less disclosure.  Gormley Name (2012) ﬁnd an increase in timely loss recognition after foreign bank entry in India due 
to these banks’ greater demand for hard, public information for screening and monitoring borrowers.  Martin and Roychowdhury (2015) ﬁnd evidence of a decrease in timely loss recognition after the initiation of trading in credit default swaps, consistent with a reduction in lenders’ monitoring incentives following this development.  Our study shares with these papers 
the common theme that borrowers optimally change disclosure in response to changes in their banking relationships.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 develops our hypotheses.  Section 3 describes the data and sample.  
Main results are presented and discussed in Section 4 .  Section 5 presents additional analyses and robustness tests, and 
Section 6 concludes.  
2.  Hypotheses development. 
Prior work argues that bank merger waves have signiﬁcantly altered the scope and nature of banks’ operations, as well 
as their ability and incentives to monitor and ﬁnance borrowers ( Berger Name, 1999 ).  We posit that these changes can affect 
borrowers’ disclosure incentives in response to changes in borrowers’ monitoring environments (the monitoring channel), 
and to changes in banks’ ﬁnancing services to borrowers (the ﬁnancing channel).  In this section, we summarize the relevant 
arguments.  
2. 1.  The monitoring channel. 
Under the monitoring channel, bank mergers can cause borrowers to increase disclosure because the banks’ monitoring 
style evolves from being based primarily on soft information to being based more on hard, quantitative information.  The 
traditional literature on relationship banking recognizes banks’ role as delegated monitors because of their unique ability to 
access and produce soft, private information about their borrowers (e. g. , Diamond, 1984, 1991; Fama, 1985; James, 1987 ).  
Because dispersed public capital providers rely mainly on hard, public information for monitoring, they ﬁnd it too costly 
to monitor and provide capital to ﬁrms for which much of the information is soft.  As a result, for such borrowers, public 
capital providers optimally delegate (at least part of) the monitoring effort to banks; this reduces public capital providers’ 
own demand for public disclosure for monitoring purposes ( Ball Name, 20 0 0; Vashishtha, 2014 ).  
Recent work argues that bank mergers could fundamentally change the nature of banks’ monitoring by altering their 
organizational structures (e. g. , Stein, 2002; Berger Name, 2005 ).  Speciﬁcally, mergers result in larger, more complex, and 
more hierarchical banking organizations that are less effective at collecting and processing soft information but may be more 
eﬃcient at processing hard information.  Theoretical studies show that complex, hierarchical organizations rely less (more) 
on  soft  (hard)  information  because  such  organizations  face  higher  costs  in  motivating  agents  to  produce  and  truthfully 
represent soft information, as well as in accurately communicating soft information within organizations.  
Several empirical studies provide evidence that banks’ organizational structure affects their relative reliance on soft versus hard information, 
and consequently their lending practices.  
The shift in the nature of bank monitoring could generate higher demand for public disclosures from capital providers.  
The higher demand can come from banks themselves.  To the extent that much of the hard information can be eﬃciently 
collected through public disclosures, after M&As, banks may reduce their costly private information collection effort s and 
may instead rely more on public disclosures.  Consistent with this possibility, Gormley Name (2012) ﬁnd that foreign banks 
demand more conservative accounting reports to facilitate their screening and monitoring effort s.  Higher demand may also 
come from other external capital providers.  To the extent that banks’ comparative advantage in monitoring emanates primarily from their ability to process soft information, after M&As, public capital providers may rely less on bank monitoring 
and instead demand additional public disclosure to facilitate their own monitoring effort s.  
On the other hand, mergers could also affect bank monitoring in ways that could lead to a decrease in borrowers’ disclosure.  The literature on the market for corporate control argues that mergers can act as a disciplining device for ﬁrms 
plagued by agency problems (e. g. , Shleifer and Vishny, 1997 ).  As a result, monitoring efforts may increase following mergers 
at banks that were not suﬃciently monitoring their borrowers prior to the mergers.  This can in turn increase public capital 
providers’ incentive to rely more on bank monitoring, reducing their own demand for public disclosure.  
2. 2.  The ﬁnancing channel. 
Under the ﬁnancing channel, public information spillovers may result if bank mergers adversely affect the availability of 
credit to some borrowers who may increase disclosure in their effort to offset the consequences of reduced access to credit.  
While mergers are usually motivated by eﬃciency gains, these gains may not be welfare improving for all borrowers.  For 
example, in disciplinary mergers that involve the acquisition of poorly run target banks plagued by agency problems, target 
banks’ borrowers may be beneﬁtting from below-cost cheap credit prior to mergers.  Following such mergers, efforts by the 
new management of the merged entity may reduce or completely eliminate credit to such borrowers.  
In general, actions taken by merging banks to realize eﬃciency gains may adversely affect credit availability to some 
borrowers even when these borrowers are proﬁtable to banks.  For example, following the increased complexity in organizational structure and associated changes in monitoring style (e. g. , Stein, 2002 ), the merged entity may realize that it 
is no longer proﬁtable to lend to borrowers whose credit relevant information tends to be soft ( Berger Name, 2005 ), such 
banks may decide to refocus their lending more on borrowers that can be more cost-effectively monitored based on hard 
information and cut lending to borrowers that do not generate reliable hard information.  Mergers can also create adverse 
effects on some borrowers because of risk management and portfolio optimization considerations (e. g. , Berger Name, 1999 ).  
For example, following mergers between banks with geographic overlap, the merged entity may cut lending to some existing borrowers to achieve better loan portfolio diversiﬁcation ( Amore Name, 2013 ).  Finally, anecdotal evidence suggests that 
banks may become more selective in lending after mergers, as they gain access to alternative markets and clienteles and 
have more proﬁtable business opportunities to pursue than lending to existing borrowers ( Sapsford, 2004 ).  
The adverse ﬁnancing effect can prompt banks’ existing borrowers to increase public disclosure for two possible reasons.  
First, to the extent that reduction/discontinuation of credit supply by the merged bank is also accompanied by reduced 
monitoring effort, the existing shareholders of these borrowers may increase their demand for public disclosure to facilitate 
their own monitoring.  Second, borrowers may also increase public disclosure to improve their access to alternative sources 
of ﬁnancing to offset the lost bank credit.  Speciﬁcally, ﬁrms with relatively easy access to public ﬁnancing (e. g. , ﬁrms with 
above investment grade credit rating or large, ﬁnancially strong ﬁrms) may attempt to offset the loss of bank credit by 
accessing public debt markets ( Sapsford and Sherer, 2001 ).  These ﬁrms could increase public disclosure because public disclosure is a more cost-effective way than private communications to resolve information asymmetries and improve their 
terms of ﬁnancing with a dispersed set of potential, public capital providers ( Diamond and Verrecchia, 1991; Baiman and 
Verrecchia, 1996) ).  Firms with no easy access to public ﬁnancing (e. g. , those with severe information asymmetries) may resort more to private sources for alternative ﬁnancing.  When this is the case, they may rely more on private communications 
to reduce information asymmetries with these investors.  However, to the extent that public disclosure can help attract the 
attention of alternative private funding sources in the ﬁrst place, they may also have incentive to increase public disclosure 
for this reason.  
While mergers may adversely affect some borrowers’ access to bank credit, they may at the same time increase bank 
credit availability to other borrowers who might beneﬁt from some of the eﬃciency gains generated from bank mergers.  
These borrowers may increase their reliance on bank ﬁnancing, which leads to no change or even a decrease in public 
disclosure.  Therefore, the net effect from the ﬁnancing channel can be ambiguous.  
Prior research offers no direct evidence on the extent to which mergers alter banks’ monitoring style and effort.  Similarly, while prior studies ( DeYoung Name, 2009 ) document signiﬁcant improvements in bank performance following mergers 
(consistent with the presence of eﬃciency gains), the evidence is inconclusive on what changes banks implement to realize 
these gains, and on the extent to which banks pass on the eﬃciency gains to customers.  The evidence is close to nonexistent 
for publicly traded borrowers in the U. S. .  For example, while Berger and Udell (1996) and Erel (2011) ﬁnd lower post-merger 
loan rates for small and medium businesses in the U. S. , Park and Pennacchi (2009) ﬁnd lower deposit rates in markets with 
large banks, suggesting rent extraction from depositors.  Black and Strahan (2002) ﬁnd that the formation of new businesses 
increases as the share of small banks decreases, consistent with the idea that banking consolidation improves ﬁnancing for 
new businesses. 