 Introduction How ﬁrms disseminate information to ﬁnancial markets, how the market responds to this information, and how the mechanism of information dissemination affects the market response are of great importance (e. g. , Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980.  Merton, 1987).  Perhaps the most common and most important vehicle by which ﬁrms release information to the market is through their earnings announcements.  In particular, one of the decision variables is the exact timing of the earnings release.  If the timing of the release affects the market's response to ﬁrms’ earnings, then ﬁrms may release news strategically, for instance, to hide bad news.  Prior studies examining the choice of weekday and, separately, time during the day for earnings announcements show that there is a higher concentration of bad news on Friday than on other weekdays (Penman, 1987.  Damodaran, 1989.  DellaVigna and Pollet, 2009.  Doyle and Magilke, 2009.  deHaan, Shevlin, and Thornock, 2015) and in the evening (after trading hours) than at other times of day (Patell and Wolfson, 1982.  Doyle and Magilke, 2009.  deHaan et al. , 2015).  Recent studies have recognized that the mere concentration of bad news on Friday and in the evening is not sufﬁcient to establish the existence of strategic announcement timing.  Doyle and Magilke consider opportunistic announcement switching and ﬁnd no evidence that managers switch announcements of bad earnings news to Friday or evening.  deHaan, Shevlin, and Thornock analyze variation in investor attention and ﬁnd evidence consistent with rational strategic announcing in the evening but not on Friday.  Our study extends the existing literature and contributes to the debate of whether and when ﬁrms strategically announce their earnings news in two ways.  First, because ﬁrms choose the weekday and time of their announcements jointly, we introduce the analysis of day-time combinations to the literature on opportunistic announcement timing.  Second, we provide new implications of strategic announcing, with a special focus on whether managers have potential beneﬁts from their announcement timing.  The analysis of announcement timing at the level of day-time combinations provides us with new insights about managers’ strategic timing behavior.  The higher concentration of bad news on Friday and, separately, in the evening found in the prior studies leads to a natural conjecture.  Announcements on Friday evenings, which are the intersection of Fridays and evenings, have the worst news and, thus, are the most susceptible to opportunistic announcing behavior.  This conjecture is also consistent with both the popular wisdom that ﬁrms and even government agencies tend to release bad news on Friday afternoon after 4 PM (Penman, 1987) and common knowledge in the ﬁnancial industry that analysts and other professional investors are less likely to be at work on Friday evenings (e. g. , Quenqua, 2010).  We ﬁnd that Friday evening announcements indeed contain by far the worst news of all day-time combinations.  In support of the strategic announcing hypothesis, we ﬁnd that ﬁrms switch to Friday evening when they have bad news.  A host of additional ﬁndings concerning the post-earnings announcement drift (PEAD), insider trading, delistings, and conference calls point out that strategic announcing occurs only on Friday evening.  We also ﬁnd that managers beneﬁt from their strategic choice through reduced market scrutiny and delayed market response to news announced on Friday evening.  The PEAD after Friday evening announcements allows managers to proﬁt through post-announcement buying and selling of the company's stock in the direction of the surprise.  The delayed market response to bad news can also provide managers with greater job security and beneﬁts associated with continued employment in the ﬁrm (Kothari et al. , 2009).  To analyze day-time combinations, we divide earnings announcements into three time-of-day slots—morning (between midnight and 9. 30 AM), during-trading (between 9. 30 AM and 4 PM), and evening (between 4PM and midnight)—and ﬁve weekdays, which creates a matrix of 15 timing cells.  We use a comprehensive dataset of earnings announcement timestamps for the period from 1999 to 2013, which we hand-collect from newswires to avoid the systematic errors in IBES timestamps (Bradley et al. , 2014.  Michaely et al. , 2014).  The timing cell resolution allows us to uncover new patterns in opportunistic announcements, and it also puts in perspective the well-documented results regarding bad news on Friday and in the evening.  We ﬁnd that Friday evening announcements are responsible for a disproportionately large portion of the bad news on Fridays documented in the literature—Friday evening announcements constitute 17% of Friday announcements but produce one third of the negative difference in earnings surprise between Fridays and other weekdays.  We also ﬁnd that while evenings have only marginally worse news than other times of the day, without Friday evening announcements in the sample, the evening effect completely disappears.  By itself, the high concentration of bad news at one time is insufﬁcient to conclude that strategic announcement timing is occurring.  We answer the question whether and when strategic announcement timing exists by focusing on ﬁrms’ decisions to switch the times and weekdays of their announcements depending on their earnings surprise.  We begin by analyzing to which timing cells ﬁrms switch when they have worse news relative to the previous quarter (Doyle and Magilke, 2009).  We also conduct a difference-in-differences test to examine whether ﬁrms that switch to a given cell have a greater decline in earnings surprise than ﬁrms that do not switch, i. e. , that have stayed in this cell since the previous quarter.  We ﬁnd that among all weekdays, times of day, and timing cells, only Friday evening robustly indicates strategic switching behavior.  Next, we test an important implication of the opportunism motive that managers are rational when they time earnings announcements, which means that they can ultimately beneﬁt from timing such announcements.  Successfully hiding news implies that the market does not fully incorporate the news into prices and has a delayed reaction to the earnings announced at a given timing cell.  Further, opportunistic announcements may allow insiders to beneﬁt from trading the company's shares after the public information is released and before the information is fully impounded into prices.  While the literature typically views opportunistic announcements as a strategy related to bad news, insiders can also beneﬁt from buying shares before a delayed market reaction to good news.  To test the conjecture that ﬁrms making announcements strategically can beneﬁt from delayed market reaction, we analyze the PEAD and document patterns in it after announcements at different combinations of weekdays and times of day.  We ﬁnd that both positive and negative news on Friday evening are followed by the largest drift in comparison to other timing cells.  The PEAD after good news on Friday evening lasts for up to 13 months, and the PEAD after bad news is longer, approximately 2 years.  A strategy with a long position in ﬁrms that announce positive news and a short position in ﬁrms that announce negative news yields 24. 4% in 13 months for Friday evening versus the average of 4. 2% over all ﬁfteen timing cells.  Our analysis of insider trading suggests that executives may be aware of the drift following Friday evening announcements.  We ﬁnd that, after these announcements, insiders tend to trade in the direction of the surprise, in contrast to the overall pattern of contrarian trading by insiders (Huddart et al. , 2007.  Jenter, 2005).  The ﬁnding that Friday evening stands out among other timing cells led us to survey investment managers regarding their thoughts about announcing earnings on Friday evening.  The main message in the survey results is that announcing earnings on Friday evening is interpreted as an attempt to hide bad news.  Another important point that was made is that many analysts have already left for the weekend when ﬁrms announce their earnings on Friday evening.  Building upon the intuition of the survey results, we ﬁnd further evidence suggesting that ﬁrms intend to reduce the number of analysts who review their announcements on Friday evening.  The time distribution of announcements on Friday evening is different from other evenings in that Friday evening announcements are made relatively late, while other weekday evening announcements are strongly concentrated immediately after the market closes.  Besides earnings ﬁgures, ﬁrms tend to concurrently release other performance measures and soft information about their current and future endeavors.  This raises a possibility that ﬁrms’ management tends to announce on Friday evening to hide not only earnings news but other information as well.  Following the intuition of this conjecture, ﬁrms should also be less likely to hold conference calls and, furthermore, give less notiﬁcation time about upcoming conference calls.  Our analysis of the distribution of conference calls associated with earnings announcements strongly supports this hypothesis for Friday evening.  For example, Friday evening announcements are followed by half as many conference calls and associated with 2–3 times fewer days between the announcements and actual dates of conference calls than other timing cells.  Finally, based on the ﬁndings that ﬁrms interact with analysts less at the time of Friday evening announcements and receive less market scrutiny as a result, we can identify events other than earnings news that managers may want to hide through opportunistic timing of earnings announcements.  Firms would be most inclined to proceed with opportunistic timing to hide information associated with the most critical events in a ﬁrm's life.  Two such events are when a ﬁrm goes bankrupt or is acquired, both of which typically lead to stock delisting.  A ﬁrm in ﬁnancial distress would wish not to elaborate on the extent of its difﬁculties to avoid further exacerbating the distress situation.  Similarly, a ﬁrm being too forthcoming can disrupt the ﬁrm's negotiations with prospective acquirers, causing managers to lose their unscheduled stock option grants (Fich et al. , 2011) or leading to ﬁnancial liability, such as a termination fee (Bates and Lemmon, 2003).  We ﬁnd that it is Friday evening announcements that are more likely to be followed by these two types of delisting events.  In particular, a ﬁrm is ﬁve times more likely to be liquidated or its stock to be dropped from the exchange in the 120 days following a Friday evening announcement compared with announcements in other timing cells.  A ﬁrm is also more than twice as likely to be acquired and, as a result, delisted during this period after Friday evening announcements.  Our ﬁndings support that Friday evening earnings announcements are motivated by managerial opportunism.  This raises a question how pervasive and important such opportunistic behavior is among publicly traded U. S.  ﬁrms.  One perspective is that only 1. 1% of earnings announcements are made on Friday evening, suggesting that managerial opportunism in the timing of earnings announcements is not a widespread phenomenon.  At the same time, we note that the number of ﬁrms (11% of ﬁrms in our data) that made announcements on Friday evening is comparable to the number of ﬁrms with accounting restatements, particularly, those due to intentional misreporting (e. g. , Hennes et al. , 2008).  A natural question is then what differentiates the ﬁrms engaging in strategic announcement timing.  We ﬁnd that ﬁrms that announce earnings on Friday evening are smaller, have lower institutional ownership, are followed by fewer analysts, and have a higher bookto-market ratio than ﬁrms that have never announced on a Friday evening.  The ﬁrst three characteristics suggest that ﬁrms that announce earnings on Friday evening are less visible than other ﬁrms.  This low visibility may explain why the management of such ﬁrms can hide news announced on Friday evening and why these ﬁrms are perhaps less concerned with “annoying the Street”, which our survey respondents suggest that Friday evening announcements do.  Because Friday evening announcers are different from other ﬁrms on several observed and, possibly, unobserved characteristics, we control for this fact to ensure that our results are not driven by selection bias.  The paper contributes to the literature on managerial opportunism concerning the timing of earnings releases along several dimensions.  First, in light of the mixed evidence on Friday and evening announcements in the literature, we suggest that strategic announcing can be studied by analyzing announcements at the timing cell resolution and ﬁnd that when Fridays as a whole or all evenings are examined, ﬁrms show no strategic behavior.  Rather, the strategic behavior concentrates on Friday evening alone.  Second, we contribute to the literature on the market's inattention to earnings news announced on Friday.  DellaVigna and Pollet (2009) ﬁnd evidence of market inattention on Friday, whereas more recent papers by deHaan et al.  (2015) and Michaely et al.  (forthcoming) ﬁnd no such evidence.  Our results are in agreement with the latter two studies in that there is no market inattention on Friday.  We also reﬁne the ﬁndings in deHaan, Shevlin, and Thornock that investors pay relatively less attention to evening announcements and show that investor inattention is present not on all weekday evenings but only on Friday evening.  Third, we discover evidence that managers’ timing of earnings announcements is related to not only earnings news itself but also the disclosure of other information to analysts.  The rest of the paper is structured as follows.  Section 2 describes the data.  Section 3 analyzes the relation between announcement timing and the sign of earnings surprise.  Section 4 conducts tests of opportunism by analyzing time switching patterns, the proﬁtability of PEAD trading strategies, and insider trading evidence.  Section 5 provides evidence on corporate events that occur after earnings announcements.  Section 6 discusses what distinguishes ﬁrms that make Friday evening announcements from other ﬁrms.  Section 7 concludes.  <Middle> Data.  Our study requires us to clearly identify the time of earnings announcements.  The initial sample consists of all quarterly earnings announcements in IBES from January 1999 to June 2013 that also have daily return data in CRSP. 1 Because there are errors in IBES timestamps (Bradley et al. , 2014.  Michaely et al. , 2014), we verify the IBES timestamps by using the newswires.  The newswires are Business Wire, PR Newswire, Dow Jones News, Reuters, and all other news sources in Factiva and LexisNexis.  First, we download all earnings announcements with their timestamps from the newswires during the sample period.  Next, using the full or partial ﬁrm name and, if necessary, the ticker, we run an algorithm that matches each announcement in IBES with the newswire announcements in the seven-day window around the announcement date in IBES.  We then manually identify the correct matches and choose the time with the earliest newswire timestamp.  Stock price and daily returns data are taken from CRSP.  Standardized unexpected earnings (SUEs), which measure earnings surprise, are deﬁned as the difference between announced earnings per share and the median analyst forecast as reported by the IBES Summary ﬁle, normalized by the stock price ﬁve trading days prior to the announcement date.  Earnings estimates and actual earnings are adjusted for splits by using the daily cumulative adjustment factor from CRSP (Glushkov and Robinson, 2006).  Throughout the analysis, we control for ﬁve ﬁrm characteristics—size, book-to-market, institutional ownership, number of analysts, and leverage.  Size is the market value of the ﬁrm's equity at the end of the quarter prior to the announcement quarter based on Compustat.  Book-to-market ratio is stockholder equity minus the preferred stock plus deferred taxes divided by the market value of equity.  Institutional Ownership is the fraction of common shares outstanding that are owned by institutional investors at the end of the quarter, and the data for this variable are obtained from the Thomson-Reuters Institutional Holdings (13F) Database.  The number of analysts is the number of analysts who made forecasts of the quarter's earnings.  the data for this variable are obtained from the IBES Summary ﬁle.  We delete the observations in which institutional ownership is greater than 100% or missing or the number of forecasts is zero (2. 5% of the sample).  Leverage is the ratio of total book debt to book assets.  The data on insider trades is from the Thomson Insider database.  We follow the procedure of Cohen et al.  (2012) and divide insiders in the routine and opportunistic trader groups.  Routine traders are deﬁned as traders who traded in the same calendar month in the previous three years.  Their trades are discarded because they are not assumed to trade on information.  An insider who does not have any trades in the previous three years cannot be deﬁned as either a routine or opportunistic trader.  therefore, we also discard these observations.  We also exclude repetitive records in the dataset, i. e. , records with the same insider, transaction date, number of shares, and transaction type, because such repetition in the dataset is an error according to Jeng et al.  (2003).  We further reduce the noise effect of relatively uninformative trades by excluding trades of less than $500 or fewer than 100 shares.  Next, we sum the net dollar value2 of trades for each insider in a given ﬁrm during the period from one day to 90 days after earnings announcements.  The delisting dates and category codes are taken from the CRSP stock event ﬁle.  Non-merger delistings are those with CRSP delisting codes starting with 4, 5, and 7, and delistings due to mergers are those with CRSP delisting codes starting with 2.  The conference call data are from Capital IQ (announcement code 48) and start from April 2004.  3.  Distributions of announcement timing and the sign of earnings surprise 3. 1.  Distribution of weekdays, times of day, and timing cells of earnings announcements Table 1 provides the distribution of the timing of earnings releases across the weekdays and time slots (morning, duringtrading, evening).  The partitioning of announcements in three time slots is as follows.  Morning is the period from midnight to 9. 30 AM EST.  During-trading represents the period during which the market is open, from 9. 30 AM EST to 4 PM EST.  and Evening is the period from 4 PM EST to midnight.  If announcements were randomly assigned to weekdays, then the unconditional percentage of announcements per weekday would be 20% (if we ignore holidays).  However, we observe in the totals in the rows of Table 1 that this is not the case.  The percentage of announcements is higher than 20% for Tuesday– Thursday and lower for Monday and, especially, Friday, with 13. 2% and 6. 3%, respectively.  Thus, the earnings release weekday is not random.  From the totals of the columns, we note that relatively few announcements are made during trading hours.  however, morning and evening announcements are divided evenly with approximately 45% of announcements made at each of these time slots.  Two timing cells stand out as those with relatively few announcements compared to their respective weekday and time slot—the frequencies of Monday morning and Friday evening announcements are a mere 4. 65% and 1. 08%, respectively.  3. 2.  Announcement timing and the sign of earnings surprise To put our methodology and ﬁndings in the context of the literature, Table 2 summarizes studies on the strategic timing of earnings announcements that examine the distribution of good and bad earnings news across weekdays and times of day.  Panel A covers the studies that compare earnings news across weekdays (Penman, 1987.  Damodaran, 1989.  DellaVigna and Pollet, 2009.  Doyle and Magilke, 2009.  deHaan et al. , 2015), and Panel B lists the studies that compare earnings news across different times of day (Patell and Wolfson, 1982.  Doyle and Magilke, 2009.  deHaan et al. , 2015).  Panel A reports that the frequencies of Friday announcements are similar in the studies after the 1990s.  Friday announcements are more common in Penman (1987) and Damodaran (1989) possibly because of the different information environment and because their data sources were not as comprehensive as IBES.  Fridays are associated with negative news in terms of SUE and MBE (the percentage of announcements meeting or beating analysts’ earnings forecasts). 3 The time of day distribution of announcements in Panel B is much different in Patell and Wolfson (1982) than in the more recent studies, including ours, because during-trading announcements have become much less common after the 1990s (Michaely et al. , 2014).  Panel B also shows that evenings have a higher proportion of negative news in terms of SUE than mornings and during-trading, though Doyle and Magilke (2009) ﬁnd the opposite in terms of MBE.  Next, we analyze the distribution of earnings news across weekdays, time of day slots, and timing cells in our sample.  In analyzing the pattern of news announcements across day and time slots, it is important to monitor the reference point.  For example, for a test whether SUEs are different on Friday, the reference point is the average of the other weekdays.  Similarly, to test SUEs in one of the three time slots (morning, during-trading, evening), the reference point is the average SUE of the other two time slots.  For the analysis of a timing cell, which is an intersection of a weekday and a time slot, the reference point can be either the average SUE of all other timing cells or the average SUE of timing cells with the same weekday and time slot as the given timing cell.  The model that estimates SUEs for weekdays is expressed in Eq.  (1), the model for time slots is expressed in Eq.  (2), and the models for timing cells are expressed in Eqs.  (3) and (4).  Table 3, Panel A reports the effects of the weekday on the earnings news distribution estimated with the followingwhere SUEi. t is the actual quarterly EPS value minus the consensus estimate normalized by the stock price.  W i. t is an indicator variable that equals one if earnings news is released on the respective weekday and zero otherwise, and Xi. t denotes control variables consisting of ﬁrm size, the number of analysts’ estimates, institutional ownership, the debt-toasset ratio, and the book-to-market ratio.  The models explaining SUE also include year and ﬁrm ﬁxed effects.  A positive (negative) and signiﬁcant α1 implies that a given weekday is associated with better (worse) news.  Table 3, Panel A reveals that the average SUE value for the sample is  0. 0016, and there is large variation across weekdays.  Friday is associated with the largest negative surprise of  0. 0043, and Monday follows with  0. 0022.  Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday are all associated with better surprise than the sample's average.  The MBE percentage provides the same ranking of weekdays.  These ﬁndings are consistent with the literature on bad news on Friday in Panel A of Table 2.  The last column of Table 3, Panel A provides the coefﬁcient α1 of Eq.  (1) and shows results consistent with the average SUEs.  The strongest economic and statistical association with good news is on Wednesday, and the strongest statistical association with bad news is on Friday.  In Panel B of Table 3, we investigate the distribution of earnings news by the time-of-day slots.  The analysis is similar to that in Panel A, but the indicator W i. t for weekdays is replaced with the indicator T i. t for time slots, which equals one if the earnings news is released at the respective time of day (morning, during-trading, or evening) and zero otherwise.  We ﬁnd that the average SUE is  0. 0020, and the MBE is 63. 7% for the during-trading time slot, which are signiﬁcantly different from the full-sample average SUE of  0. 0016 and full-sample MBE of 67%, whereas these univariate statistics in the morning and evening cells are not different from the full sample average.  A similar lack of unequivocal evidence of worse news in the evening in univariate tests is found in Doyle and Magilke (2009), as Table 2 reports.  Nevertheless, after controlling for ﬁrm characteristics, we ﬁnd that the coefﬁcient α1 for during-trading announcements is positive, whereas the coefﬁcient for evening announcements weakly suggests that evenings have worse news.  In Panel C of Table 3, we study the relation between timing cells and SUEs.  The panel provides the coefﬁcient α1 of the following two regression speciﬁcations, where W i. t and T i. t are indicators for weekdays and time slots, making the interaction term W i. tTi. t an indicator variable that equals one if the announcement is made in a given timing cell and zero otherwise.  Speciﬁcation (3) captures the effect of the timing cell compared with all other timing cells or “unconditionally”.  Speciﬁcation (4), in contrast, is conditioned on both the time-of-day and weekday information.  therefore, its α1 presents the conditional effect of a speciﬁc timing cell after the variation across weekdays and time slots is considered.  This speciﬁcation allows us to emphasize a timing cell that is signiﬁcantly different from what is expected given its weekday and time slot.  This speciﬁcation may be especially important if there is considerable variation in SUEs across weekdays and time slots (as seen in Panels A and B), which leads to a large variation among timing cells.  In this case, we should expect to ﬁnd signiﬁcant coefﬁcients for many timing cells, which makes drawing overall conclusions regarding timing strategies difﬁcult if we compare a speciﬁc timing cell to all other timing cells, as model (3) does.  Panel C reports the average SUEs, average MBEs, the coefﬁcient α1 of Eq.  (3), which we label as “unconditional”, and the coefﬁcient α1 of Eq.  (4), which we label as “conditional”.  Two points are notable.  First, Friday evening has by far the most negative news, and it is the only cell that has this property in terms of all four measures.  Friday evening has the average earnings surprise of  0. 0086, which is economically and statistically different (5 times greater in absolute value) from the overall average and 2–8 times greater than SUEs in other timing cells.  The Friday evening MBE is 46. 6%, which is the smallest among the timing cells and lower by one third than the full sample MBE.  Concerning the coefﬁcient α1 of speciﬁcation (3), we ﬁnd that half of the timing cells (8 out of 15) have a signiﬁcant unconditional effect on SUEs.  Nevertheless, if one considers the magnitude of the coefﬁcients, it is clear that Friday evening stands out as having the most economic signiﬁcance.  Speciﬁcally, Friday evening has an effect on SUEs of  0. 0053, which is 3 times higher than the second largest negative coefﬁcient, for Friday during-trading.  The conditional coefﬁcient (α1 in Eq.  (4)) reveals that there are only ﬁve timing cells that have a signiﬁcant effect on the timing cell on SUEs after we account for weekday and time slot effects, and only two timing cells have a negative effect.  Again, the Friday evening timing cell has the most negative news.  The timing cell resolution we implement provides new insights on the timing distribution of earnings news.  By analyzing weekdays and times of day separately, prior literature implicitly assumes that Fridays and evenings are homogeneous in terms of earnings surprise.  By relaxing this assumption, we ﬁnd that Friday evening stands out as the timing cell that can drive the prior ﬁndings of the worst earnings news on Friday and, separately, in the evening.  First, we ﬁnd that announcements on Fridays are very heterogeneous depending on their time—the conditional coefﬁcients in Panel C of Table 3 show that Friday morning actually has relatively positive news once we control for Friday and morning announcements.  Further, if one excludes Friday evening announcements (which constitute 17% of Friday announcements) from the sample, the coefﬁcient for Friday and its t-statistic drop by a third.  Thus, Friday evening announcements account for a disproportionately large part of the overall bad news on Fridays reported in the extant literature.  Second, Friday evening announcements are unique relative to other evenings.  When we exclude Friday evening announcements from the sample, evenings do not exhibit a negative regression coefﬁcient (Panel B of Table 3).  4.  Is there an opportunistic announcement timing.  Based on the SUE analysis, Friday evening announcements stand out as having especially negative news.  This does not necessarily prove strategic announcing behavior because Friday evening can be the most negative cell among the ﬁfteen cells by chance with a probability of 6. 6%.  To evaluate whether strategic announcement timing is responsible for a relatively high concentration of bad news on a certain weekday, time slot, or timing cell, one needs to identify the incentives for managers to announce according to this pattern, which is the objective of this section. 4 4. 1.  Switching of announcement timing and changes in earnings surprise.  Following Doyle and Magilke (2009), we suggest that ﬁrms that are susceptible to opportunism are expected to change the time and/or day of the announcement when they have signiﬁcantly worse news to announce compared with that in the previous quarter.  A switch triggered by negative earnings news would imply strategic behavior.  We also introduce a difference-in-differences test that compares changes in earnings news between ﬁrms that switched and the ﬁrms that did not switch their announcement timing cells.  In Table 4, we analyze the signs of changes in earnings news for ﬁrms that switched and did not switch their announcement times.  The switched announcements have an announcement timing cell this quarter that differs from the previous quarter.  the previous announcement is deﬁned as no more than 120 calendar days prior to the current announcement. 5 The non-switched announcements occur in the same timing cell in both the current and the previous quarter.  Announcements without such a match (i. e. , the previous announcement is more than 120 trading days before the current announcement in the dataset) are excluded.  For each weekday, time slot, and timing cell, we provide information regarding the percentage of announcements that switched their timing cells and the change in SUEs (compared with the previous quarter's SUEs) for both the switched and non-switched announcements.  Table 4 presents results from two tests of opportunistic announcement switching.  The ﬁrst test follows the method proposed in Doyle and Magilke, which assumes that ﬁrms that switch their announcement time or day when they have bad news to announce do so strategically. 6 Implemented in column (2), the test is that if a negative SUE change is accompanied by switching to a particular timing cell, that cell is associated with opportunistic announcement timing.  The second test relaxes Doyle and Magilke's assumption in that it is motivated by the understanding that opportunism is not the only reason for ﬁrms to switch their announcement timing when the SUE change is negative.  There is a host of reasons why ﬁrms announce on certain days or times, for example, industry peers’ announcement schedules or large institutional holders’ preferences.  If the relevant ﬁrm characteristics change, ﬁrms can be expected to change their announcement timing regardless of earnings news.  In such cases of benign switching, the earnings surprise of the ﬁrm's switching to a given cell and the earnings surprise of the ﬁrms that already populate the cell (the non-switchers) should be similar.  More generally, if there is no strategic announcing, there should be no difference between switching and non-switching ﬁrms’ earnings surprises.  Therefore, our test to distinguish opportunistic from benign switching entails examining whether the ﬁrm that switches to a given cell has worse news than the non-switching ﬁrms that stay in this cell.  In essence, comparing to our ﬁrst test, our second test provides a reference point for the magnitude of the switchers’ SUE change.  The second test also controls for ﬁrm characteristics that inﬂuence the timing decision because it compares switchers and non-switchers in the same timing cell.  The test in column (4) is implemented such that if a SUE change for switched announcements is more negative than a SUE change for non-switched announcements (which can be described as a difference-in-differences test), then announcements are switched opportunistically to the timing cell under consideration.  The analysis of weekdays in Table 4 reports that approximately half of the observations on weekdays are switching observations.  Importantly, although Friday announcements of switchers tend to be associated with signiﬁcantly worse news (the SUE change is  0. 00113) according to column (2), i. e. , the ﬁrst test implies opportunistic switching, this result is not supported by the second test of the difference between the switched and the non-switched announcements in column (4).  Tuesday is the only weekday for which both tests agree with each other, but we ﬁnd that ﬁrms switch to Tuesday when they have positive, rather than negative, news.  The middle portion of the table analyzes switching across times of day and shows that ﬁrms tend to keep the time of their announcements in the morning or evening (only 11% of announcements at these time slots are announcements that switched their times).  The ﬁrst test of opportunistic switching across times of day shows that ﬁrms that switched to during-trading tend to have an improvement in earnings news (the SUE change is 0. 00063), but this result does not survive the second test in the last column.  The weekday and time of day analysis overall is consistent with Doyle and Magilke (2009), who ﬁnd no evidence of opportunism in moving to Friday announcements and from morning to evening announcements.  The most important result of the switching analysis is at the timing cell resolution.  We ﬁnd that Friday evening is the only cell that fully satisﬁes both our tests of opportunistic switching.  Based on the ﬁrst test (column (2)), we ﬁnd that Wednesday morning and Friday evening are the only two cells that are associated with switching when the ﬁrm has worse news in the current quarter than in the previous quarter.  However, the second, difference-in-differences test (column (4)) does not support opportunistic switching behavior for Wednesday morning.  In contrast, the two tests agree for the Friday evening cell.  switching to Friday evening is accompanied by the biggest SUE decline ( 0. 0049) relative to the previous quarter than for any other timing cell, and Friday evening is the only cell in which SUE declines more (by  0. 00448) for switching announcements than non-switching announcements.  To summarize, Friday evening announcements are the only ones that indicate opportunistic announcing of bad news according to the switching tests.  4. 2.  Post-earnings announcement drift and a long-short trading strategy.  Our next question is whether the patterns of earnings announcement timing reported in the previous subsection are rational for managers.  Opportunistic timing is rational if the market underreacts to the bad news announced by the ﬁrm because the delayed reaction diffuses the effect of bad news.  This allows the ﬁrm's managers to beneﬁt from greater job security, as well as protect their future employment opportunities, post-retirement beneﬁts, and the value of their equity-based compensation (Kothari et al. , 2009).  By deﬁnition, a delayed reaction is revealed by a PEAD in the direction of the announcement news.  Fig.  1 shows the cumulative drift for post-announcement horizons from 1 to 36 months for Friday evening and the full sample.  In Table 5, we analyze the 1-year drift following earnings announcements on all weekdays, time slots, and timing cells.  To calculate the drift, we use the calendar-time portfolio approach. 7 Because recent studies show that the PEAD is largely driven by relatively illiquid stocks (Sadka, 2006.  Ng et al. , 2008) and limits to arbitrage (Chung and Hrazdil, 2011), we eliminate small stocks from the sample for the PEAD analysis.  Speciﬁcally, we restrict the portfolios only to stocks whose market value is above $100 million ﬁve days before the earnings announcement.  Firms smaller than $100 million often have days without trading (Foerster and Keim, 2000) and can have a peculiar PEAD regardless of announcement timing because they tend to be mispriced and have a low institutional investment in them (Bartov et al. , 2000.  Bhushan, 1994).  Penny stocks are also typically dropped in event studies due to their illiquidity, and we note that the $100 million ﬁlter eliminates stocks with prices less than $1 ﬁve days before the announcement from our sample.  We refer to Alpha 1 as the monthly alphas of the portfolios constructed according to the following simple strategy.  ﬁrms that make earnings announcements with positive (negative) SUEs enter the long (short) portfolio at the end of the month (or the following month if the announcement is made on the last trading day of the month).  A stock remains in the portfolio for n months during the period that starts in month tþ1 and ends in month tþn (inclusive), where t is the announcement month. 8 Excess returns (a stock return minus the risk free rate) are equally-weighted each month, and the monthly portfolio returns are regressed on the three Fama and French (1993) and momentum Carhart (1997) factors.  The calendar time portfolio alphas in Fig.  1 and Table 5 are the intercepts of these regressions. 9 Alpha 2 denotes the alphas of a more sophisticated strategy that creates portfolios depending on the magnitude of earnings surprise.  To avoid the effects of seasonality in earnings, we use the empirical distribution of SUEs during the full year before the announcement year to calculate the medians of the positive and negative SUE values.  Then, we construct portfolios by going long shares of ﬁrms whose SUE value is above the median of the positive SUE distribution and short shares of ﬁrms whose SUE value is below the median of the negative SUE distribution. 10 Because we rely on the SUE distribution in the year before the announcement year, the trading strategy becomes available one year after the beginning of our sample, i. e. , the portfolio time series for Alpha 2 begins in January 2000.  Fig.  1 provides the cumulative post-announcement returns for the long minus short strategy for Friday evening and full sample (Panel A) and the long and short strategies for Friday evening announcements separately (Panel B).  For example, in Panel A, an investor in the long minus short Alpha 2 strategy would earn an abnormal return of 24. 4% by holding the stocks for 13 months after the announcement month for Friday evening announcements, where the cumulative 24. 4% return is calculated as 13 months multiplied by a monthly alpha of 1. 88% obtained from the 13-month calendar-time model.  Consistent with the literature (Foster et al. , 1984.  Bernard and Thomas, 1990), most of the long-term PEAD in the full sample is accumulated during the ﬁrst 6 months. 11 We show, however, that the PEAD depends on the announcement weekday, time of day, and timing cell.  According to Panel A, the long minus short PEAD for Friday evening greatly exceeds the full sample PEAD at all horizons (with an exception of the Alpha 1 strategy in the 3–6 month horizon range).  Remarkably, more than half of the return earned by the long minus short strategy for Friday evening accumulates between months 6 and 13, in contrast to the full sample PEAD.  Panel B explores the components of the long minus short PEAD on Friday evening by considering the PEAD after positive and negative news separately.  The PEAD for stocks with positive SUE peaks at 13-15 months and becomes close to zero afterwards.  In contrast, the ﬁgure shows that approximately two years is required for the market to internalize bad news associated with Friday evening announcements.  The longer drift after bad news than after good news could be due to the short sale constraint.  Panels A–C of Table 5 report the results for a 1-year drift across all weekdays (Panel A), time slots (Panel B), and timing cells (Panel C), which complement Fig.  1 showing only the full sample and Friday evening PEADs.  According to both Alpha 1 and Alpha 2 strategies for all weekdays and time slots (except Alpha 2 for during-trading), long positions have positive signiﬁcant alphas, but short portfolios have nonsigniﬁcant alphas.  The long minus short portfolios in Panels A and B do not lose money and almost always have statistically signiﬁcant alphas.  The drifts for Friday and evening are not different from the drifts on other weekdays and times of day, respectively. 12 Table 5, Panel C presents the results of a PEAD analysis for the ﬁfteen timing cells.  Analyzing Alphas 1 and 2 yields the same conclusions about Friday evening, which suggests that our ﬁndings in Panel C are robust.  The takeaway from the table is that Friday evening announcements are followed by an exceptionally large drift for both positive and negative earnings surprises.  We ﬁnd that half of the timing cells have a positive drift in the long portfolio and that the largest long position drift is that of Friday evening (e. g. , Alpha 1 of 0. 44% and Alpha 2 of 0. 58%).  More important, the only negative signiﬁcant Alpha 1 of a short position is that of Friday evening, and the most negative Alpha 2 of a short position if that of Friday evening ( 1. 02%).  Overall, the most signiﬁcant long minus short alpha is that for Friday evening, which yields a monthly abnormal return of 0. 81% (with an annual abnormal return of 9. 7%) for Alpha 1 and 1. 59% (with an annual abnormal return of 19. 1%) for Alpha 2.  These results highlight a potentially greater market inefﬁciency for announcements on Friday evening during our sample period.  Furthermore, the delayed market reaction on Friday evening implies that managers can retain job security beneﬁts by timing their announcements to hide bad news on Friday evening.  4. 3.  Insider trading following earnings announcements.  An additional way for managers to beneﬁt from delayed market reaction to earnings announcements is through insider trading soon after the announcements, even if the ﬁrm has a trade blackout policy before the earnings announcement.  Insiders can sell shares to exploit the subsequent delayed market reaction to bad news.  Similarly, insiders can buy shares after good news to proﬁt from the subsequent positive drift.  If the analysis of insider trading data shows that managers attempt to gain from the drift on Friday evening by trading in the direction of the earnings surprise, such a ﬁnding would be powerful conﬁrmation for the Friday evening opportunism hypothesis. 14 Table 6 reports the regression results for the relation between announcement timing and insider trades.  For expositional purposes, the results for weekdays and time of day slots are in the Appendix A (Table A1), and we focus our analysis on the conditional timing cell results.  The dependent variable is the net dollar value of trades by insider i in a given ﬁrm during 90 days following an announcement at time t, Valuei. t.  Because the insiders’ wealth varies considerably across ﬁrms, we normalize the dependent variable by the total absolute value of transactions by the insider in the ﬁrm during the sample period.  The structure of independent variables is the same as in Eq.  (4), with the addition of SUE as an explanatory variable.  The model includes year and ﬁrm ﬁxed effects, and the results are unaffected by replacing ﬁrm ﬁxed effects with insider-ﬁrm ﬁxed effects.  The table provides separate analysis for positive and negative news based on the sign of SUE.  It shows that the only timing cell that is associated with trades in the direction of the surprise for both good and bad news is the Friday evening cell.  Insiders tend to increase their net buying by 3. 7% and net selling by 4. 3% after positive and negative news on Friday evening, respectively.  Besides Friday evening, there are only two other timing cells with signiﬁcant net selling activity after bad news, and no other timing cell with net buying activity after positive news.  The result that insiders trade in a way that beneﬁts them from the market underreaction after Friday evening announcements provides further support for the opportunism hypothesis for Friday evening announcements.  5.  Good time to hide any news.  5. 1.  The executive survey.  To achieve a better understanding of why ﬁrms may decide to announce on Friday evening, we conduct a small survey to gather the opinions of market participants on this issue.  Table 7 summarizes the responses of fourteen Cornell Business School alumni who work in public corporations at the executive or ﬁnancial branch.  We ask these individuals to answer the following open-ended question.  “Do you think releasing earnings news on Friday after trading hours is a good idea and why or why not. ” Although the small sample size of the survey precludes a meaningful analysis of answer frequencies, the survey results are informative about the typical answers and the executives’ perception of Friday evening announcements.  All the respondents stated that releasing earnings news on Friday evening is a bad idea and provided various rationales for why it is bad—for instance, because “analysts are not around”.  The respondents also think that Friday evening announcements imply that managers are trying to hide bad news.  5. 2.  The release of earnings news on Friday evening compared with other evenings.  The survey results point to the perception that managers try to hide earnings news by announcing it on Friday evening.  However, the ability to hide news on Friday evening depends on the presence of fewer analysts and other market participants and/or the relatively less attention devoted to the earnings news after the market closes.  We therefore conjecture that another implication of the Friday evening opportunism hypothesis is that Friday evening announcements are made later in the evening compared with announcements on other evenings, so that they are observed by fewer market participants.  Fig.  2 provides histograms of announcement times in the morning (the left-hand side ﬁgures) and in the evening (the right-hand side ﬁgures).  In each of the time slots, we also divide announcements between announcements made on Monday–Thursday (the top row) and announcements made on Friday (the bottom row).  The ﬁgure shows relatively small differences between Friday morning and other weekday mornings.  In contrast, Friday evening has a much different distribution from the other evenings.  From Monday to Thursday, more than 55% of evening announcements occur between 4. 00 and 4. 30, whereas only 28% of Friday evening announcements occur at that time.  Overall, compared with announcements on other evenings, Friday evening announcements are clearly delayed, which supports our conjecture that managers try to hide earnings news on Friday evening.  5. 3.  Earnings announcement timing and post-announcement events.  Our ﬁndings so far support the hypothesis that managers successfully try to hide bad earnings news on Friday evening.  The survey results and the relatively late time of Friday evening announcements also suggest that ﬁrms’ management tends to announce on Friday evening to avoid or reduce its interaction with market participants.  This suggests that ﬁrms can try to hide more than just earnings news on Friday evening because the previous quarter's earnings is not the only type of information that is released at the time of an earnings announcement.  Firms commonly include other performance measures, have a conference call with soft information, or combine the earnings announcement with a managerial forecast (Atiase et al. , 2005.  Matsumoto et al. , 2011.  Rogers and Van Buskirk, 2013).  Conference calls are a form of voluntary disclosure that is often held immediately after earnings announcements.  During conference calls, analysts have an opportunity to receive valuable information in the question and answer session (Matsumoto et al. , 2011), potentially uncovering information that is not publicly released through other formal channels.  If Friday evening earnings announcements are associated with managers’ desire to avoid market scrutiny, one can expect to ﬁnd a lower propensity of conference calls happening after these announcements.  Panel A of Table 8 reports the percentages of earnings releases that are followed by a conference call and provides the coefﬁcients on the timing cell effect (the results for weekdays and times of day are in Table A2 of the Appendix A) conditional on the weekday and time-of-day effects in a probit model, whose explanatory variables are as in Eq.  (4).  The Friday evening cell has a much lower percentage of conference calls (26. 6%) compared to the overall average (58. 0%).  The conditional coefﬁcient for Friday evenings is negative and highly signiﬁcant (–22. 8%).  The two other negative and statistically signiﬁcant coefﬁcients are in the Monday morning and Friday during-trading timing cells, but their magnitudes ( 2. 1% and –4. 3%, respectively) are much smaller and less signiﬁcant.  Thus, Friday evening announcements tend to be followed by fewer conference calls.  Further, if managers intend to reduce analysts’ participation in a conference call, they can try to provide less advanced warning for analysts by making a conference call announcement closer to the actual date of the conference call. 15 We conjecture that this opportunistic behavior is strongest for Friday evening earnings announcements.  The analysis in Panel B of Table 8 reports the number of days between the date on which the ﬁrm announces a conference call and the actual date of the conference call.  This conference call announcement lead time is the dependent variable in a Tobit regression, whose explanatory variables are the same as in Eq.  (4). 