
We investigate whether firms' recurring measurements of the fair values of recognized financial instruments (hereafter
“fair value measurements”) exhibit conditional conservatism when the instruments do not trade in liquid markets, thereby
enabling them to exercise discretion over the measurements. 1 Absent such discretion, fair value measurements should be
unbiased, i. e. , symmetrically incorporate unrealized gains and unrealized losses.  Policymakers and academics often make
statements or research design choices that suggest fair value measurements generally are unbiased, ignoring biases introduced by discretion.  For example, SEC (2008) states that the “objective of SFAS No.  157 and of existing fair value standards
is to provide transparent unbiased information about fair value. ” Shaffer (2011) describes fair value measurement as “an
anchor for”…“an asset/liability approach… [in which] valuations must be objective and neutral.  This requirement overrides
the constraint of conservatism, which historically assumed a downward bias for asset valuations. ” (Emphasis added in both
quotes. ) Empirical research examining fair value measurements' predictive power and their value-, returns-, and risk-relevance often sums fair values or fair value gains and losses, which is appropriate only if the summed items are measured
comparably (e. g. , are unbiased or have the same proportional bias). 2
Ostensibly in contrast to the view that fair values are unbiased, some influential observers claim that fair value measurements for instruments that do not trade in liquid markets represent optimistic or noisy “mark-to-myth” (Buffett, 2003)
or “mark-to-make-believe” (Weil, 2007) valuations that are discounted by investors.  Empirical research provides evidence
supporting these claims (Kolev, 2009; Song Name, 2010; Goh Name, 2009).  To mitigate such discounting, we expect firms to
take steps to increase the perceived reliability of these measurements.  The step we examine is suggested by the extensive
literature that documents the contracting and other benefits of conditional conservatism (e. g. , Basu, 1997; Watts, 2003). 
Roychowdhury (2010) emphasizes the critical role of explicit and implicit governance mechanisms, which increase the
strength and persistence of firms' incentives to report conditionally conservatively, to obtain these benefits.  Although firms
make reporting decisions each period, when these incentives are sufficiently strong and persistent, they effectively constitute a “credible commitment” to conditional conservatism (e. g. , Zhang, 2008). 
We identify the extent of firms' discretion over fair value measurements using disclosures provided under Statement of
Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) 157, Fair Value Measurements (FASB, 2006).  This standard requires firms to disclose,
for each major category of asset and liability, the fair value measurement amounts that are based on active market prices for
the items being measured (Level 1 inputs), other observable information (Level 2 inputs), or unobservable information
(Level 3 inputs). 3 These three input levels differ in their observability and individual completeness as measures of fair value,
and thus in the extent of discipline they provide over firms' fair value measurements.  Level 1 inputs are both observable and
individually complete measures of fair value, and thus provide a very high level of discipline over fair value measurements. 
Level 2 inputs are observable but individually incomplete measures of fair value, requiring either adjustments to observed
market prices for the illiquidity or dissimilarity of the items being fair valued or model-based calculations involving other
inputs to determine fair values.  Level 3 inputs are both unobservable and individually incomplete measures of fair value.  We
refer to Level 2 or 3 inputs or fair value measurements based on these inputs as “lower-level”. 
We predict that firms mitigate investors' discounting of lower-level fair value measurements by reporting the measurements conditionally conservatively, i. e. , by recognizing unrealized losses in a timelier fashion than unrealized gains.  We
further predict that firms report more conditionally conservative fair value measurements when the measurements are
evaluated by more knowledgeable investors, verified by more independent third parties, and disclosed more fully in financial reports, governance mechanisms that increase the strength and persistence of firms' incentives to report conditionally conservatively.  Lastly, we predict that firms that narrowly meet or beat earnings targets, an earnings management
incentive that typically conflicts with conditional conservatism, report less conditionally conservative fair value measurements. 
To test these predictions, we measure conditional conservatism using two expanded versions of Basu's (1997) approach. 4
The dependent variables in these expanded models are the portions of comprehensive income (CI) attributable to fair value
measurements of financial instruments (FVCI) and the remainder of CI (CI–FVCI).  We interact the proportions of fair value
measurements at the various levels with the explanatory variables in recent implementations of Basu's (1997) approach. 
Consistent with the discussion above, we expect firms with higher proportions of Level 2 and 3 fair value measurements,
but not those with higher proportions of Level 1 measurements, to exhibit more conditionally conservative FVCI. 
In contrast, we do not expect any association between the fair value measurement level proportions and the conditional
conservatism of CI–FVCI.  Although CI–FVCI includes any conditionally conservative fair-value-based impairment writedowns of tangible and intangible assets (Ramanna and Watts, 2012; Roychowdhury and Martin, 2013), there is no apparent
reason why the frequency or size of these non-recurring write-downs should vary with the proportions of recognized financial instruments measured at the various fair value levels on a recurring basis.  In this regard, the analysis of CI–FVCI
constitutes a placebo test. 
To test our predictions about variation in incentives to report conditional conservative Level 2 and 3 fair value measurements across firms and time, we compare the conditional conservatism of FVCI across four partitions of the full sample. 
First, to capture the ability of firms' investors to evaluate lower-level fair value measurements, we partition based on the
proportion of the firm's equity that is owned by non-transient institutional investors.  Second, to capture the verification of
firms’ lower-level fair value measurements by independent third parties, we partition based on an indicator for audit
quality.  Third, to capture firms' earnings management incentives that conflict with reporting conditionally conservative
lower-level fair value measurements, we partition based on an indicator for the firm narrowly meeting or beating earnings
targets versus clearly missing these targets.  Fourth, to capture investors' improved ability to evaluate firms' Level 2 and
3 measurements under SFAS 157's expanded disclosure requirements, we examine the sample in the first year before the
required adoption of SFAS 157, 2007, versus the first year after that adoption, 2008. 5 In addition, we expect SFAS 157's
expanded disclosures to strengthen the effects of the three firm-level partitioning variables.  To capture these interactive
effects, we compare the conditional conservatism of FVCI for the sets of subsamples formed based on each of these proxies
in 2007 versus 2008. 
Our empirical findings are largely consistent with these predictions.  As expected, in the full sample we find that firms
with higher Level 2 and 3 proportions exhibit more conditionally conservative FVCI but not CI–FVCI.  In the subsamples
formed partitioning on a single variable, we find that these results are more pronounced for firms with higher non-transient
institutional ownership, with higher audit quality, and that do not narrowly meet or beat earnings thresholds, as well as in
2008.  The results are mostly but less uniformly consistent with expectations in the sets of subsamples formed partitioning
on both a firm-level proxy and 2007 versus 2008, possibly due to the smaller sample sizes in these two-way partitions. 
To demonstrate the generalizability of our results to balance sheet items other than financial instruments, we conduct
similar analysis on pro forma earnings measures calculated using Canadian and U. S.  oil and gas firms' disclosed measures of
reserves, which are akin to Level 2 or 3 fair value measurements.  We find that the conditional conservatism of these
earnings measures increases with the inclusion of these reserve measures. 
To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first paper to examine firms' exercise of discretion to report conditionally
conservative recurring Level 2 and 3 fair value measurements for recognized financial instruments.  Our paper contributes to
ongoing debates about the relative merits of unbiased versus conditionally conservative accounting measurement and,
relatedly, of fair value versus (impaired) amortized cost measurement.  Accounting standard setters, securities regulators,
and some investors and academics argue that expanded requirements for firms to measure financial instruments and similar items at (unbiased) fair value would increase the usefulness of financial reports (e. g. , FASB, 2011; SEC, 2008; Barth,
2006, 2014; Barth and Taylor, 2010; Ryan, 2008).  Consistent with these arguments, the FASB recently issued Statement of
Financial Accounting Concepts No.  8, which eliminated conservatism from the conceptual framework. 6 The Board's rationale
is that conservative biases prevent accounting numbers from being representationally faithful, an essential qualitative
characteristic of useful financial information.  Taking an opposing view, other investors and academics argue that eliminating
conditional conservatism without understanding the reasons for its longstanding existence and pervasive use likely would
generate unintended adverse economic consequences (e. g. , Watts, 2003; Nissim and Penman, 2008; Kothari Name, 2010). 
These authors also point out that, despite the FASB's disavowal of conservatism, over its life the Board has repeatedly and
even increasingly issued standards that require conditional conservatism (Watts, 2003).  Our findings indicate that in
practice firms report conditionally conservative Level 2 and 3 fair value measurements, potentially mitigating concerns
about unintended adverse consequences of fair value accounting requirements. 
Our paper complements prior research that finds firms exercise discretion over the timing and amount of (fair-valuebased) impairment write-downs, typically for non-financial assets (Ramanna and Watts, 2012; Roychowdhury and Martin,
2013).  The settings examined in this prior research differ from our setting in the following crucial respect.  Asset impairment
standards require conditional conservatism (i. e. , asset write-ups are prohibited).  In contrast, the FASB's intent in SFAS 157 is
to yield unbiased reporting, consistent with CON 8's revisions to the conceptual framework.  We provide evidence that,
despite this intent, in practice reporting firms exercise discretion to meet the market's demand for conditionally conservative fair value measurements.  We believe this evidence is likely to generalize to other settings involving lower-level fair
value measurements, because it is difficult to legislate against market demand. 
Our paper exhibits three more specific but still notable differences from this prior research.  First, asset impairments are
non-recurring, being recorded only when specified, and sometimes hard to meet, conditions are satisfied.  For example, firms
may have to determine that assets are other-than-temporarily impaired or have less than fully recoverable amortized cost
bases to record impairments.  This feature implies that firms' exercise of discretion over asset impairments is substantially
about whether to record impairments in given periods.  In contrast, we examine firms' exercise of discretion over fair value
measurements every period.  Second, impairments often involve tangible or intangible assets for which fair value measurements rarely are based on Level 1 inputs.  This feature constrains variation in the extent of firms' discretion over impairments, which is generally fairly high.  In contrast, in our setting firms' discretion varies between high for Level 2 and
3 measurements and low for Level 1 measurements.  Third, firms record asset impairments only when news is sufficiently
bad.  Hence, studies documenting an association between impairment and conditional conservatism using Basu's (1997)
approach essentially show differential response to bad news captured in (fair-value-based) impairments versus good news
captured in non-fair-value-based measurements.  In contrast, we document differential response to bad news conveyed by
different levels of fair value measurements. 
Lastly, our results suggest that empirical research examining fair value measurements' predictive power and their value-,
returns-, and risk-relevance would exhibit improved model specification and statistical power by distinguishing these
measurements based on their extent of conditional conservatism. 
2.  SFAS 157 and related prior research
SFAS 157, which became effective in 2008 with early adoption allowed in 2007, defines fair value and provides comprehensive guidance regarding fair value measurement.  As a central part of that guidance, the standard specifies a threelevel hierarchy of fair value measurement inputs.  Level 1 (highest-level) inputs are quoted prices in active markets for
identical items.  SFAS 157 requires reporting firms to measure fair values using Level 1 inputs, generally unadjusted, if they
exist.  Level 2 inputs are most other directly or indirectly observable inputs.  Level 2 inputs include quoted prices for similar
assets in active markets or identical items in less than active markets.  Quoted priced-based Level 2 inputs generally require
adjustment for the dissimilarity or illiquidity of the item being fair valued.  Level 2 inputs also include published interest
rates, yield curves, volatilities, prepayment speeds, default rates, loss severities, credit ratings, et cetera.  These rawer Level
2 inputs generally must be plugged into models to generate fair value estimates, and the accuracy of these estimates
depends critically on the validity of the models used.  Level 3 (lowest-level) inputs are based on the reporting entity's
internal data or are otherwise unobservable, but they should reflect the inputs that market participants would use in pricing
the item.  Generally, these inputs must also be plugged into models.  SFAS 157 “prioritizes” Level 2 over Level 3 inputs but
allows reporting firms to use Level 3 inputs rather than available Level 2 inputs if the former inputs reflect “the assumptions
that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability. ” The level of a fair value measurement is determined by
the lowest significant input into the measurement. 
SFAS 157 requires firms to disclose the amounts of each level of recurring recognized fair value measurements for each
major category of asset or liability (including major types of investment securities).  The standard and its amendments
require expanded disclosures for Level 3 (and to a lesser extent Level 2) measurements due to their greater subjectivity. 
Two sets of prior papers examine SFAS 157-required fair value measurement-level disclosures for financial assets and
liabilities recognized at fair value.  First, Kolev (2009), Song Name (2010), and Goh Name (2009) examine the value-relevance
of these disclosures.  These studies provide evidence that financial instrument fair values based on higher level inputs are
more value-relevant.  Specifically, all three studies find that Level 1 and 2 fair values are more value-relevant than Level 3 fair
values.  Goh Name (2009) find that Level 1 fair values are more value-relevant than Level 2 fair values.  Song Name (2010) find
that Level 3 fair values are more value-relevant for banks with better corporate governance. 
Second, Lev and Zhou (2009) and Riedl and Serafeim (2011) examine the liquidity- and information-risk relevance of
SFAS 157 fair value measurement-level disclosures.  These studies provide evidence that firms with more financial assets
with fair values measured using lower-level inputs exhibit higher risk.  Specifically, Lev and Zhou (2009) argue that the three
fair value measurement levels indicate liquidity risk.  Consistent with this argument, they find that, for events during the
recent financial crisis that impaired market liquidity, the share price reaction is most negative for financial institutions
holding Level 3 financial assets, followed by Level 2 assets and then by Level 1 assets.  The reverse holds for events that
improved market liquidity.  Riedl and Serafeim (2011) argue that the three levels indicate information risk.  They provide
evidence that firms with more Level 3 financial assets exhibit higher betas than those with Level 1 or Level 2 assets, with
these differences being more pronounced for firms with poorer information environments.  They also show that SFAS 157
adoption reduces differences in betas across the fair value levels for firms with richer information environments. 
<Middle> Research design. 
We measure conditional conservatism using expanded versions of Basu's (1997) approach.  Basu regresses a measure of
income deflated by beginning market value of equity on share returns (hereafter “returns”), an aggregate proxy for news
from all sources, allowing for separate slope coefficients on positive returns (good news) and negative returns (bad news). 
This model captures the fact that conditional conservatism imposes a higher verification threshold to recognize unrealized
gains than to recognize unrealized losses, so that income incorporates bad news faster than good news.  Consistent with this
fact, Basu expects and finds that income is more positively associated with returns when they are negative than when they
are positive. 
Dietrich Name (2007), Givoly Name (2007), Patatoukas and Thomas (2011), and others criticize Basu's (1997) approach
primarily based on its measure of news, arguing that returns are endogenous and their variance decreases with firm size. 
Ball Name (2013a, 2013b) and others counter that these criticisms are addressable through adjustments to the model
specification. 
We use Basu's approach in this study for two primary, non-mutually exclusive reasons.  First, non-news-based measures
do not capture conditional conservatism as directly as news-based measures (Ryan, 2006).  Second, the markets for debt
instruments, the vast majority of firms’ financial instruments measured at fair value, were highly illiquid during the financial
crisis.  In contrast, equity markets remained quite liquid during the crisis. 7 Hence, returns likely constituted the best available
summary news measure with which external parties could verify firms' fair value measurements during this period. 
This point highlights the fact that, in using Basu's (1997) approach, we assume that returns is a good proxy for external
parties' information about changes in the fair values of firms' financial instruments.  An analogous assumption is made in
prior studies using Basu's approach.  Two aspects of our results provide comfort that this assumption does not drive our
results.  First, we find predictable differences in the conditional conservatism of Level 2 and 3 fair value measurements across
sample partitions based on proxies for investors' ability to evaluate these measurements, the verification of these measurements by independent third parties, and firms' incentives not to report conditionally conservatively.  There is no obvious
reason why any limitation of returns as a measure of news would vary across these partitions in this fashion.  Second, in
Section 6 we analyze oil and gas firms' disclosures of measures of their reserves that are akin to Level 2 and 3 fair value
measurements.  In untabulated analyses, we verify that these reserve measures exhibit conditional conservatism using a
measure of news that is tailored to the setting: the portion of returns explained by oil and gas price index returns. 
A now common expansion of Basu's (1997) model interacts the beginning market-to-book ratio (MTBt-1) with the two
returns variables.  Accounting standards that govern asset impairments typically require assets to be written down when
their fair values drop sufficiently below their book values.  MTBt-1 captures the amount of slack that firms have built up as of
the beginning of the period to absorb bad news before impairment write-downs are required (Beaver and Ryan, 2005;
Roychowdhury and Watts, 2007).  Relatedly, Lawrence Name (2013) view MTBt-1 as an inverse proxy for non-discretionary
conditional conservatism.  To ensure that our fair value measurement level proportions do not capture these previously
documented effects, we also include interactions of MTBt-1 with the returns variables in the model.  Following the recommendations of Roychowdhury and Martin (2013, pp.  142), we do not include other control variables, although our
inferences are robust to controlling interactively for leverage and size. 
To examine the distinct impacts of the fair value measurement levels on conditional conservatism, we expand Basu's
(1997) model further by incorporating the fair value measurement level proportions and their interactions with the returns
variables. 
Appendix 1 defines all model variables.  The dependent variable, FVCIt, is the portion of comprehensive income attributable to financial instruments recognized at fair value divided by the firm's market value of equity at the beginning of the
year.  The numerator of FVCIt contains all significant unrealized and realized gains and losses on these instruments identifiable on COMPUSTAT, including: (1) net realized gains on trading, available-for-sale (AFS), and held-to-maturity (HTM)
investment securities, net unrealized gains on trading securities, and net hedge ineffectiveness gains that are recorded in
net income; and (2) net unrealized gains on AFS securities, HTM securities (post-April 2009), and cash-flow-hedge derivatives that are recorded in other comprehensive income.  We include both unrealized and realized gains and losses in FVCIt
because realized gains and losses mechanically reduce net unrealized gains and losses dollar for dollar, and we want FVCI to
be unaffected by the likely asymmetric realization of gains and losses (due to tax minimization and other reasons).  Intuitively, FVCI equals what unrealized gains and losses would have been had the firm not realized any gains and losses
during the period,8 which is often referred to as “total” gains and losses (e. g. , Ryan, 2007).  Rett is the firm's stock return for
the 12 months ending three months after the fiscal year end.  Dt is an indicator variable that takes a value of 1 when Rett is
negative and 0 otherwise. 
Lev1t (Lev23t) is the fair value of recognized financial assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring
basis using Level 1 (Level 2 and 3) inputs divided by the carrying value of total assets. 9 In most analyses, we combine Level
2 and Level 3 fair value measurements because the latter constitute a very small proportion of financial instruments recognized at fair value, although this choice does not alter our inferences.  We calculate the fair value measurement level
proportions deflating by total assets so that these proportions reflect the percentages of firms' balance sheets that are
measured at these levels.  In Eq.  (1), these are the most natural proportions to mediate the relation between Rett, which
reflects all firm-level news, whether attributable to balance sheet items measured at fair value or other exposures, and FVCIt,
which reflects only income attributable to items measured at fair value. 10,11 Henceforth, we suppress time subscripts except
when necessary for clarity. 
Ideally, the numerator of FVCI would include only the comprehensive income attributable to recurring fair value measurements of financial instruments.  However, due to COMPUSTAT's aggregation of the data items used to calculate FVCI, this
variable includes one type of non-recurring fair value measurement: other-than-temporary (OTT) impairments of HTM
securities. 12 This inclusion should not significantly affect our results for three reasons.  First, OTT impairments of HTM
securities are infrequent and small compared to bank assets. 13 Second, the inclusion of non-recurring impairments in FVCI
should bias against finding support for our predictions regarding the interactions of returns with Lev1 and Lev23, because
these variables only reflect the proportions of recognized financial instruments measured at fair value on a recurring basis. 
Third, we conduct untabulated specification analyses estimating Eq.  (1) using only unrealized gains and losses recorded in
other comprehensive income as the dependent variable and, alternatively, on a smaller sample of bank holding companies
(BHCs) with available regulatory Y-9C data that enables FVCI to be calculated purely in terms of recurring fair value measurements.  As discussed in Section 5. 1 below, the results of these specification analyses are consistent with the tabulated
results. 
Because Level 1 fair value measurements leave little room for managerial discretion, we expect β11 on D*Ret*Lev1 (referred to as the asymmetric timeliness coefficient for those measurements) to be zero.  Because Level 2 and 3 fair value
measurements allow for discretion, we expect β15 on D*Ret*Lev23 (referred to as the asymmetric timeliness coefficient for
those measurements) to be positive.  Whereas zero is the most appropriate null hypothesis (or benchmark) for β15, we also
expect this coefficient to be larger than β11.  Although a less direct test of differential conditional conservatism, we also
expect the sum of β14 on Ret*Lev23 and β15 (referred to as the total bad news timeliness coefficient for Level 2 and
3 measurements), to be significantly larger than the sum of β10 on Ret*Lev1 and β11 (referred to as the total bad news
timeliness coefficient for Level 1 measurements). 
As a placebo test, we also estimate Eq. 