 1.  Introduction Land-use conversions from forested and natural lands to agricultural landscapes are a leading cause of biodiversity decline worldwide (Gibson et al. , 2011.  Laurance et al. , 2014).  Agricultural conversions also release large amounts of carbon and contribute signiﬁcantly to climate change (Mendelsohn and Dinar, 2009).  Economic models of agricultural land-use change have proved helpful in understanding the ecological consequences of land conversion across multiple scales and for many commodities (Lubowski et al. , 2008).  These models can also be used to predict the environmental impact of changes in agricultural policy or prices (Lawler et al. , 2014.  Polasky et al. , 2008).  Cannabis represents an emerging agricultural crop of economic and ecological signiﬁcance (Carah et al. , 2015.  Decorte et al. , 2011).  Cannabis is now legal, either as a medicine or for recreational use, in over half the United States and the federal government has signaled potential shifts in its classiﬁcation of cannabis as well (National Conference of State Legislatures, 2016).  The market for legal cannabis is already estimated to reach $22. 8 billion nationwide by 2020, approximately double the value of wheat production (Arcview Market Research, 2014).  The growth of this industry may lead to clearing of new land for agriculture or the intensiﬁcation of already established sites.  While many facets of cannabis production are not well documented, there is ample evidence that cannabis production can have negative ecological impacts (Carah et al. , 2015).  For instance, illegal cannabis cultivation sites have been linked to rodenticide poisoning throughout Northern California (Gabriel et al. , 2012.  Thompson et al. , 2014), and to dewatering of streams due to irrigation practices (Bauer et al. , 2015).  Many grows are located in areas of potential ecological impact, such as on steep slopes, far from developed road networks, and near habitat for threatened and endangered ﬁsh species (Butsic and Brenner, 2016).  Given its high economic value and potential impact on the environment, surprisingly little is known about the most basic spatial dimensions of this emerging agricultural activity.  Even less is known about how cannabis farmers choose the location and size of their operations.  Unlike most agricultural crops in the United States, which are mapped and recorded by various government departments, the presence of cannabis agriculture has gone widely undocumented, with the exception of police reports during the era of strong prohibition.  Recent advances in the availability of high resolution satellite imagery have made it possible to map cannabis farms at some times of the year across fairly broad spatial scales (Bauer et al. , 2015).  One recent study (Butsic and Brenner, 2016) produced baseline data that could be used to model land-use decisions on cultivation location and size.  With these insights, policymakers, planners, and others charged with governing this emerging land-use activity might better prepare to mitigate anticipated environmental impacts.  We use a dataset consisting of 1341 documented cannabis cultivation sites on private land in Humboldt County, California to model the spatial location and production decisions of cannabis farmers.  We evaluate the impact of biophysical variables (slope, distance from ocean, distance to water, vegetation cover, and aspect), network variables (number of plants on nearby parcels), local regulations (zoning), and historical variables (whether or not a timber harvest has taken place in the last 15 years) on producer decisions.  In addition, we test to see if the impact of these variables differs for alternative production methods (outdoor cultivation vs.  greenhouse cultivation).  <Middle> Methods.  2. 1.  Study Area.  Our study area consists of 54 randomly selected watersheds in Humboldt County, CA which are representative of the county as a whole (Butsic and Brenner, 2016).  Humboldt County is located in northern California (Fig.  1) along the Paciﬁc coast and is considered the leading cannabis producing county in the United States, if the not world.  The county is a mix of coniferous and hardwood forest with pockets of open rangeland.  The study area is home to numerous threatened and endangered species, including.  Chinook and Coho salmon, steelhead trout, and the northern spotted owl (California Department of Fish and Wildlife, 2015).  Due to the steep terrain and poor soils, agriculture is limited to a relatively small area of the county.  Livestock, dairy, and nursery production are the largest agricultural sectors ($76, $61, $41 million dollars in sales in 2014) and make up over 95% of all agricultural production by value.  Timber production contributes another $72 million in direct sales (Humboldt County, 2015).  In comparison, the wholesale value of cannabis production is likely over $300 million, although no ofﬁcial ﬁgures exist (Butsic and Brenner, 2016).  2. 2.  Cannabis Production in Humboldt County.  Cannabis can be legally cultivated in California for medicinal purposes, although the federal government still considers cannabis an illegal Schedule I drug (McGreevy, 2015).  Medical producers (recreational marijuana will not be legal in California until 2018) must be documented care givers and can supply their crop either to individuals who have physician approval to use cannabis or to dispensaries, which can sell cannabis to patients.  During the time period of our study, there was virtually no chain of custody in the cannabis industry, and the supply chain from growers to consumers was undocumented.  Under the Obama administration, federal law enforcement agencies did not strongly enforce federal cannabis laws nationally, although there is precedent for federal actions on dispensaries and growers (Zilversimt, 2016).  Federal law typically enforces a 5-year prison sentence for cultivation sites larger than 99 plants, hence anecdotal evidence suggests that many farmers stay under that number in case of federal intervention (California Normal, 2016).  Currently there is no organized program in California to track cannabis cultivation siting, production, or sales, even in the legal market.  New laws passed in 2015 aim to establish such a system by 2018 (McGreevy, 2015).  The details of such laws are still under formation in California, with the California Department of Food and Agriculture (CDFA) releasing their ﬁrst proposed regulations on medical cannabis cultivation on April 28, 2017.  From a land use perspective individual counties will be able to create land use ordinances that limit production beyond state standards.  There is little documentation of actual practices of cannabis production in the scientiﬁc literature (Carah et al. , 2015).  The lack of research stems in part from federal restrictions on interacting with cannabis, which have prevented researchers from observing and studying production systems (Sides, 2015).  Nevertheless, researchers have anecdotally observed several tendencies of cannabis production that are relevant to our modeling exercise.  First, production takes place both outdoors and in greenhouses.  Outdoor production is reliant on natural sunlight and plants are typically grown in groups or individually in raised beds.  Greenhouse production allows for light to be diminished with shades or enhanced with artiﬁcial light.  The manipulation of light allows growers to precisely control ﬂowering, which gives greater control over production in terms of both the schedule and the amount produced.  Cannabis requires water throughout its growing season, which takes place during Humboldt County's dry season and can last up to 150 days. 2 Given Humboldt County's dry summers and falls, irrigation of cannabis plants is needed on a nearly daily basis, with some estimates suggesting up to 22 l per day per plant (Humboldt Growers Association, 2010).  Although not documented, it is likely that cannabis produced in greenhouse settings may need less irrigation.  Finally, for most agricultural crops, soil quality is a driver of crop choice.  In Humboldt County, poor-quality agricultural soil covers nearly 90% of the county. 