 Introduction Business risks stemming from a firm's business model and operating environment are important determinants of its cost of equity capital (Modigliani and Miller, 1958).  One characteristic that regulators, researchers, and practitioners view as important in assessing the risks inherent in a firm's current and future cash flows is the concentration of the firm's customer base.  For instance, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No.  131 (previously SFAS No.  14) requires firms to disclose information about major customers because these customers represent “a significant concentration of risk. ” The SEC under Regulation S-K Item 101 also has similar disclosure requirements.  Further, anecdotal evidence suggests that firms explicitly recognize this risk. 4 While approximately 45% of public firms report relying on at least one customer for a sizeable portion of revenues (Ellis et al. , 2012), there is surprisingly little empirical evidence on whether customer concentration risk affects firms’ financing costs.  In this study, we aim to fill this gap by investigating the relation between the concentration of a supplier’s customer base and its cost of equity.  Depending on a major customer for a large portion of sales can be risky for a supplier for two primary reasons. 5 First, a supplier faces the risk of losing substantial future sales if a major customer becomes financially distressed or declares bankruptcy, switches to a different supplier, or decides to develop products internally.  Consistent with this notion, Hertzel et al.  (2008) and Kolay et al.  (2015) document negative supplier abnormal stock returns to the announcement that a major customer declares bankruptcy. 6,7 Further, a customer's weak financial condition or actions could signal inherent problems about the supplier’s viability to its remaining customers and lead to compounding losses in sales.  Second, a supplier faces the risk of losing anticipated cash flows from being unable to collect outstanding receivables if the customer goes bankrupt. 8 This assertion is consistent with the finding that suppliers offering customers more trade credit experience larger negative abnormal stock returns around the announcement of a customer filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy (Jorion and Zhang, 2009.  Kolay et al. , 2015).  While the above evidence suggests that a concentrated customer base can increase a supplier’s risk, whether this risk is priced into a supplier’s cost of equity is unclear and thus an empirical question.  To test the relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity, we first create three measures that capture various dimensions of customer concentration over the years 1981–2011.  Next, we follow prior research and measure a supplier’s cost of equity as the average of several implied cost of equity estimates derived from analysts’ earnings forecasts (e. g. , Hail and Leuz, 2006.  Li, 2010).  In our empirical tests, we control for omitted variables that can affect all suppliers in the same industry during any given year and several characteristics known to impact a supplier’s cost of equity.  Across all three measures of customer concentration, we find evidence that greater risk associated with a concentrated customer base results in a higher cost of equity.  Our findings suggest that a supplier that depends on one or more major customers for at least 10% of its annual revenues has a cost of equity that is 21. 2 basis points higher, which represents an additional annual cost of $7. 99 million for the average supplier to finance with equity.  This effect is economically significant relative to our other control variables, such as measures of information asymmetry.  For instance, the effect of depending on sales from a major customer on a supplier’s cost of equity is equivalent to the effect of a 1. 5 standard deviation increase in analyst forecast dispersion.  We also document a positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s systematic risk, as measured by the supplier’s equity beta.  This finding is consistent with traditional asset pricing theories that suggest that customer concentration risk would have to be related to systematic risk in order to be non-diversifiable and therefore priced into a supplier’s cost of equity (e. g. , Lambert et al. , 2007.  Lintner, 1965.  Sharpe, 1964).  Further, this result supports the conclusion that the risk associated with having a concentrated customer base is in part non-diversifiable. 9 We also conduct several cross-sectional tests that exploit settings where the risk associated with having a concentrated customer base is predictably larger.  If greater customer concentration increases a supplier's risk, then the positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity should be especially strong when these relationships are predictably riskier.  Specifically, this relation should be stronger when a supplier has a major customer that is more likely to default or declare bankruptcy or a major customer that has fewer barriers to switching to a different supplier.  This relation should also be more pronounced for a supplier that is more likely to have unpaid invoices if a major customer defaults and for a supplier that lacks a diverse stream of revenues that can coinsure against the loss of a major customer.  We use several measures to proxy for these situations and find evidence that is consistent with all four predictions.  Our estimates of the effect of customer concentration on a supplier's cost of equity could suffer from an omitted variable bias.  In particular, our control variables may insufficiently account for differences between suppliers that do and do not have concentrated customer bases.  Thus, the estimated effect of customer concentration on a supplier's cost of equity could be picking up nonlinear effects of our control variables.  We are also unable to observe the extent to which different customer–supplier relationships are governed by implicit versus explicit contracts as well as the extent to which managerial-specific relationships between customers and suppliers affect the risk of losing a major customer.  To help alleviate these endogeneity concerns, we perform a propensity score matched sample analysis and implement an instrumental variables approach.  The results from both analyses continue to show that a supplier with a more concentrated customer base has a higher cost of equity, suggesting a causal link from customer concentration to a supplier's cost of equity.  The focus of our paper is on the relation between a concentrated base of corporate customers and a supplier's cost of equity.  Yet, a supplier can also be highly dependent on revenues from the U. S.  federal government.  Unlike corporate customers, however, federal government customers are much less likely to default or declare bankruptcy, and government purchases are typically regulated by longer-term procurement contracts (Goldman et al. , 2013), which reduce the risk that government customers will switch suppliers.  As such, a supplier that depends on the federal government for a large portion of revenues gains operational efficiencies from selling to a major customer but does not bear many of the risks associated with relying on a major corporate customer.  Consequently, we expect a negative relation between federal government customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity.  We find that the cost of equity is 19. 1 basis points lower for a supplier that depends on the federal government for at least 10% of its annual revenues.  In our last set of analyses, we examine the relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of debt.  If a supplier with a concentrated base of corporate customers loses a major customer, the financial losses the supplier incurs could limit its ability to service debt payments.  As such, we expect that creditors demand a higher rate of return on loans made to a supplier with a more concentrated customer base.  We measure a supplier’s cost of debt using loan spreads on new issues of both bank loans and public bonds.  Our results show that a supplier that depends on at least one major corporate customer has 5. 0–6. 0% higher borrowing costs on bank debt and 7. 0–9. 9% higher borrowing costs on public bonds.  Thus, a concentrated customer base increases a supplier’s cost of accessing not only external equity but also debt capital.  We provide new empirical evidence that the concentration of a supplier’s customer base impacts its cost of equity.  Broadly, this finding contributes to the literature investigating the determinants of a firm's cost of equity.  Prior work predominantly focuses on how various forms of information risk affect firms' cost of equity, including voluntary financial and nonfinancial disclosure (Botosan, 1997.  Dhaliwal et al. , 2011.  Francis et al. , 2008), earnings transparency (Barth et al. , 2013), and internal control quality (Ashbaugh-Skaife et al. , 2009).  While studies find that business risks stemming from a firm’s operating environment and business model tend to have a larger impact than managerial discretion on a firm’s cost of equity (Bhattacharya et al. , 2012.  Francis et al. , 2005), they do not identify the sources of such business risks.  Our work extends this literature by documenting how a prevalent source of business risk—a concentrated customer base—impacts a firm’s financing costs.  Our findings also validate the inclusion of a “customer concentration risk premium” as an input in practitioner models of a firm’s cost of equity (e. g. , Duff & Phelps). 10,11 Our findings also extend the literature that examines how the concentration of a supplier’s customer base affects its characteristics and financial policies.  While prior work shows that suppliers with a concentrated base of customers tend to be more profitable because they realize operational efficiencies (Cen et al. , 2013.  Kalwani and Narayandas, 1995.  Patatoukas, 2012), our findings imply that a concentrated customer base raises suppliers’ risk and financing costs.  Thus, our paper relates to work documenting that a concentrated customer base is associated with higher idiosyncratic risk and a greater likelihood of receiving a going-concern opinion (Albuquerque et al. , 2014.  Dhaliwal et al. , 2014).  Last, several other studies find that suppliers with greater customer concentration tend to maintain lower financial leverage ratios (Banerjee et al. , 2008.  Kale and Shahrur, 2007), recognize bad news sooner (Hui et al. , 2012), have more discretionary accruals (Raman and Shahrur, 2008), hold more cash (Itzkowitz, 2013), and pay fewer dividends (Wang, 2012).  Finally, our study contributes to literature showing that nonfinancial stakeholders have a significant impact on a firm’s financing costs.  For instance, Chen et al.  (2011) show that labor unions increase labor adjustment costs and make wages stickier, resulting in higher operating leverage and a higher cost of equity.  Yet, Chen et al.  (2012) find that unionization lowers a firm’s cost of debt.  In addition to showing that major customers impact a firm’s financing costs, we show that the type of customer exposes suppliers to differential business risks.  Specifically, we show that a supplier with a major corporate customer has a higher cost of equity and debt, while a supplier with a major federal government customer has a lower cost of equity but not a lower cost of debt.  The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 describes our data and empirical methodology.  Section 3 reports our empirical findings.  Section 4 documents the results of additional robustness tests.  Section 5 concludes.  <Middle> Data and empirical methodology.  2. 1.  Sample selection.  We obtain data to estimate the implied cost of equity capital from the Institutional Brokers’ Estimate System (IBES), customer–supplier data from Compustat’s segment customer files, financial statement data from Compustat, and stock return data from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) files.  The intersection of these databases creates our main sample that consists of 44,218 supplier-year observations.  This sample includes industrial firms that have publicly-traded stock over the 1981–2011 period, are incorporated in the U. S. , and have non-missing data for the main variables of interest.  We exclude utilities (SIC 4900–4999) and financial firms (SIC 6000–6999).  We winsorize continuous variables at their 1st and 99th percentiles to reduce the influence of outliers and express all dollar values in 2009 dollars. Implied cost of equity capital estimates We empirically estimate the cost of equity that is implied in current stock prices and analysts’ earnings forecasts using IBES data as of June in the following year and four cost of equity models introduced by Claus and Thomas (2001), Gebhardt et al.  (2001), Easton (2004), and Ohlson and Juettner-Nauroth (2005).  The first two models are based on Ohlson's (1995) residual income valuation model, and the latter two models are based on Ohlson and Juettner-Nauroth’s abnormal earnings growth valuation model.  Appendix A provides a detailed description of the cost of equity estimates.  There is little consensus in the literature on which models perform best or how the models should be evaluated (Botosan and Plumlee, 2005.  Gode and Mohanram, 2003.  Guay et al. , 2011).  Therefore, we follow prior literature and use the mean of the estimates from the four models as our measure of the cost of equity to mitigate the effect of measurement errors associated with one particular model (Hail and Leuz, 2006.  Li, 2010).  Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics and the correlation matrix for the cost of equity estimates.  As seen in Panel A, the Ohlson and Juettner-Nauroth (OJN) method generates the highest average estimated cost of equity with a mean of 12. 94% and a median of 12. 12%.  The Gebhardt et al.  (GLS) method produces the lowest average estimated cost of equity with a mean of 7. 33% and a median of 7. 05%.  Panel B of Table 1 presents the pairwise Pearson (below the diagonal) and the Spearman (above the diagonal) correlations between the four estimates, which are all positive.  The lowest observed Pearson (Spearman) correlation is between the GLS method and the Easton (MPEG) method with a value of 0. 473 (0. 459).  The highest observed Pearson (Spearman) correlation is between the OJN method and the MPEG method with a value of 0. 885 (0. 863).  Overall, our ex ante cost of equity estimates are comparable to those in prior studies (Botosan and Plumlee, 2005.  Chen, Chen, and Wei, 2011).  2. 3.  Measures of customer concentration We use Compustat’s segment customer files to identify suppliers that disclose sales to major corporate customers.  Since 1976, the Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No.  14 (SFAS 14) of the Financial Accounting Standard Board (FASB) has required a supplier to disclose external customers that individually account for 10% or more of its revenues.  FAS 131 superseded SFAS 14 in 1997, and the requirement to report such customers remains intact for public companies under SEC Regulation S-K Item 101.  Although regulations require suppliers to identify customers accounting for at least 10% of revenues, suppliers often voluntarily report customers that account for less than 10% of sales.  Because these disclosures are voluntary, we do not include these customers in our concentration calculations to reduce concerns of a potential selection bias. 12 We create three measures to capture the extent to which a supplier’s customer base is concentrated.  Panel C of Table 1 presents summary statistics for these three concentration measures.  For our first measure of customer concentration, we create an indicator variable that is set to one if a supplier discloses at least one corporate customer that accounts for 10% or more of its annual revenues and zero otherwise (Major Customer).  In 26% of our observations, a supplier reports that at least one major customer accounts for 10% or more of revenues.  For our second measure, we follow Patatoukas (2012) and use an application of the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index to capture customer concentration (Customer HHI).  This measure accounts for both the number of major customers identified by the supplier and the importance of those major customers to the supplier’s annual revenues.  Thus, we measure supplier i’s customer concentration in year t across the supplier’s J major customers as this, where Salesijt represents supplier i’s sales to major customer j in year t, and Salesit represents supplier i’s total sales in year t.  This variable ranges between zero and one, with higher values corresponding to a more concentrated customer base.  In particular, this measure takes a value of zero for a supplier that does not disclose sales to any major customers and takes a value of one for a supplier that depends on a single major customer for all annual revenues.  Our last measure follows Banerjee et al.  (2008) and Dhaliwal et al.  (2014) who define Total Major Customer Sales as the fraction of a supplier’s annual total sales captured by all customers that account for at least 10% of the supplier’s annual revenues.  For the subset of suppliers that disclose at least one major customer, mean sales to all major customers account for 31% of these suppliers’ total revenues.  2. 4.  General empirical methodology To examine the relation between customer concentration and the implied cost of equity at the supplier-year level, we estimate the following panel regression model, where Cost of Equityit is our measure of the estimated implied cost of equity in excess of the risk-free rate, as measured by the yield on 10-year Treasury bonds, for supplier i in year t.  Customer Concentration is one of our three measures of customer concentration.  Xit is a set of control variables, and βr  βt are interactions of industry and year fixed effects. 14 Our controls include financial variables commonly found in implied cost of equity regressions (Campbell et al. , 2012.  Chen et al. , 2011).  These variables include stock return beta and idiosyncratic risk, log market value of equity, the book-to-market ratio, book leverage, return momentum, log analyst forecast dispersion, the forecasted long-term growth rate, and return on assets.  Panel C of Table 1 presents summary statistics and detailed definitions for these variables.  To ease the interpretation and independent variables (except customer comparability of coefficient estimates across variables, we standardize all concentration measures) to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one in multivariate regressions.  We define industries at the 2-digit SIC level.  The interaction of industry and year fixed effects (industry  year fixed effects) controls for omitted industry characteristics within a 2-digit SIC industry in a given year.  Thus, these fixed effects account for transitory industry-wide factors, such as industry demand shocks, which could affect a supplier’s cost of equity and customer concentration risk in any particular year. 15 The estimated standard errors in all regressions are corrected for heteroskedasticity and are clustered at the supplier level to correct for serial correlation within supplier groupings.  3.  Empirical results 3. 1.  Customer concentration and the cost of equity capital We begin our analysis by examining whether a concentrated customer base impacts a supplier’s cost of equity.  Table 2 presents the results of this analysis.  The dependent variable in columns 1–6 is the average implied cost of equity in excess of the risk-free rate (in the remainder of the paper, all models use the implied cost of equity in excess of the risk-free rate, and we refer to it as simply the implied cost of equity).  Columns 1–3 report the results from regression models that include all control variables, except equity beta and idiosyncratic risk.  The results show a positive and statistically significant relation between a concentrated customer base and a supplier’s cost of equity across all three measures of customer concentration.  In terms of economic significance, the coefficient estimate on Major Customer in column 1 implies that a supplier with at least one major customer has a cost of equity that is 21. 2 basis points higher.  Given that the sample mean of the implied cost of equity in excess of the risk-free rate is 4. 44%, this 21. 2 basis point increase translates into a 4. 8% (¼0. 212/4. 44) rise in a supplier’s cost of equity relative to the sample mean.  In addition, the mean (median) supplier has outstanding equity of $3,771 ($779. 6) million.  Thus, a 21. 2 basis point increase in a supplier’s cost of equity implies an additional annual cost of $7. 99 ($1. 65) million for the mean (median) supplier to finance with equity.  To compute the economic significance of having a concentrated customer base using the other two measures of customer concentration in columns 2 and 3, we compare the difference in concentration for suppliers that do not depend on any major customers to the average supplier that depends on at least one major customer.  The average supplier with at least one major customer has a customer concentration HHI of 0. 09 and a total percentage of sales to all major customers of 31%.  Since both measures take the value of zero for suppliers that do not depend on any major customers, the coefficient estimates in columns 2 and 3 imply that the difference in cost of equity between these two types of suppliers is 8. 4 (¼0. 932 n 0. 09) basis points and 16. 9 (¼0. 546 n 0. 31) basis points, respectively.  For the remainder of the paper, we only calculate the economic significance for the variable identifying whether a supplier has at least one major customer.  Columns 4–6 present the results from the same regression models as those in columns 1–3, but we follow prior literature and include equity beta and idiosyncratic risk as control variables (e. g. , Ashbaugh-Skaife et al. , 2009.  Chen et al. , 2011).  We use this model specification throughout the rest of our paper.  We estimate Beta Value-Weighted by regressing daily individual stock returns over the fiscal year on the contemporaneous CRSP value-weighted market returns and correct the measure for nonsynchronous trading following Scholes and Williams (1977).  Similarly, we define idiosyncratic risk as the annualized standard deviation of the residuals from the aforementioned regression that is corrected for nonsynchronous trading following Scholes and Williams (1977).  As expected, the results in columns 4–6 show that the inclusion of equity beta and idiosyncratic risk significantly attenuates the positive relation between customer concentration and a supplier’s cost of equity.  Specifically, the coefficient estimate in column 4 on the indicator variable for whether a supplier has at least one major customer declines from 0. 212 to 0. 121.  In comparison to the coefficient estimates on the control variables in column 4, we note that this 12. 1 basis point increase in the cost of equity for suppliers with at least one major customer remains economically significant.  For example, because we standardize all other independent variables to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, a one standard deviation increase in equity beta and analyst forecast dispersion are associated with a 10. 3 and 9. 1 basis point higher cost of equity, respectively.  Moreover, the economic effect of customer concentration on a supplier’s cost of equity is about a quarter of the effects of a one standard deviation change in size, the book-to-market ratio, and book leverage.  Table 2 also shows that the signs on the estimated coefficients on the control variables are consistent with previous findings in the literature.  The implied cost of equity is positively related to equity beta, idiosyncratic risk, the book-to-market ratio, book leverage, and analyst forecast dispersion.  Similar to Dhaliwal et al. 