 Introduction How ﬁrms disseminate information to ﬁnancial markets, how the market responds to this information, and how the mechanism of information dissemination affects the market response are of great importance (e. g. , Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980.  Merton, 1987).  Perhaps the most common and most important vehicle by which ﬁrms release information to the market is through their earnings announcements.  In particular, one of the decision variables is the exact timing of the earnings release.  If the timing of the release affects the market's response to ﬁrms’ earnings, then ﬁrms may release news strategically, for instance, to hide bad news.  Prior studies examining the choice of weekday and, separately, time during the day for earnings announcements show that there is a higher concentration of bad news on Friday than on other weekdays (Penman, 1987.  Damodaran, 1989.  DellaVigna and Pollet, 2009.  Doyle and Magilke, 2009.  deHaan, Shevlin, and Thornock, 2015) and in the evening (after trading hours) than at other times of day (Patell and Wolfson, 1982.  Doyle and Magilke, 2009.  deHaan et al. , 2015).  Recent studies have recognized that the mere concentration of bad news on Friday and in the evening is not sufﬁcient to establish the existence of strategic announcement timing.  Doyle and Magilke consider opportunistic announcement switching and ﬁnd no evidence that managers switch announcements of bad earnings news to Friday or evening.  deHaan, Shevlin, and Thornock analyze variation in investor attention and ﬁnd evidence consistent with rational strategic announcing in the evening but not on Friday.  Our study extends the existing literature and contributes to the debate of whether and when ﬁrms strategically announce their earnings news in two ways.  First, because ﬁrms choose the weekday and time of their announcements jointly, we introduce the analysis of day-time combinations to the literature on opportunistic announcement timing.  Second, we provide new implications of strategic announcing, with a special focus on whether managers have potential beneﬁts from their announcement timing.  The analysis of announcement timing at the level of day-time combinations provides us with new insights about managers’ strategic timing behavior.  The higher concentration of bad news on Friday and, separately, in the evening found in the prior studies leads to a natural conjecture.  Announcements on Friday evenings, which are the intersection of Fridays and evenings, have the worst news and, thus, are the most susceptible to opportunistic announcing behavior.  This conjecture is also consistent with both the popular wisdom that ﬁrms and even government agencies tend to release bad news on Friday afternoon after 4 PM (Penman, 1987) and common knowledge in the ﬁnancial industry that analysts and other professional investors are less likely to be at work on Friday evenings (e. g. , Quenqua, 2010).  We ﬁnd that Friday evening announcements indeed contain by far the worst news of all day-time combinations.  In support of the strategic announcing hypothesis, we ﬁnd that ﬁrms switch to Friday evening when they have bad news.  A host of additional ﬁndings concerning the post-earnings announcement drift (PEAD), insider trading, delistings, and conference calls point out that strategic announcing occurs only on Friday evening.  We also ﬁnd that managers beneﬁt from their strategic choice through reduced market scrutiny and delayed market response to news announced on Friday evening. 