 
The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) oversight process involves a range of activities, from advice and monitoring to enforcement actions.  Enforcement actions have been studied in the prior literature to understand both their determinants and consequences.  A ﬁrm’s political connections (PC) in particular are hypothesized from capture theory (e. g. , Stigler, 
1971 ) to bias downward the likelihood of enforcement actions and the magnitude of penalties, as politicians can interfere 
2 Empirical 
with SEC investigations, use budget allocations to control the SEC, or affect SEC oﬃcials’ careers ( Weingast, 1984 ).  
evidence suggestive of SEC capture by politically connected ﬁrms is reported in Correia (2014) and Yu and Yu (2011) , who 
ﬁnd a negative relation between ﬁrm PC and enforcement actions (which are pursued by the SEC’s Division of Enforcement 
or DOE).  
Interpreting the results in the prior literature as evidence of lax SEC oversight of PC ﬁrms is complicated by the fact that 
SEC oversight involves more than enforcement actions.  In particular, the agency also routinely reviews ﬁrms’ SEC ﬁlings to 
monitor and enhance ﬁrms’ compliance with disclosure and accounting regulation ( SEC, (2015b )).  SEC questions and concerns in the course of these reviews are communicated to ﬁrms through comment letters (CLs) that require response and 
remediation.  In this paper, we examine the relation between ﬁrm PC and the likelihood of receiving CLs to shed fuller light 
on the relation between corporate political connectedness and SEC oversight.  
The CL review process is conducted by the SEC’s Division of Corporation Finance (DCF).  The volume of CLs is large, as 
between 20% and 40% of U. S.  listed ﬁrms have received a CL in each year between 2005 and 2012.  In contrast, enforcement 
actions are relatively infrequent.  CLs are issued on a variety of topics (e. g. , revenue recognition, goodwill impairment) depending on the nature of the SEC concern generated by its review.  The initial CL might request clariﬁcation and disclosure 
of further information that leads to a sequence of “rounds” of communication between the SEC and the ﬁrm.  The CL process 
concludes when the DCF is satisﬁed with compliance and issues a “no further comment” letter, or when the DCF refers the 
matter to the SEC’s DOE.  CLs therefore are an important part of SEC oversight.  In this light, a number of recent studies have 
investigated the determinants and consequences of CLs (e. g. , Cassell Name, 2013; Bozanic Name, 2015; Johnston and Petacchi 
2014; Dechow Name, 2016 ).  These studies have not, however, examined the relation between ﬁrm PC and the likelihood of 
receiving CLs.  
SOX Section 408, paragraph (b), identiﬁes some ﬁrm characteristics (“factors”) for the SEC to consider in its CL reviews.  
This guidance concludes by stating that “any other factors that the Commission may consider relevant” can also be used in 
determining which ﬁrms are reviewed, suggesting that the SEC is given some discretion.  If ﬁrms’ political connections are 
one such discretionary factor, then we expect a signiﬁcant relation between ﬁrm PC and CL review likelihood.  Moreover, if 
the SEC is captured as suggested in the prior literature, and such capture is manifested through lax oversight, we expect 
this relation to be negative.  
On the other hand, there are reasons to expect a positive relation between these variables.  For example, the SEC’s CL 
review process may not be captured (and, in fact, prior claims of SEC capture, which are based on small samples of ﬁrms 
facing enforcement actions, may be overstated).  If so, and if ﬁrm PC is a distinct risk factor for ﬁnancial-reporting issues, we 
would expect a positive relation between ﬁrm PC and CL reviews.  
To investigate the relation between ﬁrm PC and CL reviews we obtain all comment letters from the Audit Analytics 
database for 2005–2012 and retain those related to ﬁrms’ 10-K ﬁlings.  PC ﬁrms are identiﬁed through contemporaneous 
contributions to Political Action Committees (PAC) or alternatively through their lobbying expenditures.  Results indicate that 
PC ﬁrms are more likely to receive a CL after controlling for a host of CL determinants identiﬁed in the prior literature.  The 
controls include accounting quality and complexity proxies, such as accounting restatements, internal control weaknesses, 
the length and linguistic complexity of ﬁnancial statements, and the number of SEC ﬁlings made by each ﬁrm during the 
year.  Our results on PC contrast with prior ﬁndings of a negative association between PC and SEC enforcement actions and 
suggest SEC capture by PC ﬁrms is not indicated in the CL review process.  We return to a discussion of this primary ﬁnding 
shortly.  
We conduct a range of tests that collectively are intended to mitigate endogeneity concerns and examine the robustness 
of  the  primary  result.   First,  we  estimate  the  tests  in  a  propensity-score-matched  sample  wherein  PC  and  non-PC  ﬁrms 
are matched by year, the speciﬁc SEC oﬃce conducting the review, and all covariates in the regression model ( Ho Name, 
2007 ).  Results indicate PC ﬁrms are more likely to receive a CL: for instance, we ﬁnd that while ﬁrms making political 
contributions have a 38. 5% probability of receiving a CL, matched non-contributing ﬁrms have a probability of 33. 7%, a 
statistically signiﬁcant difference that also appears to be economically substantive.  
Second, we conduct cross-sectional tests exploiting variation in the targets of ﬁrms’ political activities.  Speciﬁcally, we 
examine the relation between CL and ﬁrms that have either lobbied the SEC directly or are top contributors to legislators 
serving on SEC oversight committees.  We ﬁnd that such ﬁrms are signiﬁcantly more likely to receive CL reviews, providing 
further support to the primary result.  
Third, to further mitigate more general endogeneity concerns we use an instrumental-variables (IV) approach.  As in prior 
research (e. 