 1.  Introduction International environmental agreements have motivated binding national targets to reduce CO2 emission (e. g.  European Commission, 2009.  Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.  UNFCCC, 2015).  Around 40 countries and more than 20 cities, states and provinces have either implemented or are planning to implement a carbon tax or similar carbon pricing scheme (Farrell and Lyons, 2016.  World Bank, 2014a.  World Bank, 2014b).  In many developed economies, a carbon tax has been found to be regressive, having a proportionally greater impact on the incomes of poorer households than richer households (Callan et al. , 2009.  Farrell and Lyons, 2016).  Understanding the distribution of incidence has been the subject of much analysis to date (e. g.  O’Donoghue, 1997.  Kerkhof et al. , 2008.  Callan et al. , 2009.  Rausch et al. , 2011).  Within the carbon tax literature, revenue ‘recycling’ via the taxbeneﬁt system is commonly suggested as a means to offset regressive impacts.  Generally, redistribution is considered in the context of achieving a progressive distribution of incidence, measured according to changes in burden for aggregated income groups (e. g.  O’Donoghue, 1997.  Kerkhof et al. , 2008.  Callan et al. , 2009.  Rausch et al. , 2011).  While the distribution is progressive in aggregate, low income households that beneﬁt from the redistribution policy are not necessarily those households that lose out due to the imposition of the carbon tax.  Indeed, it is the progressive distribution of the total tax-beneﬁt system that is of greatest importance, as ‘losers’ may be compensated elsewhere in the tax-beneﬁt system (Mirrlees and Adam, 2011).  However, as carbon taxes grow through time (Tol, 2013.  van den Bergh and Botzen, 2015), potentially replacing more traditional forms of taxation, these regressive impacts may grow in magnitude.  Offsetting the regressive impacts speciﬁc to carbon taxation will therefore be of increasing importance going forward.  This paper provides the evidence base to inform any policy amendments required to ensure a progressive tax-beneﬁt policy, post-carbon tax incidence.  This is carried out by decomposing measures of inequality of carbon tax incidence by socioeconomic determinant, identifying the cohorts affected by regressive impacts and thus informing revenue redistribution policy.  Measures of income inequality are a quantiﬁable indicator of pro-rich or pro-poor distributive burden, giving insight into whether the burden of carbon tax falls disproportionately on poor households.  This paper addresses a methodological gap offered by commonly employed techniques.  Microsimulation-type analyses show the distribution of burden by income group or between socioeconomic cohorts (e. g.  comparing the burden imposed on urban vs.  rural dwellers or large vs.  small households).  This identiﬁes the distributional outcome, but does not give insight into the factors driving this result.  It is therefore diﬃcult to compare the inﬂuence each factor plays in the overall regressive impact.  While traditional regression-based analyses (e. g.  Büchs and Schnepf, 2013) can isolate the expected inﬂuence that each socioeconomic factor plays in carbon consumption, the regressivity of this relationship is not accounted for.  One must combine information on the propensity to consume carbon with the gradient of this consumption across the income distribution to elicit this information.  This paper provides this contribution by carrying out a multivariate decomposition of the concentration index, a method commonly employed to decompose socioeconomic inequalities in health outcomes (Walsh and Cullinan, 2015.  van Doorslaer et al. , 2004.  Yiengprugsawan et al. , 2009.  Wagstaff et al. , 2001).  This analysis of this paper is applied to an Irish case study and the results are threefold.  First, this paper has quantiﬁed the incidence of carbon tax expenditure.  For the considered Irish case study, electricity and ‘other’1 fuel-related carbon taxes have the greatest pro-poor distribution of incidence.  In terms of magnitude, less wealthy households spend a greater proportion of their income on ‘other’ fuel and motor fuel-related carbon taxes.  Second, the determinants of carbon tax expenditure are identiﬁed.  Location, occupation and household structure are important for motor fuel-related carbon tax expenditure.  Education, location, household structure and home heating method inﬂuence ‘other’ fuel-related carbon tax expenditure, while dwelling type, household structure and appliance ownership are important determinants of electricity-related carbon tax expenditure.  Third, the extent to which each socioeconomic determinant affects inequality has been quantiﬁed for each carbon source.  Most notably, income is associated with a large proportion of ‘other’ fuelrelated inequality in Ireland, however, it is found to be of lesser importance for electricity or motor fuel-related carbon tax incidence.  For motor fuels, location and occupation are important determinants.  In particular, farmers and own account workers are associated with regressive effects.  Household size, structure and appliance ownership is important for electricity-related carbon tax incidence.  While a greater number of inhabitants increases the household’s carbon tax cost, this impact is only regressive in relation to the number of children present.  This is especially true for electricity-related carbon tax incidence.  Potential channels that may offset negative distributional effects have also been identiﬁed in this paper.  When considering methods to counteract the regressivity associated with electricity-related carbon taxes, adjusting housing-related taxes and transfers may be effective.  Income dominates regressivity associated with ‘other’ fuels and income-based redistribution measures such as cash transfers or incentives to support less carbon-intensive heating technologies or energy eﬃciency upgrades may be most appropriate.  In providing these contributions, this paper proceeds as follows.  Section 2 reviews the previous literature in the ﬁeld of carbon taxation, concentration indices and decompositional analysis, highlighting the gap addressed by this paper.  Section 3 outlines the data and methodology employed.  Section 4 presents the results.  First, the regressive impact of each carbon tax is explicitly quantiﬁed using the concentration and Kakwani indices.  Next, regression analyses are presented to identify the determinants of carbon tax consumption.  Following the methodology of Wagstaff et al.  (2003), the total regressive impact is decomposed according to constituent socioeconomic drivers.  Presenting the results in this fashion allows for more complete insight into how carbon taxes affect the income distribution, while emphasising the beneﬁt of adopting the decomposed concentration index methodology.  Section 5 offers insight into the important policy implications of these ﬁndings.  Section 6 offers some concluding comments.  2.  Literature Review Callan et al.  (2009) have comprehensively reviewed the literature analysing the distribution of carbon tax incidence amongst households.  Microsimulation-based methods are most-often used to analyse the incidence of cost relative to income.  Most analyses to date focus on changes in income as a result of direct emission of CO2 (Poterba, 1991.  Saﬁrova et al. , 2004.  Pearson and Smith, 1991.  O’Donoghue, 1997.  Scott and Eakins, 2004.  Callan et al. , 2009).  Taxbeneﬁt microsimulation models have been used to consider the distributional impact relative to the full tax and beneﬁt system (Callan et al. , 2009.  O’Donoghue, 1997).  Advances in this ﬁeld have generally focussed on incorporating further sources of emission or incorporating a behavioural response to price changes.  Indirect consumption of CO2 embedded in goods and services has been incorporated through integration with an input-output or CGE model (Beck et al. , 2015.  Cornwell and Creedy, 1996.  Ekins et al. , 2011.  Hamilton and Cameron, 1994.  Labandeira and Labeaga, 1999.  Lyons et al. , 2012.  Verde and Tol, 2009.  Wier et al. , 2005).  Kerkhof et al.  (2008) analyse the distributional effects of taxing multiple greenhouse gases.  They ﬁnd that the tax is less regressive and more cost-effective than taxing carbon alone.  Analyses by Brannlund and Nordstrom (2004), Labandeira and Labeaga (1999) and Tiezzi (2001) include a system of demand equations to incorporate demand response to carbon taxinduced price changes, with these studies also ﬁnding regressive impacts.  Despite the wide range of methodological developments, the literature to date has not decomposed regressive impacts by socioeconomic determinant.  A number of methods have been applied to approximate these impacts.  Büchs and Schnepf (2013) use a regression-based analysis to elicit the determinants of carbon tax emission.  Comparing the socioeconomic determinants of carbon emission with the determinants of income gave qualitative insight into distributional impacts.  However, quantiﬁcation of distributional effect and ranking of importance is not facilitated by this analysis.  This is important information to effectively offset negative income effects through social transfer design.  Presenting incidence by income or socioeconomic cohort (Callan et al. , 2009.  Ekins et al. , 2011.  Grainger and Kolstad, 2010) gives intuitive insight into incidence amongst population groups.  However, it is diﬃcult to compare between-factor impacts in this manner, such as comparing the inﬂuence of education vs.  social class in determining the regressivity of a carbon tax, as determinants are confounded in such analyses.  Indeed, when such an analysis is extrapolated out over a number of determinants, easy comparison, quantiﬁcation of effect and ranking of importance is diﬃcult.  Such information may be important when designing an effective suite of social transfer policies.  To address this deﬁciency, this paper quantiﬁes the contribution each socioeconomic factor makes towards unequal carbon tax incidence using regression-based decomposition methods.  Regression-based decomposition methods have been used by Fields (2003), Morduch and Sicular (2002) and Yun (2006) to quantify the relative inﬂuence of different socio-economic determinants in overall income inequality.  Morduch and Sicular (2002) used this measure to identify the socio-economic determinants of income inequality for a number of income quintiles in rural China.  Fields (2003) used this method to identify the inﬂuence of socio-economic factors in both the overall rate of inequality in 1979 and 1999 in the USA, while also proposing a method to quantify the inﬂuence of each factor in the change in inequality between time periods.  Brewer and Wren-Lewis (2012) have carried out a similar analysis to track the relative contribution of each factor to change in inequality over a number of intervals from 1968 to 2009.  Similarly, regression-based methods have been used to decompose the unequal prevalence of a certain factor such as a health outcome, using the concentration index.  The concentration index is a metric of inequality commonly employed to analyse the socioeconomic gradient of health outcomes, with multivariate decomposition of this metric widely applied in the ﬁeld of health economics.  Applications to date have analysed socioeconomic inequalities in obesity (Walsh and Cullinan, 2015), vaccine uptake (Doherty et al. , 2014), malnutrition (Wagstaff et al. , 2001), doctor utilisation (van Doorslaer et al. , 2004) and disease (Yiengprugsawan et al. , 2009).  This paper augments the ﬁeld of application to analyse socioeconomic inequalities in carbon tax incidence.  The concentration index is used for this paper as it explicitly focuses on the regressive determinants of a particular outcome variable.  We do not employ a full tax-beneﬁt microsimulation model which allows for understanding in the broader context of the entire system of taxes and social transfers.  Such models explicitly consider measures that may offset any regressive impacts of carbon taxation.  Instead, we focus on the distributional impact of carbon tax in isolation.  In doing so, we elicit the distributional impact of this particular taxation measure.  As carbon taxes grow as a share of general taxation, these ﬁndings may inform measures to counteract regressive impacts of carbon taxation in the context of the wider tax-beneﬁt<Middle> Data and Methodology.  3. 1.  Data.  The contribution of this paper is demonstrated by means of an Irish example.  Ireland has income and consumption patterns representative of many developed countries, with levels of income inequality at the EU average, post-taxes and transfers (Eurostat, 2015).  Alongside this, there exists detailed microdata on household income and expenditure, allowing for analysis of incidence that is differentiated by source.  Such insight is of importance as, in many EU countries, electricity-related emissions are subject to a carbon price set by the EU Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS), while emissions from motor and household fuels are subject to a domestic carbon price, if any (Farrell and Lyons, 2016).  The imposition of carbon taxation in Ireland is thus representative of that experienced in many countries.  The anonymised Irish Household Budget Survey (HBS) for 2009/10 (CSO, 2012) are the primary data used in this analysis.  The HBS details household-level income and expenditures for a representative random sample of all private households in Ireland over a two week period.  In 2009/2010, 5891 private households participated with a response rate of just under 40% (CSO, 2012).  Responses are weighted to minimise any bias that may occur due to participant non-response.  The impact of a carbon tax is analysed with respect to three categories of emission source.  motor fuels, electricity and ‘other’ fuels.  Other fuel sources are predominantly used for heating or cooking and comprise domestic piped gas, gas (bulk purchase), peat, coal, anthracite and heating oil.  We thus elicit the distributional impact of carbon prices differentiated by source.  As the focus of this paper is on presenting a decomposed measure of income inequality, we follow the analyses of Callan et al.  (2009), O’Donoghue (1997), Pearson and Smith (1991), Poterba (1991), Saﬁrova et al.  (2004) and Scott and Eakins (2004) to concentrate on direct impacts.  Indirect carbon consumption comprises a small share of total carbon tax incidence and tends to be progressively distributed (Verde and Tol, 2009).  Taking an Irish case study, Verde and Tol (2009) show that indirect costs are €0. 50– 1. 50/week, assuming no ETS-related carbon taxation, while the direct cost is €3–4 per week.  Of greater importance, however, is the positive distribution of this impact.  Indeed, the proportional impact is constant for deciles 2–10 and comprises about 10% of the proportional impact for all carbon taxation for the lowest income decile.  Thus, direct emission through the consumption of electricity and fuels is the primary driver of regressive impacts and thus of most importance for policymakers when considering revenue redistribution mechanisms.  To concentrate on the primary contribution of this paper, the use of the decomposed concentration index, and to avoid superﬂuous analysis of predominantly non-regressive impacts, we limit this analysis to direct effects of carbon taxation.  An extension to consider indirect effects may be carried out in futureHousehold-level carbon emissions are calculated by ﬁrst converting expenditures to quantities consumed and then deriving the carbon content of consumed items.  To do this, we divide total expenditure by unit price data following the approach of Callan et al.  (2009), Büchs and Schnepf (2013) and Leahy and Lyons (2010).  For each quarter of analysis, the Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland (SEAI) have provided average retail price data for constituent fuels.  For electricity, we use unitary prices and standing charges applicable for the 2009/2010 survey period.  This is carried out by reducing the gross expenditure amount by 13. 5% to account for VAT and then deducting the standing charge for the standard ESB (Electricity Supply Board) Customer Supply electricity tariff (ESB, 2009).  To calculate the quantity of electricity consumed, the remaining electricity expenditure amount is divided by the unitary cost of electricity (CER, 2010c, 2011b).  Once the number of units consumed are identiﬁed, emissions coeﬃcients are taken from Scott and Eakins (2004) from which the quantity of CO2 emitted may be identiﬁed.  This quantity is then multiplied by the carbon price to elicit the carbon tax paid per household.  To calculate the unequal incidence of a carbon tax, we compare the cost to equivalised household disposable income.  Disposable income is income after taxes and social transfers.  Equivalisation is a weighting procedure to account for household size-related economies of scale.  The ‘OECD-modiﬁed scale’ is the preferred equivalence scale of Eurostat and the OECD and is used for this analysis.  This scale weighs household income according to the number and status of household inhabitants.  A weight of 1 is assigned to the ﬁrst adult, a weight of 0. 5 to each additional adult and a weight of 0. 3 to each child (Hagenaars et al. , 1994).  For ‘other’ fuel-related expenditures, we notice outliers that indicate unfeasibly high levels of usage.  For example, some households report spending €200 on peat briquettes, where the median value for those who consumed peat briquettes was €3. 83.  We follow Büchs and Schnepf (2013) and omit these observations as they can lead to biased regression results.  We omit values in excess of three standard deviations from the mean of consumption for each constituent fuel in the ‘other’ fuel category.  This is calculated conditional on consumption being greater than zero.  This trims 79 observations or 1% of the total sample.  Trimming the data in this way minimises any potential bias introduced by implausibly high data points (Büchs and Schnepf, 2013).  This restricted sample is used for analyses pertaining to emissions sourced from ‘other’ fuels and total fuel usage.  3. 2.  Methodology.  3. 2. 2.  Determinants of Carbon Tax Incidence.  A carbon price must be chosen for this analysis.  Ireland has a domestic carbon tax of €20/tCO2 applicable to motor fuels and fuels commonly used for heating (domestic piped gas, gas (bulk purchase), peat, coal, anthracite and heating oil).  In Ireland, exemptions exist for fossil fuels used for participants in the EU Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS), including electricity, as this scheme provides a price for carbon for these emissions sources (Department of Finance, 2014).  We choose a uniform price so that regressive impacts are comparable between sources.  Therefore the analysis of this paper is carried out with respect to a €20/tCO2 carbon tax across all sources.  Regression-based decomposition of an inequality index requires estimation of the inequality index and regressions to predict carbon tax expenditure as constituent calculations.  Each of these constituent analyses are presented in this paper to give a complete insight into the distributional impact of carbon taxation while also emphasising the added value of the decompositional methodology.  Each step will now be outlined in turn.  3. 2. 1.  Measuring Inequality of Carbon Tax Incidence.  The unequal incidence of each carbon tax is ﬁrst estimated in aggregate.  The concentration index (CI) is used to quantify the degree of income-related inequality in carbon tax incidence.  The CI is easily quantiﬁed and is measured between the ranges −1 and 1, with zero representing perfect equality.  The CI can be constructed according to a number of methodologies.  Following Kakwani et al.  (1997) and Doherty et al.  (2014), we calculate the CI in the following way, where yi represents carbon tax payments for household i, l is mean of carbon tax payments, Ri is the fractional rank of households along the income distribution, where household i is ranked 1 if at the bottom of the income distribution and N if at the top of the income distribution.  While the concentration index gives insight into how carbon taxes are distributed across the income distribution, it is also important to understand the progressivity of this incidence with respect to income.  To carry this out, the CI for the carbon tax must be compared to a measure of income inequality.  An index of income inequality provides a metric of how evenly income is distributed across the population.  The Gini coeﬃcient (G) is the most commonly employed index of income inequality and is related to the CI.  Once again ranking households by income, the Gini coeﬃcient may be calculated as follows, where ai is equivalised disposable income for household i, ¯a is mean equivalised disposable income and all other variables are as previously deﬁned.  The Kakwani index (K) is commonly used to measure the progressivity of a tax intervention such as a carbon tax.  This can be calculated in a number of ways.  In this paper, it is calculated as the concentration index for the analysed carbon tax, less the Gini coefﬁcient of income inequality.  The larger the Kakwani index, the more progressive the distribution of the carbon tax.  3. 2. 2.  Determinants of Carbon Tax Incidence.  A multivariate regression-based decomposition is carried out to elicit the socioeconomic determinants of inequitable carbon tax incidence.  This comprises a number of stages.  First the determinants of carbon tax expenditure are identiﬁed by means of a multivariate OLS regression, following the analysis of Büchs and Schnepf (2013), where the dependent variable (yi) is carbon tax cost per household i, the xj variables are j explanatory variables, bj is the average partial effect of variable j on carbon tax expenditure and 4 is the error term.  This is analysed for each source of carbon expenditure.  electricity, motor fuels and all other fuels (previously deﬁned).  Explanatory variables included in this analysis represent a range of socioeconomic and household variables that explain household consumption of carbon and the gradient of this consumption across the income distribution, informed by economic theory and the literature (Büchs and Schnepf, 2013.  Leahy and Lyons, 2010).  The following independent variables are included.  Location is coded according to three dummies representing Dublin.  Border, Midland, West.  and South, Mid-West, Mid-East excluding Dublin.  Dummy variables are used to represent each category of occupation, education and age of the Household Reference Person (HRP).  The presence of adults and children and Old-Age Pensioners (OAPs) are also categorised by dummy variables.  Equivalised disposable income is log-transformed to model a linear relationship with emissions and following the approach taken in the literature (Büchs and Schnepf, 2013.  Doherty et al. , 2014.  Walsh and Cullinan, 2015).  The existence of a loan indicates the degree of indebtedness for a household and may affect their propensity to consume across the income distribution and this is thus included as a dummy variable (Watson and Maitre, 2015).  Household size and type, along with water heating, space heating and cooking method, affects the consumption of electricity and other fuels (Leahy and Lyons, 2010) and these variables are included in the analysis for these regression speciﬁcations only.  Preliminary analyses found that the only appliances that varied suﬃciently across the income spectrum to inﬂuence the socioeconomic gradient of carbon tax incidence were the number of motor vehicles in a household, along with dishwasher and tumble dryer ownership.  These are thus included in the analysis. 