1.  Introduction Reducing global poverty and mitigating climate change are two major challenges facing mankind in the twenty-ﬁrst century.  Economic growth leads to absolute poverty reduction, particularly if it is not associated with rising income inequality (e. g.  Dollar and Kraay, 2002.  Bourguignon, 2003).  There is a substantial literature that investigates the relationship between income and carbon dioxide emissions (the main driver behind the increase in global surface temperature).  This literature suggests that economic growth, at least up to a certain level of economic development, increases greenhouse gases (IPCC, 2014.  Jakob et al. , 2014).  Consequently, from the perspective of a developing country, economic growth may alleviate poverty, but intensify climate problems.  A related issue is whether there is also a tradeoff between income inequality and carbon emissions, as stated by Ravallion et al.  (2000).  As we discuss below, the theoretical and empirical literature generates mixed results on this question, pointing to different mechanisms and effects (for a survey see Berthe and Elie, 2015).  Much of this literature is, however, based on econometric methods that are biased in the presence of time-varying unobserved heterogeneity, and on older data on both inequality as well as emissions.  We improve upon the existing literature in both of these respects.  A particular innovation with respect to the existing literature is that we use a group ﬁxed effects estimator (Bonhomme and Manresa, 2015) as opposed to a standard ﬁxed effects estimator.  This grouped ﬁxed effects estimator takes into account that different regions of the world adopt clean technologies at different rates or face different structural challenges and dynamics.  Furthermore, the estimator arguably deals better with endogeneity due to unobserved heterogeneity.  Finally, the within transformation associated with the standard country-based ﬁxed effects estimator would eliminate most of the variation in the Gini data, leaving only the relatively small intertemporal variation (see the literature on the debates on inequality and growth literature, e. g.  Forbes, 2000, Banerjee and Duﬂo, 2003, Scholl and Klasen, 2016).  To the best of our knowledge, only ﬁve papers are closely related to our empirical investigation of the link between per capita carbon dioxide emissions, per capita output, and inequality.  There are also related studies investigating the link between inter-country inequality and emissions (e. g.  Guo, 2013.  Coondoo and Dinda, 2008).  First, Ravallion et al.  (2000) use a pooled OLS model that interacts inequality with a third-order polynomial of income, a time trend, and population size.  The panel data set consists of 42 countries over the period from 1975 to 1992.  The authors use one (average) inequality measure per country.  They ﬁnd that there is a static tradeoff between reducing carbon emissions and reducing income inequality.  Second, Borghesi (2006) applies OLS and ﬁxed effects panel data estimators to a panel data set of 37 countries for the period 1988 to 1995.  He prefers the ﬁxed effects estimator and ﬁnds that inequality does not have an effect on emissions.  For the pooled OLS estimator, he ﬁnds a statistically signiﬁcant negative effect between income inequality and carbon dioxide emissions.  Third, Heerink et al.  (2001) use a cross-section design with 65 country observations from about 1985.  The speciﬁcation includes income, its square, and the Gini coefﬁcient.  Similar to Ravallion et al.  (2000), they ﬁnd that income inequality is negatively associated with carbon emissions per capita.  All three studies rely on the inequality measure from the data set described in Deininger and Squire (1996).  Two further studies use the University of Texas Inequality data which proxies household inequality with the between sector wage inequality in non-agricultural sectors.  Drabo (2011) ﬁnds, in a 2SLS ﬁxed effects framework using 86 countries ﬁnds that inequality increases emissions.  Gassebner et al. 