 Introduction Prior research examines and ﬁnds that ﬁnancial statement audits help reduce the cost of debt capital for small, private ﬁrms (e. g. , Blackwell et al. , 1998.  Minnis, 2011).  The premise underlying this relation is that an audit helps increase the quality and reliability of ﬁnancial statement disclosures, which reduces information asymmetry and thus the cost of capital.  We argue that, in addition to the value provided by the audit with respect to the quality of the ﬁnancial disclosures, the choice to obtain an audit itself can provide incremental information to creditors, which can reduce ﬁnancing frictions.  In particular, we argue that the observable choice to get an audit can convey information about the ﬁrm's future prospects because audits are costly in terms of audit fees paid as well as management time and effort spent preparing for, and engaging in, the audit.  Thus, ﬁrms will voluntarily subject themselves to an audit to obtain ﬁnancing if they foresee themselves generating sufﬁcient future proﬁts from their investment opportunities to recover the cost of the audit.  In this paper, we examine whether the choice to obtain an audit eases ﬁnancing frictions by conveying information about ﬁrms' future prospects that is independent of the information generated from the audit itself.  Understanding whether the decision to voluntarily get an audit contains information that reduces ﬁnancing frictions is important from a regulatory point of view because audits are mandated for private ﬁrms in many countries and the vast majority of public ﬁrms across the world.  If the choice to obtain an audit does indeed contain information that relaxes ﬁnancing frictions, such information would be hidden by the audit mandate.  Thus it is important to know the economic signiﬁcance (if any) of information revealed from observing the audit choice.  Broadly, the intuition for our research question follows from two distinct (but related) theories.  First, the audit choice can be thought of as a costly signal initiated by low risk ﬁrms that allows them to separate themselves from high risk ﬁrms (e. g. , Spence, 1973.  Jensen and Meckling, 1976.  Melumad and Thoman, 1990).  For example, Jensen and Meckling (1976) discuss that ﬁrms can incur “bonding costs,” such as an audit, to create a separating equilibrium where high quality ﬁrms commit to getting an audit that is too costly for low quality ﬁrms to mimic.  Here the ability to incur the audit cost informs ﬁnanciers that the ﬁrm is likely to generate sufﬁcient future proﬁts to recoup the audit related costs.  Second, the audit choice can be characterized as a screening mechanism used by external ﬁnanciers to separate the good credit risk ﬁrms from the bad credit risk ﬁrms (Guasch and Weiss, 1981).  The idea is that ﬁrms that are willing to incur the cost of an audit to obtain external ﬁnancing are likely to have more proﬁtable investment opportunities, and thus lower credit risk, than those unwilling to pay for an audit. 