 Introduction Understanding the forces that shape financial reporting outcomes is an important goal in accounting research.  A large prior literature provides evidence on how financial reporting choices are affected by explicit and implicit contracts.  Explicit debt contracts with firms’ creditors (Watts and Zimmerman, 1986.  DeFond and Jiambalvo, 1994.  Dichev and Skinner, 2002), and compensation contracts with firms’ executives (Healy, 1985), have been shown to influence financial reporting choices.  Implicit contracts with equity investors as reflected in these investors’ expectations have also been shown to influence financial reporting choices (Graham et al. , 2005.  Badertscher et al. , 2012).  Relatively less attention has been devoted however to understanding the potential influence of implicit contracts between firms and rank and file employees.  Firms sell employees a package of explicit and implicit claims, with explicit claims expressed through explicit employment contracts and implicit claims expressed through promises about long-run working conditions and employment and advancement opportunities (Cornell and Shapiro, 1987).  The value of the ongoing implicit claims depends on employee expectations about the firm’s future financial conditions (Bowen et al. , 1995).  Firms have an incentive to maximize the value of the package of explicit and implicit claims they offer by maximizing employees’ perceived value of the ongoing implicit claims, and this incentive is a potentially important determinant of corporate financial and reporting policies (Bowen et al. , 1995.  Agrawal and Matsa, 2013).  In this paper we provide new evidence on whether and how financial reporting choices are affected by the implicit claims of rank and file employees.  The prior literature has suggested two ways in which rank and file employees can potentially affect financial reporting.  The first is in the context of union negotiations.  The hypothesis posited in the literature is that firms are expected to manage earnings downwards in the short-run during union negotiations in order to justify resistance to union calls for enhanced pay and benefits.  This hypothesis predicts firm behavior when shareholder-employee conflicts of interest are pronounced and employees are unionized, and empirical tests of the hypothesis appear to yield mixed results (Liberty and Zimmerman, 1986.  DeAngelo and DeAngelo, 1991.  D’Souza et al. , 2001.  Comprix and Muller 2011.  Bova et al. , 2015).  The second hypothesis posited in the literature, which is the focus of this paper, is that firms are expected to make longrun earnings-increasing choices in order to project financial security, as this reduces the cost of employee hiring and retention in competitive labor markets.  The hypothesis is predicted to hold more generally when shareholder-employee conflicts of interest are not salient, and the hypothesis is not conditioned on the presence of labor unions.  This idea is advanced in a number of papers in the accounting literature.  Bowen et al.  (1995), Burgstahler and Dichev (1997), Matsumoto (2002), and Cheng and Warfield (2005), among others, argue that firms manage their financial statements to make them appear rosier in order to improve their implicit terms of trade with various stakeholders including employees, and Graham et al.  (2005) report consistent evidence from a survey of CFOs.  As in the prior literature, by long-run earnings-increasing choices (or “long-run earnings management”) we mean management of cumulative earnings over an extended period that results in a sustained wedge between ‘true’ and reported cumulative earnings.  Cumulative earnings can potentially be managed through a combination of long-run income increasing choices such as depreciation, inventory, and bad debt recognition policies, and short-run accrual and real-earningsmanagement choices when the wedge is in jeopardy.  In particular, the upward management of cumulative earnings does not require upward earnings management in every single reporting period, which makes it relatively more challenging to detect empirically.  Bowen et al.  (1995) provide one test of the long-run-earnings management hypothesis by examining whether firms with high labor intensity are more likely to adopt long-run income-increasing accounting policies, and find supportive results.  In this paper we adopt a potentially more powerful approach by testing for changes in earnings management around an exogenous shock to employees’ cost of unemployment.  A large labor economics literature documents that employees bear substantial costs of involuntary unemployment (e. g. , Gibbons and Katz, 1991.  Gruber, 1997).  Employees therefore care about the financial security of their employer (Brown and Matsa, 2013), and one way they assess this is through their employer’s earnings performance (e. g. , Burgstahler and Dichev, 1997.  Matsumoto, 2002.  Cheng and Warfield, 2005.  Graham et al. , 2005).  Firms bear at least two costs of exposing workers to unemployment risk.  First, firms bear ex ante costs of compensating employees for the level of employment risk that exists at the initiation of employment.  These “compensating differentials” are substantial and can take the form of higher wages and benefits, and better working conditions (Smith, 1976.  Abowd and Ashenfelter, 1981.  Topel, 1984.  Hamermesh and Wolfe, 1990).  The economic significance of compensating wage differentials is suggested by empirical estimates that it is up to 14% of wages (Abowd and Ashenfelter, 1981), and that up to 41% of interindustry variation in wages is explained by unemployment risk (Li, 1986.  Hamermesh and Wolfe, 1990).  Second, firms bear substantial turnover costs as employees seek more stable employment, and heightened search costs as potential employees shy away (Brown and Matsa, 2013), if there are significant increases in unemployment risk.  We expect firms try to mitigate these costs by managing long-run earnings in order to manage employee perceptions of unemployment risk.  This implies firms’ long-run-earnings management incentives change when employees’ unemployment risk changes.  Employees’ unemployment risk (and the firm’s cost of exposing employees to unemployment risk) is increasing in (i) the unemployment probability, (ii) employee risk aversion, and (iii) costs borne by workers during unemployment (Agrawal and Matsa, 2013).  Our research design exploits exogenous shocks to employees’ unemployment risk through a decrease in the costs borne by workers during unemployment.  This follows Agrawal and Matsa (2013) who show that the same exogenous shock affects firms’ financial policies through increased leverage. 