
Destructive ﬁshing is considered to be one of the most important
problems in marine governance (Clark Name, 2005.  Sethi Name, 2005). 
According to the United Nations Environment Program, about 25% of
ﬁsheries worldwide are in jeopardy of collapse due to destructive ﬁshing (Shakouri Name, 2010).  The threat of destructive ﬁshing, such as
the use of poison, dynamite and illegal nets, is especially devastating
for inshore ﬁsheries in tropical and developing countries where small
communities are engaged in subsistence ﬁshing (Belton and Thilsted,
2014).  The collapse or even serious degradation of local ﬁsheries due
to the use of destructive ﬁshing gears has a very negative impact on
the material well-being of these communities.  As a result, there have
been frequent attempts to persuade ﬁshers who are using destructive
gears to change their behavior, and switch to more environmentallyfriendly ﬁshing gears (Samoilys Name, 2008).  In most cases this involves
policy measures, such as gear-exchange programs or monetary incentives for resource conservation (Verheij Name, 2004).  These policies are
motivated by the assumption that a major motivation for using destructive ﬁshing gear is impatience or short-sightedness (low discount factors) and the lack of availability of high capital stocks. 
This assumption is based on standard economic models of renewable resources, going back to Hotelling (1931), which frame natural resource extraction as an intertemporal optimization problem, where
discount factors1 indicate the value given to expected future consumption.  This implies that, higher discount factors meaning higher valuation
of expected future consumption, leads to lower rates of extraction and
vice versa.  Following Farzin (1984) we refer to this as the conservation
effect.  However Farzin (1984) offers a different point of view and argues
that, for high cost of extraction, the relationship between discount factors and resource extraction is opposite to the generally held one, meaning that higher discount factors result in higher extraction levels and
vice versa.  This is based on the view, that, patient ﬁshers are able to invest more in their extraction capabilities.  We refer to this as the disinvestment effect. 
We add to this discussion by applying the underlying logic of these
models to the speciﬁc context of the adoption of destructive ﬁshing
gears in small-scale artisanal ﬁsheries.  Our main objective is to distinguish between scenarios where the policies based on the conservation
effect are justiﬁed and the conditions under which they are not justiﬁed. 
Typical policies, like livelihood diversiﬁcation or temporal closures with
income compensation, may lead to undesirable effects in a situation
when the disinvestment effect dominates the conservation effect.  We
contribute to solving this conundrum, by providing a better understanding of ﬁsher's motivation to adopt destructive gears and its relationship to individual time preferences. 
This research question is motivated by empirical research in Zanzibar which suggests that patient ﬁshermen have higher extraction level
since they can invest more in their extraction capability (see Javaid Name, 2016).  This surprising ﬁnding triggered some interesting and unanswered questions.  Does the relationship between time preferences and
extraction behavior change depending on the circumstances.  What role
do external factors play in this decision-making.  How do beliefs and
perceptions impact this relationship.  While these questions are motivated and based on empirical research in Zanzibar ﬁsheries, they are
not limited to this case.  The use of destructive ﬁshing gear is common
in other regions as well, such as different parts of East Africa (Guard
and Masaiganah, 1997.  Cinner, 2009.  Wells, 2009), Indonesia and
other parts of Southeast Asia (Cassels Name, 2005.  Burke Name, 2006),
parts of South Asia (Rajasuriya Name, 2004) along with other developing
and developed country ﬁsheries.  For the purpose of this paper we limit
ourselves to focus on the case of destructive ﬁshing gears in small scale
communities with open or shared access to the resource. 
Our model shows that the impact of individual discount factor on the
adoption of destructive ﬁshing gears is mediated by two key factors.  (i)
the nature of destructive gear i. e.  whether the destructive gear is costcutting low-proﬁt gear or whether it is high-cost high-proﬁt ﬁshing
gear, and (ii) the level of social dilemma, meaning the number of people
who share the same resource.  Additionally, we ﬁnd that individual beliefs about the actions of other resource users and future resource condition can have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on whether the conservation
effect prevails or not.  Overall, our model helps in clarifying the conditions under which the above mentioned policy measures may be expected to work as intended and conditions where other alternative
policy measures should be adopted. 
2.  Background Information. 
2. 1.  Destructive Extraction Methods. 
Destructive methods are deﬁned as ﬁshing methods, gears or practices whose impact is so indiscriminate and/or irreversible that they
are universally considered destructive irrespective of the environment
in which they are used (FAO 2005–2014).  In more concrete terms,
these destructive ﬁshing gears typically have a higher propensity to
physically damage habitats like corals reefs, capture a high proportion
of juvenile ﬁsh, or target species that are crucial to sustain
(McClanahan and Mangi, 2001.  McClanahan and Mangi, 2004.  Mangi
and Roberts, 2006.  Mangi Name, 2007).  Examples of destructive gears
in small scale ﬁsheries include beach seine, ring nets, explosives/dynamites, spear-guns and poison(Jiddawi and Öhman, 2002.  Cinner, 2009). 
In small-scale ﬁsheries, destructive ﬁshing gears can range from
highly proﬁtable to those which are even less proﬁtable than the traditional gears.  Similarly, in terms of capital costs (both ﬁxed and maintenance), some destructive ﬁshing gears (such as beach seines and
dynamites) are much more expensive than traditional gears, while
others (such as spear guns or poison) are less capital intensive even
compared to most basic traditional gears.  Similar comparison can be
made between labor cost required to maintain and operate destructive
ﬁshing gears (for more details see Mangi Name (2007)).  What drives
people towards these gears is an extremely important and relatively
under-researched question.  It stands to reason that given this variation
in types of destructive gears, different ﬁshers are attracted to different
destructive gears.  Earlier studies argue that destructive gear usage is
often associated with a combination of poverty, low socio-economic
conditions and myopic behavior (Cinner, 2009.  Silva, 2006).  Similarly
others have argued that institutional and normative factors can also
play an important role in destructive gear choice (Wallner-Hahn Name,2. 2.  Destructive Fishing Methods and Time Preferences. 
In economics, time preferences refer to the relative value given to future utility as compared to present utility.  Earlier research shows that
there is a considerable degree of heterogeneity in individual time preferences, some value future consumption very highly while others do
not (Tanaka Name, 2010).  Similar pattern can be observed for natural resource-users (ﬁshers) as well (Teh Name, 2014).  According to standard
economic models, ﬁshers with high value for present consumption are
likely to extract more resources (Koopmans, 1974).  This can lead to
the choice of destructive methods, as these gears often provide higher
beneﬁts in the present, but destroy future harvest possibilities.  Furthermore, unlike overﬁshing, the damage caused by using destructive ﬁshing gear is highly visible and occurs in very short time period (Cinner,
2009).  Therefore, ﬁshers using destructive ﬁshing methods are more
aware of the fact that they are causing serious long term damage to
the resource, and that the future productivity of the resource is going
to be very low as a result of their actions.  This suggests that people
with relatively lower subjective value of future consumption (impatient
ﬁshers) are more likely to use destructive ﬁshing gears as compared to
those who give higher subjective value to future consumption (patient
ﬁshers), as they can enjoy higher immediate consumption even at the
cost of potentially large decrease in future consumption. 
However, these standard economic models do not account for the
fact that, adoption of destructive gears typically requires initial investment (both capital and time investment in learning to operate the
new gear) (Farzin, 1984).  Destructive ﬁshing methods can be more expensive, either in terms of ﬁxed or variable costs than the traditional
methods.  Investing a substantial amount of money in buying a destructive gear means that this money is not available for present consumption.  This consideration is especially important for artisanal ﬁshers,
who in general don't possess large reserve capital (Cinner, 2009).  Overall, this point of view suggests that higher preference for present consumption is negatively associated with the possibility of using
destructive gear, as these gears generally require larger initial
investment. 
Thus, we have two competing accounts of the impact of individual
time preferences on the decision to adopt destructive ﬁshing methods. 
In this paper, we try to understand the conditions and assumptions
under which the conservation effect overtakes disinvestment effect
and vice versa. 
2. 3.  Adoption of Destructive Extraction Methods as Technology Diffusion
Phenomenon. 
The stereotypical description of artisanal communities is ﬁshers engaged in traditional or primitive methods threatened by the advent of
large-scale modern ﬁshing industry.  However, in many cases, these artisanal ﬁshers are aware of small-scale innovations in extraction
methods.  These innovative, yet destructive ﬁshing methods are adopted
relatively slowly due to the associated risks and learning effects.  In general, these methods start from a small area and spread to different ﬁshing sites over time (Wells, 2009). 
In this sense the adoption of destructive ﬁshing methods shares a lot
of similarities with technology diffusion process. 2 Technology diffusion
research seeks to understand how new products spread throughout a
society over time (Rogers, 2010).  Bass (1969) is one of the most prominent examples of this approach.  For a detailed review of this stream of
literature see Meade and Islam (2006).  In recent years, agent based
modeling approach has been used extensively to build models
explaining key features of the technology diffusion process (for a comprehensive review Garcia and Jager (2011), Kiesling Name (2012)). 
Agent based modeling approach to diffusion offers two key advantages
over the traditional (differential equation based) models.  First, agents
make decisions based on their own preferences, and decision rules.  In
contrast to traditional models these rules and preferences differ for different agents.  Secondly, agents are affected by what is happening
around them, as agents are connected to others in the form of a social
network.  Decisions made by others in the social network affect agent's
own choices.  We take the basic approach from these agent based
models of technology diffusion and apply them to the speciﬁc context
of adoption of destructive ﬁshing gears in small-scale artisanal ﬁsheries. 
<Middle> Model Description. 
In this section we describe the basic elements of our agent based
model as well as the important decision-making processes which we
focus on.  Although our empirical work in Zanzibar provided a motivation to develop this model, the model does not aim to mimic a speciﬁc
case in Zanzibar.  Instead the model is more stylized and captures the
broader quest of understanding the use of destructive ﬁshing methods. 
Our model consists of three major components and one ancillaryI.  Natural resource.  ﬁsh stock in our case
II.  Agents.  ﬁshers in our case
III.  Resource extraction technologies.  ﬁshing gears in our case
And lastly a social network structure which determines how agents
are connected to each other. 
The role of network structure in diffusion of technologies has been a
well-researched subject (see for example Rahmandad and Sterman
(2008)).  We implement a scale-free network (taken from Shinde and
Haghnevis, 2010) because using this particular network structure is
that it represents key features of social interaction among ﬁshers in
many small-scale artisanal ﬁsheries.  In small-scale ﬁshers a handful of
individuals play a key role in inﬂuencing the decisions regarding ﬁshing
activities.  Largely these individuals do not have signiﬁcant direct inﬂuence over others, rather their role as information aggregators is the
most important one.  Unskilled or inexperienced ﬁshers often take
their cues from these successful and well-connected individuals
(Bodin and Crona, 2008.  Ferrol-Schulte Name, 2014).  Indeed, this is
true for other natural resource extraction scenarios as well, such as agriculture, where key well-connected individuals enjoy disproportionately larger role in determining agricultural practices and reap
substantially higher margins (Fafchamps and Minten, 1999.  Conley
and Udry, 2010). 
For the purpose of this paper we focus mostly on the gear properties
and agents' decision-making processes which form the major components of the model, while keeping the social network constant.  For
more detailed analysis of the impact of social network on technology
diffusion refer to Valente (1995), Valente and Davis (1999), among3. 1.  Adoption of Destructive Fishing Gear.  Agent-based Model. 
Consider a case of small-scale artisanal ﬁsheries, which has the following characteristics. 
1) Resource (ﬁsh stock) which is deﬁned by the standard logistic population growth function,
where g is the intrinsic growth rate of the resource, K is the carrying capacity and Rt is the condition of resource in time period t. 3
2) “N” (=500) total population of agents (ﬁshers) in the model.  while
“n” number of agents share the same resource.  Agents extract this
resource for their personal consumption. 
3) Different gear types, which are deﬁned by the following
characteristics,
where Lm is the earnings per unit of effort (or in other words gear productivity), Dm the destruction per unit of effort and C is the related ﬁxedWe assume that gears target the same resource and that each resource unit extracted is priced at the same level.  Extracting resources result in increased wealth and consumption which is desirable for agents. 
The amount of effort devoted to extraction determines the current earnings along with the gear used for extraction.  So agent i's earnings in time
period t (pit) are determined by the effective effort level (Xit), total effective effort level (in the same time period) of other agents sharing
the common resource (XJt = ∑n
j¼−i X jt ), and the current resource
level (Rt).  Effective effort level is the product of effort level (xi) and
gear (Gm) used by the agent, where G1 is the environment-friendly
gear and G2 is the destructive gear.  Since we are mainly interested in
the gear adoption process, we assume that agent's effort level (xi) is
ﬁxed over time. 
where v is the coefﬁcient indicating congestion in terms of ﬁshing
effort,5 a & b are coefﬁcients for earnings and resource level respectively
which determine the total current earnings.  a + b b 1 which depicts the
decreasing marginal return of effort and resource level. 
Earnings from ﬁsheries extraction results in higher wealth (W). 6
Wealth at the start of time period t is given as,
where Wo is the initial wealth level which is determined randomly at
the start of the simulation.  Si is the savings rate which is given as Si =
f(δi,si) where si is the individual speciﬁc saving rates, and δi is the individual discount factor representing an individual's time preference. 
Extraction activities result in destroying part of the resource.  The
damage done to the resource (V) by all agents in current time period depends on the effort level and gear being used,
where Dmit is the damage-to-effort ratio (damage per unit of effort) of
the gear Gm being used by agent i in current time period, such that Dm
for G1 (traditional gear) is always less than Dm for G2 (the destructiveEq.  (1) gives us the resource available to agent population for extraction in next period as7. 
3. 2.  Agent's Decision-making Process (Gear Choice Decision). 
At the start of simulation, all agents use the same traditional gears. 
Additionally, we assume that the system is in equilibrium, meaning
that agents (ﬁshers) are extracting at a level which is economically
and biologically sustainable. 8 Agents alternate between three states. 
not susceptible, susceptible, and switched.  Agents in the “not susceptible” state keep using the same gear they were using before without
making any calculations.  Agents in the “susceptible” state decide
whether to stick with the gear they are using or to switch to the alternative gear.  Agents in the “switched” state have already made the switch
to the alternative gear. 9 Agents only consider switching once they become susceptible.  Here we report results from the most basic version
where agents become susceptible as soon as the destructive ﬁshing
gear is introduced. 
The central concern in this article is the role of time preferences in
determining the adoption of destructive ﬁshing gear, so we assume
that agents consider future implications of their actions and make
plans accordingly.  In deciding whether to switch to a more destructive
gear, agents consider the present and the future earnings from
switching. 11 However as agents do not possess perfect information
about the present or the future so they calculate expected percentage
of higher beneﬁts from switching (E[Z]) based on their beliefs about future state of the world,
where E[Pit (G2)] is the expected total earnings/proﬁts from using G2,
E[Pit (G1)] is the expected total earnings from using G1, and disc.  (Cit)
are the costs associated with switching to G2, all calculated in time period t. 
Expected total earnings by each gear depend on expected earnings
in current time period E[pit], and the present value of expected future
earnings E[piT],
where δi is the individual time preference or discount factor used to
evaluate the present value of future earnings,12 T is the planning time
horizon of the agent, and E[pi(t+h)] is the expected earnings in the hth
time step from current time period (t).  Notice that these total earnings
are based on agent's expectation in time period t about what is going to
happen in planning time horizon T. 
Expected earnings in the current time period t are given by,
where xi is the ﬁxed effort level, Lm′it is the assumed earning per unit of
effort of gear m by agent i in time period t, Rt is the current resource
level and X′Jt is the assumed effective total effort by others in the current
time period.  It should be noted here that agents do not know the actual
gear productivity deﬁned as earnings per unit of effort (Lm) of any gear
and have to form expectation about gear productivity (Lm′it) in each
time period where they consider switching.  Agents' expectations regarding the productivity of the gear they are currently using are based
on their own earlier experience.  Whereas, for new gears or gears not
being used by the agent, their expectations are based on experience of
those using these gears.  This expected gear productivity (Lm′it) is calculated based on local information from agent's social network so it may
differ for different agents and over time. 
Expected future earnings (E[pi(t+h)]) depend on the effective effort
level and the expected future resource level(R′i(t+h) ),
where R′(t+h) and X′J(t+h) are assumptions made by the agent regarding the expected future resource level and the expected extraction
level of others respectively.  The expected future resource condition
R′(t+h) estimate depends on agent's assumption about the resource
growth rate (gi′), what others are going to do in future (X′J(t +h)) and
her own actions. 
Similarly the relative costs from switching (cost differential) are
given as, where C(G1) and C(G2) are costs associated with G1 and G2
respectively. 13 Even though agents incur this ﬁxed cost in the time period where they decide to switch (i. e.  current time period), we assume
that agents see this as an investment with depreciable value for the
life span of the gear.  The discounted costs (Cit) are the agent's evaluation
of the cost of switching in time period t using Tc as her planning horizon,
where the time period Tc refers to the nearest of either the agent's planning horizon (T) or the time period when the agent expects the resource
to collapse.  RV is the difference in resale value of G2 as compared to
G1. 14 In effect, agents weigh the beneﬁts of using G2 while assuming
that any investment in G2 will bring beneﬁts until time period Tc, therefore spreading part of the additional costs of switching to G2 over this
time horizon. 
Ultimately the agent only switches to destructive gear if. 
Zmin is the minimum beneﬁt threshold where the agent decides to
change from traditional gear to the destructive gear,15 Wit is agents'
total wealth and ɤ*Wit is predeﬁned fraction of agent's total wealth
which the agent is willing to use for investment in ﬁsheries related
capabilities. 
Fig.  1 depicts agents' decision-making process with respect to the
switching decision. 
Our modeling approach allows experimentation with different types
of assumptions about agents' beliefs and representing agent heterogeneity.  Moreover, we can depict real life situation where ﬁshers do not
have perfect information about the productivity of the gears.  In order
to make an informed guess about the productivity of different gears,
ﬁshers have to rely on their fellow ﬁshers especially those in their social
network.  These calculations are based on information received from
others, so they change over time as the underlying conditions change. 
This implies that agents can learn from both the successes and failures
of others.  This learning effect is a key component of our agent-based
model and distinguishes it from other modeling approaches. 
4.  The Impact of Time-preferences on Adoption of Destructive Gears. 
computational experimental design. 
An agent's time preference is indicated by the value given to expect
future earnings.  In our model this is represented by the variable discount
factor (δi).  Lower values of discount factor indicate impatience, whereas
higher values indicate greater patience. 
In order to make their gear choice decision, agents make plans over a
ﬁxed period of time (T).  Destructive gears destroy the growth potential
of the resource, thereby decreasing future availability and proﬁtability
of the resource.  Agents calculate the negative impact of using destructive ﬁshing gear on both the resource itself, as well as, their own future
earnings.  In this way, agents are able to take into account the conservation effect of discount factors. 
The disinvestment effect is captured in two ways.  (i) agents discount
the ﬁxed costs of buying gears over the life cycle of the gear, or, as long
as the resource remains productive (whichever is earlier.  Tc), meaning
agents account for the resale value of the gear at the end of this time period, and (ii) agent's saving rate is a function of their discount factor, so
agent with higher discount factors are able to save a larger amount of
their earnings. 16 As the switching decision depends on the wealth level
of agents, so time preferences play an indirect role in determining
whether or not agents possess enough ﬁnancial capital to afford the
more expensive destructive gear. 
The main purpose of our paper is to look at the impact of time preferences on adoption of destructive ﬁshing gears.  This implies answering
two key questions. 
(1) Under what conditions, agents with higher discount factor (i. e. ,
patient ﬁshers) chose the more destructive ﬁshing gear. 
(2) Under what conditions, agents with higher discount factor (i. e. ,
patient ﬁshers) are more likely to opt for a destructive ﬁshing
gear as compared to the agents with lower discount factor (i. e. ,
impatient ﬁshers), and vice versa. 17
In order to answer these questions, we conduct a series of computational experiments.  We are mainly interested in the following three
variables. 
1.  Nature of destructive gear
2.  Level of social dilemma
3.  Agents' beliefs and assumptions
For each of these variables, we run simulations only varying the discount factor along with the variable in question to see how it impacts
the relationship between discount factor and adoption of destructive
gears.  We ﬁrst analyze the role played by the nature of destructive
gears (Section 4. 1) and the level of the social dilemma (Section 4. 2) respectively.  For these sections, we assume that agents have perfect
knowledge about the growth rate of the resource, and that agents' assume that others will continue repeating their past behavior.  This allows
us to look at the impact of variable under-consideration in isolation.  We
then relax these assumptions and consider other possibilities in the following sub-section (Section 4. 3). 
Table 1 gives the initial model parameterization. 
Note, in the baseline model we assume that, in a given simulation, all
agents have the same discount factor.  All experiments were conducted
with the parameter values given in Table 1.  Two of our variables are determined randomly at the start of the simulation.  agent's initial wealth
level (Wo) and the innovative agents who start using destructive gear
(I).  In order to make sure that our results are not driven by the initial
random assignment of these variables, we conduct 20 repetitions for
each set of experiments. 
For all experiments we allow a 10 time step burn-in period, where
agents do not make any decision regarding gear choice.  At the end of
10th time step, “I” individuals are randomly selected as innovators. 
These innovative agents start using a destructive ﬁshing gear from the
next time step.  Since, we are mainly interested in short to medium
term effects, we stop each simulation run at 120th time step, given
the fact that each time step indicate a quarter, so in effect we are looking
at a period comprising 30 calendar years. 
4. 1.  The Nature of Destructive Gear. 
4. 1. 1.  Setup. 
With respect to different types of destructive gears, we differentiate
between two major prototypes of destructive gears18. 
Prototype 1.  Destructive gears having lower ﬁxed costs, and lower
proﬁts as compared to environmentally-friendly traditional gear. 
Prototype 2.  Destructive gears having higher ﬁxed costs and higher
proﬁts as compared to environmentally-friendly, traditional gear. 
As discussed in model description (Section 3. 1), gears differ based- Earnings per unit effort (Lm)
- Destruction per unit effort (Dm)
- Cost differential (C)
We deﬁne the low-cost low-proﬁt destructive gear such that.  Lm
(G2) b Lm (G1), Dm (G2) N Dm (G1), and C b 0.  On the other hand,
high-cost high-proﬁt destructive gear is deﬁned as.  Lm (G2) N Lm (G1),
Dm (G2) N Dm (G1), and C N 0. 
For the baseline model we ﬁx the earnings per unit effort (Lm) and
destruction per unit effort (Dm) values for both prototypes of destructive gear and only vary cost differential values.  See Table 2 for more details on the parameters for different gear characteristics. 19
4. 1. 2.  Findings. 
Fig.  2 presents the adoption rate for both prototype 1 (low-cost lowproﬁt) and prototype 2 (high-cost high-proﬁt) across different values of
cost differential (C).  Note that different cost values are only important
insofar as their comparison to average earnings from resource extraction.  So in the case of low-cost low proﬁt gear the negative values of
cost differential are between 15 and 50% of agent's average earnings. 
Whereas, for the case of high-cost high-proﬁt gear the additional cost
of using the destructive gear varies between 50 and 100% of the average
earnings for one season. 
Fig.  2 indicates the adoption rate of destructive gear (represented by
the percentage of agents using destructive gears) against different discount factor values (where lower values indicate impatience and higher
values indicate greater patience) for different types of destructive gear. 
We ﬁnd that the conservation effect is dominant in the case of low-cost
low-proﬁt destructive gears.  For low to mid-range values of negative
cost differential (C = −15 or −30), we observe a negative relationship
between discount factor and adoption rate of destructive ﬁshing gear.  In
these cases, low discount factor is associated with almost complete
adoption of destructive gear.  However, adoption rate decreases substantially for higher values of discount factor, indicating that relatively
patient agents are less likely to adopt the low-cost low-proﬁt destructive gear.  We also ﬁnd that, if low cost gear offers enough savings in
terms of ﬁxed costs (C = −45), the adoption rate of destructive gears
becomes very high (close to 100%), even for very high values of discount
factor indicating that even patient ﬁshers switch to the destructive ﬁshing gear.  However, these conditions are such that impatient individuals
adopt the destructive ﬁshing gear as well. 
For high-cost high-catch destructive gear, the disinvestment effect becomes more prominent as the cost differential increases. 
This can be seen by the difference in steepness of the curve between
discount factor and adoption rate for different values of positive cost
differential.  Increasing cost differential results in lower adoption
rates for low values of discount factor.  This implies that, while patient agents can afford to invest in buying new gears, impatient
agents either cannot afford the high-cost destructive gear, or, are unwilling to invest in destructive gear due to their preference for immediate consumption. 
4. 2.  The Level of Social Dilemma. 
4. 2. 1.  Setup. 
In this section we describe the sensitivity of the model to different
levels of the social dilemma.  In natural resource settings, social dilemma
arises as extraction from one user has a negative impact on the ability of
others to use the same resource (Ostrom Name, 2002).  In our baseline
model, we start with a situation where all agents share the same resource.  This can be understood as an open-access resource system.  In
real life, most small scale ﬁsheries are shared between communities
who restrict the number and identity of users ﬁshing at speciﬁc sites. 
In order to capture this dynamic, we vary the level of social dilemma
(negative externality) by changing the number of ﬁshing sites available
(H = number of ﬁshing sites), and therefore, the number of resource
users (agents) sharing each ﬁshing site (n, where n = N / H). 
As suggested earlier, we start with one ﬁshing site (H = 1) where the
total number of agent (N = 500) is equal to the number of agents sharing
the resource (n), and consider this as the baseline scenario.  Next, we increase the number of ﬁshing site available to agents, thereby decreasing
the number of agents per ﬁshing site.  In order to make sure that our results are not driven by resource dynamics of dividing the ﬁshing site, we
assume that ﬁsh stock is divided equally between all sites, and that each
site has the same number of agents extracting resource from it.  Furthermore, we assume that agents cannot move to another ﬁshing site, even if
her site is destroyed completely.  So, for example, H = 25 means there are
25 ﬁshing sites, where each ﬁshing site has the same initial resource level
and is shared between 20 agents (n = N / H = 20).  In this case, each
agent only makes assumptions about the behavior of 19 (n − 1) other
agents, who are sharing the resource with her.  It should be noted that
for all different values of H, the total population of agents (N) remains
the same, only the number of agents sharing the resource with each
other (n) changes. 
4. 2. 2.  Findings. 
Fig.  3 presents the relationship between discount factor and adoption of destructive ﬁshing gear for different levels of social dilemma. 
Looking at low-cost low proﬁt gear, it is clear that decreasing the
level of social dilemma results in dominance of conservation effect. 
Even under moderately low social dilemma conditions (H N 5), high discount factor results in very low adoption rates, meaning patient agents
are less likely to adopt the low cost destructive ﬁshing gear, whereas for
impatient agents changing the level of social dilemma does not have anyFor high-cost high proﬁt destructive gear, higher social dilemma
(meaning few ﬁshing sites.  H b 50) results in disinvestment effect dominating the conservation effect.  Under low social dilemma settings (H
N 50), we observe an inverted-U shaped curve, where adoption rates
are very low for low discount factors, then increase with increasing discount factors and ﬁnally start declining with higher discount factors
after the mid-way point, leading to very low adoption rates for very
high discount factors. 
Low social dilemma situation implies that each agent's own actions
have a much larger role in determining their current and future earnings as compared to high dilemma situation, since the number of
other agents who can access the resource is lower.  As a result, patient
agents become less likely to adopt the destructive ﬁshing gear.  Additionally, low social dilemma, meaning higher number of ﬁshing sites,
implies that agents have more opportunities to learn from other agents'
actions and their impact on the resource level.  Therefore, agents especially those who can only switch to destructive ﬁshing gear in later
time periods due to cost reasons (i. e.  impatient agents), also become
less likely to adopt the destructive gear, as they have a better idea of
its negative consequences on the resource.  The adoption rate is highest
for middle values of discount factor, indicating that those who are neither extremely patient nor extremely impatient are more tempted to
use destructive gear, even under very low social dilemma situations. 
This is due to the fact that.  (i) they do not value the loss of future earnings due to the usage of destructive gear as highly as extremely patient
agents, and (ii) unlike impatient agents they can afford to invest in high
cost destructive gear in the very early stages. 
4. 3.  Agent's Beliefs and Expectations. 
A key feature of our modeling approach is that we test different scenarios regarding agent's beliefs with respect to (i) future state of ﬁsheries (g′), and (ii) other ﬁsher's actions (X′Jt).  For earlier sections we
assumed that agents have perfect knowledge about the growth rate of
the resource, and that they assume that other agents will continue repeating their past behavior.  In this section, we relax both these assumptions, and see how this impacts the relationship between time
preference and adoption of destructive ﬁshing gear.  This is motivated
by the fact, that, ﬁshers (in general) have to rely on incomplete and imperfect information about the resource and their fellow ﬁshers.  Indeed,
predicting the condition of resource and how other agents are going to
respond is one of the most difﬁcult problems for any resource user. 
Table 3 explains different assumptions which were used in our simulation experiments. 
Below, we explain how these different assumptions impact the relationship between time preferences and adoption of destructive ﬁshing
gears.  First, we explain our ﬁndings for the low-catch-low cost destructive gear, and then move to high-cost high-proﬁt destructive gear. 
4. 3. 1.  Low cost destructive gear. 
For prototype 1 (low-cost low-proﬁt gear), the results are simpler to
explain.  Under almost all conditions and assumptions, impatient individuals are either more or equally likely to adopt the low-cost low-proﬁt
destructive gear as compared to patient individuals.  Fig.  4 presents the
relationship between discount factors and adoptions rate of low-cost
low-proﬁt destructive gear for different assumptions about resource
level and other's behavior. 
Overall, we ﬁnd that for very high level of social dilemma (H = 1)
meaning virtually open access, even patient ﬁshers can be tempted by
the low-cost destructive ﬁshing gear.  This is especially true, if ﬁshers underestimate the growth rate of resource and overestimate the extent of
destructive ﬁshing gear users (i. e.  if g′ = pessimistic and/or X′Jt = others
destructive).  Basically, in this case we observe a self- fulﬁlling race-tothe-bottom phenomenon, where patient ﬁshers think that the resource
is going down and others ﬁshers are going to start using the destructive
ﬁshing gear.  This results in them adopting destructive ﬁshing gear to
save costs and generate short-term proﬁts, which in turn means that
the resource actually starts decreasing and the number of ﬁshers using
destructive ﬁshing gear starts increasing, motivating other patient ﬁshers to start using the destructive ﬁshing gear as well. 
However, it should be noted that this happens in only a limited number of cases (for mid-range ﬁxed costs values).  For majority of the cases,
either conservation effect is more dominant (for low ﬁxed cost values)
or there is no difference between patient and impatient agents across
all different assumptions. 
4. 3. 2.  High Cost High Proﬁt Destructive Gear. 
In this sub-section, we look at the ﬁndings from the high-cost highproﬁt gear.  Fig.  5 shows the heat map of conservation and disinvestment effects under different values of social dilemma and different assumptions, for particular discount factors (0. 25 for impatient ones and
0. 95 for patient ones), whereas Fig.  6 presents the average adoption
level across different discount factors for different assumptions. 
Both Figs.  5 and 6(a & b) have to considered together, as Fig.  5 looks
at the intensity of differences in adoption between patient and impatient ﬁshermen, therefore indicating the strength of conservation and
disinvestment effects.  However Fig.  5 does not show the extent of adoption or the differences across different discount factors.  On the other
hand, Fig.  6(a & b) shows various patterns of adoption under different
discount factors and assumption settings.  However, Fig.  6 only consider
two representative social dilemma settings, whereby Fig.  6(a) looks at
the high social dilemma situation (H = 1) and Fig.  6(b) looks at the
low social dilemma situations (H = 100). 
First, we note that, as expected, the disinvestment effect becomes
more important as the costs of destructive ﬁshing gear increases. 
This can be seen clearly from Fig.  5.  The heat maps for lower cost values
(C = 80) is mostly yellow or red, indicating that either there is not much
difference between adoption levels or (in the case of red areas) conservation effect dominates.  As the cost increases, we see more green areas
(areas under C = 80 or 100), indicating dominance of disinvestment
effect.  Second, as shown in the earlier section, we see an increase in the
conservation effect as the level of social dilemma goes down, especially
for H N 25.  This is true for most assumptions/beliefs, but not all. 
The most salient observation from our overall analysis is that conservation effect is dominant when agents' assume that other agents are
conditional cooperators (i. e. , X′Jt = same as me), meaning that they
will cooperate and use the traditional gear if the agent herself continues
to use this gear, however they will switch to destructive gear (immediately or in brief time) if the agent starts using destructive gear.  Both, impatient and patient agents are less likely to switch to destructive gear in
these conditions.  Looking at Fig.  6(a & b) makes it clear, that, for almost
all cases this leads to either very low adoption rates (for both patient
and impatient agents), or an inverted U shaped curve where adoption
rate is highest for low to mid-range values of discount factor and decreases sharply for high values of discount factor. 
In addition to this, we also observe two other interesting ﬁndings. 
First, the disinvestment effect is prevalent for over-optimistic agents
under very low level of social dilemma (H N 50).  This is especially
true, if these over-optimistic agents also underestimate the adoption
of destructive ﬁshing gears by others who share the resource with
them.  So in Fig.  5, when agents have over-optimist assumption about
the growth rate of the resource (i. e.  g′ = optimistic) and others' action
(i. e. , X′Jt = E or Sb), the area under low social dilemma situations (H
N 25) is green, whereas for both accurate and overly pessimistic assumptions (i. e. , g′ = accurate or pessimistic) the same area is red.  This
implies that over-optimistic patient agents are more likely to adopt
the destructive gear than others.  This is also illustrated in Fig.  6(b). 
When looking at the graph with g′ = optimist, and X′Jt = others environmentalist or same as before, we have the typical disinvestment
curve, where the adoption rate increases sharply for mid-range discount factors and stays quite high even at very high values of discount factor.  This is in contrast to the graphs for g′ = accurate or
pessimistic, and X′Jt = others environmentalist or same as before,
where we observe the inverted U shaped curve.  This results from the
fact that patient agents with over-optimistic assumptions about resource condition end up thinking that their investment in costly destructive ﬁshing gear is going to bring them additional rewards in
near future.  Whereas patient agents with accurate or overly-pessimistic
view about the resource tend to think that the investment in costly destructive gear is not going to be worthwhile.  As a result, over-optimistic
patient agents become more likely to adopt the costly destructive gear. 
Second, in the case of high social dilemma settings (Fig.  6a), if agents
believe that other agents are going to switch to the destructive ﬁshing
gear (i. e.  X′Jt = others destructive), this results in impatient agents not
investing in the high-cost destructive gear, as they don't expect to recover the ﬁxed costs in the immediate future.  This is indicated by the
steeper curve of extreme right column in Fig.  6(a).  On the other hand,
patient individuals still consider their investment in destructive ﬁshing
gear worthwhile, resulting in the disinvestment effect strongly dominating the conservation effect. 
<Conclusion> Discussion and Concluding Remarks. 
Our study speak to the larger literature on ﬁsheries management in
three key ways, ﬁrst we expand the literature on destructive ﬁshing
methods from sole focus on poverty and socio-economic conditions
(Cinner, 2009.  Silva, 2006) to highlight the role of both structural and
individual factors in determining the relationship between time
preferences and the adoption of destructive extraction methods.  We
ﬁnd that under high levels of social dilemma, both impatient and patient individuals are prone to use destructive gears.  This ﬁnding is in
line with earlier literature in ﬁsheries which argues that ﬁsheries management suffers from the problem of “tragedy of the commons”
(McWhinnie, 2009).  This is especially true in the absence of strong community ownership and/or management of the resources (Basurto and
Ostrom, 2009.  Berkes, 1985).  Additionally, McClanahan Name (2008)
suggest that in Kenya, the use of destructive gears (in particular seine
nets) is uncommon in areas with lower ﬁsher density as compared to
areas with high ﬁsher density where these gears are used by the majority.  We suggest that in the context of destructive extraction method
adoption this “tragedy of the commons” works via the subtle self-reinforcing mechanism of resource user's expectation.  Furthermore, we
ﬁnd that, the best mechanism to prevent the adoption of destructive
ﬁshing gear is to inculcate the belief, that, adopting the destructive
gear would lead to a reaction by others, and that they would stop
cooperating and start using the destructive gear as well.  In such a scenario, patient individuals will be put-off by the potential reaction to
their action. 
Secondly, our model suggests that the possibility of patient (as well
as impatient) individuals using destructive extraction gear remains
even under very low social dilemma situations (private property with
very minimal interlinkages).  In this regard, we follow the logic given
by earlier literature which argues that even under perfectly enforced
private property rights, natural resource users can extract the resource
unsustainably if their individual discount factor is lower than the resource regeneration rate (Clark, 1973.  Sumaila Name, 2010).  We add to
this discussion by suggesting that privatization of ﬁsheries may not address the problem of destructive extraction due to imperfections and
time lags in information, and learning feedback from resource user's action to the state of natural resource.  Typically, the negative impact of
using destructive extraction method takes place with a time lag.  As a result, while agents may eventually learn from their counterparts, it still
means that at least part of the resource suffers substantial damage.  Additionally, learning is constrained by the availability of information. 
Agents do not possess perfect information.  Incomplete and imperfect
information can lead to agents' taking wrong lessons from others. 
Moxnes (2004, 1998), Schill Name (2016) and Janssen (2012) show
that misperceptions regarding the bio-economics of the natural resources can lead users to over-exploit the natural resource, even in relatively controlled setting of lab experiments.  The imperfect information
and the learning feedback problem are particularly important for ﬁsheries.  In real-life ﬁsheries, the feedback from the resource is only indirect
and may have signiﬁcant time lag, which could pose serious hurdles in
weeding out destructive ﬁshers via learning mechanism, thereby leading others to follow these destructive ﬁshers as well. 