 1.  Introduction In recent years, climate change has aroused worldwide attention, and in-depth international discussions have been held to mitigate climate change.  Since 2007, China has surpassed the US to become the world's largest CO2 emitter, and thus becomes a focus of global efforts to reduce CO2 emissions.  As one of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, China has always been promoting the implementation of the Convention and fulﬁlling its obligations.  Chinese government committed to reduce CO2 emissions per unit of gross domestic production (GDP) by 40–45% towards 2020 at 2009 Copenhagen Climate Change Conference and by 60–65% towards 2030 at 2015 Paris Climate Change Conference.  To achieve such challenging emission-reduction targets, China has attempted to adopt effective policy instruments, such as the deployment of renewable energy, the establishment of national carbon emission trading market.  China has experienced a signiﬁcant increase in CO2 emissions in the past decades (Liu et al. , 2015).  Large variations in the growth pattern of China's CO2 emissions at the regional level exist due to uneven distribution of initial resource endowment, economic scale, industry structure, development stage etc.  (Meng et al. , 2016).  CO2 emissions per capita and CO2 emissions per unit of GDP among China's 30 regions also vary sharply (Shan et al. , 2016).  Emission-reduction targets for each region should be set in considering the characteristics of socio-economic development (Wang et al. , 2016).  Therefore, it is necessary to explore the driving forces of the variations of national and regional CO2 emissions of China in order to set accurate emission-reduction targets and take effective measures from the perspective of national and regionalThis study explores the changes of national and regional CO2 emissions using temporal decomposition analysis model, and analyzes the differences of CO2 emissions between China's 30 regions and the national average using spatial decomposition analysis model.  In addition, this study evaluates the potential of emission-reduction of China's 30 regions. 