 1.  Introduction The price of crude oil declines by about 57%, from $102. 51 to $43. 58 between June 2014 and May 2016.  During that period, the CPI for airfare declines by about 12%.  This small decline is somewhat surprising.  jet fuel accounts for about 33% of average operating costs incurred by the airline industry (Berghofer and Lucey, 2014).  Consistent with this large percentage, industry analysts estimate that the reduction in oil prices will save US airlines about $20 billion in 2015 (New York Times, January 20, 2015).  The juxtaposition of a large cost saving and a relatively small price reduction is a topic for both academic researchers and policy enforcement.  From an academic perspective, airlines respond to changes in oil prices three ways.  (1) changing the energy efﬁciency of their operations (i. e.  changing the ﬂeet), (2) passing the cost increases (decreases) to passengers, and (3) hedging fuel costs (Morrell and Swan, 2006).  Of these, Berghofer and Lucey (2014) ﬁnd that hedging behavior and changes in ﬂeet diversity do not reduce exposure to the risk that is associated with changes in oil prices.  Furthermore, hedging may increase the risk premium and increase costs (Aabo and Simkins, 2005), perhaps by 1% of fuel costs (Rao, 1999).  Despite these costs, the accounting losses of hedging will be more than offset by lower fuel prices, such that US airlines will save $15 billion (New York Times, 2015).  Academic research suggests that the degree to which cost increases (decreases) are passed on to passengers may be inﬂuenced competition in the airline industry.  High levels of competition make it difﬁcult to raise ticket prices in response to rising prices for jet fuel (Carter and Simkins, 2004).  Consistent with this hypothesis, the Portuguese airline industry could not recover the full cost of higher fuel prices (Button et al. , 2011).  Recent research indicates that the intensity of competition among airlines is decreasing.  Concentration in the US airline industry increases between 2007 and 2009 (Johnston and Ozment, 2011).  The resultant reduction in competition may slow additions to capacity.  Robert Mann, a former airline executive states.  “The industry is full at these prices.  You can't stimulate additional revenue by cutting prices. ” Based on these concerns, in June 1015, the US Department of Justice opened an inquiry into whether the airline industry is colluding to limit seating.  Beyond a reduction in competition, the small effect (to date) of lower oil prices on airfares could be caused by asymmetric rates of adjustments in the relation among the price of crude oil, the price of jet fuel, and airfares.  If the price of jet fuel and/or airfares respond asymmetrically to changes in crude oil prices (or other components of the oil market), such that increases in crude oil prices are translated into higher prices for jet fuel and air travel faster than reductions in crude oil prices are translated into lower prices for jet fuel and air travel, the small decline in airfares as of June 2016 (the last month for which data are available) may be caused by an asymmetric rate of adjustment to lower prices for crude oil.  This hypothesis echoes an extensive literature on the relation between prices for crude oil and motor gasoline, which suggests that increases in crude oil prices translate into higher motor gasoline prices faster than lower crude oil prices translate into lower motor gasoline prices (e. g.  Perdiguero-Garcia, 2013.  Frey and Manera, 2007).  This pattern of asymmetric adjustment is termed a ‘rockets and feathers’ effect (Bacon, 1991).  To test for an asymmetric relation between the price of jet fuel and air travel, Wadud (2015) uses a method developed by Gately (1992), which decomposes jet fuel prices into three components.  price rises to a new all-time high, price declines, and price rises back towards a previous high.  Each of these price changes has a different effect on airfares such that a one dollar rise in the price of jet fuel to a new all-time high generates a larger increase in airfares than a one dollar rise in the price of jet fuel that leaves prices below the previous all-time high (Wadud, 2015).  These results suggest that the price of jet fuel does not deﬁne a unique price level for airfares.  That is, the relation between the price of jet fuel and air travel is ‘path dependent. ’ Although path dependency could explain the small effect of large reductions in crude oil prices (if the equilibrium response to price reductions is smaller than the equilibrium response to price increases), path dependency or regime change (e. g.  Holmes and Panagiotidis, 2009) are different from the asymmetric rates of adjustment that are described by the ‘rockets and feathers’ relation between the price for crude oil and motor gasoline.  Here, I test three hypotheses about how the oil market may cause airfares to fall by a small percentage relative to a large decline in the price for crude oil.  1) Airfares adjust very slowly to changes in airfares.  2) Airfares adjust asymmetrically to changes in the oil market.  3) The oil market adjusts asymmetrically to changes in the price of crude oil, and these asymmetric adjustments are communicated symmetrically to airfares.  These hypotheses are tested by estimating a cointegrated vector autoregression (CVAR) model from monthly data.  The cointegrating relations identify long-run relations for wholesale and retail prices for jet fuel, inventories of jet fuel, and airfares.  The results indicate that slow or asymmetric rates of adjustment cannot account for the small decline in airfares relative to the large drop in crude oil prices.  Surprisingly, the retail price for jet fuel adjusts faster to reductions in the price for crude oil, which is opposite the asymmetric rate of adjustment between prices for crude oil and motor gasoline in many markets. 