 This paper examines the relation between industry-wide and firm-specific information contained in earnings and the extent to which this information is reflected in stock prices.  Economic theory suggests that firm performance determined by industry fundamentals (e. g. , consumer taste, production technology, and regulatory environment) is relatively long-lasting.  On the other hand, performance that deviates from industry norms tends to dissipate more quickly because learning and imitation improve industry losers’ performance but erode industry winners’ competitive edge (e. g. , Mueller, 1977, 1986, 1990.  Waring, 1996).  To the extent that accounting earnings are a (noisy) measure of economic profits, we expect the industry-wide component of earnings to be more persistent than the firm-specific component.  Prior research suggests that investors tend to fixate on reported earnings, however, not fully recognizing differences in the persistence of its components (e. g. , Sloan, 1996).  As a result, we expect the market to underreact to the higher persistence of the industry-wide component of earnings.  Predicting greater persistence of the industry-wide component of earnings inherently assumes industry homogeneity and stationarity.  Firms in homogeneous industries face relatively similar economic forces, and thus industry-wide earnings should be more persistent than in heterogeneous industries.  Earnings components should also be more persistent in stable industries than in those disrupted by business shocks.  The effect of business shocks, however, should be smaller on industry-wide earnings than on firm-specific earnings if, as expected, industry-wide earnings are more stationary in general.  Investors that underestimate the persistence of industry-wide earnings are thus more likely to do so for homogeneous industries and in the presence of a large industry-wide business shock.  Our focus on economic fundamentals represents a departure from Sloan’s (1996) work on accruals and cash flows, which are components of earnings defined by accounting systems (Dechow, 1994.  Subramanyam, 1996).  He shows that even though the accrual component is less persistent than the cash flow component, stock prices act as if investors fail to fully appreciate this difference.  Thus, we also gauge the differential persistence and pricing of earnings components classified by both economic forces and accounting constructs.  We decompose industry-wide and firm-specific earnings into their respective cash flow and accrual components.  Considering both economic fundamentals and accounting constructs suggests that industry-wide cash flows is the most persistent component of earnings, while at the other extreme firm-specific accruals is the least persistent.  The relative persistence of the other two components – industry-wide accruals and firmspecific cash flows – is less clear.  On the one hand, there is robust prior evidence that cash flows are more persistent than accruals.  On the other hand, economic theory suggests that industry-wide performance is more persistent than firm-specific performance.  We test our empirical predictions over the period 1988–2011.  Following Bhojraj et al.  (2003), we use Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS) industry codes and define industry-wide earnings as average earnings (scaled by assets) of all firms in the same eight-digit GICS industry.  We define firm-specific earnings as the difference between a firm’s reported earnings (scaled by assets) and the industry-wide earnings.  Consistent with predictions, we find that industry-wide earnings are significantly more persistent than firm-specific earnings.  However, investors fail to fully distinguish this differential persistence as stock prices place similar weights on these two earnings components in forecasting one-year-ahead earnings.  In other words, the market underreacts to the persistence of industry-wide earnings and overreacts to the persistence of firm-specific earnings.  To further test the implications of industry fundamentals on the persistence and pricing of earnings components, we partition the sample using three alternative proxies for industry homogeneity, i. e. , within-industry similarity in size, operating activities, or the number of business segments.  As expected, industry-wide earnings are significantly more persistent in homogenous industries compared to heterogeneous industries.  In contrast, the persistence of firm-specific earnings does not vary with industry homogeneity.  Further, the market fails to understand the consequences of industry homogeneity for the relative persistence of industry-wide earnings.  In fact, the underreaction to industry-wide earnings is significant only in homogeneous industries.  In a similar vein, we find that the market fails to understand the consequences of business model shocks on the persistence of earnings components.  We identify large industry-wide business shocks following Guay et al.  (2014) and firmspecific business shocks following Owens et al.  (2014).  Although these business shocks reduce the persistence of industrywide and firm-specific earnings, respectively, the effect is significantly lower for industry-wide earnings, consistent with this being the more persistent earnings component in general.  The market, however, appears to overestimate the effect of the business shock on the persistence of industry-wide earnings, and thus overreacts to its effect on industry-wide earnings.  Finally, consistent with predictions, we find that industry-wide cash flows is the most persistent component of earnings while firm-specific accruals is the least persistent.  Thus, the higher (lower) persistence of cash flows (accruals) documented in prior research is attributable primarily to the industry-wide (firm-specific) component and it is these specific components that we expect to drive mispricing.  The results confirm that stock prices significantly underweight the persistence of industry-wide cash flows and significantly overweight the persistence of firm-specific accruals.  Our results are robust to several alternative industry classifications, including Standard Industry Classification (SIC) and North America Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes, and industry-size portfolios.  Importantly, our results do not replicate in a pseudo-industry classification, suggesting that our findings cannot be explained as a mechanical artifact attributable to the aggregation of data across firms.  Our results are also robust to defining industry-wide earnings as the sales- or market-value-weighted average of firms in the industry.  Additional tests show that industry-wide earnings are a significant predictor of future stock returns, consistent with investor underreaction.  The spread between the annualized returns of the highest and lowest deciles of industry-wide earnings is 9. 5% (4. 9%) in the first (second) year after portfolio formation, both statistically and economically significant. 1 Moreover, the spread is negative in only one year of our twenty four-year sample period, indicating that the results are stable over time.  Findings from regression analyses show that these results are robust to controlling for a variety of other factors that may be correlated with industry-wide earnings and future abnormal stock returns.  This paper contributes to the literature on earnings persistence and its role in equity valuation.  Over the past two decades there has been a substantial amount of research focusing on the persistence of total earnings and its accounting components (i. e. , cash flows and accruals), leading Dechow et al.  (2010) to call for more extensive study on how economic fundamentals as well as their interaction with accounting rules affect earnings persistence.  This paper provides an initial step in this important direction.  Our findings also have implications for the literature on the determinants of earnings quality, for which persistence is a commonly used proxy.  Prior research in this area focuses almost exclusively on firm-level determinants of earnings quality.  More recently, however, accounting academics have recognized the importance of studying the role of economic fundamentals in the earnings generating process and its effects on earnings quality (e. g. , Owens et al. , 2014).  Thus, our findings more generally illustrate the importance of considering economic fundamentals in modeling earnings quality.  We focus our attention on industry fundamentals as a key driver of earnings persistence.  Financial statement analysis texts typically emphasize the importance of industry analysis in assessing firm performance (e. g. , Wahlen et al. , 2015), and survey data indicates that financial professionals view industry fundamentals as one of the most important factors affecting the sustainability of earnings at their company (Dichev et al. , 2013).  However, as yet there is limited empirical evidence on the role of industry fundamentals, and innate factors in general, on the persistence of reported earnings.  Early work by Brown and Ball (1967) and Magee (1974) finds that a significant portion of the variability of a firm’s earnings can be explained by industry-level news.  Lev (1983) reports a significant association between earnings persistence and economic factors including product type and industry competition.  We provide new evidence documenting the differential persistence of industry-wide and firm-specific earnings, and how these persistence parameters vary predictably with several economic fundamentals as well as interact with the accounting constructs of accruals and cash flows.  Finally, we contribute to the literature examining market participants’ use of industry-related earnings information in evaluating performance and valuing the firm.  Prior work examines how quickly industry-wide earnings information is impounded in stock prices, with mixed results (e. g. , Ayers and Freeman, 1997.  Elgers et al. , 2008).  Other research shows that analysts increase the relative amount of industry-wide earnings news incorporated into stock prices (Piotroski and Roulstone, 2004), even though investors' underreact to the industry-wide earnings news contained in analysts’ industry reports (Hui and Yeung, 2013).  Extending our analysis of earnings persistence, we contribute to this research by showing that investors not only underreact to the higher persistence of industry-wide earnings in general but also overreact to the lower persistence of firm-specific earnings.  Moreover, these effects are exacerbated by other economic fundamentals (e. g. , industry homogeneity, business model shocks) that investors also fail to fully understand.  The remainder of our paper proceeds as follows.  Section 2 outlines our sample and the measurement of our test variables.  Section 3 reports our primary tests regarding industry-wide and firm-specific earnings.  Section 4 extends this analysis to examine the cash flow and accrual components of industry-wide and firm-specific earnings, while Section 5 reports the results of several additional analyses.  Section 6 concludes.  <Middle> Data and variable measurement.  2. 1.  Sample.  Our sample selection strategy proceeds in two steps.  First, we impose only those data requirements necessary to calculate industry-wide earnings (as well as industry-wide accruals and cash flows) to ensure that we have the most representative measures of these variables for our analyses. 