 Introduction Multinational entities (MNEs) face tax incentives to shift taxable income from high-tax jurisdictions to low-tax jurisdictions by strategically valuing intercompany transactions.  To mitigate tax-motivated transfer prices for goods, services, intellectual property, and debt, tax authorities require that transfer prices be “arm’s length,” or comparable to prices charged between independent enterprises (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 2010a).  Because arm’s length contractual prices are generally unobservable, MNEs often benchmark transfer prices by identifying a set of observable, economically comparable, and independent companies that use similar accounting standards to compare profit margins (PWC, 2006).  Specifically, taxpayers calculate the observable range of book profit rates reported by comparable firms and demonstrate that affiliate taxable profits are within this benchmark range (McKinley and Owsley, 2013).  Adoption across jurisdictions of a common set of accounting standards, such as International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), expands the set of potential benchmark firms and could allow MNEs more flexibility to support taxadvantaged transfer prices.  However, tax authorities could use a larger set of benchmarks to enforce tighter comparability standards, resulting in narrower profit ranges.  In this paper, I examine tax-motivated income shifting across jurisdictions following affiliate adoption of a common set of accounting standards for unconsolidated financial reporting.  Unconsolidated financial reporting provides separate entity accounts for each affiliate of a MNE group.  In contrast to the 2005 mandated use of IFRS for consolidated financial reporting in the European Union (EU), countries varied in mandating or permitting IFRS for unconsolidated financial reporting.  As of 2014, 14 of the 27 EU member states require IFRS for unconsolidated financial reporting for certain types of firms, nine countries allow IFRS for certain firms, and four countries do not allow IFRS.  This significant variation in unconsolidated IFRS reporting rules by country, year and entity type across the EU makes the EU a powerful setting to address whether unifying GAAP at the affiliate level increases MNE flexibility when selecting comparable companies to use in benchmarking transfer prices.  My study contributes to the literature by exploiting institutional details of intercompany transfer pricing to investigate a tax consequence of countries permitting or requiring IFRS for unconsolidated financial reporting.  I consider how an accounting change interacts with tax incentives to affect managerial behavior, thereby addressing an important new intersection between financial accounting and tax planning.  All EU member countries follow guidance published by the OECD for substantiating intercompany transfer prices. 1 These Transfer Pricing Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and Tax Administrations state that, for the purposes of benchmarking intercompany prices, an “important aspect of comparability is accounting consistency” (OECD, 2010a, p.  72).  Thus, holding economic comparability of potential benchmark firms constant, only those firms using similar accounting standards best meet the OECD definition of comparability for justifying arm’s length transfer prices (OECD, 2006). 2 Per private discussions with global transfer pricing professionals, tax authorities in the EU historically rejected potential benchmark firms that use different accounting standards (i. e. , foreign firms using local GAAP).  However, in the years following EU countries permitting or requiring IFRS for unconsolidated financial reporting, professionals observe that MNEs increasingly rely on multinational (e. g. , pan-European) sets of benchmark firms to justify intercompany prices (Gonnet et al. ,Permitted or mandated use of a common set of accounting standards in the EU expands the set of benchmark firms available to MNEs for substantiating transfer prices, potentially allowing MNEs to choose more favorable benchmarks that support a tax-advantaged transfer price.  For example, MNEs with an affiliate in a high-tax jurisdiction could “cherry-pick” among potential benchmark firms and select less profitable firms to substantiate low taxable profits for their high-tax affiliate.  MNE tax-motivated income shifting could therefore increase following affiliate adoption of IFRS due to increased opportunity to garner tax benefits.  However, tax-motivated income shifting may remain unchanged or even decrease following affiliate IFRS adoption due to limitations to expected benefits and/or increased costs.  First, tax authorities can also use a larger opportunity set of benchmark firms to challenge taxpayer-favored transfer prices upon audit, cherry-picking benchmarks that increase taxable income in their jurisdiction or enforcing stricter comparability criteria to reduce transfer pricing flexibility. 3 Second, increased financial statement transparency upon IFRS adoption could limit tax-motivated income shifting.  Finally, the significant costs associated with updating transfer pricing strategies and compliance reports could deter taxpayers from taking action.  Whether the equilibrium level of tax-motivated income shifting increases following affiliate adoption of IFRS is an empirical question hinging on the cost-benefit tradeoffs of MNEs and taxing authorities.  An EU Directive requires that MNE affiliates disclose unconsolidated, separate entity financial statements. 4 Between 2003 and 2007, many European MNE affiliates changed accounting methods as several EU member states first permitted or required IFRS for unconsolidated financial reports.  I use Bureau van Dijk’s Amadeus database, containing European unconsolidated financial and ownership information.  This unique database provides unconsolidated financial information required to estimate affiliate-level tax incentives and their effect on estimated affiliate-level taxable profits, neither of which can be measured using consolidated financial statements or reported segment information. 5 Amadeus also reports which financial reporting standards each affiliate uses and affiliate ownership linkages.  Thus, I can identify the effect of a common set of accounting standards on tax-motivated income shifting among affiliated firms within the same controlled group.  Using a sample of 57,252 profitable affiliate-year observations over the period 2003 to 2012, I test my hypothesis in two steps.  First, I document that IFRS adopters experience a substantial increase in the number of potential benchmark firms and the range of possible benchmark book profit margins.  Second, I estimate the effects of tax incentives and affiliate IFRS adoption on reported affiliate pre-tax profits.  Following Hines and Rice (1994), I estimate affiliate reported book pre-tax income as a function of statutory tax rates, affiliate tangible fixed assets, affiliate compensation expense, and per capita GDP.  Results suggest that affiliates engage in more tax-motivated income shifting following adoption of IFRS for unconsolidated reporting.  Focusing on mandatory adopters because they experienced an exogenous shock to their set of benchmark firms, I find that the average mandatory IFRS adopter affiliate shifts 11. 5 percent more income relative to pre-adoption and nonadopter affiliate-years.  I caveat that these results are based on a sample limited to profitable affiliates, affiliates in the EU (group affiliates in other locations are not considered), and the relatively homogenous tax rates of Europe.  Further, although I conduct tests that separate the effect of changes to the potential benchmark set from accounting changes due to IFRS adoption, I am unable to rule out that findings are partially attributable to the accounting standards themselves.  I discuss these caveats in more detail below.  My study makes several contributions to the literature.  First, this study begins to fill a gap in the literature by providing a deeper view of transfer pricing institutional detail. 6 I expose a previously unexplored income shifting mechanism by examining the role that independent benchmark firms play in justifying arm’s length prices for intercompany transactions, as well as the link between an affiliate’s taxable income and the observable book income of similar, independent firms.  This study provides a nuanced understanding of transfer pricing rules and practices used by MNEs to shift income and accrue tax benefits.  I use these institutional details to examine an important spillover effect of financial reporting changes on tax planning.  To this end, this study answers the call by Shackelford and Shevlin (2001) to move beyond documenting income shifting to better explaining, understanding, and predicting income shifting.  Future studies can use this more detailed view of transfer pricing institutional features to continue deepening our understanding of the mechanisms through which MNEs shift income.  Second, although much of the research evaluating the economic consequences of IFRS focuses on the intended benefits for consolidated financial reporting, I evaluate the consequences of IFRS for unconsolidated financial reporting. 7 By examining the impact of IFRS on the pricing of MNE transactions designed to garner tax benefits, I shed light on a real effect of accounting choices made by both jurisdictional standards setters and MNE managers, positing that accounting methods, tax incentives, and managerial incentives interact to affect MNE income shifting behavior.  My study is a contribution to the literature in that it investigates a previously unexplored effect of countries permitting or requiring IFRS for unconsolidated affiliate reporting.  This study demonstrates the potential risks of tax and financial accounting policy makers ignoring the interplay between financial accounting and tax.  2.  Background 2. 1.  Tax-motivated income shifting Firms shift taxable income in response to tax incentives via the strategic valuation of intercompany sales of goods, services, debt and intangibles. 8 To constrain tax-motivated income shifting by MNEs, many countries adopt formal rules to regulate intercompany pricing.  Although the European Commission (EC) has the authority to enforce tax policies on EU member states, to date the EC has allowed member states to choose their own tax policies (such as tax rates and transfer pricing rules) to the extent these policies do not conflict with other EU law. 9 All EU member countries follow the OECD Guidelines on transfer pricing. 10 The OECD Guidelines define the “arm’s length principle” as the basis for substantiating appropriate transfer prices.  The arm’s length principle specifies that intercompany prices should be comparable to prices charged by unrelated firms (i. e. , firms held at “arm’s length”) for substantially similar transactions entered into under similar terms and economic conditions.  The OECD Guidelines provide a hierarchy of methods to determine intercompany transfer prices to comply with this principle.  Under the most preferred methods, taxpayers ideally obtain information on specific contractual terms for comparable transactions entered into with or by unrelated enterprises.  However, such information is often unavailable for two reasons.  First, private contractual terms between unrelated parties generally are not required to be disclosed.  Second, often there is simply no market for the type of transactions entered into by related parties.  For example, parent companies typically provide management services to their subsidiaries, including high-level decisions about corporate policy and strategy.  However, the parent company rarely provides such services for unrelated companies, and thus there is no “arm’s length” price with an unrelated party to be observed.  As a result of limited data availability, MNEs frequently use transfer pricing methods further down the hierarchy of OECD methods that compare the rate of taxable profit earned on an intercompany transaction to observable book profits earned by comparable independent enterprises (PWC, 2006).  For example, the use of external benchmarks to apply the gross profit method, the cost plus method, and the transactional net margin method described in the OECD Guidelines follow this approach. 11 Profit metrics include markup on total cost, gross margin, operating margin, and net profit (OECD, 2010b).  In the case of management services, for example, a firm would typically compare the markup on the cost of management services incurred by the parent against the markup on cost achieved by independent management consulting firms operating in similar economic conditions.  The OECD Guidelines list functions, risks, assets, and economic conditions as primary determinants of comparability, and consequently taxing authorities prioritize economic comparability when reviewing a firm’s transfer pricing.  However, the OECD Guidelines also note that an “important aspect of comparability is accounting consistency” (OECD, 2010a, p.  73), and that “the key is to compare like with like and follow the same accounting principles for the taxpayer and for the comparables” (OECD, 2010a, p.  87).  Although the OECD Guidelines indicate that adjustments can be made for dissimilarities in accounting rules (or economic comparability), the OECD stated in draft Issues Notes in February 2006 that “in many cases, it is almost impossible for a taxpayer to identify all differences in accounting standards and accordingly adjust third party accounts on the basis of publicly available information” (OECD, 2006, p.  51).  Because of this difficulty in adjusting for differences in reporting, Ernst & Young transfer pricing professionals conveyed that many tax authorities have challenged the use of foreign benchmark firms that followed different accounting standards. 12 Although some heterogeneity across countries remains, the trend has been for European tax authorities to increasingly accept the use of foreign benchmark firms coinciding with increased adoption of IFRS, although some economic adjustments may still be required to account for geographic differences.  Typically, potential benchmark firms must have publicly available financial information reported using the same financial reporting standards as those of the taxpayer.  Because tax returns are generally unobservable, book (financial accounting) profits (not tax profits) of comparable companies are used by the taxpayer to compare to their own taxable profits. 13 Frequently, multiple independent companies comprise a benchmark range of profitability.  taxpayers can target any point within the benchmark range and be compliant with the arm’s length standard (OECD, 2010a).  The most tax-advantaged points in the range are often the endpoints.  For example, if the foreign affiliate is located in a relatively high-tax jurisdiction, the lowest profit supported by the arm’s length range minimizes taxes. 14 Taxpayers may make tax-only adjustments to transfer prices after closing the financial books but prior to filing the tax return.  Unconsolidated financial statement information does not reflect tax-only adjustments.  however these topside adjustments are “uncommon… unless something material occurs after the end of the year that would require such an adjustment” (Mahalingham, 2013, p.  3).  Depending on the company, managerial compensation may be based on a separate managerial set of books.  Numerous studies document a negative relation between tax rates and transfer prices or reported profits in broad crosssections of firms, and that the magnitude of tax-motivated income shifting is economically significant.  Focusing on investments, Grubert and Mutti (2000) estimate that nearly 19 percent of investments are redistributed based on tax incentives. 15 Huizinga and Laeven (2008) estimate that a one percentage point increase in the top statutory tax rate is on average associated with a 1. 3 percent decrease in pre-tax book profits for European affiliates of European MNEs, resulting in the erosion of up to 13. 6 percent of the tax base in Germany.  Similar to my study, several studies address differences in multinational income shifting across firms.  Desai et al.  (2006) examine cross-sectional determinants of the use of tax havens to shift income.  Markle (forthcoming) finds that firms shift more income under territorial tax systems than worldwide tax systems.  Swenson (2001) and Blouin et al.  (2013) study the effect of conflicting customs duty and income tax incentives on MNE income shifting behavior. 16 My study most closely relates to Klassen and Laplante (2012b), who also examine the interaction of financial reporting standards and transfer pricing behavior.  While they focus on the income shifting incentives provided by a financial reporting election that varies in usage across firms, my study adds to this literature by focusing on the role that converging accounting standards plays in allowing firms to set tax-advantaged intercompany transfer prices. International financial reporting standards The development of a common set of international reporting standards has long been the goal of the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and its predecessor, the International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC), to enhance financial statement comparability across jurisdictions (IASB, 2008).  In the absence of a global standard, each country sets local generally accepted accounting principles (local GAAP).  Because these standards differ by country, it is difficult to compare companies reporting in different jurisdictions.  A primary goal and anticipated outcome of IFRS is increased comparability of financial information reported by companies in different jurisdictions. 17 However, the IASB (2008) also acknowledges that IFRS will not necessarily result in increased comparability due to the principles-based nature of the standards and cross-sectional and timing differences in implementation.  For example, Table 1 provides unconsolidated IFRS reporting rules by EU country.  Although the EU mandated IFRS for consolidated financial reporting in 2005, the EU designated authority to the member countries to require, permit or prohibit IFRS for unconsolidated reporting. 