 1.  Introduction In recent decades, the phenomenon of global warming caused by greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions has become extremely serious, resulting in more frequent and intense extreme weather and natural disasters.  As well known, the carbon emissions from fossil fuel consumption are the nuclear source of the GHG emissions.  Therefore, mitigating carbon emissions has become a global assignment to realize low carbon sustainable development.  In response to climate change, many countries have reached basic agreements on mitigating carbon emissions.  The Paris Climate Agreement and the Kyoto Protocol show the world's determination to cope with climate change issue.  As the largest developing country and the largest carbon emitter, China enacted the energy intensity target policy and a series of binding policies during the 11th “Five-Year Plan” (FYP) (2006–2010) and achieved a success in energy saving and energy intensity reduction (Cao and Karplus, 2014.  Fujii et al. , 2016).  In 2009, China has ofﬁcially raised the carbon intensity constraint target that carbon emissions per GDP (i. e. , carbon intensity) would be reduced by 40%–45% in 2020 than the 2005 level.  Such a target has been considered in the mid-long term plans of the national economic and social development.  In 2011, China's 12th FYP explicitly proposed a sub-target of the CICP that carbon emissions per GDP would drop by 17% in than that in 2010.  This is the ﬁrst time for China to propose carbon intensity constraint target in the FYP.  Subsequently, the Chinese central government allocated the carbon intensity reduction task to each provincial region, and stipulated that such a task must be incorporated into the local economic and social development plans.  Thus, the carbon intensity reduction target must be reﬂected in the performance assessment of the local government.  To fulﬁl such a target, the Chinese central government and local governments have formulated a series of relevant supporting policies and measures, and have carried out a “lasting battle” strategy for energy saving and carbon reduction.  They have released a serious of documents to declare that the government should endeavor to expedite industrial structure adjustment, support energy conservation and the development of low carbon energy, increase carbon sinks, control non-energyrelated GHG emissions, and facilitate the substitution of high carbon productions.  China's industrial sector is not only a crucial engine of economic growth, but also responsible for the largest share of the country's energy consumption and carbon emissions.  The decline of carbon intensity in the industrial sector plays a decisive role in achieving the overall carbon intensity reduction target.  As a vital part of carbon reduction polices, a number of speciﬁc measures focused on carbon reduction in the industrial sector, mainly including 6 aspects as follows.  (1) In 2009, the Chinese government ofﬁcially introduced the Standard for Sector-integrate Eco-industrial Parks, standardizing the construction, management, and assessment of sector-integrate eco-industrial parks.  In the same year, for the enterprises in the eco-industrial parks, the speciﬁc requirements for promoting the development of low carbon economy were put forward.  (2) In 2010, the Chinese government published a list of enterprises in 18 industrial sub-sectors (especially energy-intensive industries), targeted at eliminating the backward production capacity.  (3) China conducted a national resource tax reform for oil and gas in 2011, shifting from a volume-based tax to an ad valorem tax with a tax rate of 5%–10% (Shi et al. , 2015).  The resource tax reform on coal, rare earths, tungsten, and molybdenum followed the reform of the oil and gas tax.  Compared with the volume-based resource tax system, the tax rate in proportion to the market price will increase the costs of resource use in the overheated market (Liu et al. 