. 
All auditors (US and foreign) who audit US-listed companies are required to register with the Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board (PCAOB) and be subject to PCAOB inspections.  In this study, we focus on foreign auditors and consider 
whether audit quality for non -US-listed foreign public clients (non-US-listed clients) is higher following the initial PCAOB inspection. 
Our study addresses the issue of positive externality, i. e. , whether the PCAOB international inspection program 
improves audit quality for foreign auditors’ non-US-listed foreign clients even though investors in these particular foreign 
companies are not the intended beneﬁciaries of the foreign auditor inspection program
The impact of the PCAOB international inspection program on audit quality abroad is ambiguous.  Given the PCAOB’s 
reputation for actively looking for auditor misconduct and taking follow-up disciplinary actions against deﬁcient auditors 
( DeFond, 2010; Farrell and Shabad, 2005 ), the very act of registering with the PCAOB may exacerbate foreign auditors’ exposure to reputation loss and provide them with an ex ante incentive to strengthen their ﬁrm -level quality controls and 
increase audit quality.  To the extent that audit deﬁciencies are discovered during the initial inspection, the auditor may 
have an additional incentive to take appropriate remedial action and strengthen ﬁrm-level quality controls to avoid further 
embarrassment on subsequent inspections.  The improvements in the foreign auditor’s ﬁrm -level quality controls could increase audit quality for all of the ﬁrm’s foreign clients US-listed or otherwise.  Moreover, because the starting point for audit 
quality is potentially lower abroad than in the US ( Choi Name, 2008; Francis and Wang, 2008 ), the PCAOB inspection program 
could have a greater impact abroad than in the US.  
However, reasons exist to doubt the eﬃcacy of PCAOB inspections in improving audit quality.  Prior research ( DeFond, 
2010; Lennox and Pittman, 2010 ) indicates that PCAOB inspection reports are not useful for assessing audit quality because 
they merely list audit deﬁciencies and do not provide a summary opinion about the auditor’s quality.  Moreover, the effectiveness of the PCAOB’s international inspections may be limited by geographic distance from the US, potential language 
differences, or cultural barriers.  Finally, foreign auditors may follow an asymmetric approach to their US-listed and nonUS-listed clients.  Given that the PCAOB is primarily interested in protecting investors in US-listed companies (selecting only 
US-listed client engagements for inspection) and the fact that auditor litigation exposure is lower for non-US-listed clients 
than for US-listed clients, foreign auditors may be less incentivized to improve audit quality for their non-US-listed clients.  
Foreign auditors may override their ﬁrm-level quality controls and utilize less effective audit programs or assemble less 
qualiﬁed audit teams for their non-US-listed clients (which may be less costly).  To the extent that foreign auditors follow 
an asymmetric approach in servicing their US-listed and non-US-listed clients, any PCAOB inspection-related improvements 
in ﬁrm-level quality controls may not necessarily beneﬁt their non-US-listed audit clients.  For all these reasons, the overall 
effectiveness of the PCAOB international inspection program in improving audit quality for foreign auditors’ non-US-listed 
clients is far from obvious and remains an open empirical question.  
Because the quality of ﬁnancial reporting is a joint outcome of manager and auditor decision making, audit quality is 
best viewed as a continuum with higher audit quality providing greater assurance of ﬁnancial reporting quality ( DeFond and 
Zhang, 2014 ).  Still, beyond the notion that better audit quality leads to better ﬁnancial reporting quality, little or no consensus emerges in the extant literature as to how best to measure audit quality.  Hence, given that all audit quality proxies have 
their limitations, we use multiple ﬁnancial reporting quality measures (such as discretionary accruals, the propensity to just 
meet or beat earnings expectations, and accruals quality) that capture different dimensions of the audit quality construct.  
In addition, we employ a measure of auditor independence: the likelihood of the auditor issuing a modiﬁed opinion for 
non-US-listed clients as a proxy for audit quality. 