
The most valuable component in South Africa's ﬁshing industry is its
hake ﬁshery, which targets two species, the shallow-water (Merluccius
capensis) and deep-water (M.  paradoxus) Cape hakes.  It accounts N50%
of overall ﬁsheries value in the country (Butterworth and Rademeyer,
2005.  Powers Name, 2010), with landed catch worth approximately
ZAR (South African Rand) 2. 5 billion in 2008 (Petersen Name, 2010),
and is presently estimated at ±ZAR 5 billion (Durholtz, 2014, personal
communication). 
It also generates approximately 30,000 jobs
(Rademeyer Name, 2008a), and is estimated to comprise as much as
half of all ﬁsh eaten in the country (Bacela Name, 2003).  The largest sector of the hake ﬁshery is offshore demersal trawling, which lands 85% of
the catch (Field Name, 2013), and is an important contributor to the large
post-1990 export market for South African hake (Crosoer Name, 2006). 
It is known that when ﬁsheries are managed for long-term sustainability and only the ecological context is considered, while human aspects are ignored, failure of management often results.  Therefore, the
international literature generally acknowledges that ﬁsheries need to
be managed with economic and social objectives in addition to ecological
ones (Browman and Stergiou, 2005.  Folke Name, 2007.  Garcia and
Charles, 2008.  Pitcher and Lam, 2010).  A better understanding of the
economic structure and function of the hake industry and its interaction
and connection to the ecological system, will serve to inform management.  Successful actions related to sustainability are underpinned
through the linkages of ecosystems to social and economic systems
(Folke Name, 2007).  Furthermore, a current scientiﬁc challenge is to ﬁnd
coherence among the economic, social, ecological and institutional sectors of ﬁsheries through the utilization of all pertinent knowledge
(Garcia and Charles, 2008).  As a step towards this, modelling provides
a means to assist in understanding the dynamics of the economic system
and identify potential links to the ecological system.  Modelling is an approach that can be used to test understanding, synthesize knowledge and
make predictions.  Blackford Name (2010), and Starﬁeld and Jarre (2011)
suggest that it is a useful means of conducting interdisciplinary research. 
In the hake industry, several economic factors are known to have importance for the hake ﬁshing industry.  Exchange rate and market value
of ﬁsh affect the ZAR price of hake, fuel price and catch per unit effort reﬂect the cost to companies to catch hake, and industrial organization affects company operations (see for example BCLME, 2004, 2006).  Many of
these factors, such as fuel price (Sumaila Name, 2008) and exchange rate
(Asche, 2014) are known to be important internationally for ﬁsheries
proﬁtability.  The interaction of these and other variables affect company
behaviour, and proﬁts.  To understand the function of the South African
offshore hake trawl industry, it is therefore valuable to produce a novel
prototype model to examine the effect on and relative importance of
these and other factors for the industry.  The aim of this study is to develop and describe an agent-based model that captures a variety of these
important drivers for the industry (Fig.  1).  This model is designed within
the framework of ultimately linking it to an ecosystem model of the
Southern Benguela. 
There is much complexity involved in the industrial structure of companies and company clusters in the offshore hake industry, as well as variability in the types of product that they sell and their ﬂeet compositions
(Cooper Name, 2014).  Given this complexity and the heterogeneity of ﬁshing vessels, companies and markets involved in the industry, agent-based
modelling is particularly well suited for modelling it.  Agent-based models
(ABMs) capture complex systems comprised of heterogeneous, autonomous entities, ‘agents’, that interact with each other and their modelled
environment through behaviours governed by simple rules, and which
give rise to the behaviour of the system as a whole (Macal and North,
2010).  ABMs allow the capturing of individual-level information, complexity, interdisciplinary and cross-scale perspectives, giving greater predictive and explanatory power (An Name, 2005), particularly in the
broader ecological-economic context within which the present model is
developed.  Computational models like ABMs have the advantages of
being able to deal with complex, stochastic systems, and of being able
to model how the activities of elements at one scale have impacts on patterns observed at another scale (Levin Name, 1997).  They allow the modelling of heterogeneous economic agents and therefore represent a new
and alternate way of modelling and understanding economic systems
(Deissenberg Name, 2008).  This may be especially advantageous in modelling the economics of resource-extraction systems, such as ﬁsheries,
where not only are the economic agents heterogeneous but where
environmental heterogeneity also plays an important role (Nolan Name,
2009).  Despite these advantages ABMs have not often been applied to
economic aspects of ﬁsheries, and this represents a signiﬁcant area for development.  Previous applications in ﬁsheries have often centred around
the topic of understanding ﬂeet dynamics and ﬁshing strategies
(Bastardie Name, 2010.  Boschetti and Brede, 2009.  Cabral Name, 2010. 
Little Name, 2004.  Schafer, 2007.  Soulié and Thébaud, 2006.  Wilson Name, 2007.  Yu Name, 2009), where they have provided some useful insights
into ﬂeet behaviour and the way that resources are used.  Little Name
(2009), for example, has taken the ﬂeet effort allocation scenario a step
further and examined how individual transferable quotas affect a multispecies, multi-sector ﬁshery in terms of ﬁshing ﬂeet behaviour,
discarding, catch-levels, proﬁtability and so forth (Little Name, 2009). 
The present paper forms the ﬁrst of a two-part publication and will
describe the development and validation of an agent-based model of
the South African offshore hake trawling industry.  The second, upcoming
paper will explore a variety of scenarios with the model to examine interactions and trade-offs of external drivers and market organization. 
The layout of this ﬁrst paper is as follows.  ﬁrst, brief and relevant background information and how this informed the model design and development is described.  Then, in the results section the initial validation and
testing of the model, including its sensitivities, are described.  Finally, the
summary and conclusion section examines the contribution of the model
to the bio-economic modelling literature, the potential applications of
the model, its relevance to management and possibilities for linkages
to an ecological model in future. 
<Middle> Methods. 
2. 1.  The Offshore Trawl Fishery as It Relates to Model Design. 
Given the dominance of the offshore demersal hake trawl sector in
catch (85%) and exports of South Africa's ﬁnancially important hake ﬁshery (Butterworth and Rademeyer, 2005.  Field Name, 2013.  Powers Name,
2010), a detailed study was made of its industry.  Details of this study can
be found in Cooper Name (2014), but a brief and relevant summary is provided here in relation to the model structure.  The industry of the demersal hake ﬁshery is highly vertically integrated, with many of the
companies involved in most aspects of the value chain from catching
and processing of ﬁsh to its distribution.  Fishing rights are issued to individuals (henceforth “rightsholders”) in the hake industry rather than to
vessels or companies.  These rights have been allocated for 15 years (ending 2021) and are a ﬁxed percentage of the total allowable catch, which is
allocated annually on the basis of a two-species operational management procedure (Table 1.  Rademeyer Name, 2008b).  Horizontal consolidation of rights is important.  Although the industry comprises 52
rightsholders these are consolidated into seven company clusters
through various catch share and joint venture agreements1 (Cooper Name, 2014).  Each cluster effectively functions as a single company or ﬁshing business entity.  Based on their operations, four categories of company clusters can be deﬁned.  large, medium, small and super-cluster.  These
differ in the number and types of vessels owned, rights-shares, processing efﬁciency (i. e.  efﬁciency with which companies can convert whole,
raw ﬁsh to ﬁnished product) and business strategies (Cooper Name,
2014).  The ﬁrst agent class in the model is company clusters, and
based on the industry structure as at 2013, there are four types of these
agents.  small, medium, large and super-cluster agents. 