 1.  Introduction The study of the economic growth and energy consumption nexus allows for testing of four hypotheses with strong implications for growth and energy policy.  (1) the feedback hypothesis (which indicates a bidirectional causation between the two variables).  (2) the growth hypothesis (or a unidirectional causation ﬂowing from energy to economic growth).  (3) the conservative hypothesis (or a unidirectional causation ﬂowing from economic growth to energy).  or (4) the neutrality hypothesis (no causation).  Hypothesis (2) advances the view that energy consumption promotes economic growth.  It is also widely believed that demand for energy is propelled by economic growth, giving rise to hypothesis (3).  The complementarity between energy and economic growth, as portrayed in (2) and (3), has given rise to hypothesis (1).  Hypotheses (1) and (2) posit a connection between energy policy and economic growth.  Acceptance of these hypotheses discourages restrictive energy policies, but calls for policies that promote energy efﬁciency.  The prevalence of hypotheses (3) or (4) emphasises a disconnection between energy policies and economic growth and gives a green light to energy conservation policies (Narayan, 2016). 1 While a plethora of studies examine this nexus for total energy consumption, there is an emerging strand that examines the four hypotheses explicitly for total renewables and/or non-renewables for one or more individual countries, or a panel of countries, by their level of economic development or region (see, Tiba et al. , 2016.  Bhattacharya et al. , 2016.  Chang et al. , 2015.  Salim et al. , 2014.  Pao et al. , 2014.  Marques and Fuinhas, 2012.  Apergis and Payne, 2011a, 2011b, 2010a.  Apergis et al. , 2010.  and Sardosky, 2009).  Some also examine the traditional energy consumption and economic growth nexus for different energy mixes of renewables and non-renewables (see Bloch et al. , 2015.  Long et al. , 2015.  Pao and Fu, 2013.  Marques and Fuinhas, 2012.  and Yildirim et al. , 2012).  We summarise these studies in Table 1.  By mainly using cointegration/VECM/VAR/Granger causality tests for developing and developed nations, this group of studies clariﬁes policy directions along the lines of long-term growth and energy by renewable and non-renewable energy.  While this literature shows evidence that is mixed, for both renewables and non-renewables, majority tend to ﬁnd support for the feedback hypothesis (see Table 1).  Of the 28 previous studies surveyed, for renewables, the majority (57%) show evidence in support of the feedback effect in the long run (Apergis and Payne 2010a,b, 2011a,b, 2012.  Apergis et al. , 2010.  Apergis and Danuletiu, 2014.  Chang et al. , 2015.  Salim et al.  2014.  Tiba et al. , 2016.  Tugcu et al. , 2012.  Pao and Fu, 2013.  Lin and Moubarak, 2014.  Sebri and Ben-Salha, 2014.  Bloch et al. , 2015.  Omri et al. , 2015).  Only nine out of 28 studies consider short-term causality and all nine show evidence in favour of the feedback effect in the short-run (Sardosky, 2009.  Apergis and Payne 2010a,b, 2011a,b, 2012.  Pao et al. , 2014.  Sebri and Ben-Salha, 2014.  and Shahbaz et al. , 2015).  Evidence that renewable energy leads economic growth is found in 18% of the studies in the longrun (Pao et al. , 2014.  Bhattacharya et al. , 2016.  Yildirim et al. , 2012.  Chang et al. , 2015.  Shahbaz et al. , 2015.  Omri et al. , 2015).  Evidence that economic growth causes higher demand for renewable energy is found in 18% of the studies (Sardosky, 2009.  Menyah and Wolde-Rufael, 2010.  Long et al. , 2015.  Omri et al. , 2015.  and Mbarek et al. , 2017).  Neutrality between renewable energy consumption and economic growth is supported in 11% of the studies (Marques and Fuinhas, 2012.  Pao and Fu, 2015.  Chang et al. , 2015).  Of the 12 studies that examine the link between non-renewable energy consumption and economic growth, majority (67%) show the same feedback effect in the long run (Apergis and Payne, 2011a.  Pao et al. , 2014.  Salim et al.  2014.  Pao and Fu, 2013, 2015.  Shahbaz et al. , 2015.  Bloch et al. , 2015.  Long et al. , 2015).  The evidence of the growth hypothesis is prevalent in 25% of the studies (Tugcu et al. , 2012.  Bhattacharya et al. , 2016) in the long run and one study, Pao et al. , 2014, in the short run.  Evidence of the conservative hypothesis is not found, but the neutrality hypothesis is found in Tugcu et al.  (2012).  In this study, we re-examine the four hypotheses outlined above for renewable and non-renewable energy consumption per capita. 2 The point of difference between this study and the extant literature is that we distinguish between residential and industrial users of renewable and non-renewable energy.  This distinction recognises the varying energy source mix which we explain below.  We ﬁnd that the disparity in the energy type mix between the two user groups becomes more apparent when we classify the users of energy by their level of development.  It can therefore be argued that the link between energy and economic growth will depend on the level of development, the users, and the energy mix.  The four hypotheses are tested for countries categorised into four income groups.  high income (HI), upper middle income (UMI), and low and lower middle income (LLMI).  Several of the abovementioned panel-based studies examine the four hypotheses on the basis of the level of development of the country, although most of these studies only examine a developed country panel (Apergis and Payne 2010a.  Salim, et al. , 2014.  and Chang et al. , 2015) or developed and developing panels (see Apergis and Payne 2011a.  Apergis et al.  2010.  Omri et al. , 2015).  Tiba et al.  (2016) is the only study that examines the energygrowth nexus for two out of four income groups (see Table 3 below) normally used to classify countries, i. e.  high income and middle income countries.  Such a division is important as across these income groups the nature of changes occurring with respect to the use of renewables and non-renewables, is signiﬁcantly different.  The International Energy Agency (IEA, 2006.  2015) notes that in the United States and the European Union, expansion of renewable energy occurs largely at the expense of aging fossil-fuelled capacity.  In China, India, and many other developing countries, expansion of renewable capacity goes hand-in-hand with efforts to expand energy supply from other sources, to keep up with rapidly increasing demand.  So far, only one study has shed some light on the association between economic growth and renewable and non-renewable industrial energy consumption (see Doytch and Narayan, 2016). 3 Doytch and Narayan (2016) examine the one-way link going from economic growth to total industrial energy consumption for high, middle and low and lower middle income groups – in effect only testing the conservative hypothesis.  Their GMM estimations, which also factor in for sectoral FDI, suggest that real GDP per capita growth positively and signiﬁcantly inﬂuences industrial energy consumption (renewable and non-renewable).  Our study follows the same testing procedure, but focuses on the bilateral relationship for this category of energy consumption (industrial) as well as residential renewables and non-renewables.  In doing so, our study is one of the few to explore the short-term association between renewable (and non-renewable) energy consumption and economic growth.  The link between industrial energy consumption and economic growth is one that can be contemplated without much difﬁculty using the growth theory.  For instance, industrial energy use by both labour and capital produces goods and services.  However, the theoretical underpinning for the relationship between residential energy consumption and economic growth is unknown.  Empirical evidence on hypotheses (1) to (4) for total residential (and industrial) energy consumption is also rather thin. 4 Nonetheless residential energy users are seen by policymakers as key target groups for energy conservation policies.  “Residential energy conservation is a key component of contemporary energy and climate change policy in the US and elsewhere” (Suter and Shammin, 2013.  551).  Pablo-Romero et al.  (2017.  342) in their article “Global changes in residential energy consumption” reinforce this view, “(t)he residential energy sector is crucial to achieving CO2 emission reductions as it has an important energy-saving potential and its environmental controls are difﬁcult to displace to other countries”.  On the basis of an analysis of the residential energy consumption trends for the period 1993–2013, Pablo-Romero et al.  (2017) recommend different energy policies across regions.  They suggest that East Asian, Southern Asian, EU15, and other developed countries should reduce residential energy use.  However, since energy is generally seen as a vital component of growth, it is important to identify whether or not conserving residential energy use hurts economic growth.  Further, should this policy of conserving residential energy use be enforced on all countries.  Knowledge about the link between residential energy and economic growth, or whether residential energy is a viable target for conservation, is lacking.  Our study attempts to provide more evidence for understanding these important questions.  We focus on the effects of residential energy on short-term economic growth for income group panels of countries.  In this study, using data from 89 countries, we uncover additional compelling differences in the consumption patterns of residential and industrial – renewable and non-renewable – energy consumption, by income group, over the period 1971 to 2011.  We explain these in detail in Section 2 (also see Tables 2A and 2B).  Here we brieﬂy explain some of the patterns and trends relating to the energy mix of the income groups from our preliminary analysis to illustrate the importance of the energy mix, users and income groups in the examination of the linkage between energy consumption and economic growth.  First, total industrial energy consumption takes a larger share of ﬁnal energy consumption than total residential energy usage in high income and upper middle income countries (Table 2A, I7 and Table 2B, R7).  Nonetheless, between these two groups, over the period 1971 to 2011, the average growth of industrial share (of ﬁnal consumption) has been falling in the high income countries, but increasing strongly in the case of the upper middle income countries (Table 2A, I10).  Of the low and lower middle income countries, industrial share of ﬁnal consumption has been on average increasing (at a slower rate than the upper middle income) and for this income group (unlike other groups), on average residential energy users are bigger than industrial energy users (Table 2A, I10).  From these preliminary observations, given the difference in the key energy users by income group, we expect that.  (a) residential energy consumption is a signiﬁcant contributor to economic growth in the low and lower middle income countries and it seems that for this set of countries conservation of energy will hurt economic growth.  and (b) industrial energy consumption is a signiﬁcant contributor to economic growth in upper middle income countries, and possibly the high income group as well.  Second, in terms of the distribution of renewable and non-renewable, we notice that, across all income panels, residential users are more important than industrial users for renewable energy.  and for non-renewable energy, industries are more substantial users than residential users.  The residential renewable energy consumption share of total ﬁnal renewable consumption is, on average, greater than the industrial renewable energy consumption share of total ﬁnal renewable energy consumption for the period 1971 to 2011 (Table 2A, I9 andTable 2B , R9).  However, the opposite is true for non-renewable consumption share of total ﬁnal nonrenewable consumption for all panels (Table 2A, I8 and Table 2B, R8).  From this observation we can state that.  (c) residential renewable energy, not industrial renewable energy, is a driver of economic growth and/ or vice versa.  However, with biomass being the most dominant source of energy for residences in low income countries, the negative effects of biomass energy on health, environment, and productivity is also widely known and documented (see our discussion in Section 3. 3).  As a result, it is likely that.  (d) for low and middle income countries the positive effects of residential renewable energy use on economic growth will be nulliﬁed, or will become negative.  Third, growth of residential renewable energy consumption share of total ﬁnal renewable consumption averaged over 1971 to 2011 has been strongest in high income countries, but growth of industrial renewable energy consumption share of total ﬁnal renewable consumption is the strongest for the upper middle income countries (Table 2A, I12, Table 2B, R12).  Since several studies (mentioned above) suggest economic growth encourages demand for renewable energy consumption, it becomes important to investigate whether.  (e) economic growth is a trigger for residential renewable energy consumption in high income countries.  and (f) economic growth is a trigger of industrial renewable energy consumption in the upper middle income countries.  Fourth, over the same period the average growth of renewable energy consumption is stronger for the residential sector than for the industrial sector in high income and low and lower middle income countries, suggesting higher adoption of renewables in the residential sector (see Table 2A, I6 and Table 2B R6).  In the upper middle income countries, we observe the opposite effect, with industries adopting renewable energy more than the residential sector.  This preliminary ﬁnding matches with our statement in (a) that residential energy consumption may be seen as a contributor of economic growth in low and lower middle income countries.  Overall, given the difference between the levels, proportions, and growth of the share of residential and industrial renewables and nonrenewables across the income groups, we believe that the short-run effects of economic growth on energy (and/or vice versa) – and therefore the policy implications – cannot be homogenous for different energy users and energy sources.  Hence, when testing the four hypotheses related to the economic growth-energy consumption nexus, we apply the different energy categories and income panels mentioned previously.  For completeness, we also examine energy consumption as total residential.  total industrial.  total renewables.  and total non-renewables.  We apply the GMM approach as our main estimation method, but also provide results derived using the ﬁxed effect method.  To foreshadow our key GMM results, our study shows signiﬁcant differences in results amongst residential and industrial users by income panel.  In fact we ﬁnd that the effect of economic growth is multifacetted.  In other words the effects of economic growth are felt by more than one energy user group, although not all user groups contribute to economic growth.  Our ﬁndings suggest the presence of a feedback effect, with total nonrenewable for both the low and lower middle income, and upper middle income panels.  Interestingly, for the upper middle income panel, economic growth is also found to positively impact on non-renewable industrial energy.  However, this panel's non-renewable industrial energy consumption is not a signiﬁcant driver of growth in the short-term.  The high income panel also shows feedback for total non-renewable after allowing for investment.  Further we ﬁnd evidence of feedback for non-renewable industrial energy of the high income, as well as the low and lower middle income group, implying that non-renewable industrial energy consumption is the signiﬁcant source of the feedback effect for total non-renewable energy use.  Further, total residential energy consumption encourages economic growth in low and lower middle income (LLMI) countries.  Additionally, economic growth in the low and lower middle income panel boosts total industrial, non-renewable residential and total renewable energy consumption, a sign of the multi-facet effect of economic growth in the case of LLMI countries.  The models with economic growth-energy consumption variables ﬁnd neutrality for renewable industrial and residential (for all panels).  The neutrality hypothesis is also present with renewables (except LLMI).  total residential (UMI, HI) and industrial (HI).  We augmented the per capita based models with investment, following Apergis and Payne (2010a, 2010b, 2011a, 2011b).  From this exercise, we ﬁnd that most of our results are robust.  After accounting for capital investment, we were able to ﬁnd the presence of feedback for high income total non-renewables.  We are also able to show feedback in non-renewable industrial use for the LLMI group.  However, nonrenewable residential use for low and lower middle income countries, which originally supported the conservative hypothesis, moves to neutrality after capital investment is captured.  The balance of the paper is organised as follows.  Section 2 continues the discussion of the average trend of renewable and non-renewable – residential and industrial – energy consumption, in terms of levels, share, and growth.  These are explained by paying attention to all 89 nations and each of the three income groups studied here.  Section 3 presents different case studies on groups (EU, developing countries) or speciﬁc countries (the US, India) to explain some of the trends that were presented in the previous section.  This section explains the composition of residential and industrial energy consumption as well as some of the social and economic issues relating to renewable and non-renewable energy consumption by residential and industrial users.  Section 4 lays out the methodology applied in the paper to test the hypotheses.  Section 5 presents the results.  We also provide a summary of the results.  Section 6 provides the concluding remarks.  2.  Residential and industrial energy consumption (renewable and non-renewable) by income group.  The average industrial and residential energy consumption, in terms of total, non-renewable, and renewable, for the period 1971 to 2011 is presented in Table 2A and Table 2B in levels, shares, and growth terms according to three income groups.  low and lower middle income, upper middle income, and high income countries.  Table 2A and Table 2B display some of the facts which are readily known about energy consumption across income groups.  For instance, high income countries are the largest consumers of industrial and residential energy.  It is also known that high density industrial sectors in upper middle income groups are the second biggest users.  And with relatively lower industrial density, the low and lower middle income groups have the least amount of industrial energy consumption. 5 What is probably less known is that this pattern is also prevalent in the case of non-renewable energy consumption – for industrial and residential – but is not the case for renewables.  There are many interesting facts that can be observed from Table 2A and Table 2B.  First, total industrial energy consumption per capita is greater than those of residential consumption for the upper middle income and high income groups (see Table 2A, row I1 and Table 2B, row R1).  However, in the case of the low and lower middle income group, residential energy consumption is far greater than industrial consumption.  In terms of growth, residential energy consumption is higher than industrial for high income countries.  This is consistent with industrial and residential energy consumption as a share of total ﬁnal consumption for these nations (Table 2A, row I7 and Table 2B, row R7).  Second, in terms of growth of total industrial consumption, the upper middle income takes the lead followed by low and lower middle income countries and high income countries (see Table 2A, row I7).  The pattern is different for growth of non-renewable industrial energy – the low and lower middle income group shows the strongest average growth rates, followed by the upper middle income countries (Table 2A, row I8).  The high income countries show a negative growth rate for non-renewable energy.  While this is being compensated for by renewable energy, row I9 of Table 2A also reveals that growth rates for renewable energy consumption by industries in high income countries has in fact, on average, been lower than those of upper middle income countries (but higher than the lower income countries).  Table 2A (row I11) reveals that the share of non-renewable energy consumption by industry to total non-renewable energy consumption is indeed declining for high income countries.  This trend is also present in the upper middle income countries.  At the same time, the share of industrial renewable energy to total renewable energy consumption is increasing for both these panels, although growth is much higher for upper middle income countries.  Further, in the total renewable energy use by industries, the high income panel takes the lead, followed by the other two income groups (see Table 2B, R3).  Together these indicate that efﬁcient use of energy and adoption of renewable energy is mainly driving the negative growth for non-renewable energy use in our panels of high income countries and upper middle income countries.  Third, for residential energy consumption, the narrative is different (from industrial energy consumption) across income groups and energy mix.  While total energy consumption by the residential sector is indeed highest in the high income countries and lowest in the low and lower middle income countries, the share of residential energy consumption to ﬁnal consumption is greatest for the low and lower middle incomeTotal renewable energy consumption by residents is, on average, greatest for low and lower middle income countries, with the upper middle income and high income countries lagging behind (see Table 2B, row R3).  Similarly, the average share of renewable residential energy consumption to total renewables is strongest for our low and lower middle income group and weakest for the high income group.  However, the mean growth of this share is highest among the high income nations and lowest among poor nations.  As well, the average share of non-renewable residential energy consumption to total nonrenewables is highest for the high income group and lowest for the low and lower middle income group.  But the mean growth of this share is highest among the low and lower middle income countries and lowest among rich nations.  Fourth, in terms of growth, residential energy is strongest in the high income group, followed by upper middle income and low and lower middle income groups (see row Table 2B, row R9).  Nonrenewable energy consumption, on the other hand, grew fastest in the low and lower middle income countries – the energy deﬁcit countries (see Table 2B, row R8).  This was followed by upper middle income and high income countries.  Fifth, if we compare renewable and non-renewable energy consumption between industrial and residential users, we ﬁnd that for all three income panels the share of growth in non-renewable energy consumption is higher in residential than industrial (Table 2A, row I8 and Table 2B R8).  However, growth in renewable energy consumption by residence is much stronger in high income and low and lower middle income countries (Table 2A, I9 and Table 2B R9).  In the upper middle income countries, we observe the opposite effect – industries are adopting more renewable energy than residences.  Sixth, weﬁ nd that over the study period, mean renewable energy consumption total as a percentage of total ﬁnal consumption is highest for the low income countries.  This is followed by middle income countries, and ﬁnally high income countries (Fig.  1).  This is same for renewable industrial (or residential) energy consumption as a percentage of total industrial (or residential) energy consumption (Figs.  2 and 3).  We observe a recent resurgence of renewable energy use in LLMI countries mainly due to residential energy consumption. 6 3.  Residential and industrial energy consumption (renewable and non-renewable).  In this section, we look behind the trends described in the previous section.  3. 1.  Renewable energy - residential and industrial.  Our preliminary analysis revealed an increase in the share of renewable energy for high income and upper middle income countries.  There is strong evidence that the share of renewable energy has been increasing for the European Union (EU), which comprises high and upper middle income nations, reaching 16% in gross ﬁnal energy consumption, and is on track to meet its target, a 20% share of renewable energy in its gross ﬁnal energy consumption by 2020 (European Environment Agency, EEA, 2015).  Between 2005 and 2013, renewable energy use grew by an average 0. 8% every year.  In the EU countries, residences use renewable energy in power generation in the heating and cooling sector.  The renewable energy share in electricity consumed in the EU grew at an average of 1. 3% per year between 2005 and 2013.  In 2013, in the EU 25. 4% of electricity consumed was generated from renewables, with around 38. 0% contributed by variable renewable electricity (wind and solar) (EEA, 2015).  Bioenergy (for electricity and heating) make the largest source of renewable energy in the EU, followed by hydropower, and then wind power.  In the EU, renewable energy support comes in the form of surcharges on the energy bill of the end users (this prevails in the case of electricity) and governmental support.  Countries with a higher effective tax rate on carbon dioxide generally have a higher rate of patent applications in renewable technologies.  The 2014 EEA report identiﬁes that in 2012, 32 countries have a total of 236 support measures associated with renewables, which represents 40. 5% of the identiﬁed support measures.  The rest of the energy support measures (59. 5%) were in support of fossil fuels and nuclear energy.  Innovations in, and deployment of, renewable energy may be viewed as an important driver in shaping the future of our economic systems (EEA, 2014).  In Europe, the renewable energy industry provides N2. 2 million full-time equivalent jobs (EEA, 2014).  There is evidence to suggest that investment in renewables is also growing in non-European countries.  The International Energy Agency (IEA, 2016) reports that global investment in renewable-based power generation was $270 billion in 2014, and positive policy moves in many countries are encouraging growth of the renewable sector.  In many countries, renewable technologies are becoming increasingly cost-competitive, although public support schemes are still required for their deployment in many others.  In 2014, renewable-based power generation capacity amounted to 45% of world power generation capacity additions and the International Energy Agency (IEA, 2006.  2015) also reports that China (a lower middle income country) remains the largest wind power market, with increasing capacity (20 GW) more than the wind power market of Germany (5 GW) and US (less than 5 GW).  Solar power has also expanded strongly in Asia, particularly in China and Japan. 