 1.  Introduction  Theory suggests banks’ demand for high quality ﬁnancial reports varies with their lending strategies and internal information structures.  For example, Stein (2002) predicts that larger intermediaries, with a need to transmit information to  multiple agents within their hierarchical organizations, more frequently request veriﬁed reports from borrowers.  Smaller  ﬁnancial intermediaries, which typically have fewer layers of internal information transfer, are conversely more likely to use  soft information acquired through personal interactions with ﬁrms ( Berger et al. , 2005 ).  In addition to bank size, theories  suggest that exposure concentration may play an equally important role in shaping banks’ interactions with ﬁrms ( Dell’  Ariccia et al. , 1999.  Winton, 1999 ).  These theories suggest a bank’s concentration in a sector implies a degree of expertise.   banks with more exposure to a sector have more interactions with borrowers and are thus more informed.  Banks with less  exposure, and thus fewer substitute sources of information, may demand more detailed and veriﬁed information when contracting with those borrowers, resulting in a negative relation between exposure concentration and high quality information  demand.   A negative relation between the concentration of a bank’s loan portfolio and the extent of information collection from  borrowers is not obvious, however.  Concentration in an industry or region not only increases information about that sector,  but also ampliﬁes portfolio risk.  Collecting more reliable and precise information about concentrated exposures is a plausible  strategy for managing the risk and related scrutiny from regulators, depositors, and the board of directors.   Thus, a positive association may emerge between a bank’s lending concentration and its high quality information collection.   Understanding the relation between the concentration of a bank’s portfolio and its information collection practices is  of interest for several reasons.  First, the banking market has consolidated considerably following more than two decades  of mergers and bank failures.  As a result, the loan market has become more concentrated and individual bank loan portfolios have become more diverse.  Depending on the relation between portfolio concentration and information collection,  these market shifts can affect the demand for auditing from the predominantly private commercial borrowers that choose  whether to have audited ﬁnancial statements, in part, as a function of lending relationships.  Second, C&I loan exposures are  rarely securitized, and banks typically retain their loan exposures after origination ( Loutskina, 2005 , FDIC call reports).  As  a result, regulators expect banks to document more information collection from their larger positions to mitigate portfolio concentration risk ( Basel, 20 0 0.  OCC, 2011 ).  Requiring more collection of hard information about concentrated positions  could, however, impede lending to opaque ﬁrms when a bank is willing to lend based on knowledge arising from its specialization in the borrower’s sector.  Despite a close link between exposure concentration and borrower monitoring techniques  in theoretical models, empirical evidence establishing a link between concentration and information collection is sparse  because banks disclose limited details about their exposures or information collection practices.   We use a bank-level dataset supplied by the Risk Management Association (RMA) to examine the relation between a  bank’s commercial lending concentration and its level of ﬁnancial information quality requested of borrowers.  The dataset  includes the ﬁnancial statement collection records and commercial loan exposures of banks representing a substantial portion of the U. S.  commercial and industrial (C&I) loan market.  RMA compiles ﬁnancial reports collected by member banks  and categorizes them according to report type as.  unqualiﬁed audit, review, compilation, tax return, or other.  Unqualiﬁed  audits provide the highest level of independent veriﬁcation and the most ﬁnancial information.  Each category is tabulated  by six-digit NAICS code, six borrower size groups, six regions, and the ten years 2002–2011.  We use these data to measure  the frequency of banks’ audit collection from borrowers and their C&I exposure concentration within a bank-year.  RMA conﬁdentially provided these data at the bank level, allowing us to map lending exposures and statement collection records by  bank to FDIC call reports.   Our central ﬁnding is that banks’ audited statement collection is negatively related to portfolio concentration.  We begin  by using bank-year observations and ﬁnd that banks with more concentrated commercial loan portfolios collect audited  statements from borrowers less frequently, controlling for bank and borrower sizes and year ﬁxed effects.  Although these  results reﬂect differences unrelated to bank or borrower size, they could be the result of omitted bank characteristics that  are related to both concentration and ﬁnancial report collection practices.  Therefore, we use the panel structure of the  data and bank-year and industry-region-year ﬁxed effects to mitigate concerns about unobservables.  We ﬁnd banks collect  audited statements at lower rates from borrowers in industry-regions in which they have more concentration.  In our main  speciﬁcation, a one standard deviation increase in a bank’s exposure to an industry reduces the rate of audited statement  collection by approximately 2. 4 percentage points, or about 19% of the unconditional mean audited statement collection rate  in the sample.   In additional tests using portfolio sorts of bank size, borrower size, and concentration, we compare the magnitude of our  loan concentration ﬁnding to the more broadly studied characteristic of bank size.  Prior work (e. g. , Stein, 2002 .  Berger et al. ,  20 05.  Liberti and Mian, 20 09 ) argues larger banks are more reliant on hard information.  Consistent with this argument, we  ﬁnd larger banks are more likely to collect audited ﬁnancial statements from borrowers compared to smaller banks, even  after controlling for the average borrower size across banks.  Moreover, our estimates suggest the difference in borrower  audit rates across different concentration levels within bank is as large as the difference in borrower audit rates across  banks of different sizes.   An explanation consistent with our evidence is that concentration fosters lending expertise.  A bank with more exposure  to an industry has better information about it and, thus, less need to obtain high quality (and costly) ﬁnancial performance  information from borrowers in the industry.  By contrast, banks with less exposure to (and thus less information about) the  same borrowers face an adverse selection concern, and thus demand high quality information to substitute for their relative lack of expertise.  We conduct cross sectional tests to further examine whether exposure concentration builds expertise,  which in turn reduces demand for audited statements.  First, if concentration fosters bank expertise, our results should be  stronger in settings with more severe adverse selection and information asymmetry concerns.  We identify such settings using the extent of bank market competition within an industry-region and the performance dispersion of borrowers within  an industry.  Dell’ Ariccia (2001) suggests that adverse selection concerns are most acute in imperfectly competitive banking markets, because potential entrant banks are particularly uninformed.  In such situations, novice banks will demand  high quality information from borrowers to offset their information disadvantage.  Next, we argue performance dispersion  makes it more diﬃcult for banks with less exposure in those industries to interpret and utilize low quality information  gathered from individual ﬁrms, which increases their demand for high quality reports.  Thus, we expect to ﬁnd stronger results in industries with more performance dispersion.  We ﬁnd the negative relation between a bank’s exposure to a given  industry-region and its audited report collection from borrowers in that industry-region is stronger when either bank market  competition is lower or borrower performance dispersion is higher.   Second, if concentration allows a bank to acquire information about a given sector over time, the negative relation should  strengthen as the bank gains experience.  To examine this, we perform cross sectional tests based on variation in the length  of bank exposures.  We use only the banks that are in the dataset for all ten years and count the years each bank has  been lending to each industry-region as of the last year of data.  We ﬁnd a negative relation between experience and audit  collection and that this negative relation increases in the bank’s concentration in the given industry-region.  Moreover, the  negative relation between concentration and audit collection emerges only after the bank has been exposed to a sector for  about four and half years, suggesting the beneﬁcial information acquisition from concentration accumulates over time.   To further examine whether expertise through concentration is accumulated over time, and to ensure that the negative  relation between concentration and audited report collection is not the result of banks lowering standards to attract new  borrowers, we examine instances when banks ﬁrst enter an industry-region.  We ﬁnd that when banks ﬁrst lend to a sector,  the audit rate for new exposures is 6. 4% higher than for the bank’s other contemporaneous exposures.  We then show the  incremental audit collection rate declines as the bank gains experience in the industry-region.  This ﬁnding is consistent with  banks facing an adverse selection problem when entering new markets and mitigating it by collecting audited statements.   however, as banks better understand the new market the need for veriﬁed statements declines.   These results, however, do not address the concern that banks choose which new exposures they enter into.  One example  of how this concern could be a threat to our inferences is that banks could ﬁrst hire a sector expert and, only after having  acquired sector expertise via the new employee, subsequently increase exposure to the sector while decreasing the audit  collection rate.  This explanation differs from ours, as our hypothesis is that a bank’s increase in sector concentration leads  to the expertise increase.   Although we do not have random assignment of banks to new exposures, we address the concern that banks choose  exposures by using the housing boom of the 20 0 0s as a setting where bank entry into a sector is plausibly driven less by  endogenous bank strategy and more by demand-side factors.  The housing boom increased loan demand from construction  borrowers ( Lisowsky et al. , 2017 ) and we argue banks not exposed to construction borrowers in 2002 (“novice banks”)  gained exposure to construction ﬁrms by 2005, at least in part, because of the signiﬁcant demand shock.  We ﬁnd novice  banks indeed increase their relative exposure to construction lending substantially during the period.  We next compare the  information collection of novice banks to more established construction lenders in 2005 and ﬁnd that novices are more  likely to collect audited statements from construction ﬁrms.  These tests help corroborate our ﬁnding that banks entering a  new exposure are more likely to rely on audited ﬁnancial statements.   Is either an audit veriﬁcation strategy or an expertise strategy related to better performance.  We ﬁnd no indication either  future loan charge-offs or future bank return on assets is related to audited statement collection, exposure concentration, or  their interaction.  This offers suggestive evidence that specialized banks are trading off alternative information sources rather  3 Given we observe performance at only the bank rather than the exposure level, we  than recklessly forgoing audit requests.   caution that our ﬁndings do not necessarily indicate banks are pursuing an optimal monitoring strategy.   Our study makes two contributions.  First, it furthers our understanding of how organizational characteristics of a contracting party are related to the use of ﬁnancial information by that party (e. g. , Berger et al. , 2005.  Brickley et al. , 2009 ).   Our ﬁnding that bank concentration within an industry is negatively related to the use of higher quality ﬁnancial reports  is consistent with Paravisini’s et al.  (2015) result that banks concentrating in particular Peruvian export markets possess  expertise that shapes their lending decisions.  We advance this line of work by showing how a bank’s expertise relates to its  screening and monitoring activities, and examining different channels through which banks use and develop expertise.   Second, we contribute to an emerging literature linking ﬁnancial reporting to the characteristics of capital providers (e. g. ,  Our hypothesis is that banks have more substitute sources of knowledge about  Gormley et al. , 2012.  Lo, 2014.  Kalay, 2015 ).   borrowers from industries in which they have more expertise and this reduces their demand for costly audits for such  borrowers.  Our results are consistent with this hypothesis, implying that one source of bank demand for veriﬁed ﬁnancial  reports is a lack of substitute knowledge from sources such as relationships or industry experience.  Considering that the  typical U. S.  bank is much larger and less specialized following decades of consolidation, our ﬁndings are relevant to the  literature examining factors affecting the use of ﬁnancial reporting in capital allocation.   2.  Prior literature and motivation.  Seminal research by Diamond (1984) and Boyd and Prescott (1986) models banks as delegated monitors with an advantage in providing loans.  A key force driving the net beneﬁt of delegating private information collection about, and monitoring  of, borrowers to a bank is the diversiﬁcation of borrowers in the bank’s portfolio.  Diversiﬁcation reduces the risks associated  with idiosyncratic shocks and lowers the costs of monitoring the bank by depositors, thus increasing the bank’s likelihood  of meeting its obligations to depositors and allowing the bank to bear lending risks at a lower risk premium than individual  investors.  Moreover, such diversiﬁcation need not arise exclusively from the mix of loans the bank originates, but can be  bolstered when banks rebalance their loan portfolio exposures by buying and selling loans ( Cebenoyan and Strahan, 2004 ).   Traditional arguments based on these foundational papers suggest banks will avoid concentration risk.  These arguments,  however, presume banks are equally informed about all exposures in the economy.  Winton (1999) argues that a bank’s  monitoring effectiveness is lower in new sectors.  Dell’ Ariccia et al.  (1999) develop a model of bank competition in which  banks accumulate information about borrowers over time.  Incumbent banks become sector experts, creating information  asymmetry between themselves and potential entrants.  In both models, adverse selection makes it diﬃcult for banks to  perfectly diversify their lending portfolios.  More broadly, a within-ﬁrm agency cost framework suggests specialized lenders  are better able to collect information that is less veriﬁed and that such lenders also have more incentives to do so ( Rajan,  1992 .  Stein, 2002 .  Berger et al. , 2005 .  Liberti and Mian, 2009 ).   Empirical research has only recently begun investigating the tensions between concentration risk and bank expertise.   Acharya  et  al.   (2006)  use  105  Italian  banks  during  1993–1999  and  ﬁnd  that,  for  high-risk  (low-risk)  banks,  expansion  by lending to new industries is associated with riskier loans and lower returns (marginally higher returns).  Tabak et al.   (2011) also examine banks’ exposures by industry, ﬁnding increases in the scope of lending are associated with lower returns  and higher bank default risk in a sample of Brazilian banks.  Loutskina and Strahan (2011) investigate geographic concentration in U. S.  banks by studying mortgage lenders.  They ﬁnd that when such lenders specialize in a few markets they invest  more in information collection than their more geographically diversiﬁed peers.  As a result, concentrated mortgage lenders  tilt their lending more toward the information-intensive non-conforming (jumbo) mortgages and toward high-risk borrowers.  Liberti et al.  (2017) show that lenders expand their geographic and sector exposures after sharing information with one  another, and trace individual lenders’ expansion decisions to their collateral expertise.   In addition to considerable theory and some empirical evidence on the tensions between bank concentration and information collection, these issues are of  interest to policy makers and bank regulators.  Regulators offer guidance cognizant of the tradeoffs between specialization  and concentration risk.   .  .  .  due to a bank’s trade area, geographic location or lack of access to economically diverse borrowers or counterparties, avoiding or reducing concentrations may be extremely diﬃcult.  In addition, banks may want to capitalize  on their expertise in a particular industry or economic sector.  [B]anks should not necessarily forego booking sound  credits solely on the basis of concentration, [and] must be careful not to enter into transactions with borrowers or  counterparties they do not know or engage in credit activities they do not fully understand simply for the sake of  diversiﬁcation.  ( Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 20 0 0 , Item 67).   The unsettled state of the policy debate surrounding how concentration risk should be managed (see Barth et al. , 2004 .   Boyd and De Nicolo, 2005 .  Beck et al. , 2006 for a review) aligns with the conﬂicting regulatory guidance.  On one hand, regulators advise banks to diversify their exposures both geographically and by industry to avoid concentration risk.  Conversely,  regulatory documents detail various ways in which regulators expect banks to gather, store, and expertly assess information  about borrowers and loan applicants to reduce adverse selection and moral hazard ( OCC, 2011, 2014.  OIG, 2012 ).  These two  aspects of regulatory advice for banks are in conﬂict if adverse selection or monitoring costs tend to be higher when lending  to a new region or sector.  We thus contribute to the policy debate by measuring how banks trade off concentration with  collection of high quality borrower information.   New exposures can present adverse selection and moral hazard costs.  In part, these costs may arise due to banks having  less expertise about borrowers from industries or regions in which they have less experience.  If so, one way banks might  lower adverse selection costs when expanding their industrial or geographic reach is by increasing their demand for audited ﬁnancial reports, which are highly veriﬁed and contain more information than alternatives such as tax returns.  Thus,  especially for the generally non-public borrowers likely to constitute the overwhelming majority of loan applicants and borrowers, the bank’s degree of expertise in a given exposure may have important implications for the demand for external  audits.   Audits add direct costs (e. g. , fees) and indirect costs (e. g. , opportunity costs of time) relative to other report types, but  create three beneﬁts.  First, audited information is more contractible because a third party has veriﬁed it ( Watts and Zimmerman, 1983 ).  Second, audited statements have less reporting noise than ﬁnancial statements that are merely reviewed  or compiled by an external auditor, leading such statements to better reﬂect a ﬁrm’s performance and health—i. e. , audited  statements are more informative ( Minnis, 2011 ).  Third, relative to reports such as tax returns, audited statements contain  all three ﬁnancial statements and full footnote disclosure, and thus have more information.  Despite these beneﬁts, banks  are also able to use other mechanisms such as collateral, past relationship history (or soft information), and credit scoring  models in lieu of audited ﬁnancial statements ( Berger and Udell, 2006.  Cassar et al. , 2015.  Sutherland, 2017 ).  Collectively,  we hypothesize that audited ﬁnancial statements are more useful for a bank’s loan monitoring and screening when it is less  familiar with a borrower’s industry or region, but because audits are more costly, and substitute mechanisms are available,  expert banks will use alternative report types more frequently.   <Middle> Sample, data and variable construction.  Our data come from the RMA’s Annual Statement Studies.  Each year, RMA compiles the ﬁnancial statements gathered by  member banks from commercial borrowers and loan applicants, and publishes summary statistics in its Annual Statement  Studies.  The Studies detail the number of statements collected from ﬁrms according to ﬁve mutually exclusive categories.   unqualiﬁed audit, review, compilation, tax return, and other.  Financial reports collected are further partitioned according to  six-digit NAICS code, borrower size group (under $1 M of revenue, $1 M–$3 M, $3 M–$5 M, $5 M–$10 M, $10 M–$25 M, and  greater than $25 M) and region (Northeast, Southeast, Central, South Central, North Central, and West).   While the publicly available studies report aggregate ﬁgures across all banks, RMA has conﬁdentially provided us with the disaggregated data  linked to the contributing banks.  Appendix A provides additional details about the construction of the dataset.   These data allow us to observe the exposure and ﬁnancial statement collection practices of a broad set of U. S.  banks.   In its annual Survey of Credit Underwriting Practices, the OCC notes ﬁnancial reporting is a key element of underwriting,  deﬁning underwriting standards as “terms and conditions under which banks approve, extend, or renew credit such as  ﬁnancial reporting , collateral requirements, repayment terms, pricing, and covenants” ( OCC, 2014 , p.  2, emphasis added).   Consistent with the overall population of ﬁrms, the vast majority of RMA sample ﬁrms are privately held, meaning that  banks’ requests for GAAP ﬁnancial statements with unqualiﬁed audits are often costly, providing meaningful tension for our Three features of the RMA data raise selection and measurement issues.  First, while banks have to submit their ﬁrms’  ﬁnancial statements according to RMA’s protocol if they participate, bank participation is voluntary.  This is problematic if  participants are not representative of the banking market or if their choice to participate is related to their monitoring and  exposure strategies.  Fortunately, we observe which banks participate each year and can compare them to those banks not  participating.  In Table A1 in the online appendix, we tabulate a variety of descriptive analyses related to bank participation.   We do not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant differences in the amount of capital or ﬁnancial performance (as measured by return on  assets) between participants and non-participants, but do identify two differences.  Not surprisingly, participating banks have  more of their loan portfolios invested in commercial loans (relative to consumer or mortgage loans, for example) and the  RMA dataset banks are larger than banks not in the dataset.   While ideally one would want randomly selected banks in the dataset to ensure generalizability, neither the commercial  lending nor the size difference seems particularly problematic for our study.  Banks with more commercial lending activity  are the banks we are more interested in, so participation based on commercial lending activity seems innocuous.  Consistent  with the skewness in the population of bank assets, more than 40% of the total commercial and industrial loan balances  during our sample period are held by the ten largest C&I lenders (FDIC call reports).  In each year of our sample, at least eight  of these top ten commercial lenders participate in the RMA dataset, except for two years in which seven (six) participate.   Thus, because the U. S.  banking market is highly concentrated and large banks are overrepresented in our sample, our dataset  includes a large portion of the commercial lending activity in the U. S.  At the same time, the dataset includes a broad cross  section of banks according to size, location, business model, and performance.  Nevertheless, because participation is not  random we interpret our results with caution as they may not be generalizable.   Second, the ﬁnancial statements collected by banks can be part of either the application or ongoing monitoring process,  meaning some of the statements we use to measure exposures are from ﬁrms that were rejected or received loans elsewhere.  Unfortunately, the RMA data do not detail whether the statements were provided by actual borrowers of the bank  nor the dollar value of any loans made.  That said, we are comforted by the strong correlation (0. 74) between the cumulative borrower sales for the bank (which we use to calculate our exposure measure) and the size of the C&I loan portfolio  reported by the bank to the FDIC.  Moreover, banks develop industry expertise through both loans and information collection  during screening, meaning statements collected during the application stage are informative about the bank’s specialization.   Ultimately, any noise that this data feature introduces will make it harder for us to ﬁnd relations consistent with our predictions.  A third and related issue is that we do not observe loan terms, which prevents us from exploring any link between  exposure concentration and loan terms or loan-level outcomes (e. g. , De Franco et al. , 2016 ).  Related, we cannot identify  syndicated loans in our sample or separate statements collected by lead arrangers from those collected by other syndicate  participants.   Table 1 provides a variety of statistics about the reports compiled by RMA and the banks that collect them.  Panel A  reports that RMA compiled almost 1. 8 million ﬁnancial reports collected by ﬁnancial institutions between 2002 and 2011.   We eliminate 72,220 statements from twelve bank-years that have over 100 statements from ﬁrms with at least $25 million  10 The total number of statements compiled by  of revenue but zero unqualiﬁed audits, given these likely reﬂect data errors.   RMA generally increases over the sample period.  While the portion of statements that are unqualiﬁed audits averages 21. 3%,  11 In 2002, the 30,157 unqualiﬁed statements collected represent 23. 4% of statements  it is declining over our sample period.   collected, whereas in 2011 the 40,130 unqualiﬁed statements constitute 19. 5% of statements obtained.  The South Central  and North Central regions provide fewer statements than the remaining four regions.  Finally, ﬁrms with sales in the $3-$5  million range provide fewer statements than other size groups, whereas those with sales in excess of $25 million contribute  the most statements.   Table 1 , Panel B summarizes bank-level reporting for the 728 ﬁnancial institutions that provide at least one year of data  during 2002–2011.  The median bank contributes data to RMA for three years, in part because consolidation in the banking  industry has eliminated banks during this period and in part because some banks do not provide data to the RMA for all  possible consecutive years.  The majority of statements come from large banks that participate regularly in the RMA Annual  Statement Studies.  56. 4% (89. 1%) of sample statements come from banks that contribute every year (at least ﬁve years).   Tables A3 and A4 in the online appendix tabulate additional details regarding bank participation conditional on the number  of years in the dataset.   Table 2 , Panel A provides statistics for our main variables at the bank-year level.  Our main dependent variable of interest  is the proportion of ﬁnancial reports that a bank collects that are unqualiﬁed audits.  We refer to this variable as % Unqualiﬁed .  We focus on audited statements because they provide substantially more veriﬁcation and information than the other  report types.  Though other RMA statement categories include reports with some level of veriﬁcation, audits require positive assurance (in contrast to reviews which have negative assurance or tax returns with statistical or implicit monitoring).   Audited statements also provide the most information (e. g. , in contrast to tax returns, audited ﬁnancial statements have a  Statement of Cash Flows and complete footnotes).  This additional veriﬁcation and information is reﬂected in the signiﬁcantly  higher cost of audits relative to the other report types, providing revealed preference evidence of the incremental beneﬁt  of audited statements.  However, our results are similar if we also consider reviewed statements as high quality ﬁnancial  information.  An average of 12. 8% of the ﬁnancial statements collected have unqualiﬁed audits.  This ﬁgure is well below the  Table 1 , Panel A statistic which reports that 21. 3% of all statements in the database have unqualiﬁed audits.  The difference  occurs because bigger banks—which have bigger borrowers and higher audit rates—supply relatively more of the RMA data  but the bank-year statistics in Table 2 are equally weighted.   Table 2 also reports that there is skewness in the data, consistent with the skewness in the population of banks.  The  Cumulative borrower sales for the avmean (median) bank-year has 527 (72) ﬁnancial statements collected each year.   erage bank is $161 billion and the average borrower ﬁrm size for the average bank-year is $279 million.  however, both  distributions are highly right-skewed, as the median bank’s borrowers’ cumulative sales volume is just over $2 billion and  the average borrower size for the median bank is $21 million in sales.   Our main analyses examine how the collection of ﬁnancial statements with unqualiﬁed audits varies with the concentration of the bank’s C&I loan exposures.  The remaining Table 2 , Panel A statistics summarize our measures of concentration.   We ﬁrst measure the overall level of a bank’s C&I exposure concentration.  The # Unique Industry (Region) Exposures measures,  at the bank-year level, the number of unique OCC industries (regions) from which the bank collected ﬁnancial statements.   The average bank-year has data from 36 industries and slightly more than 2 (out of a possible of 6) U. S.  regions.  Combining  these two dimensions into the variable # Unique Industry-Region Exposures indicates that banks operate in approximately 52  industry-regions, on average.  We use a standard measure of concentration, the Hirschman–Herﬁndahl index ( HHI ), to measure the overall extent of exposure concentration within a bank-year.  HHI is equal to the sum of the squares of the relative  exposures, where each relative exposure is the exposure as a fraction of the bank’s total exposure.  Deﬂating by bank rather  than total industry exposure allows us to disentangle the effects of bank size and concentration, and account for the fact  We calculate HHI using the industry-region  that banks of all sizes accumulate more expertise in their larger exposures.   level of data and measure exposure to an industry i in region r for bank b in year t by summing the sales of all ﬁrms  providing ﬁnancial statements to bank b .   The closer HHI is to one, the more the bank’s commercial exposures are concentrated within fewer industry-regions.   Panel B of Table 2 shows the time trend of both the # of Unique Industry-Region Exposures and HHI from 2002 to 2011.   Overall, bank C&I exposure concentrations are decreasing, but the time trend differs considerably across bank sizes.  The  largest banks, which begin with very diverse portfolios, are becoming more concentrated over time.  By contrast, the smaller  banks (which begin with more concentrated C&I exposures) are becoming more diverse.   We next measure banks’ exposures to each particular industry-region within a year.  We sum the commercial loan exposure bank b has to all ﬁrms f in industry i in U. S.  region r in year t and then divide this numerator by bank b ’s total  commercial loan exposure across all industries and regions in year t .  This variable, which we refer to as Share_bank , measures bank b ’s exposure to industry i in region r relative to all other commercial exposures in its own portfolio in year t .   To ensure robustness of our results, we calculate a bank’s exposure to an industry-region two alternative ways.  First, we  use the same numerator as Share_bank , but instead divide it by the total commercial loan exposure in the same industry,  region, and year for all banks in the sample.  This approach measures bank b ’s exposure to industry i relative to all other  banks in region r .   Second, in the variable Share_bank , we calculate both the numerator and denominator using the sales of ﬁrms in each  industry-region.  however, our results are robust to using the number of ﬁnancial statements collected instead.  We refer to  16 Table 2 reports that the average bank has 6. 1% of its C&I portfolio  this alternative variable as Share_statements in Table 2 .   exposed to a given industry-region.  Similar to the bank-level exposure concentration measures reported in Table 1 , the  exposure concentration statistics in Table 2 indicate that these industry-region-based measures also have right-tail skewness.   Collectively, these descriptive statistics highlight two important facts.  First, there are extensive differences in ﬁnancial  statement collection practices across banks.  Second, banks have signiﬁcant heterogeneity in concentration levels across industry exposures.  We now examine how these characteristics co-vary in our main tests.   4.  Tests and results.  4. 1.  Concentration and audited statement collection across banks.  We begin by examining the association between audited statement collection ( % Unqualiﬁed ) and portfolio concentration  across banks.  Table 3 presents our bank-level results using regressions of the following form.   where the unit of observation is a bank-year.  Each column includes a control for the bank’s average borrower size that is  calculated as the natural logarithm of the total sales for all of the bank’s exposures divided by the number of statements  γ t ) so that any secular trends will not affect  collected for these exposures.  Each regression also includes year ﬁxed effects (  our inferences (e. g. , Lisowsky et al. , 2017 ).  To address concerns about serial correlation in our loan concentration measures,  standard errors are clustered by bank.   In column (1) of Table 3 , the coeﬃcient on HHI is signiﬁcantly negative, indicating that banks with more concentrated  exposures collect audited ﬁnancial statements less frequently.  In column (2) we regress % Unqualiﬁed on Log Bank Size (equal  to the log of total borrowers sales that year) and ﬁnd a signiﬁcantly positive coeﬃcient estimate.  This result is consistent  with the prediction of Stein (2002) and ﬁndings of Berger et al.  (2005) in which bigger banks are more likely to collect  hard information (in this case, audited ﬁnancial statements) even after controlling for the average borrower size.  In column  (3) we include both HHI and Log Bank Size and ﬁnd that, while the magnitudes of both variables attenuate, both remain  signiﬁcant.  Our results also remain after measuring bank size using bank size tercile indicators (column 4), and interacting  these indicators with year ﬁxed effects (column 5)  In summary, Table 3 provides evidence that loan exposure concentration has a strong negative association with audited  statement collection even after controlling for the positive association that bank size has with audited statement collection.   4. 2.  Specialization and audited statement collection within-bank.  Our ﬁndings in Table 3 that concentrated lenders collect a lower portion of audited ﬁnancial statements is consistent  with more specialization facilitating more substitute information acquisition by the lender.  These results could, however, be  driven by unobservable bank characteristics, such as bank-wide policies about what information loan oﬃcers must collect,  or differences in audit rates across industries that are spuriously correlated with bank-level exposures.  Therefore, we now  examine the relation between exposure concentration and ﬁnancial statement collection both across and within bank.   In Table 4 , we ﬁrst partition each bank’s portfolio within bank-year into terciles based on the bank’s exposure to a  given industry-region.  That is, each bank’s portfolio is allocated evenly across the concentration terciles (i. e. , one-third of  the industry-regions of a given bank are in each tercile based on the variable Share_statements within a bank-year).   This is the “within bank” portion of the analysis.  We then partition the banks based on size, according to the total borrower sales  for each bank-year as reported by RMA.  This is the “across bank” portion of the test.  One-third of the banks are in each  bank-size tercile.  We tabulate the results of the two way sort (concentration tercile by bank size tercile) by borrower size  group.  This partition allows us to compare the rate of unqualiﬁed audit collection within borrower size group and bank-year,  across industries in which the bank has a small, medium, or large portfolio share.  We calculate the percentage of ﬁnancial  statements that are unqualiﬁed audits in each portfolio.   The main messages from Table 4 are.  (1) concentration is negatively related to audited ﬁnancial statement collection, and,  (2) the importance of concentration is of similar magnitude as bank size.  This point can be seen by examining the bottom  two sets of ﬁgures in Table 4 .  The section captioned “Bank size tercile differences” shows, within each of the six borrower  size groupings, the difference in the percentage of collected statements with unqualiﬁed audits across the top versus bottom  tercile of bank size.  Consistent with theory (e. g. , Stein, 2002 ), audited statement collection is higher for larger banks for all  six borrower size groupings.   The bottom section captioned “Concentration tercile differences within bank size tercile” summarizes how audited statement collection differs across exposure concentration terciles within  a given bank size tercile and for a given borrower  size, and reports the statistical signiﬁcance for these differences.  The difference is signiﬁcantly negative in 15 cells (and insigniﬁcantly negative in the remaining three cells) in this bottom section, demonstrating that across all bank and borrower  sizes the collection of audited ﬁnancial statements is lower when the bank’s exposure to the borrower’s industry-region is  Note that the absolute values of the ﬁgures in these bottom 18 cells match quite closely the magnitudes of the  higher.   “Bank size tercile differences” immediately above.  For example, for borrowers with less than $1 million of sales, the “bank  size tercile difference” is 1. 3% and the absolute values of the concentration tercile differences are 1. 0%, 1. 4%, and 1. 7% for the  three bank size terciles.  Thus, the negative relation between exposure concentration and audited statement collection is of  similar magnitude to the positive relation between bank size and audited statement collection.   We now turn to Table 5 .  Our identifying variation in these tests is the exposure to different industry-regions within a  given bank-year, thus the unit of observation is bank-industry-region-year.  Each Table 5 regression includes a control for  The speciﬁcation in Panel A, column (1) uses  the average borrower size and clusters standard errors at the bank level.   Share_bank as the concentration variable of interest and the regression includes separate indicators for each bank, region,  industry, and year.   Our goal in using these ﬁxed effects is to isolate the relation between concentration and audited statement collection  separately from other factors, such as bank-wide policies, differences in collateral across industries, or industry trends and  regional shocks that affect demand for credit.  Columns (3) and (4) have the same ﬁxed effects speciﬁcation as Eq.  (6) but  replace Share_bank with Share_market and Share_statements as the independent variables of interest.  Column 5 examines  Share_bank but uses bank-industry-region and year ﬁxed effects.   The inference across all speciﬁcations is the same, namely that greater exposure within a bank to a given industry-region  is associated with a signiﬁcantly lower percentage of audited statements.  The coeﬃcient estimate on Share_bank is reduced  modestly in column 5 relative to columns 1 and 2, which is unsurprising given the inclusion of bank-industry-region ﬁxed  effects in this ﬁnal speciﬁcation.  Moreover, the estimates from Table 5 , Panel A are economically signiﬁcant.  For example,  the coeﬃcient estimate of  to the industry-region (9. 0%, see Table 2 , Panel A) reduces the rate of audited statement collection in that industry by 2. 4  percentage points.  This represents a meaningful one-ﬁfth reduction relative to the unconditional mean audit rate of 12. 8%.   −0. 271 in column (2) indicates that a one standard deviation increase in a bank-years’ exposure  Next, we perform two speciﬁcation checks to validate our Panel A ﬁndings.  First, we measure how audited statement  collection for a given industry is associated with the bank’s exposure to related industries .  To do so, we construct an exposure variable Share_related that is based on our Share_bank measure, but differs in two respects.  Speciﬁcally, we aggregate  borrower sales at the OCC Group level rather than the OCC Industry level, and exclude borrowers in that particular industry.  To illustrate, we calculate Share_related for the Fuel Distributors industry using the bank’s exposures to Oil, Gas, &  Coal Extraction and Petroleum & Coal Products Manufacturing—the non-Fuel Distributor industry members of the Oil, Gas,  and Coal group as deﬁned by the OCC.  Our tests retain the ﬁrm size controls and ﬁxed effects used in Panel A, column 2.   Panel B, column 1 shows a signiﬁcantly negative coeﬃcient for Share_related that is smaller in magnitude than the Panel  A, column 2 coeﬃcient for Share_bank .  This indicates that bank expertise can transfer across related industries, although a  bank’s industry expertise is more important than their related exposure expertise in explaining the reliance on non-audited  statements.   Second, we consider how Share_bank is related to the collection of other statement types.  If expertise reduces a bank’s  demand for high quality information, and audited statements are the highest quality report, then we should ﬁnd Share_bank  to have the most negative relation with audited statements.  Columns 2–4 model the proportion of ﬁnancial reports that  a bank collects that are reviews, compilations, and tax returns, respectively.  We ﬁnd a signiﬁcantly positive coeﬃcient for  Share_bank in all three tests.  Moreover, the coeﬃcient is decreasing in the degree of ex-ante veriﬁcation provided—the larger  the bank’s exposure, the greater their collection of the least veriﬁed statements (tax returns).  Together, our Panel A and B  ﬁndings reinforce that bank expertise reduces the demand for audited ﬁnancial statements.   Our  theoretical  framework  suggests  two  cross  sectional  tests  to  reinforce  our  main  inference.   First,  Dell’  Ariccia et al.  (1999) suggest that imperfect competition in banking markets arises in part from adverse selection problems.   Their argument is that when more of a lending market is served by relatively few banks, those with little exposure (or  potential entrant banks) face an adverse selection concern when assessing borrowers.  Therefore, in less competitive banking  markets the high exposure banks (which know more about the borrowers) will have less demand for veriﬁed information  from borrowers, whereas low exposure banks will have greater demand for veriﬁed information to combat the adverse se22 We ﬁnd  lection problem.  In Table 6 , panel A, we split each industry-region based on its degree of banking competition.   the greatest sensitivity of veriﬁcation standards to concentration in those markets with the lowest level of banking competition.  Moreover, as we increase the threshold deﬁning “low competition,” the difference in the coeﬃcient estimates of  interest across the partitions becomes larger, although the differences are only signiﬁcant at conventional levels for the most  extreme partitions.   Second, if expertise is particularly important in industries where borrower performance is dispersed because information  about any given ﬁrm is less useful for evaluating the creditworthiness of other ﬁrms in the same sector, then our results  will be stronger where the performance dispersion of ﬁrms is higher.  When ﬁrms within an industry perform signiﬁcantly  differently than one another, the ﬁnancial performance of one ﬁrm is not particularly informative about the creditworthiness  In Table 6 , Panel B we partition  of another and, as a result, industry expertise is more crucial to screening and monitoring.   Table 5 , Panel A results after characterizing industry-years as having low or high ﬁrm performance dispersion, where ﬁrm  In column 1 of the table,  performance dispersion is based on the interquartile range (IQR) of return on assets (ROA).   we split the data based on the median industry-year ROA IQR and ﬁnd that the relation between a bank’s concentration  and audited ﬁnancial statement collection is higher in the high dispersion industries.  In columns 2 and 3 we partition the  sample on increasingly higher thresholds of ROA IQR.  We again ﬁnd that the disparity in our coeﬃcient estimates of interest  becomes progressively larger, though the differences are not always statistically signiﬁcant.  These results suggest that the  concentration-veriﬁcation tradeoff is more acute in industries in which borrower performance may be diﬃcult to discern for  a bank with little exposure (i. e. , expertise).  In sum, these cross sectional tests reveal that when information asymmetry or  adverse selection concerns are severe, the concentration-veriﬁcation tradeoff is more apparent, consistent with the inference  that concentration reveals a bank’s expertise.   4. 3.  Specialization and syndicated lending.  In this section, we investigate whether bank expertise is relevant to lending decisions in the syndicated loan setting.  Our  goal is not to further explore how a bank’s demand for audited ﬁnancial statements is related to its concentration, but is  instead to provide preliminary evidence on how bank concentration is related to lending behavior beyond that captured in  our RMA data.  The syndicated loan setting offers two key advantages for the purpose of further studying the link between  expertise and lending decisions.  First, the lead arrangers of syndicated loans perform a delegated monitoring role in collecting and using information about borrowers ( Suﬁ, 2007.  Wittenberg-Moerman, 2008.  Ball et al. , 2008 ).  Similar to the banks  in our main setting, lead arrangers develop expertise through repeated interactions with a similar group of ﬁrms, and this  expertise can shape their contracting decisions.  Second, because ﬁrm-level data on syndicated loans are available, we are  able to explore contracting decisions that are relevant to furthering our understanding of the role of expertise, but that are  not observable in the RMA data.   To investigate how banks use their expertise in the syndicated loan setting, we collect data from DealScan on syndiWe construct our sample using the intersection of the RMA and DealScan  cated loans originated between 2002 and 2011.   datasets.  We identify 17,745 loans made by lead arrangers participating in RMA in the year of loan origination.  We access  data on ﬁrm size and ownership type (age and R&D spending.  rating coverage) from DealScan (Compustat.  Capital IQ).   We then explore two ways in which banks might use their expertise in the syndicated loan setting.  First, we examine  whether opaque ﬁrms are more likely to borrow from a lead arranger with a concentration in their industry.  Our proxies for  opacity include the ﬁrm’s sales, age, R&D spending, ownership type, and whether the ﬁrm is rated.  Our prediction is that  banks with greater concentration in an industry possess the expertise necessary to monitor more opaque borrowers, and  have suﬃcient reputation to attract other lenders to participate in the loan.   Table 7 , Panel A regresses our opacity proxies on Share_statements , measured at the bank-industry-year level, and bank,  We ﬁnd a negative but insigniﬁcant relation between log sales for the ﬁrm and the bank’s  industry, and year ﬁxed effects.   exposure to the ﬁrm’s industry.  We also do not ﬁnd an association between ﬁrm age and bank expertise.  On the other hand,  we ﬁnd industry expert banks are more likely to lend to ﬁrms with R&D spending and to privately held ﬁrms.  Last, we ﬁnd  the bank’s industry expertise is negatively related to the probability of arranging a loan to an unrated ﬁrm.   Our second set of tests in the syndicated loan setting studies whether banks more frequently lead deals in areas of their  concentration.  Our analysis models the share of the bank’s syndicated loans as a lead arranger that were allocated to a given  industry as a function of Share_statements , both measured over 2002–2011.  The unit of observation is bank-industry.  Our  initial sample contains 998 observations involving 53 unique banks with RMA data acting as lead arrangers between 2002  28  Panel B shows a signiﬁcantly positive correlation between syndicated loan allocations and Share_statements .   and 2011.   Economically, a one standard deviation increase in Share_statements is associated with a 1. 4% increase in syndicated loan  exposure to that industry, representing almost half of the mean syndicated loan exposure.  Column 2 restricts the sample to  the 43 banks leading at least ten syndicated loans across all industries between 2002 and 2011, and ﬁnds slightly weaker  and marginally insigniﬁcant results.   In sum, we ﬁnd mixed support for banks using their industry expertise, as measured in our RMA setting, in making their  syndicated loan decisions.  On one hand, we ﬁnd signiﬁcant overlap between a bank’s small commercial loan activity in an  industry and its arrangement of syndicated loans to ﬁrms in that industry.  We also ﬁnd private ﬁrms and those with R&D  expenditures are more likely to borrow from a lead arranger with more exposure to their industry.  On the other hand, we  ﬁnd exposure is not related to syndicated borrower size or age, and is negatively related to syndicated lending to unrated  ﬁrms.  Our exploration of the role of bank expertise in the syndicated loan market suggests several opportunities for future  research.  First, our tests center only on whether banks act as lead arrangers to certain types of ﬁrms.  Because of data  limitations, we do not consider how industry expertise inﬂuences the structure of the syndicate, the share held by the lead  bank, or the extent of securitization.  Second, because most syndicated lending is conducted by a limited number of banks,  the sample size is small for our tests in this setting.  As coverage in these datasets improves, or as other expertise measures  are developed (e. g. , De Franco et al. , 2016 ), additional dimensions and consequences of bank expertise can be investigated.   4. 4.  Audited statement collection and bank experience.  In the previous section, we examined variation in the rate of unqualiﬁed audit collection for a given industry as a function  of  the  bank’s  exposure  to  that  industry.   We  argue  these  ﬁndings  support  the  view  that  concentration  reﬂects  a  bank’s  opportunity to accumulate expertise, which reduces the beneﬁt of audited ﬁnancial statements.  If this argument has merit,  we should ﬁnd the relation between exposure size and audit rates varies as banks accumulate experience in the exposure.   In this section we consider how a bank’s lending experience to a sector over time is related to expertise as reﬂected in the  audit requirements the bank imposes.  We are unaware of prior evidence about how experience combines with the number  of ﬁrms falling within a shared grouping to shape a lender’s expertise about ﬁrms within the grouping.  A contemporaneous  paper that touches on a similar issue is Shroff et al.  (2017) , which ﬁnds that the number of peers a private ﬁrm has affects  its initial interest rate for newly issued public debt.   We begin by measuring a bank’s experience by counting the number of years it has contributed data to RMA from each  industry-region.  To mitigate noise in the measure, we use only banks that contribute data across all 10 years and examine  A bank’s average industry-region exposure has been in its portfolio for seven years.  In  only the ﬁnal year of the sample.   column 1 of Table 8 , we replicate our main result from Table 5 , Panel A, column 2 but with our more restrictive sample from  2011 and continue to ﬁnd a negative coeﬃcient estimate on Share_bank .  In column 2 we then include the time series variable, Years Experience , and ﬁnd that the coeﬃcient estimate on Share_bank slightly attenuates from column 1 and a negative  coeﬃcient on Years Experience , suggesting that as banks spend more time in a given industry-region, audited report demand  decreases.  To provide some context on the economic magnitudes, the coeﬃcient estimate on Bank_share from this table sug× 9%) in the  gests that a one standard deviation change in Bank_share is associated with a 1. 8 percentage point change (  audit rate.  This compares to about 2. 6 additional years of experience in the sector (divide 0. 018 by the coeﬃcient estimate  on Years Experience of 0. 007).  In column 3, we then interact Share_bank with Years Experience and ﬁnd that the coeﬃcient  estimate on Share_bank is no longer signiﬁcant (and in fact becomes weakly positive), but that the interaction term is signiﬁcantly negative.  Dividing the Share_bank main coeﬃcient estimate by the interaction coeﬃcient estimate indicates that  after 4. 5 years the relation between concentration and unqualiﬁed audits becomes negative, suggesting that only over time  does concentration lead to expertise.  Moreover, these results suggest that each year of experience provides more expertise  when banks have more concentration in the industry-region.  To further investigate how quickly banks accumulate expertise within an exposure concentration, we examine banks’  behavior in, and after, the year of entering new industry-regions.  To implement this analysis, we create an indicator variable  New Exposure This Year for industries the bank was not exposed to in the previous year and which are one of the top ten  exposures for the bank-region in the current year.  We restrict our attention to new exposures above this threshold to ensure  we are measuring cases where the bank is making a meaningful effort to enter the industry.  We omit observations that  are in the ﬁrst year that a bank appears in the RMA dataset because we have no way of knowing what exposures are new  versus preexisting.  Using this approach, the indicator for New Exposure This Year equals one for 4. 9% of our observations.  Our  Table 9 speciﬁcations control for ﬁrm size, cluster standard errors at the bank level, and include bank-year and industryregion-year ﬁxed effects.  The results indicate that when a bank takes on a meaningful exposure for the ﬁrst time, collection  of unqualiﬁed ﬁnancial statements from ﬁrms in that new exposure is signiﬁcantly higher than otherwise.  Controlling for  bank-year and industry-region-year effects, the average audit rate for new exposures is 6. 4% higher than the same bank’s  other contemporaneous exposures.   Next, in columns 2–4, we examine how the audit rates for new exposures evolve over time.  We ﬁnd that after two  −0. 1% and not  years, the incremental audit rate for new exposures is only 5. 0%, and after four (eight) years is only 4. 4% (  signiﬁcant).  These results are thus consistent with Table 8 which indicates a signiﬁcantly negative relation between lending  experience and audited ﬁnancial statement collection.  As important, these results do not provide support for the hypothesis that banks lower audit standards to increase exposure, which would produce a spurious negative correlation between  exposure and audit collection.   5.  Addressing concerns that banks choose exposures – the construction boom.  The tests to this point control for bank-year and industry-region-year ﬁxed effects, so our ﬁndings cannot be a simple  artifact of bank policy, bank condition, differences in audit rates across sectors, or industry trends.  However, the tests do  not address concerns that banks choose which exposures to specialize in and that borrowers may know whether a bank  specializes in their industry.  This could be a concern, for example, if banks hire a sector expert and, as a result, concentration  Although we do not have random assignment of banks to new exposures,  increases and audit rates subsequently decline.   we address the concern that banks choose exposures by using the housing market boom of the early 20 0 0s as a setting  where exposure changes are plausibly due to a demand shock rather than supply-side shifts by banks. 