
Oil consumption has risen over the last 50 years, as nations have become reliant on oil for daily activities such as home heating, industrial
processes and transportation (IEA, 2015).  There have historically been
few substitutes for oil, so oil prices and shocks to oil prices have had a
major impact on global economic activity (Brown and Yucel, 2002; He
Name, 2010).  High oil prices in the 1970s had adverse economic impacts
in the industrialized world, and contributed to low growth, high unemployment and high inﬂation (Blanchard and Gali, 2007).  This caused oil
importing nations to re-examine energy security, and resulted in movements towards energy efﬁciency and the development of alternative energy sources (Natural Resources Canada, 2012; Department of Energy and
Climate Change, 2012).  On the other hand, when oil prices drop, oil producing and exporting countries face a reduction in revenue streams
(U. S.  Energy Information Administration, 2016a, 2016b), which can
potentially lead to economic downturns. 
While oil prices were high for much of the early 2000s, prices declined
sharply in the summer of 2014 to levels that were less than half of their
2012 values (US EIA, 2016b).  The West Texas Intermediate (WTI) spot
price for crude oil was $105 per barrel as of July 2014 and by January
2015 it had dropped to 44 $/barrel.  Canada is a major player in the global
market for oil and gas; proven reserves in Canada are third in the world
after Venezuela and Saudia Arabia, while production and exports are
ﬁfth and fourth, respectively.  Further, the oil and gas sector accounted
for 7. 5% of Canadian GDP in 2013 (Natural Resources Canada, 2015). 
Given this dependence on the oil and gas sector, it is clear that shocks to
oil prices may have hard-hitting and potentially long-lasting effects on
the national economy.  With a lower value of Canadian production and exports, Canada suffers a loss of international purchasing power (Royal Bank
of Canada, 2014). 
In Canada, the oil and gas sector is especially predominant within the
provinces of Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Newfoundland and Labrador
(NL).  In NL, the Oil Extraction and Supporting Activities sector, comprised
primarily of the offshore oil ﬁelds Hibernia, Terra Nova, and White Rose, is
by far the largest individual contributor to GDP, responsible for approximately 30% of provincial GDP.  Provinces such as NL, which saw great beneﬁts from the rise of oil prices prior to the shock in the 2000s, have been
the hardest hit when prices drastically fell.  The shock to oil prices has resulted in increased unemployment, reduced production and GDP: “Production in oil and gas related industries declined by 8% between the
fourth quarters of 2014 and second quarter of 2015, while business
investment linked to these industries fell sharply” (Bank of Canada, 2015). 
In NL, preliminary estimates show that there has been a 2% drop in real
GDP since 2014, an expected decline in production by about 16% as of
2015 and an increase in unemployment by about 0. 6% in 2015
(Government of Newfoundland and Labrador, 2015a, 2015b).  Further,
the oil price drop has reduced government revenue (royalties); the NL
government receives a signiﬁcant portion of its provincial revenue
(33%) from the various royalty regimes associated with the offshore oil
extraction projects (Royal Bank of Canada, 2015). 
Understanding the impact of a major change in oil prices on factors
such as those described above can prove crucial for developing the
optimal policy responses in reaction to shifting prices.  Our goal is to
estimate the short run (5 year) and long run (30 year) economic costs
and impacts to NL from a drop in oil prices in the magnitude observed
in 2014.  To analyse this shock, we develop a dynamic Computable
General Equilibrium (CGE) Model that has been calibrated to the NL economy.  The model tracks important economic variables like production,
GDP, labour, investment, consumption and trade across 21 sectors up
until the year 2040.  CGE models can capture both direct impacts to the
oil and gas sector, as well as indirect and induced impacts in other sectors. 
Given the impact of oil price ﬂuctuations, many studies have examined the economic impact of oil price shocks since the 1970s (Pindyck
and Rotemberg, 1983; Kilian, 2008; Hooker, 1996; Jiménez-Rodríguez
and Sánchez, 2005; Blanchard and Gali, 2007; Bernanke Name, 1997;
Hamilton, 2009; Doroodian and Boyd, 2003).  As summarized in Aydin
and Acar (2011), the general consensus is that oil price shocks will
have an inverse relationship with economic activity, and higher prices
will lower GDP in oil importing regions.  However, as noted above,
lower prices may adversely impact oil exporting nations. 
CGE models have gained momentum in the past few decades in
analysing energy phenomenon (Beckman Name, 2011).  Researchers
can focus on variables of interest and follow how the rest of the economy (multiple economic sectors) adjusts in response to speciﬁc shocks.  A
popular adjustment in energy related models targets speciﬁc commodity prices.  For instance, Solaymani Name (2015) adapt the CGE model
from Solaymani and Kari (2013) to analyse the economic and environmental consequences of energy subsidy adjustments on the Malaysian
transport sector.  They investigate impacts from 3 scenarios: high oil
prices, energy subsidy reforms, and a combination of both.  Their ﬁndings show that higher oil prices raise real GDP and household income,
stimulate investment, and increase Malaysian terms of trade in the
long run. 
Aydin and Acar (2011) examined the general equilibrium impacts of
a change in oil prices, focusing on GDP, the CPI, tax revenues, trade
ﬂows, and carbon emissions in Turkey.  The model they used was called
TurGEM-D, which is a multi-sectorial dynamic model suited for the
Turkish economy, a small open net oil importing country.  Their oil
price scenarios include low, reference, and high oil prices.  Their results
show that high oil prices led to reductions in output and consumption,
however they also found that the higher prices reduced carbon
emissions.  Canada, a net exporter of oil, would likely gain from higher
oil prices, as the value of production rises with prices. 
Maisonnave Name (2012) used the GEM-E3 model to determine
whether climate policy would lessen the impact of higher energy prices
in the EU.  They found that a rise in oil prices would cost the EU 2. 2% of
GDP in the absence of climate change policy, and 1. 5% in the presence
of climate change policy. 
In the current application, we use a multi-sector dynamic CGE model
for the province of NL.  We examine the impact of a decrease in oil prices,
similar to many studies in the past that examined the impact of higher
prices.  In the current application, we model oil price reductions as a
reduction in royalties (the land royalty payments in the oil and gas
sector).  We follow this route since land inputs are exogenous in the
model, and shocking royalties will allow us to capture the reduction in
the productive capacity (and the value of production) of the oil and
gas sector due to lower prices.  Further, since royalties are exogenous,
we can capture growth in prices over time via growth in royalties; we
include a variety of scenarios for price growth, allowing us to capture
intertemporal impacts. 
<Middle> Methods. 
2. 1.  CGE model speciﬁcation. 
We use a provincial, recursive dynamic CGE model for the economy
of Newfoundland and Labrador (NL).  The model is based on neoclassical
economic theory.  The speciﬁcation for our model follows that of
Ochuodho and Lantz (2014) and Corbett Name (2015).  However, our
calibration differs as we use 2009 baseline economic data for NL
and focus on shocks to the oil and gas sector.  For more details on the
model, including equations, refer to Ochuodho and Lantz (2014). 
NL is assumed to be a small open economy that operates under perfect competition.  Producers are assumed to maximize proﬁts (deﬁned
as the difference between revenue earned and the cost of factors and intermediate inputs) subject to constant returns to scale on production
technology.  There are three primary factors of production in the
model: labour, capital, and land in the oil and gas sector (i. e.  royalties). 
The production function for ﬁrms is speciﬁed in a two-level nest.  At the
top level, a composite of value-added and a composite of intermediate
inputs are smoothly substitutable in a constant elasticity of substitution
function (CES).  At the bottom level, the three primary factors of production are assumed to substitute smoothly through a CES composite
value-added function under single primary factor nest (Rutherford
and Paltsev, 2000; Winchester Name, 2006).  Intermediate inputs, on
the other hand, are determined by ﬁxed-shares through a Leontief
function. 
There is a representative household who aims to maximize utility
through consumption.  The household receives income by supplying factors of production and from import tariff revenues transferred to them
by their domestic governments (Prasada Name, 2010).  Supplies of factors
of production are typically assumed to be ﬁxed within a given time period.  Labour and capital are mobile across sectors, whereas royalties are
speciﬁc to the oil and gas sector.  Under the capital mobility assumption,
ﬁrms could move their capital from one industry to another in response
to different rental rates in the economy (Alavalapati Name, 1998). 
Household savings rate is determined by a ﬁxed marginal propensity
to save; a ﬁxed proportion of total income is saved.  Disposable income is
total household income less savings, which is spent on consumption. 
The optimal allocation between consumption of commodities by households is through maximization of a Stone-Geary utility function or a
Linear Expenditure System (LES).  LES is structured so that expenditure
has a linear relationship with income and price, and is thus maximized
subject to the household's disposable income constraint. 
Total savings is the sum of household and foreign savings.  Investment
demand is determined by total savings factored by Cobb-Douglas investment preference for each commodity.  Unemployment is endogenous to the model, speciﬁed with a Phillips curve.  This explains
the relationship between wage and unemployment using a Laspeyres
consumer price index (CPI) and factor prices and supplies. 
Input factor supplies are exogenously determined in the model,
based on existing data.  Equilibrium in the factor markets requires that
the demand for factors equal the supply. 