
Private enforcement via shareholder litigation is important to investor protection and stock market development
(La Porta Name, 2006).  Prior literature suggests that cross-country variation in shareholder litigation threat affects the cost of
equity (Hail and Leuz, 2009; Khurana and Raman, 2004).  However, there is relatively scant evidence on how firm-level
mechanisms affect the disciplining role of shareholder litigation and therefore the cost of equity.  This research question is
important as the cost of equity is a summary measure of how investors perceive the risk and return tradeoff of investing in a
firm (Francis Name, 2004).  In addition, the cost of equity plays a key role in corporate financing and capital budgeting
decisions.  In this study, we examine how directors' and officers' liability insurance (D&O insurance) affects a firm’s cost ofD&O insurance is a policy purchased by a firm to cover defense cost and potential damage award when its directors and
officers (D&Os) are sued.  By effectively shielding D&Os from bearing personal financial liabilities, D&O insurance reduces the
disciplining effect of shareholder litigation (Baker and Griffith, 2010).  We hypothesize that D&O insurance increases a firm’s
cost of equity via two important channels.  First, as shareholder litigation encourages managers to increase transparency
(Ball, 2001), D&O insurance can result in poor financial reporting and disclosure quality, leading to a higher cost of equity
(Leuz and Wysocki, 2008).  Second, as D&O insurance limits the expected legal liabilities associated with bad outcomes of
D&O decisions, it encourages risk-taking (Baker and Griffith, 2010; Core, 1997).  To the extent that risk-taking results in a
higher exposure to market risks, the cost of equity is higher. 
Using a large manually collected dataset on D&O insurance from Canada, we find that D&O insurance coverage is
positively associated with the ex ante cost of equity implied in stock prices and analyst forecasts.  This association is robust to
firm fixed effects regression and alternative cost of equity measures. 