
Why do ﬁrms engage in corporate environmental responsibility
(CER) activities.  Understanding the incentives for CER engagement has
spurred a large academic literature.  In general, there are three distinct
perspectives on the determinants of CER.  The ﬁrst perspective focuses
on the role of social pressure from nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), suppliers, customers and regulators in CER (Delmas and Toffel,
2008).  The second perspective focuses on the ﬁrm-speciﬁc factors shaping CER, such as age, size, and ownership (Etzion, 2007.  Zeng Name,
2010), corporate governance (Kassinis and Vafeas, 2002.  de Villiers
Name, 2011.  Walls Name, 2012), and ﬁrm performance (Ye Name, 2013. 
Sueyoshi and Goto, 2014.  Bostian Name, 2016).  The third perspective
studies the effects of top executives on CER, which includes CEO demographic and psychological characteristics (Lewis Name, 2014.  Petrenko
Name, 2016), CEO incentives and turnover (Deckop Name, 2006.  Meng
Name, 2013). 
Nevertheless, the literature is silent on whether political connections
matter for a ﬁrm's propensity to engage in CER.  This paucity of research
is somewhat surprising given the fact that many researchers have
highlighted the effects of political connections on ﬁrm behavior and
strategic decisions (Fisman, 2001.  Li and Atuahene-Gima, 2001.  Faccio,
2006.  Zhou, 2013), and CER is increasingly viewed as an important
business strategy by researchers, investors, and society as a whole
(Etzion, 2007.  de Villiers Name, 2011).  The novel contribution of this
research is to explicitly introduce such political connections dimension
in an empirical study of corporate environmental practices.  Speciﬁcally
we are concerned in this paper with how political connections may
affect organizational CER in China. 
China offers an ideal setting to investigate this issue.  A distinct
feature of China is that the government plays a critical role in the
economy.  As a special form of business-government relationship, political connections are an important means of government intervention in
ﬁrms (Fan Name, 2007).  At the same time, political connections are also
an important channel for Chinese ﬁrms to access to valuable resources
and government protection (Li Name, 2008), which may in turn affect
the costs and beneﬁts of CER activities.  Therefore, as a governmentdominated transitional country with severe environmental problems,
China forms a good (quantitative) case study to evaluate the role of
political connections in CER. 
Our ﬁrst task is to examine whether political connections inﬂuence
ﬁrm's propensity to engage in CER.  For this purpose, we propose a
mechanism-based theoretical model to explore the possible positive
and negative effects of political connections on CER.  And we test the
model by constructing a CEO-ﬁrm matched panel data set of 823
Chinese listed ﬁrms in polluting industries from 2008 to 2014.  After
controlling for other factors, we ﬁnd that political connections have a
signiﬁcant and positive impact on CER.  This ﬁnding is robust to a number of alternative estimation approaches. 
We then go a step further and investigate where and how political
connections are important to CER.  We argue that the effects of political
connections on CER are likely to be different depending on contextual
conditions.  This is tested through comparing the roles of political
connections in ﬁrms with different ownership and in regions with
different environmental regulatory systems.  Our empirical results
show that the positive effect of political connections on CER is more
pronounced for state-owned ﬁrms and in cities with stringent
environmental rules and regulations.  With respect to the mechanisms
through which political connections increase CER, we ﬁnd that political
connections help ﬁrms to receive government grants, subsidies and tax
reduction related to the environment protection, and implement
government environmental policies.  These mechanisms work better
for state-owned ﬁrms. 
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the ﬁrst to establish a link
between political connections and CER.  Our work contributes to the
literature on CER by showing that political connections do matter in
determining a ﬁrm's propensity to engage in CER.  We also add to the
growing literature on political connections.  Previous research has
examined the impact of political connections on ﬁrm's performance
(Fan Name, 2007.  Li Name, 2008), corporate bailouts (Faccio Name,
2006), entrepreneurial investment (Zhou, 2013), workplace fatalities
(Fisman and Wang, 2015) and corporate diversiﬁcation (Li Name,
2012), but has not examined their effects on ﬁrm's environmental
responsibility.  By proposing an initial mechanism-based framework,
this paper examines the possible role of political connections in CER
and when political connections matter more or less in their effects on
CER advances, which advances knowledge of the value of political
connections. 
The paper proceeds as follows.  Section 2 develops relevant hypotheses.  Section 3 describes the data, sample selection and variables. 
Sections 4 and 5 present the empirical results, while Section 6 discusses
the ﬁndings and concludes. 
2.  Conceptual framework and hypotheses. 
As the environmental component of Corporate Social Responsibility
(CSR), CER means that ﬁrms voluntarily integrate environmental
concerns into their core strategy and production processes.  The incorporation of environmental considerations into the design, manufacturing and distribution of products ranges from local and global pollution
prevention and control, waste management, the protection of water
resources, and the preservation of biodiversity, to energy efﬁciency,
cleaner production, reverse logistics, and managing the environmental
impacts from transportation (Crifo, 2014). 
An economic analysis of CER begins with the realization that such
activities have emerged in response to the perception or existence of a
market failure-that is, instances where there is a divergence between
the private and social costs of a ﬁrm's actions.  The societal cost is deﬁned as the private cost to the company plus an additional external
cost, e. g.  pollution and environmental degradation (Siegel, 2009).  In
order to engage in CER, ﬁrms need to spend money on some pollution
control instruments.  Similarly, ofﬁce space, supplies, computers, telephones, and other communications equipment may be devoted to CER
activities.  To the extent that additional capital is required, capital costs
will be higher, which may affect a ﬁrm's price and thus proﬁtability
(McWilliams and Siegel, 2001).  As a result, prior to taking on environmental responsibility projects, CEOs need to conduct a cost-beneﬁt
analysis.  Political connections are often cited as an important channel
for ﬁrms to access to scarce and valuable resources (Faccio, 2006.  Li
Name, 2008), which would in turn affect the costs and beneﬁts of CER
activities.  We therefore develop hypotheses with respect to the effects
of political connections on a ﬁrm's propensity to engage in CER. 
2. 1.  Positive effects. 
According to the resource-based view of the ﬁrm (RBV), companies
have bundles of heterogeneous resources and capabilities that are
imperfectly mobile across ﬁrms.  If such resources and capabilities are
valuable, rare, inimitable, and non-substitutable, they could constitute
a source of sustainable competitive advantage (Barney, 1991).  For a
politically connected ﬁrm, political connections can constitute a resource or capability that leads to a sustained competitive advantage. 
For example, it has been found that political connections help ﬁrms to
access to key resources such as bank loans (Khwaja and Mian, 2005. 
Faccio, 2006), lower tax rates (Adhikari Name, 2006.  Wu Name, 2012),
and provide protection of property rights (Zhou, 2013).  This would in
turn help to relax the ﬁnancial constraint on environmental investments, lower ﬁrms' cost of capital related to environmental investment,
share the risks of environmental technology innovation with the
government, and thereby encourage ﬁrms to adopt environmentally
friendly practices.  At the same time, CEOs with extensive political and
social networks may excel at accessing information about the latest
government environmental policy, which likely helps to better understand environmental regulations and policymakers' intentions, make
effective decisions regarding CER investment and obtain the ﬁrstmover advantage associated with early investments in environmental
technologies. 
Politically connected ﬁrms can also get many social and political
beneﬁts in return for their engaging in CER.  Beneﬁts that may arise
from CER include enhanced product differentiation, reputation/image
enhancement, and improved relations with workers, customers,
suppliers, government, and the community (Siegel, 2009).  More
importantly, CER would be a means to access to the government
bureaucracy, which is an important way to strengthen the businessgovernment relationship and receive scarce and valuable resources. 
For instance, an organization's environmental responsibility projects
often bring attention in the form of praise not just to the ﬁrm, but
often more directly to the CEO.  CEOs favored by both the government
and the public are more likely to be elected and win a seat in congress
(Ma and Parish, 2006). 
In addition, politically connected ﬁrms are more likely to receive
social and government attention than nonconnected ﬁrms.  For
example, as a current or former member of the government, the politically connected CEO is expected by the public to have high moral standards and do what is morally right.  This pressure may motivate ﬁrms to
act in environmentally responsible ways.  Hence the inclusion of environmental issues into corporate strategy could be viewed as a means
to improve a company's alignment with the growing environmental
concerns and government's expectations (Buysse and Verbeke, 2003). 
In line with the research and reasoning laid out above, the following
hypotheses might be set forth. 
Hypothesis 1.  There will be a positive relationship between political
connections and corporate environmental responsibility. 
2. 2.  Negative effects. 
As mentioned before, CER activities require signiﬁcant investments
in production redesign, new equipment, and cross-functional employee coordination, whereas the rewards from strong environmental performance may only materialize in the long term.  These characteristics
make environmental initiatives unpalatable to risk-averse managers. 
Managers may be reluctant to incur expenses that do not have immediate ﬁnancial beneﬁts and therefore often focus on conservative initiatives that will maximize their reputation and ﬁnancial beneﬁts in
the short term (de Villiers Name, 2011).  In this case, political connections may act as an umbrella of protection that helps ﬁrms to escapeSpeciﬁcally, Firms may bribe local government ofﬁcials through
their political connections in order to form a strong interest group and
get away with environmental regulation and penalties.  This is especially
the case in China, where local government ofﬁcials have been evaluated
on the basis of economic development since 1978 (Li and Zhou, 2005). 
Gross regional product (GRP) and its growth rates are the main indices
for the evaluation of local ofﬁcials' work achievements.  This provides a
major incentive for local ofﬁcials to put economic growth ahead of environmental protection.  Engagement in the political process might be
used as a form of insurance against environmental regulation.  Under
protection of the local government, ﬁrms can sacriﬁce environment
for the sake of short term ﬁnancial beneﬁts.  Local government ofﬁcials
can also beneﬁt from higher levels of output in their region as well as
bribes from politically connected polluting producers.  A typical example
is Zijin Mining's pollution event in 2010, a Chinese listed company with
political connections. 