 1.  Introduction  Theory suggests banks’ demand for high quality ﬁnancial reports varies with their lending strategies and internal information structures.  For example, Stein (2002) predicts that larger intermediaries, with a need to transmit information to  multiple agents within their hierarchical organizations, more frequently request veriﬁed reports from borrowers.  Smaller  ﬁnancial intermediaries, which typically have fewer layers of internal information transfer, are conversely more likely to use  soft information acquired through personal interactions with ﬁrms ( Berger et al. , 2005 ).  In addition to bank size, theories  suggest that exposure concentration may play an equally important role in shaping banks’ interactions with ﬁrms ( Dell’  Ariccia et al. , 1999.  Winton, 1999 ).  These theories suggest a bank’s concentration in a sector implies a degree of expertise.   banks with more exposure to a sector have more interactions with borrowers and are thus more informed.  Banks with less  exposure, and thus fewer substitute sources of information, may demand more detailed and veriﬁed information when contracting with those borrowers, resulting in a negative relation between exposure concentration and high quality information  demand.   A negative relation between the concentration of a bank’s loan portfolio and the extent of information collection from  borrowers is not obvious, however.  Concentration in an industry or region not only increases information about that sector,  but also ampliﬁes portfolio risk.  Collecting more reliable and precise information about concentrated exposures is a plausible  strategy for managing the risk and related scrutiny from regulators, depositors, and the board of directors.   Thus, a positive association may emerge between a bank’s lending concentration and its high quality information collection.   Understanding the relation between the concentration of a bank’s portfolio and its information collection practices is  of interest for several reasons.  First, the banking market has consolidated considerably following more than two decades  of mergers and bank failures.  As a result, the loan market has become more concentrated and individual bank loan portfolios have become more diverse.  Depending on the relation between portfolio concentration and information collection,  these market shifts can affect the demand for auditing from the predominantly private commercial borrowers that choose  whether to have audited ﬁnancial statements, in part, as a function of lending relationships.  Second, C&I loan exposures are  rarely securitized, and banks typically retain their loan exposures after origination ( Loutskina, 2005 , FDIC call reports).  As  a result, regulators expect banks to document more information collection from their larger positions to mitigate portfolio concentration risk ( Basel, 20 0 0.  OCC, 2011 ).  Requiring more collection of hard information about concentrated positions  could, however, impede lending to opaque ﬁrms when a bank is willing to lend based on knowledge arising from its specialization in the borrower’s sector.  Despite a close link between exposure concentration and borrower monitoring techniques  in theoretical models, empirical evidence establishing a link between concentration and information collection is sparse  because banks disclose limited details about their exposures or information collection practices.   We use a bank-level dataset supplied by the Risk Management Association (RMA) to examine the relation between a  bank’s commercial lending concentration and its level of ﬁnancial information quality requested of borrowers.  The dataset  includes the ﬁnancial statement collection records and commercial loan exposures of banks representing a substantial portion of the U. S.  commercial and industrial (C&I) loan market.  RMA compiles ﬁnancial reports collected by member banks  and categorizes them according to report type as.  unqualiﬁed audit, review, compilation, tax return, or other.  Unqualiﬁed  audits provide the highest level of independent veriﬁcation and the most ﬁnancial information.  Each category is tabulated  by six-digit NAICS code, six borrower size groups, six regions, and the ten years 2002–2011.  We use these data to measure  the frequency of banks’ audit collection from borrowers and their C&I exposure concentration within a bank-year.  RMA conﬁdentially provided these data at the bank level, allowing us to map lending exposures and statement collection records by  bank to FDIC call reports.   Our central ﬁnding is that banks’ audited statement collection is negatively related to portfolio concentration.  We begin  by using bank-year observations and ﬁnd that banks with more concentrated commercial loan portfolios collect audited  statements from borrowers less frequently, controlling for bank and borrower sizes and year ﬁxed effects.  Although these  results reﬂect differences unrelated to bank or borrower size, they could be the result of omitted bank characteristics that  are related to both concentration and ﬁnancial report collection practices.  Therefore, we use the panel structure of the  data and bank-year and industry-region-year ﬁxed effects to mitigate concerns about unobservables.  We ﬁnd banks collect  audited statements at lower rates from borrowers in industry-regions in which they have more concentration.  In our main  speciﬁcation, a one standard deviation increase in a bank’s exposure to an industry reduces the rate of audited statement  collection by approximately 2. 4 percentage points, or about 19% of the unconditional mean audited statement collection rate  in the sample.   In additional tests using portfolio sorts of bank size, borrower size, and concentration, we compare the magnitude of our  loan concentration ﬁnding to the more broadly studied characteristic of bank size.  Prior work (e. g. , Stein, 2002 .  Berger et al. ,  20 05.  Liberti and Mian, 20 09 ) argues larger banks are more reliant on hard information.  Consistent with this argument, we  ﬁnd larger banks are more likely to collect audited ﬁnancial statements from borrowers compared to smaller banks, even  after controlling for the average borrower size across banks.  Moreover, our estimates suggest the difference in borrower  audit rates across different concentration levels within bank is as large as the difference in borrower audit rates across  banks of different sizes.   An explanation consistent with our evidence is that concentration fosters lending expertise.  A bank with more exposure  to an industry has better information about it and, thus, less need to obtain high quality (and costly) ﬁnancial performance  information from borrowers in the industry.  By contrast, banks with less exposure to (and thus less information about) the  same borrowers face an adverse selection concern, and thus demand high quality information to substitute for their relative lack of expertise.  We conduct cross sectional tests to further examine whether exposure concentration builds expertise,  which in turn reduces demand for audited statements.  First, if concentration fosters bank expertise, our results should be  stronger in settings with more severe adverse selection and information asymmetry concerns.  We identify such settings using the extent of bank market competition within an industry-region and the performance dispersion of borrowers within  an industry.  Dell’ Ariccia (2001) suggests that adverse selection concerns are most acute in imperfectly competitive banking markets, because potential entrant banks are particularly uninformed.  In such situations, novice banks will demand  high quality information from borrowers to offset their information disadvantage.  Next, we argue performance dispersion  makes it more diﬃcult for banks with less exposure in those industries to interpret and utilize low quality information  gathered from individual ﬁrms, which increases their demand for high quality reports.  Thus, we expect to ﬁnd stronger results in industries with more performance dispersion.  We ﬁnd the negative relation between a bank’s exposure to a given  industry-region and its audited report collection from borrowers in that industry-region is stronger when either bank market  competition is lower or borrower performance dispersion is higher.   Second, if concentration allows a bank to acquire information about a given sector over time, the negative relation should  strengthen as the bank gains experience. 