
The Transmission Network Expansion Planning Problem (TNEPP)
is a classical problem in power electrical engineering and basically
the problem consists in ﬁnding new transmission lines for an adequate operation over a planning horizon.  Traditionally, the problem
was solved as a separate problem from the generation planning
problem1, even though in the early days most electrical systems
operated with a vertical structure and there was a central planner that somehow gave the conditions to coordinate the investment
decisions in transmission and generation. 
At the end of the 1970s competition was introduced in several
electric utilities2.  In this competitive setting, no central planner is
in charge of investments.  Instead, ﬁrst, generation companies decide
their new capacity in function of their expected beneﬁts in the market. 
Then, the transmission company decides the transmission capacity
needed to transmit the energy from the new generators.  In mathematical terms, this interaction can be modeled by multilevel optimization
problems.  In the specialized literature several multilevel models have
been proposed.  an important remark is that the models implicitly assume that the opportunity cost of transmission capacity is
determined by the price difference at the line endpoints 4. 
This paper recognizes that the opportunity cost of transmission
capacity not only depends on the difference of marginal costs at line
endpoints, but also on the location of new generators.  Due to this,
economic externalities arise when investment decisions are decentralized, so that the decentralized result does not lead to a Pareto
optimal solution. 
A good example of externalities in real power systems is the
Peruvian case.  Before 2014, the Peruvian network consisted of two
large areas (North and South) connected through a long transmission line (220 kV, 612 km).  The Southern area imports electricity
from the North.  Moreover, the South has a large source of gas known
as Camisea Gas and a gas pipeline was built in 2004 in order to
deliver gas to the North.  After the entrance of the pipeline, many
generation companies decided to invest in new capacity only in the
North.  however, electricity demand in the South grew and no generation capacity was built there.  Due to this, a new transmission line
(500 kV, 1000 km) between the North and South was placed in service in the year 2014.  Moreover, another line (500 kV, 1000 km)
between the North and South is been constructed and will be placed
in service by the year 2017.  Badly placed generators introduced
negative externalities in the transmission planning.  Obviously, if
generation companies had invested in the South, no transmission
lines would have been needed. 
In this context, we discuss how separating generation expansion
from transmission planning can cause negative externalities to the
transmission planning problem.  The organization of the paper is as
follows.  in Section 2, we discuss how externalities can affect the
TNEPP using a basic model.  in Section 3, we formulate a centralized
multistage model for ﬁnding simultaneous optimal generation and
transmission capacity.  The model is based on previous work of van
der Weijde and Hobbs (2012) and O’Neill Name (2013).  The main purpose of the model is to show examples of externalities.  In Section 4,
we present case studies for the 24-bus test system and the Peruvian
system.  Finally, in Section 5 we present the conclusions of the article. 
2.  A discussion about transmission capacity opportunity cost
and externalities. 
Some articles5 implicitly assume that the opportunity cost of
transmission capacity is determined only by the price difference at
the line endpoints. 