
Most liberalized electricity markets suffer from market power,
with high concentration indices, and are frequently subject to market investigations (see for example DG COMP, 2007).  Academics and
consultants alike struggle to model the exercise of this market power
and the implications of possible reforms, such as increasing interconnection (Newbery Name, 2004), moving to nodal pricing (Joskow
and Tirole, 2000), market coupling (Newbery Name, 2016), breaking
up larger companies such as EdF in France (INSEAD, 2004), introducing capacity auctions (Entriken and Wan, 2003; Genoese Name, 2012;
Hach Name, 2015; Hu and Hobbs, 2008) or by increasing the volumes
of renewables (Liski and Vehviläinen, 2015; Newbery, 2016).  The
main problem facing those wishing quantiﬁed results rather than
illustrative examples lies in the considerable diﬃculty of modeling
strategic behaviour in markets with various capacity and transmission constraints, in which the participants interact daily on auction
markets under conditions of great transparency. 
Electricity is possibly the best example of the textbook example
of a perfectly homogenous product that would seem to favour
intense price competition, but, as observed above, liberalized electricity markets are characterized by oligopoly and deviations from
competitive behaviour.  Moreover, generators have very complete
information about their own and rivals’ short-run cost functions,
which are determined by known technologies and observable fuel
prices.  Cournot models may be suitable for modeling potential
market power and prices for speciﬁc levels of demand (Moselle
Name, 2006) but electricity demand varies substantially hourly, daily
and seasonally.  In practice, and more extensively now that the
EU has almost completed market coupling at the day-ahead stage,
generating companies offer their supply as a function of offer prices
(often a step function, see Newbery Name, 2013) into EUPHEMIA,2 the
auction platform that determines day-ahead prices for the whole of
the market-coupled EU.  The natural way of modeling the outcomes
of that auction are to look for Supply Function Equilibria, but these
are notoriously hard to solve or even simulate (Day Name, 2002). 
Nevertheless, the central idea of a supply function is helpful, in
that it requires agents to form a view of the supplies offered by
other generators, which, when subtracted from total demand, gives
a perceived residual demand.  Each agent can then choose an optimal
supply response.  If all agents have well-deﬁned supply behaviour
it is in principle possible to ﬁnd a Nash equilibrium in which each
oligopolist maximizes its proﬁts given the behaviour of other market participants.  The agents may choose to offer ﬁxed quantities –
Cournot behaviour – or may choose to mark-up their offers on their
variable costs, and the relevant demand facing those with market
power may have competitive supplies subtracted from total demand. 
The central point of this paper is that while the residual demand
facing an agent depends on the choices of other agents, the
assumption that the market will settle at the Nash equilibrium of
these speciﬁc choices needs to be tested for robustness.  The equilibrium will not be robust if it is proﬁtable for an agent, knowing the
strategies of all other players, to choose a different strategy. 
This paper tests the robustness of various popular modeling
approaches for an electricity market with a small number of players. 
We study two particular forms of mark-up pricing: ﬁxed and proportional, where in the former, ﬁrms set a ﬁxed mark-up on their
marginal cost schedule and in the latter, ﬁrms choose a proportional
mark-up.  We analyze these two mark-up pricing models because
most studies (some of which are reviewed below) ﬁnd that where
electricity markets are concentrated, generators are selling at prices
above the competitive short-run marginal cost.  They have the attraction that the choice of a single parameter (the mark-up) considerably
simpliﬁes the modeling problem (Weidlich and Veit, 2008).  More
important, they are consistent with the forms of offers that are
allowed in most power exchanges and by EUPHEMIA.  We compare
the results with the standard Nash-Cournot model in which agents
just choose the quantity to supply to the market.  In auction markets like power pools and EUPHEMIA this would require producers
to offer a ﬁxed amount at some minimum price (e. g.  variable cost)
and then receive the price set by the interaction of total supply andWe note that for the case of linear marginal costs and linear
demand, the supply function equilibrium is a proportional mark-up
model (Klemperer and Meyer, 1986), but we are interested in a wider
set of cost and demand functions.  One of the main conclusions of this
paper is that the proportional mark-up model would seem to have
wider appeal in modeling market power than just in the linear case,
and in that sense it forms a useful simpliﬁcation of complex supply
function models that lends itself to modeling market power. 
We examine the robustness of both forms of mark-up pricing
and ask whether these models are robust against more sophisticated
(Stackelberg) strategies.  If so, they pass the ﬁrst test of plausibility, but if not, then modelers need to be aware of their fragility and
consider alternatives, which we discuss.  Throughout we assume a
market structure similar to electricity pools (e. g.  Green and Newbery,
1992) or the EUPHEMIA European platform, which is a last-price
auction in which offers from generators and bids from suppliers are
submitted and the market clearing price is determined (subject to
various constraints, such as transmission capacities).  We assume that
the daily interaction on the auction market or power exchange, combined with cost transparency, makes it plausible that agents know
or learn the supply behaviour of their rivals.  They are also assumed
to know how the market clearing price is set, bearing in mind that
different plants have different costs (different eﬃciencies, different
fuels) and demand varies hourly, by day of the week, and seasonally. 
We show that the two mark-up strategies considered are more
competitive than Nash-Cournot behaviour, with the Nash choice of
the optimal proportional mark-up on marginal costs yielding lower
prices and proﬁts than the Cournot oligopoly but higher prices
and proﬁts than the optimum ﬁxed mark-up on marginal costs.  In
deterministic cases, the mark-up equilibria are robust against Nash
deviations by single ﬁrms choosing quantities (or any other actions)
instead of mark-ups.  However, these mark-up equilibria are not
robust to more sophisticated single-ﬁrm Stackelberg deviations in
which the deviant maintains her output and the remaining players
adapt to that and ﬁnd the corresponding mark-up equilibrium output levels.  This would be achieved by the deviant repeatedly offering
the same supply into an auction market (like a pool or the EUPHEMIA
platform) and the remaining players then groping towards their most
proﬁtable response.  The deviant player makes higher proﬁts following this Stackelberg strategy.  If demand is stochastic, then a ﬁxed
quantity response (deterministic Cournot) is strictly inferior to either
mark-up equilibria.  In the case of linear marginal costs and linear
demand, the proportional mark-up equilibrium as a supply function
equilibrium is robust against any deviation, while a ﬁxed mark-up is
vulnerable to a proportional mark-up deviant. 
This paper makes a number of contributions to the literature on
electricity market modeling and oligopoly pricing.  It ﬁrst sets the
scene by ranking in order of proﬁtability three common market equilibrium models: the standard Cournot model (in which producers
offer a ﬁxed quantity into the auction platform and the price is set
by the demand side),3 and two price-setting models in which ﬁrms
set prices as mark-ups on their marginal costs.  This allows us to
test their robustness against various kinds of deviations by single
and multiple ﬁrms, ﬁrst on the assumption of certainty, and then
under uncertainty about demand levels.  If, as in most industrial commodity industries and particularly for electricity, marginal costs are
increasing, we ﬁnd that proportional mark-ups emerge as the more
attractive pricing model, which we relate to the literature on supply functions usually connected to electricity markets.  These ﬁndings
are relevant to the considerable literature on simulation modeling of such industries, widely used in investment analysis, policy
reform (e. g.  Green and Newbery, 1992, commenting on restructuring state-owned monopoly generation companies) and anti-trust
investigations. 
The paper is organized as follows.  In Section 2, we brieﬂy survey
different modeling approaches to oligopolistic electricity markets. 
In Section 3, we introduce our mark-up models and test their
robustness to Cournot deviations.  Section 4 tests our models against
Stackelberg deviations.  Section 5 concludes. 
<Middle> Modeling oligopolistic electricity markets. 
Electricity markets have the great advantage for the study of
market power in that high resolution price data (hourly or halfhourly) are available, together with aggregate demand and supply
in that period (and sometimes individual company’s supply, e. g. 
Sweeting, 2007).  Variable costs are also easy to simulate, and in
some markets are observable for each generation company (e. g.  in
the Single Electricity Market of the island of Ireland).  One standard test of market power is benchmark analysis using estimates of
the short-run marginal cost of production (given by fuel prices and
conversion eﬃciencies and aggregating across all marginal costs) to
2 1 Pan-European Hybrid Electricity Market Integration Algorithm: see https://
www. apxgroup. com/wp-_content/uploads/Euphemia-_Public-_Documentation. pdf. 
simulate a hypothetical competitive market.  Wolfram (1999) used
this approach and actual cost data to measure the price-cost markup for the duopoly price setters in the electricity market of England
and Wales, ﬁnding that they moderated their mark-ups in the light
of intense regulatory and competition authority scrutiny.  The same
approach of measuring mark-ups has been applied by Wolak Name
(2000), Borenstein Name (2002), Joskow and Kahn (2002), van Damme
(2005), and Bushnell Name (2008).  In contrast to Wolfram, Borenstein
Name (2002) found high price-cost margins in the high demand
summer months in California. 
The other standard approach is to postulate a model of market power and compare its predictions with market outcomes. 
Borenstein and Bushnell (1999) use historical data to simulate the
California electricity market as a static Cournot market with a competitive fringe, while Puller (2007) uses data to conclude that the
market is relatively consistent with a Cournot pricing game. 
A number of other authors use this standard I–O workhorse
of Cournot competition to examine electricity market power, but
in two-stage games, following the lead of Kreps and Scheinkman
(1983).  The ﬁrst stage is to choose capacity (and a number of electricity markets have periodic capacity auctions), while the second
stage is to choose supplies to offer into the spot market, constrained
by prior capacity choices.  Kreps and Scheinkman (1983) show that
even if the second stage is an intensely competitive price-setting
(Bertrand) game, introducing the prior capacity choice can support
Cournot outcomes.  Much depends on the contestability of the ﬁrst
stage capacity choice.  Teirila (forthcoming) examines the proposed
Irish capacity market in which there is potentially excess capacity and hence unlikely to be signiﬁcant entry, limiting the ﬁrst
stage to competition between incumbents, who must decide their
capacity auction bids after estimating their revenues in the subsequent Cournot spot market.  Teirila ﬁnds considerable potential
market power in the proposed capacity auction, implying that ways
to mitigate that market power may be necessary.  Léautier (2016)
studies a capacity market (and reliability options) in which the system operator speciﬁes the total capacity that must be built at the
ﬁrst stage, leaving the spot market to imperfect Cournot competition. 
This removes the incentive for generators to choose to undersupply
capacity as in Kreps and Scheinkman (1983) . 
Cournot models are attractive as they are simple to solve, but
can result in unrealistically high mark-ups unless either capacities or
contracts are chosen in a prior stage.  Allaz and Vila (1993) is the classic reference to the pro-competitive effect of forward contracting,
and Bushnell Name (2008) examine the effect of contracting on the
incentive to exercise market power in a Cournot model and show
that vertical contracts dramatically reduce these incentives.  It is
therefore possible to reconcile observed behaviour with Cournot
quantity setting generators, but only by solving the prior issue of
the level of contracting.  Similarly Mulder Name (2015) model large
players contracting ahead and playing Cournot in the spot market
facing competitive supply from importers and a fringe of intermittent wind generators and CHP plants, to examine the effects of each
on the Lerner mark-up. 
Floro (2009) examines the Italian market in which ENEL is a
dominant player, more so in the South than the North.  In the North,
oligopoly can either be modeled as a Cournot game, or one in which
ENEL acts as a Stackelberg leader against the remaining ﬁrms, and the
latter ﬁts the evidence better.  In the South, the other players act as
price takers, and ENEL acts as the dominant ﬁrm optimizing against
residual demand. 
All these examples simulating or estimating spot market power
are essentially static Cournot models with different boundary conditions that determine the size and shape of the residual market
(resulting from other competitive suppliers or pre-committed
contracts).  A rather different strand of modeling assumes that the
large generators with market power choose mark-ups on cost. 
Grant and Quiggin (1994) analytically model ﬁrms choosing their
proﬁt-maximizing mark-up over average cost instead of choosing the
optimal output level, although in their constant elasticity model this
is equivalent to choosing a mark-up on variable cost.  Another related
strand is to model each generator as choosing its mark-up on variable
cost, but instead of solving this analytically, each generator follows a
learning strategy to converge on a proﬁt-maximizing mark-up, given
its interaction with other players. 
Tirole’s classic text on Industrial Organization notes the diﬃculty
in theorizing about ﬁrms with market power that repeatedly interact
in markets, and notes (Tirole, 2000, p.  240, 261) that “the proliferation of theories is mirrored by an equally rich array of behavioural
patterns actually observed under oligopoly. ” After discussing the delicacy of game theoretic models with reputation, he turns to the
Darwinian or evolutionary approach, in which agents may not consciously maximize but suboptimal rules will be rejected or lead to
exit.  “This approach .  .  .  looks at strategies, or (better terminology)
rules, that are ‘robust’ in the sense that they do relatively well against
a variety of other rules.  .  .  .  The evolutionary approach assumes that,
in the long run, only actors who use robust rules will stay around.  .  .  . 
What is mean by ‘robust rule’ is a priori contingent on the set and the
probability distribution of mutations, and on the set of strategies the
robust rule is allowed to be compared to. ”
3.  The market model. 
Different mark-up formulations lead to different equilibria that
can be ranked in terms of proﬁt, motivating the reason why a
sophisticated agent may wish to choose a different strategy from
her rivals.  The two mark-up models are examined for their robustness against the ﬁrst type of Nash-Cournot deviation, demonstrating
their robustness against single-ﬁrm deviations but not to multi-ﬁrm
deviations. 
Consider a market of n identical ﬁrms, i = 1, .  .  .  , n, producing a
non-storable homogenous output, qi, (e. g.  electricity) selling at price
p, each with cost functionC(q i), marginal cost, MC, C(cid:2)(qi) > 0, C≥ 0, facing an aggregate demand schedule Q(p), Q(cid:2)(p) < 0, Q
(p) ≥ 0,qi.  The residual demand schedule facing any single ﬁrm i,
Ri(Q−i(. )), Q−i =
j(cid:4)=iqj, will depend on the supplies offered by the
n − 1 other ﬁrms at the market clearing price.  Working with price
as the dependent variable, ﬁrm i(cid:2)s residual demand will be Ri(p) =
Q(p) − (n − 1)¯q(p), where ¯q(p) is the equilibrium supply offered by
each of the n − 1 remaining ﬁrms. 
Firm i(cid:2)s proﬁt will be pi(p) = pRi(p) − C(Ri(p)), and the ﬁrst order
condition (f. o. c. ) for proﬁt maximization. 
This gives the Lerner Index, one of the standard measures of
market power, asThe benchmark perfectly competitive (Walrasian) equilibrium
has p(n¯q) = C(cid:2)(¯q), in which case the Lerner Index is zero. 
3. 1.  The robustness of mark-up equilibria. 
In a symmetric n-ﬁrm oligopoly the possible Nash Equilibria (NE)
will depend on the strategy set, and whether each ﬁrm chooses
its strategic variable simultaneously.  The three cases considered are
the Nash-Cournot equilibrium, in which ﬁrms choose quantities, the
ﬁxed mark-up equilibrium in which ﬁrms add a ﬁxed mark-up mi to
MC: C(cid:2)(qi) + mi, and the proportional mark-up to marginal cost, in
which ﬁrms offer supplies in proportion to MC, hC(cid:2)(qi), h > 1. 
Further, deﬁne Q i(m) = ˜qi(mi, P(m)) and pi(m) = P(m)Q i(m) −
C(Q i(m)).  Then the ﬁxed mark-up model solution is a symmetric
vector of mark-ups m∗ such that for ﬁrm i. 
The proportional mark-up model is similar except that ﬁrm i(cid:2)s
quantity for a symmetric price p is determined by p = hiC
(qi).  The
Appendix derives the mark-ups for the linear demand, quadratic costProposition 1 ranks the three equilibria (Nash-Cournot, ﬁxed
mark-up and proportional mark-up) for the cases in which ﬁrms
make simultaneous decisions. 
As h > 1 , the RHS of Eq.  (3) is larger than Eq.  (2) but smaller than
Eq.  (1) , each evaluated at ¯qp , so reasoning as in (ii), the proportional
price-MC margin will be in between the mark-up margin and the NashCournot margin, demonstrating that the proportional MC strategy is less
competitive than the ﬁxed mark-up strategy, but more competitive than
the Nash-Cournot strategy, and the equilibrium prices will lie between
these two equilibria.  Finally, in each case the price-MC margin is strictly
positive and hence prices will be higher than the competitive equilibriumprice. 
Fig.  1 illustrates the result of the deviant choosing output when
the remaining ﬁrms choose to offer at a ﬁxed mark-up on marginal
cost for the linear demand, quadratic cost case as set out in the
Appendix.  The deviant’s optimal response is to choose qd to maximize proﬁt, pqd − C(qd), given the residual demand generated by the
ﬁxed mark-up behaviour, which in this linear case can be written
p = (a − qd)/b for some a and b.  The question to address is
whether choosing the Nash mark-up given in Appendix Eq.  (13) is
robust against a player optimizing against this strategy.  Proposition 2
shows, as the ﬁgure clearly demonstrates, that the answer is yes. 
Proposition 2.  In a deterministic Nash game, if players assume that
the strategy space is the choice of the ﬁxed or proportional mark-up on
its marginal cost, then that player will maximize her proﬁts regardless
of whether another player chooses the same strategy choice as other
players (ﬁxed or proportional mark-up on marginal cost) or an optimal
quantity to supply, and hence the two Nash mark-up equilibria are
robust against Cournot deviations. 
Proposition 1.  In the simultaneous move symmetric n-ﬁrm oligopoly,
the Nash Equilibrium price is highest in the Nash-Cournot equilibrium,
higher than in the proportional mark-up equilibrium, which in turn is
higher than the ﬁxed mark-up equilibrium, which is higher than the
competitive price. 
Proof.  Each ﬁrm faces the same residual demand schedule and will
choose the same optimal output whether they choose the optimal ﬁxed
or proportional mark-up, or the optimal quantity (or any other choice
variable such as price) that corresponds to MC set equal to the marginal
residual demand revenue. 
Proof.  (i) If the other firms choose quantities (Cournot), ¯q(p) = ¯qc, and
firm i ’s residual demand will be Rci
(p) = Q(p)−(n−1)¯qc , so Rc
i = Q(p),
and the f. o. c.  for profit maximization will define the equilibrium output. 
(cid:2)(cid:2) ≥ 0 , the RHS ofEq.  (2) is less than that of Eq.  (1)
evaluated at ¯qc = ¯qm .  But as demand slopes down and the MC slopes
(weakly) up, the only way that the Nash mark-up could be higher would
be if ¯qc < ¯qm and pc > pm .  It follows that the ﬁxed mark-up price-MC
margin will be lower than under Nash-Cournot competition. will be Pj(qj) = hC(cid:2)(qj) , p
equilibrium ¯qp(p) = C(cid:2)−1
(iii) If ﬁrms choose a proportional mark-up, then their offer schedules. 
Thus the Nash equilibrium behaviour in ﬁxed or proportional
mark-ups is robust against a Nash-Cournot deviant who can choose
from a broader set of strategies that also includes quantities, at
least in a deterministic setting.  Fig.  2 illustrates this for the case in
which all but the deviant ﬁrm choose their supply as a proportional
mark-up on their linear MC. 
This result should not be surprising, as once the other ﬁrms
have chosen their optimal ﬁxed (or proportional) mark-up given the
residual demand they assume faces them, the deviant faces the same
residual demand and hence chooses the same mark-up, which is
where the residual marginal revenue meets MC, shown in Figs.  1
and 2.  One might reasonably argue that the resulting outcome is no
longer a true Nash equilibrium, in that while the deviant ﬁrm correctly predicts what the other ﬁrms will do, the other ﬁrms are not
correctly predicting what strategy the deviant is following and hence
not correctly predicting the residual demand they face, although they
are predicting the mark-up she will actually choose.  We will explore
this further in Section 4.  It is also important to note that although
the equilibrium is robust to deviations, the resulting price depends
on the strategy space, in this case the ﬁxed or proportional mark-ups
rather than quantities (and is lower as a result). 
3. 2.  Multi-ﬁrm deviations. 
Suppose that r ﬁrms decide to play a Cournot strategy, knowing
that n − r ﬁrms will continue with their ﬁxed mark-up strategies but
the other deviants will choose the same output as the ﬁrst deviant
(but independently, each taking the other’s output as given).  For the
linear-quadratic example set out in Appendix, the market clearing
condition is p = A − q − (r − 1)qo − n−r
nc (p − m), where m is the ﬁxed
mark-up, qo is the output of each of the other Cournot deviants, taken
as given, and q is the output choice to be made. 
As before the f. o. c.  for the deviant is given. 
Set qo = q and substitute for m to give. 
As a numerical example, let n = 5, r = 2, c = 1, A = 100, so
that the symmetric mark-up equilibrium has qi = 9A/95 = 9. 47,
p = 52. 6.  The deviants’ output will be 98A/1045 = 9. 378, which
is smaller, so the equilibrium will be different.  The price will be
p = 52. 8 and so the proﬁt of a deviating ﬁrm rather than conforming
to the original strategy will be 274. 8 rather than 274. 2, or 0. 22%
higher.  Thus there is a (small) incentive for a subset of more than
one (very) sophisticated ﬁrms to deviate from a Nash mark-up equilibrium.  This is reminiscent of Delgado and Moreno (2004), who
show that only the Cournot outcome can be sustained by a coalitionproof supply function equilibrium, in conﬁgurations such as this,
with linear demand and at least three players.  However, the meaning of the Cournot outcome with supply functions is rather different,
as it is the least competitive supply function, which is not a constant
level of output. 
3. 3.  Robustness under uncertainty. 
The results derived above assume no uncertainty in the level of
demand nor of cost, and the results are not robust to uncertainty.  We
know from Weitzman (1974) and Klemperer and Meyer (1986) that
the choice of quantity or price may be a matter of indifference under
perfect certainty, but not with uncertainty.  Consider the simple case
of additive risk,
where ˜e is a mean zero random variable (indicated with a tilde) and
D(Q) is deterministic. 
Proposition 3.  Under additive risk, a Cournot deviant in a simultaneous
play Nash game will earn lower proﬁts than players choosing either a
constant or proportional mark-up on their marginal costs. 
Proof.  Under additive risk as in Eq.  (4) the optimal mark-up
is the same as under uncertainty, as the partial derivatives of
price and quantity with respect to the ﬁxed mark-up, mi, or
proportional mark-up parameter, hi, are deterministic.  Expected
proﬁt is Ep(Q , e)qi(0i, e)− C(qi(0i, e), where 0i = mi or hi.  But ∂qi/∂0i
and ∂p/∂0i are both deterministic,
which is the same deterministic equation for Eqi as for qi in the deterministic case.  Additivity also implies the same deterministic f. o. c.  for
the deviant’s optimal choice of quantity, qd = Eqi.  The difference
in proﬁt between the deviant choosing a ﬁxed quantity and her
mark-up rivals is
pd = pi = Eqi. Ep − Epqi < 0,
as p and qi are positively correlated.  (cid:2)
Whether a proportional mark-up equilibrium is robust against a
ﬁxed mark-up deviant, and a ﬁxed mark-up equilibrium is robust
against a proportional mark-up deviant is less clear, except in the
linear marginal cost case. 
Proposition 4.  In the case of stochastic demand and linear marginal
costs, the proportional mark-up equilibrium is robust against a ﬁxed
mark-up deviant but the ﬁxed mark-up equilibrium is vulnerable to a
proportional mark-up deviant. 
Proof.  We know from Klemperer and Meyer (1989) that there is
a unique linear supply function equilibrium in the case of linear
marginal costs which has constant slope, so the proportional markup equilibrium is also the supply function equilibrium and hence
optimal against any deviation. 
4.  Robustness to Stackelberg deviations. 
Although a single deviant was unable to improve on her proﬁts by
choosing quantities rather than mark-ups in the deterministic case,
knowing that the remaining ﬁrms were acting on the (mistaken)
assumption that all ﬁrms were choosing their mark-up facing the
same residual demand schedule, there remains the question whether
this is a consistently formulated equilibrium for a sophisticated
deviant.  In our model, a sophisticated deviant acts as a Stackelberg
leader facing rivals who take the leader’s behaviour as given, and
learn to adapt to offer their best response. 
If all that ﬁrms observe is the consequences of their choices in
the market price, then they are correctly choosing the optimal choice
of mark-up (or output).  If they are basing their choice of mark-up
on assumptions about the shape of the residual demand they face,
then the assumed residual demand will be incorrect in the face of a
Cournot deviant.  One way round this inconsistency is to suppose that
the deviant ﬁrm’s strategy choice is known to the remaining ﬁrms,
who nevertheless continue to choose their mark-up (and similarly
the deviant knows that the other ﬁrms will behave that way).  In a
learning context, this would require the leader to stick to her output
strategy, while the followers learned that they could then improve
their proﬁts by adapting to the new environment.  The resulting equilibrium is most simply modeled as the outcome of a Stackelberg
game in which the deviant is the leader who can commit in this case
to her output, and to which the followers respond.  As the aim is to
demonstrate that deterministic mark-up equilibria are not robust to
this more sophisticated deviation, this section considers the simpler
duopoly case (n = 2) for the linear quadratic example of Appendix. 
The ﬁrst step reproduces the classic Cournot Stackelberg oligopoly. 
The leader can commit to her output level, ql, before the other (the
follower) makes his choice, qf, so that the leader can optimize against
the follower’s reaction function Eq.  (10) given in the Appendix.  The
resulting equilibrium. 
These expressions are somewhat opaque, but simplify in the constant returns case in which c = 0 to the familiar solution ql = A/2,
qf = A/4 =p, and the proﬁt of the leader is A2/8, larger than the
follower’s proﬁt, who receives only one-half as much or A2/16, and
also higher than under the symmetric Nash Cournot equilibrium of
A2/9.  If c = 1, then ql = 12A/56 > qo = A/5 > qf = 11A/56 and
the leader’s proﬁt is 0. 45% higher than in the symmetric duopoly.  At
lower values of c the leader’s advantage increases, so at c = 0. 1 the
advantage is 6. 8%, and for c = 0 (the constant returns case) it is 11%. 
4. 1.  Stackelberg quantity deviations from the mark-up equilibrium. 
The question we now address is whether choosing the optimal
Nash mark-up is robust against a more sophisticated player who in
a sequential setting can stick to her optimal output while the other
player continues to mark up on marginal cost but learns the optimal mark-up (effectively the correct position on his residual demand
schedule).  The previous duopoly example demonstrates that markup behaviour it is not robust (in a deterministic setting at least)
against a Cournot (quantity-ﬁxing) deviation and that is also the case
when the follower is choosing his mark-up.  Thus if the leader commits to a quantity, ql, the follower chooses a mark-up m given the
residual demand schedule qf(ql) = A − p − ql.  The follower’s supply schedule is given by Appendix Eq.  (12) with n = 2, so market
clearing yields. 
The follower chooses m to maximize proﬁt (see Appendix) resulting
in a reaction function. 
The leader’s optimal response (and the follower’s output) are exactly
as in the Stackelberg Cournot equilibrium Eq.  (5) in which both
agents choose quantities, as shown in Fig.  3. 
Proposition 5.  If one player assumes that the strategy space is the
choice of the mark-up on its marginal cost, then with a quadratic cost
function, linear demand and two identical players, the other player will
ﬁnd it proﬁtable to commit to choosing a (different) optimal quantity toProof.  From Eq.  (5) ql > qf.  Since the leader could have chosen the
same output as the follower but chose not to, she must be making higherproﬁts. 
4. 2.  Stackelberg quantity deviations from the proportional mark-up
equilibrium. 
If the leader offers a ﬁxed quantity ql and the follower offers the
supply schedule p = hC(cid:2)(qf), then qf = sp/2, replacing h = 1/s. 