 1.  Introduction Environmentally extended input-output analysis has been widely used to estimate production- and consumption-based emissions in many countries (Peters, 2008.  Hertwich and Peters, 2009.  IPCC, 2014), and in Japan a national emission inventory has been provided to the public every ﬁve years (NIES, 2016).  A major advantage of using environmental energy input-output analysis is that product supply-chain networks can be easily modelled and environmentally and ecologically important sectors and paths can be identiﬁed from the network (Lenzen, 2003.  Lenzen et al. , 2012.  Wood and Lenzen, 2009.  Oshita, 2012).  Clustering analysis has also been applied to environmental energy input-output analysis in order to ﬁnd environmentally important industry groups (i. e. , industry clusters) that induce higher CO2 emissions along their supply-chains (Kagawa et al. , 2013a, 2013b, 2015).  It is important to note that the environmentally critical sectors, transactions, paths, and clusters identiﬁed by input-output analysis play important roles in reducing consumption-based emissions through the entire economy.  A supply-chain path is composed of transactions between two sectors.  An environmentally critical sector as identiﬁed by key sector analysis (Rasmussen, 1956.  Hirschman, 1958.  Hazari, 1970.  Lenzen, 2003) is considered to be a sector that contributes to emitting larger environmental emissions (e. g. , CO2 emissions) in the economy through not only purchasing emission- and energy-intensive products from other upstream sectors but producing emission- and energy-intensive products in its own sector.  Therefore, an effective emission reduction policy (i. e. , technology policy) is to improve the production technology of the critical sector toward a cleaner one that has less energy consumption and environmental emissions along the product supply chain.  Information on environmentally critical paths (Lenzen, 2003) and clusters (Kagawa et al. , 2013a, 2013b, 2015.  Rifki et al. , 2017) can support a technology policy in the sense that policymakers can ﬁnd highpriority supply-chain paths (i. e. , upstream products) and clusters (i. e. , upstream product systems).  However, it is not an easy task to ﬁnd high-priority paths and clusters from the supply-chain complexity due to the problem of computation (e. g. , Kagawa et al. , 2015).  Liang et al.  (2016) proposed a useful indicator, vertex betweenness centrality, of a speciﬁc sector by combining input-output analysis with social network analysis.  More speciﬁcally, Liang et al.  (2016) formulated the vertex betweenness centrality index by applying the notion of network centrality (Freeman, 1977, 1978.  Freeman et al. , 1979) to structural path analysis (Lenzen, 2003.  Defourny and Thorbecke, 1984).  Liang et al.  (2016) deﬁned a speciﬁc sector with higher vertex betweenness centrality in a supply-chain network as a critical transmission sector in the sense that many sectors supply their products to ﬁnal consumers by passing through the speciﬁc sector, and consequently the transmission sector contributes to emitting a large amount of environmental emissions in the economy.  Although key sector analysis (Rasmussen, 1956.  Hirschman, 1958.  Hazari, 1970.  Lenzen, 2003) implicitly considers the transmission power of a speciﬁc sector, previous analyses failed to deﬁne this as vertex betweenness centrality consistent with network theory (Freeman, 1977, 1978.  Freeman et al. , 1979).  A technology policy for reducing environmental emissions should target high-priority sectors with higher vertex betweenness centrality.  In this study, we develop another centrality index, edge betweenness centrality, consistent with environmental energy input-output analysis following Liang et al.  (2016) and prove a mathematical relationship between “edge” betweenness centrality and “vertex” betweenness centrality.  Edge betweenness centrality indicates how much ‘embodied’ environmental emissions of products ﬂow through the transaction and to what extent sectors are connecting through a speciﬁc edge (i. e. , a transaction) in terms of supply-chain complexity.  It is important to note that the embodied environmental emissions (e. g. , embodied CO2 emissions) in supply-chain networks are caused by embodied energy consumption in the entire economy (Hertwich and Peters, 2009.  Peters et al. , 2011).  The edge betweenness centrality for a particular transaction developed in this study can be regarded as the sum of environmental emissions associated with ‘inﬁnite’ supply-chain paths that include the speciﬁc transaction identiﬁed using structural path analysis (SPA) (e. g. , Lenzen, 2003.  Oshita, 2012.  Owen et al. , 2016.  Nagashima et al. , 2017).  However, a technical problem of SPA is that it is impossible to identify ‘inﬁnite’ paths that include the particular transaction.  therefore, the edge betweenness centrality developed in this study can be a useful indicator to express the importance (or criticality) of a particular transaction in the entire supply-chain network.  Liang et al.  (2015) also proposed strongest path betweenness.  This index represents the importance of a sector in the supply-chain network as a center transmitting or facilitating the creation of environmental impacts.  Roughly speaking, it is deﬁned as the sum of the strengths of all strongest paths in the supply-chain network passing through a sector.  The strongest path in Liang et al.  (2015) is deﬁned as the environmentally important path that causes the largest CO2 emissions in sector i owing to one unit of value added in sector j.  It is important to note that the strongest path developed in Liang et al.  (2015) is deﬁned for a path, whereas the edge betweenness centrality developed in this study is deﬁned for a transaction.  A strongest path from sector i to sector j represents the most inefﬁcient path among all possible paths from i to j.  The point of difference from vertex and edge betweenness centrality is that strongest path betweenness does not consider ‘inﬁnite’ supply-chain paths.  In this study, we compute the edge and vertex betweenness centrality indices using the environmentally extended multi-regional input-output table covering 35 industrial sectors and 41 countries and regions in 2008 (Dietzenbacher et al. , 2013.  Timmer et al. , 2015) and identify high-priority sectors with higher vertex betweenness centrality and high-priority transactions with higher edge betweenness centrality in global supply-chain networks.  Finally, we argue how those high-priority sectors and transactions can contribute to reducing CO2 emissions as climate mitigation.  It should be noted that although we mainly focus on CO2 emissions as a case study, the method developed in this paper can be applied to energy consumption and other environmental pollutants such as NOx and SOx.  In particular, although energy consumption and CO2 emissions are both typical analysis subjects for these methods, our reason for mainly focusing on CO2 emissions is interest in the effects on recent global warming.  For this purpose, we conducted similar betweenness centrality analyses focused on energy consumption and computed rank correlation coefﬁcients for both vertex and edge betweenness centralities for CO2 emissions and energy consumption.  Finally, we discuss a more direct relationship between CO2 emissions and energy consumption with a focus on vertex and edge betweenness centralities in Section 5.  The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 revisits vertex betweenness centrality as proposed in Liang et al.  (2016).  Section 3 develops edge betweenness centrality consistent with inputoutput analysis.  Section 4 presents the mathematical relationship between vertex betweenness centrality and edge betweenness centrality.  Section 5 presents and discusses the results.  and ﬁnally Section 6 concludes the paper.  2.  Vertex betweenness centrality proposed in Liang.  The vertex betweenness centrality of a speciﬁc sector proposed in Liang et al.  (2016) was deﬁned as the sum of environmental emissions associated with the supply-chain paths passing through the speciﬁc sector.  Fig.  1 illustrates the vertex betweenness centrality of sector v in a supply-chain network with seven vertices and six edges.  In the ﬁgure, ea, eb, and ec are respectively the environmental emissions in upstream sectors a, b, and c triggered by the transactions among downstream sectors, d, e, and f.  In this case, the vertex betweenness centrality of sector v can be calculated as bv = ea + eb + ec.  Following Liang et al.  (2016), the vertex betweenness centrality bv of a speciﬁc sector v can be formulated as this where w(s, k1, k2, … , kr, t) is the environmental emissions associated with all supply-chain paths from sector s to sector t passing through r sectors, sector s →sector k1→sector k2→⋯→sector kr→sector t via sector v, and qr is the number of times that sector v appears in the supply-chain paths.  w(s, k1, k2, … , kr, t) also means the environmental emissions associated with all supply-chain paths from sector s to sector t with a path length of r + 1.  Following the idea of structural path analysis (e. g. , Lenzen, 2003.  Defourny and Thorbecke, 1984), w(s, k1, k2, … , kr, t) can be formulated as fsask1ak1k2 ⋯ akrtyt, where yt is the ﬁnal demand of sector t, ak1k2 is the intermediate input from sector k1 directly required for producing one unit of output in sector k2, and fs is the direct environmental emissions per unit of output of sec⋯ akrt represents the intermediate input.  We further deﬁne the following supply-chain path where bv(l1,l2) represents the environmental emissions associated with supply-chain paths that pass through sector v that has upstream industrial supply chains with path lengths of l1 and downstream industrial supply chains with path lengths of l2.  Then, we can rewrite bv(l1,l2) as the following matrix multiplication.  where y=(yj) represents an (n×1) ﬁnal demand vector expressing the ﬁnal demand for sector j, A=(aij) (n×n) is an input coefﬁcient matrix expressing the intermediate input from sector i per unit of output of sector j, Jv is an (n×n) matrix whose (v,v) element is 1 and other matrix elements are 0, and f=(fi) represents an (n × 1) emission coefﬁcient vector expressing direct environmental emissions per unit of output of sector i.  The prime denotes the matrix transpose.  (f′Al1)v and (Al2y)v represent the v-th elements of the respective computed vectors.  It is well known that the direct and indirect requirement matrix (i. e. , Leontief inverse matrix) can be obtained as the following power series expansion.  The matrix computation in Eq.  (5) yields the vertex betweenness centrality of sector v.  Hence we can compute vertex betweenness centrality for each node (i. e, each sector) in Ο(nw) time, where w denotes the matrix multiplication exponent.  It is well known that w b2. 373 (Williams, 2012).  Since the number of sectors is n, the total running time is Ο(nw+1) and therefore very low.  3.  Edge betweenness centrality.  In this study, we develop another betweenness centrality, edge betweenness centrality, for supply-chain networks.  Let (u,v) be a directed edge (i. e. , a transaction from sector u to sector v in a supply-chain network).  We then deﬁne the edge betweeness centrality for a speciﬁc transaction (u,v) as the amount of environmental emissions associated with all supply-chain paths passing through the transaction (u,v).  As in Eq.  (1), we can formulate the edge betweeness centrality for the transaction (u, v) as follows.  where pr represents the number of times that transaction (u,v) appears in all supply-chain paths from sector s to sector t passing through r sectors.  As with vertex betweenness centrality, edge betweenness centrality is explained using a simple example.  Fig.  2 illustrates the betweenness centrality of transaction (u, v) in a supply-chain network with eight vertices and seven edges.  In Fig.  2, ea, eb, ec, and eu are respectively the environmental emissions in upstream sectors a, b, c, and u triggered by the transactions among downstream sectors, d, e, f, and v.  In this case, the betweenness centrality of transaction (u,v) can be calculated as buv = ea + eb + ec + eu.  As in Eq.  (2), we denote by buv(l1,l2) the environmental emissions associated with supply-chain paths that pass through a transaction from sector u to sector v that has upstream industrial supply chains with path lengths of l1 and downstream industrial supply chains with path lengths of l2 as follows.  Here Juv represents an (n×n) matrix whose (u,v) element is 1 and other elements are 0.  It should be noted that when l1 =l2 =0, buv(0, 0) = fuauvyv.  Considering all the supply-chain paths passing through transaction (u,v), edge betweenness centrality buv in Eq.  (6) can be computed based on the following matrix computation.  If a speciﬁc transaction from u to v does not exist in the supply-chain network, its edge betweenness centrality is zero because we have auv= 0.  As in vertex betweenness centrality, each edge betweenness centrality is computed in Ο(nw). 