
One of the best-established stylized facts in the decision-making literature is that individuals are over-optimistic about
future outcomes (e. g. , Weinstein, 1980).  Over-optimism is related to overconﬁdence but is distinct. 1 Over-optimism creates
an upward bias in the mean of the distribution while overconﬁdence creates an upward bias in its precision.  Importantly,
prior analytical work also suggests the possibility that over-optimism can increase ﬁrm performance (e. g. , Hackbarth, 2008),
but little empirical work exists on this topic.  We investigate this issue empirically. 
We ﬁrst note that individuals are over-optimistic in general, and particularly so regarding the effect of their own actions
(we call this phenomenon “static over-optimism”).  In addition, managers may suffer from a biased attribution of causality
after a series of good performances that leads them to under-estimate the role of random noise and over-attribute successes
to their own actions (we call this phenomenon “dynamic overconﬁdence”).  The combination of these two phenomena leads
to an increase in over-optimism after a series of successes (we call this phenomenon “dynamic over-optimism”): optimistic
managerial actions (or beliefs) receive an increasingly disproportionate weight in the overall estimation of a project's
success.  Thus, our ﬁrst hypothesis posits that the degree of managerial over-optimism should increase after a series of
successes.  This miscalibration in managerial prediction may encourage managers to exert greater effort, as they expect this
effort to pay-off with a greater likelihood.  Naturally, this additional effort should have a positive effect on ﬁrm performance. 
Hence, our second hypothesis conjectures that ﬁrm performance should increase following a series of successes, even if the
increase remains below the level expected by an over-optimistic manager. 
We note that our hypotheses can be motivated in an economic framework in which individuals are Bayesian.  For
example, Van den Steen (2004) proposes a model in which a representative agent is endowed with priors.  In the most basic
setting, a manager can choose from a menu of actions.  For each action, the manager's prior over the likelihood of success
equals the true probability plus a (non-invertible) random error.  The manager optimally chooses the action for which her
prior is highest, which is also the action whose probability of success the manager is most likely to over-estimate ex post. 
This generates the static over-optimism we discuss above.  This framework also allows for a Bayesian but biased attribution
of performance that yields a form of dynamic overconﬁdence.  Combined with static over-optimism, this phenomenon
generates the dynamic over-optimism that is the core of our ﬁrst hypothesis.  Our second hypothesis relies on the idea that
over-optimism can elicit higher effort from management.  As noted in Van den Steen (2004) this emerges naturally if the
payoff is increasing in effort when the action is successful. 
Our empirical ﬁndings are consistent with our analytical framework and support the presence of dynamic overoptimism.  First, we show that managers who experienced more frequent successes in the recent past, subsequently issue
more optimistic forecasts.  Further analysis reveals that they also exercise stock options later (Malmendier and Tate, 2005;
Campbell Name, 2011) and issue earnings releases with a more optimistic tone (based on textual analysis).  Importantly, these
results hold in speciﬁcations with manager ﬁxed effects.  By showing that over-optimism has an endogenous and dynamic
component, our results suggest that, at least to a certain extent, some managers are made (rather than just born) overoptimistic.  Second, and importantly, we show that the over-optimism we document can improve ﬁrm performance and that
managers appear to exert greater effort to meet their own over-optimistic forecasts.  Speciﬁcally, ﬁrm accounting performance and quarterly market return increase as the degree of managerial over-optimism increases.  In contrast, measures of
accruals or real earnings management are not affected by this over-optimism.  These results suggest that the increase in ﬁrm
performance is genuine.  They also suggest that managers, being over-optimistic regarding the likelihood of meeting the
expectations they set, do not feel the need to manage earnings in order to reach their forecasts.  Third, using comparative
statics, we show that our empirical ﬁndings are consistent with our economic framework, which predicts that overoptimism increases with ﬂexibility in decision-making and with the diffusion of priors, and decreases with managerial
experience.  Van den Steen (2004) notes these comparative statics empirically distinguish this framework from others.  Lastly,
we perform a path analysis.  Results demonstrate a series of structural links that go from past performance to overconﬁdence, from overconﬁdence to over-optimism, from over-optimism to effort, and from effort to performance.  This chain
of links is consistent with our overall framework. 
We contribute to the literature in several ways.  First, we show that over-optimism can increase ﬁrm performance. 
Although prior analytical work suggests this possibility (e. g. , Benabou and Tirole, 2002; Compte and Postlewaite, 2004; Van
den Steen, 2004; Hackbarth, 2008; Gervais Name, 2011), little empirical work exists on this topic.  Second, we present evidence consistent with the comparative statics and ancillary predictions of the economic over-optimism framework.  Lastly,
we empirically distinguish between overconﬁdence and over-optimism.  The importance of this distinction has been noted
by prior literature.  For example, Moore and Healy (2008) explain (p.  503) “[t]he ﬁrst problem with overconﬁdence research
is that the most popular research paradigm confounds overestimation and overprecision. ” There is now an established
literature on overconﬁdence in managerial behavior (see Glaser and Weber, 2010 for a review), yet much less is known
about over-optimism in this context. 