 1.  Introduction The most valuable component in South Africa's ﬁshing industry is its hake ﬁshery, which targets two species, the shallow-water (Merluccius capensis) and deep-water (M.  paradoxus) Cape hakes.  It accounts N50% of overall ﬁsheries value in the country (Butterworth and Rademeyer, 2005.  Powers et al. , 2010), with landed catch worth approximately ZAR (South African Rand) 2. 5 billion in 2008 (Petersen et al. , 2010), and is presently estimated at ±ZAR 5 billion (Durholtz, 2014, personal communication).  It also generates approximately 30,000 jobs (Rademeyer et al. , 2008a), and is estimated to comprise as much as half of all ﬁsh eaten in the country (Bacela et al. , 2003).  The largest sector of the hake ﬁshery is offshore demersal trawling, which lands 85% of the catch (Field et al. , 2013), and is an important contributor to the large post-1990 export market for South African hake (Crosoer et al. , 2006).  It is known that when ﬁsheries are managed for long-term sustainability and only the ecological context is considered, while human aspects are ignored, failure of management often results.  Therefore, the international literature generally acknowledges that ﬁsheries need to be managed with economic and social objectives in addition to ecological ones (Browman and Stergiou, 2005.  Folke et al. , 2007.  Garcia and Charles, 2008.  Pitcher and Lam, 2010).  A better understanding of the economic structure and function of the hake industry and its interaction and connection to the ecological system, will serve to inform management.  Successful actions related to sustainability are underpinned through the linkages of ecosystems to social and economic systems (Folke et al. , 2007).  Furthermore, a current scientiﬁc challenge is to ﬁnd coherence among the economic, social, ecological and institutional sectors of ﬁsheries through the utilization of all pertinent knowledge (Garcia and Charles, 2008).  As a step towards this, modelling provides a means to assist in understanding the dynamics of the economic system and identify potential links to the ecological system.  Modelling is an approach that can be used to test understanding, synthesize knowledge and make predictions.  Blackford et al.  (2010), and Starﬁeld and Jarre (2011) suggest that it is a useful means of conducting interdisciplinary research.  In the hake industry, several economic factors are known to have importance for the hake ﬁshing industry.  Exchange rate and market value of ﬁsh affect the ZAR price of hake, fuel price and catch per unit effort reﬂect the cost to companies to catch hake, and industrial organization affects company operations (see for example BCLME, 2004, 2006).  Many of these factors, such as fuel price (Sumaila et al. , 2008) and exchange rate (Asche, 2014) are known to be important internationally for ﬁsheries proﬁtability.  The interaction of these and other variables affect company behaviour, and proﬁts.  To understand the function of the South African offshore hake trawl industry, it is therefore valuable to produce a novel prototype model to examine the effect on and relative importance of these and other factors for the industry.  The aim of this study is to develop and describe an agent-based model that captures a variety of these important drivers for the industry (Fig.  1).  This model is designed within the framework of ultimately linking it to an ecosystem model of the Southern Benguela.  There is much complexity involved in the industrial structure of companies and company clusters in the offshore hake industry, as well as variability in the types of product that they sell and their ﬂeet compositions (Cooper et al. , 2014).  Given this complexity and the heterogeneity of ﬁshing vessels, companies and markets involved in the industry, agent-based modelling is particularly well suited for modelling it.  Agent-based models (ABMs) capture complex systems comprised of heterogeneous, autonomous entities, ‘agents’, that interact with each other and their modelled environment through behaviours governed by simple rules, and which give rise to the behaviour of the system as a whole (Macal and North, 2010).  ABMs allow the capturing of individual-level information, complexity, interdisciplinary and cross-scale perspectives, giving greater predictive and explanatory power (An et al. , 2005), particularly in the broader ecological-economic context within which the present model is developed.  Computational models like ABMs have the advantages of being able to deal with complex, stochastic systems, and of being able to model how the activities of elements at one scale have impacts on patterns observed at another scale (Levin et al. , 1997).  They allow the modelling of heterogeneous economic agents and therefore represent a new and alternate way of modelling and understanding economic systems (Deissenberg et al. , 2008).  This may be especially advantageous in modelling the economics of resource-extraction systems, such as ﬁsheries, where not only are the economic agents heterogeneous but where environmental heterogeneity also plays an important role (Nolan et al. , 2009).  Despite these advantages ABMs have not often been applied to economic aspects of ﬁsheries, and this represents a signiﬁcant area for development.  Previous applications in ﬁsheries have often centred around the topic of understanding ﬂeet dynamics and ﬁshing strategies (Bastardie et al. , 2010.  Boschetti and Brede, 2009.  Cabral et al. , 2010.  Little et al. , 2004.  Schafer, 2007.  Soulié and Thébaud, 2006.  Wilson et al. , 2007.  Yu et al. , 2009), where they have provided some useful insights into ﬂeet behaviour and the way that resources are used.  Little et al.  (2009), for example, has taken the ﬂeet effort allocation scenario a step further and examined how individual transferable quotas affect a multispecies, multi-sector ﬁshery in terms of ﬁshing ﬂeet behaviour, discarding, catch-levels, proﬁtability and so forth (Little et al. , 2009).  The present paper forms the ﬁrst of a two-part publication and will describe the development and validation of an agent-based model of the South African offshore hake trawling industry.  The second, upcoming paper will explore a variety of scenarios with the model to examine interactions and trade-offs of external drivers and market organization.  The layout of this ﬁrst paper is as follows.  ﬁrst, brief and relevant background information and how this informed the model design and development is described.  Then, in the results section the initial validation and testing of the model, including its sensitivities, are described.  Finally, the summary and conclusion section examines the contribution of the model to the bio-economic modelling literature, the potential applications of the model, its relevance to management and possibilities for linkages to an ecological model in future.  <Middle> Methods.  2. 1.  The Offshore Trawl Fishery as It Relates to Model Design.  Given the dominance of the offshore demersal hake trawl sector in catch (85%) and exports of South Africa's ﬁnancially important hake ﬁshery (Butterworth and Rademeyer, 2005.  Field et al. , 2013.  Powers et al. , 2010), a detailed study was made of its industry.  Details of this study can be found in Cooper et al.  (2014), but a brief and relevant summary is provided here in relation to the model structure.  The industry of the demersal hake ﬁshery is highly vertically integrated, with many of the companies involved in most aspects of the value chain from catching and processing of ﬁsh to its distribution.  Fishing rights are issued to individuals (henceforth “rightsholders”) in the hake industry rather than to vessels or companies.  These rights have been allocated for 15 years (ending 2021) and are a ﬁxed percentage of the total allowable catch, which is allocated annually on the basis of a two-species operational management procedure (Table 1.  Rademeyer et al. , 2008b).  Horizontal consolidation of rights is important.  Although the industry comprises 52 rightsholders these are consolidated into seven company clusters through various catch share and joint venture agreements1 (Cooper et al. , 2014).  Each cluster effectively functions as a single company or ﬁshing business entity.  Based on their operations, four categories of company clusters can be deﬁned.  large, medium, small and super-cluster.  These differ in the number and types of vessels owned, rights-shares, processing efﬁciency (i. e.  efﬁciency with which companies can convert whole, raw ﬁsh to ﬁnished product) and business strategies (Cooper et al. , 2014).  The ﬁrst agent class in the model is company clusters, and based on the industry structure as at 2013, there are four types of these agents.  small, medium, large and super-cluster agents.  The company clusters operate and mostly possess their own ﬂeets of trawlers (and normally employ the skippers and crews on a permanent basis).  Vessels from the offshore trawl industry may be classiﬁed as a) freezer stern trawlers and b) factory freezer trawlers, both of which store the ﬁsh at sea in on-board freezers and consequently land frozen ﬁsh, or c) wetﬁsh stern trawlers, which store ﬁsh chilled on ice and land their catch fresh (unfrozen) within a few days (see Table 2).  These three vessel types are represented as different types of the modelled vessel agent class.  Two types of hake are represented in the model, fresh and frozen hake, to capture and distinguish the two ways it can be landed and consequently processed and sold on.  Joint products (i. e.  other landed species) are not considered in the model at this stage, since although some can be high-value, they are non-target species and represent only a small proportion of landings and exports.  Depending on the vessel type the ﬁsh may be partially or completed processed at sea.  In the case of unprocessed or partially processed, after ﬁsh is landed it is processed ashore in large factories.  Processed ﬁsh (i. e.  ﬁnal hake product) is sold to distributors and exporters.  Some of the large companies that perform distribution and export also sell directly to clients.  Clients of ﬁshing companies are frequently domestic or international retail chains and wholesale distributors.  It is difﬁcult to identify individual international clients and volumes of ﬁsh purchased.  Markets for hake were therefore treated at the country level in the model.  In a separate study by Cooper (2015), a comprehensive analysis of TradeMap export data revealed the major international markets for hake, i. e.  those markets who imported N500 t of South African hake per annum for the data period (Fig.  2).  These countries were Spain, Italy, Portugal, United Kingdom (UK), Australia, France, Germany, the United States of America (USA) and the Netherlands.  They were all represented as client agents in the model, along with one substitute agent that collectively represented the total demand of all other small importing countries (those countries that imported b500 t of hake per annum) and one agent that represented the South African domestic market.  In summary, the agent-based model was informed by the industry structure during 2013. 2 The model includes three types of vessel agents that ‘catch’ and ‘land’ hake ﬁsh, four types of company cluster agents that each operate as a single entity processing and marketing the hake, and eleven types of client (i. e.  market) agents in the form of importing foreign country markets and a domestic market for fresh and frozen hake.  All agents can exchange hake, segregated as fresh and frozen ﬁsh (in units of metric tonnes), and money (ZAR and Euros), which are all consequently deﬁned as model currencies.  2. 2.  Prototyping Approach.  As part of the model development and implementation process, a rapid prototyping approach was used.  Starﬁeld and Jarre (2011) suggest this approach of building a ﬁnal model through a series of prototypes with the ﬁrst built as fast and simply as possible, simplifying assumptions listed and then the model tested.  Subsequent prototypes are then built in much the same manner in incremental steps of complexity with full assumption listing and testing at each stage.  Rapid prototyping has several advantages, including (i) not stalling the modelling process due to data gaps or poor data and (ii) rapidly producing preliminary results that allow an assessment of what the model is capable of, the direction the model development could/should take, and reﬁnement or reconsideration of the model objectives (Starﬁeld and Jarre, 2011).  As part of this process a thorough assumption analysis was carried out.  Assumptions are created when something is omitted while creating a simpliﬁed, purpose-built model of the real world (Starﬁeld and Jarre, 2011), and core behavioural assumptions, for example, often underpin the mechanistic explanations of a model and it is therefore important to test them (Tsang, 2006).  Pelletier and Mahévas (2005) state that models for policy-related applications should be designed to allow for the inclusion of various combinations of policy designs, parameter values and model assumptions to ensure that the models are not overly dependent on any parameter value or model assumption.  A sound design and thorough sensitivity analysis cover the ﬁrst two points, but an assumption analysis is essential to ensure that model behaviour is not overly dependent on any one assumption.  Assumption analysis can involve examining whether observations from the real world are commensurate with the assumptions made (Tsang, 2006).  Starﬁeld and Jarre (2011) explain that a thorough assumption analysis is as important as a sensitivity analysis and should involve testing key assumptions through making basic modiﬁcations to the model to determine how each assumption might affect the models' results.  The assumption analysis for HakeSim tests the effects of relaxing a variety of fundamental assumptions made in the choice of model design to determine the full effect of the assumption.  This helps with the choice of the best model structure through a process of elimination of assumptions, some of which might signiﬁcantly affect model function while others may not.  It is essentially looking at a trade-off between producing the simplest model possible and not making over-simplifying assumptions that would negatively affect model behaviour and usefulness (Starﬁeld and Jarre, 2011).  During rapid prototyping, as each new procedure was added the model was debugged and tested by varying inputs and examining outputs and model behaviour, until the ﬁnal prototype described in the present manuscript was arrived at.  Procedures were independently tested and some of the sub-models were also independently implemented in Microsoft Excel to verify their outputs, e. g.  the equation for vessel fullness after catches.  Ad hoc testing was completed on the ﬁnal model prototype, in order to test that the model was functioning.  Extreme values were used as inputs to the basic model interface, such as extremely low or high fuel prices, unrealistic vessel numbers, all frozen or fresh ﬁsh situations, and zero values for inputs, to determine whether the model behaved erratically.  Finally, a full sensitivity analysis was undertaken, and scenario analyses were also conducted to examine whether the model had interesting and realistic behaviours.  These served as a foundation to more complex analyses (Cooper and Jarre, 2017).  2. 3.  Model Procedures.  The model operates on a monthly time step, to match export and landings data.  Individual years are also marked to update annual ﬁshing allocations, e. g.  total allowable catch (TAC), and one complete model run is ten years.  Since companies own and operate a particular ﬂeet of vessels, a suite of vessel agents are linked to a particular company agent for the entire model run.  The number and types of vessel agents that are linked to (i. e.  ‘operated’ by) each company agent are speciﬁed as a model input in the initialization phase.  In each time-step of the model a range of procedures occur.  These sub-models and procedures have been categorized as three broad steps below, for ease of explanation.  2. 3. 1.  Vessel Activation and Fishing.  Companies check whether there is a market demand for fresh or frozen ﬁsh and then activate fresh and/or freezer vessels one by one according to a randomly assigned rank number until all of the company's quota weight assigned for that month is caught.  The maximum quantity of hake that one company can catch in a single time step, Q, in tonnes per month, is calculated as, where R is the company's allocated ﬁshing right which is a ﬁxed percentage of the TAC.  TAC is the maximum quantity of hake (tonnes) allowed to be caught in that year, it updates at the start of each modelled year and is based on real time-series (appended Table A. 1).  Once activated, each vessel executes a ﬁshing procedure, which determines the total landings of that vessel for the monthly time step, as follows, where L is the quantity of hake caught and landed by one active vessel on a single ﬁshing trip (i. e.  in one monthly, time-step).  M is the maximum capacity for hake (tonnes) that a ﬁshing vessel can land in one month.  In the standard model run input values of M per vessel type are based on the average number of trips vessels make per month and the average maximum storage capacity per vessel type in the real South African ﬂeet (c.  2013), see Table 2.  Depending on whether the vessel is a fresh-ﬁsh or freezer vessel the landings will be separated as fresh (LFR) or frozen (LFZ) hake in the model.  The SC is the stochasticity of catching ﬁsh and CPUE is the catch per unit effort based on a transformed scale (from 0 to 1) of real CPUE values (appended Table A. 2).  The deviation in CPUE is determined by a number drawn from a random distribution between 0 and the SC.  The vessel's monthly landing is determined by the ‘catchability’ of ﬁsh, captured as CPUE and SC, a proxy for the environmental variability that can affect individual catches.  Since recruitment and natural mortality of hake are not well understood for the Southern Benguela (Nel et al. , 2007), this crude proxy was the best ﬁrst attempt at capturing environmental variability that could be made.  Once a company's monthly quota has been caught, a total operating cost to the company of all active vessels for that time-step can be calculated.  Running costs and catch costs per landed tonne of fresh/frozen ﬁsh differ between vessel types.  Given limited data, fuel consumption per vessel type is assumed to be directly related to engine size (HP).  It is further assumed to be determined by daily fuel usage (with 265 days ﬁshing per year) spread evenly across the 12 months of the year (based on company interviews that indicated ﬁshing activity to be almost consistent through the year), where FM is the vessel's fuel usage (l·month−1).  N is vessel engine size (HP) and FD is daily fuel consumption per horsepower (l·HP−1·day−1).  values for these in the standard model run are based on South African offshore hake trawling industry data (see Table 3).  The FM is used to calculate the fuel cost of an active ﬁshing vessel for a one month time-step (AVCF) in South African Rands (ZAR), where D is the fuel price (ZAR. l−1).  For a standard model run the average diesel price paid by the offshore ﬁshing industry for the 2000–2012 time series was used (Table 4).  An active vessel accrues other costs (AVCO) in addition to fuel, such as crew salaries and wages and additional variable costs directly related to ﬁshing.  These have been described for the European demersal trawling ﬂeet and were used to estimate an average per vessel cost (Table 5) in the model.  The total cost for an active vessel (AVCT) in ZAR is calculated accordingly as.  2. 3. 2.  Company Processing & Sale of Fish.  Landed hake is processed in companies to end products, which may be anything from fresh whole, head-on ﬁsh that are only gutted to crumbed frozen ﬁllets (Cooper et al. , 2014).  Modelled company agents convert hake landings to hake product and waste, based on the processing efﬁciency of the company agent (Table 1), where H is the ﬁnal processed hake product for sale to client agents, L is the landed quantity of hake and E is the processing efﬁciency of the company agent.  The procedures and variables are segregated for frozen (FZ.  Eq.  (6a)) and fresh (FR.  Eq.  (6b)) hake.  Since E represents the efﬁciency with which a company converts whole ﬁsh to ﬁnal product, it also determines how much ﬁsh is ‘lost’ during processing, where WFZ and WFR are the quantities of frozen and fresh hake, respectively, lost as waste (tonnes).  Modelled client agents, activated at random, then purchase from randomly selected companies one by one until their demand for fresh and frozen ﬁsh is satisﬁed, or all the companies have run out of ﬁsh.  Modelled client demand (tonnes) is based on real world demand of the largest international markets for hake.  2. 3. 3.  Cost and Proﬁt Calculations by Companies.  Company agents calculate their revenue at the end of the time-step.  In the model only revenue from hake sales is considered, income from commercial bycatch is ignored, where RT is total revenue, RFZ is the revenue for all frozen hake sales and RFR is the revenue from all fresh hake sales in ZAR made by the company agent, and i is the list of clients to which these sales were made in the time-step.  SFZ and SFR are the respective quantities of frozen and fresh hake (tonnes) sold to each client, and VFZ and VFR are the corresponding values (Euros/t) paid, based on real domestic and international markets.  X is the exchange rate of Euro to ZAR (appended Table A. 3).  To calculate company proﬁt, all costs to company agents, including vessel costs described in Section 2. 3. 1 are determined, where CT is the total monthly cost to a company (ZAR).  A is the number of active vessels.  AVCT is the total vessel cost (from Eq.  (5)) for each active vessel.  T is the total number of vessels owned by a company and CC is the company costs (ZAR), which include repairs and maintenance to all vessels and facilities and non-variable costs.  Since the number of vessels a company owns scales with its size these costs are reduced to a per vessel value (CC).  Values used in the model are estimated from running costs of similar European demersal ﬂeets (Table 5).  Vessels and their estimated monthly costs are differentiated into wet-ﬁsh, freezer, and factory freezer vessels in the model.  Finally, gross proﬁts are calculated for individual companies based on the balance between the total revenue (RT) and total short term costs (CT), in each time step.  (Opportunity costs, amortization costs and capital depreciation are ignored in these calculations due to insufﬁcient data. ) Longer term calculations of nett proﬁt which might be paid to shareholders are not calculated in the model.  This is due to the fact that long term costs, such as capital (re-)investments, are difﬁcult to estimate for different companies and may represent costs that do not occur at ﬁxed intervals or have ﬁxed values. 