
One of the best-established stylized facts in the decision-making literature is that individuals are over-optimistic about
future outcomes (e. g. , Weinstein, 1980).  Over-optimism is related to overconﬁdence but is distinct. 1 Over-optimism creates
an upward bias in the mean of the distribution while overconﬁdence creates an upward bias in its precision.  Importantly,
prior analytical work also suggests the possibility that over-optimism can increase ﬁrm performance (e. g. , Hackbarth, 2008),
but little empirical work exists on this topic.  We investigate this issue empirically. 
We ﬁrst note that individuals are over-optimistic in general, and particularly so regarding the effect of their own actions
(we call this phenomenon “static over-optimism”).  In addition, managers may suffer from a biased attribution of causality
after a series of good performances that leads them to under-estimate the role of random noise and over-attribute successes
to their own actions (we call this phenomenon “dynamic overconﬁdence”).  The combination of these two phenomena leads
to an increase in over-optimism after a series of successes (we call this phenomenon “dynamic over-optimism”): optimistic
managerial actions (or beliefs) receive an increasingly disproportionate weight in the overall estimation of a project's
success.  Thus, our ﬁrst hypothesis posits that the degree of managerial over-optimism should increase after a series of
successes.  This miscalibration in managerial prediction may encourage managers to exert greater effort, as they expect this
effort to pay-off with a greater likelihood.  Naturally, this additional effort should have a positive effect on ﬁrm performance. 
Hence, our second hypothesis conjectures that ﬁrm performance should increase following a series of successes, even if the
increase remains below the level expected by an over-optimistic manager. 
We note that our hypotheses can be motivated in an economic framework in which individuals are Bayesian. 