1.  Introduction  We provide evidence on the effects of bank mergers and acquisitions (M&As) in the U. S.  on borrowers’ voluntary disclosure of ﬁrm-speciﬁc information to public ﬁnancial markets.  The past three decades have witnessed waves of consolidations  through M&As in the U. S.  banking industry.  This trend has signiﬁcantly reduced the number of banking institutions, and a  few large banks now hold the bulk of assets.  Researchers argue that the consolidation has fundamentally altered the nature  of banks as ﬁnancial intermediaries, both directly by affecting how banks monitor and ﬁnance borrowers (e. g. , changing the  type and nature of products and services banks offer), and indirectly by affecting borrowers’ demand for products and services from alternative (public) ﬁnancial markets.  Evidence on how bank mergers affect borrowers’ disclosure adds to our  understanding of their consequences, and contributes to the growing literature that seeks to understand how ﬁrms’ incentive to produce and disseminate public information is affected by various institutional mechanisms in a country’s ﬁnancial  markets (e. g. , Ball et al. , 20 0 0.  Leuz et al. , 2003.  Bushman et al. , 2004 ).  Furthermore, to the extent that public information  is a key determinant of the development of stock markets, such evidence can shed light on the interaction between public  stock markets and bank markets ( Allen and Gale, 20 0 0.  Levine, 2005 ).   We posit that bank mergers affect borrowers’ incentive to disclose information publicly by affecting the monitoring and  ﬁnancing services provided by banks.  Prior work, however, has not reached consensus on the speciﬁc nature and degree  of the monitoring and ﬁnancing effects of bank mergers, especially for publicly listed borrowers.  Therefore, whether bank  mergers can cause economically meaningful public information spillover through increased disclosure by borrowers is ex  ante unclear and ultimately an empirical question.   On the monitoring side, mergers can change borrowers’ disclosure incentives by changing the nature and extent of bank  monitoring.  Traditional banking literature emphasizes the unique role played by banks because of their ability to produce  soft, private information about their borrowers.  This ability allows banks to serve as delegated monitors for public capital  providers who ﬁnd it diﬃcult to monitor ﬁrms for which much of the information is soft (e. g. , Diamond, 1984, 1991.  Fama,  1985 ).  Following bank mergers, borrowers’ incentive to disclose may increase or decrease depending on how mergers affect  bank monitoring.  On one hand, mergers can alter the nature of bank monitoring from being more soft information based to  being more hard information based, as mergers create more complex and hierarchical organizations that are less effective  at collecting and processing soft information but may be more eﬃcient at processing hard information (e. g. , Stein, 2002.   Berger et al. , 2005 ).  This can lead to increased public disclosure by borrowers for two reasons.  First, merged banks themselves may rely more on hard information that can be eﬃciently collected through public disclosures ( Gormley et al. , 2012 ).   Second, to the extent that banks’ comparative advantage in monitoring primarily emanates from their ability to process soft  information, public capital providers may rely less on bank monitoring after mergers and instead demand additional public  disclosure to facilitate their own monitoring efforts.  On the other hand, to the extent that mergers discipline banks plagued  by agency problems, monitoring effort may increase at banks that did not suﬃciently monitor their borrowers prior to the  mergers.  This may increase the willingness of public capital providers to delegate the monitoring role to banks, reducing  the public capital providers’ demand for public disclosure.   On the ﬁnancing side, borrowers’ disclosure can change if mergers affect their access to bank credit.  Bank mergers are  often motivated by eﬃciency gain considerations, and banks take actions and make changes in their operations to realize  these gains.  While these changes may beneﬁt the merging banks, they are not necessarily welfare improving to all borrowers  ( Karceski et al. , 2005.  Berger et al. , 1999.  DeYoung et al. , 2009 ).  Some borrowers may be adversely affected by these changes  and might experience reduced credit availability.  For example, the merged entity may re-balance and re-optimize their portfolios to achieve better risk management.  When merged banks have signiﬁcant geographic overlap, they may reduce loans  to some existing borrowers to reduce their exposure to the local area ( Amore et al. , 2013 ).  Or, following the disciplinary  acquisition of a poorly run bank, the merged entity may cut lending to borrowers who were beneﬁtting from ineﬃciently  priced cheap loans from the acquired bank.  Reduced credit availability might prompt these borrowers to increase public  disclosure to improve their access to alternative ﬁnancing sources ( Diamond and Verrecchia, 1991.  Baiman and Verrecchia,  1996 ).  At the same time, these changes may also beneﬁt some borrowers whose disclosure may decrease or remain unchanged.  Therefore, whether bank mergers can cause any meaningful public information spillover via the ﬁnancing channel  is also an empirical question.  Our analysis is based on a comprehensive sample of nearly 13,0 0 0 syndicated loan contracts where the lead lenders  are commercial banks or bank holding companies and the borrowers are publicly traded companies in the U. S.  exchanges  with ongoing lending relationships with their banks.  We use a difference-in-differences (DiD) design in which we compare  changes in the disclosure of borrowers whose banks are involved in M&As during their contract periods to contemporaneous  changes in the disclosure of borrowers whose banks are not involved in M&As.   Using the incidence of conference calls as our main measure of disclosure, we ﬁnd that borrowers signiﬁcantly increase  disclosure after their lending banks engage in M&As.  The disclosure increases are not concentrated in periods immediately  after mergers.  instead, they persist throughout post-merger periods.  These effects are robust to the inclusion of controls for  known determinants of disclosure and to alternative measures of disclosure based on earnings forecasts.   In cross-sectional analyses, we ﬁnd that the effects of bank mergers are stronger for borrowers who are more vulnerable  to disruptions in banking services following mergers.  Speciﬁcally, the disclosure increases are larger for borrowers who are  more reliant on the merging banks to ﬁnance their assets and who do not have alternative existing banking relationships.   Consistent with the monitoring channel, we also ﬁnd that disclosure increases are larger when banks perform a stronger  monitoring role (as proxied by the number of covenants in the borrowers’ existing covenants), when information about  borrowers’ operations tends to be soft (as proxied by a composite score based on borrowers’ intangible assets and R&D  expenditure), and when their banks’ pre-merger organizational structures are more suitable for soft-information monitoring  (as proxied by the number of branches operated by the banks).  Finally, consistent with the ﬁnancing channel, we ﬁnd that  the effects of mergers are stronger for borrowers when the merging banks have more correlated geographic exposures and  thus are more likely to cut lending to their existing borrowers for risk diversiﬁcation purposes.   We examine the sensitivity of our results to two alternative explanations.  The ﬁrst one is that changes in local economic  conditions coinciding with bank mergers could be driving our results.  We conduct three analyses to address this concern.   First, we show that our ﬁndings are robust to the inclusion of a comprehensive set of controls for location-level economic  conditions.  Second, we ﬁnd that our results are robust to the inclusion of state-year or MSA-year interactive dummies that  ﬂexibly absorb the effect of any time-varying local-level economic shocks.  Finally, our ﬁndings are also robust to estimating  the DiD speciﬁcation on a propensity score matched sample in which each treatment borrower (affected by bank mergers) is  matched to an economically similar control borrower (unaffected by bank mergers) from the same location.  These ﬁndings  suggest that the disclosure increase is unlikely to be driven by changes in local economic conditions.  A second alternative  explanation is that our results reﬂect the effect of poor ﬁnancial health of banks engaged in mergers.  We note that prior  studies show that bank mergers in the U. S.  have largely been driven by regulatory, technological, and competitive changes,  and most mergers involved healthy ﬁnancial institutions ( Pilloff, 2004 ).  In addition, we ﬁnd that the disclosure increase does  not vary with proxies for bank performance and also manifests when banks are in good health prior to mergers.   We also document two ﬁndings consistent with the premise that bank mergers cause disruptions in borrowers’ banking  service.  First, we ﬁnd that relative to borrowers whose banks did not engage in M&A activities, borrowers of merged banks  reduce their reliance on bank credit and increase their reliance on public bond ﬁnancing following mergers.  Second, we  document signiﬁcant negative stock price reactions to borrowers upon the announcement of their bank mergers.  Collectively,  these ﬁndings are consistent with the interpretation that the disclosure increase reﬂects borrowers’ response to disruptions  in banking services caused by mergers at their existing lending banks.   Our study contributes to the literature on bank mergers.  Merger waves over the last three decades have fundamentally  altered the nature of banks as ﬁnancial intermediaries in the U. S. , and a growing literature seeks to understand the economic consequences of this development.  Our study is the ﬁrst to explore the consequences of this change for the public  information environment in the banking market.  Our results suggest that banking consolidation prompts borrowers to increase transparency to improve access to alternative ﬁnancing sources and to meet the informational demands of capital  providers in a changed monitoring environment in which both public capital providers and banks rely more on public, hard  information for monitoring purposes.  The large number of bank mergers in the U. S.  over the last three decades suggests  that our ﬁndings can shed light on the over-time increases in voluntary disclosure by U. S.  public companies ( Bushee et al. ,  2004 ).  More generally, because the availability of public information affects the ability of stock markets to allocate resources  eﬃciently, our ﬁnding of a spillover effect from bank mergers also improves our understanding of the channels through  which ﬁnancial markets affect resource allocation in the economy, and informs the debate on bank- versus market-based  ﬁnancial systems ( Allen and Gale, 20 0 0 .  Levine, 20 05 ).  While our main focus is on the consequences for the public information environment, our ﬁndings on borrowers’ ﬁnancing changes around mergers add to our understanding of how U. S.   bank mergers affect bank credit supply to publicly listed borrowers.   Our study also contributes to recent research establishing the importance of banking relations on ﬁrms’ public information disclosure behaviors.  Lo (2014) ﬁnds that borrowers increase disclosure following deterioration in their banks’ ﬁnancial  health, consistent with the hypothesis that ﬁrms increase disclosure to facilitate access to public ﬁnancing when continued  access to bank ﬁnancing is under threat.  Vashishtha (2014) ﬁnds that borrowers reduce disclosure after covenant violations.   he concludes that reduced disclosure reﬂects a delegation of monitoring to banks by shareholders who consequently demand less disclosure.  Gormley et al.  (2012) ﬁnd an increase in timely loss recognition after foreign bank entry in India due  to these banks’ greater demand for hard, public information for screening and monitoring borrowers.  Martin and Roychowdhury (2015) ﬁnd evidence of a decrease in timely loss recognition after the initiation of trading in credit default swaps, consistent with a reduction in lenders’ monitoring incentives following this development.  Our study shares with these papers  the common theme that borrowers optimally change disclosure in response to changes in their banking relationships.   The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 develops our hypotheses.  Section 3 describes the data and sample.   Main results are presented and discussed in Section 4 .  Section 5 presents additional analyses and robustness tests, and  Section 6 concludes.   2.  Hypotheses development.  Prior work argues that bank merger waves have signiﬁcantly altered the scope and nature of banks’ operations, as well  as their ability and incentives to monitor and ﬁnance borrowers ( Berger et al. , 1999 ).  We posit that these changes can affect  borrowers’ disclosure incentives in response to changes in borrowers’ monitoring environments (the monitoring channel),  and to changes in banks’ ﬁnancing services to borrowers (the ﬁnancing channel).  In this section, we summarize the relevant  arguments.   2. 1.  The monitoring channel.  Under the monitoring channel, bank mergers can cause borrowers to increase disclosure because the banks’ monitoring  style evolves from being based primarily on soft information to being based more on hard, quantitative information.  The  traditional literature on relationship banking recognizes banks’ role as delegated monitors because of their unique ability to  access and produce soft, private information about their borrowers (e. 