 1.  Introduction Many countries subsidise the production and consumption of fossil fuels.  Most subsidies are given downstream, to reduce the cost of consuming fossil fuels (Coady et al. , 2016).  While these subsidies beneﬁt fuel consumers, at least in the short run, they also have a number of negative effects (IEA, 2014).  First, they contribute to ﬁscal imbalances and thus crowd out other government spending.  Second, subsidies stimulate excessive fossil fuel consumption contributing to increased emissions of harmful pollution such as CO2.  Finally, in the long run low oil prices encourage the development of energy-intensive industries and discourage development of renewable technologies.  Despite the negative effects, it has proven difﬁcult to remove fossil fuel subsidies.  In many countries fossil fuel subsidies were originally introduced to improve consumer welfare, and proposals to remove such subsidies could result in citizen protests.  We ﬁnd, however, that the biggest subsidisers may increase their welfare by removing their oil subsidies.  The reason is that subsidy removal allows these countries to shift oil from the domestic market to the international market where prices are higher.  The biggest fossil fuel subsidisers are also major producers and exporters of oil and gas.  In fact, the heaviest fossil fuel subsidisers are the OPEC countries, mostly located in the Middle-East and North-Africa (MENA) region.  Public spending on subsidies – estimated as the gap between international and domestic prices – is, on average, much higher in the oil exporting MENA region than in other countries.  In particular, there are extensive subsidies in the transport sector.  According to IMF (2014), subsidies to gasoline and diesel in the MENA countries amounted to almost 4% of the regional GDP in 2012.  Oil products used in the transport sector are also subsidised to a certain degree in other Non-OECD countries.  Price control is often a key element in fossil fuel subsidies.  However, subsidies can also include cash transfers directly to consumers, as well as tax exemptions and rebates.  Assessing the magnitude of fossil fuels subsidies in all its forms is a task challenged by poor data quality, limited data availability and lack of data comparability (Ellis, 2010).  Like many other studies, we use the price-gap method, calculating the combined effect of reducing the wedge between domestic and international (reference) prices (Koplow, 2009).  The reference price on goods that are traded on the international market, like oil, is usually the international or border price adjusted for market exchange rates, transport and distributional costs, and country speciﬁc taxes and tariffs.  As we focus on price-gap subsidies in the transport sector, we can apply a consistent and uniform dataset as in GIZ (2014) (formerly GTZ), which lists the retail prices of diesel and gasoline in 174 countries, and assess the effects of subsidy reforms. 1 The oil price fall in late 2014 has presented countries with a unique opportunity to phase out fossil fuel consumption subsidies, since the wedge between the global and domestic regulated prices has been reduced.  As a result, consumers would be less hurt by subsidy removal, at least in the short run.  In addition, the recent drop in the oil price has reduced government incomes in OPEC countries, and removal of fossil fuel subsidies would help improve ﬁscal balances.  Several OPEC countries have recently reduced (implicit) subsidies on gasoline and diesel, including Angola, UAE, Saudi-Arabia, Iran, Kuwait, Qatar and Venezuela (IEA, 2016a.  Bloomberg, 2016).  According to IEA (2016b) this has slowed consumption and increased the potential for export.  Other countries outside OPEC, such as India, have also started similar price reforms on gasoline and diesel (IEA, 2016a).  This paper analyses how removal of oil consumption subsidies in the transport sectors might affect oil consumption and production in major geographic regions in the world.  The transport sector currently accounts for 54% of the world's fuel liquid consumption, and the share is expected to increase towards 2040 (IEA, 2014).  We focus on subsidy removal primarily in OPEC countries, but also to a certain extent in other countries.  We also consider a situation where all subsidising countries introduce moderate fuel taxes.  We compare the welfare effects of these policies for different regions, distinguishing between effects on consumers, producers and the government.  To analyse these effects, we use a numerical model of the international oil market called Petro2 (Aune et al. , 2017).  The model incorporates dynamic behavior by oil producers and distinguishes between competitive producers and producers with market power.  The model is described in more detail below.  Our analysis suggests that OPEC countries may achieve signiﬁcant welfare gains by removing the oil subsidies in their transport sector.  On the one hand, OPEC consumers experience a loss due to the higher consumer prices.  There is also a producer surplus loss following a lower world market oil price.  On the other hand, removing oil subsidies involves a huge transfer from oil consumers to the government (or to oil producers, depending on who is in fact paying the subsidies), such that the losses from reduced subsidies are dominated by government gains. 