 1.  Introduction  Theory suggests banks’ demand for high quality ﬁnancial reports varies with their lending strategies and internal information structures.  For example, Stein (2002) predicts that larger intermediaries, with a need to transmit information to  multiple agents within their hierarchical organizations, more frequently request veriﬁed reports from borrowers.  Smaller  ﬁnancial intermediaries, which typically have fewer layers of internal information transfer, are conversely more likely to use  soft information acquired through personal interactions with ﬁrms ( Berger et al. , 2005 ).  In addition to bank size, theories  suggest that exposure concentration may play an equally important role in shaping banks’ interactions with ﬁrms ( Dell’  Ariccia et al. , 1999.  Winton, 1999 ).  These theories suggest a bank’s concentration in a sector implies a degree of expertise.   banks with more exposure to a sector have more interactions with borrowers and are thus more informed.  Banks with less  exposure, and thus fewer substitute sources of information, may demand more detailed and veriﬁed information when contracting with those borrowers, resulting in a negative relation between exposure concentration and high quality information  demand.   A negative relation between the concentration of a bank’s loan portfolio and the extent of information collection from  borrowers is not obvious, however.  Concentration in an industry or region not only increases information about that sector,  but also ampliﬁes portfolio risk.  Collecting more reliable and precise information about concentrated exposures is a plausible  strategy for managing the risk and related scrutiny from regulators, depositors, and the board of directors.   Thus, a positive association may emerge between a bank’s lending concentration and its high quality information collection.   Understanding the relation between the concentration of a bank’s portfolio and its information collection practices is  of interest for several reasons.  First, the banking market has consolidated considerably following more than two decades  of mergers and bank failures.  As a result, the loan market has become more concentrated and individual bank loan portfolios have become more diverse.  Depending on the relation between portfolio concentration and information collection,  these market shifts can affect the demand for auditing from the predominantly private commercial borrowers that choose  whether to have audited ﬁnancial statements, in part, as a function of lending relationships.  Second, C&I loan exposures are  rarely securitized, and banks typically retain their loan exposures after origination ( Loutskina, 2005 , FDIC call reports).  As  a result, regulators expect banks to document more information collection from their larger positions to mitigate portfolio concentration risk ( Basel, 20 0 0.  OCC, 2011 ).  Requiring more collection of hard information about concentrated positions  could, however, impede lending to opaque ﬁrms when a bank is willing to lend based on knowledge arising from its specialization in the borrower’s sector.  Despite a close link between exposure concentration and borrower monitoring techniques  in theoretical models, empirical evidence establishing a link between concentration and information collection is sparse  because banks disclose limited details about their exposures or information collection practices.   We use a bank-level dataset supplied by the Risk Management Association (RMA) to examine the relation between a  bank’s commercial lending concentration and its level of ﬁnancial information quality requested of borrowers. 