 1.  Introduction The Nordic electricity market was liberalized in the late 90’s to increase competition and create incentive to invest in new generation capacity and modernize existing production.  At the same time, the liberalization reduced the barriers on import and export between countries, allowing for more eﬃcient use of many power production technologies.  Currently, the Nordic market covers the countries in the Nordic and Baltic regions, i. e.  Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.  It is divided into 17 bidding areas with individual area prices based on local supply and demand.  Furthermore, an overall market price for electricity, referred to as the system price, is determined for contractual purposes.  This price is based on aggregated supply and demand and disregards transmission constraints between bidding areas.  In contrast, the bidding areas are established to avoid congestion in the system.  The area price and the local load are, therefore, highly correlated.  It is important to account for this market design in the derivation of hedging strategies.  In this paper we study the hedging problem of a Nordic distribution company that has agreed to deliver electricity to customers at a ﬁxed price.  The company has to buy electricity in the spot market, but knows neither the future electricity demand of the customers nor the future market price of electricity.  As trades in the spot market are settled at the area price, the distributor is thereby exposed to both volume risk and area price risk.  To mitigate risk, the company can lock in part of its proﬁt by buying ﬁnancial contracts on electricity, in advance and at a ﬁxed price.  In the Nordic electricity market, however, ﬁnancial contracts are settled against the system price and not the area price.  With signiﬁcant differences between the system price and the area price, especially for periods with high load, this introduces considerable basis risk.  Basis risk may be managed using forward contracts on the price difference.  Nevertheless, only monthly contracts are available.  As a result, the distribution company cannot completely eliminate risk from ﬁxed price agreements.  In spite of this, in 2010 more than 50% of contracts for electricity were based on ﬁxed price agreements in the Nordic market and in EU 60% of contracts were ﬁxed price agreements. 1 This paper contributes to the literature by developing a joint model for the area price, the system price and the load, accounting for both cross-correlations and auto-correlations, and by suggesting strategies for hedging in the presence of local volume risk.  In addition to using base load and peak load contracts for hedging, we study the impact of including contracts for difference.  Furthermore, since the proﬁt distribution is asymmetrical, we complement the traditional variance-based approach by using a one-sided measure of risk in the hedging problem.  We benchmark against the strategy that ignores correlation and hedges at the expected load, as is common practice in the industry.  The importance of accounting for correlation between electricity price and load has already been demonstrated in the existing literature.  As an example, Bessembinder and Lemmon (2002) develop an equilibrium-based market model and ﬁnd that correlation has a substantial impact on the optimal hedging strategies in a forward market.  Closer to our work is Oum et al.  (2006), who consider a load serving entity and study the inﬂuence of correlation on the residual risk following optimal hedging.  The authors derive analytical solutions to the hedging problem for speciﬁc utility functions and approximate these solutions by call options to compensate for the lack of contracts to hedge volume risk.  Their results likewise show that correlation has a signiﬁcant impact on the payoff structure as well as on the hedging strategy.  Whereas these references use a single-period setting, we include multiple periods and thereby capture the basis risk that arises as contracts cover an entire month.  This makes our hedging strategies applicable to the Nordic Market.  An example of using a more advanced electricity price model for hedging is provided by Coulon et al.  (2013), who develop a three-factor model with load-based regime switching to model the electricity market of Texas.  The authors study variations of daily payoffs, using spark spreads or call options and considering a single day and one-dimensional hedging.  The inclusion of load-based regime switching makes calibration and estimation much more diﬃcult on longer time horizons, and, therefore, is not considered in this paper.  For further electricity price modeling, Erlwein et al.  (2010) and Weron et al.  (2004) develop advanced reduced-form models that involve jumps and regime switching and present algorithms to calibrate their models to price data.  In addition to such single-factor models, multi-factor models with jumps and regime switching have also been used by Deng (1999) and Schwartz and Smith (2000), capturing both short-term and long-term dynamics of electricity prices.  Moreover, their approach is extended in Burger et al.  (2004) to include a demand component in the pricing of derivatives.  For a thorough review of electricity price models, see also Carmona and Coulon (2014), covering both structural and reduced-form models.  In contrast to these references, our price model is speciﬁcally tailored to the Nordic market by including both load, area and system prices, whereas the modeling of each component is restricted to a single factor and does not involve jumps.  The inclusion of area and system prices makes it possible to use contracts for difference when hedging.  To the best of our knowledge, the literature has not previously addressed hedging strategies to manage differences between the area and system prices in the Nordic market.  The paper is organized as follows.  The spot and forward markets are described in Section 2.  This includes the dynamics of the system price, the area price and the load as well as the ﬁnancial contracts used to manage the uncertainty of payoffs.  Section 3 covers the various sources of risk faced by a company trading in the spot and forward markets and offering ﬁxed price agreements, whereas we formally introduce the accompanying hedging problem in Section 4.  Section 5. 1 analyzes the load and price data, deﬁnes seasonal components and describes calibration and Section 5. 2 develops the joint model for the system price, the area price and the load.  When calibrated to data from 2012 and applied to data from 2013 and 2014, we analyze the corresponding hedging strategies in Section 6.  We study the effect of using another risk measure, the impact of including the contracts for difference and the implications of improved forecast of average prices.  Finally, in Section 7, we summarize our ﬁndings and discuss future work.  2.  The trading of electricity.  In this section we describe the market dynamics of the Nordic electricity market and the ﬁnancial instruments that will be used for hedging.  We focus on the Nordic spot market, Nord Pool Spot, and the corresponding forward market at Nasdaq Commodities.  2. 1.  Area price and system price.  In the Nordic and Baltic region, the system price provides an overall market price for electricity and is determined by an equilibrium that disregards the grid.  In contrast, the area prices should ensure that electricity is produced in the least expensive way, aiming at a market equilibrium that accounts for transmission.  In the absence of transmission congestion, all area prices coincide with the system price.  In its presence, area prices are determined on the basis of the system price by adjusting for transmission.  By raising the area price, local supply will increase and local demand will decrease.  Similarly, by reducing the area price, local supply will decrease whereas local demand will increase.  Thus, by raising the area price in bidding areas that would ideally be importing beyond their transmission limits, import is reduced.  Likewise, by reducing the area price in bidding areas that would be exporting beyond their transmission limits, export is reduced.  Thus, in equilibrium, bidding areas with low marginal cost will be exporting at full transmission capacity and bidding areas with high marginal cost will be importing at full capacity, and so, electricity is produced at minimal costs.  The load on the grid varies signiﬁcantly throughout the day, which produces variations in both area price and system price.  Differences between the area price and the system price, however, often occur in periods with high load.  The reason is that capacity limits on transmission lines between bidding areas are met more often in hours with high load than hours with low load.  Here, we focus on two large portfolios of ﬁxed price contracts in DK1 and DK2, respectively.  The load of the DK1 portfolio is shown in Fig.  1.  This ﬁgure conﬁrms the occurrence of price differences in hours of high load.  Moreover, market prices suggest that the bidding area DK1 is importing throughout most of August (the area price exceeds the system price), but is exporting during a few hours in the beginning of February (the system price exceeds the area price).  Other factors, such as changes in demand in other bidding areas and varying supply of wind power, may create differences in periods with low load.  2. 2.  Financial contracts on electricity.  In the Nordic region, ﬁnancial contracts on electricity prices are traded at Nasdaq Commodities.  Here, we consider three types of contracts.  The most simple type is a base load contract on the system price that covers every hour of a given month.  It is not related to physical delivery of electricity, but is a purely ﬁnancial contract that pays the difference between the system price and the forward price for every hour of the month.  Load typically varies between a peak level and an off-peak level, as seen in Fig.  2.  To manage these variations the market also includes peak load contracts that pay the difference between the system price and the forward price in peak hours, 8–20, during weekdays.  A portfolio of base load and peak load contracts can to some extend replicate the load proﬁle.  Base load and peak load contracts are both settled against the system price and not the area price that is the basis for physical trading.  To handle the risk related to differences between area and system prices, we include contracts for difference (CfD).  This type of contract pays the difference between the area price and the system price minus the cost of the CfD and covers the entire month.  In spite of including the CfD, however, it remains impossible to completely eliminate the risk related to delivering an uncertain quantity, i. e.  the volume risk.  <Middle> Hedging volume risk.  We start by assuming that the area price and the system price coincide and study hedging strategies when facing volume risk in a single-period setting.  When planning to buy a ﬁxed load LT at an uncertain price ST at time T and resell it at a ﬁxed price F, risk can be completely eliminated by buying LT futures contracts with maturity T at time t, for t < T.  The contracts pay the difference between the uncertain price ST and a ﬁxed forward price qt(T).  Thus, at time T we have theAs a result, the purchase price is locked at qt(T), eliminating the priceIn contrast, when planning to buy an uncertain load LT at an uncertain price ST and reselling it at a ﬁxed price F, it is impossible to completely eliminate the risk using only futures contracts.  By buying V futures contracts at time t, the payoff at time T will be (F − ST)LT + (ST − qt(T))V = (F − qt(T))V + (F − ST)(LT − V).  If we could choose V = LT, the risk would be eliminated.  The problem is that LT is stochastic whereas V has to be ﬁxed at time t, for t < T.  For this reason, we are interested in the quality of a hedge, which introduces the need for risk measures.  See Artzner et al.  (1999) for a detailed analysis of risk measures.  3. 1.  Variance as a measure of risk.  A classical measure of risk is the variance of the payoff, i. e.  as shown in Lemma A1 of Appendix A.  We refer to the minimizer as the minimum variance (Min Var) hedge.  We note that V∗ is independent of the forward price qt(T), but not the ﬁxed price F.  We can rewrite Eq.  (3) to cf.  Lemma A2 of Appendix A.  Hence, for any distribution, it is optimal to hedge the expected load and compensate for expected unhedged payoff, depending on the covariance between price and load, and for the covariance between the quadratic deviation from the expected price and the load.  If ST and LT are independent,V∗ = E(LT) and the optimal strategy is to hedge the expected load.  This is the straightforward extension of the case with ﬁxed load and we refer to this strategy as the mean hedge.  Example 3. 1.  Assume ST and LT are jointly Normal with correlation q and standard deviations s S and s L, respectively.  Then, the minimal variance hedge simpliﬁes to this  as shown in Lemma A3 in Appendix A.  We note that if LT and ST arepositively correlated, the minimal variance hedge satisﬁes V.  Finally, if F − E(ST) = 0 or LT and ST are uncorrelated (and hence independent, as they are jointly Normal), the optimal strategy is again to hedge the expected load.  Since the correlation between load and electricity price is typically signiﬁcant, the mean hedge is suboptimal unless F − E(ST) is small.  The variance measures expected quadratic deviations from the mean and is a symmetrical risk measure.  It is useful as it often allows for closed-form minimizers.  Moreover, for symmetrical payoff distributions minimizing the two-sided risk is equivalent to minimizing the one-sided risk.  In general, however, using the variance may not only reduce the downside but also the upside.  Because of this, and as payoffs distributions are not necessarily symmetrical, we consider another classical measure of risk, namely the expected loss.  3. 2.  Expected loss as a measure of risk We deﬁne expected loss , which is the absolute value of expected payoff, conditional on the payoff being negative.  We refer to the minimizer as the minimum loss (Min Loss) hedge.  When facing price risk only, i. e.  load is ﬁxed, and provided F > qt(T), both the variance and the expected loss areminimized by V = LT with minimum 0.  However, in the presence of volume risk, the two risk measures may result in different hedging strategies as demonstrated by the following example.  Example 3. 2.  Assume again that ST and LT are jointly Normal with E(ST) = 35, E(LT) = 0. 5, s S = 10, s Q = 0. 1, q = 0. 5 and qt(T) = 29. 75.  We compare the two strategies that minimize the expected loss and the variance, respectively, and further include the mean hedge for comparison.  The strategy minimizing the expected loss is determined numerically.  In the ﬁrst plot of Fig.  3 the ﬁxed price is F = 40 and the expected payoff per unit electricity is positive (F − E(ST) > 0), whereas this is not the case in the second plot with F = 30.  In both cases the forward price for electricity is below the expected price (qt(T) < E(ST)), which is known as backwardation.  With expected loss, this makes the expected payoff increase linearly with the hedging volume.  The variance, however, is always quadratic with a global minimum.  We note that both the minimal variance hedge and the minimal loss hedge are below the mean load in the case of positive expected payoff and above the mean hedge in the case of negative expected payoff.  Moreover, the hedged payoff with minimum loss has a lighter tail for negative payoffs than the minimum variance hedge in the case with negative expected payoff.  It likewise has a heavier tail for positive payoffs.  Thus, the skewness of the payoff density is affected when using expected loss.  For Normal distributions and positive correlation, the minimal variance hedge is always below the mean load in the case of positive expected payoff and above the mean load in the case of negative expected payoff, as observed from Eq.  (5).  This may not always be the case for the minimal loss hedge.  For instance, if the forward price is higher than the expected price, known as contango, the minimum loss hedge deviates signiﬁcantly from the mean hedge in the opposite direction of the minimum variance hedge, see Appendix B.  4.  Hedging in the Nordic market.  We proceed to introduce the speciﬁc problem of hedging in the Nordic market and discuss its relation to the analysis of volume risk in the previous section.  As prices are ﬁxed for every hour, we let St and Ssys t denote the area price and the system price, respectively, in hour t.  Moreover, we let Lt denote the percentage of the maximal load delivered to the local customers in hour t.  As a result, payoffs are scaled by the maximal load.  Letting Fj be the ﬁxed price for electricity in month j, the sales revenue for a given hour t in month j are (Fj − St)Lt.  For risk mitigation, we consider three types of contracts, that is, base load contracts, peak load contracts and contracts for difference.  We let qb j denote the forward price of the base load contract and Vbthe percentage of maximal load that is covered by base load contracts in month j.  For every hour of month j, the following cash ﬂow is obtained by buying base load contracts Similarly, for the peak contracts we let qp j denote the forward price and Vp j the percentage of the maximal load that is covered by the peak load contracts in month j.  For every hour covered by peak load contracts in month j, the following cash ﬂow is obtained.  We let mj be the set of all hours in month j, peakj be the subset of mj that are peak hours, and offj be the subset of mj that are offpeak hours.  Finally, we let qd j denote the percentage of maximal load that is covered by CfDs.  For every hour in month j, the following cash ﬂow is obtained by buying CfD contracts j denote the forward price and Vd.  Thus, the total cash ﬂow in hour t of month j is given by.  This formulation shows how variation in the cash-ﬂow originates from only two random terms for both peak or offpeak hours.  The ﬁrst term is the difference between the area price and the system price times the deviations from the hedging volume of the CfDs.  Thus, ifj is small at a time when the system price and the area price differ, it barely has an impact on the payoff.  The second random term is the difference between the system price and the ﬁxed price times the deviations from the hedging volume of the base load and peak load contracts.  As before, we note that if Lt−Vb j is small when the system price deviates from Fj, it barely affects the payoff.  This reveals that to minimize variations it is most important to replicate the load in periods of volatile prices.  We immediately recognize the payoff structure in the presence of − St and volume risk, although with a sum of two components, Ssys , times the corresponding differences between the hedging volume and the load.  As the system prices in peak hours are typically above the ﬁxed price and the system prices in off-peak hours are typically below the ﬁxed price, the results of Example 3. 1 suggest hedging above the mean load in peak hours and below the mean load in off-peak hours.  Unfortunately, the two terms cannot be handled separately as both include the system price and the load.  If we could perfectly predict Lt and adjust Vdhour, price risk could be completely eliminated.  This could be done by setting  for peak hours.  This would result in the following cash ﬂow where 1(t∈peakj) is 1 if t ∈ peakj and 0 otherwise.  By introducing the effective hedging volume in peak hours, Ve j , the effective Thus, qd price and the system price and F − qb j becomes the cost of hedging the difference between the area j becomes the payoff j or F − qe that is locked when hedging.  The problem is that Lt is stochastic and varies from throughout each month, whereas Vb j have to be ﬁxed for month j, which creates the need for risk measures to determine the optimal hedge.  We proceed to modeling load and prices, with special emphasis on seasonality and correlation.  5.  Modeling load and prices.  This section introduces three models for the stochastic evolution of the area price, the system price and the load.  The three models differ mainly by the modeling of the correlation structure.  Appendix C shows correlation plots for the price data.  As observed, the area and system prices are highly correlated.  In the ﬁrst two models we use a simple correlation structure, assuming independence between the system price and the differences between area and system prices.  The plots reveals that this assumption does not entirely ﬁt to data.  Therefore, in the third model, we directly model correlation between the area and system prices.  As further observed, both area and system prices are correlated over time, which is likewise captured by the third model.  For reasons of conﬁdentiality of the data, we cannot show correlation plots for price and load.  For the ﬁrst and second models we obtain analytical solutions to the minimal variance hedging problem, for which the objective is the sum of variances of hourly cash ﬂows.  For the third model we solve the hedging problem numerically, and use the minimal loss, the objective of which is.  This risk measure focuses on the expected hourly losses.  Whereas we expect the payoffs from the minimal variance hedge to vary very little, we expect those of the minimal loss hedge to decrease very little over time.  5. 1.  Seasonality.  To capture seasonality in load and prices, we calibrate seasonality curves to data from 2012 and use these to predict seasonality curves for 2013 and 2014.  Furthermore, we describe how to calibrate expected monthly prices using base load contracts and peak load contracts.  Finally, we determine a ﬁxed price for 2013 and 2014 on the basis of 2012 data.  5. 1. 1.  Seasonality in load.  The load data is from two portfolios of customers on ﬁxed price contracts from the bidding areas West Denmark (DK1) and East Denmark (DK2).  The price data includes area prices for the two bidding areas as well as the system price for 2012–2014.  The bidding areas have very different load characteristics and are therefore modeled separately.  In particular, the load portfolio of DK1 is strongly affected by weekends and holidays, whereas the portfolio in DK2 is primarily affected by yearly variations in demand.  We let ht be the periodic function, with p periods t0, .  .  .  tp, amplitudes A0, .  .  .  , Ap and phases B0, .  .  .  Bp.  A0, t0 and B0 serve to capture seasonal behavior in the amplitude that occurs for the load of DK2 and we set A0 = 0 in DK1.  For calibration the load data is split into three subsets.  weekdays, weekends and holidays.  The function ht is calibrated to data from each of the subsets, numerically minimizing the sum of quadratic deviations, and combined to the dotted curve shown in Fig.  4.  The periods are based on peaks of autocorrelation functions for 2012 data, with t0 = 2 • 24 •365, t1 = 12, t2 = 24, t3 = 24 • 7, t4 = 24 •365, t5 = 24 •365. 2 Using the load for 2012 we predict the seasonality curves for 2013 and 2014 based on holidays, weekends and day-light savings.  To reﬂect the long-term increase of load, a is adjusted to match the yearly average, which can usually be predicted with high accuracy by electricity companies.  Fig.  5 shows that the load is extremely accurately predicted, i. e.  the behavior of the data is very close to that of the function ht.  This is also conﬁrmed by coeﬃcients of determination for out-of-sample data of 0. 823 and 0. 923 for DK1 and DK2, respectively.  5. 1. 2.  Seasonality in prices.  We apply the same approach for calibration and prediction of seasonality in prices.  In the periodic function, we let A0 = 0.  The calibration results are shown in Fig.  6 with t1 = 12, t2 = 24, t3 = 24 •7.  To adjust for more long-term variations in the system price, the forward prices of base load contracts and peak load contracts are used to adjust the monthly mean of the seasonality curves for the system price in peak and off-peak periods such that.  To simplify results, we ignore the market price of risk as well as discounting.  Furthermore, due to risk premium and seasonal bias in forward prices for base load contracts and CfDs, see Bessembinder and Lemmon (2002) and Kristiansen (2004), we do not use them to adjust the seasonality curves for the area prices.  Fig.  7 shows that for prices randomness dominates seasonality and predictability is low, which is reﬂected by coeﬃcients of determination for out-of-sample data of 0. 213, 0. 211 and 0. 363 for the DK1 area price, the DK2 area price and system price, respectively. 3 5. 1. 3.  Fixed price of electricity.  The ﬁxed price Fj for each month in 2013 and 2014 is determined, using the data from 2012.  This implies that, and that the company would break even in 2012.  With this construction Fj will typically be higher than the average off-peak price and lower than the average peak price, indicating expected proﬁt in offpeak hours and expected loss in peak hours.  In practice Fj is increased with a margin to increase proﬁtability of the contract and compensate for the risk, but we start by studying the problem without a margin .  5. 2.  Stochastic modeling.  We consider three different models for modeling the deviations from the seasonality curve, all with the underlying assumption that, where hS t are seasonal components of the area price, the system price and the load and ˜St, ˜Ssys and ˜Lt are the deseasonalized components.  The deseasonalized data inherits correlations over time as well as cross-correlations between the area price, system price and load.  In the ﬁrst two models, however, we disregard auto-correlations and assume a simple cross-correlation structure, obtained by formulating the models in terms of the difference between the area price and the system price.  The ﬁrst model assumes independence between load and price, whereas the second allow for correlation between the two.  The third model incorporates temporal correlation, mean reversion as well a more advanced structure for cross-correlations by a direct modeling of the area price.  5. 2. 1.  Model 1.  independence of load, system price and price difference, independence over time.  In this model we let ˜4t = ˜St − ˜Ssys t be the difference between the deseasonalized area and system prices such that the area price is the system price plus some noise caused by congestion.  We assume that.  with independence over time.  With these assumptions, we obtain the following analytical expressions for the minimal variance hedge.  as shown in Appendix D.  This hedging strategy only depends on the prediction of the load, which is one of the reasons it is widely used by electricity companies.  As an extension of the previously introduced terminology, we refer to this as the mean hedge.  5. 2. 2.  Model 2.  correlation between load and system price, independence over time In the second model we include correlation between the deseasonalized system price and load.  The motivation is that the system price reflects the equilibrium between aggregated supply and demand.  Thus, if the load is above its expectation, the system price is likely to be above its expectation, and similarly if the load is below its expectation.  Our model is.  cf.  Appendix D.  This is the natural extension of Model 1.  With the positive correlation between load and price, the strategy is to hedge slightly above expected load for high prices and slightly below expected load for low prices.  Note that the hedging volume for contracts for difference remains the same and that the peak load hedge, but not the effective peak hedge, is independent of F.  5. 2. 3.  Model 3.  correlation between load, area price and system price, correlation over time.  In the third model we include temporal correlation in the deseasonalized components and assume follow a threedimensional Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process given by. t are correlated Brownian motions with crosscorrelation coefficients qS,sys, qS,L, qsys,L.  Conditional on for u < t, the explicit solutions to Eqs.  (20), (21) and (22) are.  Estimation procedures for the parameters in Models 1–3 can be found in Appendix E.  The corresponding parameter estimates are found in Tables 1 and 2.  5. 2. 4.  Monte Carlo simulation To determine the optimal hedging strategies ofModel 3, we let Pkfor t ∈ mj denote a sample of the stochastic hourly payoff Pt in month j, given by. for k = 1, .  .  .  , K are sample paths obtained by simulating from Model 3.  We let ¯Pt be the sample average of the payoff in hour t, i. e.  We now determine the hedging strategy, Min Var, that minimizes the sum of sample variances of payoffs for hours in month j.  Likewise, we determine the hedging strategy, Min Loss, that minimizes the sum of sample averages of hourly losses in month j.  6.  Results.  In this section we assess the performance of the optimal hedging strategies from Models 2 and 3 and benchmark against the mean hedge strategy derived from Model 1.  All hedging strategies can be determined 14 days prior to the start of the month and do not use any other information than historical data from 2012, yearly predicted load as well as forward prices for base load contracts, peak load contracts and CfDs.  Furthermore, all contracts are available at Nasdaq Commodities and our market structure closely reﬂects the real market.  We study the inﬂuence of correlation, the choice of risk measure, the inclusion of CfDs, the effect of improved price forecast as well as the impact of margins on the ﬁxed price.  To compare the payoff streams from implementing the optimal hedging strategies in 2013 and 2014, we let Pt denote the payoff Finally, using the average monthly payoff, we deﬁne the realized variance.  The realized variance measures the stability of the payoffs throughout each month, but differs from the sum of hourly variances deﬁned in Eq.  (24).  Realized monthly variance can be estimated from actual data as opposed to the sum of hourly variances.  Minimizing the deviations from the hourly mean, however, creates a more stable cash ﬂow than minimizing the deviations from the monthly mean. 4 For reasons of conﬁdentiality, the load data has been anonymized by scaling with the 1/(maximal load).  Thus, the P&L, gross loss and gross proﬁt are measured in Euro/(maximal load).  The sum of realized variances is likewise scaled by 1/(maximal load)2.  6. 1.  Comparing hedging strategies.  Table 3 contains the total P&L, gross loss, gross proﬁt and realized variance of the payoffs without hedging (No hedge) and with the variance minimizing strategy based on Model 1 (Mean hedge), the variance minimizing strategy based on Model 2 (Comp.  mean hedge), the variance minimizing strategy based on Model 3 (Min Var) and the loss minimizing strategy based on Model 3 (Min Loss). 5 Furthermore, the monthly hedging volumes, P&L, gross loss and realized variance are shown in Appendix F.  We ﬁrst observe that, as expected, the hedged cash-ﬂows have lower P&L and gross proﬁt than the unhedged, but the gross loss and especially the realized variance are also substantially lower.  6. 1. 1.  Best practice When comparing the Min Loss hedge to the mean hedge strategy, we ﬁnd that the gross loss is 5. 8% and 13. 6% lower in DK1 and DK2, respectively.  Furthermore, the gross proﬁt is 3. 8% and 9. 5% higher and the P&L is 2111. 77 Euro and 4910. 26 Euro higher (times maximal load), respectively. 6 At the same time, the realized variance increases, but as this measure includes positive deviations from the monthly mean, it is of less importance than the gross loss.  We note from the monthly P&L in Appendix F that the largest difference between the Min Loss hedge and the mean hedge strategy are in the months with a negative P&L.  In these months the Min Loss hedge incurs much smaller losses, resulting in a larger accumulated P&L over the two years.  With the superiority of the Min Loss hedge over the mean hedge strategy, we refer to best practice as opposed to common practice.  6. 1. 2.  The inclusion of correlation The plots of Appendix F show that the inclusion of correlation between price and load increases the base load hedging volume and reduces the peak load hedging volume, especially when comparing Model 3 to Models 1 or 2.  These differences are reﬂected in the performance measures of Table 3, although to a lesser extend.  When comparing the variance minimizing strategy from Model 2 to Model 1, we ﬁnd that the gross proﬁt slightly increases (by 0. 2% and 0. 6% for DK1 and DK2, respectively), whereas the gross loss and the realized variance slightly decrease (in the order of 0. 2–0. 9%).  P&L likewise increases, although not much in absolute terms (by 107. 55 Euro and 167. 10 Euro, respectively).  This suggests a moderate but valuable effect of including the correlation between the system price and load and thereby also the simple correlation structure between area price and load.  When comparing the variance minimizing strategy from Model 3 to Model 1, gross proﬁt increases by 1. 0% for both DK1 and DK2, gross loss changes by 0. 1% and −0. 5% in DK1 and DK2, respectively, realized variance increases by 4. 3% and 0. 6%, and P&L increases by 167. 67 Euro and 147. 74 Euro.  Thus, the direct modeling of the correlation between load, system price and area price generates higher proﬁts at the expense of higher variances.  6. 