1.  Introduction  Following a series of accounting scandals in the early 20 0 0s (e. g. , Enron and WorldCom), capital market participants  questioned how auditors and regulators failed to identify the misreporting.  However, in a comprehensive examination of  fraud cases from 1996 to 2004, Dyck et al.  (2010) ﬁnd that a ﬁrm’s employees identify and reveal fraud more often (17%  of the time) than both auditors (10%) and the corporate ﬁnance division of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)  (7%).  Given that employees provide ex-post discipline of ﬁnancial reporting by helping uncover fraud after it has occurred,  a natural question is whether employees are able to impose ex-ante discipline on ﬁnancial reporting before violations take We examine whether the quality of a ﬁrm’s workforce is associated with ﬁnancial reporting quality.  We proxy for the  quality of a ﬁrm’s workforce in two ways.  (1) the average education level of the workforce in the Metropolitan Statistical  Area (MSA) where the ﬁrm is headquartered, and (2) the average education level of the workforce across all MSAs mentioned  2 Using these measures, we examine two broad research questions.  First, are highly educated  in the ﬁrm’s Form 10-K ﬁling.   employees associated with improved mandatory disclosure quality.  Second, are highly educated employees associated with  improved voluntary disclosure quality.   Prior research examines whether executive (i. e. , CEO and CFO) characteristics contribute to ﬁnancial reporting quality  ( Aier et al. , 2005.  Bamber et al. , 2010.  Dyreng et al. , 2010.  Ge et al. , 2011.  Demerjian et al. , 2013 ).  However, the literature  largely ignores whether characteristics of the ﬁrm’s entire workforce are associated with ﬁnancial reporting outcomes.  Because a ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial data originate far from the C-suite, we argue that the ﬁrm’s entire workforce plays an important  role in shaping the quality of a ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial reporting.  Furthermore, while lawmakers and regulators have traditionally  focused on other ﬁrm monitors (i. e. , investors, board of directors, the SEC, auditors, and corporate executives) to improve  reporting quality, we examine whether a high-quality workforce is associated with better reporting outcomes.   High-quality employees can improve their ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial reporting environment in at least two ways.  First, they can  provide superior information as inputs to executives’ reporting choices.  Second, high-quality employees can identify and  uncover intentional ﬁnancial misreporting, perhaps even before it develops into a larger misreporting event.  Our proxy for  high-quality employees, the education level of the ﬁrm’s workforce, is associated with both channels through which employees can improve ﬁnancial reporting.  First, more educated employees provide their superiors with higher-quality inputs  (i. e. , fewer errors), resulting in higher-quality reporting outcomes ( Merchant and Rockness, 1994.  O’ Fallon and Butterﬁeld,  2005 ).  Second, highly educated employees are more likely to recognize when a transaction appears abnormal, elevating con3 Consistent with this point,  cerns to management before it becomes a more serious misstatement ( Glaeser and Saks, 2006 ).   Call et al.  (2016) ﬁnd that executives grant more stock options to rank and ﬁle employees during periods of misreporting in  an effort to discourage whistleblowing, suggesting that executives engaged in misconduct believe their employees have the  ability to uncover information that would bring ﬁnancial misconduct to light.   We ﬁnd signiﬁcant variation in education levels throughout the United States.   4 Speciﬁcally, the highest education levels  are in Boston, Silicon Valley, and several cities that are home to large public universities (e. g. , Iowa City, IA, Columbia, MO,  Madison, WI), suggesting that ﬁrms with operations in these areas employ more highly educated employees with greater  ability to improve ﬁnancial reporting quality.  On the other hand, Dallas, Los Angeles, and Las Vegas are in MSAs that are  among the bottom half of workforce education, suggesting that ﬁrms with operations in these areas often rely on employees  with less ability to improve reporting quality.   We ﬁrst examine the association between education levels and three attributes of mandatory reporting quality—the quality of the ﬁrm’s accruals, the propensity of the ﬁrm to report an internal control weakness, and the likelihood the ﬁrm  restates its ﬁnancial statements ( Dechow and Dichev, 2002.  Hennes et al. , 2008.  McGuire et al. , 2012 ).  After controlling  for several MSA-level attributes (i. e. , macroeconomic indicators, microeconomic indicators, and location speciﬁc monitoring  variables), we ﬁnd that the average education level of a ﬁrm’s workforce is positively associated with accruals quality, negatively associated with the likelihood that the ﬁrm reports an internal control weakness, and negatively associated with  the likelihood that the ﬁrm restates its ﬁnancial statements.  These ﬁndings suggest that ﬁrms with high-quality employees  exhibit superior mandatory disclosure quality.   Next, we examine whether these ﬁndings extend to the ﬁrm’s voluntary reporting quality—namely, the quality of management earnings forecasts.  These forecasts differ from mandatory disclosures in that they are “forward-looking” (rather  than “backward-looking”) and are not subject to an external audit.  As a result, there is more discretion afforded to managers  when making voluntary disclosure choices, and the impact of high-quality employees on the quality of these disclosures is  unclear.  Consistent with our results related to mandatory disclosures, we ﬁnd that the average education level of a ﬁrm’s  workforce is positively associated with the frequency and horizon of management forecasts, and is negatively associated  with absolute forecast errors, forecast bias, and forecast range.  These ﬁndings suggest that employee quality is positively  associated with voluntary disclosure quality.   In additional analyses, we ﬁnd strong support for the notion that employee quality at the ﬁrm’s headquarters is associated with reporting outcomes, with relatively weaker support for the role of employees at non-headquarter locations.   Further, although only a very limited number of ﬁrms in our sample changed their headquarters location during our sample  period, we ﬁnd that changes in the education level in the headquarters location for these ﬁrms (i. e. , moving from a less  educated MSA to a more educated MSA) is generally positively associated with changes in both mandatory and voluntary  disclosure reporting quality.  We therefore conclude that our main ﬁndings are primarily driven by the quality of employees at the ﬁrm’s headquarters, suggesting that aggregating and summarizing accounting data from across the ﬁrm plays a  unique role in the ﬁrm’s reporting outcomes.  However, we note that we measure the education level of non-headquarter  employees with considerable error, which may contribute to our relatively weaker results for these employees.  Therefore,  our ﬁndings should not be interpreted to suggest that employees at non-headquarter locations are irrelevant to ﬁnancial reporting outcomes.   Our study contributes to the literature on ﬁnancial misreporting and corporate governance.  Recent research suggests that  employees play a role in monitoring the ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial reporting.  For example, Bowen et al.  (2010) ﬁnd that employee  whistleblowing events are associated with negative stock price reactions, future earnings restatements, subsequent lawsuits,  and poor future ﬁrm performance.  Similarly, Dyck et al.  (2010) ﬁnd that employees detect and reveal 17% of frauds, exceeding the rate of auditors (10%) and regulators (7%).  Collectively, the ﬁndings of these studies suggest employees play an  important governance role after fraud has been committed.  We extend this research by providing evidence that employees  can discipline ﬁnancial reporting before the incidence of fraud.   We also contribute to the literature examining the effect of idiosyncratic, employee-speciﬁc attributes on ﬁnancial reporting outcomes.  Prior research focuses on the relation between CEO and CFO personal traits and the impact of these characteristics on their ﬁrms’ policy choices.  For example, CEO and CFO traits such as age, education, ﬁnancial and legal expertise,  and personal risk-aversion have been linked to voluntary disclosure ( Bamber et al. , 2010 ), earnings quality ( Demerjian et  al. , 2013 ), ﬁnancial misreporting ( Aier et al. , 2005.  Ge et al. , 2011 ), option backdating ( Dhaliwal et al. , 2009 ), and tax aggressiveness ( Dyreng et al. , 2010.  Chyz, 2013 ).  We contribute to this literature as the ﬁrst to establish that characteristics of  employees outside the C-suite are also associated with disclosure outcomes.   Finally, our study relates to recent literature examining the effects of MSA-level attributes on reporting quality.  McGuire  et al.  (2012) ﬁnd that ﬁrms headquartered in MSAs with religiously adherent residents have fewer restatements and are less  likely to be sued for accounting malfeasance.  They conclude that religion acts as a substitute for other forms of monitoring.   Two recent papers explore the link between education and external monitoring by analysts ( Gunn, 2013 ) and auditors ( Beck  et al. , 2017 ).  We demonstrate that the education of the ﬁrm’s own employees can serve as a form of internal monitoring.   2.  Background and motivation.  2. 1.  Prior literature on education.  Prior research examines whether CEO and CFO education impacts ﬁnancial reporting quality.  Hambrick and Mason’s  (1984) upper echelons theory predicts that cross-sectional differences in managers’ education are likely to shape their values  and cognitive biases, which in turn will affect their managerial styles.  In addition, prior literature establishes that managers  with an MBA develop different styles relating to conformity, conventionality, rationality, and ethics than do their counterparts without the same educational backgrounds ( Chen, 2004.  Ghoshal, 2005.  Gintis and Khurana, 2008 ) .  Consistent with  this literature, Bamber et al.  (2010) ﬁnd that CEOs and CFOs with an MBA issue forecasts that are more accurate, consistent  with the notion that the education of senior management (i. e. , CEO and CFO) is associated with reporting outcomes.   The economics literature also ﬁnds that education levels are associated with the monitoring of fraudulent behavior.   Glaeser and Saks (2006) document that, from 1990 to 2002, United States federal prosecutors convicted more than 10,0 0 0  government oﬃcials of acts of corruption.  They appeal to Lipset’s (1960) theory that highly educated (and high-income)  voters are more able and willing to monitor and take action when public employees violate the law.  Consistent with this  idea, they ﬁnd that more educated states and, to a lesser extent, more aﬄuent states, have lower levels of corruption.   Finally, two contemporaneous papers link the education level of capital market participants outside the ﬁrm (i. e. , analysts  and auditors) to improved reporting outcomes.  Gunn (2013) appeals to urban economics theory and predicts that the human  capital depth in a geographic area, as measured by the average education level, creates knowledge spillovers that result in  positive economic outcomes ( Moretti, 2004.  Glaeser and Gottlieb, 2009 ).  He ﬁnds that sell-side analysts located in MSAs  with higher education levels issue more accurate and informative earnings forecasts than do analysts located in MSAs with  lower education levels.   Beck et al.  (2017) investigate a different type of capital market intermediary—the ﬁrm’s auditor.  They measure auditor  human capital as the education level of the city in which the auditor’s oﬃce is located.  They ﬁnd a positive association  between the average education level in the MSA surrounding an auditor’s local oﬃce and accrual quality of the ﬁrms they  audit.  Beck et al.  (2017) conclude that auditors located in highly educated areas perform higher-quality audits, but acknowledge the possibility that superior reporting outcomes could also be driven by the education of the client ﬁrm’s employees.   They leave this issue for future research.   Three features of our study distinctly separate it from these contemporaneous papers.  First, at a conceptual level, we use  the education level of the community as a proxy for the quality of the employees themselves, whereas Gunn (2013) and  Beck et al.  (2017) argue that analysts and auditors simply beneﬁt from living and working around educated people, regardless of their own education levels.  Second, we examine education levels of the workforce in the MSA in which the ﬁrm  is headquartered (rather than the education levels where the ﬁrm’s auditor or analysts are located).  Finally, we examine  outcomes that are outside the scope of ﬁnancial analyst reports and ﬁnancial statement audits (i. e. , management forecasts,  internal control weaknesses, and, in supplemental analysis, whistleblowing after misreporting events), allowing our ﬁndings  to speak directly to the association between ﬁrms’ employees and ﬁnancial reporting quality.   2. 2.  Prior literature on the role of a ﬁrm’s workforce in ﬁnancial reporting  While academic research frequently focuses on senior executives and their role in the ﬁnancial reporting process  ( Bergstresser and Phillipon, 2006.  Cheng and Warﬁeld, 2005.  Feng et al. , 2011.  Hennes et al. , 2008.  Bamber et al. , 2010 ),  we know relatively little about the impact of the broader workforce on either voluntary or mandatory disclosure quality.   Although CFOs are ultimately responsible for the quality of the ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial reporting, the entire workforce not only participates in the preparation of accounting information, but also plays an indirect role in ﬁnancial reporting by providing the  raw internal data that form the basis for the executives’ reporting choices.   Dyck et al.  (2010) examine a comprehensive sample of alleged corporate fraud in large US companies and ﬁnd that the  ﬁrm’s own employees, some of whom are not senior executives, uncover more corporate wrongdoing than do investors,  regulators, auditors, or the media, suggesting that employees outside the C-suite can play an important role in bringing  reporting violations to light.  In describing the role of employees in monitoring ﬁrm behavior, Dyck et al.  (2010) indicate  that “employees clearly have the best access to information,” and that “few, if any frauds can be committed without the  knowledge and often the support of several employees” (page 2240).  Relatedly, Call et al.  (2016) ﬁnd that ﬁrms grant more  stock options to non-executive employees during periods of misreporting in an effort to discourage employee whistleblowing, suggesting that corporate leaders are aware that lower-level employees participate in and have the potential to monitor  the ﬁrm’s reporting practices.   3.  Hypothesis development.  There are two ways in which a highly educated workforce can, ex ante, improve ﬁnancial reporting quality.  First, they  can provide higher-quality information (i. e. , fewer errors) as inputs to the accounting system.  Speciﬁcally, highly educated  employees should make fewer unintentional errors in the process of gathering and generating data that are in turn processed  into ﬁnancial information appearing in various ﬁnancial reports (i. e. , Form 10-K, Form 10-Q, Form 8-K, among others).  If  fewer errors are input into the accounting system, the resulting ﬁnancial statements should be of higher quality.   One might question whether unintentional accounting errors offset in the aggregate.  For instance, if one error has the  effect of increasing earnings, another error may decrease earnings, and the cumulative error could be close to zero, even for  ﬁrms with employees who make a large number of errors.  However, in untabulated Monte Carlo and mathematical analyses,  Thus, we show that the absolute cumulative error is increasing in the number of unintentional errors that are committed.   highly educated employees should make fewer unintentional errors, resulting in smaller absolute cumulative errors.   Second, in addition to making fewer unintentional errors, highly educated employees are more likely to recognize when  a transaction appears abnormal and possibly fraudulent, elevating that information to management before it becomes a  more serious misstatement.  In the context of the political process, Glaeser and Saks (2006) ﬁnd that political corruption  is lower when the voting population is more highly educated, as an educated voter base imposes discipline on its elected  politicians.  Consistent with executives believing their employees have the ability to uncover ﬁnancial misconduct, Call et al.   (2016) ﬁnd that executives grant more stock options to lower-level employees during periods of misreporting to discourage  whistleblowing.   We do not assume that a ﬁrm’s workforce needs a working knowledge of generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)  to improve reporting outcomes.  Employees from outside the accounting function provide information that is relevant to the  ultimate reporting decision made by senior management.  For example, when sales and production personnel provide better  information about past and projected activity, senior management is in a better position to provide informative disclosures.   Further, employees need not understand the rules surrounding revenue recognition to recognize when production and shipping activities are abnormal (i. e. , concentrated at the end of the quarter, shipped without a purchase order), when standard  procedures are bypassed (i. e. , reduction in quality-control checks, skipping planned maintenance), or when product returns  are abnormal.  An employee who does not understand the nuances of GAAP but who understands when something is amiss  can elevate the issue to a superior who is more likely to be ﬁnancially sophisticated and have an understanding of GAAP.  In  fact, prior research shows that when they suspect corruption, educated individuals are more proactive than less educated  individuals ( Glaeser and Saks, 2006 ).  Thus, even when non-accounting employees are more educated, the ﬁrm’s reporting  outcomes should be superior.   We ﬁrst investigate these issues in the context of mandatory reporting quality.  We predict that employee education  levels are associated with higher-quality accruals (i. e. , the extent to which accruals map into past, present, and future cash  ﬂows ( Dechow and Dichev, 2002 )), fewer internal control weaknesses, and fewer restatements of prior ﬁnancial statements  ( Hennes et al. , 2008.  McGuire et al. , 2012 ).   Hypothesis 1A.  Employee education is positively associated with accruals quality.   Hypothesis 1B.  Employee education is negatively associated with the likelihood of internal control weaknesses.   Hypothesis 1C.  Employee education is negatively associated with the likelihood that the ﬁrm restates its ﬁnancial statements.   Unlike mandatory disclosures, voluntary management forecasts provide forward-looking information and are not subject  to an external audit.  Despite these differences, we predict that employee education levels are also associated with higherquality voluntary disclosures.  Research suggests that voluntary disclosure increases with the quality of managers’ information ( Francis et al. , 2008.  Ball et al. , 2012.  Dorantes et al. , 2013 ).  We argue that more educated employees provide senior  executives with better information, increasing their willingness to issue voluntary disclosures.  We therefore predict that  highly educated employees are associated with earnings forecasts that are (1) more frequent, (2) issued earlier in the period (i. e. , longer horizon), (3) more accurate (i. e. , smaller absolute forecast error), and (4) more precise (i. e. , smaller forecast  8 Further, prior research suggests greater external monitoring reduces the upward forecast bias inherent in managerange).   ment’s estimates of future ﬁrm performance ( Rogers and Stocken, 2005.  Ajinkya et al. , 2005 ), and we expect highly educated  employees play a similar (albeit internal) monitoring role, thereby reducing any upward bias in management earnings forecasts.   Hypothesis 2A.  Employee education is positively associated with the frequency and horizon of management earnings forecasts.   Hypothesis 2B.  Employee education is negatively associated with the absolute error, bias, and range of management earnings  forecasts.   <Middle> Research design and empirical results.  4. 1.  Measuring workforce education and sample selection.  The average education level of a ﬁrm’s workforce is unobservable.  Therefore, we rely on education data collected annually  by the United States Census Bureau, as part of the much larger American Community Survey (ACS), to proxy for employee  9 Beginning in 2001, the ACS survey has been performed in every non-census year and involves collecting  education levels.   responses from a sample of the population from each MSA.  While results of the ACS are available from the Census Bureau,  the data require extensive manipulation before being machine-readable.  Therefore, we obtain data from the University of  10 IPUMS–USA provides harmonized  Minnesota’s Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS–USA.  Ruggles et al. , 2010 ).   economic microdata derived from annual ACSs and decennial censuses.   IPUMS provides information about both the MSA in which the employee lives and the MSA in which the employee works.   Because we are interested in the education of the workforce where ﬁrms are located, we utilize the MSA corresponding to  the respondent’s place of work (IPUMS data item PWMETRO).  When PWMETRO is not reported, we use the respondent’s  home MSA (IPUMS data item METAREA) to identify the individual’s location.  Because information about the individual’s  place of work is only available from 2005 to 2011, our analysis is limited to this time period.   We compute the weighted-average education level of the MSA’s workforce using the sampling weights provided in the  IPUMS data (PERWT).  These sampling weights indicate the estimated number of residents in an MSA with similar characteristics to the respondent.  We restrict responses to records pertaining to active members of the workforce.  The IPUMS education variable indicates the highest level of schooling completed by the respondent.  For instance, a value of six corresponds  to someone completing the 12th grade, while a value of 10 indicates four years of college.  Thus, our variable of interest,  EDUC , is the MSA-level weighted average of these responses.  Appendix A provides an illustration of these calculations.   Using this data, we develop two proxies for the average education level of the ﬁrm’s employees.  First, we use the average  education level of the workforce in the MSA in which the ﬁrm is headquartered ( EDUC-HQ ).  Second, we compute the average  8 Management forecast errors can be driven by the noise in both forecasted earnings and the actual earnings realization.  Thus, it is possible that the  effect of employee education on management forecast accuracy is not incremental to its effect on actual earnings realizations (i. e. , as predicted in H1  through accruals quality, internal control weaknesses, and restatements).  To disentangle these effects, we (a) control for all factors that prior research  suggests are related to the accuracy of both the management forecast and actual earnings, and (b) control for the speciﬁc outcomes examined in H1  (i. e. , accruals quality, internal control weaknesses, and restatements).  Taken together, these tests provide reasonable assurance that our results related to  voluntary disclosure quality do not simply reﬂect the effects of employee education levels on mandatory reporting quality.   education level of all MSAs in which the ﬁrm had signiﬁcant operations during the year, acknowledging that many ﬁrms  have employees who work outside the ﬁrm’s headquarters MSA.  We capture the education level of employees at other  ﬁrm locations because sales and other accounting information often originates away of headquarters.  However, even if the  underlying information originates elsewhere, accounting information is often aggregated and summarized by employees at  ﬁrm headquarters.  Therefore, we employ both proxies in our empirical tests and make no prediction about which proxy  better captures the quality of the employees most closely associated with reporting outcomes.   We use Compustat to identify the headquarters address, and then obtain latitude and longitude data using Google’s ‘geocoding’ functionality to compute the average straight-line distance between the ﬁrm’s headquarters and the center of each  city named in the description of each MSA (e. g. , “Dallas” and “Fort Worth” for Dallas-Fort Worth).  We assign observations to  the closest MSA using this average straight-line distance.  The mean (median) distance between ﬁrm headquarters and the  center of the nearest city named in an MSA is 7. 8 (0) miles, and less than 1% of observations are more than 60 miles from  the center of the closest MSA.  We then merge the education data based on the ﬁrm’s ﬁscal year end.   We search for locations in ﬁrms’ 10-Ks using a process similar to Bernile et al.  (2015) and Garcia and Norli (2012) .   Speciﬁcally, we search for city-state locations that appear in any portion (excluding the header) of a ﬁrm’s 10-K ﬁling.   We then validate each match using a comprehensive list of nearly 30,0 0 0 US cities, and map these city-state combinations  We ﬁnd substantial variation in the number of locations identiﬁed in the 10-K.  For about 20% of the ﬁrm-year  into MSAs.   observations in our sample, we ﬁnd no mention in the 10-K of locations outside of the ﬁrm’s headquarters MSA.  However,  for the remaining 80%, we identify multiple MSAs, and in these cases, we calculate the ﬁrm’s employee education level as  the simple average of the average education level across these MSAs ( EDUC-10K ).   We obtain ﬁnancial data from the CRSP-Compustat merged database.  Because the ACS data is limited to the population  of the United States, we delete ﬁrms headquartered outside the US.  We also remove ﬁrms headquartered in Puerto Rico  because local regulations likely differ when compared to ﬁrms headquartered elsewhere in the US.  This process yields 34,090  ﬁrm-year observations between 2005 and early 2012.  Each of our analyses begins with this population, although additional  data requirements yield much smaller samples in our tests.  We discuss these restrictions below.   In our analyses, we control for several MSA-level variables.  Speciﬁcally, we control for the average wages in the MSA  ( WAGES ), the natural log of the size of the workforce in the MSA ( LNPOP ), and the cost of living using the MSA’s consumerprice index ( CPI ).  We also control for the level of religious adherence ( RELIGION ), as prior research links religiosity to ﬁnancial reporting ( Dyreng et al. , 2012.  McGuire et al. , 2012 ) and the intensity of press coverage ( REPORTERS ), since research  identiﬁes journalists as capable monitors ( Miller, 2006 ).  Further, we control for the MSA’s economic environment using unemployment ( UNEMP ), new housing starts ( HOUSESTARTS ), the state coincident index ( SCI ), a summary measure of economic  condition, and average proﬁtability and earnings volatility ( MSA_ROA and MSA_ROA_VOL , respectively).  We compute each of  these MSA-level variables using the same two measurement bases (headquarters MSA or 10-K MSAs) described for EDUC .   We expect RELIGION to relate positively to reporting quality based on evidence in Dyreng et al.  (2012) and McGuire et al.   (2012) , but we make no other predictions related to these MSA variables.   We also control for several ﬁrm-level measures associated with the ﬁrm’s geographic location and that may correlate  with employee quality.  Speciﬁcally, research suggests auditors ( Choi et al. , 2012 ), the SEC ( Kedia and Rajgopal, 2011 ), security analysts ( Yu, 2008 ), and institutional ownership ( Ayers et al. , 2011 ) are all associated with ﬁnancial reporting quality.   Accordingly, we control for the proximity of the ﬁrm to these monitors.  Speciﬁcally, we control for the natural log of the  distance between the ﬁrm’s headquarters and its auditor ( AUDITORDIST ), the responsible SEC regional oﬃce ( SECDIST ), and  New York City ( NYCDIST ), where more than half of all analysts are located ( Gunn, 2013 ).  We expect each of these distance  measures to relate negatively to ﬁnancial reporting quality.  We also control for local institutional ownership ( LOCMONITOR )  16 We expect both of these variables to relate positively to ﬁnancial reand analyst following ( AFOLLOW ) in all analyses.   porting quality.  Finally, we control for the education level of named executives and directors ( BOARDEDUC ) using degree  information from BoardEx.  Because of BoardEx’s limited coverage, we set BOARDEDUC equal to zero and include an indicator  variable ( MISSING_BX ) equal to one for observations without BoardEx data.  Appendix B provides detailed deﬁnitions of all  variables.   4. 2.  Descriptive statistics for MSA data.  Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for our MSA-level variables.  In Panel A, we sort MSAs by mean education, where  lower (higher) ranks correspond to a more (less) educated workforce.  We report descriptive statistics for the 25 MSAs with  the highest and lowest values of EDUC , along with any MSA that are headquarters to at least 1% of observations in the CRSPCompustat universe during our sample period.  A score of 7 (8) corresponds to one (two) years of college completed, and the  education level corresponding to each value of EDUC is outlined in Appendix B .  The most educated cities often correspond  to “college towns” (e. g. , Iowa City, Ann Arbor, Gainesville), although a few larger cities appear in this list of the 25 most  educated MSAs as well (e. g. , Boston, New York).  The 25 MSAs with the lowest education levels represent areas typically  associated with economic hardship and high poverty levels (e. g. , Stockton, Modesto).  Panel A also reports average WAGES ,  the average size of the workforce, and the average CPI for each MSA during our sample period.  As expected, larger cities  typically correspond to higher cost of living and wages.  However, wages can also be associated with education, highlighting  the importance of controlling for these potentially confounding factors.   Panel B of Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for select MSA-level variables separately for each year.  Average EDUC exhibits a modest increase over our sample period, increasing from 7. 31 in 2005 to 7. 47 in 2011.  For context, one scenario that  could lead to this increase of 0. 16 is for 16% of the workforce to complete one additional year of college.  To further investigate the time-series properties of EDUC , Fig.  1 plots EDUC values for the largest ten MSAs from 2005 to 2011.  Consistent  with Panel B of Table 1 , education is increasing over time.  However, there is MSA-level variation regarding the magnitude  of this increase over our sample period.   In Panel C of Table 1 , we sort MSAs into deciles by EDUC , where Decile 1 corresponds to the most educated locations.   We then present the mean value of EDUC , along with the number and percentage of observations in our sample, within  each decile.  A large proportion of observations correspond to ﬁrms located in more educated cities, as approximately 60% of  observations fall within the ﬁrst three education deciles.  However, nearly 17% of observations fall within the bottom three  deciles.  Panel D of Table 1 presents correlations among MSA variables.  EDUC exhibits signiﬁcant correlations with all MSA  variables.  Speciﬁcally, EDUC correlates positively with WAGES , LN_POP, CPI, HOUSESTARTS, REPORTERS, and MSA_ROA_VOL ,  with correlations ranging from 0. 12 to 0. 39.  EDUC correlates negatively with UNEMP, RELIGION, SCI, and MSA_ROA , with  correlations ranging from −0. 12 to −0. 21.  We control for these variables in all regressions.   4. 3.  Research design for H1.  H1A predicts that larger values of EDUC ( EDUC-HQ and EDUC-10K ) are associated with higher-quality accruals.  Using a  modiﬁed Dechow–Dichev measure of accruals quality ( AQ ) ( Dechow and Dichev, 2002.  McNichols, 2002 ), we estimate the  following regression (with ﬁrm and year subscripts i and t ).  We estimate Eq.  (1) using OLS, and assess statistical signiﬁcance throughout the paper using one- (two-) sided p -values  when predictions are (are not) made using t -statistics derived from robust standard errors clustered by ﬁrm.  Because smaller  values of AQ correspond to better accruals quality, we expect  to be negative.  MSA Controls refer to those variables deﬁned  in Section 4. 1 (i. e. , WAGES, RELIGION, NYDIST, etc. ), and are included in all regressions.  The remaining control variables ( Other Controls ) are largely based on Francis et al.  (2004) .  We expect AQ to deteriorate  (or increase in magnitude) with increases in the volatility of fundamentals ( SALEVOL and CFVOL ) , the length of the operating  cycle ( LNOPCYCLE ) , the intensity of intangible assets ( INT_INT ) and the incidence of negative earnings ( NLOSSES ), because  higher values of these ﬁrm characteristics make accrual estimation more diﬃcult.  Conversely, larger ﬁrms ( LNASSETS ), ﬁrms  with more capital assets ( CAP_INT ), and those audited by a Big 4 auditor ( BIG4 ) typically exhibit higher accruals quality.  In  addition to these measures, we also include ﬁrm and peer idiosyncratic shocks ( IDIOSHOCKS and PEERSHOCKS ) derived from  returns data based on evidence in Owens et al.  (2017) .  We expect each of these measures to relate positively to AQ .  We  remove ﬁrms with less than $100 million in assets to avoid small denominator problems.  Many variables ( CFVOL, SALEVOL,  NLOSSES ) require a ﬁve-year time series to calculate.  These screens result in a sample of 8,787 ﬁrm-year observations.  De17 Appendix B presents detailed deﬁnitions of all  scriptive statistics for this sample are presented in Panel A of Table 2.   variables.   H1B uses the effectiveness of internal controls over ﬁnancial reporting ( Feng et al. , 2009 ) to proxy for the quality of  the ﬁrm’s mandatory disclosures.  Better internal controls decrease the likelihood that errors or irregularities go undetected.   Thus, we estimate the following regression.   is equal to one if ﬁrm i has an internal control weakness in year t , and zero otherwise.  H1B predicts that more highly educated workforces correspond to fewer internal control weaknesses, so we expect α1 to be negative.  Again, MSA Controls refer to those variables deﬁned in Section 4. 1 .  The majority of Other Controls are based  on Doyle et al.  (2007) , who identify determinants of internal control weaknesses.  Based on their results, we control for  and expect SIZE, AGE , and INSTHOLD ( AGGLOSS, ZSCORE, EXTSG, LNSEGS, MERGE_ACQ, LEV, RESTRUCT, and FOREIGN ) to relate  negatively (positively) to the likelihood of an internal control weakness.  We include BIG4 , although we make no directional  prediction for its coeﬃcient.  A Big 4 auditor could increase the likelihood of an internal control weakness if Big 4 auditors  best ensure that the control system is designed properly.  However, BIG4 may be negatively associated with ICW if these audit  ﬁrms avoid clients with poor internal control systems.  We also include LIT because litigation risk may affect management’s  focus on internal controls.  We include industry-adjusted ROA ( IA_ROA ) because employees of better performing ﬁrms have  less incentive to circumvent internal controls for personal gain.  Finally, we include an indicator variable equal to one for  ﬁrms in the top quintile of return volatility ( HIGHVOL ) for two reasons.  First, return volatility captures the ﬁrm’s idiosyncratic  risk, as internal control systems may be less effective in riskier ﬁrms.  Second, higher return volatility potentially captures a  market expectation that the ﬁrm’s internal control systems, and ﬁnancial reporting in general, are of poor quality ( Cassell et  al. , 2013 ).   Data requirements for H1B include coverage in Audit Analytics SOX – 404 Internal Controls ﬁle and the Compustat Historical Segments ﬁle.  We also require CRSP Daily returns to compute HIGHVOL .  After removing ﬁrms with insuﬃcient data and  with total assets of less than $100 million, we have a sample of 11,608 ﬁrm-year observations.  Panel B of Table 2 reports  18 Slightly less than ﬁve percent of our sample report internal control weaknesses.   descriptive statistics used to test H1B.   This percentage is lower than the approximately 10% reported in prior studies (e. g. , Doyle et al. , 2007.  Cheng et al. , 2013 ).   This difference likely arises for two reasons.  First, our sample excludes the early years of mandatory SOX compliance when  internal control weaknesses were much more common and extends to more recent years when material weaknesses occur  less frequently.  Second, our sampling procedures and data requirements yield a sample of larger ﬁrms, which prior research  suggests have higher-quality internal controls ( Doyle et al. , 2007 ).   H1C predicts that more educated workforces correspond to less frequent earnings restatements.  To test this hypothesis,  we estimate the following model.  H1C predicts a negative coeﬃcient on EDUC.  MSA Controls refer to the variables deﬁned in Section 4. 1 , where we discuss our predictions .  Because determinants of ICW , a measure of the likelihood of misreporting, closely align with those of  RESTATE , a measure of the incidence of misreporting, we use the same set of Other Control variables as in our test of H1B.   Further, we make the same directional predictions as in Eq.  (2) .   Because we use the same set of control variables in Eq.  (3) as in Eq.  (2) , our sample construction consists of only minor  differences between internal control data and restatement data (i. e. , a slightly larger sample size of 11,696 ﬁrm-year observations compared to the 11,608 used in Eq.  (2) ).  Descriptive statistics are presented in Panel B of Table 2 .  As shown, 12. 6%  of ﬁrm-years correspond to restatements in our sample.  This percentage is consistent with the 13% reported in Demerjian  et al.  (2013) over a similar sample period.  Other MSA level and ﬁrm level controls for this sample closely mirror those  reported in Panel B.  Panel D of Table 2 reports correlations among variables of interest.  The correlation between our two  EDUC measures, EDUC-HQ and EDUC-10K , is 0. 77.   4. 4.  Tests of H1.  In Table 3 , we report estimation results for Eq.  (1) .  Consistent with H1A, the coeﬃcient on EDUC is signiﬁcantly negative using both measures of employee education.  Recall that AQ is measured inversely, so this coeﬃcient implies that  higher education levels are associated with higher-quality accruals (i. e. , less estimation error in accruals).  From an economic  perspective, a one standard deviation increase in average education (0. 371 reported in Panel A of Table 2 ) corresponds  to an improvement in AQ of between 3. 8 and 5. 4% of the sample mean, depending whether the HQ or 10-K based mea19 Several control variables are predictably associated with AQ , including the distance from an SEC regional  sure is used.   oﬃce ( SECDIST ) ( Kedia and Rajgopal, 2011 ), analyst following ( AFOLLOW ) ( Yu, 2008 ), sales and cash ﬂow volatility ( SALEVOL,  CFVOL ), and the existence of a Big 4 auditor ( BIG4 ) ( Francis et al. , 1999 ).  Consistent with Owens et al.  (2016) , we also observe  a signiﬁcantly positive association between IDIOSHOCKS and AQ .   Table 4 presents results related to the association between workforce education and internal control weaknesses.  The  coeﬃcient on both EDUC-HQ and EDUC-10K are signiﬁcantly negative, suggesting that higher levels of education decrease  the likelihood that the ﬁrm reports a material weakness in internal controls, consistent with H1B.  To assess economic signiﬁcance, we estimate the marginal effect of EDUC-HQ , evaluated at the means of other control variables.  In untabulated  calculations, we ﬁnd that a one standard deviation increase in EDUC-HQ (0. 376 reported in Panel B of Table 2 ) is associated  with a 0. 8 to 1. 0% decline in the likelihood the ﬁrm reports a material weakness, depending on the speciﬁcation, or between  16 and 21% of the base rate of internal control weaknesses in our sample.   H1C predicts that firms with more educated employees restate prior period financial statements less frequently.  Our findings reported in Table 5 are consistent with H1C, as the coefficient on both EDUC-HQ and EDUC-10K are significantly negative.  20 Further, we find that a one standard deviation increase in EDUC-HQ corresponds to a reduced likelihood of restatement by between 0. 9 and 1. 7%, or 7 to 14% of the base rate of RESTATE .  Thus, consistent with our first set of hypothe- ses, highly educated (i. e. , higher-quality) employees are associated with improved mandatory disclosures, as evidenced by higher-quality accruals and a lower incidence of internal control weaknesses and restatements.  H2A and H2B predict that employee education levels are positively associated with various aspects of firms’ management forecasting activity.  To test these hypotheses, we estimate the following OLS regression models.  H2A predicts that employee education levels ( EDUC ) are positively associated with forecast frequency ( FREQ ) and timeli- ness ( HORIZON ), suggesting α1 in Eq.  (4) will be positive.  Similarly, H2B predicts that employee education levels ( EDUC ) are associated with smaller absolute forecast error ( ERROR ), less forecast bias ( BIAS ), and greater forecast precision (i. e. 