 1.  Introduction International environmental agreements have motivated binding national targets to reduce CO2 emission (e. g.  European Commission, 2009.  Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.  UNFCCC, 2015).  Around 40 countries and more than 20 cities, states and provinces have either implemented or are planning to implement a carbon tax or similar carbon pricing scheme (Farrell and Lyons, 2016.  World Bank, 2014a.  World Bank, 2014b).  In many developed economies, a carbon tax has been found to be regressive, having a proportionally greater impact on the incomes of poorer households than richer households (Callan et al. , 2009.  Farrell and Lyons, 2016).  Understanding the distribution of incidence has been the subject of much analysis to date (e. g.  O’Donoghue, 1997.  Kerkhof et al. , 2008.  Callan et al. , 2009.  Rausch et al. , 2011).  Within the carbon tax literature, revenue ‘recycling’ via the taxbeneﬁt system is commonly suggested as a means to offset regressive impacts.  Generally, redistribution is considered in the context of achieving a progressive distribution of incidence, measured according to changes in burden for aggregated income groups (e. g.  O’Donoghue, 1997.  Kerkhof et al. , 2008.  Callan et al. , 2009.  Rausch et al. , 2011).  While the distribution is progressive in aggregate, low income households that beneﬁt from the redistribution policy are not necessarily those households that lose out due to the imposition of the carbon tax.  Indeed, it is the progressive distribution of the total tax-beneﬁt system that is of greatest importance, as ‘losers’ may be compensated elsewhere in the tax-beneﬁt system (Mirrlees and Adam, 2011).  However, as carbon taxes grow through time (Tol, 2013.  van den Bergh and Botzen, 2015), potentially replacing more traditional forms of taxation, these regressive impacts may grow in magnitude.  Offsetting the regressive impacts speciﬁc to carbon taxation will therefore be of increasing importance going forward.  This paper provides the evidence base to inform any policy amendments required to ensure a progressive tax-beneﬁt policy, post-carbon tax incidence.  This is carried out by decomposing measures of inequality of carbon tax incidence by socioeconomic determinant, identifying the cohorts affected by regressive impacts and thus informing revenue redistribution policy.  Measures of income inequality are a quantiﬁable indicator of pro-rich or pro-poor distributive burden, giving insight into whether the burden of carbon tax falls disproportionately on poor households.  This paper addresses a methodological gap offered by commonly employed techniques.  Microsimulation-type analyses show the distribution of burden by income group or between socioeconomic cohorts (e. g.  comparing the burden imposed on urban vs.  rural dwellers or large vs.  small households).  This identiﬁes the distributional outcome, but does not give insight into the factors driving this result.  It is therefore diﬃcult to compare the inﬂuence each factor plays in the overall regressive impact.  While traditional regression-based analyses (e. g.  Büchs and Schnepf, 2013) can isolate the expected inﬂuence that each socioeconomic factor plays in carbon consumption, the regressivity of this relationship is not accounted for.  One must combine information on the propensity to consume carbon with the gradient of this consumption across the income distribution to elicit this information.  This paper provides this contribution by carrying out a multivariate decomposition of the concentration index, a method commonly employed to decompose socioeconomic inequalities in health outcomes (Walsh and Cullinan, 2015.  van Doorslaer et al. , 2004.  Yiengprugsawan et al. , 2009.  Wagstaff et al. , 2001).  This analysis of this paper is applied to an Irish case study and the results are threefold.  First, this paper has quantiﬁed the incidence of carbon tax expenditure.  For the considered Irish case study, electricity and ‘other’1 fuel-related carbon taxes have the greatest pro-poor distribution of incidence.  In terms of magnitude, less wealthy households spend a greater proportion of their income on ‘other’ fuel and motor fuel-related carbon taxes.  Second, the determinants of carbon tax expenditure are identiﬁed.  Location, occupation and household structure are important for motor fuel-related carbon tax expenditure.  Education, location, household structure and home heating method inﬂuence ‘other’ fuel-related carbon tax expenditure, while dwelling type, household structure and appliance ownership are important determinants of electricity-related carbon tax expenditure.  Third, the extent to which each socioeconomic determinant affects inequality has been quantiﬁed for each carbon source. 