 1.  Introduction About $2 billion of petroleum are traded daily, making petroleum the single largest item in the balance of payment and exchange between countries (Tordo etal. , 2011).  Economies are susceptible to oil supply and price volatility as a result of their strong dependence on oil-based products (Cuñado and Pérez de Gracia, 2003.  Jiménez-Rodríguez and Sánchez, 2005).  This is probably the reason for state interventions in the industry, in the form of National Oil Companies (NOCs).  State ownership of oil companies started in 1914 when the British government acquired a controlling stake in the Anglo-Persian Oil Company, now British Petroleum (BP), setting a precedent for the many state-owned oil companies to follow in other countries (Wolf, 2009).  Since 1991, countries that possess NOCs have held nearly 90% of global crude oil reserves (Eller etal. , 2011).  Various governments have seen the oil industry far important to be left in the hands of private International Oil Companies (IOCs) as direct state control over its resources is a strong indicator of national sovereignty (Mommer, 2002).  State ownership in this industry is at the heart of debates on state interventionism, asset nationalization and deregulation policies in the oil industry.  This notwithstanding, to some researchers direct state intervention is seen as a major cause of inefﬁciency in this industry (Kashani, 2005a, 2005b).  The issue of state ownership versus private ownership of oil companies has become the overarching theme of most efﬁciency-related studies in the industry.  Indeed, Al-Obaidan and Scully (1992), Eller etal.  (2011), Ike and Lee (2014), Wolf (2009), and Sueyoshi and Goto (2012) have all provided empirical evidence on the differences in the efﬁciency of state controlled oil companies and privately controlled ones.  Although, these studies mostly favour private ownership, the debate is not dwindling since high energy prices, asset nationalization policy and economic success of some NOCs have re-ignited calls for more state involvement (Wolf, 2009).  There is therefore the need to reconsider how state ﬁrms can be more productive, and stay relevant in this volatile industry, compared to their private counterparts.  Empirical evidence show that one way ﬁrms (both private and state) can improve efﬁciency is through multinational operations (Greene etal. , 2009.  Li, 2008).  A multinational ﬁrm is one that owns and operates income generating assets in more than one country.  A ﬁrm that operates in a single country is a local ﬁrm.  Petroleum ﬁrms are among the largest multinationals internationally (Al-Obaidan and Scully, 1995).  Royal Dutch Shell, Sinopec, China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC) and Exxon Mobil are among the top six global ﬁrms on Fortune Magazine's 2016 global 500 company ranking (Fortune Magazine, 2017).  Even some of the NOCs, who are usually expected to only operate in their home countries, have multinational operations.  For example CNPC, a company with 100% state ownership (Energy Intelligence, 2013), has oil and gas operations in 29 countries around the world (CNPC, 2014).  CNPC is an example of a state-owned multinational oil company (MNOC).  For ﬁrms like Exxon Mobil, Chevron and Total, they are privately-owned multinationals (MIOCs).  Indeed, from the theoretical arguments of both the eclectic paradigm (Dunning, 1977) and portfolio diversiﬁcation theory (Markowitz, 1952), multinational operations bring some gains to a ﬁrm's operation in the form of efﬁciency (Al-Obaidan and Scully, 1995).  Though this view that multinational operation improves ﬁrm performance, is quite predominant in theory, more empirical testing of this view in the petroleum industry is needed. 