 1.  Introduction China’s excess air pollution is widely known.  In 2014, for example, annual ﬁne particulate (PM2. 5) levels in 31 Chinese major cities (4 province-level cities and 27 provincial capitals) were 23-124 μg/m3, with a mean of 65 μg/m3, exceeding the World Health Organization (WHO) guideline level of 10 μg/m3 by a factor of N6 (Nam, forthcoming).  As demonstrated by a substantial body of the epidemiological literature, conventional air pollutants, such as PM2. 5, increase health risks substantially (Dockery et al. , 1989, 1992.  Dockery and Pope, 1994).  Given its excessiveness, air pollution in China has posed enormous and imminent threats to the public health of urban residents.  Many impact studies motivated to increase public awareness of the threats have used such epidemiological evidence to estimate pollution-induced socioeconomic burdens.  A conventional approach ﬁrst keeps track of the morbidity and mortality cases that occur due to exposure to excess pollution, applying concentration-response functions, drawn from the epidemiological literature, to given pollution levels.  Each case is then valuated in monetary terms, using market or surveyed data for each health endpoint.  A substantial number of China-focused studies have adopted this approach, and their estimated pollution-health costs range from 3. 5 to 5. 9% of China’s historic gross domestic product (GDP) (see Section 4. 2).  One potential problem in the literature is a lack of dynamic thinking in economic valuation.  Many available estimates for China are based on a static application of the conventional approach mentioned above, considering only a single point in time.  However, the effects of pollutioncaused damage may remain in an economy for a long time (Nam et al. , 2010).  Labor loss in one period, for example, reduces incomes and savings, which will then lead to less investment and growth in the future.  Also, increased demand for medical services can hardly be met without drawing resources from other sectors, distorting cross-industry resource allocation.  Distorted resource allocation due to an external shock (i. e. , pollution) can reduce economy-wide efﬁciency over time, in a cumulative manner.  Neglecting such dynamic dimensions can lead to substantial underestimation.  Other areas for improvement include a ﬁner unit of analysis and the adoption of local epidemiological evidence.  Due to the lack of data, a dynamic impact analysis of China’s pollution is often conducted at the national level.  Given the substantial subnational heterogeneity in terms of air quality or socioeconomic conditions, however, the disadvantage of treating China as a single entity is substantial.  In addition, many studies simply apply Western epidemiological evidence to China’s context, although a huge gap in background air quality may lead to different exposure-response relationships between the two regions.  Accordingly, it seems important to incorporate local epidemiological evidence, away from direct application of Western estimates.  In this study, we ﬁll the gap in the literature through application of a dynamic assessment tool, following in the footstep of Matus et al.  (2012).  The method developed in this study is distinct from others in that it can capture cumulative dimensions of the pollution-health effects, which are often overlooked in the literature, with subnational details.  We also focus on PM2. 5, instead of PM10, given its closer relevance to human health, and incorporate local epidemiological evidence to improve the accuracy of our estimates.  2.  Literature Review.  A substantial body of literature has so far estimated pollution-health effects in China’s context.  Among the pioneering studies on China is a 1997 study by the World Bank (World Bank, 1997).  This study estimates that in 1995 the socioeconomic burden associated with PM10 pollution was as large as 4. 6% of China’s historic GDP, even when its cumulative dimension is ignored.  A follow-up World Bank study (World Bank and SEPA, 2007) concludes that a comparable economic loss from PM10 pollution in 2003 was around 3. 8% of GDP, conﬁrming its earlier ﬁnding and reﬂecting an improving air-quality trend in China.  In terms of method, these two studies take a static approach in impact estimation and a contingent valuation method (CVM) in valuation of statistical life.  Many other studies apply a similar static method, taking human capital (HC) or cost of illness (COI) approaches, as well as a CVM (e. g. , Cai, 2009.  Greenpeace and Peking University School of Public Health, 2015.  Kan et al. , 2004.  Mu and Zhang, 2013.  Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2014.  Xie et al. , 2016.  Gao et al. , 2015.  Zeng et al. , 2015.  Huang et al. , 2012.  Hammitt and Zhou, 2006.  Zhou et al. , 2014.  Xu et al. , 2015, 2016).  In general, those estimates based on HC or COI methods tend to be smaller than CVM-based estimates, due to their restrictive focus on economic damage (Viscusi et al. , 2005).  A key problem of the studies adopting a static approach is that they tend to neglect cumulative dimensions of economic damage (Matus et al. , 2012).  Pollution-caused wage loss in one period, for example, means a reduced pool of capital inputs available for growth in the following periods, and such effects remain in an economy for a long time (Nam et al. , 2010).  Also, increased exposure to pollution drives up the demand for healthcare services, requiring an economy to allocate more of the available intermediate or factor inputs toward the healthcare sector at the expense of other sectors’ output (Matus et al. , 2008).  Such distorted resource allocation caused by pollution likely introduces economy-wide inefﬁciency, and this effect lasts beyond a single time period.  Failure to consider these cumulative dimensions can result in substantial underestimation of pollution-health costs (Reilly et al. , 2013).  For this reason, more recent studies take a dynamic approach, often employing computable general equilibrium (CGE) models (Bollena and Brink, 2014.  Matus et al. , 2012.  Nielsen and Ho, 2013.  Saari et al. , 2015.  Wu et al. , 2017.  Xie et al. , 2016).  With the explicit description of a pollution-related production nest within a CGE framework, we can trace cross-industry interactions and associated pollution-health costs2, and the model’s dynamic application allows us to capture cumulative effects of economic damage over time, leading to a more complete impact assessment (Boehringer and Rutherford, 2008.  Clarke et al. , 2009.  Dai et al. , 2017.  Yang et al. , 2005.  Karplus et al. , 2016.  Li et al. , 2012.  Qi et al. , 2014.  van Ruijven et al. , 2012.  Zhang et al. , 2013.  Zhu et al. , 2017.  G.  Wang et al. , 2016.  X.  Wang et al. , 2016).  Estimates based on a dynamic approach tend to be greater than static estimates, given their additional consideration of such missing dimensions in the latter.  For example, Matus et al.  (2012) estimate that PM10-associated health damage in 2005 reached 5. 9% of China’s GDP, which exceeds the World Bank’s static estimate available for 2003 (3. 8%) by 2. 1 percentage point.  Part of this difference is due to the former’s more complete inclusion of cost dimensions, although a parallel comparison of the two studies is hard, due to dissimilar time covered and methodological details (e. g. , assumption of PM10-related threshold effects).  The latter group of studies, however, also present substantial room for further improvement.  Most notably, China-focused dynamic analysis often treats entire China as a single region, due to lack of reliable subnational data (e. g. , Matus et al. , 2012).  This approach may not be reasonable, given China’s substantial subnational heterogeneity in terms of air quality or socioeconomic conditions (Nam, forthcoming).  Another area for improvement is incorporation of local epidemiological evidence.  Recently, a few studies have shifted toward regional CGE modeling, presenting substantial improvement in the ﬁrst aspect, but they still tend to apply Western epidemiological evidence to China’s context (e. g. , Xie et al. , 2016).  This application neglects the possibility that a huge gap in background air quality can lead to substantially different exposureresponse relationships in China and Western countries (Burnett et al. , 2014).  In recognition of these problems, we conduct a dynamic pollution-health effects analysis at subnational levels, incorporating local epidemiological evidence.  <Middle> Theoretical Framework and Method.  Our dynamic analysis is based on the China Regional Energy Model (CREM) extended for health-effects analysis (CREM-HE), developed as part of the Regional Emissions Air-Quality Climate Health (REACH) assessment framework (Kishimoto et al. , 2017.  Zhang et al. , 2013.  Karplus et al. , 2016.  Luo et al. , 2016).  Our method in detail is described3. 1.  REACH assessment framework.  The REACH assessment framework is self-consistent and intends to capture comprehensive energy-environment-economy dynamics in response to a policy shock.  This framework is a key product of the China Energy and Climate Project, co-led by Tsinghua University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Zhang, 2016.  Kishimoto et al. , 2017).  As shown in Fig.  1, the following four components compose the REACH framework.  an energy and economy model (CREM), an emission inventory module, an atmospheric chemistry transport model, and a healtheffects evaluation module.  In the ﬁgure, thin gray arrows indicate the ﬂow variables among the components.  This framework can be applied for various policy-driven cost-beneﬁt analyses at multiple levels, and its spatial resolution can be easily increased by incorporating provincial details of energy and economic systems and other spatial distribution information, such as emissions and population.  In response to a policy shock, CREM ﬁrst simulates economic growth, energy use, and emissions pathways for each region.  Then, the air quality modeling system, composed of a pollutant emissions inventory model and a regional atmospheric chemistry model, uses CREM’s simulation results to generate air-quality layers. 