
Oil ranks among the most volatile non-agricultural commodities in the
world and this volatility has increased in recent years due mainly to the
recent global ﬁnancial crises, the surge in production of shale oil and the
change in OPEC's policy from the quota mechanism to the market
share maximization.  Oil prices dropped from $147/barrel in July 2008 to
$32/barrel in March 2009 due particularly to the global ﬁnancial crisis of
2008–2009 and then climbed to more than $100/barrel in the ﬁrst quarter
of 2011, rising in-line with the global economic recovery.  They dropped
again in 2015 to under $50/barrel, where they have stayed, as a result of
Saudi Arabia's decision seeking a greater market share as well as the increases in shale oil production.  In January 2016, the U. S.  oil prices plunged
below $27/barrel for the ﬁrst time since 2003 due to a rise in global oil
inventories, concurrently with traders also worried that the crude supply
glut could linger.  Therefore, the oil volatility shocks are a major source of
instability for the world economy, and they particularly impact the future
economic health of oil-exporting countries that depend on oil exports for
most of their revenues.  Under these circumstances, these countries have
had to dip into their foreign reserves and thereby have seen their credit
ratings drop signiﬁcantly, while the premiums on their credit default
swaps (CDS) have soared because these credit derivatives generally measure the expected credit risk, fear, default, greed and future economic performance of countries (Hammoudeh Name, 2013a, 2013b.  Hammoudeh
and Sari, 2011). 
A CDS contract is the most common type of credit derivatives that
offers protection against adverse credit events.  The market price of a
CDS (called a CDS premium or a spread) reﬂects the risk of the underlying
credit asset.  A CDS index is a highly liquid, standardized credit security
that trades at a very small bid-ask spread.  CDSs can thus be efﬁcient in
processing information on evolving risks in the economies.  For a sovereign CDS, a credit event is equivalent to a debt-issuing country defaulting
on its debt payment commitments (Broto and Pérez-Quirós, 2015).  The
magnitude of the credit spreads gauges the degree of the default risk exposure of the country, where a widening of a CDS spread in response to
certain oil events indicates an increase in the level of credit risk and vice
versa.  The CDSs for the oil-exporting countries have widened differently
in reaction to the drops in oil prices, but they are expected to narrow
when those prices surge. 
It is widely accepted that oil prices play a major role in determining
economic activity in many economies, particularly those of the oil exporters.  In this sense, it has been well documented that oil price
volatility shocks have a substantial impact on industrial activity, stock
and credit markets performance and economic growth, even though
the effects differ considerably across countries and industries.  For example, negative oil price shocks generally lead to an economic slowdown
in net oil-exporting countries and have differential impacts on capital
market participants, while the effect on economic growth tends to be
beneﬁcial for net oil-importing countries. 
The recent Eurozone sovereign debt crisis has renewed the debate
on the sovereign CDS market.  The perceived risk and dramatic jumps
in the sovereign spreads during the crisis, the recent collapse of oil
prices since June 2014 and the ensuing elevation in economic uncertainty have motivated us to investigate the impact of oil market uncertainty
on sovereign CDS spreads for a group of diverse oil-exporting countries. 
The oil-exporting countries included in this study are Bahrain, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia and United Arab Emirates (UAE), which make up most of
the GCC bloc, as well as Brazil, Norway, Russia, Mexico, and Venezuela
which are important oil producers and exporters.  These countries are
selected based on data availability for their CDS spreads.  These diverse
oil exporters are different in terms of their relative dependency on oil
revenues, amounts of foreign reserves, sizes of foreign debt-to-GDP
and levels of credit ratings. 
The primary objectives of this paper are twofold.  First, to examine the
impact of the oil market uncertainty (proxied by the CBOE Crude Oil Volatility Index known as the OVX index) on the sovereign credit spreads
(proxied by sovereign CDS spreads) of the four GCC and other ﬁve
major oil-exporting countries.  Second, to discern the differences in the
responses of the sovereign CDS spreads of the different oil exporters to
the implied oil volatility shocks since important lessons can be learned
from those differences.  The study is conducted by a time-varying approach based on the modiﬁed bootstrap-rolling window procedure in
order to study the directional predictability between oil uncertainty
and sovereign credit risk for those oil-exporting countries over different
time periods, particularly during the times when oil volatility follows rising and falling trends.  To check the robustness of our estimations, we use
the quantile dependence measure through the cross-quantilogram approach to detect dependence across the entire range of quantiles or market conditions. 
We examine the order of integration of the time series variables by
using the Narayan and Popp (2010) unit root test, which accounts for
the presence of two structural breaks that the classical Augmented
Dickey and Fuller (1979) and the Phillips and Perron (1988) unit
root tests cannot.  The presence of structural breaks in the data renders
linear or full sample estimates of the implied oil volatility and the sovereign CDS spreads unreliable. 