 1.  Introduction Since the many projects launched over the past decade to achieve increased market integration across day-ahead electricity markets in Europe, the day-ahead electricity price convergence between market areas has increased signiﬁcantly, adding to the complexity of modeling the joint behavior of day-ahead electricity prices.  The ﬁrst signiﬁcant step towards market integration in Europe was taken with the introduction of the Nord Pool market, which is the main platform for trading power in most Nordic and Baltic countries.  At Nord Pool, the bidding areas are price coupled, meaning that the transmission capacity is auctioned as an implicit part of the day-ahead auction of electrical energy.  This achieves - as opposed to the explicit auctioning, where the transmission capacity auction and the day-ahead auction of electrical energy are separate actions - the eﬃcient utilization of interconnectors and results in smaller price differences between the bidding areas.  Since Nord Pool’s creation in the mid 90’s, many countries have joined and Nord Pool today comprises Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.  For the sake of completion, we also mention that Nord Pool has taken sole ownership of the UK market as of 2014.  Although Nord Pool has a long-standing history of price coupling, such initiatives are more recent for other European countries.  In 2006, the so-called Tri-Lateral Market Coupling (TLC) project comprising France, Belgium and the Netherlands was initiated.  Later in 2010, the price coupling of Central West Europe (CWE) was achieved, integrating Germany, France, Austria, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg.  In 2014, a crucial milestone was reached with the price coupling of the North Western European (NWE) region, covering the CWE region, the UK, the Nordic and Baltic countries - and as of 2016, the price coupling region has grown to include 19 European countries.  Also, a new algorithm regarding how cross-border capacities are included in the day-ahead price calculation was introduced on 20 May 2015 in the CWE region, with the transition from the Available Transmission Capacity (ATC) methodology to the more eﬃcient Flow-Based (FB) methodology.  For the joint modeling of day-ahead electricity prices in two interconnected areas, price coupling has induced a fundamental change that cannot be ignored.  In the case of the CWE region for example, the transition from explicit to implicit auctioning of transmission capacity has meant that equal prices in two adjacent markets are very often observed now.  As already accentuated in the existing literature (see e. g.  Füss et al.  (2017)), this has generally resulted in the non-feasibility of previously proposed models.  For one, the pricing of spread options such as the ﬁnancial transmission rights cannot be achieved using spread option formulas á la Margrabe.  Also in risk management applications, the classical reduced-form models are no longer suitable for modeling the joint behavior of prices.  To exemplify some events and their inﬂuence on the day-ahead electricity prices, we plot in Fig.  1 the evolution of the German– French price spread at hour 8, for the period 1 January 2009 to 25 September 2016.  According to Fig.  1, the most visible change in the spread dynamics was caused by the price coupling of Germany and France in 2010, leading to a large amount of exact price convergence in the following period.  In this paper, we propose a regime-switching AR–GARCH copula model for the joint behavior of pairs of day-ahead prices in coupled electricity markets, inspired by ideas from Haldrup and Nielsen (2006) and Haldrup et al.  (2010).  The regime-switching part is essential for distinguishing the case of identical prices from the case of non-identical prices.  The AR–GARCH functions as a ﬁlter to remove the serial dependence in the conditional means and conditional variances.  The use of copula models facilitates the analysis in the sense that marginal models for day-ahead prices are treated separately from the dependence structure.  Furthermore, copulas allow for the easy transition to more realistic distributional assumptions for the residuals, and also allow for the inclusion of a more detailed description of the dependence structure when the prices do not coincide.  Our empirical study concentrates on four coupled markets.  Germany–France, Germany–Netherlands, Netherlands–Belgium and Germany–Western Denmark.  The proposed model has a wide range of applications in the context of derivatives pricing, hedging and risk management.  Here, we consider two applications.  The pricing of ﬁnancial transmission rights, and the out-of-sample forecasting of tail quantiles.  In both applications, we study how the results are impacted by the choice of marginal distributions and the choice of copula.  Furthermore in the forecasting exercise, we demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed modeling framework by comparing the forecast performance of copula-based models against a simple alternative that is not copula-based.  The existing literature on bivariate or multivariate models for day-ahead prices in coupled electricity markets is scarce.  Due to the aforementioned increasing complexity in the joint price dynamics, some authors employ fundamental models, with examples being Kiesel and Kustermann (2016) and Füss et al.  (2017).  Kiesel and Kustermann (2016) propose a fundamental model in the spirit of Carmona et al.  (2013), and derive closed-form pricing formulas for futures and plain vanilla options under market coupling.  Moreover, they provide an empirical application using data from the German and French markets.  In Füss et al.  (2017), the authors also employ a fundamental model, and consider the pricing of futures and transmission rights under different allocation schemes.  Aside from providing closed-form pricing formulas, sensitivity analyses are also carried out.  However appealing fundamental models are when it comes to their adaptability to changes in the market structure - which indeed happen quite often - they can be extremely data-heavy and thus both theoretically and empirically challenging, as also acknowledged by Kiesel and Kustermann (2016).  In the empirical analysis of Kiesel and Kustermann (2016) regarding Germany–France, the data input amounts to many different time series.  Day-ahead electricity price data, coal, gas and oil data to obtain a proxy for the marginal fuel, residual expected demand data for both countries (which is in turn obtained by subtracting renewable electricity generation from the expected demand), and also data on installed transmission capacities.  Our proposed model on the other hand, which belongs to the class of reduced-form models, is not nearly as data intensive, while still being able to comply with the institutional framework.  Examples on applications of time series models in the context of price coupled electricity markets are Haldrup and Nielsen (2006), where a regime-switching multiplicative SARFIMA model is proposed for the modeling of price spreads in the Nord Pool area, and Haldrup et al.  (2010), where a vector autoregressive model with long memory and regime switches is proposed and applied again to Nord Pool data.  In the context of copula models and their applications in energy markets, copulas have been gaining more interest recently.  Some examples are Börger et al.  (2009), who use copulas in the context of cross-commodity risk management, Benth and Kettler (2011), who employ copulas to model the spark spread, Avdulaj and Barunikl (2015), who use dynamic copulas to investigate oil-stock diversiﬁcation, and Grothe and Schnieders (2011) and Elberg and Hagspiel (2015), who consider copulas in the context of wind power in Germany.  The remaining of this paper is organized as follows.  Section 2 describes the data that our analysis is based on.  Section 3 introduces the regime-switching AR–GARCH copula model.  In Section 4 the proposed model is ﬁtted to the data.  Sections 5 and 6 present two empirical applications of the model.  Section 7 concludes.  <Middle> Data.  Our empirical study relies on day-ahead electricity price data from four price coupled markets.  Germany–France (DE–FR), Germany–Netherlands (DE–NL), Netherlands–Belgium (NL–BE), and Germany–Western Denmark (DE–DK1).  After careful considerations, we choose to ﬁx the sample window to the period 1 May 2011 to 20 May 2015.  Since areas of CWE are mostly represented in our analysis, and we wish to analyze the period following price coupling, a natural starting point for the sample is 10 November 2010, which marks the ﬁrst day of price coupling in the CWE region1.  Shortly after however, the Fukushima nuclear disaster followed, leading to a sudden change in German policy, with the closure of nuclear power plants and the signiﬁcant focus on the development of renewable generation sources.  To exclude the immediate perturbation caused by the Fukushima accident, we thus let the start of our sample be 1 May 2011.  Regarding the end point, we choose the date marking the switch to the FB methodology.  According to EPEX (2015), the FB coupling algorithm allows for more sophisticated grid modeling to optimize the ﬂows on interconnectors in comparison to the ATC methodology.  Effects of the change regarding how ﬂows are included in the calculation of day-ahead prices are not evident from just looking at time series plots of the data.  However, we do suspect some implications on the joint price dynamics, and let the sample end at this date as a result.  We will get back to this issue later in the paper.  Having ﬁxed the sample window to the period 1 May 2011–20 May 2015, we avoid the most signiﬁcant structural changes in the institutional framework for the pairs belonging to the CWE region.  Careful attention is however needed in the case of the DE–DK1 pair, where price coupling was ﬁrst introduced on 4 February 2014.  Before then, Western Denmark was volume coupled to Germany, using explicit auctioning.  This is not necessarily as worrying as the case of price coupling in the CWE region, since exact price convergence between Germany and Western Denmark was achieved frequently also before their price coupling.  Nevertheless, we shall treat the pair DE–DK1 with special consideration before applying the same modeling framework to all pairs of prices.  Although the pair DE–DK1 complicates our analysis somewhat, its inclusion is motivated by having one of Nord Pool’s bidding areas represented in our analysis, and also by having a pair where the in-feed of renewable energy is very signiﬁcant in both markets.  We consider hourly price data separately for each hour of the day – so for all four pairs, we will have 24 hourly time series, consisting of 1481 observations each.  Fig.  2 shows time series plots of the four pairs of spreads at four different hours of the day, and Table 1 provides summary statistics in order to get a better sense of the data.  To avoid distortions, few extreme prices have been truncated.  Speciﬁcally, prices below −50 EUR/MWh were set to −50, and prices above 150 EUR/MWh were set to 150. 2 The spreads show a rather different behavior across pairs and also across the hours of the day.  For DE–FR, we observe a changing seasonal pattern during (or near) off-peak.  During summer off-peak, Germany usually imports electricity from France due to low renewables generation in Germany (less wind during summer periods, and very little solar during off-peak) and excess nuclear production in France due to the lower demand.  During winter peak and off-peak, France usually imports from Germany due to increased demand and higher production in Germany caused by increased renewables generation.  In the case of the DE–NL pair, the German price is almost always below the Dutch price, signaling Netherlands to be a signiﬁcant importer of German power.  This relation can be explained by the electricity generation mix in the Netherlands, which relies heavily on more expensive natural gas.  For NL–BE we see that the Dutch price is more often observed to be above the Belgian price, which again is due to the more expensive generation sources in the Netherlands compared to Belgium.  However, both countries are mainly importers, and their day-ahead electricity prices are heavily inﬂuenced by conditions in Germany and France.  A seasonal pattern is also observed here, but is not as persistent as in the case of DE–FR.  According to TenneT (2013), this is because higher demand for electrical heating in France during winter is somehow reﬂected in the Belgian price, which in such situations would typically increase above the level of Dutch prices.  Regarding the DE–DK1 pair, prices in Western Denmark are usually below Germany.  Renewable power is signiﬁcant in both countries - DK1 has a lot of wind and DE has both wind and solar however Denmark is connected to both Sweden and Norway, from where it can import cheap hydropower.  A generation deﬁcit typically takes place during summer periods in DK1 due to less wind.  Depending on transmission capacity limitations, weather conditions, etc. , imports come from Germany, Sweden and/or Norway.  Considering in more detail the summary statistics presented in Table 1, we see that exact price convergence or equivalently a price spread of zero occurs very often for all pairs and hours of the day.  Moreover, the exact price coupling percentage can vary quite a lot depending on the hour of the day, and so can the mean and the standard deviation.  We also observe a strong positive relation between the prices conditional on the spread being nonzero.  This is of course expected due to the limited transmission capacity which impedes exact price convergence at all times – note that only a utilization of the available interconnector capacity below 100% would allow exact price convergence.  In Fig.  3, we consider in more detail the behavior of exact price convergence across the hours of the day.  For the CWE, there is generally less exact price convergence during the night hours, and also during midday.  For DE–DK1, the situation is somewhat reversed, with more coupling during off-peak.  The shape of the plots for the CWE areas, especially the plot for DE–NL, where the shape is most pronounced, reminds us of the “two hump” behavior of German day-ahead prices.  Typically, the German price is low during the night because of lower demand and high wind in-feed (especially during winter).  Prices are also lowered during midday, due to the high solar in-feed, which peaks at noon.  Why the shape of German prices during the day is reﬂected in the absolute coupling percentage can, to a high extent, be explained by the mix of generation assets across markets.  Let us consider the example of DE–NL.  The shape of the Dutch price during the peak hours is rather ﬂat compared to Germany, and the level of prices is higher due to the more expensive marginal cost of natural gas-ﬁred power plants, which play a major role in the daily fuel mix.  A smaller price difference between DE–NL is thus more likely to occur during morning and evening, when the German prices reach their highest level.  This implies that the remaining gap that needs to be closed in order to obtain exact price convergence is smaller during these periods, and more likely to be achieved with less than a 100% utilization of the available transmission capacity.  In the case of DE–DK1, the increased exact price convergence during off-peak can be explained by the combination of lower demand and high in-feed of wind generation in both countries, which leads to smaller price differences during off-peak.  3.  Model speciﬁcation.  To model the evolution of prices in two interconnected markets, we propose a regime-switching AR–GARCH copula model for each hour of the day separately.  We allow for two regimes, which are in fact observable and can be categorized as 1) identical and 2) nonidentical prices.  Making this distinction is of uttermost importance since it allows us to replicate periods of spreads equaling zero (see Fig.  2 and Table 1). 3 Our modeling procedure can be divided into three steps.  In a ﬁrst step, we deal with the seasonality aspect.  For all price areas we consider in this paper, that is BE, DK1, DE, FR and NL, the mechanism of day-ahead price formation is based on matching supply and demand curves on an hourly basis.  Hence, the strong seasonal variation that characterizes both the demand and the supply is reﬂected in the behavior of the electricity prices.  To correct the data for seasonality, suitable seasonal functions are applied to each pair of prices, for each hour of the day.  The seasonal functions are such that the identical/non-identical price patterns are preserved in the deseasonalized prices.  In a second step, regime-switching AR–GARCH ﬁlters are applied to each pair of deseasonalized prices.  Again in this case, the resulting residuals will maintain the same pattern of identical and nonidentical prices that we observe in the actual price data.  Hence, the residuals can be split according to 1) a case of perfect positive dependence, where the residuals from the regime-switching AR– GARCH will coincide, and 2) a case of non-perfect dependence.  In a third step, we study the dependence of non-equal residuals by applying the ﬂexible copula models.  Below, we elaborate on the second and third steps in our modeling framework.  3. 1.  A regime-switching AR–GARCH copula model.  Let us denote by yn,t,i the price in area i, at hour n and day t, which has been corrected for deterministic seasonality.  Since we only consider pairs of day-ahead prices, i = 1, 2.  To simplify the notation in what follows, we suppress the subscript n.  Whenever we refer to yt,i, we mean the deseasonalized day-ahead price for some given hour of the day.  We consider the following dynamics for the prices.  If yt,1 = yt,2, then we are in the regime of equal prices denoted by st = 0, and for i = 1, 2.  According to Eqs.  (1) and (4) for the conditional mean, and Eqs.  (3) and (6) for the conditional variance, all parameters vary depending on the regime.  We shall thus obtain three sets of parameter estimates.  One set corresponding to the regime where prices are identical, denoted with superscript (0), and two sets of parameters corresponding to the regime where prices are not identical, denoted with superscripts (i), for i = 1, 2.  To provide a parsimonious representation, the structure of the models is slightly different under the two regimes.  In the model for the conditional mean, identical prices are explained by lagged average prices from the two areas, whereas no averaging appears in the case of non-identical prices.  We note that aside from autoregressive terms, we allow for cross-equation effects by including lagged values of “the other price series”, in the spirit of vector autoregressions.  Nevertheless, we will refer to the model for the conditional mean as an AR.  The model for the conditional variance resembles the GARCH(1,1) speciﬁcation.  In times of identical prices, the model contains averages of lagged values, whereas the non-identical price regime is characterized by the classical GARCH(1,1) dynamics.  While accounting for serial dependence and heteroskedastisity, we stress that the construction of the model in Eqs.  (1)–(6) ensures that the regime switching nature of prices is maintained in the standardized residuals.  For the distribution of the standardized residuals denoted by g in Eqs.  (2) and (5), we consider different possibilities.  First, we consider the standard choice of a normal distribution.  where m and k denote the degrees of freedom and skewness parameters of the skew t distribution, respectively, and are allowed to vary with the regimes.  Next, we introduce copulas to model the dependence structure of standardized residuals belonging to the non-equal price regime.  Copulas are ﬂexible tools that enable the study of dependence structures beyond the linear correlation.  For the two-dimensional case we consider here, a copula is essentially a bivariate distribution function C deﬁned on the unit cube, with standard uniform margins.  The central result concerning copulas is due to Sklar’s theorem [Sklar (1959)], which states that if we assume (g1, g2) to have bivariate distribution function F and univariate marginal distribution functions F1, F2, then there exists a bivariate copula C, such that.  If the marginal distribution functions are continuous, we have furthermore that the copula is unique, and can be deﬁned through, where the u(cid. 4)s represent standard uniform variables and the F represent the inverse of the marginal distribution functions.  Adding to the ﬂexibility of copulas is that the converse of Sklar’s theorem also holds, meaning that we can combine two marginal distributions, be it from different families even, to form a joint distribution.  Since we condition on the information generated by past observations of the variables (by using AR–GARCH ﬁlters), we are in fact considering here the conditional copula.  Also in this case, Sklar’s theorem applies, as shown in Patton (2001).  3. 2.  Estimation procedure.  Estimation of the model parameters is done by maximum likelihood.  The joint conditional density function is obtained by differentiating Eq.  (9), and thus the full-sample log-likelihood takes theIn Eqs.  (11) and (12), the functions fi denote the conditional marginal density functions for area 1 and 2, and c is the conditional copula density representing the non-equal price regime.  The variable IY denotes the indicator function of the event Y.  Furthermore, Ft−1 denotes the ﬁltration, and (H1, H2, H3) refer to the parameters for the full model.  Speciﬁcally, (H1, H2) refer to the parameters of the regime-switching AR–GARCH model, and H3 refers to the copula parameters.  Recall that by construction of the model, ut,1 = ut,2 if yt,1 = yt,2, and ut,1 (cid. 2)= ut,2 otherwise.  In the equal price regime, the residuals thus coincide and we have a case of perfect positive dependence, where there is no copula parameter to be estimated.  Hence, the only copula parameter to be estimated corresponds to the pair of standardized residuals in the non-equal state.  Usually, the model parameters are obtained by performing a multi-stage maximum likelihood estimation, where the marginal models and the copula are considered separately, see e. g.  Dias and Embrechts (2009) and Patton (2013).  Since the parameter vectors of the marginal models have common elements in our case, these cannot be estimated separately.  Hence, in a ﬁrst step, a joint numerical maximization of the the ﬁrst term in Eq.  (11) is performed to obtain estimates for (H1, H2).  Then, standardized residuals are obtained, and the uniforms entering the copula log-likelihood follow immediately from applying the probability integral transform.  In a second step, the copula parameters are estimated by maximizing the copula log-likelihood numerically.  4.  Model ﬁtting.  4. 1.  Seasonal function.  As mentioned in Section 3, the ﬁrst step in our data analysis is concerned with the seasonality correction.  Following the related literature (see e. g.  Lucia and Schwartz, 2002.  Haldrup et al. , 2010.  Janczura et al. , 2013), we consider the following seasonal function K for each area in a price pair.  In Eq.  (13), a is a constant, b denotes the trend coeﬃcient and c and d are coeﬃcients for the yearly cycle.  To capture the weekly seasonality, we use day-of-week dummies denoted by Wj, with their corresponding coeﬃcients denoted by wj.  We group Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday in one dummy variable, and have therefore limited ourselves to only four day-of-week coeﬃcients.  Lastly, the dummy variable H is included to capture holiday effects, and its coeﬃcient is denoted by h. 4 The seasonal functions are ﬁtted to the data by ordinary least squares.  To ensure that the deseasonalized price data corresponding to a given pair retains the same regime-switching structure, note that we let all parameters vary with the regime st.  For a given pair, the parameter estimates corresponding to the state st = 0, i. e. , state of equal prices, will by construction be the same for area i = 1 and area i = 2.  For the state st = 1, i. e. , state of non-equal prices, the parameter estimates will differ for the two areas.  4. 2.  Marginal models.  After removing the deterministic seasonal component,regime-switching AR–GARCH model introduced in Eqs.  (1)–(6) is ﬁtted to the data.  Speciﬁcally, the model is ﬁtted to all four pairs of prices and all hours of the day, which corresponds to a total of 96 models.  For the order of the autoregression (P) and cross-equation effects (Q) in the equations for the conditional mean, we consider P = 1, .  .  .  , 7 and Q = 1, .  .  .  , 7.  The optimal order of the models is chosen based on the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC).  In the interest of brevity, we provide the detailed results in Appendix A, Table A. 12.  We do however mention that the order of Q is zero for the majority of the models, revealing that the cross-equation effects (cf.  Eq.  (4)) can generally be omitted.  Model speciﬁcations other than those stated in Eqs.  (1)–(6) were experimented with, and we note that our proposed regimeswitching AR–GARCH model is one of many possible speciﬁcations.  We found however our speciﬁcation to be superior in terms of parsimony and its ﬁt to the data.  To provide some evidence for the ﬁt of the regime-switching AR–GARCH, we consider as an example the DE–FR pair at hour 8.  Table 2 presents the estimation results, and Fig.  4 displays sample autocorrelation and quantile plots.  Sample autocorrelation plots are provided for both the standardized residuals and the squared standardized residuals, and give indication of almost no serial correlation left.  Regarding the quantile plots, we provide both the ﬁt with the normal and the skew t distribution, illustrating the superiority of the latter.  Similar results to those in Fig.  4 were obtained for the remaining models.  In Appendix A, we provide some additional results for the remaining pairs at hour 8.  4. 3.  The pair DE–DK1.  Before proceeding to copula modeling, we recall that the pair DE–DK1 behaved differently compared to the other pairs in terms of initiatives that impacted the market structure.  With price coupling ﬁrst being introduced on 4 February 2014 as opposed to 10 November 2010, we wish to consider the pair DE–DK1 more closely.  As mentioned earlier, the dynamics of the DE–DK1 spread has not changed visibly with the transition to price coupling, with equal prices having been observed prior as well as post price coupling.  Therefore, we applied the same regime-switching AR–GARCH framework to this pair cf.  Section 4. 2.  However, we wish to investigate whether a break in the dependence structure has occurred at the time of transitioning from volume coupling (VC) to price coupling (PC).  If this were the case, the subsequent copula modeling would need to account for such a break.  We consider searching for a break in the rank correlation of the ﬁltered prices (i. e. , the standardized residuals obtained after applying the regime-switching AR–GARCH ﬁlter) corresponding to the non-equal price regime, at t∗ = 4 February 2014.  Speciﬁcally, we wish to test, where qV C is the rank correlation (Spearman’s q) of ﬁltered prices corresponding to the non-equal price regime in the interval [1, t∗], and qPC denotes the rank correlation (Spearman’s q) in the interval (t∗, T].  A critical value for qV C − qPC is obtained by using an i. i. d.  bootstrap as in Patton (2013).  We perform the test for all 24 DE–DK1 models, and only ﬁnd evidence against the null of equal rank correlation in 2 out of 24 cases (we consider a 5% signiﬁcance level).  Since we do not ﬁnd stronger evidence for a break in the dependence, we decide to treat the pair DE–DK1 like all others in the subsequent analysis.  4. 4.  Copula models.  Next, we turn to the study of the dependence between residual pairs obtained from the regime-switching AR–GARCH models.  As mentioned in Section 3, only the pairs of residuals belonging to the non-equal price regime are relevant in this context, and hence copula models are ﬁtted to this data.  We restrict our attention to ﬁve copulas, namely the Gaussian, Student t, Gumbel, Rotated Gumbel5 and Symmetrized Joe-Clayton (SJC)6.  The choice of these copulas is motivated by having models that can capture different types of dependence structures, and also by their extensive use in the economic and ﬁnancial literature.  In the interest of clarity, we summarize in Table 3 the key features of the copula models considered in this paper.  The tail dependence terms appearing in Table 3 refer to measures of dependence between extreme events.  For the case of positive dependence, the lower and upper tail dependence are deﬁned as, where q denotes the quantile and C denotes the bivariate copula distribution function.  As it turns out, the expressions above have simple closed forms for many copulas.  Speciﬁcally for the ﬁve copulas considered in this paper, tail dependence coeﬃcients are easily computed using the expressions given in Table 3.  Turning to the estimation results, the ﬁve copula models are ﬁtted to each residual pair.  basing the model selection on the commonly used Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), we report the preferred copula for each model in Table 4.  The results reveal that the Gaussian copula is only chosen for 27 out of 96 models, conﬁrming that linear correlation is, in most cases, not enough to describe the dependence between prices in interconnected markets.  The Student t copula, which allows for symmetric upper and lower tail dependence, is preferred for 29 of the models.  The even more ﬂexible SJC copula, which allows for asymmetric upper and lower tail dependence (nesting the case of symmetric dependence), is chosen 26 times.  Lastly, the Rotated Gumbel copula and the Gumbel copula, which allow for tail dependence in only one of the tails, are preferred in 8 and 6 cases, respectively.  4. 4. 1.  Tail dependence implied by the optimal copulas.  To gain more insight regarding the optimal copulas listed in Table 4, we consider next their implied tail dependence.  In Fig.  5, we plot the implied lower and upper tail dependence coeﬃcients for all pairs of prices and all hours of the day.  An i. i. d.  bootstrap procedure was used to obtain the conﬁdence intervals for the estimates (see e. g.  Patton (2013) for more details).  Moreover, the estimated lower and upper tail dependence coeﬃcients grouped by peak (hours 8–19) and off-peak (hours 20–7) are reported in Table 5.  Recall that the analysis we perform in this section is based on ﬁltered prices belonging to the non-equal price regime.  Recall further that non-equal prices occur when there is a need to move more electricity across the border than what the available transmission capacity allows.  Hence, we can interpret the lower (upper) tail dependence as being the probability of observing very low (high) prices in two interconnected markets conditional on the full utilization of the interconnector.  According to Fig.  5, the estimates of the preferred copulas translate into tail dependence coeﬃcients that are often signiﬁcantly different from zero – and this holds for selected hours in all price pairs.  Further, a general tendency is that the lower tail dependence is stronger than the upper tail dependence during the off-peak hours (cf.  Fig.  5 and Table 5).  One explanation for this is that the probability of very low prices is higher during the off-peak hours, where the demand is lower.  In a situation where two interconnected areas exhibit a low demand and at the same time a high generation from renewable sources, e. g.  wind energy generation, extremely low prices happening simultaneously is a likely outcome.  Another general feature we observe in Fig.  5 and Table 5 is that the lower tail dependence is usually higher during off-peak than during peak.  Again here, we expect the lower demand during off-peak to be the main driver of this behavior.  The most pronounced difference between peak and off-peak lower tail dependence is found for the DE–DK1 pair.  This can be explained by the high wind infeed in both countries as well as similar weather conditions.  Most wind turbines in Germany are placed in the northern part, that is, rather close to the Danish border, implying that high wind scenarios are likely to happen simultaneously in both countries.  While low prices happening simultaneously in two neighboring countries can be explained by e. g.  low demand and/or high levels of renewables production, high prices occurring simultaneously can be explained by combinations of e. g.  high demand, low renewables production, low temperatures, increasing marginal prices of the price setting unit (coal, gas), and plant outages.  To provide an economic interpretation of particular events however, like the high upper tail dependence estimate for DE–NL for hour 8, can be very diﬃcult, since a set of very speciﬁc combinations of events might have been the4. 5.  Simulation.  Performing simulations from the proposed regime-switching AR–GARCH copula model, which is a central point in almost all applications, requires a last modeling element.  A model for the probabilities of transitions between the two regimes.  4. 5. 1.  Transition matrices.  We let the regimes be determined by a Markov chain of order one, with transition probability matrix P.  The probability of prices being equal conditional on prices being equal at the previous time step is denoted by p00.  Similarly, p11 denotes the probability of prices not being equal given that they were not equal at the previous time step.  Recalling that the regimes are observable, the transition probabilities are simply estimated from the data as, where Njk denotes the number of times regime j was followed by regime k, for j = 0, 1 and k = 0, 1.  4. 5. 2.  Simulation procedure.  Performing simulations from the proposed model is straightforward, but there are many steps involved.  In order to create an overview, we brieﬂy state the necessary steps below.  To generate a pair of (deseasonalized) prices (yt,1, yt,2) at timet, we ﬁrst generate the regime st based on the transition probability matrix in Eq.  (14).  If a) st = 0, we are in the equal price regime, i. e. , yt,1 = yt,2, and a standardized residual gt is to be drawn from the univariate marginal distribution, which can be either N(0, 1) or Skew t(0, 1, m(0), k(0)) depending on the model speciﬁcation.  By applying Eqs.  (2) and (1), a pair (yt,1, yt,2) is subsequently obtained.  If b) st = 1, we have thaty t,1 (cid. 2)= yt,2, and a pair (ut,1, ut,2) is generated from the copula7.  A standardized residual pair (gt,1, gt,2) is obtained by applying the inverse probability integral transform to the generated uniform pair (ut,1, ut,2).  This is done for each uniform individually, based on the univariate marginal distributions, i. e, N(0, 1) or Skew t(0, 1, m(i), k(i), ), for i = 1, 2.  Finally, Eqs.  (5) and (4) are employed, to generate a pair (yt,1, yt,2).  4. 5. 3.  In-sample simulations.  To provide more evidence for the ﬁt of the model, we perform in-sample simulations.  Revisiting the example of DE–FR hour 8, we follow the procedure described in Section 4. 5. 2 to generate 1000 sample paths of German and French prices of length T − max(P, Q), with T denoting the sample size of the data, and P and Q referring to the order of the model for the conditional mean, cf.  Eqs.  (1) and (4). 8 In Fig.  6, we show quantile plots of actual prices vs.  simulated prices, and quantile plots of actual non-zero spreads vs.  simulated non-zero spreads, with the results revealing a satisfactory in-sample ﬁt.  Similar in-sample ﬁts were obtained for the other pairs regarding quantile plots of the individual price series.  For the spreads on the other hand, the model does not always perform very well when considering matching both tails.  For some hours of the day regarding DE–NL, the model assigns slightly more mass to the right tail of the distribution, while being able to capture the left tail nicely.  As can be seen in Fig.  2 and Table 1, cases where the Dutch price is below the German price are either extremely few or none at all, explaining perhaps the inability of the model to provide a suﬃcient explanation of the right tail.  5.  Financial transmission rights.  The presence of heavy tails in the individual price distributions, asymmetric dependence and tail dependence between prices can have signiﬁcant implications when considering derivatives whose payoffs depend on the price spread.  To investigate such effects, we consider in this section the pricing of ﬁnancial transmission rights as a ﬁrst application.  A ﬁnancial transmission right (FTR) is a spread option written on the hourly day-ahead electricity price difference in two interconnected areas.  It gives the option holder the right to “transfer electricity across the border” if the price difference is positive for the corresponding hour.  In reality, no physical cross-border transfer of electricity is undertaken as the rights are settled ﬁnancially, hence the name ﬁnancial transmission right.  A particular feature of FTRs is that delivery is limited to certain periods, such as an entire year or month.  When entering e. g.  a monthly FTR, the option holder actually enters a string of hourly spread options, and has the right to exercise at each hour in that month.  Also interesting is that FTRs are linked to the actual available capacity of the interconnector, and they are offered by the transmission system operators (TSO) through explicit auctions. 9 Let us denote by V(t0, T) the value of a ﬁnancial transmission right at time t0, with delivery at T.  V(t0, T) can be obtained by the usual practice of computing the discounted value of the expected payoff, where the expectation is taken under a pricing measure Q (see e. g.  Benth et al.  (2008)).  In Eq.  (15), Pi T denotes the hourly day-ahead electricity price corresponding to the time period T in area i, where i = 1, 2.  Furthermore, r denotes the risk-free rate, which we for simplicity set to zero in the following analysis.  The value of e. g.  a monthly FTR is simply obtained as the sum of all individual hourly spread option values in that month, which in turn are obtained using Eq.  (15).  Thus, the holder of a monthly FTR will have the right to exchange electricity in area 2 for electricity in area 1, if the price difference is positive, during each hour of that month.  Having established a modeling framework for pairs of day-ahead electricity prices in interconnected areas, FTR prices can be obtained by Monte Carlo simulation, following the procedure described in Section 4. 5. 2.  We note however that computing expectations based on simulations from a model that has been ﬁtted to historical data would yield an option price under the objective measure P, and not the pricing measure Q.  We will make the simplifying assumption of P= Q, arguing that a change of measure would not alter the overall conclusions regarding the impacts of heavy tails and choice of copula on option prices.  For further discussions regarding measure change in the context of electricity markets we refer to Burger et al.  (2004), Benth and Meyer-Brandis (2009), and Benth and Schmeck (2014).  To investigate the effects of heavy tails and choice of copula model, we consider here the pricing of FTRs for the months June and December 2015 as examples.  The valuation date is set to t0 = 20 May 2015, which corresponds to the end of our sample.  Since we model each hour of the day separately, we will limit ourselves to pricing monthly FTRs with delivery during one single hour of the day, for all days in June and December.  This way, we avoid averaging effects to some extent and showcase the different behavior among the hours of the day.  Speciﬁcally, we consider hour 2, 8, 14 and 20, for all pairs of prices, and ﬂows in both directions.  The pricing formula for e. g.  the ﬂow direction DE→FR during each hour 2 in June is given by, where t0 =20 May 2015, T1 =1 June 2015, and T2 =30 June 2015.  PFR t denote the hour 2 prices in France and Germany, respectively, for a given day t ∈ [T1, T2].  We perform option price calculations using three different models.  First, a model with normal margins and a Gaussian copula (Model 1).  second, a model with skew t margins and a Gaussian copula (Model 2), and third, a model with skew t margins and the preferred copula cf.  Table 4 (Model 3).  By construction, Model 1 is a naive model since it imposes no heavy tails, no asymmetry and no tail dependence.  Model 2 on the other hand allows for heavy tails but imposes symmetry and no tail dependence, while Model 3 allows for heavy tails, and can allow for tail dependence and asymmetry (note that preferred copulas are in some cases the Gaussian copula according to Table 4).  In the interest of clarity, we summarize the characteristics of the above-mentioned models in Table 6.  The pricing results are displayed in Table 7, and are based on 200,000 Monte Carlo simulations from the ﬁtted regime-switching AR–GARCH copula models from Section 4.  Price 1, 2 and 3 in Table 7 refer to prices obtained from Model 1, 2 and 3, respectively, and are given in EUR/MWh.  D1 refers to the relative difference between Price 1 and 2, measuring the effect of introducing heavy tails in the model.  D2 refers to the relative difference between Price 2 and 3, measuring the effect of using a better ﬁtting copula, which in contrast to the Gaussian copula, allows for tail dependence and in some cases asymmetry.  Notice that if the Gaussian copula was chosen as the optimal copula cf.  Table 4, no price for the corresponding option was computed with Model 3, since Model 3 then corresponds to Model 2.  Regarding the robustness of option price estimates, we note that the same option prices were estimated based on 100,000 and 200,000 Monte Carlo simulations, yielding estimates that are generally accurate to two or three decimal places.  Furthermore, the same random number generator was used to compute option prices across competing models, thus allowing us to solely concentrate on the effects induced by the different marginal distributions and copulas.  According to Table 7, introducing heavy tails can have a signiﬁcant effect in terms of magnitude, with the maximum reduction in the option price being as high as 45%, and the maximum increase reaching 28%.  In terms of sign, the effects are mixed, which might be surprising at ﬁrst.  In the case of e. g.  an out-of-the-money option written on one underlying asset, heavy tails would imply an increase in the option price, since more mass is assigned to extreme events.  In the case of spread options however, where the payoff depends on the price differential, heavy tails might or might not cancel out, leading to both decreases and increases.  Another factor inﬂuencing both the sign and the magnitude is the dependence implied by the Gaussian copula, which is not exactly the same for the models with normal margins as for the those with skew t margins.  To illustrate this variation, we compute the Kendall’s t implied by the models speciﬁed in Table 6.  The results are reported in Table 8, revealing differences which naturally impact the option prices.  Also noticeable in the context of heavy tails is that when comparing the same option in the two different ﬂow directions, the effect is always magniﬁed for the direction that is least inthe-money.  The more difference there is between the moneyness of the options, the more difference there is in the effect of heavy tails.  This is of course expected, since out-of-the-money options are more sensitive to changes in the tail behavior of a distribution.  When considering the effects of using a better ﬁtting copula, the results generally imply a reduction in the option prices, with a maximum drop amounting to 13%.  As with heavy tails, the effects are magniﬁed for out-of-the-money options.  These ﬁndings are expected if considering the isolated effect of tail dependence.  Allowing prices to move together in extreme events lowers the probability of obtaining extreme price differences in the simulated future payoffs, which ultimately lowers the option price.  Furthermore, the moneyness of the option plays an important role in this context, since it decides the importance of the joint tail behavior for the option price.  Although tail dependence is included in the effect measured by D2, we stress that tail dependence is not the only inﬂuencing factor, and hence its impact cannot be separated and measured explicitly.  Equally important is that D2 can include the effects of asymmetry, and simply measures the impact of assuming a dependence structure that is different from the Gaussian one.  To emphasize this point, we again refer to Kendall’s t computed in Table 8, which makes the results comparable across copula models.  According to this measure, some differences are observed in the dependence implied by Models 2 and 3.  With everything else being equal, a reduction in Kendall’s t implies an increase in the option price, which would counteract the effects of tail dependence.  Similarly, an increase in Kendall’s t implies a decrease in the option price, possibly adding to the reduction implied by tail dependence.  Overall, heavy tails and a better ﬁtting copula are most important to consider in the context of out-of-the-money options - and as we can see from Table 7, there are many such options for the interconnected electricity markets we analyze here.  Lastly, we note that the seasonal behavior of prices and the electricity ﬂow patterns discussed in Section 2 are of course reﬂected in the option prices.  For the pair DE–FR for example, we observe that the direction FR→DE is more in-the-money than DE→FR for the summer month June, during hours 2, 8 and 20. 