
Empirical research on conditional conservatism documents a piecewise linear relation between earnings and stock
returns and often attributes this pattern to a more timely recognition of bad news than good news (e. g. , Basu, 1997). 
However, we argue that a similar asymmetric relation can arise from a fundamentally different source—cost stickiness.  Cost
stickiness refers to the asymmetric response of costs to sales increases versus decreases, which is a widely documented
finding in the research on cost behavior (e. g. , Anderson Name, 2003).  We show that cost stickiness can be mistaken for
conditional conservatism in standard models, distorting inferences about both the average level of conservatism and the
extent of cross-sectional variation in conservatism.  To reduce the likelihood of spurious inference, we develop new
empirical tests that separate conservatism from the confounding effect of sticky costs. 
Conditional conservatism implies that bad news (the usual proxy for which is negative stock returns) is recognized in
earnings more quickly and more fully than good news (measured by positive returns).  Therefore, the contemporaneous
association between earnings and stock returns should be stronger for negative returns than for positive returns (Basu,
1997).  Numerous studies find results consistent with this prediction and infer the presence of conditional conservatism (e. g. ,
Pope and Walker, 1999; Ball Name, 2000; Watts, 2003b; Ball Name, 2013a). 
The research on sticky costs documents an asymmetric behavior of costs and attributes it to operational decisions by
managers who face adjustment costs, such as severance payments to dismissed workers and disposal costs for property, plant,
and equipment (e. g. , Anderson Name, 2003).  To avoid adjustment costs, managers retain some unused resources when sales
fall.  By contrast, when sales rise, managers have to add sufficient resources to meet the demand.  Because of this operational
asymmetry, costs are “sticky” on average—they rise more in response to sales increases than they fall for sales decreases. 
The cost asymmetry implies that, on average, earnings respond more to sales decreases than to sales increases.  Because
sales changes and concurrent stock returns are positively correlated, cost stickiness leads to an asymmetric relation between
earnings and stock returns, which is stronger for negative returns than for positive returns.  Therefore, the standard
estimates of asymmetric timeliness are likely biased upwards on average when sticky costs are prevalent.  Further, because
cost stickiness varies systematically (e. g. , Weiss, 2010), it leads to variation in the bias, which is likely to distort inferences
about the extent of cross-sectional variation in conservatism.  To control for this confounding effect, we incorporate cost
stickiness in standard conservatism models. 
We use data for publicly traded US firms from 1987 to 2007 to examine the confounding effect of cost stickiness in the
Basu (1997), Ball Name (2013b), and Collins Name (2014) models. 1 Controlling for the asymmetric effect of sales changes
reveals an average bias in conservatism estimates of more than 25%.  Further tests confirm that the confounding asymmetry
for sales changes is consistent with manifestations of cost stickiness and is distinct from conservatism.  Thus, the upward
bias in the standard conservatism measures arises because the measures mistake cost stickiness for conditional
conservatism.  We also find that controlling for the variation in cost stickiness has a large impact on estimates of the
variation in conservatism.  For example, the correlation between industry-level conservatism estimates (at the three-digit
SIC level) with and without controls for cost stickiness is just 51. 3%, and the difference between the two estimates is
statistically significant in 49% of the industries.  Thus, the use of standard models leads to mistaken inferences not only about
the average degree of conservatism but also about how much conservatism varies cross-sectionally. 
Cost stickiness also confounds inferences about the correlates of conservatism.  For example, we find that the standard
estimates of the association between managerial stock ownership and conditional conservatism contain a large bias.  These
estimates become statistically insignificant when we mitigate the bias.  Controlling for cost stickiness also significantly changes
the estimated effects of the standard proxies of the demand for conservatism, such as size, leverage, and the book-to-market
ratio.  Thus, recognizing the confounding effect of cost stickiness is essential to ensure accurate inferences in future research. 
In Section 2, we develop our argument for the correlated omitted variable bias and formulate the hypotheses.  In Section 3,
we describe the data and the estimation models.  Section 4 presents our main empirical results and the additional validation
tests.  Section 5 further illustrates the confounding effect of cost stickiness.  Section 6 concludes. 
2.  Hypothesis development. 
We build on both the research on conservatism in financial accounting (e. g. , Basu, 1997; Pope and Walker, 1999; Ball
Name, 2000) and the research on sticky costs in cost accounting (e. g. , Anderson Name, 2003; Weiss, 2010; Chen Name, 2012). 
Conservatism and sticky costs are fundamentally different phenomena: conservatism is asymmetry in the information
system that translates economic activity into accounting data, whereas cost stickiness is asymmetry in the economic activity
itself.  Because the asymmetry in reported earnings can arise from either conservatism or cost stickiness, empirical models
should account for both phenomena to ensure accurate inferences. 
Financial accounting interprets conditional conservatism as the higher degree of verification of good news as gains than
bad news as losses (Basu, 1997; Watts, 2003a).  Conservatism implies that earnings incorporate bad news about future cash
flows more quickly than good news.  Basu (1997) bases his primary measure of asymmetric timeliness on a regression of net
income on stock returns with separate slopes for positive and negative returns (proxies for good and bad news,
respectively).  He finds that the slope coefficient and the R2 are higher for negative returns than for positive returns, which
is consistent with his predictions.  His model has been widely used to document the prevalence of conservatism, measured
by average asymmetric timeliness, and to examine theories about the causes and correlates of conservatism, tested by
analyzing systematic variation in asymmetric timeliness (see Watts (2003b) and Qiang (2007), for reviews). 
The cost accounting literature (e. g. , Anderson Name, 2003; Weiss, 2010; Banker Name, 2013; Banker and Byzalov, 2014) has
identified another source of asymmetry in cost and earnings behavior.  These studies document that most of the major cost
components are “sticky” in the sense that they rise more for sales increases than they fall for equivalent decreases.  Anderson
Name (2003) explain that cost stickiness arises because of deliberate decisions by managers to adjust resources.  For many
resources, managers face substantial adjustment costs, such as installation and disposal costs for equipment or hiring and firing
costs for labor.  These adjustment costs lead to an asymmetry in managerial decisions.  When sales decrease, managers retain
some slack resources to avoid incurring adjustment costs associated with cutting resources and future adjustment costs to
restore resources when sales rebound.  Consequently, the fall in costs is less than proportional to the sales decrease.  In contrast,
when sales increase sufficiently, managers have less discretion because they must add resources to accommodate the increased
demand.  Therefore, on average, costs are more sensitive to sales increases than to sales decreases because of asymmetric
resource adjustment.  Because costs enter earnings with a negative sign, the direction of asymmetry is reversed for earnings, i. e. ,
earnings are more sensitive to sales decreases than to sales increases when costs are sticky (Banker and Chen, 2006). 
Changes in sales and concurrent stock returns are positively correlated (e. g. , Benston, 1967).  For example, the
contemporaneous correlation between sales changes and stock returns in our sample is 0. 193 and is significant at the 1%
level.  Thus, sales changes may constitute a correlated omitted variable in the standard conservatism models.  When costs are
sticky, this omitted variable has an asymmetric effect on earnings, which is stronger for sales decreases than for sales
increases.  Because sales changes correlate positively with stock returns, the association between earnings and stock returns
should be stronger for negative returns than for positive returns even if conservatism is absent.  Therefore, the estimates of
the piecewise linear relation between stock returns and earnings in standard models reflect not only asymmetric loss
recognition but also the confounding asymmetric effect of cost stickiness.  Because both types of asymmetry act in the same
direction, sticky costs could lead to an upward bias on average in the standard estimates of asymmetric timeliness. 2
Collins Name (2014) and Hsu Name (2012) document significant asymmetric timeliness for operating cash flow and
recommend that researchers estimate conservatism using operating accruals rather than earnings.  However, this
modification of the Basu model is unlikely to remove the confounding effect of sticky costs because cost stickiness affects
operating accruals.  For example, because managers retain unused fixed assets when sales decrease and acquire additional
fixed assets when sales increase beyond the available capacity, depreciation expense falls less for sales decreases than it
rises for sales increases.  Because the retention of slack resources entails additional cash outflows, managers also need to
increase their borrowing or slow down the repayment of loans.  These financing activities lead to an asymmetry in interest
expense, including its non-cash component.  Additionally, when sales decrease sufficiently, managers remove some unused
resources and incur the associated adjustment costs.  Some of these costs, such as severance payments to workers or
environmental remediation costs following the closure of production facilities, can include cash payments in the following
fiscal year that are reported as operating accruals.  Because cost stickiness has an asymmetric effect on accruals, it biases
both earnings-based and accruals-based conservatism measures in standard models, distorting inferences about the average
level of conservatism. 
Hypothesis 1a.  Asymmetric timeliness estimates in standard conservatism models have an upward bias on average because
these models do not control for cost stickiness. 
Cost stickiness varies systematically (e. g. , Weiss, 2010).  The cost accounting literature has documented four primary drivers of
this variation: the size of the resource adjustment costs (Anderson Name, 2003; Banker Name, 2013), managerial optimism and
pessimism about future sales (Anderson Name, 2003; Banker Name, 2014b), agency problems (Chen Name, 2012), and behavioral
issues (Chen Name, 2013).  Further, variation in conservatism can influence cost stickiness.  Francis and Martin (2010), Ahmed and
Duellman (2011), and Bushman Name (2011) show that conservatism improves investment efficiency either by curbing the
inefficient overinvestment associated with managers' empire-building behavior or by mitigating the inefficient underinvestment
caused by frictions in capital markets.  These investment patterns can affect cost stickiness. 