 1.  Introduction Human societies have always been dependent on material and energy use.  In recent time, however, the increasing level of per-capita consumption and the pressure generated by a rising world population have increased the worldwide energy and material demand.  Based on data provided by Arto et al.  (2012)and by the International Energy Agency (IEA, 2015), the quantity of material extracted increased by around 43% (between 1995 and 2007) and the world energy consumption by almost 100%, rising from 4666 Mtoe in 1973 to 9302 Mtoe in 2013.  Fossil fuels have been the main source of energy supply, accounting today for around 82% of the total energy use (World Bank, 2016).  The consequent impact on resource availability, pollution and unequal distribution of wealth are some of the main elements raising concerns related to possible instabilities and crisis.  Over the last few decades, different models have been proposed to investigate the mutual relationships existing between the humans and the natural environment and the concept of social metabolism has been proposed to investigate the process of energy and material transformation taking place on societies (Martinez-Alier, 1987.  Fischer-Kowalski, 1998).  Based on the idea that the human environment is strictly dependent on the natural environment, the social metabolism analyses the energy and the material use as fundamental elements for the maintenance and development of societies.  The main objective is to investigate how variation in energy, material and human time allocation can generate impact on both social and environmental elements.  The Multi-Scale Integrated Analysis of Societal and Ecosystem Metabolism (MuSIASEM) is an accounting framework speciﬁcally design to investigate the size, the allocation and the human and natural dependencies of societies (Giampietro and Mayumi, 1977, 2000).  By using the MuSIASEM approach, this paper compares the metabolic proﬁle of 28 world countries in 1995 and 2007.  The main objective is to provide an overview of the variations that have taken place and to investigate the main elements responsible for changes.  The paper is structured as follow.  Section 2 introduces the methodology.  Section 3 presents the study area and the data sources.  In Section 4 the main results are reported and interpreted.  Section 5 includes discussion, future development and limitations.  Section 6 concludes.  2.  Social Metabolism and MuSIASEM Methodology.  The Multi-Scale Integrated Analysis of Societal and Ecosystem Metabolism (MuSIASEM) has been proposed by Giampietro and Mayumi (1977, 2000) based on the integration of various concepts related to complex system theory (Prigogine, 1961, 1978.  Maturana and Valera, 1980.  Odum, 1971, 1983, 1996.  Ulanowicz, 1986, 1995.  Rosen, 1958, 2000.  Zipf, 1941.  Morowitz, 1979.  Kauffman, 1993.  Ahl and Allen, 1996.  Koestler, 1969) post-normal science (Funtowicz and Ravetz, 1994) and bioeconomics (Georgescu-Roegen, 1971, 1977) (for exhaustive descriptions please see Mayumi, 1999, Ramos-Martin et al. , 2007 and Giampietro et al. , 2009).  The main idea is to consider societies as metabolic structures that use ﬂows and funds to sustain and expand.  According to the deﬁnition reported by Velasco-Fernandez et al.  (2015), ﬂows are elements that enter into the system, as energy or material and that are transformed by the socio-economic processes.  Funds are elements that are sustained by the ﬂows and that preserve their identity, as for example capital or human time.  The way in which ﬂows and funds are combined characterise the metabolic proﬁle of societies.  The analysis of the relationships existing between energy, materials and socio-economic variables, as human time, demography and economic elements, provides information about the way in which societies evolve and self-organise.  During the last decade, the MuSIASEM approach has proven to be particularly useful to analyse how technological development and acceleration of energy and material use, generates changes in the metabolic structure of societies.  The increasing use of exosomatic energy, deﬁned as the non-human body energy source, has been related to changes in demographic structure, economic activities, human time allocation, social stability and environmental impacts (Mayumi, 1991.  Falconi-Benitez, 2001.  Ramos-Martin, 2001.  Ramos-Martin and Giampietro, 2005.  Eisenmenger et al. , 2007.  Ramos-Martin et al. , 2009.  Serrano-Tovar and Giampietro, 2014.  Velasco-Fernandez et al. , 2015.  Ginard-Bosch and Ramos-Martin, 2016).  According to this approach, the accounting framework proposed by MuSIASEM is speciﬁcally designed to study biophysical and socioeconomic elements in an integrated way (Giampietro and Bukkens, 2015).  The analysis of the interrelationships existing between them is useful to identify constraints that can affect the evolution of the system as well as impacts that can be generated both on the human and on the natural environment.  Since the MuSIASEM approach recognises the idea that societies are complex systems operating at different levels, the proposed accounting framework includes different scales of analysis.  The objective is to investigate societies as a whole or disaggregated between activities.  The main levels of analysis can be summarised as.  ▪ Level N consider the entire society.  ▪ Level N-1 disaggregates society between consumption and production activities, respectively deﬁned as household and paid sectors.  The paid sector includes all the activities that are responsible for value added generation.  The household sector includes the activities related to value added consumption.  ▪ Level N-2 split the paid activities into different subsectors.  The economic sectors considered in this paper are reported Table 1.  For every one of the three levels, the energy and the human time constraints are investigated.  The mutual relationships existing between them are also taken into account by considering that changes in one level generates impacts in the other levels.  Different variables and indicators have been proposed by the MuSIASEM approach.  An overview is reported in Tables 2 and 3.  These variables and indicators have been speciﬁcally designed to have a multi-level and multi-dimensional structure.  The main objective is to analyse both the characteristics of the different compartments of society as well as to take into account the mutual relationships existing between them.  This multi-level descriptions, together with the inclusion of quantitative information related to biophysical and socio-economic elements provide an useful tool to investigate the complex relationships and constraints existing between the human and the natural environment.  The MuSIASEM approach has proven to be an effective tool to analyse the characteristics of societies based on population, socioeconomic constraints (Velasco-Fernandez et al. , 2015.  Giampietro and Bukkens, 2015).  By using the accounting framework described above, the present paper analyses the energy metabolism of 28 world countries in 1995 and 2007.  The results provide an overview of the development path of countries and can be used to support policy in the design of sustainable environmental strategies.  <Middle> Study Area and Data.  The study area considered in this paper includes the 28 world countries reported in Table 4.  Fourteen of the countries have been classiﬁed as western European countries, six countries as eastern European countries and the remaining eighth as extra European areas.  This selection of countries has been mainly driven by consistency in data availability.  Since the main objective was to provide an overview of the exosomatic energy metabolism of different countries, only the areas with consistent information across all the variables have been considered in this paper.  For this reason, all the countries requiring alternative data sources have been excluded.  Based on this data consistency approach, the World Input-Output Database (WIOD) has been used as the main data source for calculation.  This database includes a set of socio-economic and environmental information for 40 world countries plus the Rest of the World (for a description of the database see Dietzenbacher et al. , 2013).  The socio-economic accounts included in WIOD provide consistent information on the number of hours worked by persons engaged (employees, self-employed and family-workers), exosomatic energy and labour productivity for all the 28 countries considered in this paper.  The socio-economic information provided by WIOD are also disaggregated according to the economic sectors reported in Table 1.  OECD data have been used for population and GDP (US$ constant prices, constant PPP reference year 2005).  The World Input Output Database is suitable to be used to investigate a large set of topics related to economy, society and environment.  In the past, it has for example been used to analyse the relationships between economic activities and environmental impacts (Arto et al. , 2012, 2014, 2016), to investigate the main drivers on energy use (Andreoni and Galmarini, 2016) and to analyse topics related to global value chain, globalisation and competitiveness (Timmer et al. , 2013.  Timmer et al. , 2014.  Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare, 2014.  Los et al. , 2015).  As far as I know, the present paper is the ﬁrst attempt to use the WIOD database to analyse the metabolic proﬁle of societies.  4.  Results.  4. 1.  Level N – Country Level.  The results presented in this section summarise the main variables and indicators reported in Level N of Tables 1 and 2.  Based on country level information, they provide an overview of the metabolic performance of the 28 countries considered in this paper.  Disaggregated data for countries, variables and indicators are reported in Tables A. 1– A. 9 of the appendix.  According to data reported in Fig.  1 and in Table A. 1 of the appendix, the total energy throughput (TET) increased for all the countries considered in this paper, ad exception of Great Britain and Sweden (−3. 0% and −1. 1%, respectively).  In Great Britain, the reduction of the total energy consumption that has taken place in the paid sector (ETPW) (− 680,959 TJ) has driven the reduction of the total energy throughput, while the energy consumed in the household sector (ETHH) increased (+236,597 TJ) (Tables A. 3 and A. 4 of the appendix).  According to data reported in Table A. 6 of the appendix, the energy throughput reduced in the manufacturing (−15. 1%), in the construction (−15. 1%), in the wholesale (−14. 1%), in the public administration (−43. 2%) and in the education (−16. 2%) sectors.  However, the largest absolute variations have taken place in the manufacturing (−1. 004,989 TJ) and in the public administration sectors (−74,272 TJ).  The reduction of activity of the heavy industry sub-sectors (iron and steel, non-ferrous metal, mineral products and chemicals) and the improvements on the heating system and insulation, that have taken place in public administration sectors, have been the main elements inﬂuencing the reduction of the total energy throughput (TET) (Department of Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, 2016).  In a similar way, the large investments devoted to reduce the energy consumption of buildings and the Swedish Energy Agency programme oriented to increase consumer's responsibility have been the main factors responsible for the reduction of the total energy throughput (TET) of Sweden (IEA, 2013.  Vassileva, 2012).  In this country, the household sector has been the main driver of the reduction in the energy throughput (ETHH reduced by 9% between 1995 and 2007), while the energy used in the paid sector (ETPW) remained almost unchanged (+0. 1%) (Tables A. 3 and A. 4 of the appendix).  Between the years 1995 and 2007, the gross domestic product (GDP) increased for all the countries considered in this paper.  The largest percentage variations have taken place in Ireland (+129. 5%), Korea (+77. 