 1.  Introduction  This paper examines whether and when the information environment of peer ﬁrms in  an industry affects the cost of capital for other ﬁrms in the industry.  We predict and ﬁnd  that the peer information environment is negatively associated with a ﬁrm’s cost of capital  when there is less publicly available ﬁrm-speciﬁc information and this negative association  shrinks as the amount of ﬁrm-speciﬁc information increases.  This paper provides evidence  that information about peer-ﬁrms has externalities on the cost of capital for related ﬁrms  and that these externalities are time-varying.   We examine whether the information environment of peer ﬁrms (henceforth, peer information) affects the cost of capital  for related ﬁrms in an industry and whether the importance of this effect depends on the amount of information available  directly from the related ﬁrm (henceforth, ﬁrm information).  Speciﬁcally, we hypothesize that peer information has a larger  economic effect on a ﬁrm’s cost of capital when ﬁrm information is scarce, and that these externalities reduce when the  amount of ﬁrm information increases and substitutes for peer information.  Recent research ﬁnds evidence that a ﬁrm’s disclosure has important economic consequences for its peers.  For example, a ﬁrm’s disclosure inﬂuences peer ﬁrms’ (i)  stock prices, (ii) stock liquidity, and (iii) investment decisions (e. g. , Foster, 1981.  Bushee and Leuz, 2005.  Badertscher et al. ,  2013 ).  We extend this literature by examining temporal changes in the importance of peer effects from when ﬁrms are  newly public with limited ﬁrm information to when ﬁrms have a longer history of public disclosure and relatively more  ﬁrm information.   Our hypothesis is based on the idea that ﬁrms in an industry are affected by similar economic forces (e. g. , common  demand/supply shocks).  Thus, peer disclosures have spillover effects that reduce information asymmetry between managers  and investors, as well as among investors, for all ﬁrms operating in that industry.  Such reductions in information asymmetry  can reduce ﬁnancing costs (in both debt and equity markets), as illustrated in corporate ﬁnance models with adverse selection ( Leland and Pyle, 1977.  Myers and Majluf, 1984.  Rock, 1986 ) and in asset pricing models with imperfect competition  ( Lambert et al. , 2012 ).   To the extent peer information affects information asymmetry and ﬁnancing costs, we predict that such externalities vary  over time as a function of the amount of ﬁrm information available to investors.  Our intuition is similar to that presented in  other streams of literature.  For example, models in the executive compensation literature (e. g. , Banker and Datar, 1989 ) show  that the weights placed on different performance evaluation signals are proportional to relative “signal-to-noise” ratios.  In  our setting, we expect investors to put less weight on peer information (the “noisy” signal) as more information becomes  2 Nevertheless, ex ante there are several reasons why ﬁrm discloavailable from the disclosing ﬁrm (the “precise” signal).   sures might not substitute for peer information.  For example, ﬁrm disclosures are often affected by managerial incentives to  manipulate them, which can make them noisy and potentially less reliable than peer information.  or peer disclosures could  complement (rather than substitute for) ﬁrm disclosures by providing richer context to interpret ﬁrm disclosures ( Section 2  expands on these arguments).   We test our hypothesis using private ﬁrms that raise public capital (debt or equity) for the ﬁrst time.  A principal beneﬁt  of our setting is that private ﬁrms are not subject to SEC reporting requirements until they raise public capital.  as a result,  there is (i) little publicly available ﬁrm information prior to the capital issuance and (ii) a large increase in the amount of  publicly available ﬁrm information in the years immediately following the capital issuance.  Thus, this setting is especially  powerful for studying the substitution between peer information and ﬁrm information as the amount of ﬁrm information  rapidly increases while the amount of peer information stays relatively constant.  In addition, the relative lack of ﬁrm information in the initial year of capital issuance makes it more likely that peer information has a ﬁrst-order effect on the cost  of capital.   Drawing from the theoretical models of disclosure externalities (e. g. , Dye, 1990.  Admati and Pﬂeiderer, 20 0 0 ), we construct our measure of peer information to capture.  (i) the relevance of peer ﬁrms’ disclosures to non-disclosing ﬁrms and  (ii) the aggregate amount of information available about peer ﬁrms.  We proxy for the relevance of peer information within  an industry using the degree of earnings synchronicity in the industry.  Our intuition is that ﬁrms in industries with greater  earnings synchronicity are more likely to be economically linked and therefore information about one ﬁrm’s future prospects  is more likely to convey information about peer ﬁrms’ prospects.  We proxy for the aggregate amount of industry information  available about peer ﬁrms using two proxies.  Our ﬁrst proxy is the percentage of public ﬁrms (relative to the total number  of ﬁrms, public plus private) operating in the industry ( Badertscher et al. , 2013 ).  Since publicly owned ﬁrms disclose both  mandatory and voluntary information to the public and are analyzed by information intermediaries, there is an extensive  amount of public information about these ﬁrms that is not available for private ﬁrms.  Therefore, the composition of public  and private ﬁrms in an industry affects the information environment in that industry.  Our second proxy for aggregate industry information is the analyst coverage for ﬁrms in the industry (measured as the average number of forecasts per ﬁrm).   Prior research ﬁnds that analysts not only supply information about ﬁrm prospects but also demand a greater quantity and  quality of information from the ﬁrms they cover (see Beyer et al. , 2010 for a review of the literature), thereby improving the  industry information environment.   We initially focus on the public debt issuances of private ﬁrms because proxies for the cost of debt (such as bond yield  spreads) are relatively less subject to measurement error concerns than proxies for the cost of equity capital, which are  notoriously noisy ( Elton, 1999.  Easton and Monahan, 2005 ).  We ﬁnd that peer information is negatively associated with bond yield spreads (henceforth, “bond yields” for expositional ease) at the time of issuance, but this association gradually  declines over time.  Speciﬁcally, a one standard deviation increase in our proxy for peer information lowers bond yields by  17% in the ﬁrst year of issuance.  The effect declines to 3% in the third year after the bond issuance.  Similarly, when we  break down our data into quarterly, rather than annual, observations, we observe a gradual decline in the relation between  peer information and bond yields over the 12 quarters following the bond issuance.  These results are consistent with our  prediction that peer information lowers the cost of capital for other ﬁrms in the industry when ﬁrm information is scarce  and this effect declines as ﬁrm information increases.   Next, we conduct two cross-sectional tests to further validate our inference that peer information and ﬁrm information  serve as substitutes.  Speciﬁcally, we examine whether the effect of peer information on bond yields is smaller for ﬁrms with  richer initial ﬁrm-speciﬁc information environments.  We proxy for the amount of ﬁrm information using (i) the level of  disaggregation in ﬁrms’ ﬁnancial statements immediately before the bond issuance ( Chen et al. , 2015 ), and (ii) bond trading  volume in the ﬁrst quarter of its issuance, which proxies for the amount of private information aggregated into prices via  the trading process (e. g. , Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980.  Kyle, 1985 ).  Consistent with our prediction that peer information  serves as a substitute for ﬁrm information, we ﬁnd that the effect of peer information on bond yields is smaller when ﬁrms  have richer ﬁrm-speciﬁc information environments.   There are two primary concerns with our analyses thus far.  First, our proxy for peer information, which is constructed at  the industry-year level and is fairly constant over time, could be picking up industry characteristics (besides peer information) that affect the cost of capital.  Second, our analyses focus on endogenous capital raising events and thus our inferences  could be confounded by a correlation between our proxy for peer information and ﬁrms’ capital raising incentives.  We  conduct three tests in the bond setting to mitigate these concerns.  The common theme of these tests is that we focus on  settings in which ﬁrm information is rich and, as a result, peer information is predicted to be less important.  Showing that  peer information matters less in certain settings mitigates the concern that our proxy for peer information is associated  with bond yields due to an omitted correlated variable or a mechanical effect.   First, we compare the effect of peer information on bond yields for our sample of private ﬁrms to that observed for  a matched sample of public ﬁrms that issue bonds in the same industry-year, thereby holding peer information constant.   Since public ﬁrms have richer information environments due to SEC disclosure requirements, voluntary disclosures, and  information intermediary coverage, the importance of peer information for public ﬁrms is likely to be lower than that for  observably similar private ﬁrms.  Consistent with this prediction, we ﬁnd that peer information has an insigniﬁcant effect on  the yields of bonds issued by public ﬁrms.   Second, we focus on a subsample of private ﬁrms that simultaneously issue both public bonds and bank loans.  Unlike  bond markets, bank ﬁnancing is characterized by relationships between lenders and borrowers, where lenders have significant access to (hard and soft) non-public information about the borrowing ﬁrm (e. g. , Diamond, 1984.  Boot, 20 0 0 ).  As a  result, peer information is likely less relevant to pricing private debt than to public debt.  This is precisely what we ﬁnd.   peer information is not related to the cost of private debt but is related to the cost of public debt, holding the borrower and  year constant.   Third, we exploit an institutional feature of our sample which consists of bonds issued under Rule 144A.  Bonds issued  under Rule 144A are initially marketed to institutional investors as private placements and are only subsequently registered  with the SEC.  As a result, ﬁrms issuing bonds under Rule 144A are not required to comply with SEC disclosure requirements  until they register the bond with the SEC.  If the temporal change in the relation between peer information and bond yields  is due to changes in the amount of ﬁrm information available to investors (as we predict), we should not observe a decay  in the relation between peer information and bond yields between the time of the bond’s issuance and its SEC registration.   Rather, the decay in this relation should occur only after the bond is registered with the SEC.  Consistent with this prediction,  we ﬁnd that the effect of peer information on bond yields begins to fade only following SEC registration.   We next turn to the equity market tests.  We ﬁrst examine a sample of private ﬁrms that issue public equity for the ﬁrst  time.  Similar to the bond setting, initial public offering (IPO) ﬁrms are also subject to SEC disclosure requirements only after  their equity issuance and, as a result, experience a substantial increase in ﬁrm information post-IPO.  We document three  results that parallel the ﬁndings above.  First, we ﬁnd that peer information is negatively associated with bid-ask spreads  (our proxy for the adverse selection component of the cost of capital) in the ﬁrst year of a ﬁrm’s IPO, but that this relation  monotonically decreases over time in the three years subsequent to the IPO.  Second, the effect of peer information on bidask spreads in the ﬁrst year of a ﬁrm’s IPO is smaller in the cross-section of IPOs with richer initial ﬁrm-speciﬁc information  environments.  Third, analogous to our test comparing private ﬁrms issuing bonds to public ﬁrms issuing bonds, we predict  and ﬁnd that peer information affects the bid-ask spreads of IPO ﬁrms (and that this effect decays over time), but there is  no such effect for a matched sample of seasoned equity offering (SEO) ﬁrms.   To further alleviate endogeneity concerns, we test whether the effect of peer information on bid-ask spreads increases as  ﬁrm information decreases during pre-SEO quiet periods.  The Securities Act of 1933 restricted ﬁrms from disclosing information prior to their equity offering, which is popularly known as “gun-jumping” regulation.   Consistent with this regulation affecting disclosure behavior, prior research ﬁnds that ﬁrms reduce their voluntary disclosure activity before SEOs (i. e. , during the SEO quiet period) and bid-ask spreads increase during this period ( Shroff et al. , 2013 ).  We predict and ﬁnd that  the increase in bid-ask spreads during SEO quiet periods documented in prior research is signiﬁcantly smaller for ﬁrms  with richer peer information environments.  Importantly, the effect of peer information on bid-ask spreads during the quiet  period disappears after the SEC relaxed quiet period disclosure restrictions with the Securities Offering Reform in 2005.   This paper contributes to the literature on the externalities or peer effects of disclosure.  Early evidence documents the  presence of intra-industry information transfers (i. e. , instances where one ﬁrm’s disclosures affect the stock prices of other,  related ﬁrms).  For example, prior studies document information transfers arising from news contained in earnings announcements ( Foster, 1981 ), management forecasts ( Baginski, 1987.  Han et al. , 1989 ), and transfers between buyers and suppliers  in the same supply chain ( Olsen and Dietrich, 1985.  Pandit et al. , 2011 ).  More recent studies tackle the question of whether  disclosures generate positive or negative externalities related to ﬁnancing and investment decisions (see e. g. , Gleason et al. ,  2008.  Durnev and Mangen, 2009.  Badertscher et al. , 2013.  Chen et al. , 2013.  Shroff et al. , 2014 ).  Our paper builds on prior  research by focusing on a speciﬁc idea that has been overlooked by past studies.  Speciﬁcally, we hypothesize and show  that the importance of externalities from peer-ﬁrm disclosures varies over time and is a function of the relative amounts  of ﬁrm-speciﬁc vs.  peer information available to investors.  This focus on dynamic effects is in contrast to prior research,  which assumes that the economic importance of externalities is constant over time.  Our evidence informs the debate on the  merits of ﬁnancial reporting regulation because the presence of externalities is one of the primary rationales for disclosure  regulation ( Leuz and Wysocki, 2016.  Minnis and Shroff, 2017 ).   Our paper is also related to recent research examining the substitutive nature of ﬁrm- and peer-disclosures.  For example,  Baginski and Hinson (2016) document that the cessation of quarterly management forecasts by a ﬁrm is associated with a  subsequent inception of quarterly management forecasts by peer ﬁrms, suggesting that ﬁrm- and peer-earnings forecasts are  substitutes.  Similarly, Arif and De George (2017) ﬁnd that European ﬁrms that report on a semi-annual basis have greater  information transfers from their U. S.  peers during (European ﬁrms’) non-reporting quarters than during their reporting quarters, which is also evidence consistent with a substitutive relation between ﬁrm- and peer-disclosure.   Finally, our paper is related to a nascent stream of literature examining how the market learns about an agent’s ability by observing the agent’s behavior over time (see e. g. , Pan et al. , 2015.  Hermalin and Weisbach, 2017 ).  For example,  Pan et al.  (2015) show that when a new CEO takes oﬃce, uncertainty about the quality of the new leadership is high, and  thus news about the ﬁrm contains information about the CEO’s unknown ability (in addition to cash ﬂows news), magnifying stock return volatility.  Over time, as the CEO’s ability and ﬁt within the company becomes better known to investors, the  market’s update from a particular signal of her quality becomes smaller, leading volatility to decline.  In our setting, a greater  reliance on ﬁrm information in place of peer information over time is consistent with the idea that investors/markets learn  about the disclosure practices of a ﬁrm by observing a longer time-series of the ﬁrm’s disclosure following its ﬁrst capital  raising event (see also Lang, 1991 ).  While our goal in this paper is not to test whether investor learning is the sole (or  even primary) driver of the documented evidence, our ﬁndings are consistent with such a learning hypothesis and we hope  future research can provide further evidence speciﬁc to the learning hypothesis.   2.  Hypothesis development.   Our hypothesis is predicated on three arguments.  (i) adverse selection concerns inﬂuence ﬁnancing costs, (ii) peer information reduces adverse selection costs, and (iii) ﬁrm information is more informative than peer information with respect  to valuing a company.  We discuss each of these arguments in more detail below to motivate our hypothesis but note that  insofar as any of them are untrue, we might not ﬁnd evidence supporting our hypothesis.   The idea that adverse selection affects ﬁnancing costs is well founded in the corporate ﬁnance literature.  In the context of IPOs, Beatty and Ritter (1986) and Rock (1986) show that information asymmetry among investors creates uncertainty that is priced in equilibrium and increases ﬁnancing costs.  In a similar vein, Myers and Majluf (1984) show that  adverse selection affects ﬁnancing costs in secondary offerings as well as in debt offerings.  Subsequent work shows that  information asymmetry can also raise the cost of capital in an “asset pricing” model with multiple securities.  For example,  Lambert et al.  (2012) show that in imperfectly competitive settings, information asymmetry between investors creates adverse selection costs, which increase expected returns.  These theoretical arguments are supported by numerous empirical  papers (see Beyer et al.  (2010) and Dechow et al.  (2010) for reviews of the literature).   The second argument underlying our hypothesis is that peer information reduces the adverse selection costs of related  ﬁrms.  The idea is that, to the extent that ﬁrms in an industry are affected by similar economic forces, greater disclosure  by peer ﬁrms can have spillover effects for all ﬁrms operating in that industry.  For example, Dye (1990) and Admati and  Pﬂeiderer (20 0 0) develop analytical models that show positive externalities in the form of liquidity spillovers in capital  markets.  Speciﬁcally, they show that if ﬁrm values and cash ﬂows are correlated, the disclosures of one ﬁrm are useful to  6 Overall, prior analytical studies  investors in valuing other ﬁrms and increase investors’ demand for shares in other ﬁrms.   provide evidence that peer information helps reduce information asymmetry in other ﬁrms, suggesting that it can have  positive capital market effects.   The  ﬁnal  argument  underlying  our  hypothesis  is  that  the  relative  importance  of  peer  information  is  a  function  of  the  amount  of  ﬁrm  information  available  to  help  reduce  adverse  selection  costs.   In  the  context  of  ﬁrm  information,  Lang (1991) shows that as investors observe a longer time-series of earnings (i. e. , “more ﬁrm information” in the parlance  of our paper), uncertainty about future earnings is reduced and investors respond more strongly to ﬁrm information.  To  the extent that ﬁrm information and peer information are substitutes, we expect the importance of peer information to decrease as the amount of ﬁrm information increases.  This argument is similar in spirit to the relative signal-to-noise ratio of  the performance measures established in the compensation literature ( Banker and Datar, 1989 ).  Speciﬁcally, we argue that  with respect to assessing a ﬁrm’s future prospects, disclosures directly provided by a ﬁrm have a higher signal-to-noise ratio  than does peer information and, as a result, investors would rely less on peer information as the amount of ﬁrm information  increases.   Our hypothesis, motivated by the discussion above, is as follows.   H.  Peer information is negatively associated with the cost of capital when ﬁrm information is scarce and this negative  association weakens as the amount of ﬁrm information increases.   Notwithstanding the above discussion, whether peer information affects the cost of capital of related ﬁrms and whether  this association decays as the amount of ﬁrm information increases is ultimately an empirical question.  First, a large literature ﬁnds that ﬁrm disclosures can be affected by managerial incentives to increase stock prices and their compensation (see  Dechow et al.  (2010) for a review of the literature).  Thus, even in the presence of a rich ﬁrm-speciﬁc disclosure environment,  peer information could help reduce adverse selection costs since they are unlikely to be affected by the managerial incentives of related ﬁrms in the industry.  Second, while we assume that ﬁrm information and peer information are substitutes,  it is also conceivable that they are complements and help reinforce each other.  As mosaic theory describes, many individual  information items that might not be particularly relevant individually can, when joined together, be especially valuable to  analysis.  Speciﬁcally, Pozen (2005, p.  639) states that “the signiﬁcance of one item of information may frequently depend  upon knowledge of many other items of information. ” Likewise, peer information can provide additional context for evaluating ﬁrm information, which can make these two sources of information complements rather than substitutes.  The use  of benchmarking in investment valuation exercises is an example consistent with the idea that ﬁrm and peer information  might be complements.   <Middle> Research setting, sample selection and research design.  3. 1.  Research setting.  We test our prediction in two settings where ﬁrms raise public capital for the ﬁrst time.  The primary beneﬁt of examining ﬁrst-time capital issuers is that private ﬁrms are not required to publicly disclose any information (in the U. S. ).  As a   result, little is known about the operations and performance of private ﬁrms before they raise public capital.  However, once a private ﬁrm decides to raise public capital (debt or equity), it is required to comply with the SEC’s mandatory disclosure  requirements, such as 10-K, 10-Q and 8-K ﬁlings, which contain enormous amounts of information about ﬁrms and their  operating environments.  In addition, public capital is typically traded on secondary markets and the trading process transmits private information acquired by traders for their own speculative trading into market prices ( Grossman and Stiglitz,  1980.  Glosten and Milgrom, 1985.  Kyle, 1985 ).  The idea that market prices are a useful source of information goes back to  Hayek (1945) , who suggests that stock prices aggregate diverse pieces of information from different traders that might even  be informative to managers (e. g. , see Zuo (2016) for empirical evidence in the context of management forecasts).  Thus, the  amount of publicly available ﬁrm-speciﬁc information about a private ﬁrm signiﬁcantly increases following its public capital  issuance, thereby serving as a powerful setting for testing the changing role of peer information in mitigating information  asymmetry and adverse selection costs.   We ﬁrst examine the public debt issuances of private ﬁrms before they begin complying with the SEC’s ongoing disclosure requirements.  Compared to the cost of capital measures available for equities, the debt market setting allows us to employ a relatively clean and observable measure of the cost of capital.  bond yield spreads. 