 1.  Introduction The literature on oil and commodity markets during the last decade has shown the importance to identify and understand the causes and consequences of commodity price shocks.  Some of the key insights (Kilian, 2008a) are that (i) most commodity prices are endogenous with respect to the global business cycle, and (ii) demand shocks cause delayed and sustained price movements while supply shocks have small and transitory effects.  Whereas disentangling the supply and demand components in a structural model is now common in the empirical literature to understand commodity price dynamics (especially for crude oil price), some important concerns are missing regarding the effect of second-order moments (especially the one related to uncertainty).  So far, the previous literature is indeed silent on the effects of macroeconomic uncertainty on the volatility of commodity prices.  This issue is nevertheless worthy of investigation since the impact of uncertainty on the global economy has been widely documented.  For instance, theories of investment under uncertainty explain why under irreversibility condition or ﬁxed costs, uncertainty over future returns reduces current investment, hiring, and consumption through an “option value to wait”. 1 The starting point is that at a micro level, uncertainty may diminish the willingness of ﬁrms to commit resources to irreversible investment and the readiness of consumers to spend or allocate their earning and wages.  It follows that micro-level uncertainty may be transmitted to the macro level because uncertainty about the return to investment at a micro level may create cyclical ﬂuctuations in aggregate investment at a macro level (see Bernanke, 1983). 2 The crucial point here is that there is no reason why such mechanism at both micro and macro levels should not be extended to commodity markets.  Indeed, at a micro level, commodity ﬁrms in several sectors (especially in oil industry) are confronted to high costs and should be impacted by uncertainty about returns to investment.  Similarly, at a macro level, as prices are related to global supply and demand conditions, uncertainty about macroeconomic aggregates should also affect commodity prices.  In the wake of the literature about the origins of commodity price movements, the aim of this paper is to investigate the impact of uncertainty on commodity price returns and volatility.  Regarding the previous literature, the bulk of the studies have looked at the reverse relationship and highlighted the signiﬁcance of uncertainty in oil prices in explaining economic ﬂuctuations and in exacerbating asymmetry in the oil price-economic activity nexus. 3 All of them suggest that oil price uncertainty impacts output, investment, and consumption in the U. S.  and G-7 countries in an asymmetric way.  While providing interesting results, these studies suffer from an important drawback since it is well known that the effect of uncertainty in the oil price—and commodity prices in general—on the macroeconomy should be small, by construction of the underlying economic models.  As argued by Kilian (2014), energy is indeed not necessarily a key component of the cash ﬂow of investment projects, making the effect of oil price uncertainty on output not plausible. 