 1.  Introduction The Genuine Progress Indicator (GPI) remains one of the most ubiquitously applied alternatives to Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in sustainable development research and policy settings.  Unlike GDP and related measures that have a dubious connection to economic welfare, the GPI attempts to measure it directly by accounting for the beneﬁts of both market and nonmarket goods and services as well as the economic, social, and environmental costs of economic activity.  Pioneered by Herman Daly and John Cobb in 1989, the basic structure and calculation methods for the GPI (known originally as the Index of Sustainable Economic Welfare) have changed relatively little despite theoretical reﬁnements that have been suggested in recent literature and a proliferation of new methods and sources of data for many of the GPI's basic adjustments.  Recent GPI studies have been completed at multiple scales including the world as a whole (Kubiszewski et al. , 2013), at the country level for Japan (Hayashi, 2015), Brazil (Andrade and Garcia, 2015) and Italy (Armiento, 2016), at the state or province level for Liaoning Province (Hou, 2016), Oregon (Kubiszewski et al. , 2015), Hawaii (OstergaardKlem and Oleson, 2014), northeast Ohio (Bagstad and Shammin, 2012), Maryland (McGuire et al. , 2012), Utah (Berik and Gaddis, 2014), Vermont (Erickson et al. , 2013), Flanders (Bleys, 2013) and Tuscany (Pulselli et al. , 2012) and at the city level for Baltimore (Posner and Costanza, 2011.  Talberth and Weisdorf, 2014), Hong Kong (Delang and Yu, 2015), Singapore (Delang and Yu, 2015) and a group of six cities in China (Li et al. , 2016).  While all these studies replicate core elements of the original methodology, they also reﬂect a wide divergence in some important details, for example, regarding whether nor not to include the social cost of carbon emissions or assign value to the spillover beneﬁts of higher education.  At the same time, the GPI and other sustainability indicators are facing increasing demands for use in justifying green economy interventions, monitoring economic performance, and guiding public budgets and investments.  The outcome document “The Future We Want” from the 2012 Rio + 20 Conference on Sustainable Development plus a set of Sustainable Development Goals adopted by the UN highlight the urgency of using robust quantitative sustainability metrics that go beyond GDP (Bartelmus, 2013).  In response to these new demands and to help ensure that the GPI remains policy relevant practitioners worldwide have called for greater consistency and a uniform framework to guide future GPI studies – GPI 2. 0 (Bagstad et al. , 2014).  There are several theoretical and methodological issues that GPI 2. 0 ought to resolve.  Among the most fundamental is the question of what the GPI is intended to measure and what purpose it serves.  Is the GPI a measure of sustainability, a measure of current welfare, or a bit of both.  What role can it play in economic policy making.  Another signiﬁcant issue is the basis for valuation.  The existing literature offers ambiguous and sometimes conﬂicting guidance for assigning monetary values to various positive and negative adjustments that are nonmarket in nature.  GPI 2. 0 should establish a uniform protocol for this.  Bagstad et al.  (2014) provide a thorough review of methodological issues GPI 2. 0 should address and propose a list of modiﬁcations, many of which have already appeared in one or more recent studies.  Among the most signiﬁcant include inversion of certain adjustments (ecosystem services and leisure) to measure beneﬁts remaining rather than costs of depletion, development of a less arbitrary adjustment for income inequality, removal of certain indicators that lack a solid theoretical basis, and adoption of more rigorous metrics for calculation ofOn December 19th, 2013 Center for Sustainable Economy launched an online discussion forum to engage the community of GPI researchers and practitioners worldwide on these theoretical and methodological challenges in order to more thoroughly explore alternatives for GPI 2. 0.  Center for Sustainable Economy (CSE) is a non-proﬁt environmental economics think tank based in Portland, Oregon.  Among other issues, CSE specializes in sustainability indicators, including the GPI, and their application in policy settings. 1 The forum is still active, and, to date has engaged ﬁfty-two researchers, practitioners, and public agency partners with varying degrees of involvement and experience with the GPI.  Detailed technical papers were submitted and discussed, as well as lengthy posts on 22 distinct topics that were grouped under headings such as deﬁnition, architecture, externalities, human capital, local scale adaptations, inequality adjustment and column-by-column methods and data sources.  In addition to these online discussions, the Gund Institute for Ecological Economics at the University of Vermont and think tank Demos hosted GPI 2. 0 workshops during this period.  This paper attempts to operationalize some of the consensus that emerged from these discussions.  It addresses both theoretical and methodological issues with conventional GPI accounting and presents a set of pilot accounts for the United States, State of Maryland, and City of Baltimore that incorporates speciﬁc reﬁnements discussed in detail.  The pilot accounts also include suggested reﬁnements that have yet to be discussed at length, but which could serve as a platform for future research.  The remainder of this paper is organized as such.  In Section 2, we revisit some of the theoretical foundations of the GPI and make suggestions for reﬁning its deﬁnition and purpose, valuation basis and mathematical representation.  In Section 3 we provide an overview of suggested components and high-level indicators for GPI 2. 0 and highlight major differences from conventional GPI accounting at this conceptual level.  Important ﬁner-scale differences from conventional GPI accounts are discussed in detail in Appendices A and B.  In Section 4 we present and discuss results.  In Section 5, we conclude by discussing how this suggested framework, if adopted, could be further improved and identify several important areas where consensus should be sought before a GPI 2. 0 methodology can be fully embraced.  2.  Theoretical Reﬁnements.  The GPI's theoretical foundations have been thoroughly articulated and defended, primarily by Daly (1979), Daly and Cobb (1994) and Lawn (2003, 2008).  But connecting the dots between this theoretical foundation and actual components, indicators, and metrics used in many GPI studies has been a somewhat less rigorous undertaking – a shortcoming that has helped fuel the trend towards divergent methodologies (Bagstad et al. , 2014) as well as a number of criticisms about the GPI's apparent arbitrariness (e. g.  Neumayer, 1999, 2000).  In this section we ﬂag three theoretical aspects that could beneﬁt from additional reﬁnement and describe where we landed for each in the context of the GPI 2. 0 pilot accounts.  2. 1.  Deﬁnition and Purpose.  Throughout its history, a precise deﬁnition of the GPI has eluded practitioners.  Despite the GPI's prominence in sustainability indictor applications, there has never been a clear consensus on how the metric is deﬁned, what purposes it serves, and what basic architecture is thus justiﬁed for organizing its various components.  Since its inception, the GPI has been variously deﬁned as (1) an index of sustainable economic welfare, most closely aligned with the notion of maximum sustainable income deﬁned by Hicks (1946).  (2) an experiential social welfare measure based on the concept of net psychic income as set forth by Fisher (1906), or.  (3) a “somewhat ad hoc” collection of indicators that provide useful information about both current welfare and sustainability not presently reﬂected in national income and product accounts (Hanley et al. , 1999).  This deﬁnitional murkiness, in turn, has led to various mathematical representations, such as those displayed in Fig.  1.  While there are many common elements, these expressions have many important differences in their treatment of government expenditures, changes in capital stocks, and types of capital addressed by each.  A precise deﬁnition will help resolve these differences.  While wordsmithing is somewhat of an art, we believe that the theoretical foundations of the GPI require that any proposed deﬁnition capture four basic attributes, or restrictions (1) an emphasis on ﬁnal consumption of both market and nonmarket goods and services by a given (geographically speciﬁed) population.  (2) an emphasis on current economic welfare generated by that consumption.  (3) a restriction that all beneﬁts and costs tabulated in GPI accounts be causally related to economic activity, and (4) a restriction that monetization of all adjustments be carried out using peer reviewed methods, consistent valuation rules, and best available data.  Restriction 1 makes it clear that the most important purpose of the GPI is to tell us about the condition of individuals and households within a given economy in terms of economic welfare as experienced as opposed to other economic dimensions measured by gross domestic product, stock indices, trade balances and such.  Of four fundamental economic activities – production, consumption, trade and investment – it emphasizes consumption because here is where the rubber meets the road from an economic welfare perspective.  As succinctly stated by Daly and Cobb (1994, p.  77)) “GNP is a measure of production, not consumption, whereas economic welfare is a matter of consumption. ” Beneﬁts and costs associated with other economic activities factor in GPI assessments, but solely in terms of how they ultimately affect the welfare derived from consumption.  Restriction 2 reﬂects what appears to be a growing consensus among practitioners that the GPI cannot measure both sustainability and current welfare at the same time and should thus focus on the latter (Harris, 2008.  Lawn, 2008).  Sustainability – which is more about nondeclining per capita stocks of capital in its broad sense – is better addressed through separate accounts that measure this directly.  Importantly, restriction 2 also emphasizes the experiential nature of economic welfare as measured by Fisher's concepts of psychic income and psychic outgo – terms synonymous with beneﬁts and costs both ﬁnancially and viscerally experienced by individuals within a given economy (Lawn, 2008).  In essence, the restriction requires that all GPI adjustments be traceable to hypothetical ticks on a psychic income or outgo meter.  Restriction 3 creates economic sideboards for all GPI adjustments.  While there are many other dimensions to welfare, the GPI's domain is restricted to welfare gains or losses that stem from economic activity.  Restriction 4 limits GPI adjustments to those that can be reliably measured and evaluated in monetary units, but with the recognition that this may change as new methods and sources of data emerge.  If this is an accurate description of the GPI's domain, then perhaps some form of the following formal deﬁnition could be adopted.  2. 1. 1.  GPI 2. 0 Definition The Genuine Progress Indicator is a monetary measure of economic welfare for a given population in a given year that accounts for benefits and costs experienced by that population in association with investment, production, trade, and consumption of goods and services.  Defined as such, the purposes of the GPI are made more evident.  It can serve as a per capita measure of economic performance that can be compared across cities, regions, and nations.  It offers a welfarebased profile of a given economy, for example, by describing the relative contributions of unpaid labor, defensive expenditures, and consumption ofmarket-based goods and services.  TheGPI is also increasingly relevant for policy analysis, capable of being used in both backcasting and forecasting GPI growth with and without certain policy interventions such as trade agreements, climate action, stormwater, or land use plans and programs (Talberth and Bohara, 2006.  Talberth and Wysham, 2014.  Talberth, 2015.  Bagstad and Shammin, 2012).  Perhaps most importantly, the GPI provides critical information about how an economy stands with respect to its optimal scale.  In particular, at some point, the deleterious effects of growth in economic activity overwhelm genuine progress beneﬁts, rendering any additional expansion “uneconomic” (Lawn, 2016).  Knowing where this inﬂection point lies will help decision makers know when to pull the plug on expansionist policies and redirect attention towards improving the economic welfare of existing workers, businesses, and households.  2. 2.  Basis for Valuation.  As an experiential measure of current welfare, the basis for valuation of individual GPI 2. 0 adjustments ought to be anchored in the concepts of consumer surplus (CS), willingness to pay (WTP) for a welfare gain or to prevent a loss, or willingness to accept (WTA) compensation for a loss.  CS is simply the difference between WTP and costs actually incurred for obtaining a good or service and thus provides “the best measure of the total beneﬁt to society” associated with consumption and economic policy interventions that affect it (OMB, 1992).  However, CS estimates for most goods and services consumed is lacking, and so WTP by itself is used as an approximation under the assumption that the consumer surplus an average consumer receives from a good or service is more or less equal to WTP.  In GPI accounts, market prices, nonmarket valuation studies, and, in many cases, government expenditures (i. e.  per capita costs of supplying certain public goods and services) provide sources for WTP values.  WTA is simply the inverse – it measures what compensation individuals need to receive to be made whole in response to a welfare loss incurred.  Conceptually, these valuation concepts should underlie all welfare contributions and deductions included in GPI 2. 0 accounts.  Tying each adjustment to its WTP/WTA foundation will help distinguish between ideal, second best, and invalid valuation approaches.  For example, existing GPI studies reﬂect a mix of techniques for valuing the costs of pollution – those based on WTP to reduce impairment of air and water quality, and those based on marginal damages.  The former may constitute an ideal approach and the latter second-best because of its more indirect connection to current welfare.  2. 3.  Mathematical Framework.  Another implication of restricting the GPI to a measure of current welfare and not sustainability is that the GPI's mathematical representation can be tightened up to ﬁt ﬁrmly within the framework offered by social welfare functions and the concepts of utility and disutility (Daly, 2007).  Expressing the GPI as a social welfare function will help resolve some of the randomness illustrated by equations in Fig.  1 and clarify the theoretical basis for each adjustment.  The standard textbook representation of a consumption-based Utilitarian or Benthamite social welfare function is simply this.  In this expression, per capita welfare of a particular (geographically speciﬁed) population (W) in a given year (t) is the sum of individual utilities (Ui) derived from consumption (Ci) of goods and services for a population of N individuals.  The (t) subscript has been omitted from the right hand side for convenience.  But as long recognized by GPI accounting, utility derived from consumption is impeded by a litany of undesirable social, economic, and environmental conditions and trends caused, at least in part, by economic activity, thus making Ui a net ﬁgure.  Both local and non-local economic activity may be the source of these irksome conditions and trends.  Homelessness and noise pollution are examples primarily associated with local economic activity.  Water pollution is often caused by non-local economic activities far upstream – such as nutrient runoff from farmlands.  Regardless, a term reﬂecting the disutility associated with these conditions and trends is required.  But most people also care about adverse effects local economic activity may have on other communities.  For example, people value reductions in greenhouse gas pollution not only out of concern for climate change damages in their communities but globally (Kotchen et al. , 2013).  People also care about conditions and trends facing their children and future generations.  Concern for the leaving the next generation's welfare as least as great as our own is of course the driving force behind international sustainable development programs that illustrate quite well people (and states) are not only willing to pay but have generously done so to ensure this result.  The Seventh Generation Principle – the idea that decisions we make today should result in a sustainable world seven generations into the future – is a “governing ethic” among many indigenous nations (Graham, 2008).  As such, disutility associated with local economic activities that jeopardize that future must be reﬂected in the GPI.  Social welfare functions have often been adapted to model altruism for others and the next generation through the lens of environmental sustainability (Fleurbaey, 2009.  Heal, 2005).  Within the GPI context, and to keep things simple, relevant adaptations can be expressed as this.  In Eq.  (2), we've added the component (dUi) to reﬂect disutility associated with undesirable conditions and trends (UCT) as well as economic activities that cause welfare losses to the rest of the world (−ΔWROW) and future generations (−ΦΔWt + 1).  Here, (t + 1) is simply a convenient way to express next generation impacts.  A discount factor (Φ) is included as well to represent the rate of social time preference (arguably zero in sustainable development settings) as well as uncertainty over if, when, and in what form the externalized costs will manifest.  Another basic feature of GPI accounting is to distinguish between the utility derived from consumption of market-based goods and services and nonmarket services derived from underlying stocks of capital.  The latter can be disaggregated from UiCi and included as a separate GPI component.  Here, the term Ui(ŝ(K)) represents the utility associated with services (and some goods) produced by various types of essential capital discussed below.  If this is an acceptable mathematical framework, then the GPI can be thought of as a speciﬁc form of a social welfare function that takes into account both utilities and disutilities of economic activity and one that can serve as a foundation for justifying, arranging, and valuing both existing and potentially novel GPI components and indicators.  What follows is one path forward for GPI 2. 0 based on this foundation.  <Middle> GPI 2. 0 Pilot Accounts—Architecture, Components and Indicators.  Before we describe the pilot accounts a little nomenclature housekeeping is in order to help differentiate between the various data aggregation levels that exist within the GPI framework.  So for purposes of this paper we will refer to the GPI as a measure (of economic welfare) built upon an architecture of components, indicators and sub indicators within these components, and metrics (raw data) that feed into the overall model.  Eq.  (4) presents a model for GPI 2. 0 that ﬁlls in the three major components described by Eq.  (3) with indicators that are standard in GPI accounting as well as suggested additions.  Fig.  2 deﬁnes these indicators.  Overall, the architecture involves 3 major components and 13 indicators.  In the pilot accounts presented below, the architecture includes an additional 67 sub indicators and over 400 individual metrics.  Below, we brieﬂy describe and justify the indicators within each component and highlight major differences from previously published GPI studies.  In Appendices A and B, we offer more detail on methods, sub indicators, and metrics.  3. 1.  Utility Derived From Final Consumption of Market-based Goods and Services.  Ideally, the GPI would begin with a measure of aggregate consumer surplus (CS) for the economic region of interest since this is the most widely and generally accepted proxy for utility derived from consumption of goods and services with a market price (Varian, 1992).  In practice, this is not feasible because requisite demand curves have not been estimated, nor would the time and expense of such an undertaking be readily achieved – at least for GPI purposes.  Instead, ﬁnal consumption spending is used as a convenient proxy (Lawn, 2003).  In earlier GPI accounting, this term is ﬁlled out by ﬁrst extracting the personal consumption expenditure (PCE) line item from national income and product accounts (NIPA) or sub-national equivalents, if available, and then adjusting this ﬁgure to account for inequality under the assumption that a highly skewed distribution of consumption in favor of the wealthy makes less of a contribution to total welfare than a more equitable one.  The inequality adjustment is an index based on current year departure from an historical Gini coefﬁcient baseline.  Defensive and regrettable expenditures and spending on consumer durables are then backed out since these have zero or negative welfare effects or represent the current costs of investing in future beneﬁt streams.  For GPI 2. 0, we suggest six modiﬁcations to this basic approach.  First, and demonstrated by Bagstad and Shammin (2012), we suggest that practitioners search for alternatives to NIPA PCE data since there are far more detailed data available fully scalable from the national down to the city level.  But this might not be the case in every locale.  We've relabeled PCE to household budget expenditures (HBE) to note this change, and also to recognize that a signiﬁcant amount of spending included in PCE actually has nothing to do with welfare-improving ﬁnal consumption.  Secondly, we recommend that the list of defensive and rehabilitative expenditures (DEFR) be broadened to include additional items such as insurance, following Lawn (2013).  Third, the list of household investment expenditures (HI) should be extended beyond consumer durables to other items that represent investments in future beneﬁt streams – items such as home improvements, retirement contributions and higher education.  Fourth, and to correct a mathematical error present in many GPI accounts, the inequality adjustment (INQ) should be applied to net expenditure on ﬁnal goods and services (Fig.  3) and not gross spending.  It is easy to show that doing the latter would result in artiﬁcially inﬂated deductions for DEFR and HI.  Fifth, we suggest use of an inequality adjustment (INQ) based on diminishing marginal utility of income, rather than one tied to some baseline year.  We think this more closely aligns with the original intent of this adjustment (Daly and Cobb, 1994) and is an approach now feasible to estimate using new methods and data (Layard et al. , 2008).  Finally, and this may not be an issue in NIPA accounts in other countries, public provision of goods and services by governments and non-proﬁts (PP) should be added.  In the US at least, PP associated with federal, state, and local government spending is not included in PCE and so it underestimates the true value of ﬁnal household consumption and welfare.  Appendix A, Sections A. 1 to A. 5 and Appendix B provide more detail on these reﬁnements.  3. 2.  Services From Essential Capital.  All economic activity is made possible by various stocks of capital and the services they perform.  Goodwin (2003) categorizes these capital stocks as human, social, built, natural and ﬁnancial and we follow this convention by including relevant terms (less a term for ﬁnancial capital) in Eq.  (4) to represent services they provide.  KH, KS, KB, and KN.  Human capital stocks are the skills and knowledge that enable humans to convert natural resources into useful artifacts and to express themselves culturally and artistically.  Social capital is about relationships and goodwill – it manifests as people performing valuable services for one another, for example, in the context of volunteering and other forms of unpaid labor.  Built capital services are those provided by consumer durables and home improvements as well as both public and private transportation, water, and communications infrastructure.  Ecosystem services from natural capital include all the economically valuable functions – such as provision of foods and medicine and pollination of crops – communities and industries would have to pay for if native forests, wetlands, and other ecosystems were depleted beyond critical thresholds.  Financial capital is not a basic (or essential) form of capital, but merely a vehicle of exchange for market-based goods and services and, as such, the value of services it renders is already baked into the GPI's market-based component.  It is thus excluded from the second component of Eq.  (4).  GPI accounts that are fully aligned with Fisher's concepts of psychic income (utility) and capital, are internally consistent with other components, and meet all of the deﬁnitional restrictions discussed in Section 2. 1 would measure public economic beneﬁts above and beyond any facet captured in market-based transactions generated by investments in.  (a) creating a highly educated, technically skilled and culturally diverse population (human capital).  (b) goodwill and supportive relationships (social capital).  (c) household, water, transportation, and other types of infrastructure (built capital), and (d) conserving and protecting native ecosystems (natural capital).  It is the psychic income (utility) generated by these investments that ought to be measured by the GPI and not sustainability in terms of changes in underlying capital stocks.  Stock-related changes and sustainability should be treated with a separate set of biophysical indicators accounts suited for that purpose (Neumayer, 2004. 