
OPEC has a fragile cartel structure.  It does not have a formal
enforcement mechanism in place (except for the occasional price war)
to incentivize its members to comply with their quota allocations
(Alhajji and Huettner, 2000).  As a result, non-compliance to the quota
has become a norm among OPEC members over the past decades. 
In every single quarter from 1993 to 2005, total OPEC production
exceeded the sum of its members’ quotas.  In this period, an OPEC
member over-produced its quota by an average of 6. 7%.  In this paper,
we provide a framework to explain such a persistent non-compliance
pattern based on strategic interactions among members inside OPEC. 
Quota violations vary signiﬁcantly among different countries.  For
example, Saudi Arabia’s overproduction averaged around 3. 2% from
1995 to 2007 but Qatar’s overproduction averaged around 18. 5% during the same period.  In extreme cases, some members overproduce
their quotas by a large margin.  For example, in the second quarter of 1998, OPEC requested that Qatar cut its production to reach a
quota of 384 thousand bpd due to falling oil prices, but Qatar kept its
production level at 670 thousand bpd–a 75% quota non-compliance. 
Another extreme example is Algeria who overproduced its quota by
more than 50% in 13 out of 24 quarters between 2002 and 2006. 
Moreover, as suggested by a large body of theoretical literature1, the
diﬃculty of supporting collusion varies with the economic state of
the market.  Based on these preliminary observations, we ask the following.  is non-compliance related to oil market conditions.  If so, is
it a pro-cyclical or a counter-cyclical behavior.  How does the degree
of non-compliance differ for smaller vs.  larger producers.  To what
extent does OPEC rely on the quota system. 
There are a number of prominent empirical studies on OPEC
behavior, but the majority of them focus on whether OPEC behaves
as a cartel or not, rather than analyzing the nature of quotas and
violations.  To name a few, Griﬃn (1985), tests the market-sharing
hypothesis by looking at the co-movement of each country’s production with that of the rest of OPEC.  He concludes that “OPEC is a looser
cartel” given that market sharing considerations only partially affect
production decisions.  Gülen (1996) uses a similar intuition to test
for parallel movements in members’ output levels.  He ﬁnds evidence
of coordination among members, especially during the rationing
period, 1982–1993.  Dahl and Yücel (1991) ﬁnd no evidence in support of several hypotheses for OPEC behavior including dynamic
optimization, target revenue, cartel, competitive, and swing producers.  Therefore, they conclude that “loose coordination or duopoly” is
the closest description to OPEC behavior.  However, as pointed out
by Smith (2005), there are serious concerns regarding the low power
of the statistical tests employed in these studies and the extent to
which they are capable of distinguishing between collusive and competitive behavior within OPEC.  He describes OPEC as “much more
than a non-cooperative oligopoly, but less than a friction-less cartel. ”
Instead of calling this strand of literature inconclusive, we prefer
the conclusion that some of the studies reach—such as Geroski Name
(1987), Almoguera Name (2011) and Kaufmann Name (2008)—that
OPEC behavior cannot be ﬁtted into a single model, but rather it
follows a varying-conduct model that switches between collusive
and non-cooperative behavior over time.  We use the same notion
in our theory model by formulating the proposed framework as a
combination of a cooperative game and a non-cooperative behavior. 
Although the empirical evidence for OPEC’s collusion behavior
is mixed, the ﬁeld of industrial organization provides a sharp predictions for one of the factors affecting collusion.  the link between
market conditions and the incentive to cheat in a cartel.  The standard
approach in this literature is to repeat game models in which cartel members interact via their choice of production levels or prices. 
In this approach, members choose to cooperate or cheat in each
period by comparing the net value of cooperation vs.  that of deviation.  If they cooperate, they receive a moderate period payoff for
cooperation with a continuation of this payoff in the future.  However, if they decide to cheat, they will enjoy a high period payoff
but will face punishment in the future.  The prediction of this literature is that it’s harder to collude in booms because the incentive to
cheat is higher2.  For example, Rotemberg and Saloner (1986) show
that with an i. i. d.  demand structure collusion is harder to support in
booms, simply because the net gains of deviation are higher.  Assuming a cyclical demand, Haltiwanger and Harrington Jr (1991) show
that the incentive to cheat is stronger at the end of a boom when
the demand is about to fall.  This is because with falling demand the
value of cooperation is at its lowest.  Consistent with Rotemberg and
Saloner (1986), Kandori (1991) and Bagwell and Staiger (1995) generalize this result for the cases of serially correlated and Markov
demand shocks respectively.  Overall, the theory predicts a monotonic relationship between market conditions and the incentives to
cheat.  the more favorable the market conditions, the more diﬃcult
it is to support collusion. 3 Staiger and Wolak (1992) introduce the
capacity-constraints features to previous models and show that large
excess capacities can result in severe price wars. 
We use a less complex economy to characterize the noncompliance behavior of an OPEC-like cartel.  Our model consists of
a small and a large capacity country.  We use a simple multistage
model where in the ﬁrst period countries choose their optimal level
of capacity.  In the second stage the optimal aggregate production
of the cartel and the quota level for each member are determined
through maximizing the joint proﬁt of the cartel members.  In the
third stage countries decide their production level and in the fourth
stage possible deviations from the quota might be punished. 
The model implies that OPEC members take into account the
investment cost of building capacity with the possible beneﬁt of
obtaining a larger quota.  We show that for the small member, the
endogenously chosen capacity work as an implicit quota enforcement mechanism in good times and leaves very little room for
non-compliance.  Therefore, we predict that OPEC relies on its quota
and punishment system more in bad times than in good times. 
We also allow the punishment reaction of the cartel’s police (Saudi
Arabia) to vary in a range (between very weak enforcement to a
full enforcement) to study the reaction of investment and production decisions of small members to changes in the stringency of the
punishment mechanism.  We show that while more stringent punishment results in lower quota violations, it increases investment in
capacity expansion. 
The key feature of our theoretical framework is to model the
decision making process by the cartel members inside and outside
of OPEC.  We do this by highlighting the role of an important variable, under-emphasized in literature, as the key variable explaining
the compliance behavior of cartel members.  More speciﬁcally, we
emphasize the role of capacity as the fundamental heterogeneity
among cartel members in three ways.  First, empirical and anecdotal evidence support the idea of a direct link between the production
capacity of a country and its share of total quota.  Second, we introduce convex capacity building costs, which pin down the optimal
maximum production capacity for each member.  We argue that the
marginal cost of oil production is much smaller than the initial cost
of building capacity, as pointed out by Gault Name (1999).  Therefore, some of results are driven by the capacity limits.  Third, larger
capacity provides the option to produce in high-demand states for
the larger member in the production game that follows the quota
allocations. 
Our empirical analysis supports these predictions.  Using quarterly data for the period of 1995 to 2007, during when OPEC had a
stable structure, we build a panel data model to test the statistical
signiﬁcance of the predictions of our theory model.  We use Instrumental Variable approach to control for potential endogeneity of
the size measure, Capacity.  Consistent with the notion that capacity
constraint works as an enforcement mechanism in good times, we
ﬁnd that unlike the police that always holds spare capacity to keep
the potential punishment credible, other OPEC members become
more capacity constrained when oil prices are higher.  Next, consistent with OPEC relying on quota system in bad times, we ﬁnd that
OPEC meets more frequently when oil prices are lower.  Moreover,
consistent with a size-dependent punishment mechanism, we provide empirical evidence that shows non-compliance relative to quota
levels is more common among the smaller countries especially in badThree things distinguish our paper from earlier studies on OPEC
non-compliance.  First, our paper is one of the few studies that
look into strategic interactions and cheating behavior inside OPEC,
instead of looking at the behavior of OPEC as a whole.  Second, unlike
the bulk of the literature on OPEC that are merely empirical (e. g. ,
Molchanov, 2003), we provide a theoretical model that is tuned to
resemble the OPEC decision-making process and delivers empirically
testable predictions along with our empirical analysis.  Third, we offer
a more universal framework that integrates the effects of general
market conditions (e. g. , demand ﬂuctuations) and country-speciﬁc
characteristics (e. g. , cost of capacity building) on quota violations
into a single framework.  This is in contrast to other studies such as
Dibooglu and AlGudhea (2007) and Kaufmann Name (2008) that look
at cheating behavior on a country-by-country basis. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section 1 presents
the theory model in two stages.  the cooperative quota-setting stage
and the non-cooperative production game.  Section 2 describes the
empirical design and the data.  Section 3 illustrates empirical analysis
and estimation results, and Section 4 contains the conclusion. 
2.  Theoretical model. 
This section introduces a series of stylized models of OPEC members’ behavior.  The objective of the modeling exercise is to identify
major determinants of capacity building and production decisions,
which can potentially include a deviation from the assigned quota
(among other factors).  The model highlights trade-offs between
members investment and production decisions. 
In its most complete form, our theoretical model consists of a
four-stage game.  In the ﬁrst stage countries endogenously choose the
optimal level of capacity investment.  In the second stage production
quotas are allocated (taking into account the installed capacities). 
Countries make decisions regarding the actual production (and possible deviations from quotas) in the third stage.  We do not assume
that the third stage’s production plans fully follows the allocated
quotas because endogenous deviations from quotas are allowed.  The
fourth stage includes monitoring the actual performance of members
by the large producer (aka the police) and potentially implementing
a random punishment strategy.  In our model capacity levels, quota
allocation, actual production, quota violations, and punishment are
all endogenous. 
2. 1.  Key components and assumptions of the model. 
OPEC is a sophisticated and non-transparent organization.  A lot
of politics is involved in OPEC. s bargaining, agreements, and decision making.  We recognize that a stylized model, such as the one
presented in this paper, cannot fully capture all aspects of OPEC’s
dynamics.  Moreover, given the size limitations of the current paper
we have to make certain assumptions and take a pragmatic approach
for building and solving the model in order to come up with empirically testable hypothesis. 
2. 1. 1.  Focus on the key message related to the empirical section of the2. 1. 1. 1.  Objectives and functions of OPEC.  OPEC acts as a cartel maximizing the total proﬁt of its members4.  OPEC’s objective in reality
is a mix of proﬁt-maximizing and price-stabilizing goals.  Especially
in recent years, OPEC has tried to keep the crude oil prices around
a reasonable bound (appx $50–$60) to reduce the incentives of the
demand side to invest in alternative forms of energy5.  We model
OPEC only as a proﬁt-maximizing cartel6. 
2. 1. 1. 2.  Cartel members.  The cartel consists of a large producer (aka
the police, who monitors other members production and their deviations from quotas) and a fringe of small producers.  We assume the
production capacity of the police is K1 and the aggregate production
capacity of all fringe members together is K2.  To keep the algebra
simple we solve the game between one large producer and one
representative small player.  Thus, we abstract from strategic interactions between small producers.  Since the interest of the paper is in
quota violations of non-police members, we only model the endogenous capacity investment, quota allocation, and production decisions
of the representative small producer.  The production capacity of the
police is exogenous. 
2. 1. 1. 3.  Cartel’s police.  In order to preserve the stability of a cartel,
there should be some credible punishment strategies vis-a-vis noncomplying members.  We assume Saudi Arabia is the de facto police
of the OPEC cartel.  No other member has the production or ﬁscal
capacity to punish defying members.  We assume the police holds
an exogenously-speciﬁed level of excess capacity beyond the levels
of any other OPEC member to support a credible threat against
deviations from the cartel allocations7. 
2. 1. 1. 4.  Demand.  The demand for crude oil has a standard linear
functional form.  P = h − cQ.  Hereh is the demand shift parameter
and c is the ﬁxed parameter representing the sensitivity of prices to
quantities.  We will ﬁrst solve a deterministic model and then introduce a stochastic demand.  The stochastic demand shift parameter
includes two states which follow a discrete i. i. d distribution of hH
(high demand) and hL (low demand), with probabilities of pH and pL,
respectively. 
2. 1. 1. 5.  Capacity building costs.  OPEC members face convex capacity
building costs.  This assumption is in line with the order of extraction hypothesis in the resource economics literature (Amigues Name,
1998).  According to the order of extraction theory, resource holders
(OPEC members here) ﬁrst extract the most eﬃcient resource base
and then move to ﬁelds with higher costs (less eﬃcient ﬁelds or types
of reserves such as offshore, and deep water) if the demand is highWe assume that the marginal cost of production is zero8.  The
major component of the total cost function is the ﬁxed cost of building capacity.  The capacity cost is modeled as a stream of annualized
payments (i. e. , all equipment are perpetually leased).  The limiting
case of the convex capacity cost is a hard capacity constraint, which
is equivalent to a locally inﬁnite marginal cost (i. e.  a vertical part of
the cost curve).  However, countries have different levels and curvatures in their cost curves.  This heterogeneity for the size and quality
of reserves distinguishes a large producer such as Saudi Arabia from
a small producer like Gabon or Qatar.  Fig.  1 shows a stylized view of
this model. 
Under an eﬃcient planner solution the country with a lower
capacity building cost (i. e.  cost curve to the right) will optimally build
a larger capacity and receive a higher production quota. 
2. 1. 1. 6.  Allocation rule of OPEC.  The theoretical foundations for the
internal allocation of aggregate production to cartel members is a
matter of debate (see Cave and Salant, 1995).  We assume that the cartel uses a two-layer allocation rule.  In the strategic layer the allocation
rule minimizes the cartel’s production cost (surplus maximization
strategy) for capacity investment.  In the production layer (when
capacities are not binding due to a low demand) the rule suggests
an allocation proportional to existing capacities.  Anecdotal evidences
suggest that the established capacity is a key factor in assigning initial
quotas to OPEC members.  In the strategic version of the model we
will discuss how a proportional allocation rule incentivizes member
countries to build excess capacity.  Sandrea (2003) suggests that the
following eight factors have been used in the initial stage.  reserves,
production capacity, historical production share, domestic oil consumption,
production costs, population, dependence on oil exports,
and external debt.  Reynolds and Pippenger (2010) use Venezuela as
an example and shows that in the long-run, production capacity and
actual productions of countries Granger-cause their OPEC quotas. 
2. 1. 1. 7.  Punishment.  In reality, constant deviations from assigned
quotas occur for multiple reasons.  First, countries are typically not
content with the officially assigned quota and prefer to produce
more.  Second, it is both difficult and costly for OPEC to constantly
punish non-complying members. 
The problem with the standard definition of punishment in cartels
(i. e the strategy of flooding the market with overproduction and thus
reducing the price) is that it not only punishes the non-compliant
member but also other “innocent” members (including the police
itself)9. 
This causes the punishment strategy to be ex-post sub game perfect
but not negotiation-proof.  We are not aware of other credible
punishment mechanisms (such as trade embargoes), which have
been used by OPEC members.  During important historical incidents
(e. g.  the oil price war of 1986) Saudi Arabia overproduced to punish
the other members.  In order to have a credible punishment strategy,
cartel members need to have enough spare capacity, able to identify
the deviant member (Green and Porter, 1984), and not be jammed by
demand uncertainty noises. 
2. 1. 1. 8.  Punishment technology.  Punishment in our model is random
and the probability of punishment (conditional on cheating) is m ∈A special case is the size-independent punishment technology,
which will react to all positive deviations with a constant probability
m.  The random punishment can be interpreted as a mixed strategy
played by the police. 
In the case of size-independent punishment, when m → 1 the
punishment is very effective, and when m → 0 the ability or the
incentive to punish is very weak.  When m → 0 the non-police
members are conﬁdent that the cartel will never punish their quota
violations. 
The inability to accurately observe members’ actual production,
the lack of a political will to punish the deviating member, or internal
disagreements within the OPEC are several frictions that can result
in a partially effective punishment technology.  We summarize all of
these forces using the single parameter m. 
2. 2.  Four versions of the model. 
A step-by-step development of cartel models is presented in the
following order. 
1.  A planer’s11 solution for a cartel with a convex capacitybuilding costs under certainty
2.  A planer’s solution for a cartel with a convex capacity-building
costs under uncertainty
3.  A cartel with quota allocation and full enforcement of quotas
4.  A cartel with quota allocation, possibility of quota violation,
and endogenous punishment for quota violation. 
2. 3.  Model 1.  eﬃcient allocation under certainty. 
The benchmark case is a two-country cartel problem with asymmetric convex capacity building cost curves c(Ki) = 1
i , where 0i
is the coeﬃcient of resource eﬃciency and Ki is the installed capacity. 
For countries with a larger resource base, 0 is a smaller parameter. 
We also assume a full enforcement of OPEC quota rules (through
a planner).  We ﬁrst introduce this benchmark to provide the key
intuitions from an eﬃcient allocation and then will move to a more
realistic case with capacity limits and incentives to cheat. 
We assume that the two countries choose the optimal production
capacity based on an eﬃcient internal allocation mechanism.  Since
the capacity has not been built, one can treat the annualized cost
of capacity like marginal cost.  Members of the cartel are bound by
their maximum capacity.  thus, even if the operational marginal cost
is zero, they will not be able to deviate upward from the eﬃcient
solution.  Moreover, no party has an incentive to build more capacity
than what we recommend here because the marginal cost of building
an additional unit of capacity exceeds the marginal beneﬁts (taking
the behavior of the other members as given). 
The optimal cartel solution is here where c(K1) and c(K2) are the total cost of building K1 and K2 units of capacity. 
The cartel problem in this version of the model is the same as
the standard multi-plant monopolist problem, which maximizes the
joint proﬁt of all plants.  The FOCs of the cartel problem results in
the following system of equation, in which the marginal cost of each
member is equal to the marginal revenue of the cartel. 
Given that the right hand sides are equal, we immediately observe
that c(cid. 4)(K1) = c(cid. 4)(K2) ⇒ K1
.  Since capacity is set in the model, we
also note that 01 > 02 ⇒ K2 > K1, implying that the member with
a less eﬃcient cost curve (represented by a higher 0) will receive a
lower production quota. 
Plugging in the speciﬁc functional forms for ci and P. 
The solution to the system of equation characterizes an eﬃcient 
internal allocation while maximizing the total proﬁt of the cartel. 
2. 4.  Model 2.  eﬃcient allocation under uncertainty. 
When the uncertainty is introduced, the optimization problem
of the planner consists of two stages.  In the ﬁrst stage (before the
resolution of uncertainty) member countries choose their optimal
capacity levels (by considering the expected value of capacity over
different states).  In the second stage with the ﬁxed capacity installed
in the ﬁrst stage, countries produce according to a proﬁt-maximizing
program. 
The demand states are distributed according to hL, pL and hH, pH,
where pL, pH are the probability of low and high states, respectively. 
We denote the production at the high and low states by qH
A key point to note is that the choice of capacity is prior to the
resolution of uncertainty regarding the demand state.  Therefore, the
country maximizes based on the expectation of proﬁts.  However,
production decisions are taken after observing the realized demand
state (i. e after the uncertainty regarding the demand is resolved. )
Since the production in the low demand state will always be
below the capacity, the marginal value (i. e.  shadow price) of capacity
at this state is zero.  Therefore, the choice of capacity will be driven by
the high state optimal production plan.  In other words, there are four
equations for qL,1, qH,1, qL,2, qH,2, out of which two are binding (in the
H-state) and two are always slack (in the L-state).  Therefore, Ki = qHThe optimization problem of the planner looks very similar to
the previous case except that the marginal value of capacity is only
relevant in the high state12. 
Solving the system of equations using the assumed functional
conditioned on actual capacities, OPEC decides on the aggregate supply and then allocates quotas to members.  Economic theory has
little to say about the internal allocation in the low demand state
when members have excess capacities (especially when the marginal
cost of production is zero).  In practice, OPEC uses a combination of
economic, social, and political factors to determine the quotas.  We
assume the allocation is based on installed capacities.  The cartel ﬁrst
ﬁnds the monopoly production quantity.  Since we assumed marginal
cost is equal to zero the cartel just maximizes revenues14. 
Two types of deviation can be identiﬁed.  an operational deviation
by producing more than assigned quota (the focus of this paper) and
an investment deviation by building too much initial capacity15.  The
operational deviation is more frequently observed in practice.  Given
the nature of our motivating empirical observations, our theoretical
focus is on operational deviations.  Consequently, we only model the
punishment mechanism for the operational deviations and abstract
from modeling the punishments for the investment deviations. 
2. 5.  Model 3.  strategic incentives for capacity investment. 
We now consider the incentives of OPEC members to build excess
capacity (ex-ante) in order to gain a larger quota in the low demand
state.  Our assumption of the strategic effect of capacity is in line with
the intuition offered by some recent papers (e. g.  Fagart, 2016). 
We assume a reduced-form proportional quota allocation rule,
which assigns quota based on the relative share of countries’ installed
capacities.  If the theoretical share of country i is greater than its actual
capacity, the quota will be capped at capacity. 
Combining cartel total production and allocation rules. 
The equations above pin down the binding capacity (and hence
the production plans) in the H state.  Note that when pH = 1 the
solution is the same as Model 1. 
We also need to characterize the optimal production in the L
state.  In state L, after observing the realized state of demand and
Note that OPEC members’ individual capacities do not affect the
optimal level of the cartel’s production (as long as the total capacity
of the cartel is large enough).  Moreover, the proportional rule does
not guarantee that members will get quotas equal to their production
capacities.  As long as the aggregate capacity of OPEC is larger than the
optimal cartel production, some members will receive quotas below
their capacities16. 
The objective function of the nested optimization problem is here
where players choose the capacity in the ﬁrst stage by considering
its effect both in the low and the high demand states (and taking the
capacity strategy of others as a given. ) The new feature of this version
of the model takes into account the strategic effect of capacity on the
assigned quota for the low state (i. e.  bargain for a higher quota)
Under this structure and with qH 1 = K1 , the key equation to pin
down the endogenous choice of capacity by a small cartel member
is this. 
We derive the value of the expression in the second bracket in the next subsection. 
2. 5. 1.  Marginal quota effect of capacity. 
The proposed allocation rule allows us to derive the marginal
“allocation value” of a unit of capacity.  Assuming that the marginal
effect on the total capacity of cartel is negligible, the marginal
allocation value can be deﬁned as follows. 
Denoting the assigned quota in the low demand state by qL. 
We see that with a larger total capacity of OPEC members, the
quota allocation effect of additional unit of capacity for an individual
member becomes weaker.  Note that Q
is the total production of cartel in the low state and
Ki is the total production in the high state. 
Thus, closer production values in the two states results in a higher
incentive for bargaining. 
The marginal value of capacity in the low state then can be calculated. 
Eq.  (13) suggests that when the total installed capacity of the
cartel is large, the demand in the low state is weak, and the sensitivity of price to quantity is high, the incentives for building excess
capacity (for quota bargaining purposes) would become smaller.  The
small member of the cartel compares the marginal value of capacity with the marginal cost of building (an almost unused) unit of
excess capacity.  If capacity costs are relatively low, the country may
build and keep spare capacity for bargaining purposes.  however, if
capacity investment costs are high, the country may give up building
excess capacity. 
The optimality condition to pin-down the equilibrium capacity
for the representative small member is here. 
2. 6.  Model 4.  strategic interaction
In the ﬁnal version of the model the full quota compliance
assumption is relaxed.  OPEC members can potentially deviate from
the allocated quota.  however, they are subject to possible punishment by the police.  The game consists of four major stages as
described in Fig.  2.  The small producers use backward induction and
consider the effect of equilibrium outcomes in later stages of their
current decisions.  The ﬁrst stages of the time-line occur only once. 
however, the production and punishment stages are a summarized
form a repeated game. 
2. 6. 1.  Capacity stage. 
As before, small producers take into account the marginal cost of
building one additional unit of capacity versus its marginal beneﬁts. 
The incentives to build capacity are twofold.  ﬁrst, the option value
of producing higher in good time and second, the strategic effect of
capacity on the allocated quota.  We assume that the ﬁrst effect is
small and abstract from it to focus on the second effect which is the
key focus of this paper. 
2. 6. 2.  Actual production stage. 
Given Ki, qi the individual small (i. e.  non-police) country i solves a
constrained optimization problem under uncertainty.  Note that since
the capacity has been already built and there are no operational costs
(as we assumed before), the marginal cost of production is zero. 
The member country considers the following two cases. 
The ﬁrst line refers to the compliance strategy.  If the country
complies, it earns the proﬁt associated with the assigned quota and
the repeated game continues.  The game in this case is basically the
repeated version of the one-shot game of compliance.  However, if the
country violates the quota (second line), it may trigger punishment. 
The country enjoys a higher proﬁt at the current period by accepting
the risk of punishment, which shifts the value function to a Cournot
value function.  The details of the Cournot value function is presented
in the Appendix. 
The violation branch creates two sub-scenarios ahead of the cartel
member.  with probability (1 − m) no punishment will occur and the
member continues with the same value function.  However, with the
probability m the police will punish the non-compliant behavior and
the game continues in a non-cooperative (Cournot) regime. 
After simplifying the algebra, it turns out that the small member
has incentive to deviate if the following condition holds this. 
Any punishment strategy that the beneﬁt of a one-shot deviation
is smaller than the lost value of cooperation will induce members toFrom Eq.  (16) we can see that the cartel is more stable when the
immediate beneﬁt of deviation is smaller or when the expected cost
of punishment is higher. 
Proposition 2. 1.  The incentive to cheat is higher in the H-state compared to the L-state. 
Proof.  The R. H. S of Eq.  (16) is independent of the current state (note
that the demand follows an i. i. d regime. ).  However, the LHS is a function of the current state.  In the high-price state the marginal value
of an additional unit of production is higher than a low-price state
(which is the standard result of Rotemberg and Saloner, 1986). 
Corollary 1.  Small producers face binding constraints in the high
demand state.  Thus, the potential magnitude of deviation for a small
producer is larger in the L state compared to the H state.  Capacity
constraints work as an implicit enforcement mechanism. 
In the H state, small producers typically will have a small excess
capacity to unilaterally expand their production.  Thus, the immediate value of deviation is limited.  However, in the low demand state
there is plenty of excess capacity to be used for quota violation. 
Proposition 2. 2.  If the size of the strategic excess capacity is small,
punishment is only required in the low state. 
Proof.  Small members do not have major excess capacity in the H
state.  Therefore, the total beneﬁt of quota violation is small.  However, they have signiﬁcant excess capacity in the L-state and the
potential value of a one-shot deviation can be signiﬁcant20.  In summary, in the high state the capacity constraints function as the
enforcement mechanism and in the low state quotas need to be
enforced by the cartel. 
Even if members have some excess capacity to deviate in the
H state, such a deviation is not too costly for the cartel.  On contrary, a deviation during the L time can be very costly to everybody. 
Thus, one can expect that during the low demand regime more
quota-related activities (e. g. , quota-setting, political bargains, and
meetings) should be observed. 
Corollary 2.  The frequency of OPEC meetings and quota adjustments
should be negatively associated with the level of crude oil price. 
2. 6. 3.  Occasional punishment. 
We make a ﬁnal assumption to create a model similar to the real
world.  In a classic cartel model with a credible punishment strategy
(no shock or noise) and fully rational players no quota violation or
punishment will be observed on the equilibrium path.  Punishment
occurs as an off-equilibrium phenomena.  However, in reality a few
episodes of punishment within OPEC have been observed.  Green and
Porter (1984) introduce a model of collusion under imperfect information, in which some punishment is observed.  The authors show
that when the “observed” market price is low, cartel members may
follow a non-cooperative Cournot behavior and then revert back to
a collusion behavior after a few periods.  This model of behavior ﬁts
well with the observed behavior of OPEC cartel members. 
We justify occasional (but infrequent) punishment and some
episodes of quota violations by shocks to the ability/willingness of
the police to punish deviations.  The following trigger strategy by
the police constitutes a Nash equilibrium in states when the police
can punish.  if a deviating member is detected, the game will switch
to Cournot for a few periods and then will revert back to cooperative strategy21.  A plausible scenario is when a few periods of quota
violations (until the cheating is detected) is followed by a severe
punishment and reversion to the cooperation. 
When the punishment technology is very weak (i. e the police is
incapable in the majority of periods), m → 0 and as a result the game
switches to a traditional Cournot competition.  On the other hand, if
the punishment is extremely effective (i. e.  a tiny deviation will be
caught and punished in every single period), we will have m → 1 and
the game converges to a textbook cartel game in which no deviation
will be observed.  The more interesting case is the intermediate value
of 0 < m < 1, meaning that while the OPEC member is worried
about possible punishment, they still may take the gamble and cheat
because punishment is not certain. 
2. 6. 3. 1.  Size-dependent punishment.  So far we assume that the punishment function m() does not depend on the aggregate size of
deviations.  The police may tolerate small deviations (in absolute
terms) but react to large deviations.  The intuition over the optimization problem suggests that deviations are smaller when the
punishment is size-dependent. 
One can also observe that if the punishment probability depends
on the aggregate deviation of all members, small members will
have a larger proportional deviation.  The same percentage of deviation by a small and a larger producer will have different absolute
effects on the market.  When the likelihood of punishment depends
on the size of deviation, each member considers the marginal effect
of its deviation on the probability of being punished.  This acts as a
cost and reduces the optimal level of production for the one-shot
deviation. 
Proposition 2. 3.  When the punishment becomes more effective, violations decreases but capacity investment also increases.  Average spare
capacity increases with the effectiveness of the monitoring technology. 
Proof.  The small member will compared expected value of a unit of
additional production in the L state versus the cost of reaching that
excess unit of production. 
In the above equation, small members consider the value of a
marginal legitimate quota through excess capacity building (given
by Eq.  (14)) versus the expected beneﬁt of deviating from the legal
quota (Eq.  (16)).  If the punishment is size-dependent, small members
will choose a combination of building excess and some deviation. 
The optimality condition for an interior solution is that the
marginal cost of attaining one extra unit of production is the same
through capacity building and cheating.  There is a substitution effect
between the two ways of increasing production.  If m becomes bigger,
then the member state will increase the excess capacity. 
The intuition behind Proposition 2. 3 is that a higher likelihood of
punishment for non-compliance will reduce the incentive to cheat in
the second stage.  on the other hand, it shifts the strategic incentives
to the ﬁrst stage to gain a higher allocated share.  This, however, will
not necessarily result in very large capacities because each member
compares the marginal beneﬁt of capacity (i. e.  the probability of a
marginal unit of quota) to the investment cost of capacity. 
2. 7.  Summary of theoretical insights. 
We summarize the lessons learned through the modeling
exercise. 
1.  Deviation is more likely in the high price state.  However, hard
capacity constraints might function as a limit. 
2.  OPEC needs to work harder to sustain the cartel quota system
during low demand state. 
3.  Small producers have higher incentives to deviate.  They can
make larger deviations (proportional to their capacity) before
triggering a punishment strategy. 
4.  A more stringent punishment strategy increases incentives for
building excess capacity to gain a larger legitimate quota. 
<Middle> Empirical analysis. 
In this section, we review our data collection, summary statistics of the sample, and the empirical design we use to test model
predictions and additional empirical insights. 
3. 1.  Data. 
We use country level quarterly data for production, capacity, and
quota allocations for OPEC members excluding Iraq between 1995
and 2007.  We obtain the data from three sources.  quota allocations
and crude oil prices come from the OPEC statistical bulletin, production and capacity data are obtained from the Energy Information
Agency (EIA) website, and reserves data comes from BP Statistical Review of World Energy website.  We intentionally do not use
OPEC data on production given that OPEC members tend to underreport their production levels to hide quota violations.  A comparison
between OPEC vs.  EIA conﬁrms this conjecture22.  Data availability
dictates the time span of our sample.  1995 is the ﬁrst year that EIA
provided the quarterly production data for OPEC members, and 2007
is the last year that EIA published members’ production capacity data
on their website.  Given that EIA does not provide capacity data for
years before 2001, we complement this sample with the data used in
Kaufmann Name (2008)23. 
Moreover, OPEC as an organization had a very stable structure
with no entry or exit during this time window (Ecuador exited OPEC
before 1995, and Indonesia exited after 2007. ) We follow the common practice of dropping Iraq from our sample due to the Persian
Gulf War and trade sanctions that limited its interactions with OPEC
during this period.  This leaves us with a sample of 10 OPEC members. 
Algeria, Indonesia, Iran, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
United Arab Emirates (U. A. E. ), and Venezuela. 
Table 1 presents summary statistics for this sample between 1995
and 2007.  As can been seen from the table, quota non-compliance
ranges from −46. 8% for Venezuela to 74. 5% for Qatar.  It has an average of 7. 7% and a median of 5%.  Note that a negative number means
producing below the quota or complying with the quota allocations,
and a positive number signiﬁes a quota violation.  We also observe
that spare capacity for some members occasionally is a negative
number.  This means that their production quota is set above their
capacities.  We drop those observations from our non-compliance
sample because non-compliance is virtually impossible for those
countries. 
Table 2 presents summary statistics for non-compliance of each
country between 1995 and 2007.  Looking at the median or mean
column of Table 2, we can see that Algeria, Qatar and Indonesia are
on average the most non-compliant members.  In contrast, Iran, UAE,
and Venezuela are on average the most compliant members.  This
immediately suggests an inverse pattern between non-compliance
and producer size, measured by capacity or production.  We revisit
this conjecture more formally later to see if it is a robust pattern in a
multiple regression framework. 
3. 2.  Empirical model and estimation results. 
In this section, to test the predictions of our theoretical model
empirically, we investigate the compliance behavior of the individual
OPEC members using a Logit, a time-series, and a panel data model. 
To investigate if the capacity constraint works as an enforcement
mechanism in the H state, we ﬁrst study the relationship between
the likelihood of being capacity constrained and the level of oil prices. 
Next, we examine if OPEC relies on quota and punishment system as
an enforcement mechanism in L-state by evaluating the relationship
between the frequency of OPEC meetings and the oil prices.  Finally,
we characterize the pattern of non-compliance (in both absolute
and relative terms) as a function of country size and market conditions to see if we can ﬁnd supportive evidence for size-dependent
punishment strategy or the swing producer hypothesis. 
3. 2. 1.  Capacity constraint. 
Does OPEC rely on quota system in both L and H states.  Does
capacity constraint work an implicit enforcement mechanism in
either state.  Proposition 2. 2 and Corollary 1 predict that in the
H-state the capacity constraint works as an enforcement mechanism
for the small members to ensure that they do not overproduce their
22 Total OPEC production reported by OPEC was consistently lower than what is
reported by EIA between 1983 and 2003, except in 1992. 
23 Kaufmann Name (2008) estimate quarterly capacities by interpolating annual
capacity data provided to them by Erik Kriel of the US Department of Energy. 
This table presents the summary statistics of non-compliance relative to quota for OPEC countries.  Data is on quarterly basis between 1995 and 2007. 
quota levels24.  This is in opposite to the behavior of the police country who keeps a large spare capacity strategically in both L and H
states to make sure that punishment is credible in L-state and it can
overproduce its quota if needed in H-state when everyone else is
more likely to be capacity constrained. 
To see if small members are in fact more capacity constrained in
the H-state, we illustrate the frequency of producing at capacity for
each member as a function of quartiles of the real oil price25 in Fig.  3. 
Consistent with Corollary 1, we ﬁnd that while for almost all OPEC
members the likelihood of being capacity constrained rises with oil
price, for the police/large country this likelihood is always zero. 
To formally test this conjecture, we use the following Logit model, where Constrainedit is an indicator variable for country i in period t
that switches on when it produces at its capacity level.  and a member’s size is measured by Capacity, which is a member’s production
capacity in mbpd. 
Estimation results are presented in Table 3.  Two immediate
observations are clear from Table 3.  the likelihood of being capacity constrained is higher (i) for smaller countries, and (ii) when the
oil prices are high.  However the results in column (4) suggest that
the coeﬃcient for the interaction term, b3, is not statistically signiﬁcant.  Overall, consistent with Corollary 1, this result conﬁrms that the
capacity constraint works as an enforcement mechanism especially
for the smaller members in the H-state. 
3. 2. 2.  OPEC meetings frequency
In previous section we observed that smaller members are more
likely to be capacity constrained in H-state.  Next, we investigate
if this observation implies that OPEC relies on capacity constraint
as an implicit enforcement mechanism in H-state.  If so, does this
imply that OPEC relies on quota system more in the L-state than in
the H-state.  Proposition 2. 2 and Corollary 2 predict that given that
small members are capacity constrained in H-state, the actual role
OPEC plays is in L-state.  This is because the L-state is exactly when
small members produce under their capacity limits and therefore can
potentially overproduce their quota levels.  To test if OPEC behaves
as a cartel more in L-state than in H-state, we investigate if OPEC is
more responsive to an oil price shock in L-states than in H-states. 
To do this, we depict the relationship between OPEC meeting frequency and the real oil price in Fig.  4.  In this ﬁgure the horizontal axis
presents 10 bins of the real oil prices and the vertical axis shows the
average number of OPEC meetings in a quarter for each price bin.  If
OPEC is more responsive to oil price shocks in L-states, we expect to
see more meeting in L-state than in H-state, a negative relationship. 
Consistent with Corollary 2, Fig.  4 conﬁrms a negative relationship
between OPEC meetings frequency and the oil price. 
Next, we use the following time-series model to go beyond the
link to the price level and ask if the direction of the price change and
its interaction with price level matters,
where Meeting Frequency is the number of OPEC meetings in a quarter that resulted in a quota change.  Price is the quarterly real oil price
in 2001 dollars.  and Price Jump is an indicator variable that captures
oil price jumps.  A positive jump is an increase in real oil price that
exceeds 30%, a negative jump is a drop in real oil price that exceeds
30%, and no jump refers to quarters in which the oil price changes
stays within the −30% and +30% bands.  If OPEC is more responsive
to negative jumps in oil price we expect to observe a positive and signiﬁcant sign for b2 when there is a negative price jumps.  Moreover,
if the drop in oil price matters more in L-state, we expect a negative
and signiﬁcant sign for b3. 
Table 4 presents the estimation results for Eq.  (19).  Consistent
with Corollary 2 and similar to Fig.  4, the ﬁrst column of this table
shows a signiﬁcant and negative sign for b1 indicating a negative
relationship between OPEC meetings frequency and the oil price. 
Moreover, when we investigate the impact of the price dynamics on
meeting frequency we ﬁnd strong evidence for this effect.  Columns
(2), (3) and (4) show the estimation results for positive, negative and
no jump scenarios.  While the overall relationship between meeting frequency and the real oil price remains negative in all three
columns, an important distinction between the results in column (4)
and other two columns is made.  The likelihood of OPEC meetings signiﬁcantly increase in response to a negative price jump during low
oil prices.  This can be seen by the fact that the only time b2 and b3
are signiﬁcant is in column (4) where there is a negative price jump. 
Moreover, the size of the estimated coeﬃcient for b2 shows the
impact is economically signiﬁcant.  a negative price jump increases
the number of meetings in a quarter by almost 2.  This result is consistent with the notion that the OPEC act more as a quota-driven cartel
in L-states than in H-state, as stated by Corollary 2, especially when
there is a price drop. 
3. 2. 3.  Non-compliance pattern. 
In this section we analyze the non-compliance pattern for nonpolice (small) members.  A size-dependent punishment strategy
implies that the tolerance for non-compliance is higher for the
smaller members.  Thus, in equilibrium, we expect to observe a negative relationship between a producer’s size and non-compliance
when it is measured in relative terms (i. 