 Introduction Accruals are fundamental to ﬁnancial reporting and are the underlying innovation of accounting.  While a long line of prior research notes that accruals are likely to be a function of fundamental economic forces, little is known empirically or theoretically about how economic factors impact the level of a ﬁrm's accruals (e. g. , Dechow et al. , 1995.  Bernard and Skinner, 1996.  Dechow et al. , 2010.  Gerakos, 2012.  Owens et al. , 2013).  Further, prior research generally disaggregates accruals at time tþ1 into discretionary and non-discretionary components based on ﬁnancial information observed at time tþ1.  therefore, the research has provided little guidance for forming expectations of accruals based on ex ante ﬁrm characteristics.  In this study, we consider accruals as a form of investment and examine whether theoretical predictions from a real options-based investment framework provide insights for forming expectations of accruals based on ex ante economic factors.  Prior research in accounting suggests that accruals at least partially reﬂect deliberate investment choices by the ﬁrm (Fairﬁeld et al. , 2003.  Zhang, 2007.  Dechow et al. , 2008.  Wu et al. , 2010.  Bushman et al. , 2011.  Allen et al. , 2013.  Momente et al. , 2013.  Arif and Lee, 2014).  In addition, a large literature in economics and ﬁnance adopts a real options approach to investment decision-making and suggests a negative relation between investment and volatility (e. g. , Bernanke, 1983.  McDonald and Siegel, 1986.  Ingersoll and Ross, 1992.  Dixit and Pindyck, 1994.  Schwartz and Trigeorgis, 2004.  Grenadier and Malenko, 2010). 2 The intuition for the expected negative relation between investment and volatility is as follows.  Investment is costly, and sunk costs cannot be recovered.  Therefore, when ﬁrms make investment decisions, they trade off the returns earned from investing today against the beneﬁt from delaying investment to the future, when information or business conditions may be better.  Taking into account the beneﬁt of postponing investment – known as the “option to wait” – means that since higher volatility increases the value of the option to wait, higher volatility dampens investment because ﬁrms prefer to “wait and see” instead of investing immediately.  Thus, higher (lower) volatility is associated with lower (higher) investment.  Adopting the investment perspective of accruals, our ﬁrst hypothesis is that a ﬁrm's level of accruals is negatively associated with volatility.  We note, however, that this prediction from the real options framework may not directly apply to accruals.  For example, models of optimal inventory suggest that managers have incentives to avoid inventory shortages and therefore increase inventory levels as demand volatility rises (e. g. , Petruzzi and Dada, 1999.  Cachon and Terwiesch, 2013).  This research therefore suggests a positive relation between investment in ﬁnished goods inventory and volatility.  Despite this potentially countervailing force, we adopt the investment perspective and rely on the real options framework to predict a negative relation between the level of a ﬁrm's net working capital accruals and volatility.  Second, we investigate the role of ﬁnancial distress in shaping the relation between accruals and volatility.  Eisdorfer (2008) models the investment decisions of ﬁnancially distressed ﬁrms using a real options framework and ﬁnds that ﬁnancial distress weakens the negative effect of volatility on investment.  This is because shareholders of distressed ﬁrms have an incentive to invest when volatility is higher since they enjoy the beneﬁts if things go well, while bondholders bear the costs if things go badly.  Accordingly, we predict that the negative association between the level of working capital accruals and volatility is less pronounced for distressed ﬁrms.  Third, we exploit the real options framework to form predictions regarding the relation between the length of the operating cycle and the association between accruals and volatility.  The operating cycle measures the average time between the disbursement of cash to produce a product and the receipt of cash from the sale of the product (Dechow, 1994).  therefore, ﬁrms with a longer operating cycle have greater exposure to changing business conditions and a wider range of possible accrual investment outcomes.  This suggests that the option to wait is more valuable for ﬁrms with a longer operating cycle.  Thus, we hypothesize that the sensitivity of net working capital accruals to volatility is stronger for ﬁrms with a longer operating cycle.  Fourth, we investigate whether the asset and liability components of net working capital accruals have differing sensitivities to volatility.  We predict that volatility not only negatively affects current asset accruals but also current liability accruals, given that liabilities partially ﬁnance investments and thus positively co-vary with investment by nature.  However, we expect current asset accruals to be more sensitive to volatility than current liability accruals since investment decisions have ﬁrst-order implications for asset accruals but affect liability accruals only to the extent that managers use liabilities instead of internally generated cash ﬂows or equity issuances to ﬁnance the investment.  To empirically test our predictions, we examine the relation between year-ahead working capital accruals and expected volatility.  We highlight that our approach is distinct from prior accounting literature that disaggregates accruals into discretionary and non-discretionary components (e. g. , Healy, 1985.  DeAngelo, 1986.  Jones, 1991.  Dechow et al. , 1995).  Speciﬁcally, while the prior earnings management literature models total working capital accruals in year tþ1 as a function of explanatory variables which are also measured in year tþ1 (e. g.  Healy, 1985.  DeAngelo, 1986.  Jones, 1991.  Dechow et al. , 1995), we model accruals in year tþ1 as a function of characteristics in year t.  Further, we view accruals as a form of investment, rather than as a component of proﬁtability.  As such, our model is grounded in the real options-based investment framework, in which measures of the ﬁrm's characteristics and economic environment (such as expected volatility, ﬁrm size, market-to-book, leverage, and cash ﬂows) are used as inputs into investment decisions (e. g.  Hayashi, 1982.  Dixit and Pindyck ,1994.  Gilchrist and Himmelberg, 1995.  Eisdorfer, 2008).  Our empirical analysis begins by replicating the ﬁnding in Eisdorfer (2008) that there is a signiﬁcant negative relation between year-ahead capital expenditures and expected volatility for a sample of manufacturing ﬁrms.  We then extend the analysis to net working capital accruals and ﬁnd a robust negative relation between year-ahead net working capital accruals and expected volatility in this manufacturing ﬁrm sample.  Next, we broaden the sample to all non-ﬁnancial and non-utility ﬁrms and ﬁnd, consistent with the economic theory, that higher expected volatility has a dampening effect on year-ahead net working capital investment.  In addition, consistent with our predictions, we ﬁnd that the association between year-ahead net working capital accruals and expected volatility is less pronounced for ﬁrms in ﬁnancial distress and more pronounced for ﬁrms with a longer operating cycle.  We then decompose year-ahead net working capital accruals into its asset and liability components and examine the relation of each component with expected volatility.  Consistent with our expectations, we ﬁnd that both current asset and current liability accruals are negatively associated with expected volatility.  Moreover, asset accruals are more sensitive to expected volatility than liability accruals, giving rise to the overall negative relation between net working capital accruals and expected volatility.  We provide two types of robustness tests.  First, we note that our dependent variable (i. e. , year-ahead accruals) is affected not only by expected volatility but also by expected demand.  Thus, as a robustness test, we include additional controls for expected demand as of the end of year t – including the consensus analyst forecast of year-ahead sales, the median consensus analyst forecast of year-ahead sales for the industry, and prior 12-month stock returns – and continue to ﬁnd a signiﬁcant negative relation between year-ahead accruals and expected volatility.  Second, we acknowledge that year-ahead accruals also contain an unexpected component that may be affected by unexpected demand in year tþ1.  While our primary speciﬁcation controls for unexpected demand with year-ahead stock returns, we explore its robustness to additional controls for unexpected demand – including the year-ahead change in sales, year-ahead employee growth, and the year-ahead change in the consensus analyst sales forecast – and ﬁnd that our results are robust to the inclusion of these additional controls.  Finally, we examine the implications of the investment perspective of accruals and the real options-based investment framework for earnings management research.  We note that the primary aim of our study is not to develop a new accrualbased earnings management proxy.  however, we provide evidence that the residuals from an investment-based expected accrual model have discriminating ability for identifying ﬁrms that just meet or beat earnings expectations.  In fact, the residuals from the investment-based expected accrual model appear to have more discriminating ability for identifying ﬁrms that meet or beat expectations than those from the commonly-employed performance-adjusted modiﬁed Jones model.  This result is particularly striking given that our expected accrual model is based on information known ex ante, whereas the performance-adjusted modiﬁed Jones model is based on information only known in year tþ1.  Our study provides important contributions to the literature.  Understanding the properties of accruals is among the chief goals of ﬁnancial accounting research.  Dechow et al.  (2010), DeFond (2010) and Ball (2013) and others express concern that there is little theory to guide researchers in understanding the economic factors that shape the level of a ﬁrm's accruals.  We draw on real options-based investment theory and document that expected volatility has a pervasive effect on year-ahead accruals.  Further, we show that the investment-based theory applies more strongly for ﬁrms not facing ﬁnancial distress and for ﬁrms with a longer operating cycle.  Accordingly, we provide insight into the ex ante economic characteristics that shape a ﬁrm's level of accruals and therefore provide guidance for forming expectations of accruals.  Our ﬁndings also contribute to the economics and ﬁnance literature studying the factors that shape investment.  This literature has focused on ﬁrms’ capital expenditure decisions and has not considered the predictions for accrual-based investment.  We believe that examining how the investment theories apply to capital expenditures versus accruals, both similarly and differentially, can provide greater insights into the investment policies of ﬁrms.  The paper proceeds as follows.  Section 2 presents the background and hypothesis development.  Section 3 presents variable deﬁnitions and descriptive statistics.  Section 4 presents empirical results, and Section 5 concludes this paper.  2.  Hypotheses development.  Real-world investment decisions tend to share three features, which collectively motivate real option-based investment theory (Dixit, 1992).  First, ﬁrms cannot perfectly forecast the future because the business environment has ongoing uncertainty and information arrives gradually.  Second, investment is costly and difﬁcult to reverse due to frictions such as sunk costs, i. e.  investment tends to be at least partially “irreversible”.  Third, an investment opportunity does not generally disappear if no investment is made immediately, i. e.  ﬁrms generally have the option to postpone investment to the future.  Under the real options-based investment framework, a manager's decision to invest involves a tradeoff between investing immediately or instead postponing investment to the future.  On the one hand, the beneﬁt of immediate investment is that the ﬁrm is able to start enjoying returns from the investment.  On the other hand, the beneﬁt of waiting is that the manager can gain more information about the value of the investment and take advantage of any improvements in business conditions that occur in the meantime.  This beneﬁt of waiting introduces an opportunity cost to investing today.  At the point when the beneﬁts of waiting equal the costs of waiting, investment occurs.  When volatility is higher, the beneﬁt of waiting (commonly referred to in the literature as the “option to wait”) is higher, and ﬁrms become more cautious in their investment behavior because they prefer to “wait and see” what happens in the future. 3 Motivated by this framework, a large theoretical literature predicts a negative relation between investment and volatility (e. g.  Bernanke, 1983.  McDonald and Siegel, 1986.  Ingersoll and Ross, 1992.  Dixit and Pindyck, 1994.  Schwartz and Trigeorgis, 2004.  Grenadier and Malenko, 2010), and the empirical evidence generally supports this prediction (e. g.  Pindyck and Solimano, 1993.  Leahy and Whited, 1996.  Guiso and Parigi, 1999.  Bond and Cummins, 2004.  Eisdorfer, 2008.  Badertscher et al. , 2013). 4 We adopt the investment perspective of accruals in this paper.  Fairﬁeld et al.  (2003) note that accruals are not only a component of proﬁtability but also a component of investment.  Zhang (2007) and Dechow et al.  (2008) support the investment role of accruals and conclude that the accrual anomaly documented by Sloan (1996) is primarily attributable to the role of accruals as a form of investment.  In addition, investment in the form of accruals reﬂects the three features that motivate real options-based investment theory.  First, ﬁrms cannot perfectly forecast the payoff from working capital accruals.  Second, working capital accruals are at least partially irreversible. 5 Third, ﬁrms generally have at least some control over the timing of working capital accruals.  For example, ﬁrms can postpone working capital investment via managing the timing of inventory purchases and/or the extension of credit to customers.  Therefore, to the extent that accruals are shaped by investment decisions, we expect the predictions of real options-based investment theory to apply to working capital accruals.  We note, however, that there are potentially countervailing features of accruals that may weaken the descriptive power of the real options-based investment theory for accruals.  First, accruals can be viewed as a secondary outcome of the earnings process that is aimed at resolving the timing issues associated with the use of cash ﬂows as a performance metric (Dechow, 1994).  This suggests that accruals are shaped by the accounting standards that pertain to each speciﬁc accrual (Healy and Wahlen, 1999).  Second, accruals can also be viewed as the component of proﬁtability that involves relatively greater subjectivity.  Thus, accruals may be subject to unintentional mismeasurement (Richardson et al. , 2005) and/or intentional manipulation (Sloan, 1996.  Xie, 2001.  Dechow et al. , 2010).  In fact, Zang (2012) ﬁnds that ﬁrms engage in income-increasing accrual-based earnings management when they have more accounting ﬂexibility, suggesting that they might also engage in income-increasing earnings management during periods of greater volatility. 6 Third, research on optimal inventory levels indirectly suggests a positive relation between accruals and volatility.  Speciﬁcally, models of optimal inventory suggest that managers have incentives to avoid inventory shortages, or stock-outs, and therefore increase ﬁnished goods inventory levels as demand volatility rises (e. g. , Petruzzi and Dada, 1999.  Cachon and Terwiesch,In short, even if accruals are partially shaped by investment decisions, the simultaneous inﬂuence of diverse forces on accruals may obscure any negative relation between net working capital accruals and volatility as predicted by the real options theory. 8 Despite this caveat, we adopt the investment perspective of accruals and rely on the real options framework to predict a negative relation between accruals and volatility. 9 This leads to our ﬁrst hypothesis.  H1.  The level of working capital accruals is negatively associated with volatility.  Second, we hypothesize that ﬁnancial distress plays a role in shaping the relation between accruals and volatility.  Eisdorfer (2008) models the investment decisions of ﬁnancially distressed ﬁrms using a real options framework and ﬁnds that ﬁnancial distress weakens the negative effect of volatility on investment.  The intuition is that because shareholders of distressed ﬁrms enjoy the beneﬁts if things go well while bondholders bear the costs if things go badly, the asset substitution problem (Galai and Masulis, 1976.  Jensen and Meckling, 1976) leads to an incentive for shareholders to invest when volatility is higher.  This leads to our second hypothesis.  H2.  The negative association between the level of working capital accruals and volatility is less pronounced for ﬁrms facing ﬁnancial distress.  Our third hypothesis predicts an increasing sensitivity of accruals to volatility as the ﬁrm's operating cycle lengthens.  The operating cycle measures the average time between the disbursement of cash to produce a product and the receipt of cash from the sale of the product (Dechow, 1994).  A ﬁrm with a longer operating cycle has greater exposure to changing business conditions.  More speciﬁcally, a longer operating cycle leads to a wider range of possible investment outcomes, which makes the option to wait more valuable.  Thus, we predict volatility to have a stronger dampening effect on working capital accruals in ﬁrms with a longer operating cycle. 10 There are, however, reasonable arguments for why the negative relation between accruals and volatility may be weaker for ﬁrms with a longer operating cycle.  Zang (2012) suggests that greater ﬂexibility leads to income-increasing accrualbased earnings management, and, consistent with this notion, documents a positive relation between the level of abnormal accruals and the length of the ﬁrm's operating cycle.  Given that higher volatility and a longer operating cycle may lead to greater ﬂexibility and more opportunities for income-increasing earnings management, her ﬁndings suggest that the negative relation between accruals and volatility may be weaker for ﬁrms with a longer operating cycle.  Despite this reasonable argument for the null hypothesis, we present our third hypothesis based on our theoretical economic framework as follows.  H3.  The negative association between the level of working capital accruals and volatility is more pronounced for ﬁrms with a longer operating cycle.  Our fourth hypothesis focuses on the differential sensitivities of the asset and liability components of net working capital accruals to volatility.  While we expect liabilities to be negatively associated with volatility because liabilities partially ﬁnance investments and thus naturally positively co-vary with the factors that shape investment, we predict the asset component of net working capital accruals to have a more pronounced negative sensitivity to volatility than the liability component of net working capital accruals.  This is because investment decisions have ﬁrst-order implications for asset accruals but affect liabilities only to the extent that managers use liabilities instead of internally generated cash ﬂows or equity issuances for ﬁnancing investment.  Thus, we expect assets to co-vary with volatility more strongly than liabilities.  This leads to our fourth hypothesis.  H4.  The asset component of net working capital accruals is more sensitive to volatility than the liability component.  Finally, we predict that the investment perspective of accruals and the real options-based investment framework is useful for identifying ﬁrms that manage earnings through accruals.  Speciﬁcally, accruals that are not explained by the investment perspective and real options-based framework are more likely to be associated with earnings management.  Therefore, we predict that unexpected accruals – deﬁned as the residual from our investment-based accrual model – provide information about earnings management.  This leads to our ﬁfth hypothesis.  H5.  Unexpected accruals from the investment-based accrual model are associated with earnings management.  <Middle> Variable deﬁnitions, sample, and descriptive statistics.  3. 1.  Model and variable deﬁnitions.  Our analyses begin with a replication of the model in Eisdorfer (2008) to examine the relation between year-ahead working capital accruals and expected volatility and, for comparison to the prior ﬁnance literature, the relation between year-ahead capital expenditures and expected volatility.  Speciﬁcally, we estimate the following regression model, which follows the model in Eisdorfer (2008).  The dependent variable is the ﬁrm's year-ahead (i. e. , year tþ1) capital expenditures scaled by beginning assets (Capital Expenditures) and the primary variable of interest is the expected industry volatility as of the end of year t (Expected Industry Volatility).  Consistent with prior ﬁnance research (e. g. , Eisdorfer, 2008), Expected Industry Volatility is estimated with a generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (GARCH) model using all daily data available in year t. 11 We note that industry expected volatility is intended to capture the volatility faced by the ﬁrm's industry.  Our regression model also follows Eisdorfer (2008) with respect to control variables that capture the ﬁrm's size, market-to-book ratio, leverage, and cash ﬂows at the end of year t.  In addition, consistent with Eisdorfer (2008), we control for the state of the economy in the year of the investment using three macroeconomic variables measured in year tþ1.  a recessionary period indicator, the default spread, and the interest rate.  These variables have the added beneﬁt of controlling for unexpected macroeconomic changes in year tþ1, which may affect unexpected investment during that year.  As a ﬁrst test of the relation between year-ahead accruals and expected volatility (H1), we substitute year-ahead net working capital accruals into Eq.  (1) in place of capital expenditures as the dependent variable.  The dependent variable, Working Capital Accruals, is year-ahead (i. e. , year tþ1) operating accruals before depreciation for the ﬁrm.  More speciﬁcally, Working Capital Accruals is deﬁned as year-ahead growth in operating working capital (other than tax liabilities) scaled by beginning total assets.  This deﬁnition of accruals is consistent with prior research (Sloan, 1996.  Fairﬁeld et al. , 2003). 12 We also examine the relation between year-ahead net working capital accruals (capital expenditures) and expected ﬁrm volatility (Expected Volatility).  Expected Volatility is calculated similarly to Expected Industry Volatility using daily ﬁrm-speciﬁc stock returns (in lieu of daily industry stock returns) available as of the end of year t. 13 Speciﬁcally, we apply a GARCH (1,1) model to the entire series of daily ﬁrm-speciﬁc stock returns in year t, requiring at least 200 daily return observations. 14 To test for a relation between accruals (capital expenditures) and expected ﬁrm volatility, we use a similar regression model as Eq.  (2) (Eq.  (1)) but with Expected Volatility as the explanatory variable of interest.  For brevity, we only denote the working capital accrual version of this model.  While the Eisdorfer (2008) model provides the foundation for our real options-based investment model, it is particularly important (given our focus) to control for the unexpected component of accruals in year tþ1.  That is, we note that our dependent variable (i. e. , year-ahead accruals) includes an expected component as well as an unexpected component that is likely associated with unexpected demand.  As such, we augment Eqs.  (2) and (3) with a proxy for unexpected demand.  stock returns in year tþ1.  In addition, we incorporate year ﬁxed effects to control for any omitted macroeconomic forces that may inﬂuence unexpected accruals.  These additions lead to the following equation, where Expected Volatility is either expected ﬁrm volatility (Expected Volatility) or expected industry volatility (Expected Industry Volatility).  To test whether the relation between expected volatility and year-ahead accruals is less pronounced for ﬁrms facing ﬁnancial distress (H2), we augment Eq.  (4) with a distress indicator variable (Distress) and an interaction term between Distress and Expected Volatility.  We deﬁne distressed ﬁrms (i. e. , Distress¼1) as those with an Altman's Z-score below 1. 81 in year t.  As an alternative test, we also estimate Eq.  (4) separately for healthy ﬁrms and distressed ﬁrms and test for a difference in the Expected Volatility coefﬁcients.  We take a similar approach to test hypothesis H3 that the relation between expected volatility and year-ahead accruals is more pronounced for ﬁrms with a longer operating cycle.  That is, we augment Eq.  (4) with an operating cycle ranking variable (OpCycle) and an interaction term between OpCycle and Expected Volatility.  We deﬁne OpCycle as the scaled quintile ranking of the ﬁrm's operating cycle length as deﬁned in Dechow (1994). 15 We also estimate Eq.  (4) separately for each operating cycle quintile.  In our tests regarding the ability of the investment-based framework to identify ﬁrms that manage earnings, we compare the ability of the investment-based expected accrual model to the ability of the widely-used performance-adjusted modiﬁed Jones model to identify ﬁrms that meet or beat analyst forecasts.  We calculate ‘expected’ and ‘unexpected’ accruals by decomposing year-ahead Working Capital Accruals into its ﬁtted values and residual values, respectively, from our investment-based accrual model.  Speciﬁcally, we estimate Eq.  (4) augmented with Distress and OpCycle and their interactions with Expected Volatility.  We estimate the model using annual, cross-sectional regressions within two digit SIC codes excluding the year-ahead (i. e. , year tþ1) control variables – Returns, Recession Indicator, Default Spread, and Interest Rate – and the year ﬁxed effects.  For clarity, this results in the following regression equation.  We apply a similar procedure using the performance-adjusted modiﬁed Jones model to partition total net working accruals into ‘normal’ and ‘abnormal’ components using the following equation.  We deﬁne the variables used in model (6) as follows.  1/AT is one divided by year t total assets.  Δsales is the year tþ1 change in sales scaled by year t total assets.  PPE is the ending year tþ1 balance of property, plant and equipment scaled by year t total assets.  and ROA is the year tþ1 operating income after depreciation divided by year t total assets.  Eq.  (6) is a common variant of the modiﬁed Jones (1991) model.  however, we use working capital accruals (i. e. , operating accruals excluding depreciation expense) in lieu of total accruals (including depreciation and longer-term accruals).  The model includes ﬁrm size, growth in sales less growth in accounts receivable, and property, plant and equipment (Dechow et al. , 1995).  The model also controls for ﬁrm performance (Kothari et al. , 2005).  It is important to note that the explanatory variables in the performance-adjusted modiﬁed Jones model (Eq.  (6)) are only observable in year tþ1, whereas the explanatory variables in the investment-based model (Eq.  (5)) are observable in year t.  3. 2.  Sample and descriptive statistics.  Table 1 provides the details of our sample selection.  Our sample begins with all observations on Compustat from 1964 to 2013 with 12 months of trading data, which leads to 172,822 ﬁrm-year observations.  We delete 5,327 observations that are not U. S.  corporations or that have other than ordinary common stock.  We exclude 18,148 ﬁnancial and utility ﬁrms (SIC 49XX.  60XX-69XX).  In addition, we exclude 10,317 (7,567) observations that do not have data to calculate Capital Expenditures, Working Capital Accruals, and lagged total assets (the control variables and ZSCORE).  We delete 1,239 observations with less than ﬁve ﬁrm observations for the industry (two-digit SIC) and year.  Finally, we exclude 3,675 (16,990) observations that do not have data to calculate industry (ﬁrm-speciﬁc) expected volatility.  This leads to our broad sample of 109,559 observations, which we use in all of our analyses except the direct replication of Eisdorfer (2008) in Table 3.  For the replication, we seek consistency with prior investment under uncertainty research (e. g. , Eisdorfer, 2008.  Leahy and Whited, 1996).  As such, we further limit our sample to the population of manufacturing ﬁrms (SIC 20XX-3999).  This restriction excludes 45,195 non-manufacturing observations and results in our sample for Table 3 of 64,364 observations.  The Appendix presents the detailed variable deﬁnitions.  Table 2 presents the descriptive statistics for our measures of year-ahead accruals and year-ahead capital expenditures, our measures of expected volatility, operating cycle, and the control variables.  Panel A reports the descriptive statistics on the variables.  The mean (median) year-ahead working capital accruals is 1. 84 (1. 02) and the mean (median) year-ahead capital expenditures is 7. 69 (5. 08).  These statistics suggest positive investment over the sample period on average.  The mean (median) expected industry volatility is 0. 01 (0. 01) and the mean (median) expected ﬁrm volatility is 0. 04 (0. 03).  With respect to other variables in the model, we ﬁnd a mean (median) cash ﬂow from operations of 0. 09 (0. 12) and a mean (median) market to book of 2. 56 (1. 60).  The descriptive statistics also indicate that the mean (median) operating cycle is 144. 8 (124. 2) days.  Panel B reports the descriptive statistics separately for observations with low expected ﬁrm volatility versus those with high expected ﬁrm volatility, where low/high expected ﬁrm volatility is based on a median split of Expected Volatility.  The panel also reports the mean and median difference for each variable across the sets of observations.  The statistics indicate that ﬁrm-year observations with low expected volatility have higher capital expenditures and working capital accruals.  These differences are consistent with the real options-based investment framework and the effect of expected volatility on investment decisions.  The statistics also suggest that ﬁrm-year observations with low expected volatility are larger, have a lower market to book ratio, are more highly levered, and are more proﬁtable.  Periods in the year following low expected volatility are less likely to be recessionary, have higher default spreads, and have higher interest rates.  Panel C reports the Spearman Rank (Pearson) correlation coefﬁcients above (below) the diagonal between the variables.  We ﬁnd that expected ﬁrm volatility and expected industry volatility are positively correlated (0. 28 Spearman.  0. 27 Pearson), indicating that industry-level and ﬁrm-level expected volatility are related.  In addition, both year-ahead working capital accruals and capital expenditures display negative correlations with expected ﬁrm volatility and expected industry volatility.  We also ﬁnd that each of the components of year-ahead working capital accruals display negative correlations with expected ﬁrm and industry volatility.  Consistent with our hypotheses, these univariate ﬁndings provide initial support for a negative association between year-ahead working capital accruals and expected volatility.  4.  Empirical results.  4. 1.  Test of hypothesis H1.  We begin our examination of hypothesis H1 with a replication from the model in Eisdorfer (2008).  Speciﬁcally, Table 3 presents the results of multivariate regressions using Eqs.  (1,2), and (3).  The ﬁrst set of analyses report the results for expected industry volatility, while the second set reports the results for expected ﬁrm volatility.  We restrict the sample for the analyses in Table 3 to the subset of manufacturing ﬁrms for comparison with prior investment under uncertainty research (e. g.  Leahy and Whited, 1996.  Bond and Cummins, 2004.  Eisdorfer, 2008).  Consistent with Eisdorfer (2008), we ﬁnd a negative association between year-ahead capital expenditures and expected volatility, as indicated by the negative coefﬁcient of  35. 11 on Expected Industry Volatility and the negative coefﬁcient on Expected Volatility of  11. 02, both of which are signiﬁcant at the one percent level.  The results are consistent with prior research and provide strong evidence of the negative relations between year-ahead capital expenditures and expected industry and expected ﬁrm volatility.  Having replicated the prior ﬁndings on the relation between capital expenditures and expected volatility, we turn to examining the relation between year-ahead working capital accruals and expected volatility.  Consistent with H1 and the investment perspective of accruals, we ﬁnd a negative coefﬁcient of  35. 71 on Expected Industry Volatility when Working Capital Accruals is the dependent variable.  The coefﬁcient is signiﬁcant at the one percent level.  In the second set of columns, we ﬁnd a negative coefﬁcient of  34. 39 on Expected Volatility, which is signiﬁcant at the one percent level.  The results are consistent with H1 and provide strong evidence that there is a negative relation between year-ahead working capital accruals and expected volatility, as predicted by the real options-based investment theory.  Consistent with Eisdorfer (2008), we also ﬁnd signiﬁcant positive coefﬁcients on Market-to-Book Equity and Cash Flow from Operations across all speciﬁcations.  This suggests that ﬁrms invest more in year-ahead working capital accruals when they have higher current cash ﬂows and higher current expected growth.  We also ﬁnd signiﬁcant negative coefﬁcients on Log(MV Assets) and Leverage, indicating that smaller and less levered companies invest more in year-ahead working capital accruals.  Turning to the year-ahead variables, we ﬁnd that the coefﬁcients on Recession Indicator and Default Spread are negative and signiﬁcant and the coefﬁcient on Interest Rate is positive and signiﬁcant, suggesting lower investment in working capital during recessionary periods and periods with a higher default spread and higher investment during periods of higher interest rates.  These ﬁndings are consistent with the ﬁndings in prior research on year-ahead investment and expected volatility (e. g. , Eisdorfer, 2008).  While the Eisdorfer (2008) model provides the foundation for our real options-based investment model, it is particularly important (given our focus) to control for the unexpected portion of accruals in tþ1.  As such, in Table 4 we estimate Eq.  (4), which more directly controls for unexpected demand and any omitted macroeconomic forces.  Speciﬁcally, we include year-ahead stock returns (Returns) to control for unexpected demand and year ﬁxed effects to capture any omitted macroeconomic factors.  In addition to expanding the breadth of our model, we also transition from the manufacturing ﬁrm sample in Table 3 to a broader sample of all non-ﬁnancial and non-utility ﬁrms.  In Table 3, we use the manufacturing ﬁrm sample to ensure consistency with prior research, whereas for Table 4 (and throughout the rest of the paper) we use the broader sample for generalizability and robustness purposes.  Finally, we highlight that in the model of Eisdorfer (2008), the ﬁrm chooses investment based on the level of expected volatility.  This static model yields the cross-sectional prediction that ﬁrms with higher volatility tend to invest less, and the time-series prediction that an increase in volatility will tend to decrease investment.  To provide insight into whether year-ahead working capital accruals is associated with expected volatility not only in a cross-sectional setting but also for within a ﬁrm over time, we separately tabulate a speciﬁcation that also includes ﬁrm ﬁxed effects.  The ﬁrst (second) two columns of Table 4 present the results for the relation between year-ahead working capital accruals and expected industry volatility (expected ﬁrm volatility).  Within each section, we ﬁrst report the results of Eq.  (4) and then report the results with the inclusion of ﬁrm ﬁxed effects.  We note that the coefﬁcient on Returns is positive and signiﬁcant at the one percent level in all speciﬁcations.  This is consistent with year-ahead accruals being affected by unexpected demand.  With respect to industry-level expected volatility, we ﬁnd a negative coefﬁcient of  68. 82 on Expected Industry Volatility in the Eq.  (4) speciﬁcation, which is signiﬁcant at the one percent level.  We also ﬁnd a negative coefﬁcient of  62. 55 on Expected Industry Volatility in the regression with ﬁrm ﬁxed effects, which is signiﬁcant at the one percent level.  Similarly, with respect to ﬁrm-level expected volatility, we ﬁnd a negative coefﬁcient of  26. 42 on Expected Volatility in the Eq.  (4) speciﬁcation, and a negative coefﬁcient of  25. 42 on Expected Volatility in the regression with ﬁrm ﬁxed effects, both of which are signiﬁcant at the one percent level.  These results suggest that year-ahead working capital accruals are negatively associated with both expected industry and expected ﬁrm volatility across ﬁrms at a point in time.  Importantly, the results also suggest that a ﬁrm's year-ahead working capital accruals are negatively associated with both expected industry and expected ﬁrm volatility across time.  Given our consistent results for industry and ﬁrm expected volatility, we focus the remainder of our tests on expected ﬁrm volatility because it encompasses the ﬁrm's total exposure to volatility, including that related to the ﬁrm and industry.  4. 2.  Test of hypothesis H2.  Our second hypothesis predicts that the negative relation between working capital accruals and volatility is less pronounced for ﬁrms in ﬁnancial distress.  The analyses to test this prediction are presented in Table 5.  First, we estimate Eq.  (4) with the inclusion of a Distress indicator variable and an interaction term between Distress and Expected Volatility (our variable of interest to test hypothesis H2).  These results (column 1) show that the coefﬁcient on the interaction term is 19. 90 which is positive and statistically signiﬁcant, consistent with hypothesis H2.  Next, we partition the sample into healthy and distressed ﬁrms and estimate Eq.  (4) for each subgroup.  The coefﬁcient on Expected Volatility for healthy ﬁrms (column 2) is  30. 27, whereas the coefﬁcient for ﬁrms facing distress (column 3) is  13. 09.  Further, the difference in these coefﬁcients (column 4) is signiﬁcant with a p-Value of 0. 00.  Collectively, these results provide support for hypothesis H2.  4. 3.  Test of hypothesis H3.  Our third hypothesis predicts that the sensitivity of working capital accruals to expected volatility is increasing in the length of the ﬁrm's operating cycle.  To test this prediction, Column (1) of Table 6 presents the results of multivariate regressions using Eq.  (4) with the inclusion of the scaled quintile ranking of the ﬁrm's operating cycle (OpCycle) and its interaction with Expected Volatility.  We ﬁnd a signiﬁcant negative coefﬁcient of  24. 87 on Expected Volatility, suggesting a negative relation between year-ahead working capital accruals and expected ﬁrm volatility.  In addition, consistent with H3, we ﬁnd a signiﬁcant negative relation between Working Capital Accruals and Expected Volatility  OpCycle.  The coefﬁcient on the interaction variable is  60. 55 which is signiﬁcant at the one percent level.  This ﬁnding suggests a signiﬁcantly more pronounced negative association between year-ahead working capital accruals and expected volatility as the operating cycle increases.  To provide greater insight into the interactive effect of operating cycle on the relation between year-ahead working capital accruals and expected volatility, Column (2) of Table 6 reports the regression of Working Capital Accruals on Expected Volatility and the control variables (i. e. , Eq.  (4)) by operating cycle quintile.  Within each set of results, the ﬁrst column reports the coefﬁcient on Expected Volatility, the second column reports the t-statistic for the coefﬁcient, and the third column reports the adjusted R-squared for the regression.  We exclude the coefﬁcients on the other variables in the regression for brevity.  We ﬁnd that the coefﬁcient on expected ﬁrm volatility is more pronounced as the operating cycle lengthens.  Speciﬁcally, the coefﬁcient on Expected Volatility decreases from 3. 00, which is statistically insigniﬁcant for the lowest operating cycle quintile, to  50. 43, which is signiﬁcant at the one percent level for the highest operating cycle quintile.  These results provide strong support for our third hypothesis that the negative association between year-ahead working capital accruals and expected volatility strengthens as the operating cycle lengthens.  4. 4.  Test of hypothesis H4.  Our fourth hypothesis focuses on the differential sensitivities of the asset and liability components of year-ahead net working capital accruals to expected volatility.  We predict that the asset component of net working capital accruals has a more pronounced negative sensitivity to expected volatility than the liability component of net working capital accruals.  In Table 7, we present results of regression analyses in which we examine the components of Working Capital Accruals as the dependent variables.  Panel A of Table 7 presents the regression results when working capital accruals are disaggregated into its asset component and its liability component.  Panel B further disaggregates working capital accruals into growth in accounts receivables (Accounts Receivable Accruals), growth in inventory (Inventory Accruals), growth in other current assets (Other Current Asset Accruals), growth in accounts payable (Accounts Payable Accruals), and growth in other current liabilities (Other Current Liability Accruals).  The results in panel A show a signiﬁcant negative coefﬁcient of  35. 92 on Expected Volatility for explaining the asset component of working capital accruals and a signiﬁcant negative coefﬁcient of  9. 22 on Expected Volatility for explaining the liability component of working capital accruals.  The negative association between year-ahead asset accruals and expected volatility is consistent with the real options perspective of investment.  The negative association between yearahead liability accruals and expected volatility is consistent with liabilities partially ﬁnancing investments and therefore naturally ﬂuctuating with investment.  However, we ﬁnd that the sensitivity of liability accruals to expected volatility is less pronounced than the sensitivity of asset accruals to expected volatility.  More speciﬁcally, the coefﬁcient on Expected Volatility for explaining liability accruals is approximately one-fourth of the magnitude of the coefﬁcient on Expected Volatility for explaining asset accruals.  An F-test on the difference between the coefﬁcients on Expected Volatility for assets and for liabilities is signiﬁcant at less than the one percent level.  This is consistent with the view that investment theories have ﬁrst-order implications for asset accruals and second-order implications for liabilities.  This is expected given that investments are funded through a mix of liabilities, equity issuance, and internally generated cash ﬂows.  Overall, our tests indicate that asset accruals are more sensitive to expected volatility than liability accruals, which leads to a negative relation between year-ahead net working capital accruals and expected volatility.  In panel B of Table 7, we ﬁnd a signiﬁcant negative relation between the accounts receivable, inventory, and other current asset components and the accounts payable and other current liability components of year-ahead working capital accruals and expected volatility.  Consistent with the investment perspective of accruals, we ﬁnd that the negative relation between year-ahead accruals and Expected Volatility is strongest for the two main asset accrual components of working capital, i. e.  Accounts Receivable Accruals and Inventory Accruals.  This is consistent with the notion that these asset accruals more closely reﬂect investment decisions and are therefore more sensitive to the economic factors that shape investment.  We note that the negative relation between inventory investment and expected volatility is consistent with the real options-based investment framework, but inconsistent with the research on optimal inventory levels which suggests a positive relation between inventory levels and volatility.  Speciﬁcally, models of optimal inventory order quantity suggest that managers have incentives to avoid inventory shortages and therefore increase inventory levels as demand volatility rises (e. g. , Petruzzi and Dada, 1999.  Cachon and Terwiesch, 2013).  To provide greater insight into the relation between inventory investment and expected volatility, in untabulated analyses, we examine the relation between the components of inventory and expected volatility.  We ﬁnd a statistically signiﬁcant negative relation between both year-ahead raw materials and year-ahead work-in-process inventory and expected volatility.  In contrast, we ﬁnd a statistically signiﬁcant positive relation between year-ahead ﬁnished goods inventory and expected volatility. 16 This is consistent with theories of optimal inventory order quantity which suggest that when volatility rises, ﬁrms increase their ﬁnished goods inventory to avoid customers experiencing shortages of their end product.  In contrast, our results for raw materials inventory and work-inprocess inventory are more consistent with the predictions of the real options-based investment theory. 