
Explaining the main determinants and improving the forecast accuracy of crude oil market volatility are crucial to market investors and
government decision makers.  However, forecasting oil volatility is an
intractable task, as the crude oil market is quite complex and has various
uncertain determinants, such as global oil supply and demand, OPEC
spare capacity levels, ﬁnancial crises, and national elections.  Some studies have claimed that oil price change relies heavily on oil demand and
supply, especially global demand (i. e. , Dées Name, 2007.  Kilian, 2009.  Mu
and Ye, 2011).  However, other studies have argued that a speculative
component plays a key role (Zhang, 2013.  Hamilton and Wu, 2014. 
Kilian and Murphy, 2014.  Juvenal and Petrella, 2015.  Gogolin and
Kearney, 2016). 
Liu Name (2016) disentangle the contributions of oil demand, supply,
and speculation in real oil prices, whereas Yin and Zhou (2016) identify
the role of speculation and economic fundamentals in driving oil price
volatility.  However, as in the seminal work of Baker Name (2013) on
measuring economic policy uncertainty (EPU), it is worth mentioning
that many studies have examined the effect of EPU on the stock market
and have considered EPU indices in forecasting stock market returns
(Pastor and Veronesi, 2012.  Antonakakis Name, 2013.  Kang and Ratti,
2013.  Tsai, 2017).  The literature about EPU's impact on the oil market
is growing in recent years (e. g. , Aloui Name, 2016.  Balcilar Name, 2016. 
Yin, 2016).  For example, Aloui Name (2016) hold that the movements
in uncertainty index can identify the supply-side, aggregate-demand,
and oil-speciﬁc demand shocks, that directly drive the oil price.  Thus,
an increase (decrease) in the uncertainty index probably negatively
(positively) affects the economy, which in turn reduces (increases)
the demand and supply of crude oil and then cause oil price volatility. 
Balcilar Name (2016) also emphasize that EPU can drive the oil price ﬂuctuations.  We conjecture that a high EPU can cause serious divergence in
the expectations of oil consumers, producers, and speculators simultaneously and thus affect the demand, supply, or speculation stock for
crude oil.  Therefore, EPU may comprehensively involves various information such as oil shocks, ﬁnancial crisis, and political events that greatly impact the oil market and cause oil price volatility.  However, it is not
clear whether EPU is the most informative factor in forecasting oil volatility, and which determinant is the most powerful remains to be
addressed. 
This study is speciﬁcally related to the literature on the determinants
of oil market return or volatility (e. g. , Dées Name, 2007.  Kilian, 2009.  Mu
and Ye, 2011.  Conrad Name, 2014.  Hamilton and Wu, 2014.  Kilian and
Murphy, 2014.  Gogolin and Kearney, 2016) and the predictability of
EPU indices in asset return or volatility (e. g. , Pastor and Veronesi,
2012.  Antonakakis Name, 2013.  Kang and Ratti, 2013.  Tsai, 2017).  We
address two questions.  First, is EPU helpful for forecasting crude oil
market volatility.  Second, which determinant is most informative and
helpful in forecasting spot oil volatility—oil demand, supply, speculation, or the novel EPU index.  To answer these questions, we consider
two newly released global EPU (GEPU) indices and six countryspeciﬁc EPU indices from major oil consumers and producers worldwide.  This allows us to investigate whether these new indices help in
forecasting oil volatility and to compare their predictabilities with
those of traditional determinants. 
Regarding the models for forecasting asset volatility, GARCH
and its extensions have been popularly used in empirical analyses
(e. g. , Bollerslev, 1987.  Glosten Name, 1993.  Cheong, 2009. 
Mohammadi and Su, 2010.  Nomikos and Andriosopoulos, 2012. 
Charles and Darné, 2014.  Eﬁmova and Serletis, 2014).  However, most
of these models are strictly limited to imputing data at the same frequency.  Ghysels Name (2004) introduce mixed data sampling (MIDAS)
regression models, which successfully address the data frequency problem.  To overcome the defect of GARCH-class models, Engle Name (2013)
incorporate the MIDAS technique with the GARCH model, forming the
GARCH-MIDAS model, which allows macroeconomic determinants to
be incorporated at different sampling frequencies.  Conrad Name (2014)
use the GARCH-MIDAS model to investigate the oil volatility with respect to the stance of the U. S.  macroeconomy but they focus on insample evidence.  Combination methods have also been argued to
achieve stable forecast ability (Stock and Watson, 2004).  They can be
categorized as constant combined models and time-varying combination methods.  Speciﬁcally, Raftery Name (2012) develop the dynamic
model averaging (DMA) technique, which Liu Name (2017) successfully
apply as a time-varying combination method to forecast volatilities of
the West Texas Intermediate (WTI) oil futures, accounting for both parameter and model uncertainty.  We construct 11 individual GARCHMIDAS models and three DMA model combinations with various
determinants. 
Although both Conrad Name (2014) and our study involve the determinants of oil price volatility.  However, our innovation is quite different
from theirs in several ways.  First, based on the controversy in crude oil
market, we aim to address the question which determinant is most informative and helpful in forecasting spot oil volatility, i. e. , oil demand,
supply, speculation, or the novel EPU indices.  Whereas, the main contribution of Conrad Name (2014) provide the ﬁrst evidence on the link between U. S.  economic activity and the daily oil-stock correlation.  They
examine whether the long-term oil and stock market volatility, as well
as oil-stock correlation respond to the same macroeconomic information, especially, the oil-stock correlation.  Second, due to the different
aims, Conrad Name (2014) consider the determinants that contain information on current and future U. S.  economic activity.  Unlike those determinants, we are the ﬁrst to integrate both the global economic policy
uncertainty (GEPU) indices and several national economic policy uncertainty (EPU) indices with traditional determinants, such as global oil demand, supply, and speculation.  Third, unlike Conrad Name (2014), this
study mainly concerns the models' out-of-sample performance. 
We make two contributions.  First, we are the ﬁrst to consider various
EPU indices, especially the GEPU indices and the country-speciﬁc EPU
indices from major oil consumers and exporters, and the traditional determinants in forecasting crude oil market volatility.  Aloui Name (2016)
suggest that EPU indices can identify three types of shock on oil prices
(i. e. , supply-side, aggregate, and oil-speciﬁc demand).  Furthermore,
we argue that EPU not only inﬂuences oil demand-supply fundamentals, but also changes market participants' sentiments, giving rise to
speculation activities, and thus may contain more information and
achieve better oil volatility forecasting accuracy than commonly used
determinants.  Our empirical study provides an overview of the EPU indices and traditional determinants in forecasting oil volatility. 
Second, we model daily oil volatility using a GARCH-MIDAS model
with different monthly determinants.  To provide the time-varying effects of the determinants, we also apply DMA combination methods,
allowing both a set of determinants and their coefﬁcients to change
over time. 