
A long strand of literature suggests the great importance of
commodities' predictive power to stock market, in which few, if any,
other commodities have received more attention for their perceived
economic signiﬁcance than oil.  Theoretically and empirically, the critical
role of oil market for understanding macroeconomic ﬂuctuations has
been well documented (see, for example, Hamilton, 1983, 2005. 
Backus and Crucini, 2000.  Kilian and Park, 2009.  Bodenstein etal. ,
2011.  Alquist etal. , forthcoming).  Among various oil market variables,
oil shock is a noteworthy one as there are voluminous studies, for
instance, on the short and long-runco-movements and causation relationships between oil shocks and stock volatility (see, e. g. ,Arouri etal. ,
2011, 2012.  Creti etal. , 2013.  Conrad etal. , 2014.  Du and He, 2015. 
Kang etal. , 2015.  Ewing and Malik, 2016).  It is, therefore, of interest to
deeply investigate the effect of oil market volatility on stock markets. 
However, not much has been done on the subject of predictive ability of oil to stock volatility from an out-of-sample perspective.  Existing
researches are largely, almost all, based merely on in-sample empirical
work.  Admittedly, it is more of reason to employ an out-ofsampleapproach
in the sense of prediction although in-sample results
appear for reference and comparison (see, e. g. ,Campbell and
Thompson, 2005.  Rapach etal. , 2010).  Therefore, in this paper, we investigatewhether
the oil volatility risk is useful in explaining the future volatility
of international stock market returns.  In particular, our
forecasting exercise using a recursive out-of-sample test, confirms that
oil volatility risk does exhibit statistically and economically significant
and robust in-sample and out-of-sample forecasting power, clearly exceeding
some of well-known macroeconomic variables.  Investigating
such volatility patterns in this way is critical to many fundamental issues
in asset pricing, investment, corporate finance, and risk management
(Bali etal. , 2005). 
In this paper, oil volatility risk is captured with variance risk premium
(oil VRP) of West Texas Intermediate crude oil (WTI).  The variance risk
premium measures the price of a hedge against variance ﬂuctuations,
and it is equal to the difference between the expected variance, under
the physical and the risk-neutral measures, which are thought to capture
a market-wide measure of uncertainty (Bali and Zhou, 2016).  We choose
this proxy since it well measures the volatility risk generated within oil
market and its time-varying characteristic better covers information of
the market over time. 