 1.  Introduction Human societies have always been dependent on material and energy use.  In recent time, however, the increasing level of per-capita consumption and the pressure generated by a rising world population have increased the worldwide energy and material demand.  Based on data provided by Arto et al.  (2012)and by the International Energy Agency (IEA, 2015), the quantity of material extracted increased by around 43% (between 1995 and 2007) and the world energy consumption by almost 100%, rising from 4666 Mtoe in 1973 to 9302 Mtoe in 2013.  Fossil fuels have been the main source of energy supply, accounting today for around 82% of the total energy use (World Bank, 2016).  The consequent impact on resource availability, pollution and unequal distribution of wealth are some of the main elements raising concerns related to possible instabilities and crisis.  Over the last few decades, different models have been proposed to investigate the mutual relationships existing between the humans and the natural environment and the concept of social metabolism has been proposed to investigate the process of energy and material transformation taking place on societies (Martinez-Alier, 1987.  Fischer-Kowalski, 1998).  Based on the idea that the human environment is strictly dependent on the natural environment, the social metabolism analyses the energy and the material use as fundamental elements for the maintenance and development of societies.  The main objective is to investigate how variation in energy, material and human time allocation can generate impact on both social and environmental elements.  The Multi-Scale Integrated Analysis of Societal and Ecosystem Metabolism (MuSIASEM) is an accounting framework speciﬁcally design to investigate the size, the allocation and the human and natural dependencies of societies (Giampietro and Mayumi, 1977, 2000).  By using the MuSIASEM approach, this paper compares the metabolic proﬁle of 28 world countries in 1995 and 2007.  The main objective is to provide an overview of the variations that have taken place and to investigate the main elements responsible for changes.  The paper is structured as follow.  Section 2 introduces the methodology.  Section 3 presents the study area and the data sources.  In Section 4 the main results are reported and interpreted.  Section 5 includes discussion, future development and limitations.  Section 6 concludes.  2.  Social Metabolism and MuSIASEM Methodology.  The Multi-Scale Integrated Analysis of Societal and Ecosystem Metabolism (MuSIASEM) has been proposed by Giampietro and Mayumi (1977, 2000) based on the integration of various concepts related to complex system theory (Prigogine, 1961, 1978.  Maturana and Valera, 1980.  Odum, 1971, 1983, 1996.  Ulanowicz, 1986, 1995.  Rosen, 1958, 2000.  Zipf, 1941.  Morowitz, 1979.  Kauffman, 1993.  Ahl and Allen, 1996.  Koestler, 1969) post-normal science (Funtowicz and Ravetz, 1994) and bioeconomics (Georgescu-Roegen, 1971, 1977) (for exhaustive descriptions please see Mayumi, 1999, Ramos-Martin et al. , 2007 and Giampietro et al. , 2009).  The main idea is to consider societies as metabolic structures that use ﬂows and funds to sustain and expand.  According to the deﬁnition reported by Velasco-Fernandez et al.  (2015), ﬂows are elements that enter into the system, as energy or material and that are transformed by the socio-economic processes.  Funds are elements that are sustained by the ﬂows and that preserve their identity, as for example capital or human time.  The way in which ﬂows and funds are combined characterise the metabolic proﬁle of societies.  The analysis of the relationships existing between energy, materials and socio-economic variables, as human time, demography and economic elements, provides information about the way in which societies evolve and self-organise.  During the last decade, the MuSIASEM approach has proven to be particularly useful to analyse how technological development and acceleration of energy and material use, generates changes in the metabolic structure of societies.  The increasing use of exosomatic energy, deﬁned as the non-human body energy source, has been related to changes in demographic structure, economic activities, human time allocation, social stability and environmental impacts (Mayumi, 1991.  Falconi-Benitez, 2001.  Ramos-Martin, 2001.  Ramos-Martin and Giampietro, 2005.  Eisenmenger et al. , 2007.  Ramos-Martin et al. , 2009.  Serrano-Tovar and Giampietro, 2014.  Velasco-Fernandez et al. , 2015.  Ginard-Bosch and Ramos-Martin, 2016).  According to this approach, the accounting framework proposed by MuSIASEM is speciﬁcally designed to study biophysical and socioeconomic elements in an integrated way (Giampietro and Bukkens, 2015).  The analysis of the interrelationships existing between them is useful to identify constraints that can affect the evolution of the system as well as impacts that can be generated both on the human and on the natural environment.  Since the MuSIASEM approach recognises the idea that societies are complex systems operating at different levels, the proposed accounting framework includes different scales of analysis.  The objective is to investigate societies as a whole or disaggregated between activities.  The main levels of analysis can be summarised as.  ▪ Level N consider the entire society.  ▪ Level N-1 disaggregates society between consumption and production activities, respectively deﬁned as household and paid sectors.  The paid sector includes all the activities that are responsible for value added generation.  The household sector includes the activities related to value added consumption.  ▪ Level N-2 split the paid activities into different subsectors.  The economic sectors considered in this paper are reported Table 1.  For every one of the three levels, the energy and the human time constraints are investigated.  The mutual relationships existing between them are also taken into account by considering that changes in one level generates impacts in the other levels.  Different variables and indicators have been proposed by the MuSIASEM approach.  An overview is reported in Tables 2 and 3.  These variables and indicators have been speciﬁcally designed to have a multi-level and multi-dimensional structure.  The main objective is to analyse both the characteristics of the different compartments of society as well as to take into account the mutual relationships existing between them.  This multi-level descriptions, together with the inclusion of quantitative information related to biophysical and socio-economic elements provide an useful tool to investigate the complex relationships and constraints existing between the human and the natural environment.  The MuSIASEM approach has proven to be an effective tool to analyse the characteristics of societies based on population, socioeconomic constraints (Velasco-Fernandez et al. , 2015.  Giampietro and Bukkens, 2015).  By using the accounting framework described above, the present paper analyses the energy metabolism of 28 world countries in 1995 and 2007.  The results provide an overview of the development path of countries and can be used to support policy in the design of sustainable environmental strategies.  <Middle> Study Area and Data.  The study area considered in this paper includes the 28 world countries reported in Table 4.  Fourteen of the countries have been classiﬁed as western European countries, six countries as eastern European countries and the remaining eighth as extra European areas.  This selection of countries has been mainly driven by consistency in data availability.  Since the main objective was to provide an overview of the exosomatic energy metabolism of different countries, only the areas with consistent information across all the variables have been considered in this paper.  For this reason, all the countries requiring alternative data sources have been excluded.  Based on this data consistency approach, the World Input-Output Database (WIOD) has been used as the main data source for calculation.  This database includes a set of socio-economic and environmental information for 40 world countries plus the Rest of the World (for a description of the database see Dietzenbacher et al. , 2013).  The socio-economic accounts included in WIOD provide consistent information on the number of hours worked by persons engaged (employees, self-employed and family-workers), exosomatic energy and labour productivity for all the 28 countries considered in this paper.  The socio-economic information provided by WIOD are also disaggregated according to the economic sectors reported in Table 1.  OECD data have been used for population and GDP (US$ constant prices, constant PPP reference year 2005).  The World Input Output Database is suitable to be used to investigate a large set of topics related to economy, society and environment.  In the past, it has for example been used to analyse the relationships between economic activities and environmental impacts (Arto et al. , 2012, 2014, 2016), to investigate the main drivers on energy use (Andreoni and Galmarini, 2016) and to analyse topics related to global value chain, globalisation and competitiveness (Timmer et al. , 2013.  Timmer et al. , 2014.  Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare, 2014.  Los et al. , 2015).  As far as I know, the present paper is the ﬁrst attempt to use the WIOD database to analyse the metabolic proﬁle of societies.  4.  Results.  4. 1.  Level N – Country Level.  The results presented in this section summarise the main variables and indicators reported in Level N of Tables 1 and 2.  Based on country level information, they provide an overview of the metabolic performance of the 28 countries considered in this paper.  Disaggregated data for countries, variables and indicators are reported in Tables A. 1– A. 9 of the appendix.  According to data reported in Fig.  1 and in Table A. 1 of the appendix, the total energy throughput (TET) increased for all the countries considered in this paper, ad exception of Great Britain and Sweden (−3. 0% and −1. 1%, respectively).  In Great Britain, the reduction of the total energy consumption that has taken place in the paid sector (ETPW) (− 680,959 TJ) has driven the reduction of the total energy throughput, while the energy consumed in the household sector (ETHH) increased (+236,597 TJ) (Tables A. 3 and A. 4 of the appendix).  According to data reported in Table A. 6 of the appendix, the energy throughput reduced in the manufacturing (−15. 1%), in the construction (−15. 1%), in the wholesale (−14. 1%), in the public administration (−43. 2%) and in the education (−16. 2%) sectors.  However, the largest absolute variations have taken place in the manufacturing (−1. 004,989 TJ) and in the public administration sectors (−74,272 TJ).  The reduction of activity of the heavy industry sub-sectors (iron and steel, non-ferrous metal, mineral products and chemicals) and the improvements on the heating system and insulation, that have taken place in public administration sectors, have been the main elements inﬂuencing the reduction of the total energy throughput (TET) (Department of Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, 2016).  In a similar way, the large investments devoted to reduce the energy consumption of buildings and the Swedish Energy Agency programme oriented to increase consumer's responsibility have been the main factors responsible for the reduction of the total energy throughput (TET) of Sweden (IEA, 2013.  Vassileva, 2012).  In this country, the household sector has been the main driver of the reduction in the energy throughput (ETHH reduced by 9% between 1995 and 2007), while the energy used in the paid sector (ETPW) remained almost unchanged (+0. 1%) (Tables A. 3 and A. 4 of the appendix).  Between the years 1995 and 2007, the gross domestic product (GDP) increased for all the countries considered in this paper.  The largest percentage variations have taken place in Ireland (+129. 5%), Korea (+77. 3%), Russia (+71. 1%), Turkey (+71. 1%) and in the eastern European countries that during the period considered joined the EU (Estonia +131. 2%, Slovakia 79. 8%, Poland +71. 9%, Slovenia 67. 3%).  The percentage increase of GDP has been higher than the percentage variation of TET.  This trend is also summarised by the quantity of energy used per unit of GDP (TET/GDP), that reduced for all the countries included in this paper.  According to data reported in Fig.  2 and in Table A. 2 of the appendix, Russia (−38. 3%), Great Britain (−34. 4%), Sweden (−32. 4%) and the eastern European countries, that joined the EU during the period considered, performed the largest energy efﬁciency increases (Estonia −50. 2%, Slovakia, −39. 3%, Poland −39. 2%, Slovenia −33. 2%, Czech Republic −30. 2% and Hungary −28. 5%).  The technological transfer and the EU regulations, together with the externalisation of some of the most energy intensive activities and the increasing contribution of the ﬁnancial sector have been some of the main factors contributing to reduce the quantity of energy use per unit of GDP (Andreoni and Galmarini, 2016.  Fiorito, 2013).  Denmark has been the only country with an energy intensity reduction lower than 1% (−0. 7%).  As reported by Andreoni and Galmarini (2012) the fuel switching that has taken place in the maritime transport sector, has been the main factor inﬂuencing the low energy efﬁciency improvement.  According to data reported in Fig.  3 and in Table A. 1 of the appendix, the percentage variation of the total human time (THA), that can be considered as a proxy of the population size, has been generally lower than the percentage variation of the total energy throughput (TET).  These data provide evidence that the total energy consumption increase has not been driven by a population growth but it has been generated by an overall per capita energy consumption increase.  The only exceptions are Netherlands, where the total human time increased more than the energy throughput (+6% and +4. 3%, respectively), Great Britain and Sweden, that as reported above, reduced the total energy consumption during the period considered in this paper.  To better investigate this evidence, the following section analyses the variation in the energy consumption for the household and for the paid sectors.  4. 2.  Level N-1 – Household and Paid Sector Level.  The analysis of the metabolic performance at national level can be complemented by analysis at a lower scale.  The Level N-1 disaggregates the human activities between household (HH) and paid sectors (PW).  When analysing the performance of the household sector, particular attention needs to be devoted to the demographic structure of society.  According to data reported in Table A. 1 of the appendix, most of the countries considered in this paper, ad exception of Russia and some of the eastern European countries that joined the EU during the time period considered in this paper (Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary and Poland) had a population increase (THA).  However, since the percentage variation of the time spent in the paid sectors (HAPW) has, in most of the cases, been higher than the percentage variation of the population (THA), the fraction HAPW/THA has increased (Table A. 4 of the appendix).  This means that the dependency ratio of the non-working and unemployed population decreased.  The only countries that increased the dependency ratio have been Czech Republic, Germany, Japan, Korea, Poland, Slovakia and Turkey.  On these countries, the percentage variation of HAPW has been lower than the population increase.  Aging population and outﬂow migration of working age citizens have been the main factors affecting this trend.  Japan and Germany ranked as two of the top three world aging population countries and Czech Republic and Slovakia experienced large population outﬂow particular towards western European countries (OECD website).  In terms of energy throughput, twenty-one countries increased the quantity of energy used in the household sector (ETHH) and nineteen of them increased the energy used per unit of time (EMRHH) (Fig.  4 and Table A. 4 of the appendix).  According to Cleveland et al.  (1984), Hall et al.  (1986), Pastore et al.  (2000), Giampietro et al.  (2011) and Velasco-Fernandez et al.  (2015) a higher energy throughput per hour of human activity in the household sector can be considered as a proxy of the material standard of living.  Larger energy throughput can be associated with more energy services and home appliances that usually increase the overall comfort of non-working time.  For the countries that performed a negative variation of EMRHH (Austria, Belgium, Germany, Finland, Netherlands, Poland, Russia, Slovenia and Sweden), the percentage change of the time spent in the household sector has been higher than the percentage variation of the energy throughput and for seven of the countries (Belgium, Germany, Netherlands, Poland, Russia, Slovenia and Sweden) the energy consumed in the household sector decreased.  Based on data reported in Table A. 3 of the appendix, all the countries considered in this paper, with exception of Great Britain, increased the energy throughput of the paid sector (ETPW).  The largest variations have taken place in Ireland (56. 4%), Korea (+54. 3%), Turkey (+53. 3), and Greece (51. 4%).  Ireland, Korea and Greece, together with Spain, also experienced some of the highest percentage variations of the energy throughput of the household sector (ETHH) (+58. 9%, +62. 3%, +52. 5% and +64. 8%, Industrial development, mechanisation, increasing demand for electrical appliances and transports have been, according to EEA (2015), the main factors responsible for the energy consumption increase.  In terms of exosomatic metabolic rate of the paid sector (EMRPW), nineteen countries increased the amount of energy consumed per hour of labour (with exception of Australia, Canada, Spain, France, Great Britain, Mexico, Netherlands, Sweden, USA) (Fig.  5).  The largest percentage variations have taken place in Turkey (+65. 2%) and Korea (+47. 7%).  Based on data reported in Table A. 5 the appendix, Turkey is the only country that increased the exosomatic metabolic rate in all the twelve economic sectors reported in Table 1.  For all of them, the percentage variation of the energy used (ETPW) has been higher than the percentage variation of the human time (HAPW) (Tables A. 6 and A. 7 of the appendix).  Following Velasco-Fernandez et al.  (2015), the increase in the exosomatic metabolic rate of the paid sector (EMRPW) can be considered as a proxy of the level of technical capitalisation.  An example of that is provided by Korea that, by implementing a set of farm mechanisation plans, largely reduced the number of working hours devoted to the agricultural sector (Choi and Kang, 2016).  Based on data reported in Tables A. 6 and A. 7 of the appendix, between 1995 and 2007 the HAPW of “agriculture, hunting, forestry, mining and quarrying” sector reduced by 35. 4% and the energy consumption increased by 46. 5%.  As a result, the exosomatic metabolic rate of this sector increased (Table A. 5 of the appendix).  In terms of labour productivity (ELPPW), all the countries considered in this paper increased the quantity of GDP produced per unit of working hour (Fig.  6).  The largest variations have taken place in eastern European countries (Estonia +123. 6%.  Slovakia +83. 2%.  Poland + 76. 3%.  Slovenia +64. 2%), Turkey (+84. 4%) and Korea (+69. 7%) (Table A. 2 of the appendix).  According to different authors (Jorgenson and Timmer, 2011.  Campos and Coricelli 2002.  Voskoboynikov, 2014.  Choi and Kang, 2016), the work productivity increase of these countries can be explained by a set of factors, as for example the large investments in technology and mechanisation, the development of the service sectors, the technological catch up and, for the eastern European countries, the transition from a planned to a market economy and the inclusion inThe smaller variations have taken place in Spain and Italy where the productivity increase have been largely lower than in the other countries (6. 4% in Italy and 7. 7% in Spain).  According to Gordon and DewBecker (2008) the labour market reforms oriented to promote ﬂexibility in the work market, with consequent increase in the availability of temporary and non-expensive workers, have discouraged the investments in productivity and innovation.  4. 3.  Level N-2 – Economic Sectors Level.  In this section, the energy consumption and the human time allocation are analysed at economic sector level, based on the disaggregation reported in Table 1.  Three main economic sectors are considered in this section, namely.  the agricultural, the industrial and the services sectors.  Disaggregated data for the exosomatic metabolic rate of all the activities included in the different sectors are reported in Table A. 5 of the appendix.  The analysis of the changes that have taken place in different economic sectors can provide important information related to the qualitative (EMRPWi) and quantitative variations (ETPWi and HAPWi) affecting the size and the characteristics of the metabolic trends of countries (Velasco-Fernandez et al. , 2015).  According to data reported in Table 5, in most of the countries considered in this paper (with exception of Belgium, Germany, France, Netherlands and USA) the exosomatic metabolic rate of the agricultural sector (EMRPWa) has increased.  Belgium and USA together with Australia have also been the only countries to slightly increase (less than 8%) the human time devoted to the agriculture.  In all the other countries, the number of working hours decreased.  The largest reductions have taken place in the eastern European countries (Slovakia − 60. 1%, Estonia −54. 5%, Czech Republic −47. 6%, Hungary −47. 0%), Turkey (−50. 2%), Greece (−36. 3%) and Korea (−35. 4%).  Three of them, (Czech Republic, Hungary and Slovakia) also reduced the energy throughput (−36. 0%, −18. 1% and −41,8%, respectively) (Absolute values are reported in Tables A. 8 and A. 9 of the appendix).  According to EEA (2015), the transition to a more service-oriented economy contributed to reduce the energy and the working time spent in the agricultural sector of these countries.  On the contrary, the increasing mechanisation that took place in Turkey, Korea and Estonia, largely contributed to increase the energy consumption of the agricultural sector (Eurostat, 2015.  FAO, 2013.  OECD, 2008).  According to data reported in Table 5, these countries also performed the largest variation of the exosomatic metabolic rate (EMRPWa) (+179. 3%, +126. 9%, +148. 4%, respectively).  Most of the countries also increased the exosomatic metabolic rate of the industrial sector.  Denmark, Spain, Estonia, Hungary, Ireland, Mexico and Sweden, have been the only countries to reduce EMRPWi of industry.  For all of them, the percentage variation of HAPWi has been higher than the percentage variation of ETPWi.  For these countries (ad exception of Denmark), the number of working hours in the industrial and in the service sectors increased, while the number of working hours in the agricultural sector decreased.  Ireland, Mexico and Spain also experienced some of the highest percentage of population increase (+21. 5%, 16. 2%, 13. 9%, respectively).  All the countries considered in this paper, increased both the energy throughput and the human time allocated to the service sector.  In twelve countries, however, the exosomatic metabolic rate of the service sector decreased.  For all of them, (namely.  Austria, Belgium, Canada, Germany, France, Great Britain, Korea, Mexico, Netherlands, Russia, Slovakia and USA) the percentage variation of the time devoted to this sector has been higher than the energy consumption increase.  Belgium and USA recorded the largest exosomatic metabolic rate percentage decrease (−16. 2% and −14. 9%, respectively) and Denmark and Greece the largest increase (+111. 2% and 134. 0%, respectively).  According to data reported in Tables A. 5, A. 6 and A. 7 of the appendix, the reduction of the energy used, that took place in the ﬁnancial intermediation (for USA) and in the other community, social and personal service activity sector (for Belgium), has been the main factor responsible for the reduction of the exosomatic metabolic rate of the service sector of Belgium and USA.  In Denmark and Greece, the transport sector has been the main sector responsible for the EMRPWs increase.  In both countries, the percentage variation of the energy throughput (+219. 5% in Denmark and +257. 6% in Greece) has been largely higher than the percentage variation of the working hours (+12. 9% in Denmark and −16. 4% in Greece).  4. 4.  Initial Metabolic Proﬁle of Countries and Development Paths.  In this section, the 28 countries considered in this paper are ranked according to the main MuSIASEM variables and indicators reported in Tables 2 and 3.  The main objective is to provide an overview of the initial characteristics of countries (for the year 1995) and, based on the results provided above, to identify similarities in the development of metabolic proﬁles.  In Table 6, the ranking of countries is provided for the year 1995 and for the percentage variations that have taken place between the years 1995 and 2007.  Countries are ranked from the highest to the lowest values.  4. 4. 1.  1995 Metabolic Proﬁles.  ▪ According to data reported in Table 6, the countries with the highest GDP also had the highest total energy throughput (TET) and total human time (THA).  USA, Russia, Japan, Mexico, Germany, France, Great Britain and Italy ranked in the top ten countries for all the three MuSIASEM variables reported in Table 2.  In a similar way, the countries with the lowest level of GDP also had the lowest level of TET and THA (namely.  Estonia, Slovenia, Ireland and Slovakia).  ▪ Eight of the top ten countries that in 1995 had the highest exosomatic metabolic rate of the paid sector (EMRPW), also had the highest exosomatic metabolic rate of the household sector (EMRHH) (namely.  Netherlands, Belgium, Canada, USA, Denmark, Germany, Finland and Sweden).  ▪ Six of them, also had some of the largest values of labour productivity (ELPPW) and GDP per capita (namely.  Belgium, Netherlands, Germany, USA, Denmark and Canada).  ▪ In a similar way, seven of the ten countries with the lowest exosomatic metabolic rate of the paid sector (ELPPW) also had the lowest exosomatic metabolic rate of the household sector (ELPHH) (namely.  Turkey, Mexico, Portugal, Hungary, Poland, Greece and▪ All of them, together with Estonia Russia, Slovakia, Check Republic and Slovenia, also had some of the smallest values of labour productivity (ELPPW) and GDP per capita.  4. 4. 2.  1995–2007 Metabolic Proﬁle Developments ▪ The countries with the lowest level of GDP, had some of the highest GDP percentage variations (namely.  Estonia, Ireland, and Slovakia).  Ireland also performed the highest energy throughput percentage increases (TET).  On the contrary, Estonia and Slovakia ranked twelve and eighteen in terms of TET variation.  As reported in Table A. 2 of the appendix, these two countries had the largest energy efﬁciency (EEI) increase.  ▪ Some of the countries that in 1995 had some of the lowest level of exosomatic metabolic rate of the paid sector, performed some of the largest EMRPW percentage increases (namely.  Turkey, Slovenia, Greece, Estonia, Korea and Poland).  On the contrary, six of the top ten countries that in 1995 had the highest values of EMRPW, performed some of the smallest increases (namely.  Netherlands, Belgium, Canada, USA, Sweden, Austria and France).  ▪ Six of the eight countries with the lowest level of exosomatic metabolic rate of the household sectors (EMRHH) performed the largest percentage increases (namely.  Mexico, Korea, Portugal, Spain, Japan and Greece).  On the contrary, seven of the ten countries with the highest level of EMRHH performed the smallest percentage variations (namely.  Finland, Sweden, Belgium, Denmark, Australia, Germany and Netherlands).  ▪ Eight of the eleven countries with the lowest level of labour productivity (ELP) and per capita GDP had some of the largest percentage increase (namely.  Russia, Estonia, Poland, Korea, Slovakia, Hungary, Czech Republic and Slovenia).  On the contrary, seven of the ten countries that in 1995 had the highest level of labour productivity and per capita GDP, performed some of the lowest percentage increase (namely.  Netherlands, Belgium, Canada, USA, France, Denmark and Germany).  Based on data reported above, metabolic patterns can be identiﬁed between the following groups of countries.  1) the western European countries (excluding Ireland), together with USA, Japan and Canada 2) the eastern European countries, together with Turkey, Ireland and Korea.  The ﬁrst group of countries generally had the highest initial values of metabolic variables and indicators.  However, between the years 1995 and 2007, most of them performed the lowest percentage increases.  On the contrary, the eastern European countries, together with Turkey, Ireland and Korea, in spite of having some of the smallest metabolic proﬁles in 1995, performed some of the largest percentage increases.  In particular.  ▪ The eastern European countries, together with Russia performed the largest energy efﬁciency increases.  ▪ The eastern European countries, together with Korea, Russia, Ireland and Turkey had the largest GDP and GDP per capita increases.  ▪ The eastern European countries, together with Turkey and Russia had the largest labour productivity increases.  ▪ Three eastern European countries (namely.  Czech Republic, Slovakia and Poland), together with Turkey and Korea increased the dependency ratio.  ▪ The eastern European countries, together with Turkey and Korea had the largest reduction in the human time devoted to agriculture.  Mexico is performing as an outliner and cannot be included in the two group of countries reported above.  In particular, in 1995 it ranked in the top half for the metabolic variables and in the bottom half for the metabolic indicators.  In terms of percentage variations, it ranked in the ﬁrst top half for THA, TET, GDP, EMRHH, ELPPW and in the bottom half for EMRPW, and GDP per capita.  <Conclusion> Future Developments and Limitations.  In this paper the metabolic proﬁle of 28 world countries have been investigated.  As reported above, the selection of countries has been mainly driven by data availability.  Both European and non-European countries have been considered in the analysis, however some of the fastest growing areas, as for example India, China and Brazil have not been included because data availability was not covering the entire time period considered in this paper.  These countries have been previously investigated in other studies (Ramos-Martin et al. , 2007.  Velasco-Fernandez et al. , 2015).  Another gap is related to the lack of consistent data for Middle East countries, as Qatar, Dubai or Saudi Arabia.  During the last decade those countries massively changed the metabolic proﬁle by increasing the use of fossil fuel resources.  The rapid economic growth and the large migration inﬂow of workers from other Asian countries largely contributed to increase consumption and human time availability.  The analysis of the exosomatic metabolic proﬁle of these countries would be particularly interesting to investigate.  When data will be available, additional analysis could also be oriented to investigate the impacts that the global economic crisis generated on the metabolic trend of developed and developing countries.  6.  Conclusions.  In this article, the metabolic proﬁle of 28 world countries have been analysed.  The main conclusions can be summarised as follow.  6. 1.  Level N.  ▪ Between the years 1995 and 2007, the gross domestic product (GDP) increased for all the countries considered in this paper.  The largest percentage variations have taken place in Ireland, Korea, Russia, Turkey and in the Eastern European countries that during the period considered joined the EU.  ▪ The total energy throughput (TET) increased for all the countries considered in this paper, with the exception of Great Britain and▪ Energy consumption grew slower than GDP. 