J.  Child Lang.   (), –.  © Cambridge University Press 
doi. . /S
Acquisition of nouns and verbs in Italian pre-school
children*
LUCIA COLOMBO
Dipartimento di Psicologia Generale, Università di Padova
EDUARDO NAVARRETE
Dipartimento di Psicologia dello Sviluppo e della Socializzazione,
Università di PadovaBARBARA ARFÉ
Dipartimento di Psicologia dello Sviluppo e della Socializzazione,
Università di Padova
(Received  September  – Revised  May  – Accepted  October  –
First published online  December )
A B S T R A C T
Noun and verb acquisition was investigated in three- and ﬁve-year-old
Italian children by means of picture naming of objects and actions,
selected from Druks and Masterson ().  The aim was to examine
the previously reported advantage of nouns compared to verbs.  Older
children were faster than younger children, and naming latencies were
faster for object pictures than for action pictures.  For errors, the
advantage of objects over actions was greater for younger children.  A
qualitative
according to a
classiﬁcation derived by Masterson, Druks, and Gallienne (). 
Overall, % of the errors reﬂected a complete lack of knowledge of
the names or of the meanings of the pictures.  Most errors, however,
were likely to be due to a not yet fully developed knowledge of the
meaning of words
to an incomplete
conceptual representation, and this pattern was more marked for
action concepts. 
labelling the pictures, or
carried out
analysis of
errors was
* The research was funded by Fondi %  from the University of Padova.  We wish to
thank Jackie Masterson for giving us access to the pictures of the Druks and Masterson
() database.  We would also like to thank Valentina Mantesso and Lucia Moresco for
running the experiment.  Preparation of this paper was supported in part by NSF Grant
 to EN.  Address for correspondence.  e-mail.  lucia. colombo@unipd. itDownloaded from https. //www. cambridge. org/core.  Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14. 25. 30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https. //www. cambridge. org/core/terms.  https. //doi. org/10. 1017/S0305000916000593
N O U N S A N D V E R B S A C Q U I S I T I O N
I N T R O D U C T I O N
The acquisition and processing of nouns and verbs, two word categories that
diﬀer both syntactically (i. e. , for their grammatical role) and conceptually
(denoting diﬀerent entities.  objects and actions), has received much
attention recently.  There is empirical evidence that verbs and nouns are
two cognitively distinct word categories,
involving diﬀerent kinds of
representations and processing demands.  Studies of children’s early lexical
development have shown evidence of a gap in the acquisition of nouns and
verbs, with nouns being acquired earlier than verbs in some languages
(English, French, German, and Italian.  Bassano, .  Bates et al. , . 
Gentner, .  Gentner & Boroditsky, .  MacNamara, .  Nelson,
), and the opposite pattern being true in others (Mandarin Chinese
and Korean.  Choi & Gopnick, .  Tardif, ), suggesting that
children’s processing of nouns and verbs entails diﬀerent cognitive
demands.  The present study adds to this line of research by exploring the
lexical and conceptual/semantic variables contributing to object and action
naming skills in three- and ﬁve-year-old Italian children. 
There is extensive evidence that the vocabulary of very young children
speaking English, German, and Italian includes mainly nouns, with verbs
present in a more restricted number (Bassano, . 