
The US Endangered Species Act (ESA) and Canadian Species at Risk
Act (SARA) mandate that recovery strategies be developed for endangered and threatened species.  Of the 1872 species or populations listed
under the ESA or SARA, two thirds (1393) have formal recovery plans
(Fig.  1).  Despite this large-scale effort, relatively few listed species
have been sufﬁciently recovered as to be removed or down-listed
from either the ESA or SARA.  Of the 61 species delisted from the ESA,
only half (32 species) have been delisted because they have met recovery goals, 10 species have been removed due to extinction, and the remainder as a result of updated information (e. g.  taxonomic revisions)
(https. //ecos. fws. gov/tess_public/reports/delisting-report accessed 7
December, 2015), while only 3 species under SARA have been delisted
because they were recovered (Favaro N, 2014).  The challenge of recovering species often stems from uncertainty in the causes of decline,
mitigating or circumventing the drivers of decline, and having sufﬁcient
resources to meaningfully address these problems at the often large
spatial and temporal scales required for species recovery. 
Recovery decisions for endangered species are often made quickly
and with limited data with which to inform recovery objectives
(Martin N, 2012.  Gerber and Hatch 2002).  However, reviews of
ESA recovery plans found that plans with a higher number of clear
quantitative recovery goals (i. e.  target population sizes and number of
populations) are associated with improving species status (Gerber and
Hatch 2002.  Himes Boor, 2014), suggesting that leveraging even limited
data in a quantitative framework to inform species recovery is useful. 
Others have also suggested steps to improve science-based decision
making that are applicable across taxa, including specifying quantitative
requirements for species recovery and recovery timelines, as well as
identifying the number of populations or the spatial extent to which recovery measures apply (Boersma N, 2001.  Clark N, 2002.  Gerber
and Schultz, 2001.  Himes Boor, 2014.  Possingham N, 1993.  Scott
N, 1995.  Waples N, 2013), but such standards have yet to be
adopted in a way that improves planning (Himes Boor, 2014.  Doak
N, 2015.  Troyer and Gerber, 2015).  For instance, recent updates to
the US Fish and Wildlife Service and National Marine Fisheries Service
failed to make any quantitative criteria or standards mandatory
(Troyer and Gerber, 2015). 
Integrating quantitative measures into recovery planning can be
challenging due to lack of data for rare species, uncertainties in recovery
costs, and sociopolitical factors (Restani and Marzluff, 2002.  Scott N,
1995).  One way to leverage limited data to support choices between alternative recovery actions is to apply decision theory, which provides a
logical structure for complex problems (Keeney and Raiffa, 1976. 
fold difference in the beneﬁt-cost ratio between alternative predator removal strategies (Engeman N, 2002), and for the kokako, an endangered bird in New Zealand, that an increase in spending for predator
control does not always lead to an increase in the number of breeding pairs (Fairburn N, 2004).  These examples highlight the need
to explore tradeoffs between the cost of management actions, and
the resulting net beneﬁt to the population or species.  In many
cases, recovery costs are not incorporated into biological analyses
of recovery options (e. g.  Drechsler N, 1998.  Regan N, 2005. 
VanderWerf N, 2006), but often play a large role in whether a recovery option is successfully implemented (Hughey N, 2003) and
thus it is useful to explicitly consider costs during the decisionmaking processes.  Weighting a recovery option by its associated
cost in a decision analysis framework can help identify pathways to
recovery that are easier to achieve given both ﬁnancial and biological
constraints, and ensure that limited funds are not allocated to recovery options that are unlikely to succeed. 
Here, we use decision analysis in a novel way by incorporating
both the biological efﬁcacy and monetary cost of recovery to quantitatively assess alternative population supplementation strategies,
captive breeding or head-starting wild embryos, and to explore the
return on investment for each potential management action while
considering the initial state of the population (i. e.  wild population
size).  Captive breeding and head-starting are two commonly proposed population supplementation tools for critically endangered
populations
(Fischer and Lindenmayer, 2000.  Zippel and
Mendelson, 2008), particularly for amphibians which are at higher
risk of extinction than many other vertebrate taxa (Hoffmann N,
2010.  Stuart N, 2004).  Captive breeding and release involves establishing a population in captivity, in which individuals mate and
produce offspring that are subsequently released into a separate
wild population.  Head-starting and release typically involves removing individuals at an early life stage (embryos or larvae) and raising
individuals in captivity through sensitive life stages before releasing
into a wild population.  Although both options include rearing individuals in captivity for a period of time, the relative genetic and demographic consequences, as well as the economic tradeoffs
between captive-breeding and head-starting are largely unknown
(Grifﬁths and Pavajeau, 2008).  In general, the effectiveness of population supplementation, regardless of method, has been difﬁcult to
assess (Dodd and Seigel, 1991.  Grifﬁths and Pavajeau, 2008), and
thus is often reserved for when other threat mitigation strategies
(e. g.  habitat degradation, competition with invasive species) are
not feasible (Zippel and Mendelson, 2008). 
We identiﬁed 24 alternative supplementation strategies using either
eggs from captive females (captive breeding) or wild collected eggs
(head-starting), which we compared to no supplementation (for a
total of 25 alternative scenarios, Fig.  2), to aid the recovery of a critically
endangered population of Oregon spotted frogs (Rana pretiosa).  Using
empirical data and an existing population demographic model (Kissel
N, 2014) we evaluated the biological efﬁcacy of each of the 25 supplementation strategies (henceforth recovery pathway) and conducted
a decision analysis from the perspective of conservation managers who
wanted to choose a recovery strategy to achieve a baseline recovery target of reducing the 10-year extinction risk below 10% while minimizing
cost.  We calculated the cost of each alternative recovery pathway and
used stochastic population viability analysis to estimate the reduction
in extinction risk over 10 years of continuous implementation of each
pathway.  We explored uncertainties in the top ranked scenario with
sensitivity analyses by relaxing model assumptions and recovery targets, which allowed us to assess the robustness of the top-ranked recovery pathway under non-static conditions. 