
1. Introduction

The US Endangered Species Act (ESA) and Canadian Species at Risk
Act (SARA) mandate that recovery strategies be developed for endan-
gered and threatened species. Of the 1872 species or populations listed
under the ESA or SARA, two thirds (1393) have formal recovery plans
(Fig. 1). Despite this large-scale effort, relatively few listed species
have been sufﬁciently recovered as to be removed or down-listed
from either the ESA or SARA. Of the 61 species delisted from the ESA,
only half (32 species) have been delisted because they have met recov-
ery goals, 10 species have been removed due to extinction, and the re-
mainder as a result of updated information (e.g. taxonomic revisions)
(https://ecos.fws.gov/tess_public/reports/delisting-report accessed 7
December, 2015), while only 3 species under SARA have been delisted
because they were recovered (Favaro et al., 2014). The challenge of re-
covering species often stems from uncertainty in the causes of decline,
mitigating or circumventing the drivers of decline, and having sufﬁcient
resources to meaningfully address these problems at the often large
spatial and temporal scales required for species recovery.

Recovery decisions for endangered species are often made quickly
and with limited data with which to inform recovery objectives
(Martin et al., 2012; Gerber and Hatch 2002). However, reviews of
ESA recovery plans found that plans with a higher number of clear
quantitative recovery goals (i.e. target population sizes and number of
populations) are associated with improving species status (Gerber and
Hatch 2002; Himes Boor, 2014), suggesting that leveraging even limited
data in a quantitative framework to inform species recovery is useful.
Others have also suggested steps to improve science-based decision
making that are applicable across taxa, including specifying quantitative
requirements for species recovery and recovery timelines, as well as
identifying the number of populations or the spatial extent to which re-
covery measures apply (Boersma et al., 2001; Clark et al., 2002; Gerber
and Schultz, 2001; Himes Boor, 2014; Possingham et al., 1993; Scott
et al., 1995; Waples et al., 2013), but such standards have yet to be
adopted in a way that improves planning (Himes Boor, 2014; Doak
et al., 2015; Troyer and Gerber, 2015). For instance, recent updates to
the US Fish and Wildlife Service and National Marine Fisheries Service
failed to make any quantitative criteria or standards mandatory
(Troyer and Gerber, 2015).

Integrating quantitative measures into recovery planning can be
challenging due to lack of data for rare species, uncertainties in recovery
costs, and sociopolitical factors (Restani and Marzluff, 2002; Scott et al.,
1995). One way to leverage limited data to support choices between al-
ternative recovery actions is to apply decision theory, which provides a
logical structure for complex problems (Keeney and Raiffa, 1976;
fold difference in the beneﬁt-cost ratio between alternative predator re-
moval strategies (Engeman et al., 2002), and for the kokako, an endan-
gered bird in New Zealand, that an increase in spending for predator
control does not always lead to an increase in the number of breed-
ing pairs (Fairburn et al., 2004). These examples highlight the need
to explore tradeoffs between the cost of management actions, and
the resulting net beneﬁt to the population or species. In many
cases, recovery costs are not incorporated into biological analyses
of recovery options (e.g. Drechsler et al., 1998; Regan et al., 2005;
VanderWerf et al., 2006), but often play a large role in whether a re-
covery option is successfully implemented (Hughey et al., 2003) and
thus it is useful to explicitly consider costs during the decision-
making processes. Weighting a recovery option by its associated
cost in a decision analysis framework can help identify pathways to
recovery that are easier to achieve given both ﬁnancial and biological
constraints, and ensure that limited funds are not allocated to recov-
ery options that are unlikely to succeed.

Here, we use decision analysis in a novel way by incorporating
both the biological efﬁcacy and monetary cost of recovery to quanti-
tatively assess alternative population supplementation strategies,
captive breeding or head-starting wild embryos, and to explore the
return on investment for each potential management action while
considering the initial state of the population (i.e. wild population
size). Captive breeding and head-starting are two commonly pro-
posed population supplementation tools for critically endangered
populations
(Fischer and Lindenmayer, 2000; Zippel and
Mendelson, 2008), particularly for amphibians which are at higher
risk of extinction than many other vertebrate taxa (Hoffmann et al.,
2010; Stuart et al., 2004). Captive breeding and release involves es-
tablishing a population in captivity, in which individuals mate and
produce offspring that are subsequently released into a separate
wild population. Head-starting and release typically involves remov-
ing individuals at an early life stage (embryos or larvae) and raising
individuals in captivity through sensitive life stages before releasing
into a wild population. Although both options include rearing indi-
viduals in captivity for a period of time, the relative genetic and de-
mographic consequences, as well as the economic tradeoffs
between captive-breeding and head-starting are largely unknown
(Grifﬁths and Pavajeau, 2008). In general, the effectiveness of popu-
lation supplementation, regardless of method, has been difﬁcult to
assess (Dodd and Seigel, 1991; Grifﬁths and Pavajeau, 2008), and
thus is often reserved for when other threat mitigation strategies
(e.g. habitat degradation, competition with invasive species) are
not feasible (Zippel and Mendelson, 2008).

We identiﬁed 24 alternative supplementation strategies using either
eggs from captive females (captive breeding) or wild collected eggs
(head-starting), which we compared to no supplementation (for a
total of 25 alternative scenarios, Fig. 2), to aid the recovery of a critically
endangered population of Oregon spotted frogs (Rana pretiosa). Using
empirical data and an existing population demographic model (Kissel
et al., 2014) we evaluated the biological efﬁcacy of each of the 25 sup-
plementation strategies (henceforth recovery pathway) and conducted
a decision analysis from the perspective of conservation managers who
wanted to choose a recovery strategy to achieve a baseline recovery tar-
get of reducing the 10-year extinction risk below 10% while minimizing
cost. We calculated the cost of each alternative recovery pathway and
used stochastic population viability analysis to estimate the reduction
in extinction risk over 10 years of continuous implementation of each
pathway. We explored uncertainties in the top ranked scenario with
sensitivity analyses by relaxing model assumptions and recovery tar-
gets, which allowed us to assess the robustness of the top-ranked recov-
ery pathway under non-static conditions. We found that decision
analysis is a feasible, intuitive method for providing a quantitative
basis for ranking alternative recovery actions, and can be a useful lens
through which to balance tradeoffs between costs and endangered spe-
cies management.
Morgan and Henrion, 1990; Peterman and Anderson, 1999). While most
natural resource management decisions are ultimately made based on
more than scientiﬁc data (e.g. economic, social, cultural, political fac-
tors), decision analysis can provide clear support to these decision-
making processes by identifying and ranking options that meet stat-
ed objectives and provide quantitative information regarding trade-
offs among alternative actions, and can accommodate both qualita-
tive (i.e. expert opinion) and quantitative data (i.e. models to esti-
mate extinction risk or occupancy) in the process. A decision
analysis can help to streamline decision-making processes that
often involve multiple pathways to achieve an objective, and an
array of different stakeholders, sometimes with competing objec-
tives (Peterman and Anderson, 1999). The steps of a decision analy-
sis include; 1) explicitly stating the objectives or targets, 2) outlining
alternative pathways to achieve the targets, 3) identifying uncer-
tainties or unknowns in the data (referred to as ‘uncertain states of
nature’) and explicitly incorporating them into the analysis,
4) using a quantitative model to determine the outcomes of each po-
tential pathway, 5) determining the ‘optimal’ decision by ranking the
outcomes with respect to the objectives, and 6) performing sensitiv-
ity analyses on key parameters in the model to determine the robust-
ness of the ‘optimal’ decision (Peterman and Anderson, 1999).
Acknowledging uncertainty in the process by assigning probabilities
to each identiﬁed uncertain state of nature (step 3), and performing
sensitivity analyses on critical parameters (i.e. targets or key model
assumptions, step 6), decreases the likelihood of choosing an ineffec-
tive recovery option by increasing the quantitative basis of the
decision-making process.

Decision analysis models have been applied to numerous conserva-
tion problems, such as invasive species management, designing ecological reserves,
and endangered species planning.
Several studies highlight the utility of decision analysis for endangered
species management, and it can be a valuable tool for quantifying tradeoffs between
the biological efﬁcacy and economic cost of a suite of alternative recov-
ery strategies.

A fundamental assumption of most recovery efforts is that increased
spending will result in improvements in species status. However, it
has been demonstrated for marine turtles that there can be a three-

<Middle> Methods.
2.1. Study Species.
Oregon spotted frogs (Rana pretiosa) are categorized as ‘Vulnerable’
under the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), and
federally listed as ‘Endangered’ under the U.S. ESA and Canada's SARA.
The species historically ranged between northern California and south-
western British Columbia (BC), but has been extirpated from N90% of its
distribution (Hammerson and Pearl, 2012). In BC, there are ﬁve extant
populations of R. pretiosa, each of which are estimated to have fewer
than 250 breeding females by the Canadian Oregon spotted frog Recov-
ery Team (COSFRT, unpublished data). Head-start and captive breeding
supplementation programs were implemented for the BC populations
in 2008 and 2010 respectively as part of a federal recovery strategy to
address declines (Kissel et al., 2014).

2.2. Decision Analysis.
The goal of our decision analysis is to support decisions between al-
ternative supplementation strategies to reduce the extinction risk of
R. pretiosa. Our baseline management target was to reduce the 10-year
extinction risk of an imperiled R. pretiosa population (n = 100 breeding
females) to below 10% and minimize the ﬁnancial cost of recovery (step
1 of decision analysis). We chose a 10-year time horizon to coincide
with the stated recovery objectives in the BC Oregon spotted frog recov-
ery plan (COSFRT, 2012), and a 10% extinction risk threshold as it is con-
sistent with the IUCN quantitative criteria for ‘Endangered’ (20% over
20 years, IUCN, 2012). We used a stage-based stochastic matrix model
(developed in Kissel et al., 2014, see supplemental materials, Fig. S1)
to estimate the consequences of 25 management pathways, which we
deﬁned as the combination of 10-year extinction risk for the wild
R. pretiosa population, and ﬁnancial cost of the pathway. Demographic
population models are a common tool for assessing extinction risk of
populations, and (Brook et al., 2000) demonstrate that PVAs frequently
match actual population dynamics.

We developed a decision tree to demonstrate each recovery path-
way (Fig. 2, step 2 of decision analysis), which consisted of a series of
choices; 1) the choice to supplement or not, 2) whether to head-start
or captive breed, 3) release individuals as larvae (2–4 week-old tad-
poles) or young of the year (YOY, recently metamorphosed frogs), and
4.) the ‘level of effort’ at which to head-start or captive breed (Table 1,
supplemental materials).

Transition probabilities from one life stage to the next, called vital
rates (see Kissel et al., 2014, Fig. S1), were modeled as uncertain states
of nature (Fig. 2, step 3 of decision analysis), and we randomly pulled in-
dividual vital rates (e.g. survival, fecundity) from probability distribu-
tions representing the range in values estimated from empirical data
to parameterize our matrix model (see Kissel et al., 2014).

We used these quantitative models to calculate the 10-year
R. pretiosa extinction risk based on λs, generated by running 10,000 sim-
ulations of separate models for head-starting and captive breeding at
each of the 6 levels of effort, resulting in a model for each of the 24 sup-
plementation pathways (step 4 of decision analysis). Our ﬁnal pathway
consisted of an additional matrix model that did not include any form of
supplementation (and thus had a recover cost of $0). Finally, we quan-
tiﬁed the cost of each pathway (see below), and ranked the pathways
according to our objectives; reduce extinction risk below 10% and min-
imize cost (step 5 of decision analysis).
The sixth and ﬁnal step in our decision analysis was to explore the
robustness of our supplementation pathway rankings with three sepa-
rate sensitivity analyses (i.e. explored changes to our baseline scenario)
to determine if the optimal pathway changes. We considered a shift in
management objectives (i.e. varying thresholds of acceptable extinction
risk over 10 years), changes in the size of the wild population (number
of adult females is either greater or b100), and ﬁnally variation in the re-
productive output for captive females. The ﬁrst sensitivity analysis re-
ﬂects variation in intrinsic social and economic constraints in setting
recovery targets, the second acknowledges uncertainty in estimates of
wild population sizes affecting extinction risk, both of which are key at-
tributes in recovery planning for endangered species. We chose to run
our ﬁnal sensitivity analysis (variation in reproductive output of the
captive populations), because it has been widely documented that suc-
cessfully breeding amphibians in captivity is difﬁcult for most species,
and even when successful, often results in lower rates of reproduction
or lower offspring viability compared to wild individuals (Kiik et al.,
2013; Kouba et al., 2009; Muths et al., 2014; Penfold et al., 2014;
Trudeau et al., 2010).

To reﬂect changes in recovery targets compared to the baseline sce-
nario (reduce 10-year extinction risk below 10% and minimize cost), we
assessed three additional scenarios; reduce extinction risk below 50%
over 10 years (the IUCN criteria for ‘Critically Endangered’, IUCN,
2012) and minimize cost, reduce extinction risk below 25% over
10 years and minimize cost, or minimize 10-year extinction risk regard-
less of cost, which would represent the ideal recovery scenario if funds
were unlimited. To explore uncertainty in measuring abundance for
critically small populations (baseline = 100 females), we varied the
size of the population between 50 and 150 adult females in increments
of ten, representing a range of populations in which extinction risk war-
rants supplementation (Caughley, 1994; Kissel et al., 2014). Finally, we
assessed sensitivity in the optimal pathway to changes in the annual re-
productive output of captive females (baseline = 100% captive breeding
each year), by exploring whether the optimal decision would shift if
only 90%, 75%, or 50% of the females in captivity successfully bred each
year. We compared the beneﬁt-cost ratios of the ‘optimal’ decisions
from our baseline analysis and sensitivity analyses as an additional met-
ric to explore tradeoffs in the reduction in extinction risk per conserva-
tion dollar spent.

2.3. Head-start Program Costs.
We estimated the cost of the head-starting program using actual op-
erational and capital costs from R. pretiosa recovery efforts in BC (2008
and 2009) at the Greater Vancouver Zoo, where ~5% of the population
is brought in each year, reared to metamorphosis and released as YOY
(Table S1 and S2). We divided costs into capital (one time) and recur-
ring and included ‘in-kind’ costs such as husbandry infrastructure and
labor not directly supported through recovery funds. For scenarios out-
side of current R. pretiosa recovery efforts (N5% of the population re-
moved for head-starting), we predicted costs as a linear function of
the level of ‘effort’ and the starting population size to provide a relative
comparison, assuming that cost efﬁciencies gained with increasing the
program size were equal among supplementation programs (head-
starting and captive breeding), with the exception of capital expendi-
ture for enclosures needed to house individuals (see supplemental ma-
terials for details).

2.4. Captive Breeding Program Costs.
Costs for captive breeding were based on 2013 estimates from an
ongoing R. pretiosa captive breeding program at the Vancouver Aquari-
um where ~20 females are bred and offspring are released as larvae 2–
4 weeks post hatching to the wild population (Table S3). As with the
head-start program, we included ‘in-kind’ costs and scaled costs linearly
with effort, estimating costs for a range of effort from 10 to 60 adult
females in captivity. For scenarios in which individuals were released
as young of the year (YOY) frogs, we assumed the additional costs asso-
ciated with the post-hatching period would be equal to head-starting
and releasing as YOY (Table S1), as estimated above. For example, at a
captive-breeding effort of 20 females, our model predicts that approxi-
mately 18,200 tadpoles would be produced annually. Raising 18,200
tadpoles to metamorphosis would require 182 tanks to house individ-
uals. This scenario would also require similar recurring costs as the
head-start program, thus the total cost of captive breeding with release
as YOY was calculated as the sum of the capital and 10-year recurring
costs of captive breeding, plus the cost of head-staring the resulting
number of tadpoles until they reached metamorphosis.

3. Results.
The top ranked pathway (i.e. ‘optimal decision’) for the baseline sce-
nario (reduce 10-year extinction risk below 10% and minimize costs for
a wild population of 100 breeding females), was captive breeding, with
release to the wild population as larvae, and to do so at a ‘medium-high’
effort (Fig. 3a). This translates to breeding 40 females each year and re-
leasing offspring as larvae into the wild population. The total 10-year
cost for this strategy was $1.49 million over 10 years, with a 46% reduc-
tion of the 10-year extinction risk (from 53% without supplementation,
to 7%), which equates to a beneﬁt-cost ratio of a 3% reduction in extinc-
tion risk for every $100,000 spent (Fig. 4). There was no reduction in ex-
tinction risk for the pathway in which supplementation did not occur,
and thus we use this pathway to compare the reduction in extinction
risk for the 24 remaining pathways.

When we explored the robustness of the top-ranked pathway for
the baseline scenario to different management objectives, we found
that the optimal decision was highly sensitive to the recovery target
(10-year extinction risk). When we eased the recovery target to equal
25% extinction risk over 10 years (as opposed to the baseline 10%), the
optimal decision was still to captive breed and release as tadpoles, but
required only a low level of effort (breed and release offspring from
20 captive females as opposed to 40), with a total cost of $750,000
over 10 years (Fig. 3b). This strategy reduced extinction risk by 36%
(from 53% to 17%) and equated to a beneﬁt-cost ratio of 4.8% reduction
in extinction risk for every $100,000 spent (Fig. 4). When the recovery
target was eased further to a 50% chance of extinction in 10 years
while also minimizing costs, the top-ranked pathway shifted to head-
starting wild collected eggs with release as tadpoles at a minimum ef-
fort, which reduced extinction from 53% to 48.5%, with 10-year total
cost equal to $370,000 (1.2% reduction in extinction risk for every
$100,000 spent) (Figs. 3c, 4). When we minimized the 10-year extinc-
tion risk regardless of cost, the optimal decision shifted to head-
starting wild eggs and re-introducing them into the population as YOY
using maximum effort (equivalent to removing 30% of the reproductive
effort from the wild each year) (Fig. 3d). However, this strategy only re-
duced extinction risk by 0.8% for every $100,000 invested (Fig. 4) and
would require 482 tanks over the course of 10 years to raise larvae to
metamorphosis and a total of $6.38 million.

When we simulated a range of hypothetical starting wild population
sizes from 50 to 150, the resulting optimal scenarios required greater ef-
fort as the population size declined (Fig. 5a & b) because the background
extinction risk increases as population size decreases. At population
sizes b70 wild females, the optimal strategy was to head-start wild
eggs, and release as young of year at a maximum effort, and the total
10-year cost ranged between $3.02 million and $3.29 (for a population
size of 50 and 60 respectively) (Fig. 5c). However, if the population size
was 70 or above, the optimal strategy was always to captive breed and
release as tadpoles at decreasing levels of effort as the starting popula-
tion increased (Fig. 5d). Regardless of wild population size, we found
that head-starting and release as tadpoles was never an optimal recov-
ery action.
We also explored how assumptions regarding the reproductive out-
put of the captive population affected the optimal decision. We found
that with a 10% reduction in reproductive output each year (i.e. 90% of
females successfully reproduce) (Fig. 6a), the optimal decision switched
to head-starting and release as YOY at a low effort for a wild population
size of 100 breeding females. For scenarios in which only 75% and 50% of
successfully produce offspring, the optimal decision was also to head-
start and release as YOY at a low level of effort (Fig. 6b & c respectively),
which corresponds to head-starting 10% of eggs in the wild population
each year for 10-years.

<Conclusion> Discussion.
We combined biological and economic aspects of species recovery
into a decision framework to estimate the optimal strategy for reducing
extinction risk for a highly imperiled population of R. pretiosa. Our ap-
proach of weighing tradeoffs between conservation actions and their
costs highlights that a seemingly beneﬁcial recovery option with respect
to the biology of a species may not be optimal once monetary resources,
often the deciding factor in implementing conservation measures, are
considered. The top-ranked recovery pathway depended on the speciﬁc
management target, but in general, captive breeding achieved our base-
line recovery target more often than head-starting, with 8 of 10 popula-
tion sizes resulting in captive breeding and release as larvae (Fig. 5).
Only at the two lowest population sizes we considered (50 and 60
breeding females) was captive breeding unable to reduce extinction
risk below 10%, and thus the top-ranked pathway switched to head-
starting (at maximum and high efforts respectively). Although it may be
intuitive that extinction risk increases as population size decreases,
rarely has uncertainty in the target population size been considered in
the decision analysis literature (but see Pestes et al., 2008). Similarly,
we found that the optimal recovery pathway, captive breeding and re-
lease as larvae, was the same whether the recovery target was to reduce
extinction risk below 10% (baseline scenario) or 25%, though achieving
the latter target could be done more cost-effectively (3% reduction and
4.8% reduction for $100,000 spent respectively). However, when the re-
covery goal was relaxed to extinction risk below 50%, the optimal path-
way switched to head-start and release as tadpoles, and although it was
the least expensive pathway ($370,000 total cost), the beneﬁt-cost ratio
was low (only 1.2% reduction in extinction risk per $100,000 spent).
When we removed the consideration of cost all together, and prioritized
simply minimizing the 10-year extinction risk, the optimum recovery
pathway was to head-start and release as YOY, and resulted in a
beneﬁt-cost ratio of only 0.8% reduction in extinction risk per
$100,000, but reduced overall extinction risk to below 1% over 10 years.
Although the objective of our decision analysis was to minimize cost
(rather than maximize beneﬁt-cost ratio), we've presented the beneﬁt-
cost ratios above, as these results demonstrate a non-linear relationship
between the ﬁnancial costs of recovery actions and their biological efﬁ-
cacy (Fig. 4). Many studies have incorporated beneﬁt-cost ratios into
decision analyses of endangered species recovery (Canessa et al.,
2014; Engeman et al., 2002; Rose et al., 2015; Shwiff et al., 2007). The
majority weigh tradeoffs between categorical recovery options, and
rarely do studies present data on incremental increases in recovery ‘ef-
fort’ as we have done here (but see Canessa et al., 2014), allowing man-
agers to compare beneﬁt cost ratios both between alternative
supplementation strategies (i.e. head-starting vs. captive breeding),
and within supplementation strategies (i.e. low vs. high effort). Our
analysis demonstrates that with the exception of head-starting and re-
lease as larvae, the beneﬁt-cost ratio is high at low levels of effort (i.e.
greater increases in extinction risk per dollar investment), but the re-
turn on investment decreases as effort increases (Fig. 4).

The decoupling between the amount of money spent on recovery ac-
tions and their biological effectiveness highlights the utility of adopting
a decision analysis framework, as it can help identify non-intuitive path-
ways to recovery. For example, Kissel et al. (2014) compared the biolog-
ical efﬁcacy of head-staring and captive breeding without considering
costs, and demonstrated that head-starting 15% of the wild egg masses
and releasing as YOY reduced the 10-year extinction risk to a similar
level as captive breeding 40 females and releasing as larvae (3% and
6% probability of extinction respectively). By incorporating costs into
our decision analysis, we show that captive breeding 40 females (as-
suming a 1:1 ratio of females to reproductive output in captivity) is a
more economically viable option than head-starting 15% of the popula-
tion by a difference of N1 million dollars over 10 years. Overall, our anal-
ysis demonstrates that although head-starting and release as YOY
reduces extinction risk to levels similar to captive breeding and release
as larvae, the tradeoff in monetary costs of recovery is typically lower for
captive breeding and release as larvae (Fig. 4), and thus drives the rank
order of the pathways in our analysis.

We simulated using early life stages (larvae and YOY) to supplement
a wild population, effectively bolstering survival at these stages. Yet for
many species, including R. pretiosa, adult survival has been shown to
have the greatest inﬂuence (e.g. sensitivity or elasticity) on population
stability (Biek et al., 2002; Crouse et al., 1987; Stahl and Oli, 2006;
Vonesh and De la Cruz, 2002), suggesting that greater biological efﬁcacy
could be achieved by targeting adults. However, recovery actions aimed
at improving adult survival for amphibians are rare (Biek et al., 2002), as
there are often logistical challenges, or actions require long-term com-
mitments and large monetary investments that exceed the resources
of most conservation organizations and many government agencies.
Here, we demonstrate that targeting life-stages with lower demograph-
ic sensitivity can be effective at reducing the extinction risk of popula-
tions using several forms of population supplementation.

Our decision analysis framework included elements that are already
commonly recommended for recovery planning, such as population vi-
ability analyses (PVAs) and recovery actions including population sup-
plementation. Although PVAs have been criticized as data-hungry
models (Coulson et al., 2001), we argue that they are useful tools for
making relative comparisons of conservation pathways, even when
data are limited. We extended the use of PVAs to quantify the potential

for recovery with respect to two common conservation actions
employed for amphibians and other vertebrates; captive breeding and
head-starting with release into the wild (Fischer and Lindenmayer,
2000; Harding et al., 2015; Muths et al., 2014; Zippel and Mendelson,
2008). Although improving estimates of vital rates in our model (e.g. ju-
venile survival) would reduce uncertainty in baseline estimates of λs
and extinction risk, our model captures the relative changes to λs with
respect to changes in early life history stages (eggs and larvae) for
which we have empirical data, providing a valid comparison of the bio-
logical beneﬁts of supplementation strategies for early life history
stages.

The effectiveness of supplementation to bolster populations over
longer management time-horizons (N10 years) is largely unknown
(Grifﬁths and Pavajeau, 2008). In particular, artiﬁcial selection imposed
by captive breeding and rearing can dramatically reduce population ﬁt-
ness (Araki et al., 2007), and many species in captivity fail to produce
offspring at the same rate as their wild counterparts (Kiik et al., 2013;
Kouba et al., 2009; Muths et al., 2014; Penfold et al., 2014; Trudeau
et al., 2010). Such observations encourage caution in adopting captive
breeding, but despite this uncertainty, supplementation is increasingly
proposed for many species, and amphibians in particular (Stuart et al.,
2004). We argue that quantifying the tradeoffs between alternative sup-
plementation approaches, while explicitly incorporating uncertainty, is
a useful step in recovery planning given the frequency with which such
actions are employed for species conservation. For example, we demon-
strated that accounting for the diminished reproductive output of adult
females in captivity resulted in a re-ranking of our recovery pathways,
but that our conservation target could still be reached (Fig. 6).

This case study represents a dire conservation problem in which
population supplementation is one of few options currently available
to reduce extinction risk (Caughley, 1994). Although we simulated con-
tinuous supplementation for 10 years, a timescale considered relevant
for conservation actions (Semlitsch 2002; IUCN, 2012), in our baseline
scenario only half of the pathways achieved or surpassed the goal of
minimizing extinction risk below 10% (Fig. 3a). This, along with other
assessments of recovery plans that show improved species status with
longer time since listing (Boersma et al., 2001; Male and Bean, 2005)
suggests that 10 years may actually be an artiﬁcially short management
time horizon for conservation measures to be effective. We also empha-
size that unless the ultimate causes of decline in wild populations are
addressed, population supplementation is likely to be but short-term
life-support for species that otherwise will become reliant on continu-
ous conservation action (Scott et al., 2005, 2010).

Managing a population for recovery is often a non-linear process in
which management targets can change through time. Decision analysis
provides a ﬂexible framework to evaluate multiple management targets
simultaneously with imperfect information as an iterative process
(Peterman and Anderson, 1999). Through explicitly incorporating un-
certainty at multiple levels (uncertain states of nature in the model, ob-
server uncertainty, and recovery target uncertainty), decision analysis
provides a roadmap of options for decision-makers and managers that
can increase the probability of success (Converse et al., 2013). For exam-
ple, through our stochastic PVA models, we explicitly incorporated un-
certainty in vital rate estimates by pulling from a distribution
characterized by the variance in our estimates of survival rather than re-
lying on mean estimates, which more accurately reﬂects real-world
population dynamics (Morris and Doak, 2002). However, decision anal-
ysis is highly dependent on both the management targets and the alter-
native pathways included in the analysis (Peterman and Anderson,
1999; Converse et al., 2013). For example, we found that the top-
ranked pathway when cost was unlimited was to head-start wild col-
lected eggs and release individuals as YOY (Fig. 3a). However, this ﬁnd-
ing likely reﬂects the different pathways we chose to include in our
analysis. Had we chosen to include a wider range of ‘effort’ for both
head-starting and captive breeding, it is likely that the rank order
would change. Additionally, our 10-year timeframe only allows us to
compare a snapshot of costs, and had we chosen to frame our recovery
target differently (for example exploring the number of years it took to
reduce extinction risk below a threshold), our rankings may have
changed.

Although decision analysis can clarify options and identify the opti-
mal management action based on input criteria, it is still ultimately a
tool for decision-makers, who must determine if the top-ranked action
produced by the model is the right action for the problem at hand, once
the uncertainty in the process, data, and social and political factors have
been considered. Despite these limitations, we argue that decision anal-
ysis is an under-used tool for endangered species recovery, and could
improve the quantitative basis for recovery planning, which in turn
could increase the probability of success (sensu Himes Boor, 2014;
Gerber and Hatch, 2002; Boersma et al., 2001). Recovering endangered
species often requires making quick decisions while balancing compet-
ing objectives from stakeholders and opposing opinions on recovery
strategies (Gregory et al., 2012; Martin et al., 2012). In the absence of
a quantitative approach,
this can lead to either inaction or
implementing conservation measures that are unsuccessful (Abbitt
and Scott, 2001; Martin et al., 2012). By leveraging even relatively mod-
est data regarding species at risk and the costs associated with recovery
options, those tasked with endangered species recovery can adapt this
framework as a means to streamline the complexities related to species
recovery for a range of conservation problems, from population supple-
mentation, to habitat management, to threat eradication, while also ex-
ploring important nonlinearities in the beneﬁts and costs of alternative
recovery actions.

Acknowledgements
