

1. Introduction

The link between competition and innovation has been a very
active topic in industrial organization. It goes back to the indirect
debate between Arrow (1962) and Schumpeter (1942) centering
around the so-called Schumpeterian hypothesis, which brieﬂy stated
says that one should expect to observe an inverse relationship
between innovation and the intensity of competition or market
structure.

On the one hand, there are several arguments supporting the
view that possession of market power should result in greater inno-
vative activities (Schumpeter, 1942). First, market power may be
extendable to new products, for example, through a dominant ﬁrm’s
command over channels of distribution, and so on. With the ability
to extend market power to new products, an incumbent monopo-
list should ﬁnd innovation more attractive. Second, there may be a
need to ﬁnance innovation internally, which puts ﬁrms with mar-
ket power at an advantage since these ﬁrms may have supernormal
proﬁts. Third, ﬁrms with current market power typically have more
resources and thus are more likely to hire the most innovative peo-
ple. Of course the third argument is related to the imperfect capital
market argument underlying the second reason.

On the other hand, there are arguments for the opposite view,
supporting the view that a monopolist can have reduced incen-
tives to innovate. Arrow (1962) shows that a competitor can proﬁt
more than a monopolist from innovation, and the monopolist may
be slower in replacing it with a superior product or process than a
newcomer. This is because the ﬁrm realising monopoly proﬁts on its
current product calculates the proﬁt from innovation as the differ-
ence between its current proﬁts and the proﬁts it could realise from
the new product, whereas the competitor regards the proﬁts from
the new product as the gain. As such, the larger current monopoly
proﬁts are, the less incentive the monopolist has to innovate. More-
over, a monopolist may regard additional leisure as superior to
additional proﬁts. This may be due to the lack of active competitive
forces and thus generates an x-ineﬃciency effect.

The lively debate on the relationship between competition and
innovation in the industrial organization literature is still open and
systematically predicts a monotone relationship in either direction
between competition and innovation.1 In clear contrast, Aghion et al.
(2005) provide evidence of an inverted-U relationship between inno-
vation and competition. Their theoretical explanation is based on a
neo-Schumpeterian endogenous growth model (Aghion et al., 1997),
in which both technological leaders and followers in any indus-
try can innovate, and innovations occur as a step-by-step process.2
Innovation incentives depend upon the difference between post-
innovation and pre-innovation rents of incumbent ﬁrms. In this case,
more competition may foster innovation and growth, because it may
reduce a ﬁrm’s pre-innovation rents by more than it reduces its
post-innovation rents.

One aspect that, to the best of our knowledge, has not been con-
sidered is the relationship between competition and innovation in a
polluting (or energy intensive) industry where R&D investment aims
to reduce the environmental footprint of production. This is the pur-
pose of the present paper. In particular, we bring together the debate
on the relationship between competition and innovation with the
environmental economics debate on the optimal policy for pollution
control, concentrating on one policy instrument, an emission tax.
Currently the main three major inﬂuences on ﬁrms’ R&D investment
are a focus on cleaner technologies, demand for renewable or sus-
tainable energy and climate change,3 and they are further fuelled by
environmental regulation and international agreements on climate
change and the like.4 In this context, “green” R&D can be seen as
a tool that ﬁrms can use to improve the cost imposed on them by
environmental regulation.

We verify the presence of an inverted-U relationship between
competition and innovation in a microeconomic setting of oligopolis-
tic competition where production is polluting and innovation results
in reducing emissions (abatement or, “green” R&D). Given the pres-
ence of Pigouvian (emission) taxation, reducing pollution would
reduce production costs.5 We present an n-ﬁrm oligopoly model
where ﬁrms compete in quantities and decide their investment in
“green” R&D, and where spillovers in R&D are present. We establish
the link between competition and “green” innovation through the
variation of aggregate investment in R&D according to the number
of ﬁrms in the industry: a greater number of ﬁrms in the industry
proxies increased competition and a concomitant reduction in mar-
ket power (Sutton, 1998).6 We show that the relationship between
competition and “green” R&D is represented by an inverted-U and
that this result is driven mainly by the presence of R&D spillovers
(appropriability problem). The results obtained by Aghion et al.
(2005) are thus conﬁrmed in a microeconomic framework where
innovation has the aim of abating polluting emissions.

The paper is also related to the literature on organisational struc-
ture of environmental R&D (e.g., Scott, 1996; Chiou and Hu, 2001;
Petrakis and Poyago-Theotoky, 2002; Sandonís and Mariel, 2004;
Poyago-Theotoky, 2007; Golombek and Hoel, 2008). With this lit-
erature, we share the assumption of R&D efforts being directed
not towards process or product enhancement, but directed towards
emission reduction of harmful pollutants. The analysis in the paper
is close to Poyago-Theotoky (2007), who examines the issue of R&D
cooperation versus competition in a polluting industry where two
ﬁrms operate and endogenous taxation is set by a time-consistent
regulator. Compared to Poyago-Theotoky (2007), we set aside the
R&D cooperation issue; instead we consider an oligopoly rather
than a duopoly, and we focus on the case in which the regulator is
able to commit credibly to the setting of the environmental policy
instrument. Finally, we assume that abatement is of the end-of-pipe
variant.

Finally, the paper is related to the literature of innovation and
market structure. Hausman and MacKie-Mason (1988) argued that
the actions of monopolies with regard to third-degree price discrim-
ination, may lead to social welfare improvement due to opening
new markets, achieving economies of scale and higher eﬃciency and,
importantly, increasing net social welfare. Geroski (1990) shows that
innovating may be a way to obtain market power, in particular he
ﬁnds that innovation increases the degree of competition in markets.
This leads to a fall in market concentration over time and eventually
to the emergence of very few and large ﬁrms. Therefore ﬁrms inno-
vate with the aim to become incumbents. Etro (2004) shows that
the innovative process is naturally connected to the persistence of
monopolies. Their investment in research and development would
be beneﬁcial to society as they advance new technologies. Our paper
contributes to this strand by focussing on innovation with “green”
features.

The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. In Section 2
we present the model, in Section 3 we carry out the analysis and
establish the results and in Section 4 we provide concluding remarks.
Proofs of propositions are in the Appendix.

<Middle> The model.
Consider an oligopoly market with n identical proﬁt-maximising
ﬁrms competing à la Cournot-Nash. Firms supply a homogeneous
good, with market demand given by p = a − Q; a is a positive con-
stant parameter measuring the reservation price (alternatively, it is a
n
measure of the size of the market) and Q =
i=1 qi is total industry
output, i = 1, . . . , n. Production generates pollution, which is taxed
at the emission tax rate t, while ﬁrm i can reduce its tax burden
by undertaking environmental (“green”) R&D, zi, to reduce its emis-
sions. The cost function for ﬁrm i is additive separable and is given
by c (qi, zi) = cqi + cz2
i /2, where c is the unit cost of production,
a > c, andc > 0 is a parameter capturing the eﬃciency of the R&D
R&D, z(t) =t /c. Evidently, ﬁrms respond to an increase in the
emission tax by increasing their “green” R&D. Notice also that the
emission tax acts as an incentive for ﬁrms undertaking abatement, as
in the absence of emission taxation there would be no “green” R&D.
Aggregate R&D is therefore.
Clearly, total R&D increases monotonically with the number of
ﬁrms for a ﬁxed emission tax. Hence, if taxation were exogenous, we
obtain a clear-cut Arrowian result: Increased competition (higher n)
leads to an increase in aggregate R&D (innovation).

In the ﬁrst stage, the regulator sets the emission tax so as to max-
imise social welfare, deﬁned as total surplus minus production costs,
R&D costs and environmental damages.
Substituting the ﬁrm’s output q(t) and R&D effort, z(t) into the above
expression we obtain total welfare as a function of the emission tax.
From the ﬁrst-order condition of Eq. (4) we obtain the optimal
emission tax 
where b ∈ [0, 1] represents R&D spillovers, i.e. there are spillovers
in environmental R&D in that a ﬁrm beneﬁts not only from its own
R&D effort but also from its rivals’ effort by an amount b.9 We denote
aggregate R&D as Z =
i=1 zi and the total R&D expenditure as
cZ2/2. Hence, ﬁrm i(cid:5)s proﬁt is pi = pqi − c (qi, zi) − tei (qi, zi) , with
emission taxation a linear function of net emissions. Total emissions
are E =
i=1 ei (qi, zi), and the damage function is a quadratic func-
tion of emissions, D = dE2, where d is a parameter capturing the
steepness of marginal damages or, the degree of convexity of the
damage function. To guarantee interior solutions in what follows we
assume d > (1/2n) (see also, Petrakis and Xepapadeas (2001) and
Poyago-Theotoky (2007)). This implies that environmental damages
are not insigniﬁcant for the economy.

In the sequel we consider the case where the regulator precom-
mits to the level of environmental policy, i.e., the emission tax. In
particular, we examine a three-stage game where: in stage one, the
regulator sets the emission tax so as to maximise social welfare,
in stage two, ﬁrms invest in “green” R&D and in stage three mar-
ket competition occurs.10 The equilibrium solution concept is perfect
subgame equilibrium with backward induction.

3. Analysis and results.
3.1. Derivation of equilibrium.
In the last stage, the market competition stage, ﬁrm i chooses

output to maximise proﬁts
where t is the tax per unit of emissions and q−i =
j(cid:3)=iqj is the
total output of its rivals, taken by ﬁrm i as given. From the ﬁrst-
order condition, a − 2qi − q−i − c − t = 0, and by symmetry (i.e.
q1 = q2 = ... = qn ≡ q) we obtain per-ﬁrm equilibrium output:
where, for notational simplicity we set m = a − c, and m measures
market size. Notice that the equilibrium output does not depend on
abatement directly, but it is affected by it through taxation; with out-
put decreasing in the emission tax and the number of ﬁrms, ceteris
paribus. The associated proﬁt is then this.
In the second stage, ﬁrm i chooses “green” R&D (abatement effort) to
maximize proﬁts (Eq. (2)), taking as given its rivals’ aggregate abate-
ment effort. From the relevant ﬁrst-order condition, t − czi = 0, and
by symmetry (z1 = z2 = . . . = zn ≡ z) we obtain the equilibrium
by substituting Eqs. (5), (6) and (7), into Eqs. (2) and (3).

3.2. Comparative statics.
In this section, we examine how the equilibrium values react
to changes in the parameters: n (intensity of competition), c
(eﬃciency/diﬃculty of innovation), b (degree of spillovers) and d
(severity of environmental damage).

We proceed by summarising our ﬁndings in the following propo-

sitions (proofs are relegated in the Appendix).

Proposition 1 (EFFECT OF d). The optimal emission tax t
in the severity of environmental damage d.

∗ is increasing

That the emission tax is increasing in the severity of environmen-
tal damages is entirely expected. Indeed the emission tax is the only
policy tool to address a number of market failures: the environmen-
tal externality distortion, the output market distortion associated
with imperfect competition, the innovation/abatement distortion
and the appropriability problem (knowledge-public good distortion)
associated with the R&D spillover. Thus the higher the damages
the higher the emission tax, ceteris paribus, as it is addressing the
environmental externality.
Proposition 2 (EFFECT OF n). The effect of the number of ﬁrms n on the
optimal emission tax t is described as follows,
there exists a threshold value for n, ˆn2,
I For d > max
such that the emission tax is increasing (decreasing) as n ≶ ˆn2,
II For d ∈
(cid:16)
there exists a threshold value for n,
ˆn3, such that the emission tax is increasing (decreasing) as n ≶ ˆn3,
there exists a threshold value for n,
ˆn4, such that the emission tax is increasing (decreasing) as n ≶ ˆn4.
The threshold values ˆni (dni) are given by the solution to 1/(
, the emission tax is decreasing in n.
Proposition 2, illustrated in Fig. 1, provides a full characterisation
of the effect of the number of ﬁrms on the emission tax.12 Parts I,
II and III identify a ‘small/large’ number oligopoly effect in relation
to the extent of damages: when n < ˆni (‘small’-numbers oligopoly),
the emission tax is increasing in n so as to bring about more abate-
ment but also to address the output market distortion while for
n > ˆni (‘large’-numbers oligopoly) the emission tax is decreasing in n
as competition becomes more intense, partly easing the output and
innovation distortions so that a lower emission tax can be justiﬁed. In
part IV, the emission tax is decreasing due to damages being insignif-
icant (small d), as with more ﬁrms conducting R&D there is less need
for incentivising abatement.

Proposition 3 (EFFECT OF c ). The optimal emission tax t

(i) increasing in R&D eﬃciency, c, for d ≥ d+
c ,
(0,(cid:21)c), and decreasing in c when c ≥(cid:21)c
(ii) for d ∈

2n , d+
1

c

, the emission tax is increasing in c when c ∈

where

1 +b (n(n + 1) − 2) +

d+
c =

(cid:22)
4n + 5 + 2b [n(3n + 1) − 4] + b2 [n(n + 1) − 2]

4n [1 + b (n − 1)]

with d+

c > 1/(2n) > 0 , and

(cid:21)c = − 2dn (n + 1) [1 +b (n − 1)]

(cid:4)

(1 + b (n − 1)) (2dn − 1) +
D2

(cid:5)

√
X

> 0.

When environmental damage d is relatively large, R&D is more
important in reducing emissions, so to incentivise ﬁrms to engage in
emission reduction the emission tax is increasing (part (i)). For small
damages, the emission tax is increasing for relatively easy R&D, but
decreasing when R&D is more diﬃcult, still providing incentives for
abatement (part (ii)).

Proposition 4 (EFFECT OF b ). The effect of the spillover, b, on the
optimal emission tax t

∗ is described as follows:

∗

(n)/∂b ≤ 0,

S1 For d ≥ max{db0, 1/(2n)} the emission tax is decreasing in the
S2 For d ∈ (max{db1, 1/(2n)}, db0), ∂t
∗(n)/∂b (cid:3) 0 for all b (cid:4) b+
S3 For d ∈ (1/(2n), db1), the emission tax is increasing in the

spillover, b, ∂t
with b+ ∈ (0, 1],
∗

spillover, b, ∂t

(n)/∂b > 0,

(Proposition 2) and captures the effect of the emission tax. The effect
on aggregate innovation can be decomposed into a positive direct
effect (ﬁrst term in brackets) and a non-monotonic indirect effect
(second term in brackets) which is further re-enforced by n.

In a similar manner we obtain,

Therefore the non-monotonicity in the variation of t with respect
to c (from Proposition 3) explains these variations of equilibrium
innovation and output. Next we observe that. Proposition 4 is illustrated in Fig. 2, drawn in the space (c, d). Its

properties are invariant in n.

Proposition 4 provides a complete characterisation of the effect
of the spillover on the emission tax. In area S1 a higher spillover is
associated with a reduction in the emission tax as the appropriability
problem is exacerbated and hence points to a lower tax and a lower
incentive to innovate. In area S3, the opposite occurs which appears
counter-intuitive; however, in this area R&D is more diﬃcult (higher
c) and damages are small (low d) so than an increase in the emis-
sion tax is needed to provide the necessary incentive for abatement.
Area S2 is intermediate between areas S1 and S3 where the direction
of the change in the emission tax depends on the magnitude of the
spillover.

Regarding the comparative statics of individual ﬁrm innovation,
ﬁrm output, and aggregate innovation notice that these can be
expressed as functions of the emission tax:

It is evident that the behaviour of individual innovation is deter-
mined by the effect of n on the tax and therefore is non-monotonic
(from Proposition 2). The effect on individual output is also com-
prised of two effects, a negative direct effect (ﬁrst term), which
is the standard result arising from increased competition, and an
indirect effect (second term) which can be negative or positive,
where from Proposition 4 and the non-monotonicity in the variations
of t, we can put in evidence the well known effects of the appro-
priability problem of knowledge (in particular, Proposition 4, part
S1).

Finally, we consider the comparative statics properties of individ-

ual emissions.

Proposition 5. Individual equilibrium emissions are:

(i) decreasing in the number of ﬁrms,
(ii) decreasing in spillovers,
(iii) increasing in R&D eﬃciency,
(iv) decreasing in the severity of environmental damage.

Parts (ii) and (iv) are a direct consequence of the effects identiﬁed
in Proposition 4 (S1 and S2) and Proposition 1 above. Parts (i) and
(iii) are more complex as they combine the non-monotonic effect of
the changes in the emission tax and the direct and indirect effects
associated with changes in R&D and output. It appears that in part
(i) the output direct effect is dominating while in part (iii) the R&D
direct effect dominates.

3.3. Competition and “green” innovation

We now turn to the main research question, i.e., the relationship
between competition and “green” innovation. Recall that we proxy
the intensity of competition by the number of ﬁrms in the market,
n. In order to highlight the role played by R&D spillovers, we con-
sider ﬁrst the case where they are absent, i.e., b = 0. In this instance
aggregate R&D is,
showing a positive relationship between innovation and n, that is, a
clear-cut Arrowian result. We thus state:

Lemma 1. In the absence of R&D spillovers there is a positive relation-
ship between competition and “green” innovation.13

Next we consider the case where R&D spillovers are present, b ∈
(0, 1]. To obtain fully analytical results, we evaluate the shape of the
aggregate R&D function. The main result of the paper is given in the
next Proposition:

Proposition 6 (COMPETITION AND “GREEN” INNOVATION).
For any
given d in the presence of positive R&D spillovers, b ∈ (0, 1], the aggre-
(n) is concave and single peaked. A suﬃcient
gate “green” innovation Z
condition for its maximum to occur at n ≥ 2 is b ∈ (0, min{(1+c)/5, 1}].

∗

Proposition 6, together with Lemma 1, points out that the
inverted-U relationship is driven by the presence of spillovers. It
appears then that it is the presence of the appropriability problem
that is the main driving force for the inverted-U relationship between
competition and innovation (Proposition 6).
In the absence of
spillovers, ﬁrms appropriate fully the results of their R&D in that
they cannot use rivals effort to inﬂuence their tax bill. The only
way to do so is by increasing their own abatement effort, so when
everyone does that aggregate innovation increases. In this instance,
increased competition goes hand-in-hand with increased innovation
(Lemma 1). When spillovers are present, ﬁrms suffer from the appro-
priability problem (R&D results leak out to rivals without payment)
which also erodes market share and unless they have signiﬁcant
market power (i.e., n is low) they are led to cut on innovation expen-
diture, so that aggregate R&D exhibits an inverted-U shape. Some
intuition for this result can be obtained by linking it to the behaviour
of individual innovation and output.14 The inverted-U emerges from
the interaction between the increase in total output, due to com-
petition and an increased number of ﬁrms in the market, and the
decrease in individual innovation. The increase in the total level of
output boosts aggregate innovation, when market structure is com-
posed by a ‘relatively’ small number of ﬁrms. As the number of ﬁrms
increases, the total output effect is more than offset by decreasing
levels of individual innovation.

Proposition 6, the inverted-U relationship, is illustrated in Fig. 3
whereas in Fig. 4 we explore the sensitivity of the inverted-U rela-
tionship to changes in the parameter values. To do this we have run
extensive simulations, reporting here a representative sample. We
set the parameter value at m = 1 for the market size,15 and explore
, for n ∈ [2, 100]. In particu-
the change in aggregate innovation, Z
lar, we vary the severity of environmental damage, d, the degree of
spillover, b and the eﬃciency of R&D, c. The inverted-U appears to be
quite robust with respect to changes in the parameters: Fig. 4 shows
that the level, but not the shape of the inverted-U differs: it increases
with d, while it decreases as b and c increase.

Finally, we offer some brief comments on the question of aggre-
gate innovation, competition and social welfare. An inverted-U rela-
tionship between “green” innovation and competition points to the
existence of the relevant market structure, i.e., number of ﬁrms,
required to attain the maximum innovation. From a policy perspec-
tive, one would want to know whether this industry structure is
welfare maximising. Social welfare at equilibrium is.
At a basic level, concentrating on static welfare, it is well known
that perfect competition is associated with maximising social wel-
fare; in the case examined this would be equivalent to evaluating
Eq. (9) as the number of ﬁrms tends to inﬁnity. This is
Social welfare increases in n with an asymptotic behaviour in the
limit. Therefore, there is a divergence between the market structure
necessary to maximise social welfare (perfect competition) and the
market structure that maximises “green innovation” (oligopolistic,
imperfect competition). Exploring this issue in more detail is left for
further research.

<Conclusion> Concluding remarks.
We have explored the relationship between competition and
innovation when R&D investment aims at reducing polluting emis-
sions. The problem was tackled from a microeconomic angle,
through the analysis of an oligopoly where n ﬁrms compete à la
Cournot and decide their investment in “green” R&D. We have
uncovered an inverted-U relationship between “green” innovation
and competition, which is driven by the presence of R&D spillovers.
We have used the number of ﬁrms as a measure of competition
in the sense that the intensity of competition is increasing in the
number of ﬁrms. This is not, however, the only way in which the
extent of competition can be proxied. Examples of different mea-
sures of competition include the mode of competition (price instead
of quantity), product differentiation, market share and concentra-
tion indices and so on. These approaches may lead to a potentially
different outcome, and are interesting extensions to the present
analysis.

References
