1. Introduction
Within the 1997 United Nations Watercourses Convention it is stated
that riparian states “may, where necessary, consider” harmonizing their
existing agreements with the principles of the convention, thus leaving
the decision whether or not to reevaluate past agreements essentially
up to riparian states (UN, 2014: Article 3). Yet, scholars have emphasized
that reevaluation of past agreements is rather a necessity due to pressing
economic and development needs, as well as new international agendas
(Wegerich and Olsson, 2010; Brooks et al., 2013; Salman, 2014; Wouters,
2014). Similarly, calls for reevaluation of water-sharing agreements have
been voiced in connection with growing environmental concerns and
climate change (Sanchez and Roberts, 2014; World Economic Forum,
2015). While there are large-scale studies on how treaties could be de-
signed for coping best with new challenges and what mechanisms are
utilized within agreements to address changes (e.g., Fischhendler,
2004; Stefano et al., 2010; Drieschova et al., 2011; De Bruyne and
Fischhendler, 2013), there have been only a few studies systematically
showing changes in agreements due to paths taken (Pak et al., 2014;
Soliev et al., 2015). Adapting from the conﬂict and cooperation
continuum approach on international basins (Yoffe et al., 2003; Zeitoun
and Mirumachi, 2008; Sadoff and Grey, 2005), in this article contrasting
degrees of change in formal and de facto riparian water allocation are
systematically analyzed within multiple transboundary sub-basins in
the Ferghana Valley of Central Asia. The purpose of the analysis is to iden-
tify key sources of path dependency determining various degrees of re-
sistance to reallocation and understand how long-term dynamics
between (a) drivers of pressure and (b) sources of path dependency
can lead to various outcomes in riparian water allocation.

Therefore, the focus is not on one agreement, but on the history of
agreements in three case studies selected using the “most similar” com-
parative method (Lijphart, 1971; George and Bennett, 2005). There is no
longitudinal comparative study with an in-depth qualitative analysis
such as this to be found in the current literature; as Cox (2016: 230) ex-
plains, “obtaining high-quality longitudinal data relevant to the study of
human-environment interactions is frequently prohibitively expen-
sive.” The Ferghana Valley, shared by Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbek-
istan, presents an opportunity to apply such an approach, as it has a long
history of changing water agreements on a large number of small
transboundary tributaries with recent research documenting data of
great detail and depth (e.g., Abdullaev et al., 2009; Abdullaev and
Rakhmatullaev, 2016; Pak et al., 2014; Pak and Wegerich, 2014;
Platonov et al., 2014; SIC ICWC, 2011; Soliev et al., 2015; Stucker et al.,
2012; Wegerich et al., 2015; Wegerich et al., 2016). The early
agreements on these transboundary basins go back to the 1940s. Al-
though historically these small tributaries were in the same country,
the Soviet Union, due to the differences in institutional conditions relat-
ed to individual tributaries, each of them has its own history of water-
sharing agreements. We were particularly interested in cases where
sources of path dependency provided strong, moderate, and weak resis-
tance to reallocate over a long period of time to understand how, under
conditions with similar pressure, established institutional arrangements
can resist reform in various ways. To understand the differences in these
established institutional arrangements and their corresponding effects,
dynamics in allocation decisions, protocols of meetings where water-
sharing agreements were reached, historical correspondence, reports
on implementation, wider government documents such as laws,
decrees, and basin management schemes, as well as broader literature
reﬂecting the nature of riparian relationship in the Ferghana Valley
and Central Asia (e.g., Bichsel, 2011; Bucknall et al., 2003; Djanibekov
et al., 2016; Dukhovny and de Shutter, 2011; FAO, 2013; Libert et al.,
2008; O'Hara, 2000; Sehring, 2009) were iteratively studied using an
in-depth qualitative content analysis veriﬁed with information from
key informants in the province water management departments.

The article continues with the theoretical framework explaining the
concept and different degrees of path dependency in riparian water allo-
cation. Then materials and methods are presented, followed by results of
analysis and then discussion of how sources of path dependency can lead
to various outcomes. Finally, discussion is extended to a broader signiﬁ-
cance of the study results for the scholarship on transboundary water
management from an institutional perspective, before drawing main
conclusions in the ﬁnal section.

2. Path Dependency in Riparian Water Allocation.
Path dependency has been emerging as an important concept
explaining the possibility of and the ways that a change can take place
in allocation institutions (Heinmiller, 2009; Theesfeld and MacKinnon,
2014). North (1990, 1994) has argued that while continuously changing
circumstances will put pressure on existing institutions and require
adoption of new solutions, historically formed path dependency in
these institutions will resist or limit the scope of changes. More generally,
in economic literature, path dependency is explained by increasing
returns from staying on the taken path (Arthur, 1994) where sources
such as (i) high setup (and sunk) costs, (ii) learning effects, (iii) coordi-
nation effects, and (iv) adaptive expectations provide the existing insti-
tutions with so-called “positive feedback” (see for example Weber de
Morais et al., 2015 for a summary). In addition, there are sources of
non-increasing returns that in certain combinations with signiﬁcant
ﬁxed (sunk) costs might be sufﬁcient to create path dependency or
lock-in (Arrow, 2000; Marshall, 2005). Among these, Kay (2005)
highlighted (i) vested interests of existing actors, (ii) network effects
from administrative capacities, and (iii) existence of formal and informal
contracts with individuals.

Later, North (2003) reiterated that to be able to understand how a
change takes place in a complex environment and therefore to be able
to bring about successful development reforms, economists need to go
well beyond application of neoclassical concepts such as prices and mar-
kets and recognize that our choices are at all times path dependent at
least to some degree. Within this study, path dependency is explored
as a concept that is seen as especially helpful to understand the often–
complex cross-disciplinary problems of transboundary water manage-
ment. The concept can powerfully address both the adaptability aspect
of transboundary water management, which is crucial for sustainable
management of natural resources in large-scale socio-ecological systems,
as well as the stability aspect, which is particularly important from the
perspective of sustaining constructive international relations. Sjöstedt
(2015: 2) states that “[p]ath dependence is often used to conceptualize
stability rather than change and gives an underlying logic to why partic-
ular paths can be extraordinarily difﬁcult to reverse.” However, he goes
on to emphasize that “the concept is in fact dynamic rather than static
in character” (Sjöstedt, 2015: 2). Further, as Cox (2016: 215) summa-
rizes, in contrast to classical economic perspectives “[t]he perspective
of path dependence is likely to value adaptability more than efﬁciency
as a primary policy goal, or at least to value them in equal measure.”
Yet, this highly cross-disciplinary concept is far from its theoretical satu-
ration and, as Cox (2016: 230) concedes, further research is needed to
understand “what institutional conditions encourage lock-in or adapt-
ability.” In particular, he (ibid.) stresses the need for “more data, speciﬁ-
cally longitudinal and panel data to document patterns over time.” The
three-fold theoretical question of the present study is therefore: (1)
How to strike an appropriate balance between stability and adaptability
or “between permanence and change,” as Pahl-Wostl (2009: 358) puts
it? (2) What are the institutional conditions affecting such a balance?
(3) What can we learn from a longitudinal study in transboundary
water management?

Until recently, the broader literature on the continuous need for
water reallocation in river basins has largely lacked a longitudinal per-
spective. For example, Ohlsson and Turton (1999), and similarly Molle
(2003), argued that growing pressure on water resources would lead
to corresponding adaptation—pushing toward ﬁrst, “more water”, then
“more use per drop” and ﬁnally, “more value per drop”—resulting in sim-
ilar patterns or trajectories of development in river basins. While their
studies focused on forecasting continuously increasing water stress on
the one hand and explaining how societies should adapt in order to
cope with the scarcity on the other hand, possible resistance resulting
from existing institutional arrangements in response to new reforms
has remained unexplored. Likewise, in a more recent work, Molle et al.
(2010: 575) explain “how to best share scarce water supplies” from
state, user, or market perspectives. They stress the increasing economic
importance of reallocations. However, the question of what a realloca-
tion could mean for existing actors and allocation institutions is not cov-
ered. Molle and Berkhoff (2009: 6) show in the reallocation of water
resources from agriculture to cities that “cities select options that go
along the ‘path of least resistance’, whereby economic, social and political
costs are considered in conjunction.”

In addition to water stress, the nature of the established relationship
between riparian states is one of the most commonly identiﬁed factors
when it comes to transboundary water allocation (e.g., Fischhendler,
2004; Zeitoun and Warner, 2006; Mirumachi and Alan, 2007). Trust,
power asymmetry, and riparian position, as well as issue linkages are
among the determinants shaping the relationship between riparian
parties in a transboundary setting. Nevertheless, to this day, there is
hardly any study speciﬁcally focusing on the impact of path dependency
on the dynamics in transboundary water allocations in a systematic way,
with scholars who applied the concept to water reforms being focused
mostly on federal level transboundary cases or path dependencies within
one national jurisdiction (e.g., Heinmiller, 2009; Libecap, 2011; Marshall,
2005, 2013; McCann, 2013; Theesfeld and MacKinnon, 2014; Garrick,
2015; Cox, 2016; Marshall and Alexandra, 2016). Findings of these stud-
ies generally support the argument that reforms are increasingly difﬁcult
with the presence of established allocation institutions. In this respect, a
brief overview by Hensengerth et al. (2012: 27) challenges the often–
replicated contrasting assumption of Wolf (2004) that “… in river basins
with a history of cooperation and institutions to build on, cooperation in
new areas can be achieved more easily than in basins where no institu-
tions exist, since existing mechanisms can be used to exchange informa-
tion and build mutual conﬁdence, which reduces transaction costs.”
Instead, Hensengerth et al. (2012) point to a number of cases where con-
ﬂicts emerged despite established cooperation.

The question is then whether it is possible to distinguish among dif-
ferent degrees of path dependency to explain this varying effect of
established institutions more holistically. Theesfeld and MacKinnon
(2014) suggest that there is a continuum from no or little change to fun-
damental or rapid change. Studying transformations in water allocation
in the US West, they argue that path dependence can result in
incremental changes, where small changes occur without threatening
the survival of the entire system. Within incremental changes,
Theesfeld and MacKinnon (2014: 110) stressed the importance of
distinguishing between “successful,” which accommodate new needs,
and inadequate (“too little too late”) changes, which ultimately allow ac-
cumulated “pressure of unmet needs to push the system over threshold
and collapse.” It is in line with what North (1990) described as adaptive
efﬁciency: incremental change might or might not be efﬁcient in terms of
responding to new challenges (see also Marshall, 2005). To sharpen the
focus further, it is proposed here to distinguish among three continua:
(1) continuum in drivers of pressure, from weak to strong; (2) continu-
um of path dependency, from weak to strong resistance; and (3) contin-
uum consisting of varying degrees of change as a result of collision
between the drivers of pressure and sources of path dependency. For
the purposes of this research, which is interested in sources of path de-
pendency, the possibility of investigating two, ideally three cases (to
allow triangulation), where drivers of pressure could be realistically as-
sumed as constant across these cases, would present an opportunity to
understand intricacies within complex characteristics of path dependen-
cies and their impact on possible outcomes. Given that, we also keep in
mind that both strong resistance to change over a long period with cor-
responding no or little change in outcome, as well as moderate resistance
leading to multiple incremental changes, might equally result in a funda-
mental transformation of the system in the long run (Theesfeld and
MacKinnon, 2014). At the same time, weak resistance can be seen as a
third comparative possibility, which, in the presence of sufﬁciently
strong drivers of pressure, can result in a more immediate fundamental
change. Hence, the logical model of the present research can be illustrat-
ed as presented in Fig. 1. Finally, it should be acknowledged that any out-
come of a reform can contribute to creation of a new or reinforcement
of an existing path dependency (Cox, 2016; see also Thelen, 1999;
Mahoney, 2000; Pierson, 2000).

Obviously, there is often a discrepancy between formal and informal/
de facto water-sharing arrangements. In a complex resource and institu-
tional environment, it is reasonable to expect some discrepancy between
an agreement and its implementation. Among others, Luhmann (1995),
and speciﬁcally from an institutional perspective, North (2003), have
stressed that social systems operate with imperfect information at all
times due to limited cognitive abilities, differences in perceptions and
complexity of the environment. Pak et al. (2014) show how lack of
data to determine annual or decadal ﬂows, inaccurate data due to negli-
gence of maintenance, or lack of control on water abstraction can result
in deviations of implementation from formal sharing agreements of
varying intensities (see also SIC ICWC, 2011). The article intends to ex-
tend this framework by analyzing the long-term changes in water
allocation. In categorization of the presented cases, although the history
of the formal agreements is studied in depth, particular attention is paid
to the de facto outcomes of the implementation of these plans.

<Middle> Materials and Methods.
3.1. Study Area.
The Ferghana Valley is situated in the upstream Syr Darya Basin (Fig.
2). While the central part of the valley covers the territories of Andijan,
Ferghana, and Namangan provinces of Uzbekistan, the surrounding
mountainous slopes are mostly part of Batken, Jalalabad, and Osh prov-
inces of Kyrgyzstan and Sogd province of Tajikistan. The Naryn, with an
average annual discharge of 13.8 km3, and the Karadarya (3.9 km3) orig-
inate in the mountains of Kyrgyzstan and converge in Uzbekistan, forming
the main stem of the Syr Darya (37 km3). The two main tributaries are
regulated by the Toktogul (14 km3 of storage capacity) and Andijan
(1.75 km3) reservoirs; at the exit from the valley the Syr Darya is regulat-
ed by the Kayrakkum (2.6 km3) reservoir. There are also more than 20
smaller transboundary tributaries (STTs) with combined average annual
ﬂow of 7.8 km3. These STTs feed the Naryn, Karadarya, and Syr Darya, as
well as the canals constructed across the valley (Soliev et al., 2015).

3.2. Data.
The data represent interactions among the riparian states on national,
provincial, and district levels signed or prepared to manage the shared
land and water resources and other related matters reﬂected in 24 doc-
uments covering the period between 1946 and 2012 (detailed in
Appendix A). Such documents include minutes of the meetings where al-
location decisions were made (Protocols), agreements, and correspon-
dence between government organizations, as well as reports and
internal notes on implementation of agreed decisions. In addition, data
with main characteristics of transboundary infrastructure (Soliev et al.,
2015) and information on wider relevant developments were derived
from earlier studies (World Bank, 2004; UNEP, 2004; SIC ICWC, 2011).

3.3. Methods.
A most similar comparative approach has been used to select the
cases (Lijphart, 1971; George and Bennett, 2005). Here, the three cases
with a common political and socio-economic background, which over a
long period of time have shared very similar drivers of pressure to real-
locate and had very similar technological development trajectories, are
comparatively analyzed to understand why, despite these similarities,
each case experienced a different degree of resistance to reallocation,
categorized here as strong, moderate, and weak resistance to reallocation
in the long run.

The case studies are based on an in-depth qualitative analysis of the
documents described in Section 3.2. First, the documents are analyzed
to establish the chronology of formal changes in allocations and drivers
of pressure leading to these decisions. Second, informal/de facto changes
are identiﬁed through analysis of documents related to implementation
of water sharing agreements. Third, each case study (see Appendix A) is
examined against the set of explanatory variables reviewed in Section 2:
the reasons for the systematic appearance of resistance to change, as well
as discrepancies between formal and de facto changes in allocations, are
analyzed. As a result of the three-step analysis, key sources of path de-
pendency applicable to riparian water allocation are suggested and
discussed.

It should be noted that the wealth of local knowledge that the team
of authors possesses and their access to further local experts were cru-
cial in verifying ﬁndings of the research derived from the documents,
especially in relation to older documents that were created under the
Soviets, in times when documents might have been intended to obscure
either the process or the result involved in these water allocation agree-
ments. Thus, as the reliance on the documents alone would present a
challenge, in parallel to clarifying the nuances with the experienced
key informants, the authors were exceptionally cautious in their reﬂex-
ive iterations, “visiting and revisiting the data and connecting them with
emerging insights, progressively leading to reﬁned focus and under-
standings” (Srivastava and Hopwood, 2009: 77). In one of the cases, as
will be shown, a comparative analysis of satellite images proved to be
useful to verify long-term developments.

<Conclusion> Results and Discussion.
The comparative summary of the three case studies (consisting of
ﬁve different river basins) highlighting established principal similarities,
differences, and corresponding outcomes is presented in Table 1.
All rivers in the Ferghana Valley largely share a broader history and
have similar techno-ecological basin development trajectories. Histori-
cally, water allocation rules in the valley developed through complex
multilevel decision processes (Soliev et al., 2015; Pak and Wegerich,
2014; Pak et al., 2014). The pre-independence ideology, when the
three riparian states were part of the Union of the Soviet Socialist Repub-
lics (USSR) as Kyrgyz SSR, Tajik SSR, and Uzbek SSR respectively, was to
develop lands to their maximum level and create a system of intercon-
nected water infrastructure: ﬁrst, to regulate the available ﬂow; second,
to be able to transfer water among different sources and reach different
parts of the valley. Despite being part of one country, already starting in
the 1950s the republics gained increased autonomy, directly negotiating
projects with one another. In the 1970s, the central government in Mos-
cow actively encouraged competition and direct dispute resolution be-
tween the republics; in the 1980s it became acceptable if the republics
ofﬁcially challenged the decision of the central government; and in
1992 the new independent states agreed to adhere to the arrangements
existing at the time, thus transferring the legitimacy of allocation agree-
ments, as well as unresolved issues related to them, directly to the new
period (Soliev et al., 2015). Therefore, although often seen as a single com-
plex system, a more detailed look at individual rivers shows their different
pathways of continuous allocation adjustments at different points in time.
The ﬁrst case study, the Maylisai River, shows strong resistance to re-
allocate in de facto arrangements, despite fundamental changes in formal
allocation agreements. The second case study bundles the Sokh,
Isfayramsai, and Shakhimardansai rivers, and displays relatively moderate
resistance, leading to incremental changes in both formal and de facto ar-
rangements. The third case study, the Isfara River, shows weak resistance
to continuous reallocations, as well as a fundamental change in de facto
riparian allocation that followed formal incremental changes. The three
sources of path dependency and their varying degrees of strength
explaining the differences across the three case studies were identiﬁed
as (i) vested interests, (ii) infrastructure control, and (iii) network effects.
The article continues with discussion of the ﬁndings from the three
case studies in more detail (see the detailed description of changes in
allocations in Appendix A). Table 2 provides a more in-depth synthesis
of how formal and de facto changes in riparian water allocation were
triggered and implemented. Please note, to refer to a speciﬁc detail
from Table 2 in our discussion, we use the following acronyms in paren-
thesis (T2: CS2-C5), where, in this example, T2 stands for Table 2, CS2
for Case Study 2, and C5 for Column 5. First, we reﬂect on the longitudi-
nal aspect of the study. This is followed by subsections with individual
discussion on drivers of pressure (Section 4.1) and sources of path de-
pendency (Section 4.2), as well as on interplay among these drivers of
pressure and sources of path dependency (Section 4.3). The ﬁnal sub-
section discusses broader implications of the ﬁndings (Section 4.4).

For the precision of analysis, it is important to distinguish short- and
long-term outcomes (T2: C9 and C10): the ﬁrst is seen in comparison of
the changes within a case study and the other is among the case studies
from a broader longitudinal perspective.

On the one hand, each case has had its own little-to-fundamental
changes. The gradual ﬁlling of the Tortgul reservoir and corresponding
increases in the Kyrgyz share on the Isfara River (T2: CS3-C9; Appendix
A: CS3) might be seen as incremental changes in the short-term, but
the mutual exclusion of riparian states altogether (Uzbekistan from the
Isfara and Tajikistan from the BFC) can be seen as a fundamental change
in the long run. In contrast, while the change to 50/50 sharing in the
Sokh, Isfayramsai, and Shakhimardansai through an oral agreement in
2001 (T2: CS2-C9; Appendix A: CS3) might be seen as a fundamental
change in the short-term, in the long run it can be viewed as part of in-
cremental changes, as the de facto sharing did not change as fundamen-
tally over time (Appendix A: Fig. A2). As expected, in relation to the time
horizon taken in the analysis, it can be seen that a series of incremental
changes over a long period of time can cumulate in very signiﬁcant
changes in institutions (Theesfeld and MacKinnon, 2014). Thus, the de-
gree of change at one place might look different if one were to consider
the effectiveness of implementation and a longer time perspective.

On the other hand, comparing the cumulative outcomes from the
three case studies allows deliberating on sources of path dependency
leading to the different long-term outcomes.

The institutional analysis shows that the longer the history of relations
on a river or bundle of rivers was, the larger the “baggage” (sources of
path dependency) became, in terms of both number of issues and pent-
up pressure from certain individual issues. The scope and nature of each
subsequent change was clearly affected by the accumulated issues. This
highlights the importance of longitudinal studies to better understand
the changes. The ﬁndings support the argument that a long-term relation-
ship between riparian states, even if cooperative, does not necessarily
mean that reallocation in such basins will be easier; a change in such
settings, in fact, might prove more complicated. For example, for down-
stream Uzbekistan, improving the infrastructure, such as in the case of
the reconstruction of the BFC in the Isfara case (Appendix A: CS3) or in-
creased ﬂow regulation through a number of reservoirs in the Isfayramsai
and Shakhimardansai case (Appendix A: CS2) resulted in fact in continu-
ous pressure from upstream Kyrgyzstan beyond previously agreed alloca-
tions. Such continuous pressure obviously creates strong disincentives to
improve internal use or report any gains, as it would entail new demands
to reconsider allocations. However, we have also observed that on-de-
mand informal communication channels (telephone calls or so called
telegrams—instant message services) through which lower level province
and district level ofﬁcials contacted their neighbors were sometimes use-
ful to prevent situations from getting “worse”, especially in cases of emer-
gencies such as ﬂoods or droughts. Nevertheless, provinces reported that
these communication channels became increasingly ineffective with the
basin closure, that is, after all water resources were allocated for use
(the late 1970s).

4.1. Drivers of Pressure Leading to a New Allocation.
As noted, the rivers in the Ferghana Valley generally share similarity
in terms of drivers of pressure to reallocate. Most of the pressure to get
“more water” resulted from the continuous plans to expand and main-
tain irrigated areas, with all of the selected basins set as priority areas for
such expansion since the early 1970s (Wegerich et al., 2016). These
plans were implemented primarily by integrating new infrastructure,
such as canal and pump-stations (Appendix A: CS1), as well as reser-
voirs (Appendix A: CS2 and CS3). To gain more water, riparian republics
also attempted to optimize allocations across different sources, as in the
case of the 1980 Protocol, where all small transboundary tributaries in
the Ferghana Valley were considered in conjunction (T2: C3). Finally,
the pressure to reallocate was similarly intensiﬁed after the closure of
the river basins, as a riparian state with less developed irrigated
areas—Kyrgyzstan—increasingly requested greater shares (Soliev et al.,
2015). This is in line with what earlier studies have suggested and gen-
erally could be seen as states pursuing their development plans
(Ohlsson and Turton, 1999; Molle, 2003; Molle et al., 2010).

An interesting ﬁnding is that a need for “more water” intensiﬁed the
pressure when an agreement was not implemented timely. It can be
seen how delays in measurement and amendment of irrigated areas in
the Maylisai (Appendix A: CS1) and delays in approval and implementa-
tion of the LSKR Canal and Sokh reservoir resulted in sharp unilateral
changes by Kyrgyzstan later on (Appendix A: CS2). However, looking
at the drivers of pressure alone still does not fully reveal the different pat-
terns in the long-term changes.

Two further drivers of pressure to reallocate water that have been ob-
served are ﬁnancial shocks and climatic changes. The collapse of the So-
viet Union created signiﬁcant ﬁnancial difﬁculties for all riparian states.
As Moscow stopped ﬁnancing the republics, now they were on their
own with massive and already aging infrastructure, requiring more in-
vestments in operation and maintenance. The states had to restore eco-
nomic and social stability and water became even more crucial for the
national economies than before. Upstream Kyrgyzstan started using the
Toktogul to produce more hydropower (Appendix A: CS3), downstream
could not fully fulﬁll its commitments to complete construction of the
Sokh reservoir (Appendix A: CS2-3) and started to look for solutions to
meet its demands internally. At the same time, the riparian provinces
had to adjust their shares as a result of weather extremes, as in the exam-
ple of the Sokh, Isfayramsai, and Shakhimardansai in 2001 through an
oral agreement (T2: CS2-C9; Appendix A: CS2). However, it was not pos-
sible to establish whether this was a one-time or continuous adjustment,
although the data provided in the province reports indicate that the de
facto allocation was not affected signiﬁcantly, especially in the Sokh. Sim-
ilar to the ﬁndings of Marshall and Alexandra (2016), both ﬁnancial and
climatic shocks could be described as crises that tested the existing sys-
tem and led to increased pressure across all three cases.

4.2. Sources of Path Dependency and Resistance to Change.
The key sources of path dependency observed within the case studies
(Tables 1 and 2 and Appendix A) are hereby grouped and explained as
follows:

(i) Vested interests: institutionalization of water as a source of (eco-
nomic) beneﬁts creates opportunistic incentives; a riparian party
with established entitlement resists reallocation affecting its
share or beneﬁts negatively.

In the analyzed cases, vested interests were found to be institutional-
ized within the proportional allocation principle: this overarching princi-
ple connected the area of land included in the agricultural production
plan to the water entitlements. In contrast to the existing literature
(e.g., Kay, 2005; Heinmiller, 2009; Cox, 2016; Marshall and Alexandra,
2016), vested interests here are not directly of established individual
actors; rather, they are more systemic. The more land a riparian party
could include in the scheme, the more water could be claimed to irrigate
these lands. One could question the legitimacy of these claims and why
they were so persistent after independence despite new national socio-

economic as well as ecological priorities in the water sector. Changing
priorities could provide good reasons to readjust or make new claims.
Yet, similar to what was found for post-socialist states elsewhere, in
the ﬁrst decade of transformation the focus was on land restitution and
privatization processes, while reforms in the agricultural water sector
were rather a mere by-product of these processes (Theesfeld, 2008).
Thus, in the absence of new clear strategic decisions, especially on the
province level, it appears to have been easier to stick to the old propor-
tional allocation argument for a while. The most notable example from
the case studies is the clause in the 1966 Maylisai agreement (T2: CS1-
C3; Appendix A: CS1) calling for a clariﬁcation of the irrigated area within
the basin, which led to long-standing disagreements. A clariﬁcation was
clearly hindered by vested interests, since it could have implied a reduc-
tion of the water share. Generally, vested interests were present at all
times (in the other two cases, the riparian parties had vested interests
in greater shares at all times, too) and hence can be seen as the main
source of path dependency; however, this very universal presence of
vested interests does not help understand the differences in paths.

(ii) Infrastructure control: infrastructure built for implementing allo-
cation decisions creates a long-lasting control over water; control
over infrastructure enables its holder(s) to implement unilateral
decisions.

The cases demonstrated that the control over infrastructure was cru-
cial for the negotiations of an allocation path. It shows that large infra-
structure costs cannot be fully seen as sunk costs (as for example in
Heinmiller, 2009; Marshall and Alexandra, 2016). The control that
comes with the water infrastructure, especially in a transboundary set-
ting, indeed has a signiﬁcant value for decision making over time. In the
Maylisai (Appendix A: CS1), when Andijan province had control, it
could implement its plans even when contested by its riparian province.
With the loss of control over the infrastructure due to difﬁculties in bor-
der crossing, Jalalabad province, the upstream riparian province, gained
increased control and started implementing its own plan. The unilateral
withdrawals by Kyrgyzstan in the Sokh (irrigation networks in the
Burgandy massif) (Appendix A: CS2) and Isfara (Tortgul reservoir)
(Appendix A: CS3) also exemplify how control over infrastructure trig-
gered de facto changes. Overall, infrastructure appears to provide the
means to materialize vested interests.

(iii) Network effects: physical and institutional complexity of the sys-
tem within and across jurisdictions makes it difﬁcult to undertake
partial reforms without undertaking reforms of the entire socio-
techno-ecological network; (a) multiple governance levels of ad-
ministrative responsibilities, (b) physical interdependence of in-
frastructure, and (c) issue linkages within agreements make up
the network effects. Further, (d) lack of information and knowl-
edge intensify them.

The analysis showed how the continuously increasing physical (in-
frastructure) and institutional (protocols and decisions with references
to one another) complexity created room for justiﬁcation of unilateral
plans. Further, decisions were often made on one level, while actors on
lower levels, responsible for implementation, did not see the big picture
and lost track of earlier connections over time. This is in line with earlier
explanations of network effects (e.g., Heinmiller, 2009; Cox, 2016) and
broadens this category of path dependency sources by singling out its
sub-categories. In the Maylisai case, while there was a clear agreement
at the beginning, interpretation of the sharing principle was increasingly
contested by the actors involved later (whether intentionally or due to
loss of knowledge) (Appendix A: CS1). The increased use of the Maylisai
River by Andijan province in the 1980s, as claimed by the Kyrgyz side,
was implicitly justiﬁed as a response to reduced inﬂows on other rivers
(Akburasai, Aravansai) (Appendix A: CS1). The history of the Burgandy
massif demonstrates how details of the earlier agreements on expansion
in the Burgandy linked to the Toktogul and Andijan reservoirs in the
1960s were partially lost by the 1980s (Appendix A: CS2). The increased
unilateral withdrawals in the Sokh (Appendix A: CS2) and Isfara
(Appendix A: CS3) by Batken province were explicitly justiﬁed with
the non-completion of the LSKR Canal. In 1989, the signiﬁcant increase
in the Kyrgyz share from the Sokh (greater than what was previously
agreed) did not prevent them from continuing their claims on the LSKR
Canal and Sokh reservoir (Appendix A: CS2). Indeed, the room for ma-
nipulation becomes greater in the absence or obsolescence of metering
and monitoring infrastructure able to provide all riparian parties with
neutral and instant ﬂow of data, as well as possible loss of nuances due
to changes in staff.

4.3. Interplay among Drivers of Pressure and Sources of Path Dependency
Determining the Degree of Change.
Overall, while control over infrastructure provides the means to ma-
terialize the vested interests, network effects provide the room to justify
unilateral decisions should a riparian party deviate from an agreement.
Based on the conducted research, how interplay among the sources of
path dependency can affect the forthcoming degree of change in reallo-
cation is illustrated in Fig. 3.

Institutional change, exempliﬁed here as new formal allocation
agreements, can encompass both (i) ﬂexibility, which enables adaptation
to upcoming challenges and (ii) path dependency, which limits ﬂexibil-
ity. A balance between these two can determine whether and how fast
an institution can adapt to possible changes or fails to do so and collapses
(Theesfeld and MacKinnon, 2014). The discrepancy between formal and
de facto agreements is partly due to the fact that the formal changes
might call for more than the actors are in a position to give, based on
their actual circumstances, resulting in path dependency and only
allowing an incremental change. A parallel could be drawn with a num-
ber of multilateral environmental agreements: countries might join
them under pressure from the international community and commit
themselves to goals that are sometimes (rightly) ambitious; however,
compliance might prove difﬁcult due to countries’ internal constraints,
resulting in varying degrees of discrepancy in fulﬁllment of those com-
mitments. One cannot exclude the possibility where such behavior
might be deliberate, that is, part of a strategy (to gain advantages of
being a party or avoid disadvantages of not being a party, or consolidate
power, etc.).

Three de facto outcomes have been distinguished: no or little, incre-
mental, and fundamental change as a result of a reform. The analysis
shows that a fundamental change might occur because of both no or lit-
tle change due to strong resistance over long time leading to unresolved
pent-up pressure (Maylisai case) and a number of incremental changes
(Isfara case, partly Sokh, Isfayramsai, and Shakhimardansai case) due to
moderate or weak resistance. However, the obvious difference is wheth-
er such a fundamental change is a shock to the system or a planned and
better controllable transition. Thus, an incremental de facto change in
water allocation that is in line with incremental formal changes might
be more sustainable in the long run.

In particular, the effect of issue linkages should be highlighted. Al-
though issue linkages, such as those established with land and energy
sectors or across different river basins, helped at the negotiation phase
and served as an enforcement mechanism during implementation
(reverse riparian positions); separation of previously linked issues facil-
itated reallocations. Though the implication was (partially) revoked pre-
vious commitments. In the Maylisai, the long-standing contested
interpretations were a result of the strong network effects due to the
complexity of new infrastructure and issue linkages with other sources.
Separation from the Karadarya helped to change allocations in the
Isfayramsai and Shakhimardansai. Further, the upgrade of Batken district
to a province level effectively delinked commitments of Osh province in
the cases of Sokh, Isfayramsai, and Shakhimardansai, as well as in the
case of the Isfara. The latter demonstrates how riparian parties would
prefer parting ways, if it were possible technically.

Finally, although the outcomes with fundamental change within
each case study manifested themselves differently (exclusion of ripari-
an parties in the Isfara; 50/50 sharing in the Sokh, Isfayramsai, and
Shakhimardansai; acceptance of 82/18 by Uzbekistan in the Maylisai),
their timing points to how ﬁnancial and climatic shocks intensiﬁed the
vested interests. The independence and consequences thereof (loss of
technical control over water, land reforms, budget cuts, administrative
reforms, competing sectors for state support) and increased variability
due to climatic changes, for example the drought in 2001, appear to
have been the ﬁnal trigger for the outburst of pent-up pressure (Fig. 3).

4.4. Broader Implications: Vested Interests, Infrastructure Control, and Net-
work Effects.
Assuming vested interests present as they were in our cases, infra-
structure upstream and being in unilateral control of the infrastructure
appears to be a general risk for stability in relationship of riparian
parties with “baggage,” where an upstream riparian party has develop-
ment needs/ambitions related to shared water resources (Wegerich and
Olsson, 2010). This phenomenon can be proven also in other parts of the
world, such as in the recent advances in the construction of the Grand
Ethiopian Renaissance Dam in the Nile that made Egypt negotiate
with Ethiopia (Tawﬁk, 2015). The accumulated pressure from long-
standing disagreements with no or little change resulted in a funda-
mental change. Looking further broadly, the lack of ultimate overarch-
ing authority in a transboundary setting—the distinguishing feature of
transboundary water management—makes dialogue and whether one
can convince the other riparian party (parties) as well as the interna-
tional community increasingly important for how much resistance
intended reforms will face. “Soft power of persuasion” described by
Zeitoun et al. (2011: 159) comes into play. However, while persuasion
implies that there is a side to be persuaded, network effects simply pro-
vide unilateral justiﬁcation, meaning without the need to persuade the
counterpart. Persuasion implies that action follows explanation; the
danger in case of network effects is that it is the opposite: explanation
follows action. Then, the question of whether upstream honors an
agreement or not increasingly becomes a matter of justiﬁcation, ampli-
fying the uncertainty for downstream with each infrastructure project
upstream. Therefore, it might be understandable that countries down-
stream are often opposed to upstream large-scale infrastructure and
generally prefer smaller incremental changes.

At the same time, for incremental changes to be effective or to
achieve adaptive efﬁciency (North, 1990; Marshall, 2005; Garrick,
2015), it is important that a reform has minimal network effects,
preventing unpredictable discrepancy between an agreement and its im-
plementation. The ﬁndings on the network effects are also interesting in
the light of recent literature, with classic economic objectives aiming at
achieving a positive sum and increasingly viewing issue linkages and
beneﬁt sharing as tools for enhancing cooperation (e.g., Sadoff and
Grey, 2002; Sadoff and Grey, 2005; Phillips et al., 2006; Pham Do et al.,
2012). While considering more options indeed increases the chances of
reaching a new agreement, increased complexity affects implementation
of agreements, both by reducing controllability of individual issues (see
also Zeitoun et al. (2016) for importance of analysis ﬁtting the state of
knowledge processed) and by creating linkages where a side with a
more favorable position could take advantage on other linked issues
(Soliev et al., 2015). Similarly, the ﬁndings on network effects expand
the hydro-hegemony framework (Zeitoun and Warner, 2006): sequenc-
ing of arguments might sufﬁce in combination with a favorable riparian
position and exploitation potential for exercising hegemony, which
makes power as such (e.g., military, economic) much less relevant.

Finally, it is quite illuminating how sufﬁciently strong network ef-
fects, where riparian parties are in need of development but do not
have technical capacities to fully monitor water ﬂow, can create paths in-
herently unfavorable to trust. Even when a riparian party receives less
water due to natural variability, the accumulated “baggage” in relation-
ship can easily push this riparian party toward defensive strategies.
This riparian party will have to compensate its “loss” from other sources
or in other ways altogether (through arrangements in other sectors) due
to pressing development needs, since efﬁcient negotiation is highly un-
likely. That, in turn, will most likely have reciprocal consequences, lead-
ing to an endless domino effect. Hence, it appears that establishing full
technical control of runoff—transparent measuring infrastructure
allowing instant ﬂow of data for all sides and continuity of highly profes-
sional staff—should be of highest priority and the starting point in cases
with a rich history of relationship and aging infrastructure. In our partic-
ular cases, improving stability rather than adaptability in the riparian re-
lations should be of higher priority for sustainability of the system
(Sjöstedt, 2015; Cox, 2016). Improving clarity of data should be followed
by achieving absolutely clear decisions on validity of historical agree-
ments. Only when the data and rules are not constantly questioned,
does reallocation in an environment of high institutional and geographic
complexity become implementable in an effective way.

5. Conclusions.
The study examined how negotiation and implementation of realloca-
tion decisions among transboundary riparian states in the Ferghana Valley
encountered three different—strong, moderate, and weak—degrees of re-
sistance from sources of path dependency. It showed how development
needs and ﬁnancial and climatic shocks pushed toward reallocation. How-
ever, the resistance from the three sources of path dependency—(i) vested
interests, (ii) infrastructure control, and (iii) network effects—determined
the degree of change in outcome. The universal positive feedback proved
to be from vested interests, as an incentive of “getting more water” was
institutionalized within the proportional sharing principle. The strongest
manifestation of vested interests took place when large infrastructure
granted control, and network effects (complexity) provided a reason for
implementation of unilateral plans. The latter was found to be the most
decisive source of path dependency. Strong network effects led to persis-
tence of delay in implementation of reallocation over a long time. The par-
tial and gradual separation of issues and therefore moderate or reduced
network effects resulted in corresponding incremental reallocations. It
was in case of weak network effects when existing issues in bundle
were delinked both physically and institutionally, that the fundamental
change leading to exclusion of riparian parties took place.

Overall, the study brought forward the importance of dealing with
“baggage,” that is, the sources of path dependency, to be able to effective-
ly respond to new challenges. The success of reforms, negotiation, and
implementation of new allocation decisions will greatly depend on
how well these processes take into account the unresolved issues and
pent-up pressure. Just as the International Network of Basin Organiza-
tions (INBO) has recently called for quick actions in connection with
the 2015 Paris Pact (INBO, 2016), the growing pressure to get “more
water,” “more drop per use,” and “more value per drop” will move
transboundary riparian states toward reforms (infrastructure projects,
optimization models). In this context, knowledge about the riparian po-
sition along the continuum of path dependency, as well as on the inter-
play of key sources of path dependency, will be necessary to achieve an
agreement on reallocations and to make the formal reallocations effec-
tive. The ﬁndings of the study highlighted the central role of clarity in
knowledge and hence improving technical and personnel capacities,
and the need for caution in respect of reforms intensifying network ef-
fects, which in the long run increase complexity and make the system
highly prone to ﬁnancial and climatic shocks. This is especially important
in the light of increasingly promoted approaches in environmental gov-
ernance calling for higher levels of integration within and across jurisdic-
tions, as well as across sectors and issues, despite the economic appeal
such approaches might have at ﬁrst sight.

Acknowledgments
