

1. Introduction


Oil ranks among the most volatile non-agricultural commodities in the
world and this volatility has increased in recent years due mainly to the
recent global ﬁnancial crises, the surge in production of shale oil and the
change in OPEC's policy from the quota mechanism to the market
share maximization. Oil prices dropped from $147/barrel in July 2008 to
$32/barrel in March 2009 due particularly to the global ﬁnancial crisis of
2008–2009 and then climbed to more than $100/barrel in the ﬁrst quarter
of 2011, rising in-line with the global economic recovery. They dropped
again in 2015 to under $50/barrel, where they have stayed, as a result of
Saudi Arabia's decision seeking a greater market share as well as the in-
creases in shale oil production. In January 2016, the U.S. oil prices plunged
below $27/barrel for the ﬁrst time since 2003 due to a rise in global oil
inventories, concurrently with traders also worried that the crude supply
glut could linger. Therefore, the oil volatility shocks are a major source of
instability for the world economy, and they particularly impact the future
economic health of oil-exporting countries that depend on oil exports for
most of their revenues. Under these circumstances, these countries have
had to dip into their foreign reserves and thereby have seen their credit
ratings drop signiﬁcantly, while the premiums on their credit default
swaps (CDS) have soared because these credit derivatives generally mea-
sure the expected credit risk, fear, default, greed and future economic per-
formance of countries (Hammoudeh et al., 2013a, 2013b; Hammoudeh
and Sari, 2011).

A CDS contract is the most common type of credit derivatives that
offers protection against adverse credit events. The market price of a
CDS (called a CDS premium or a spread) reﬂects the risk of the underlying
credit asset. A CDS index is a highly liquid, standardized credit security
that trades at a very small bid-ask spread. CDSs can thus be efﬁcient in
processing information on evolving risks in the economies. For a sover-
eign CDS, a credit event is equivalent to a debt-issuing country defaulting
on its debt payment commitments (Broto and Pérez-Quirós, 2015). The
magnitude of the credit spreads gauges the degree of the default risk ex-
posure of the country, where a widening of a CDS spread in response to
certain oil events indicates an increase in the level of credit risk and vice
versa. The CDSs for the oil-exporting countries have widened differently
in reaction to the drops in oil prices, but they are expected to narrow
when those prices surge.

It is widely accepted that oil prices play a major role in determining
economic activity in many economies, particularly those of the oil ex-
porters. In this sense, it has been well documented that oil price
volatility shocks have a substantial impact on industrial activity, stock
and credit markets performance and economic growth, even though
the effects differ considerably across countries and industries. For exam-
ple, negative oil price shocks generally lead to an economic slowdown
in net oil-exporting countries and have differential impacts on capital
market participants, while the effect on economic growth tends to be
beneﬁcial for net oil-importing countries.

The recent Eurozone sovereign debt crisis has renewed the debate
on the sovereign CDS market. The perceived risk and dramatic jumps
in the sovereign spreads during the crisis, the recent collapse of oil
prices since June 2014 and the ensuing elevation in economic uncertain-
ty have motivated us to investigate the impact of oil market uncertainty
on sovereign CDS spreads for a group of diverse oil-exporting countries.
The oil-exporting countries included in this study are Bahrain, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia and United Arab Emirates (UAE), which make up most of
the GCC bloc, as well as Brazil, Norway, Russia, Mexico, and Venezuela
which are important oil producers and exporters. These countries are
selected based on data availability for their CDS spreads. These diverse
oil exporters are different in terms of their relative dependency on oil
revenues, amounts of foreign reserves, sizes of foreign debt-to-GDP
and levels of credit ratings.

The primary objectives of this paper are twofold. First, to examine the
impact of the oil market uncertainty (proxied by the CBOE Crude Oil Vol-
atility Index known as the OVX index) on the sovereign credit spreads
(proxied by sovereign CDS spreads) of the four GCC and other ﬁve
major oil-exporting countries. Second, to discern the differences in the
responses of the sovereign CDS spreads of the different oil exporters to
the implied oil volatility shocks since important lessons can be learned
from those differences. The study is conducted by a time-varying ap-
proach based on the modiﬁed bootstrap-rolling window procedure in
order to study the directional predictability between oil uncertainty
and sovereign credit risk for those oil-exporting countries over different
time periods, particularly during the times when oil volatility follows ris-
ing and falling trends. To check the robustness of our estimations, we use
the quantile dependence measure through the cross-quantilogram ap-
proach to detect dependence across the entire range of quantiles or mar-
ket conditions.

We examine the order of integration of the time series variables by
using the Narayan and Popp (2010) unit root test, which accounts for
the presence of two structural breaks that the classical Augmented
Dickey and Fuller (1979) and the Phillips and Perron (1988) unit
root tests cannot. The presence of structural breaks in the data renders
linear or full sample estimates of the implied oil volatility and the sov-
ereign CDS spreads unreliable. Therefore, because structural changes
exist in the oil markets and the countries that depend on them,
an analysis that employs the rolling window approach reﬂects more
directional predictability between the variables than the linear
models.

Using the daily data from January 1, 2009, to June 30, 2016, our empir-
ical results can be summarized as follows. (i) There is a signiﬁcant direc-
tional predictability from oil uncertainty to CDSs for Qatar, Bahrain, Saudi
Arabia and Norway, particularly during the 2014–2015 oil price collapse
which could be due to their governments' active ﬁscal stabilization poli-
cies. (ii) A signiﬁcant directional predictability is also found for the foreign
exchange reserves poor Mexico mostly during the 2014 oil collapse, and
for the likewise Venezuela during the 2011–2013 rising volatility.
(iii) No directional predictability is found in the case of Brazil, probably

muted by the country's signiﬁcant political risks.1 The alarming results
for the foreign reserves-poor Mexico and Venezuela may ﬂash a red ﬂag
for the foreign reserves-rich GCC countries if such countries run out of
their large foreign assets, which are currently depleting their reserves.

This study differs from, and adds to, the related literature on sover-
eign CDS spread dynamics in several ways. First, it investigates the
directional predictability from the oil market uncertainty to sovereign
credit spreads for important oil-exporting countries across different
rolling windows based on a time-varying framework in the presence
of structural breaks. This has not been researched before in the litera-
ture. Second, it examines whether the sovereign CDS spreads of these
oil-rich countries are more (less) exposed and in varying degrees to
the effects of oil market uncertainty, which have been adversely impact-
ed by recent oil price shocks. Third, our recent sample period (January 1,
2009, to June 30, 2016) allows us to investigate the CDS impact of the
recent collapse of oil prices and also contains both low and high volatility
subperiods, leading one to discern how diverse oil market uncertainty is
transmitted to those sovereign CDS spreads. Finally, we compare the
results between the GCC and the other oil-exporting countries under
different market conditions to discern whether lessons can be learned
for the future from foreign reserves-poor oil producing countries. The
countries under consideration differ regarding their oil reserves, foreign
reserves, population, labour markets, and exchange rate mechanisms
among other ﬁnancial and economic speciﬁcations.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews
the related literature. Section 3 discusses the empirical model. Section 4
describes the data and presents preliminary statistics. Section 5 analyzes
the empirical results. Section 6 gives concluding comments.

2. Literature review.
The growing importance of both private and sovereign CDS markets
has led to the opening of different lines of theoretical and empirical
studies. Many of these studies have investigated the relationship be-
tween private CDS spreads and stock market conditions (e.g., Bystrom,
2006; Zhang et al., 2009; Naifar, 2012, among others) and with bond
markets (e.g., Zhu, 2006; Wagner, 2008, among others). Other empirical
studies argue that ﬁnancial and economic uncertainty factors should
matter for the dynamics of CDS spreads, particularly around and in the
wake of the two recent global ﬁnancial crises (e.g., Sum, 2012;
Antonakakis et al., 2013; Li et al., 2015; Ko and Lee, 2015; Wisniewski
and Lambe, 2015, among others). More recently, some empirical studies
focus on the impact of oil prices on private CDS spreads. Da-Fonseca
et al. (2016) examine the relationship between the CDS spreads for
the energy market and oil futures price dynamics during the period
from 2004 to 2013. These studies ﬁnd that the relationship between
CDS spreads and energy prices is stronger during volatile periods
which had strengthened after the 2008–2009 global ﬁnancial crisis.
Lahiani et al. (2016) investigate the transmission process from oil prices
to the sector CDS index spreads for the banking, ﬁnancial services and
insurance sectors in the United States from 2004 to 2014. They ﬁnd no
relationship for the short run dynamics between oil prices and the
CDS spreads of the banking and ﬁnancial service sectors.

Another strand of the recent empirical CDS literature focuses on the
sovereign CDS spreads. Longstaff et al. (2011) ﬁnd a link between sover-
eign CDS spreads and global risk factors. They conclude that the sovereign
CDS spreads can be explained by the U.S. equity market returns, equity
volatility, and bond market risk premia. Moreover, Ang and Longstaff
(2013) show that the systemic risk component of the sovereign CDS
spreads is inﬂuenced by global ﬁnancial factors and that there is no rela-
tionship with macroeconomic variables. The studies on sovereign CDSs
during and after the recent European sovereign debt crisis focus mainly
on the joint dynamics between the sovereign and bank CDS markets
(e.g., Alter and Schuler, 2012; Dieckmann and Plank, 2012, among others)
and the relationship between sovereign risk and spillovers of the ﬁnancial
contagion (e.g., Kalbaska and Gatkowski, 2012, among others).

Despite the increasing shift to researching the sovereign CDS mar-
kets, most of the literature is focused on the determinants of sovereign
CDS spreads, spillovers and contagion and the relationship with global
ﬁnancial and economic uncertainty factors. Additionally, most of the
empirical studies focus mainly on the European area market and a few
emerging markets.

The aim of the current study, which considers the recent collapse of
oil prices in its sample period, is to shift the investigation to the GCC and
other more diverse oil-exporting countries, which has not been
researched before, to analyze the directional predictability from the oil
market uncertainty to the sovereign CDS markets and draw lessons for
the future based on the results of the foreign reserve-rich oil exporting
countries. Further, we deepen the analysis of the strength of the direc-
tional dependence during different market conditions by using a time-
varying methodology based on the rolling-window causality approach.
We also seek to detect red ﬂags from one group of oil-producing coun-
tries that can provide insights into another oil-producing group during
different market conditions.

<Middle> Methodology.
Both symmetric (Toda and Yamamoto, 1995) and asymmetric
(Hatemi-j, 2012) causality approaches are not free from criticism. For
instance, Shukur and Mantalos (1997) demonstrate that the Toda and
Yamamoto (1995) causality test has low explanatory and power prop-
erties, and thus misleading causality results for small and medium sam-
ple sizes. Furthermore, Tang (2013) points out that the Toda and
Yamamoto (1995) and Hatemi-j (2012) causality approaches are un-
able to capture the time-varying causality features as these rely on full
sample estimates.

To accommodate structural breaks and shifts in parameters, we use
the Hurn et al. (2015) and Shi et al. (2016) rolling-window causality
methods, and also the cross-quantilogram approach as a robustness
check. Hurn et al. (2015) and Shi et al. (2016) show that the rolling-
window approach yields the best results in comparison with the
forward and recursive rolling approaches for stationary and possibly
integrated systems, respectively. Shi et al. (2016) also examine the
lag-augmented VAR (LA-VAR) rolling-window approach following
Toda and Yamamoto (1995). To examine the directional dependence
from oil volatility to sovereign CDS spreads, we apply the bootstrapped
rolling window predictability procedure to overcome the above
highlighted issues. Zapata and Rambaldi (1997) note that the test is
more convenient and provides efﬁcient results not only for larger sam-
ples but also for small samples due to its good size and explanatory
power properties. Furthermore, Mantalos (2000) proves that the
bootstrap test exhibits the highest accuracy in all estimates, regardless
of the cointegration properties. These pioneering ﬁndings motivate
our choice of the bootstrap Granger causality test, which relies on the
following bivariate VAR(p) speciﬁcation:
where εt=(ε1t,ε2t)′ is a zero-mean independent white noise process
with the nonsingular covariance matrix ∑. For a simplistic representa-
tion, we separate yt into two sub vectors, the ﬁrst one is related to the
CDS spreads of GCC and other oil-exporting countries (y1t), and the

second one is related to the OVX index (y2t). Then we rewrite Eq. (1)
in the following form:
where, ϕij(L)=∑k=1
p ϕij,kLk,i,j=1,2 and L is the lag operator deﬁned as
Lkxt= xt −k.2 In this setting, we test the null hypothesis that the OVX
does not Granger-cause the CDS spread by imposing the zero restric-
tions ϕ12,i=0 for i=1,2,…,p.

To overcome the issue of structural instability resulting from struc-
tural breaks, we employ the rolling and recursive rolling window
Granger causality approaches. The structural changes may be the
cause of the shift in parameters that seems to alter the direction of the
dependence between the variables. For the rolling window approach,
we ﬁx the rolling window size, and then the directional dependence is
determined for each subsample, and the ﬁxed rolling window moves
forward until the last sample's observation is reached. The recursive
rolling approach estimates the test statistics for a backward-
expanding sample sequence. For each observation of interest (f ∈ [ f0,
1]), the Wald statistics are computed for the backward expanding sam-
ple sequence. As indicated above, the end point of the sample sequence
is ﬁxed at f. However, the starting point of the samples extends back-
ward from (f – f0), which is the minimum sample size to accommodate
the regression, to 0. The Wald statistic obtained for each subsample re-
gression is denoted by Wf2 (f1), and the sup-Wald statistic is deﬁned as this.
Let fe and ff denote the origination and termination points in the
directional relationship, respectively. These points are estimated as
the ﬁrst chronological observation that respectively exceeds or falls
below the critical value. In a single switch case, the dating rules are
given by the following crossing times where cv and scv are the corresponding critical values of the Wf and SWf
statistics, respectively. Now, suppose there are multiple switches in the
sample period. We denote the origination and terminations of the ith di-
rectional dependence by fie and fif for successive episodes i = 1, 2, …, I.
The estimations of the dates associated with the ﬁrst episode (i.e., f1e
and f1f) are exactly the same as those for the single switch case. For
i ≥ 2, fie and fif are estimated as follows.
Further, following Shi et al. (2016), we consider both the standard
test statistics and the heteroskedastic-consistent versions of the tests.
The heteroskedastic-consistent subsample Wald statistic is denoted by this.
The simulation results of Hurn et al. (2015) suggest that the rolling
window approach has the most severe size distortion but also has the
highest correct detection rate. In a single direction scenario, the perfor-
mance of the recursive rolling approach is relatively balanced - both the
test size and correct detection rates are satisfactory. Nevertheless, in a
case where there are bi-directional episodes in the sample period, the
recursive rolling algorithm has difﬁculty detecting the second shorter
episode, whereas the performance of the rolling window approach is
relatively better. We utilize the framework of Hurn et al. (2015) and de-
termine the optimal lag length by employing the Akaike information
criterion (AIC) for each estimation window. Notably, the Wald statistic
based on the LA-VAR model follows a standard chi-squared distribution
(Toda and Yamamoto, 1995). However, we rather prefer to use the
bootstrap Wald test approach to better approximate the ﬁnite sample
distribution (see for example Balcilar et al., 2010).

4. Data description.
We use the implied volatility index of the WTI crude oil price, and
the oil-exporters' sovereign CDS spreads to detect the casual links
going from the oil market uncertainty to the sovereign credit risk of
the GCC and the other oil-exporting countries. The CBOE Crude oil ETF
volatility index (OVX) measures the market's expectations of the
30-day volatility of crude oil prices by applying the VIX methodology
to the United States Oil Fund options spanning a broad range of strike
prices.

The index is calculated from the market prices of the out-of-the-
money calls and puts without the use of any pricing models. The vol-
atility used to price options not only includes the consensus of the
market regarding future volatility but is also more accurate and
contains a premium for fear. Therefore, this index is more suitable
in our context than the realized or historical volatility measures
that are less informative on the implied volatility, and do not account
for fear.

The sovereign credit risk is the risk of a government becoming un-
willing or unable to meet its loan obligations, and we have proxied
this credit risk by using the spreads of sovereign credit default swaps.
In our sample, we have included major oil-exporting GCC countries:
Bahrain, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and United Arab Emirates (UAE), as well
as ﬁve other oil-exporting countries: Brazil, Mexico, Norway, Russia
and Venezuela. The selection of these countries is based on the CDS
data availability for the period under consideration, which is not possi-
ble for other oil-exporting countries such as Algeria, Libya, Nigeria,
Angola, etc. The weekly data totaling 392 observations cover the period
January 1, 2009, to June 30, 2016.3 All the data of our study are sourced
from DataStream.

The descriptive statistics of the data series are shown in Table 1. The
variables are transformed into the natural logarithmic form. Notably,
this table indicates that the CDS spreads of the exchange reserves-
poor and minor oil producer Bahrain are on average more than double
any of those of the other GCC member countries. On the other hand,
Qatar has the lowest average CDS spreads among the GCC countries,
most likely due to its abundant exports of natural gas which comple-
ment its oil revenue, its huge relative foreign reserves and its prudent
ﬁscal measures. For the other ﬁve oil-exporting countries, the foreign
exchange-poor and politically unstable Venezuela has an alarming
CDS spread, while Norway which has the greatest sovereign wealth
fund in the world and relatively more diversiﬁed economy has the low-
est. The Jarque-Bera test rejects the null hypothesis of normality at the
1% level of signiﬁcance, conﬁrming the non-normality of the series
under consideration, which is all supported by the measures of skew-
ness and kurtosis.

Fig. 1 displays the time trend of the OVX index and the sovereign
CDS spreads in the natural logarithmic form for the four GCC and the
other ﬁve oil-exporting countries, respectively. A rising trend in the
OVX and credit spreads is noted during 2010–2011 and from 2015
onward. The ﬁrst date corresponds to the European sovereign debt
crisis, while the second one reﬂects the heart of the recent collapse of
the oil prices.

<Conclusion> Empirical results and discussion.
5.1. Unit root testing.
The standard unit root tests lack power in the presence of structural
breaks in the series. The oil market is known to have structural breaks
due to the business cycle and the geopolitical risk. The CDS market
should also exhibit structural breaks as it picks up shocks in the oil
market and the macroeconomy. The presence of those breaks has impli-
cations for the validity of the unit root tests.

To account for those breaks and to ensure the robustness of the re-
sults, we employ the ADF-type unit root test proposed by Narayan and
Popp (2010), since it allows for two structural breaks in both the levels
and slopes of the series. This test does not require an a priori knowledge
of the timing of possible structural breaks because the break dates are
endogenously determined within the model. Another distinctive
feature of this test is that the breaks are allowed under the null and
alternative hypotheses. Since the Narayan and Popp (2010) unit root
test has already been widely employed in the economic and ﬁnancial lit-
erature, we do not reproduce the technical details of this test. The re-
sults of the Narayan and Popp (2010) unit root test are summarized in
Table 2.

The results reported in this table indicate that the OVX and CDS var-
iables are nonstationary in the level but stationary in the ﬁrst difference,
irrespective of whether one allows for breaks in the intercept only or
breaks in both the intercept and trend. Furthermore, the presence of
structural breaks in the time series data gives an early indication that
the relationship between OVX and CDS spreads may change over the
sample period. Since structural breaks exist, an analysis of the rolling-
window causality approach reﬂects a more accurate directional depen-
dence than the linear models.

5.2. Interpretation of structural shocks.
The results of the unit root test reported in Table 2 indicate that most
of the structural shocks of the sovereign CDS spreads of the oil-
exporting countries occurred during the years 2011–2012, which
correspond to the heart of the European sovereign debt crisis that
drove up interest rates for shaky sovereign borrowers such as Greece
and Italy. In this period, investors and policymakers have raised major
concerns about the ﬁnancial contagion of the sovereign debt crisis to
other countries of Europe. Given the interconnectedness of global
ﬁnancial markets, a default of one sovereign may trigger contagion
fears that may result in successive defaults of other sovereigns.
The resulting effect of such breaks is that they increase volatility, uncer-
tainty and CDS premiums, which consequently lead to higher borrow-
ing costs.

The results of the unit root tests also show that there is a structural
break occurring in 2014 for the foreign reserves-poor Venezuela,
which marks the collapse of oil prices in October 2014. This collapse in
oil price is due to Saudi Arabia pursuing a market share policy in an en-
vironment that is glutted by shale oil production. The oil collapse has a
strong bearing on Venezuela' economy since oil exports constitute near-
ly all of it exports, which in turn make up most of country's revenues.
The economic growth in this country was −3.9% in 2014, −5.7% in
2015 and an estimated −10.1% in 2016. Protesters also became more
violent in 2014 and inwards.

On the other hand, the structural shock in OVX (the measure of oil
market uncertainty and new volatility derivatives published by Chicago
Board Options Exchange (CBOE)) is in the period surrounding the sov-
ereign debt crisis in the euro zone area. This shock can be interpreted
as a shock to risk, risk-aversion or uncertainty in the oil market.

5.3. Discussion of results.
Fig. 2 displays the statistic sequences of the rolling-window boot-
strap Wald tests, testing the directional dependence from oil market un-
certainty, as represented by the OVX index, to the sovereign CDS
spreads of the four GCC and the other ﬁve oil-exporting countries. It
shows their corresponding ﬁve percent critical values, assuming homo-
scedasticity (Panels A) and heteroscedasticity (Panels B).5

The results show signiﬁcant episodes of directional predictability
from the OVX to the CDS spreads for the GCC and the other oil-
exporting countries. Overall, the results under the homoscedasticity
and heteroscedasticity assumptions are alike only for Qatar, Mexico
and Brazil. However, the heteroscedasticity version depicts a signiﬁcant
directional predictability in different periods, mainly when oil volatility
follows a rising trend. For example, in the case of Bahrain, the homosce-
dastic version identiﬁes directional predictability during 2010, whereas
the heteroscedasticity-consistent version depicts signiﬁcant directional
dependence during the 2014–2015 period of the collapse of oil prices.
Similarly, for UAE and Saudi Arabia, the homoscedastic version fails to
identify directional predictability during the recent collapse of oil prices.
For the case of Norway, the homoscedastic version shows no signiﬁcant
episodes of directional predictability ﬂows from the OVX to the CDS
spreads, whereas the heteroscedasticity version identiﬁes periods of
signiﬁcant directional predictability from 2013 to 2015. Overall, the oil
volatility causes the CDS spreads mostly during 2010–2011 and
2014–2015 for most of the countries, except Brazil where we ﬁnd no ev-
idence of directional predictability. Brazil extracts most of its oil from
sugarcane, is not a major oil exporter and has a relatively more diversi-
ﬁed basket of exports than GCC OPEC countries. It also suffered from
very high geopolitics which may have overwhelmed other sources of
crises.

Following the recommendation of Hurn et al. (2015) and Shi et al.
(2016), we focus on the heteroscedasticity-consistent version6 of the re-
sults displayed in Panel B of Fig. 2. The OVX predicts the CDS spreads of
Qatar and Bahrain during the oil price collapse of 2014–2015, implying
that higher oil volatility causes increases in the credit risk of these coun-
tries, particularly during the period of the recent collapse in oil prices,
which was triggered by the market share-maximizing policy contrived

6 The ﬁnancial time series data mostly exhibit heteroscedasticity, and hence the
heteroscedasticity-consistent version should be used for a reliable conclusion. Since the
results of recursive-rolling and simple rolling window analysis are qualitatively same,
we have presented the results of rolling window results to conserve space; however, the
other results are available from the author on request.

by Saudi Arabia. In the case of UAE (Abu Dhabi) and Saudi Arabia, we
ﬁnd brief periods, namely 2010, 2012 and 2015, of signiﬁcant direction-
al predictability ﬂows from the OVX to CDS spreads. For Russia, the OVX
causes its sovereign CDS spread during 2012 and 2014–2015.

In Mexico, OVX causes CDS spread mostly during 2014, which is the
ﬁrst year of the recent oil price collapse, and for Venezuela the periods of
signiﬁcant directional dependence ﬂows are concentrated during the
highly volatile subperiod of 2011–2013, reﬂecting the early problems
this country has been facing. From 2013 onward, the oil volatility signif-
icantly causes the CDS spread of Norway, while there are no directional
predictability in the case of Brazil. Notably, the periods of signiﬁcant
causal-ﬂows coincide with the structural breaks (associated with turbu-
lent oil market conditions), which are identiﬁed through the Narayan
and Popp (2010) unit root test. In sum, the recent collapse of oil prices
increased the CDS spread of the GCC and non-GCC oil-exporting coun-
tries. The policy implication of the increase in credit risk as a result of
higher oil volatility is that these oil-exporting countries may face higher
borrowing costs and mounting pressure on their currencies that are
pegged to an anchor.

Anecdotally, the WTI price jumped from $79.48 to $94.88/barrel on
average from 2010 to 2011 — a surge of about 20%. In 2011, the oil
price ﬂuctuated between $78–$112/barrel due to a pressure from the
fast-rising oil production extracted from shale formations in the
United States and oil sands in Canada. It collapsed in 2014–2015 due
to the Saudi oil policy of maximizing market share invoked by the
high production of shale oil in the United States.

Regarding the CDSs, their premium increased in summer 2011
due to the escalation of the European sovereign debt crisis. In the
case of Brazil, this country is the largest economy in Latin America
and is more diversiﬁed than all the GCC countries, Venezuela,
Norway and probably Russia, but it suffers from high political crises.
Moreover, Brazil is not a major oil exporter and extracts a good portion
of its oil from sugarcanes and not from oil wells, which gives
more diversiﬁcation to its economy. Brazil is also located far from
European countries, thus was not very prone to the European soverign
debt crisis.

5.4. Robustness check.
In this subsection, we test the robustness of the main results by using
a relatively novel approach, which is the directional dependence
through the cross-quantilogram technique.

5.4.1. Cross-quantilogram approach.
The methodology of quantilogram was initially proposed by Linton
and Whang (2007) for testing and measuring directional predictability
of time series at their stationary levels at different quantiles or market
conditions. This work of univariate quantilogram was extended to
bivariate cross-quantilogram by Han et al. (2016). Compared to the
rolling-window Granger causality approach used in the previous
sections, the cross-quantilogram method provides a more complete
relationship across the entire range of quantiles and is based on the
“quantile hits.” Therefore, this method is comparatively more advanced
and offers more ﬂexibility in estimating the lead-lag correlation
between oil price uncertainty and sovereign CDS at different lags and
quantiles. The use of the quantilogram approach is also justiﬁed in our
case because the null hypothesis of no directional predictability is
rejected.

Consider two stationary time series deﬁned as {xi,t,t ϵ Z}, i = 1, 2.
Let Fi(∙) and fi(∙) represent the distribution functions and the
density functions of series xi,t, respectively. The quantile of xi,t is repre-
sented as qi(∝i) =inf{v : Fi(v)≥αi} for αiϵ (0,1). The expression qα
represents the two-dimensional series of the quantiles (q1(∝1)q2(∝2))τ
for which α ≡ (∝1, ∝2)τ. The equation for the cross-quantilogram for
the α-quantile and the k lags is expressed as.
For k = 0, ±1, ±2, … Note that Ψa(μ) ≡ 1[μ b 0] − a, 1(∙) represents
the indicator function and 1[xi,t≤qi(αi)] is the quantile exceedance pro-
cess (also called the quantile hit). The cross-quantilogram in Eq. (10)
presented above is also capable of capturing the serial dependence
between two series at different quantile levels. For our variables,
ρα(1) measures the cross-correlation between OVX below or above
the quantile qOVX(αOVX) at time t and the CDS spread being above or
below the quantile qCDS(αCDS) at time t-1. Therefore, in that case,
ρα(1) =0 implies that whether OVX is below or above the quantile
qOVX(αOVX) at time t does not help on average in predicting if the CDS
spread will be below or above the quantile qCDS(α CDS) during the next
week. On the other hand, ρα(1) ≠0 suggests a one-week directional
predictability from the OVX to the CDS spread at α = αOVX(α CDS). To
calculate the sample counterpart of the cross-quantilogram, we esti-
mate the following equation
for k = 0, ±1, ±2, … In the above equation, ^qiðαiÞ represents the
unconditional sample quantile of xi, t as deﬁned by Han et al. (2016).
Furthermore, Han et al. (2016) propose the quantile version of the
Ljung-Box-Pierce statistic as H0:ρα(k) = 0 for all k ϵ 1, …, p against
the alternative hypothesis of H1:ρα(k)≠0 for k ϵ 1, …, p:
The above equation presents the portmanteau test ^Q
α that can be
used to test the directional predictability from one time series to the
other for events ranging up to p lags under the quantile pair of
α=(α1,α2). Under the null hypothesis of no directional predictability,
the asymptotic distribution of the cross-quantilogram contains
nuisance parameters. Therefore, Han et al. (2016) suggest the use of
the stationary bootstrap (SB) proposed by Politis and Romano (1994)
for the approximation of the null distribution and for conducting infer-
ence. The SB test is a block bootstrap procedure to handle inherent serial
dependence in the data by allowing random block lengths, unlike the
usual bootstraps.

Suppose that BKi,Li={(x1,t,x2,t−k)}t=Ki
Li−1 is the ith block with block
length Li that starts from Ki. Here, Li represents an independent and
identically distributed (iid) variable with Pr (Li = s) = γ(1−γ)s−1,
s = 1, 2, … for γ∈ (0,1) with Ki being an iid sequence drawn from
a uniform distribution {1,2,…T}. We replace the pair (x1,tx2, t−k) by
(x1,jx2, j−k) with j = k + (t mod (T-k)) because of the fact that the
upper limit Bki,Li may exceed the sample size T, when t N T. We con-
struct the pseudo SB resample based on the sequence of the block
followed by the application of the cross-quantilogram and the associ-
ated portmanteau test to obtain the bootstrapped conﬁdence interval.

5.4.2. Directional predictability through cross-quantilogram.
The method adopted for the robustness check requires the time
series to be stationary. Thus, relying on the conclusion drawn regarding
the integration properties of the series (See Table 2), we take the ﬁrst
difference of all the series to examine the predictability of the CDS
spreads through oil volatility. To motivate the use of the quantile-
based causality approach, we ﬁrst statistically investigate the possibility
of nonlinearity in the relationship between the CDS spreads and OVX. In
doing so, we apply the Brock et al. (1996) test on the residuals of the
CDS spreads and the OVX equations in the VAR (1) model.

The results, as reported in Table 3, provide sufﬁcient evidence of the
rejection of the null of i.i.d. residuals at various embedded dimensions
(m), for all considered cases. These results provide strong evidence of
nonlinearity in the relationship between the CDS spreads and OVX.
Hence, the application of the quantile-based causality approach deemed
robust and reliable.

Fig. 3 shows the results of the dependence structure between the
CDS spreads and OVX. We select 2 sets (Panels A and B) of the cross-
quantilogram heat map arrangement ranging from 1 to 2 lag values.
These lags at different intervals allow us to analyze the heat maps close-
ly, and thereby discussing the associated causality. The strength of the
magnitude of the coefﬁcient values ranges from dark blue (highly neg-
ative) to yellow (highly positive), and is also depicted by the multicolor
bar at the end of the ﬁgure. It is worth noting that the case of no direc-
tional dependence is absent in all the heat maps, suggesting that there is
a dependence structure between oil volatility and CDSs for the oil
exporters.

We can see that the increase in oil volatility is followed by a change
in the CDS spreads of the oil-exporting countries and the magnitude of
this causal behavior is higher and positive in the upper OVX quantiles.
We observe this predictability behavior across both selected lags,
underscoring the consistency of our results while observing a direction-
al predictability in different quantiles from OVX to the CDS spreads.
Except for the UAE, which has the second largest global wealth fund
and follows rational ﬁscal policy where predictability is relatively
lower, the upper quantiles of OVX signiﬁcantly predict changes in the
CDS spread.

These ﬁndings are in line with our main ﬁndings obtained through
the bootstrapped rolling- window approach and indicate that the surge
in oil volatility causes the CDS spreads. The results of the cross-
quantilogram analysis also indicate that an extreme increase in oil
price uncertainty increases the sovereign credit risk of the oil-
exporting countries (See Fig. 3). This ﬁnding implies that during the
European ﬁnancial crisis and the collapse of oil prices, the directional
predictability from oil volatility to sovereign CDS spreads changed.

6. Conclusions.
Considering the vital role of oil volatility in driving the economies
and credit risk of oil-exporting countries and the recent collapse of oil
prices, this study is motivated by the lack of empirical research to detect
the directional predictability from the implied oil volatility to the
CDS spreads for four GCC and ﬁve other oil-exporting countries
selected based on data availability, particularly for the CDS spreads. The
selection of those countries is constrained by data availability on oil-
exporting countries' CDSs. We accommodate the structural breaks
and the resulting parameter instability using the lag-augmented VAR
(LA-VAR)-based rolling window approach, following the prints of the re-
cent literature.

The empirical results show a signiﬁcant directional predictability
from oil uncertainty to the CDS spreads for most of the oil-exporting
countries under consideration, especially during the periods of higher
oil volatility such as those of the European sovereign debt crisis
and the recent collapse in oil prices. In particular, the OVX causes the
CDS spreads of Qatar and Bahrain during 2014—2015, implying that
higher oil volatility causes increases in the credit risk of these countries
during the period of the recent collapse in oil prices, which was trig-
gered by the market share policy concocted by Saudi Arabia. This result
also prevails for other oil-exporting countries, but at a small scale,
whereas in the case of Brazil, no causality is found which may have to
do with this country having a relatively large and more diversiﬁed
economy than the GCC and the other major oil-exporting countries
and suffers from signiﬁcant political crises. To check the robustness of
our estimations, we use the cross-quantilogram approach to measure
the degree of directional predictability across the entire range of
quantiles or under different market conditions. The results show a di-
rectional predictability from oil volatility to sovereign CDS spreads
that is non-linear.

Increases in the credit risk as a result of higher oil price volatility
have implications for capital borrowing costs, the values of currencies
that are pegged to an anchor and the levels of ﬁnancial spreads which
have further implications for ﬁnancial and commodity markets,
particularly during crises. The rise of sovereign credit risk affects banks
funding conditions and impacts the level and volatility of sovereign
bond yields, mainly in terms of maturity, and therefore impacts sover-
eign liquidity risk. Oil-exporting countries may also consider the rele-
vance of drawing down, repaying and redrawing loans advanced to
them during crises. These loans can be revolving loans.

Policy makers and sovereign debt managers in oil-exporting coun-
tries can tap our empirical results by minimizing the medium- to
long-term expected cost of funding government activities, particularly
when oil volatility and uncertainty follow a rising trend. They should re-
duce the risk of sudden shocks in oil prices to government funding by
considering the appropriate lengths and spreading maturities of debt
by avoiding large, concentrated placements.

The alarming CDS results for Venezuela, which is poor in foreign re-
serves and suffers from political unrest, should be a good future lesson
for the GCC countries that are currently suffering from depleting their
foreign reserves and borrowing billions from international capital mar-
kets after a long period of borrowing from domestic markets. There
could be a day of reckoning for the oil-exporting countries, particularly
the GCC states, if oil prices do not move up signiﬁcantly and foreign
reserves are at the verge of depletion.

References