
1. Introduction

There is no general consensus among policy makers, development
practitioners and academicians on how to disseminate goods that have
both private and public beneﬁts if the markets fail to generate a substan-
tial penetration of the product (Bensch and Peters, 2012). One example
which this paper has focused is clean and energy efﬁcient technologies
such as the improved cookstoves (ICS). Improved stoves are stoves that
are designed to improve energy efﬁciency, remove smoke from the

☆ We gratefully thank the editor, associate editor and anonymous referees for their
helpful comments and suggestions on the preliminary draft of this paper, according to
which the content was improved. We would also like to thank Gunther Bensch, Abebe
Damte, Mark Jeuland, Subhrendu Pattanayak, Peter Jörg and participants at the ﬁrst SETI
workshop at Duke University, Duke, USA, participants at the tenth Environment for
Development Initiative annual meeting at Pucon, Chile, and seminar participants at the
EDRI seminar series for the useful comments on earlier versions of the paper. Financial sup-
port from the Norwegian Embassy at Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and the Swedish International
Development Cooperation Agency (Sida) through the Environmental Economics Unit at
the University of Gothenburg, Sweden is gratefully acknowledged. All errors and omissions
remain the sole responsibility of the authors.
indoor living space, or lessen the drudgery of cooking duties (Köhlin
et al., 2011). Energy efﬁcient technologies are technologies or appliances
that reduce the amount of energy required to provide products and ser-
vices. Despite the health, economic and climate beneﬁt of improved
cookstoves, demand for them is surprisingly low in the rural areas of
many less-developed countries. Most nongovernmental organizations
that are involved in the dissemination of improved stoves reject the op-
tion of distributing them for free (Martin et al., 2011), while others ar-
gued that if liquidity and credit constrained people have high valuation
for an item, it is more likely that these people will use goods/items that
are distributed with subsidy.

Screening and sunk cost effects are two concepts that are related to
peoples' valuation of a product, the price they pay, and usage of the prod-
uct. The screening effect is observed when households with a higher
willingness to pay are also more likely to use the product, while the
sunk cost effect occurs when people who paid a higher price for an
item are more likely to use it, i.e., if an investment has already been
made, people are more likely to use it because they don't want to appear
wasteful.

In this paper, using a randomized experiment in rural Ethiopia, we
studied whether price incentives (sunk cost and screening effects)
matter for the waiting time to start using the improved stove. The
study is based on free distribution of improved stoves to 150 households
in six villages and 150 households from six other villages that paid
a positive price. Among households that paid a positive price, their
willingness to pay (WTP), or valuation of the stove, was tested using
the Becker-DeGroot-Marschak bidding method (Becker et al., 1964).
When we compare those who received the stove for free with those
who paid for it, we ﬁnd no evidence of a sunk cost effect. However,
the screening or valuation effect, measured as WTP, is signiﬁcant.

The previous empirical evidences on these effects are inconsistent.
Arkes and Blumer (1985) tested whether higher prices (higher sunk
cost) lead to higher usage of a product or a theater ticket. The authors
found that those who paid the regular price for the ticket used the tickets
more often than those with a discounted price. Similarly, Moon (2001)
ﬁnd that the higher the sunk costs, the greater the willingness of the de-
cision maker to invest further. Though the above empirical evidence is in
other contexts, they suggest positive relationship between price paid and
usage.

Ashraf et al. (2010) do not ﬁnd an evidence of a sunk cost effect in
Zambia in the use of a water puriﬁcation product but they ﬁnd an
evidence for the screening effect. Bensch and Peters (2012), studying a
free distribution of improved cookstoves in Senegal found a high rate
of usage of the technology. Beyene et al. (2015) also found a high rate
of usage of the freely distributed improved stove in rural Ethiopia.
Tarozzi et al. (2014) tested existence of a sunk cost effect in using malaria
bed nets, compared those that are freely distribution and those with a
positive price. They ﬁnd that those who received the nets for free use it
even more intensively than those who paid a positive price. Cohen and
Dupas (2010) also studying malaria bed nets do not ﬁnd a difference in
adoption behavior between households who a paid price and those
who got it for free. These ﬁndings weigh against the concept of sunk
cost effect and also against the belief of non-government organizations
that usage intensity increases if people pay a positive price.

This is not the ﬁrst paper to test the sunk cost and screening effects on
the use of products. However, the existing empirical results are inconsis-
tent. Further, to the best knowledge, this is the ﬁrst paper to test both
sunk cost and screening effects on the timing of use of an energy efﬁcient
technology that has environmental, climate and welfare beneﬁts. In rela-
tion to energy efﬁcient technologies, papers which are very close to this
paper are Bensch and Peters (2012) and Beyene et al. (2015). Bensch and
Peters (2012) considers only the effect of free distribution and Beyene
et al. (2015) do not also consider the screening effect.

The rest of paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the ex-
perimental design and procedure. In section three, we provide empirical
strategy of our study. Sections 4 and 5 present the data. Descriptive
statistics and econometric results, respectively. Finally, the last section
concludes.

<Middle> Experimental setting and design.
2.1. Experiment setting.
The experiment was conducted in the southern Tigrai region of
Ethiopia. The region contains “Dega”, “Weynadega” and “Kola” agro-
ecological zones.1 These are the major agro-ecological conditions of the
country. In some areas in these zones, households have relatively high
fuelwood access while other have low access. In the areas with low ac-
cess to fuel wood, households have to travel on average around 30 km
to collect fuel wood, but only 6 km in areas with relatively high fuel
wood access.2 This climate and forest setting is suitable for the stove pur-
chase experiment because the demand for stoves may vary depending
on the weather and access to fuel wood.
A total of 300 households were randomly selected to participate in a
stove purchase experiment from six villages that represent the different
weather and forest conditions (here after called as purchase villages).
Another 300 households were also selected from six other villages for
a free distribution of stoves (here after called free distribution villages).
The type of improved stove used in this experiment is called the “mirt”
stove. This is an energy efﬁcient stove that is used for baking Injera, a
pancake like thin bread that is the Ethiopian staple food. The stove is
also designed to cook soup, boil water, make coffee, etc. while baking
Injera without the use of additional fuel.

The stove purchase experiment was conducted using Becker-
DeGroot-Marschak (BDM) bidding method. We choose a BDM bidding
method to generate an incentive compatible data (truthful and accurate)
data on willingness to pay (WTP), which can be used to study the screen-
ing and sunck cost effects of prices. The mechanism of the BDM works as
follows. Subjects state their individual maximum WTP to buy the item
and this bid placed in a closed envelope. Those whose WTP is greater
than or equal to a random price will buy the item and pay the random
price (not their WTP) and those whose WTP is less than the random
price will not buy the item and pay zero. Thus, bidding one's true maxi-
mum willingness to pay is a dominant strategy to maximize expected
utility (Becker et al., 1964).

The BDM method has been used in other contexts such as new brand
name meat, mosquito nets, etc. (e.g., Lusk et al., 2001; Feldkamp et al.,
2005; Hoffmann, 2009). Although the Vickrey auction method also can
be used to generate an incentive-compatible WTP, the design of the Vick-
rey auction method is not suitable for the case when multiple buyers can
successfully bid to buy the item. This is because, in a Vickrey auction,
each subject simultaneously submits a bid to purchase a good and the
agent who submits the highest bid wins the auction and pays an amount
equal to the second-highest bid among the bidders. The other bidders do
not receive the item; they pay zero (Vickrey, 1961). A take-it-or-leave-it
pricing mechanism may also be used to test the screening and sunk cost
effects of the prices of improved stoves; however, that approach, would
not generate WTP data, and it is difﬁcult to test the screening effect with-
out WTP data.

In these experiment villages, subjects were randomly invited to par-
ticipate in the experiment individually (husband or wife) and jointly (i.e.
both husband and wife) (see Fig.-1 of Appendix A). We informed these
subjects that they were randomly selected to come to the farmers' train-
ing center on a speciﬁed date for two to 4h of compensated physical
work (weeding) and two more hours participating in a similar study.
All those randomly selected were willing to come and participated in
the physical work and experiment study.

The physical work was introduced to make farmers buy the improved
stove using income earned from this work. Conducting an experiment
with real labor income ensures that households in the study area had in-
come available so that they could follow through on a purchase decision.
This is important because almost all households in the study area depend
on earned income, mainly agricultural income; thus, the study created
realistic conditions. Further, subjects may treat windfall income and
earned income differently in the decision to buy the stove. This is in
line with the theory of mental accounting which stipulates that con-
sumers tend to arrange expenditures into separate mental accounts
and how the money is spent depends on how it is acquired (Hoffmann,
2009). Proponents of the theory of mental accounting argue that income
earned in exchange for labor is treated differently than windfall income.
As discussed in Christiaensen and Pan (2012), there is a notion in many
societies around the world (including the study area) that money that is
earned more easily is spent more easily, as exempliﬁed by the expression
‘Easy come, easy go’, an expression which ﬁnds its counterpart across the
world's languages, including ‘Bekelalu Yemta Bekalau Yehedal’ in Am-
haric, a main language of Ethiopia. As evidence of this notion, they
found that farmers in China and Tanzania tend to spend earned income
on necessities, while windfall income is spent on alcohol and other lux-
ury items. Further, Thaler (1990) and Clingingsmith (2015) documented
that subjects share less from an earned dollar than from a windfall dollar.
Earned income and windfall income can thus be considered different
mental accounts.

Before the invited subjects of our stove experiment arrived at the
place of the experiment, the subjects did not know anything about
the stove purchase and purpose of the experiment. This was done
to avoid information spread, pre-experiment spousal inﬂuence and
self-selection in attending the experiment.

2.2. The purchase experiment design and procedures.
The stove purchase experiment was conducted in three steps. First,
based on prior random assignment as individual or couples, individual
subjects were instructed to work the weeding activity for 4 h and
couples were instructed to work for 2 h.3 They were also informed
that, at the end of the study, remuneration would be paid in proportion
to the time invested. A husband or wife who participated alone would
get ETB 150 and a couple would get only ETB150. We also told them
that it was not possible to choose only one of the two activities (either
weeding or participating in the experiment). No payment would be
given if they did not participate in both activities. Fortunately, no subject
rejected participating in both activities nor asked to participate in only
one of the activities. After the weeding was complete, we provided
information about the mirt stove (see Appendix B for the details of
experiment procedures).

Then, we asked the subjects to make the purchase decision based on
the BDM random price mechanism. The mechanism works as follows.
Participants were asked to bid a price for an improved stove by stating
their maximum willingness to pay. Subjects were given a color copy of
currency notes representing actual currency and an envelope in which
to place the amount they were willing to pay to buy the stove. We
explained that, at the end, all subjects would be gathered in one place
and a random price would be selected from a bucket containing the
following prices; 30, 45, 60, 75, 90,105, 120, 135 and 150. These prices
were unknown to the participants.4 Those who bid at or above the
randomly drawn price would purchase the item and those who bid
below the price would not purchase the stove. Under this procedure,
it would be in the best interest of the participants to bid according to
their actual valuation of the improved stove. We explained to partici-
pants that, if they stated an amount higher than the maximum they
actually want to pay, they would be forced to pay it if that price was
randomly chosen. On the other hand, if they bid a price below their
actual willingness to pay and a lower price was drawn, they would
not be allowed to buy, even if they wanted to buy it at this randomly
drawn price. To avoid the effect of the experimenter, one experimenter
explained the mechanism of the BDM for each group in all villages. A
subject participating in the stove purchase experiment might ask the
need of stating his/her/their maximum WTP instead of just asking
him/her to pay a price. Before the subjects could raise such questions,
we gave an explanation using the following statements:

“You might wonder why we ask you to give a bid for the stove instead
of just asking you to pay a price. Well, this research tries to establish
how valuable such improved stoves are to you. We would therefore
ask you to think carefully about the most you would be willing to
pay for the stove.”

[(See Appendix B for the details of the script of the experiment.)]

Before they started the actual bidding for the improved stove, we did
a practice experiment using a pencil. We took two different pencils of
different quality. One is an improvement over the other. The standard
pencil is made with wooden material, standard lead and a standard
eraser, while the improved one is made of plastic material, high quality
lead and a quality eraser. The improved one is better in terms of
strength of the lead during use and cleanliness of the paper after using
the eraser. In the experiment, all were familiar with the standard pencil,
but did not know about the other pencil. We asked them the maximum
price they were willing to pay for the improved pencil. This practice
experiment was done in each group.

To make the bids for the stove as conﬁdential as possible, subjects
were placed as far apart as possible; we instructed subjects to keep
their bids conﬁdential; and we directed them not to talk to each other
or ask questions in public, from the beginning to the end. If they had
questions, we asked them to raise their hands and the experimenter
would give answers privately. At the end, all groups were called back
to one place and a subject among them would pick a price from a bucket
containing the stated prices.

3. Empirical strategy.
We conducted a follow up survey of improved stove installation
ﬁfteen months after delivery. The length of waiting time to start using
the improved stove is measured by the number of months a household
has waited to get started using the stove since the household got the
stove. Its value ranges from 0 to 15 where zero means immediate use
and 15 means they have delayed starting to use it until the last month
(i.e., they have started using the stove in last month). One might suggest
OLS to estimate the effect of distribution type, price incentives and WTP
on the length of waiting time to start using the improved stove because
the length of waiting time is a continuous dependent variable. However,
the maximum value of the dependent variable may be limited by
the monitoring month. This is because households were informed a
month in advance that a survey team would come to each household
for stove monitoring and conduct interview. About 22% of the house-
holds installed the stove during the last month and the remainder
installed earlier. Therefore, following Wooldridge (2010, 785–790),
we set the following censored model for length of waiting time:
where εi is the error term, Xi is a vector of regressors, β is a vector of
∗ is a latent length of waiting time to start
parameters and waiting timei
using the improved stove which is observed for values less than the
upper bound, set by the survey time period (τ =15) and censored
otherwise. The observed waiting time is deﬁned by the following
measurement equations;
Assuming waiting time is normally distributed with mean Xiβ and
variance σ 2, we can use the maximum likelihood estimation method
using the following log likelihood function for a censored normal
regression model:
One can use the STATA command Tobit with ul(15) option to
estimate the correlates ofwaiting time. Our interest is in estimating the
causal relationship between the explanatory variables-distribution
types, e.g., free versus paid and WTP and length of waiting time to start
using the improved stoves. Below we show that our experiment design
ensures that the effects of our explanatory variables are causal.

In what follows, by making our explanatory variables of interest
explicit in the latent waiting time models, we provide descriptions of
the variables of interest and discuss the mechanism of causation. In
∗ denotes the wife's5 latent waiting time and
Eq. (4), waiting timei
distribution_type is the experimental variable which indicates whether
the stoves where distributed for free or purchased for a price. It takes
a value one if the household paid money for the stove and zero if the
stove was received for free. Xi is a vector of other characteristics speciﬁc
to the wife (such as her education), household level socio-economic
characteristics (such as wealth), and location dummies; and εi is the
error term in the equation.
Villages were randomly assigned to the purchase and free distribu-
tion experiments. First, six villages were randomly selected using strat-
iﬁed simple random sampling for the purchase experiment.6 In order to
randomly select villages for the free distribution, we purposively ex-
cluded villages that are adjacent or very close to the purchase villages
on the list.7 In each of these villages' types, households were randomly
selected using systemic sampling methods. Because the assignment of
villages into purchase or free distribution is random, the assignment
of households into these two groups is also random. Households within
the same village have the same treatment status. The effect of the distri-
bution type on the length of use is causal because the “distribution type”
(assignment into these two groups) is exogenous to the households.
The variable “distribution type” measures whether people who paid
for the stove are more likely to start using the stove earlier, i. whether
people were more likely to start using it as soon as possible because
an investment had already been made and they didn't want to feel or
appear wasteful. In other words, this variable measures the effect of
sunk cost. In other words, this variable measures the effect of sunk cost.
One of the objectives of this paper is to test whether households with
a higher willingness to pay are also more likely to start using the product
sooner, i.e., the screening effect hypothesis. In order to test this hypoth-
esis, we need to include WTP as an explanatory variable in the model.
Willingness to pay data is obtained from subjects' participation in the
BDM experiment. Hence, this hypothesis is tested for subjects who par-
ticipate in the bidding experiment and got the improved cookstove
from that experiment. Eq. (5) below is set up to test this hypothesis.
Unlike the previous models, the main explanatory variable, in
Eq. (5), WTP may not be exogenous, i.e., subjects' WTP may be correlated
with their unobserved characteristics such as risk and uncertainty.
Subjects who are uncertain about the beneﬁts of the improved stove
may state lower WTP and if they got a stove through the BDM's random
price, they may not start using it quickly. If this is the case, the standard
Tobit regression will result in inconsistent estimates. Hence to get consis-
tent estimates, we use an instrumental Tobit regression method. We use
the dummy variable ‘individual decision’ as an instrument. This variable
takes a value of one if the purchase decision is made individually by one
suppose and zero for a joint decision. For an instrument to be valid, it
must be exogenous and relevant. Below we discuss how this instrument
can satisfy these two conditions.

Subjects were randomly assigned into an individual or joint purchase
decision. Individual means either the husband or wife was randomly
assigned to make the purchase decision alone (thus eliciting an individ-
ual WTP). Joint means that a couple was randomly assigned to make the
decision jointly (thus eliciting a joint WTP). Because subjects were not
allowed to choose whether to make the decision individually or jointly,
this instrumental variable is exogenous. A test of the randomization is
conducted by running a probit regression of the decision type on socio-
economic characteristics of the subjects. Table 3 shows that there is no
signiﬁcant difference between subjects who made the decision the indi-
vidually and jointly, which implicitly conﬁrms that the instrument is ex-
ogenous. The decision type (individual vs joint) will not affect use of the
improved stove directly and will only affect the stove use indirectly
through WTP. Hence the instrument is relevant.

4. Data, survey instrument and descriptive statistics.
4.1. Data, and survey instrument.
A baseline and follow-up survey was conducted in 12 villages
(kushets) in the region that represents these major weather and forest
conditions.8 We randomly selected 50 households from each village
using a list of households obtained from each village's administrator.
In villages with free distribution of stoves, 25 households from each
village are treatments (i.e., those who received the free stove) and the re-
maining 25 are controls.9 However, in the villages where we conducted
the stove purchase experiment, all 50 subjects from each village partici-
pated in the experiment. The bidding experiment results in 146 house-
holds with improved stove and the remaining with no improved stove.
We conducted a baseline survey two weeks before the stove
purchase experiment and free distribution of the improved stoves. In
the survey, households were asked about their socio-economic charac-
teristics, fuel use, cooking practices, awareness about adverse conse-
quences of cooking with traditional stoves, awareness about improved
cookstove, household decision-making power, etc. A year and half after
the baseline survey, a follow-up survey was also conducted for all house-
holds participated in the baseline survey.10 Most of the survey questions
in the follow up survey were same as the base line survey except that we
add questions that capture stove use in the follow up.

4.2. Descriptive statistics.
Table 1 provides summary statistics of individual and household level
characteristics of wives obtained from the baseline survey conducted in
the BDM and free distribution villages. Starting with the BDM villages,
as can be seen from Table 1, wives on average are 44.5 years old, are
the main fuel collector in the household (76%); 24% of them participate
in off-farm work, and are on average have only one years of schooling.
29% and 23% of wives participating in political activities and off-farm
work, respectively.

On average, households in the BDM villages have 3.0 timad (0.76 ha)
of land, about 40 thousand Ethiopian Birr ($2122) of wealth in assets,
and a household size of 5.7 people. From Table 1, we can see that 49%
of households do not have a separate kitchen for cooking and 48% of
them do not have windows in the place where they cook and live. This
means a large proportion of households in these villages, in particular
household members who are responsible for cooking, may be subject to
the health impacts of indoor air pollution. As can be seen from Table 1,
households in the free distribution villages have similar characteristics
to households in BDM villages with respect to age, education, off-farm
work, hours spent in fuelwood collection, household size, land size,
wealth, etc.

We want to test whether there exist any difference in the socio-
economic characteristics of households in the free distribution and
BDM (purchase) villages. If any signiﬁcance difference exists between
these two groups in some or all of the explanatory variables, the solution
is to include these variables in the main regression models. Table 2 de-
picts probit results of the difference in the socio-economic characteristics
of households in the free distribution and BDM (purchase) villages. From
this result we can see that households in these two villages are different
in wife's fuel collection time, wife's education level, wife's participation
in off-farm income activities, households' number of livestock, house-
hold size, and household land size. Because of these signiﬁcance differ-
ences in these two villages, our main regressions include these and
other covariates.

We used the follow-up survey data to assess to what extent the
stoves, both those purchased through the BDM experiment and those
distributed freely, have been in use by households. Fig. 1 shows the
percentage of households and the number of months the stoves were
delayed in use by households who purchased the stoves through the
BDM experiment. The stoves were delivered in October 2013 and the
survey for use was conducted in January–February 2015.

From Fig. 1, we can see that around 50% of the households have
started using the stove for at within 10 months or less, and about 15% de-
layed use until the survey month. From this ﬁgure, we can also see that
around 12% have used the stove for immediately. Likewise, in the villages
with free distribution, from Fig. 2 we can see that around 54% of house-
holds have started using the stove for within 10 months or less, and
about 9% delayed use until the survey month. Among the households
that received free distribution of stoves, around 36% have started using
the stove within three months of stove delivery, and around 5% started
to use it in the month of delivery. In both villages, we observe that a
large proportion of households have started using the stove for within
10 months or less.

5. Econometric results.
Estimates of the OLS and Tobit models for the effects of distributional
types (free vs purchased) and WTP on the length of use of an improved
cookstove are presented in Tables 3–4. The results in Table 3 are an OLS
results while Table 4 results are Tobit results. A result, not shown in
these Tables is that about 20% of the observations have the upper
bound value which can be used as a statistical justiﬁcation to use the
Tobit model. Because the estimated coefﬁcients of the Tobit regression
model with upper limits can be interpreted as if they were OLS coefﬁ-
cients (Wooldridge, 2010), all estimated coefﬁcients of variables are
also marginal effect estimates. In Table 3, we presented results of two
OLS models and results of three Tobit models in Table 4. Model-1 of
both tables refers to an inclusion of a dummy variable “distribution
type” which takes a value of one if the household purchases the stove
and zero if it gets it for free. This model is used to test the sunk cost effect
hypothesis. In Model-2, we estimate the screening effect by including
households WTP as a main explanatory variable in a standard Tobit
model. In Model-3, we use the IV-Tobit method to estimate the effect
of WTP on use.

Comparing the Ordinary Least Square and Tobit estimates of the
distributional types (free vs purchased), and WTP variables in Tables 3
and 4, we observe that Tobit estimates of WTP variable are higher by
about 200% in absolute value than the estimates of the Ordinary least
square. Likewise, the Tobit estimate of distributional types is also higher
in absolute value by 33% than the OLS estimates. The log likelihood ratio
(LR) chi-square (2) test statistics presented in Table 4 indicate the ﬁtness
of the Tobit model with the data and the relevance of the chosen explan-
atory variables in explaining the model. Because the Tobit model corrects
for any boundness in the data, we refer to the results from this estimator
in our discussion below.

Starting our analysis with the results shown in Model-1 of Table 4, we
can see that there is no statistical signiﬁcance difference in the length of
waiting to start using the improved cookstove between those who get

the improved cookstove for free and those who paid money for it. This
result contradicts with opinion of most nongovernmental organizations
that are involved in the dissemination of improved stoves which reject
the option of distributing ICS for free (Martin et al., 2011). Our result is
consistent with previous ﬁndings in Senegal and Ethiopia. Bensch and
Peters (2012) using a free distribution of improved cookstoves in
Senegal found a high rate of usage of the technology. Beyene et al.
(2015) also found a high rate of usage of the freely distributed improved
stove in rural Ethiopia. In other areas, Ashraf et al. (2010) also do not ﬁnd
also a difference in use of a water puriﬁcation product between those
that purchased the product and those that get the product for free.
Cohen and Dupas (2010), studying malaria bed nets do not ﬁnd a differ-
ence in adoption behavior between households who paid a price and
those who got them for free.

Using similar data as in the current project Hassen (2015) did not
also ﬁnd a difference in the use of improved stoves among wives with
different levels of bargaining power regardless of the way they received
the stove(i.e. for free or purchase). In that study, the insigniﬁcance of the
bargaining power estimate in both the village types means that if wives
get an improved stove; they are more likely to use it regardless of differ-
ence in their decision making power. This result coincides with the ﬁnd-
ing of this paper. Regardless of the way the improved stoves are
distributed, wives will use the improved stoves. The economic beneﬁt
of improved stove, i.e., the reduction in fuel consumption, may be push-
ing households in both groups of villages to use the improved stoves.
In the experiment, we explained to the households that the stove
has health and economic beneﬁt (reduce fuel consumption by half).
A household who is faced with fuel scarcity may have very high motiva-
tion to start using the improved stove. Households in the study area
travel up to 15 km to collect fuelwood. The health beneﬁt may also be
the motive for some or all the households in these village types.

Another objective of this study is to test whether households who
stated a high willingness to pay are more likely to use the improved
stove than those who stated a lower willingness to pay. This is called in
the literature as a screening effect. This measures whether households
who have high valuation for the stove will use more often than house-
holds with relatively low valuation. Model-2 and Model 3 of Table 4
show the result related to this screening effect. Model-2 is the result
based on a standard Tobit model whereas model-3 is based on an IV-
Tobit model. As stated in the empirical strategy section, the WTP is not
exogenous variable because households valuation for the stove may be
correlated with unobserved characteristics such as risk and uncertainty
about the stove, i.e. uncertainty about the beneﬁts of the stove. In such
a case the standard Tobit model, as in Model-2, will result in inconsistent
estimators. As discussed above, to get a consistent estimator, we use an
IV-Tobit regression method. And we use decision types as an instrument.
This decision type variable is randomly assigned to the subjects and the
results in Table-1 of Appendix A conﬁrm the randomness of the variable.
Hence this instrument is exogenous to the households. Furthermore a
statistical test of exogeneity is conducted. As shown in Table 4, the
Wald test of exogeneity of rejects the null of the instrument is not exog-
enous. This proves that our instrument is exogenous both logically and
statistically.

From Table-2 of Appendix A, we can also see that the instrument is
relevant, i.e., the coefﬁcient of the instrument is statistically signiﬁcant
at 1% level of signiﬁcance. Thus, we refer to Model-3 of Table 4 results
to test the hypothesis on the screening effect. As can be seen form
Table 4, we can see that the coefﬁcient of the WTP variable is statistically
signiﬁcant at 1% level of signiﬁcance implying that households' with
higher valuation for the improved stove use the improved stove more
often than those with lower valuation for it. This is consistent with pre-
vious ﬁndings on the effect of WTP on product use. Ashraf et al. (2010)
do ﬁnd an evidence for the screening effect in Zambia using a water
puriﬁcation product.

Though we have a randomized experiment, in the descriptive statis-
tics we have shown that households in the free distribution villages and
BDM villages are different with respect to some socio-economic vari-
ables. Because of this, we include other control variables in all the three
regression models. From the models, we can see that wives who spend
substantial time in fuel collection are more likely to use the stove quickly
than those who spend less time. Likewise wives who participate in off-
farm work are also more likely to use the stove quickly. This may be be-
cause these wives have little time for fuel collection and hence the im-
proved stove is considered as a substitute for the time spent in fuel
collection. Number of windows is also included as an additional control
in the regressions. This measures the extent of indoor smoke concentra-
tion inside the house. It can also measure extent of wives exposure to in-
door air pollution. The more windows a house has, the less indoor smoke
concentration and less exposure to indoor air pollution; hence, this may

delay the use of improved cookstoves. The results from this table support
the above stated hypothesis. We ﬁnd that households with larger land
size are more likely to use it quickly than are those with low land size.
This may be because households with large land size may want to save
fuels such as dung and use them as fertilizer.

<Conclusion> Conclusion and policy implication.
Despite the health and economic and environmental beneﬁt of clean
and energy efﬁcient technologies such as improved cookstoves, demand
for them is surprisingly low in rural areas of many less-developed coun-
tries. A number of reasons have been documented as to why there is low
demand in these countries. The non-monetary nature of the beneﬁts of
the technologies for rural households, liquidity and credit constraints,
lack of knowledge (low educational attainment), and wives low deci-
sion making autonomy on the purchase of improved cookstoves have
been mentioned in the literature as reasons for low adoption of these
technologies.

Although the private (health and economic) and public (climate and
environmental) beneﬁts of these improved stoves are substantial, there
is no general consensus among policy makers, development practi-
tioners and academicians on how to disseminate good/items if the mar-
kets fail to generate a substantial penetration of the product. The debate
include on whether people more likely to use goods that are distributed
for free or provided with high price discount (subsidy). One side of the
debate is that people do not much appreciate much goods/items that
are distributed for free and hence there will be very low usage of goods
distributed in this way. Others argued that if liquidity and credit
constrained people have high valuation for the good/item, it is more like-
ly that these people will use goods/item distributed with subsidy.

Screening and sunk cost effects are two concepts related to usage of
product and amount of money they are willing and/or able to pay for the
product. Screening effect is an effect if households with a higher willing-
ness to pay are also more likely to use the product while sunk cost effect
is an effect if people who paid a higher transaction price are more likely
to use it, i.e. if an investment has already been made, people were more
likely to use as they don't want to appear wasteful to themselves or
others. The empirical evidences on these two concepts are inconclusive.
Further, there are very limited empirical researches, which tests the
effects of these two concepts of energy efﬁcient technology.
Using a randomized experiment in rural Ethiopia, this paper studies
whether sunk cost and screening effects do matter on the use of improved
stove. In otherwords, in this paperwe test two main hypotheses.
The first hypothesis is whether the amount of money invested in an energy
efficient technologies matters for the subsequent use. The second
hypothesis is whether households which have high valuation for the energy
efficient technology are more likely to use it than those with low
valuation for it. The study is based on a free distribution of improved
stoves to 150 households in six villages and 150 households from other
six villages that paid a positive price using the Becker-DeGroot-
Marschak bidding method. A baseline and follow up survey were conducted
in both village types.
We find that there is no difference in the length of use between those
that got the stove for free, and those that paid a price; however, we do
find an evidence of screening effect i.e., those with a higher valuation
used it sooner. The effects of these two channels can be seen in terms
of the pricing policy that may be followed for different households
groups. The sunk cost effect implies that there is not risk that the stoves
will not be used if they are distributed for free compared to the case
when they are distributed at a price. In terms of the public benefit of
the improved stove, this sunk cost effect means that distributing subsidized
improved stoves for low-income households will have environmental
benefits in terms of reducing forest degradation and emission
of greenhouse gases. Further, subsidy for low-income households will
also have implications in terms of reducing the health impacts of
indoor air pollution. The upfront cost of this improved stove ismore likely
to be difficult for low-income households. On the other hand, the
screening effect implies subsidy is not needed for households with high
WTP.
Further, from our findings and application of the BDM bidding
method in study area, we have learnt that BDM is the good method to
generate an incentive compatible WTP data. We did not findWTP that
is extremely too large and too small. But a care needs to be taken when
conducting such experiment among rural farm households, which are
mostly illiterate. The BDM experiment would be relatively difficult for
the participants to understand, which would be subject to errors caused
by misconceptions or misunderstandings of the method. In order to reduce
such errors, one should use enough time in explaining to the participants
and use tools that they can understand easily. For example, most
farmers do not know writing numbers, but they recognize the different
currency notes by their colors, size and symbols (pictures in the notes).
A color copy of the currencies notes can solve the number difficulties. If
the intention of the experiment is not to generate WTP, but rather to
study demand or take up of the commodity, a take-it-or leave-it method
at a specified price may reduce the cognition burden.

References