
1. Introduction

Environmental sustainability, climate change and global warming
have attracted increasing public awareness (Bloch et al., 2012; Ma,
2015). Many countries have set and ratiﬁed nationally determined
contributions in the recent Paris agreement, targeting to keep the global
average temperature increase well below 2 °C above pre-industrial
levels. China, who accounts for half of the world coal consumption
and contributes to 25% of the world carbon dioxide emission (Energy
Information Administration, 2016), in particular, sets a goal of achieving
the peak before 2030, lowering the emission per unit of GDP by 60–65%
from its 2005 level, and increasing the non-fossil fuel share in the pri-
mary energy consumption to 20%. A sweeping energy evolution is called
for in China since 2014 with new priority placed on environmental goals
and the deployment of clean energy.1 However, it remains a challenge
to meet the goal considering the uneven distribution of energy
resources and unbalanced economic growth with a high degree of
inequality (Herrerias et al., 2013; Song and Zheng, 2012). For China
to align the long-term low carbon energy strategy with economic devel-
opment goals, the central government has set and broken down the car-
bon and energy intensity reduction target at the level of individual
provinces. Motivated by the context characterized by heterogeneous
energy strategy and economic development paths in each of these prov-
inces, this paper addresses three main questions: 1) does energy play a
role in promoting provincial growth together with the physical and
human capital? 2) how and to what extent the disaggregate energy
source is responsible for economic growth; and 3) what is the causal
direction between total and disaggregate energy use and growth of
economy in each of these provinces, if any? The answers will provide
rich policy implications for a better understanding of interaction be-
tween localized development path and energy conservation to set an
implementable emission reduction target for sustainable development.
In the literature, many scholars examine the cointegration and Grang-
er causal link between energy use and economic development in China
using national time series data (Shiu and Lam, 2004; Zhang and Cheng,
2009; Bloch et al., 2012). While country level studies provide some in-
sights on the relationship between energy consumption and economic
growth, they have at least two major limitations. In terms of method,
the power of unit root and cointegration tests in time series studies is low
due to a short time span (Campbell and Perron, 1991); the conventional
causality tests using time series have a high risk of wrongly rejecting the
null hypothesis of no cointegration (Yalta and Cakar, 2012) and therefore
can lead to inaccurate conclusions on the direction of causality. In addi-
tion, previous studies using national-level time series ignore the signiﬁ-
cant heterogeneity and interdependence across Chinese provinces. The
endowments of energy resources in China are unevenly distributed; for
example, coal is mainly reserved in Shanxi, while oil and natural gas are
mainly in Xinjiang and Sichuan.2 The economic structure and energy in-
tensity have large variations across provinces as well. Fig. 1 illustrates
the provincial differences in economic structure and energy intensity in
year 2014. The blue, red and green bars indicate the share of gross output
values from the primary, the secondary and the tertiary industry, respec-
tively. The purple solid line depicts the energy intensity for each of the 30
provinces (Tibet excluded). The stacked bar chart shows that output from
the tertiary industry exceeds that from the primary and the secondary
industries for coastal rich provinces such as Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin,
Hainan, Jiangsu and Zhejiang. Among the 30 provinces, there are eight
resource-rich provinces such as Hebei, Shanxi, Inner Mongolia, Guizhou,
Gansu, Qinghai, Ningxia and Xinjiang with energy intensity above the av-
erage which is indicated by “*”. Compared with existing studies, by using
the provincial panel, our study offers improved test power over conven-
tional time series methods, which also enables us to account for marked
heterogeneity in economic structure and energy distribution across prov-
inces. The growth-energy nexus analysis at a disaggregated level matters
for local regulators to evaluate and act on differentiated strategies of en-
ergy conservation and efﬁciency enhancement, and is also vital for the
central government to coordinate the regional development and efforts
in reducing resource costs and emissions for speciﬁc energy source.

A limited but growing number of studies recently exploit provincial
data and panel techniques to investigate the energy-growth nexus in
China, albeit producing mixed results (S.S. Wang et al., 2011; Fei et al.,
2011; Zhang and Xu, 2012; Herrerias et al., 2013). For example, using
data from 28 provinces over the period 1995–2007, Y. Wang et al.
(2011) and S.S. Wang et al. (2011) ﬁnd a uni-directional causal relation-
ship from GDP to energy consumption. Zhang and Xu (2012) identify
the bidirectional linkage for the eastern region, while Fei et al. (2011)
conclude the growth effect that energy consumption leads to economic

development for the same part of China. While no consensus has been
obtained, results from the panel analysis are relatively more reliable
than that from national studies. One shortcoming of these studies is,
however, that they did not explore the impact of disaggregate energy
sources on the province-speciﬁc economic growth; therefore, con-
clusions made on the analysis of aggregate energy cannot be general-
ized to disaggregate energy within each of the administrative boundary,
that is, the nexus between total energy use and local growth may not
hold and be equally applied to disaggregate energy source across prov-
inces, and thus policy suggestions based on this body of studies are hard
to implement (Soytas and Sari, 2006).

The brief review highlights the importance to account for provincial
heterogeneity and examine not only the aggregate energy but also the
disaggregate energy sources. This paper ﬁlls the gap that little empirical
work has been conducted to examine the causal relationship between
economic development and energy consumption at both the aggregate
and disaggregate levels using provincial data and most recent panel
econometric methods within a human-capital augmented production
framework.

Furthermore, this paper is one of the ﬁrst studies that incorporate
sub-national level human capital in the multivariate framework with
a focus in China. Despite the fact that human capital is a crucial input
to economic growth, it only attracts attention in the broad energy-
growth nexus literature very recently (Pablo-Romero and Sánchez-
Braza, 2015; Fang and Chang, 2016; Fang et al., forthcoming), probably
due to lack of quality human capital data.3 Theoretically, human capital
can be linked to energy consumption through multiple channels. First,
human capital can increase income, which may then cause more energy
consumption. Second, human capital can stimulate R&D of new energy
and accelerate the transition to energy-efﬁcient technologies (Li and
Lin, 2016). This mechanism contributes to the negative association be-
tween human capital and energy. Third, if human capital is accumulated
through education and campaign on energy conservative awareness
among the common people, more human capital is linked to less energy
consumption (Fang et al., forthcoming). Lastly, economic structure also
matters. With the development of human capital, economies that expe-
rience rapid industrialization and urbanization may see huge reliance
on energy; but when the country develops to a service-led economy,
energy reliance may be reduced with further development of human
capital (Arbex and Perobelli, 2010). By and large, the relationship be-
tween energy and human capital is uncertain and a rigorous analysis
is required.

Our contributions to the existing energy-growth nexus literature
lie in three aspects. First, we incorporate the input of human capital
to the energy-augmented neoclassical production function. Due to
reasons mentioned above, human capital should not be ignored in
the multivariate framework for the energy-growth analysis. How-
ever, due to data availability or other reasons, we do not ﬁnd many
studies employing this framework. At Chinese provincial level, the
data availability, particularly that for a quality measure of human
capital, is even more problematic. Fortunately, the Chinese human
capital database established by the China Center for Human Capital
and Labor Market Research of Central University of Finance and
Economics makes this research possible. It includes national and
provincial human capital stock in both the nominal and real terms
for years starting from 1985 to 2014. The uniqueness of the data
makes our paper the ﬁrst of its kind.

Second, this paper takes into consideration the cross-sectional
dependence and provincial heterogeneity using the advanced panel
econometric techniques and provides more reliable test results and
fresh empirical evidences on the nature of the relation between
economic growth and energy consumption. Speciﬁcally, the cross-
sectionally augmented IPS (CIPS) test proposed by Pesaran (2007) is
used to check the stationarity of the data. Westerlund (2007)’s error-
correction based test is bootstrapped to examine the presence of
cointegrating relationship relaxing the assumption of cross-sectional
independence. Furthermore, we adopt the continuously-updated
fully-modiﬁed OLS approach (Bai et al., 2009) which is valid under the
cross-sectional dependence rather than the panel heterogeneous
FMOLS (Pedroni, 2001) and DOLS (Stock and Watson, 1993) to estimate
the coefﬁcients of the long-run relationship. None of the existing studies
on China have employed these toolkits to avoid lack of test power and
biasness of estimates when there are strong interdependences across
provinces. The presence and direction of the causality between variables
are also examined using a panel bootstrap method (Emirmahmutoglu
and Kose, 2011) that allows for heterogeneity and cross-sectional
dependence.

Third, we examine the causal relationship between economic
growth and both aggregate and disaggregate energy sources that are
available from the China Energy Statistical Yearbooks (various years
1995–2014), including raw coal, coke, crude oil, petroleum products
(fuel oil, gasoline, diesel, kerosene), natural gas, and electricity. This is
one of the few studies that comprehensively investigate the disaggre-
gate energy consumption types. Rich policy recommendations based
on these results are thus credibly provided.

Our results indicate strong cross-sectional dependence in the pro-
vincial panel, and we conﬁrm the presence of cointegration relationship
between GDP, investment, human capital and various energy variables
even after taking into consideration interdependence across provinces.
Using a continuously updated fully modiﬁed estimation proposed by
Bai et al. (2009), we ﬁnd that human capital is a crucial factor input
which exerts about 2–3 times effects that investment has on GDP;
energy, both in aggregate or disaggregate forms as coal, crude oil,
petroleum products, natural gas and electricity, plays a signiﬁcant role
in economic development in China as well. Therefore, both human cap-
ital and energy are indispensable in stimulating economic growth.
Using the bootstrap panel Granger causality test which is appropriate
within the cross-sectional dependence framework, we ﬁnd Granger
causal relationships running from GDP to petroleum products and
electricity, and bi-directional relationship between GDP and coal,
coke, natural gas and total energy consumption in the whole China.
For individual provinces, causal relationships vary signiﬁcantly. This
has important policy implications to especially local governments in
the sense that while following the macro- and strategic policies from
the central government, local governments should take initiatives and
evaluate their unique stages of economic development and energy sta-
tus as well as the causal relationship between the two before taking
micro- and speciﬁc measures.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
reviews the energy proﬁle for China as a whole and the energy balance
structure of the primary energy sources for each of the 30 provinces as
well as the energy-growth nexus literature with a focus on China.
Section 3 provides data descriptions and a preliminary analysis. Econo-
metric methods are discussed in Section 4. Main results are presented
and discussed in Section 5 and the last section concludes with policy
recommendations.

<Middle> An overview of Chinese energy proﬁle and energy-growth
nexus studies.
2.1. Energy proﬁle in China.
As the world's most populous country with a fast-growing economy,
China becomes increasingly inﬂuential in the world energy market with
rapidly rising energy demand because of the swiftly modernizing econ-
omy and sizeable industrialization. China becomes the world's largest
global energy consumer in 2011. It is also the world's top coal producer,
consumer and the world's second-largest oil consumer behind the
United States (Energy Information Administration, 2015). This sub-
section ﬁrst provides an overview of the energy proﬁle for China as
a whole. Subsequently, by exploiting information from the energy
balance table of the primary energy sources4 for individual provinces,
we show the link of production, consumption and inter-province
trade of coal, oil, gas, and electricity, using the annual average values
during the period of 1995–2014.

Fig. 2 shows the annual growth rate of GDP and total energy
consumption from 1980 to 2015. Two observations are drawn from
the ﬁgure. First, there seems to be a co-movement of growth in output
and energy consumption; speciﬁcally, energy consumption growth
before 1995 is slightly lagging behind economic growth, while after-
wards the growth cycle in energy is moving ahead of economic growth.
To rigorously examine the relationship between the two variables, a
cointegration analysis is necessary. Second, the ﬁgure shows that the
growth rate of energy consumption is slower than GDP growth rate
until 2002 and later exceeds GDP growth rate within a short period of
time during 2003–2005; this suggests a clear downward trend of energy
intensity (deﬁned as the ratio of energy consumption to GDP) with an
interruption during 2003–2005.

The driving forces governing energy intensity change in China have
been widely debated in the literature.5 First, China's industrial structure
has shifted from energy-intensive heavy industries toward export- and
consumption-oriented tertiary industries (Kambara, 1992; Huang,
1993). Using the decomposition analysis, Song and Zheng (2012) ﬁnd
that the structural change does not play a major role in reducing energy
intensity while Garbaccio et al. (1999) reach the opposite conclusion.
Using the econometric analysis and a panel dataset of 30 provinces
from 2000 to 2012, Yan (2015) concludes that the structural change
toward more energy-intensive industries explains the rise in energy
intensity. Zeng et al. (2014) show that the slight increase in energy
intensity since 2002 to 2005 is associated with the construction boom
across the nation as well as the heavy industrialization strategy for
provinces along the coast, which leads to the boosted production of
energy-intensive products such as aluminum, cement and steel. Second,
though the role played by structural change in reducing energy inten-
sity remains controversial, the previous studies seem to agree on the
role played by technological progress which lowers energy consump-
tion required to produce a speciﬁc product in a particular sector
(Fisher-Vanden et al., 2004; Li and Lin, 2014; Wang et al., 2013).
Third, the market reform in the energy sector (Liao et al., 2007; He
and Wang, 2007) improves energy efﬁciency and incentivizes the
deployment of new material (Sinton and Fridley, 2000; Wu, 2012).
Glomsrød and Wei (2005) point out since 1994 the dual-price system
in the energy sector was gradually reformed and there is a deep level
of marketization since then. In addition to the main driving forces,
several other studies identify alternate inﬂuential factors such as urban-
ization, total population, export and sectoral ownership structure to
explain the nature and causes of energy intensity change in China
(Yan, 2015; Yang et al., 2016; Zheng et al., 2011; Yu, 2012).

Fig. 3 presents the consumption dynamics of three major energy
sources—coal, crude oil and natural gas for 1980–2015. We can see
that China's energy consumption is dominated by coal, the energy
source that China can increase in the short term and is available in
many provinces. The demand for energy increases tremendously after
2000s since joining the World Trade Organization (WTO). This leads
to an export-oriented industrial expansion and the associated rise in de-
mands for energy, especially for coal. An alternative driving force of the
rise in energy demand, primarily for oil, is the exponential growth of
motor vehicles. From 2001 to 2014, the privately-owned cars increase
from 7.7 million to 123.4 million, at a rate of 24% per annum (National
Bureau of Statistics, 2016).

Fig. 4 portrays the shares of disaggregate energy sources in total
energy consumption from 1980 to 2015. Before the occurrence of ﬁnan-
cial crisis in China, fossil fuels including coal, crude oil and natural gas
account for 92.5% of China's energy consumption in year 2007, followed
by hydro-, nuclear and wind power. In 2009, China pledged to cut
its carbon intensity by 40%–45% by 2020 compared with the 2005
level of carbon emission per unit of GDP under pressure from interna-
tional climate change negotiations. To meet this voluntary emission
reduction target, there is an upward trend in the consumption of natural
gas, a relative cleaner burning alternate compared to coal and petro-
leum products in the industrial sector. In fact, the share of natural gas
consumption in the total energy consumption has been tripled from
1.9% to 5.7% during the period 1994–2014. In comparison, the share of
coal consumption has been declined from 75% to 65.6% within the
same period. The declining trend of coal consumption, on one hand,
comes from energy efﬁciency and the China's goal to increase environ-
mental sustainability when the Chinese government plans to cap coal
use to 62% of total primary energy consumption by 2020 in the commit-
ment to reduce air pollution and carbon emission (Energy Information
Administration, 2015). On the other hand, it might be attributed to
slower economic growth especially since 2012 as ﬁxed asset invest-
ment, industrial production and exports declined (Cattaneo et al.,
2011).

Next, we present the energy balance tables detailing production,
consumption and trade for each of the primary disaggregate energy
sources—coal, oil, natural gas and electricity— individually so as to lay
out the background information before the empirical analysis.

2.1.1. Coal.
The underpricing of coal products and abundant domestic stocks
during the central planning era6 leads China to rely heavily on coal
consumption (Crompton and Wu, 2005), with the share of coal in
total energy consumption hovering around 70% during 1985–2011.
The share starts to shrink from the beginning of the eleventh Five Year
Plan (2006–2010). As mentioned above, this might be attributed to
much of China's effort to promote energy efﬁciency and emission reduc-
tion by clamping down on its downstream user (mainly heavy industry)
and limiting the growth of coal use.7 The downward trend in the share
of coal consumption is also associated with the economic slowdown in
coal-consuming sectors, moderate demand growth of electricity, and
price reform in the coal market.

Table A1 in the appendix presents the annual average supply, de-
mand, and trade of coal during the period of 1995–2014 across Chinese
provinces located in seven different regions.8 There are three balance
relationships: (1) The total primary energy supply equals the sum of
indigenous production, trade balance and the stock change, where the
trade balance measures the difference between imports and exports;
(2) The total energy consumption equals loss plus end energy consump-
tion less of the net input value during the transformation process;
(3) The statistical difference accounts for the error between total supply
and total consumption. The last column reports the annual average ratio
of trade balance to the total energy supply during 1995–2014. A nega-
tive value implies that on average a province is the producer and export-
er of coal; a positive value shows that a province is scarce of and highly
dependent on coal imports. Among the 30 provinces, Shanxi, Shaanxi,
Inner Mongolia, Xinjiang, Ningxia and Henan in the northern and
central part of China contain and export most of their coal resources.
Guizhou is the only southern province which has abundant coal
resources. In comparison, Hainan, Shanghai, Tianjin, Guangdong and
Zhejiang located along the eastern coastal line are economically devel-
oped, but N90% of supply of coal depends on imports from inland
provinces.

2.1.2. Oil.
Although coal is the dominant energy source, oil and petroleum
products are also essential. China's oil demand growth is boosted
by several factors, such as economic growth, trade, reﬁning capabilities,
petroleum inventory building and shift of transportation sector (Energy
Information Administration, 2015). The increase in the number of
passenger vehicles with the rising middle class in China, along with
expansion of petrochemical industries might be one of the most impor-
tant factors driving the consumption of oil and petroleum products in
China, among which diesel and gasoline dominate other oil types such
as fuel oil and kerosene (see Fig. 5).

The share of oil in the total energy consumption, as shown in Fig. 4,
peaks at 22% in year 2000. After 2010 the annual growth of oil consump-
tion slows down, reﬂecting the impacts of global ﬁnancial crisis and
economic downturn as well as China's efforts to reduce capacity over-
building and excessive investment in pollution-intensive industries.
Different from the coal consumption met by the indigenous production,
China as the world's second largest oil consuming country (Energy
Information Administration, 2016), heavily relies on oil imports and
searching for new reserves in Tarim Basin in the northwest and offshore
in the South China Sea. Fig. 6 provides a graphical illustration of oil con-
sumption, production and the surplus ratio in China during the period of
1965–2015. It shows that the surplus ratio turns from positive to nega-
tive from 1994 and the demand-supply gap enlarges since then.

In Table A2 of the appendix, we present oil production, consumption
and trade across Chinese provinces. All variables are measured as the
annual average during the period of 1995–2014. Total supply of oil com-
prises of indigenous production, import net of export, and the stock
change. Total energy consumption is decomposed into the net input,
loss in the oil production and transmission and end consumption in var-
ied sectors such as farming, forestry and animal, industry, construction,
transportation, storage, postal services and telecommunications,
wholesale, retail, catering, and residential consumption. Sorted by the
ratio of trade balance to total supply, Table A2 shows that the top ﬁve
exporters of oil are provinces of Heilongjiang, Xinjiang, Qinghai, Shaanxi
and Tianjin, all located in the northern part of China. Shandong, in close
proximity to the Bohai bay and East China Sea is the second largest oil
producer just after Heilongjiang, while on average still depends on
imports to ﬁll the gap between supply and demand. Guangdong is the
only southern province rich in oil resource with N50% of supply depend-
ing on imports. It is worth noting that more than half of Chinese prov-
inces including the developed ones such as Beijing, Shanghai and
Jiangsu, with total oil consumption heavily dependent on imports.

2.1.3. Natural gas.
The natural gas reserve distributes in nine basins including Tarim
(Xinjiang), Sichuan, Ordos (Inner Mongolia) and Qaidam (Qinghai),
accounting for around 84% of the total recoverable resources in China.
With the development and formation of national and regional natural
gas pipeline networks, China's natural gas consumption surges from
173 million m3 in 1994 to 1869 million m3 in 2014, with an average
annual growth rate of about 12%. Based on energy balance data from
China Energy Statistical Yearbooks (1996–2015), Table A3 in the appen-
dix shows that among the top ﬁve gas consumers, Sichuan, Xinjiang and
Chongqing are self-dependent and export to other provinces, while
economically developed large consumers such as Beijing, Jiangsu and
Shanghai depend on imports. Notably, Guangdong stands out as the
largest producer of gas in the south and export to its close neighbors
Guangxi, Hunan and Fujian.

2.1.4. Electricity.
Historically, the electric power industry experiences rehabilitation and
reconstruction during 1949–1951 since the establishment of the country's
ﬁrst generation plant in Shanghai, and then a slow expansion in big cities
along the coastal regions during the ﬁrst and second ﬁve-year plans
(1953–1962) before the Cultural Revolution. Power shortages and a short
fall in coal supply were associated with the social turmoil during 1966–
1975, bringing adverse effects on the rest of the economy (Shiu and Lam,
2004). With the open door policy in 1978 that leads to a series of structural
reforms and injection of market incentives, the fast growth of the electricity
industry started from early 1980s and continued into late 1990s.

Because of the large size of domestic reserves, coal among other
fossil fuels, makes up almost 80% of power generation sources (NBS,
2014). Oil-ﬁred generation remains a small portion. Natural gas serves
as a fuel source for power primarily in the southern coastal cities
where gas is more competitive and available (Energy Information
Administration, 2015). In the long run, China is determined to shift
from coal-ﬁred to more gas-ﬁred power generation, spending efforts
has the highest trade dependence ratio. Guangdong, Jiangsu, Shandong,
Zhejiang and Hebei are large consumers of electricity while b20% of
supply depends on imports from other provinces.

2.2. A brief review on energy-growth nexus studies.
The relationship between economic growth and energy consump-
tion has long been a controversial topic with rich implications in the
design of conservative and efﬁcient energy policies. The traditional eco-
nomic growth theory takes the role of energy in the production process
as being neutral (Solow, 1956; Galor, 2005). This perspective is chal-
lenged by Cleveland et al. (1984) from the biophysical and ecological
perspective, by Stern (1997) with thermodynamic concerns and by
Beaudreau (1995) from an engineering perspective. They argue that
an engineering production is infeasible without energy input, which
attracts great attention from energy and ecological economists to reex-
amine the GDP-energy nexus in a systematic way (Kander and Stern,
2012; Bhattacharya et al., 2016).

Interestingly, even within the economics discipline, the dispute has
been far from settled with results highly sensitive to the scope of
study, the period of time, the data structure, the analysis framework,
the number of variables and the methodology used. Since the seminal
work by Kraft and Kraft (1978), the topic has invoked a large volume
of relevant studies for the developed and developing countries at both
the aggregated and disaggregated levels (Ozturk, 2010).

In this sub-section, we restrict the review on energy-growth nexus
studies that have a focus on China. Table 1 provides a summary of
these studies in chronicle order by type of data used; causality results
between growth and both aggregate energy and disaggregate energy,
together with time period covered, are listed. As shown in Table 1,
Shiu and Lam (2004) may be one of the earliest studies that have used
the error-correction models to examine the presence and direction of
causal relationship between electricity consumption and economic
growth in China. Using annual data from 1971 to 2000, they ﬁnd that
electricity consumption Granger causes GDP but not vice versa. This is
to increase gas supply, regulate coal use, and improve gas transmission
infrastructure. China is also aggressively investing in hydro, nuclear,
wind and solar-power as key sources of renewable energy generation.
In 2014, the share of hydro, nuclear and wind power in total energy pro-
duction and consumption has reached 13.3% and 11.3%, respectively
(NBS, 2014). Fig. 7 shows electricity consumption by sector in 2014.
The industrial sector accounts for 72% of China's electricity consumption
(NBS, 2014), followed by 13% share of consumption in residential and
6% in other sectors. Wholesale, retail, accommodation and catering sec-
tors account for 4% of total electricity consumption; agriculture, forestry
and ﬁshery consume 2%; transportation, storage, postal service sector
plus the construction sector consumes the remaining 3%.

In the electricity ﬂow table (Table A4), about half of provinces are
exporters of electricity with negative values reported in the last column,
among which Anhui is the only eastern province that exports. Beijing
later conﬁrmed by Yuan et al. (2007) who conduct sectoral analysis on
data from 1978 to 2004. Using the same method and a longer time span
covering 1953–2002, Zou and Chau (2006) investigate the relationship
between oil consumption and GDP in China and ﬁnd that oil consump-
tion is an important predictor of economic growth in both the short and
long run. They explain that this is mainly caused by the enormous use of
oil in industrial sectors.

Different from the above two, Soytas and Sari (2006) extend the
bivariate framework to a multivariate case that is built on the neoclassi-
cal production function and use the Toda and Yamamoto (1995) (TY in
short) for causality test. They ﬁnd no causal relationship between ener-
gy and economic growth in China. Similar to Soytas and Sari (2006),
Zhang and Cheng (2009), Y. Wang et al. (2011), S.S. Wang et al.
(2011), and Shahbaz et al. (2013) also study the relationship between
aggregate energy consumption and economic growth using national-
level data, but different methods and frameworks are adopted. Speciﬁ-
cally, Zhang and Cheng (2009) incorporate carbon emission in the
framework, use the TY method and ﬁnd that neither carbon emissions
nor energy consumption leads to economic growth; Y. Wang et al.
(2011a), S.S. Wang et al. (2011) use energy-augmented production
function and autoregressive distributed lag (ARDL in short) bounds test-
ing approach and ﬁnd energy Granger causing economic growth in both
short and long run; Shahbaz et al. (2013) incorporate ﬁnancial develop-
ment, trade, and capital, adopt ARDL, and also evidence the unidirec-
tional relationship from energy to GDP.

However, as pointed out by Soytas and Sari (2006), conclusions
made on the analysis of aggregate energy should not be generalized to
disaggregate energy; instead, the importance of various energy sources
in the economy should be assessed separately before providing sugges-
tions to policy makers. A few studies that consider both the aggregate
and disaggregate energy consumption include Yuan et al. (2008),
Herrerias et al. (2013), Zhang and Yang (2013), Bloch et al. (2015),
Long et al. (2015), and Fang and Wolski (2016). All the researchers,
except Herrerias et al. (2013), use the national annual series. While
no consensus has reached on the presence and direction of Granger cau-
sality between individual disaggregated energy type and economic
growth, the policy implications drawn from these works have been
largely enriched.

Another deﬁciency of these studies exists in the aggregate national
level data. As pointed out by Yalta and Cakar (2012), analysis using
national level data has a limited potential to observe the complex causal
linkages between energy use and economic growth in China. Using
various framework and econometric methods applied to national series,
they ﬁnd results from 53 out of 60 models support no causal relation-
ship between energy and economic growth. The reason is that causality
tests based on time series data has a high risk falsely rejecting the null
hypothesis of no causality when the sample size is small. To avoid
the over-rejection and uncover the causal relationship, research should
be performed on provincial panel data. This argument is echoed in
Ozturk's (2010) thorough review of about 100 papers with time series
framework.

More recent work in China shifts from time series analysis of national
level data to panel approaches applied to provincial data, with the
advance of panel econometric methodologies. For example, Y. Wang
et al. (2011), S.S. Wang et al. (2011), using data from 28 provinces
over the period 1995–2007, ﬁnd that GDP Granger causes energy con-
sumption but not vice versa. Zhang and Xu (2012) identify the bidirec-
tional linkage for the eastern region using data from 1995 to 2008,
while Fei et al. (2011) using data from 1985 to 2007 show that only
the growth effect is signiﬁcant for the eastern part of China. Li and
Leung (2012) use data from 23 provinces for a period of 1985–2008 to
reexamine the causal link between coal and GDP, and ﬁnd heteroge-
neous effects across regions, i.e., bi-directional relationship in the coastal
and central regions but uni-directional relationship from GDP to coal in
the western region. Akkemik et al. (2012) also take into account the
panel heterogeneity and evidence that causality holds for 19 provinces
from GDP to energy and in the opposite direction for 14 provinces.
However, none of the studies investigates the causal relationship for
various disaggregated energy sources for each of the provinces.

To summarize, it is important to perform the energy-growth causal-
ity analysis using Chinese provincial data of not only the aggregate
energy consumption but also the disaggregate energy types. To the
best of our knowledge, Herrerias et al. (2013) is so far the only paper
that has almost done so. They use the bi-variate framework to examine
the causal relationship between energy and economic growth across
27 provinces from 1995 to 2009. They discuss the total energy con-
sumption and disaggregate energy types into coal, coke, crude oil and
electricity except for gas, and ﬁnd the uni-directional causation from
economic growth to energy consumption from 1999 to 2009.

Our paper attempts to add more evidence in this regard that uses
provincial panel data to examine the causal link between individual
energy sources and economic development for China as a whole and
in each of the provinces. Different from Herrerias et al. (2013) and all
other empirical studies in China, we introduce an innovative factor
human capital to the theoretical framework. The endogenous growth
theory developed by Romer (1986) and Lucas (1988) emphasizes the
role of human capital as the main source of growth, but it has only
been considered in the energy-growth nexus literature until very re-
cently for cross-country analysis (Pablo-Romero and Sánchez-Braza,
2015; Fang and Chang, 2016). Our paper is one of the ﬁrst that includes
human capital into the energy-growth nexus analysis in China. This is of
vital importance for China as evidenced by Whalley and Zhao (2013)
that human capital contributes N38% of GDP growth during 1979–
1998 and plays a larger role since 1999 following a major education
expansion.

In this paper, using the panel Granger causality test (Emirmahmutoglu
and Kose, 2011) and the continuously-updated fully-modiﬁed estimates
(Bai et al., 2009) that allow for cross-sectional dependence, we aim to
provide fresh empirical evidence to reexamine the heterogeneous link-
ages between energy consumption and economic growth at individual
provinces for different sources of energy. Local energy policy implications
will be informed and shaped by regional heterogeneity and the province-
speciﬁc energy mix.

3. Data description.
This paper uses an augmented neoclassical production function to
explore the cointegration and causal relationship between economic
growth and energy use. Therefore, we use GDP, physical capital,
human capital and energy in the multivariate framework.9 Data used
in this paper are collected from three sources. The ﬁrst source is China
Energy Statistical Yearbooks (various years, 1996–2015) from which
the total energy consumption10 and disaggregate energy consumption
including coal, coke, crude oil, petroleum products (which consist of
fuel oil, gasoline, diesel, kerosene), natural gas, and electricity at provin-
cial levels are obtained. Total energy consumption is measured in
10,000 tons of standard coal equivalent; consumption of coal, coke,
crude oil, and petroleum products are measured in million tons, and
units for natural gas and electricity are million cubic meters and billion
kWh respectively.

The second data source is China Statistical Yearbooks (various year,
1996–2015) where we have access to nominal GDP, ﬁxed asset invest-
ment and population. The nominal GDP is converted to real GDP in
1995 constant prices using year-on-year GDP indices. Population is

9 Similar to Soytas and Sari (2006) who used the supply-side approach to study the
energy-growth nexus, no other control variables are included. Within a multivariate
model with too many controls, the concern is regarding over-parameterization and loss
of degrees of freedom which can lead to estimation error (Smyth and Narayan, 2015).
10 Total energy consumption comprises of the ﬁnal energy consumption, the loss during
energy transformation as well as the loss of that during the course of energy transport, dis-
tribution and storage caused by any objective reason.
used to generate variables in per-capital form.11 Though physical capital
stock is preferred in the theoretical framework, and can be estimated
using ﬁxed asset investment and the perpetual inventory method
with the assumption of a constant depreciation rate (Zhang et al.,
2004), we decide to use ﬁxed asset investment as a proxy of capital
stock for two reasons. First, physical capital stock is hard to measure
and collect; and that estimated from the perpetual inventory method
is incomparable and subject to estimation biasness (Berlemann and
Wesselhöft, 2014).12 Second, capital stock and investment are closely
related, and it is not uncommon to use gross ﬁxed capital formation as
a proxy in the growth related literature. Examples include Sharma and
Dhakal (1994), Lee and Huang (2002), Lee (2005), Soytas and Sari
(2009), and Zhang and Cheng (2009).

Lastly, human capital is obtained from the China Human Capital
Index Report 2016 published by the China Center for Human Capital
and Labor Market Research of Central University of Finance and
Economics. The 2016 Report provides detailed human capital informa-
tion such as total human capital, human capital per capita and human
capital index at both the national and provincial level starting from
1985 up to 2014. It is calculated using a modiﬁed Jorgenson-Fraumeni
lifetime income approach (Jorgenson and Fraumeni, 1989) based on
both the survey and macro data. We use the provincial real per capita
human capital data for a period of 1995–2014 and convert them into
the 1995 constant prices.

Using data available from the three sources, our panel covers 30
provinces, municipalities and autonomous regions (provinces in short
hereafter) and a period ranging from 1995 to 2014.13 The 30 provinces
include Beijing, Tianjin, Shanxi, Hebei, Inner Mongolia in North China;
Liaoning, Jilin and Heilongjiang in Northeast China; Shanghai, Jiangsu,
Zhejiang, Anhui, Fujian, Jiangxi and Shandong in East China; Henan,
Hubei and Hunan in the central; Guangdong, Guangxi and Hainan in
South China; Chongqing, Sichuan, Guizhou and Yunnan in Southwest
China; and Shaanxi, Gansu, Qinghai, Ningxia and Xinjiang in Northwest
China. Table 2 lists the deﬁnitions and summary statistics of these vari-
ables. All the variables, real GDP, ﬁxed asset investment, human capital
and energy consumption, are expressed in per-capita logarithm forms
denoted by InGDP, InInv, InHC and lnE where E refers to one of the
aggregate energy and disaggregate energy types, i.e., Energy, Coal,
Coke, Crude Oil, Petroleum Products, Gas, and Electricity.

Using the provincial ArcGIS shapeﬁle, we visualize the real GDP per
capita and the share of energy consumption across provinces in Fig. 8.
The gradual colors from dark to light indicate the decreasing magnitude
of per capita real GDP. The size of the grey bubble represents how large
the share of energy consumption is for each of the provinces over the
national aggregate. It clearly indicates the huge variance across prov-
inces in economic development as well as the speciﬁc dependence of
energy. Strong correlation is identiﬁed between output and energy con-
sumption, which is highly visible along the coastal line of China in the
provinces of Shandong, Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Fujian and Guangdong. This
is also true for central provinces such as Henan and for western
provinces like Inner Mongolia, Shaanxi and Sichuan.

4. Econometric methodologies.
This paper aims to answer two main research questions. First,
whether the variables GDP, physical and human capital and energy
consumption are cointegrated and what is the magnitude of output
elasticity with respect to each factor input if there is a cointegrating
relationship. Second, whether there is a Granger causal link between
energy consumption and economic growth; if so, what is the direction
of the Granger causality? To answer these questions, we incorporate
human capital and energy consumption into the following neoclassical
production function where Y is the real output per capita, and K, HC, E are factor inputs of per
capita physical capital, human capital and energy, respectively. The
subscript i denotes the Chinese province i and t denotes year t. Using
log-linearization, we can rewrite it as
ln Y it ¼ β0 þ β1 ln Kit þ β2 ln HCit þ β3 ln Eit þ εit
where β0 is the intercept, β1, β2 and β3 are the coefﬁcients which
measures the output elasticities with respect to physical capital,
human capital and energy consumption, respectively, and εit is the
error term.

For the ﬁrst query, we employ the panel cointegration method pro-
posed by Westerlund (2007) and continuously-updated fully modiﬁed
estimator (Bai et al., 2009) which enable us to address the potential
issue of cross-sectional dependence. To answer the second research
question, bootstrap panel Granger causality test (Emirmahmutoglu
and Kose, 2011) is applied. The econometric methods are explained in
detail below.
4.1. Panel unit root test with cross-sectional dependence.
In order to examine the existence of cointegrating relationships, we
ﬁrst check the stationarity of the series. There are two generations of
panel unit root tests in the literature. The ﬁrst generation of panel unit
root tests such as Maddala and Wu (1999), Choi (2001) and Im et al.
(2003) does not account for the cross-sectional dependence, while the
second generation of panel unit root tests (Phillips and Sul, 2003; Bai
and Ng, 2004; Moon and Perron, 2004; Pesaran, 2007) is developed to
solve issues associated with the assumption of cross-sectional indepen-
dence in the ﬁrst-generation tests.

To determine which panel unit root test is appropriate for this study,
we begin with the cross-section dependence test. It is expected that
there is a strong interdependence across provinces partly because of
common shocks and regional dependence in China. Since there are
20 years and 30 provinces in the sample, we use three cross-sectional
dependence tests—namely, Frees (1995), Friedman (1937) and Pesaran
(2004) statistics—that are suitable for the sample T b N.

Among the second-generation panel unit root tests, the most popu-
lar one is the cross-sectionally augmented IPS (CIPS) test which is based
on the averages of the individual IPS ADF statistics as proposed by
Pesaran (2007). It is suitable for small T, thus we use the CIPS test to ex-
amine the stationarity of the series in this paper. Speciﬁcally, to investi-
gate whether series {yit} has unit root, assume the cross-sectionally
augmented Dicky-Fuller (CADF) regression speciﬁcation is this
where CADFi is the t-statistic on the lagged variable obtained by running
the CADF regression for each unit i.

4.2. Panel cointegration test with cross-sectional dependence.
Similar to two generations of panel unit root tests, there are panel
cointegration tests which assume the absence and presence of the
cross-sectional dependence. The representative of the ﬁrst type is
Pedroni's (1999, 2004) tests which include seven statistics. Pedroni
(1999, 2004)’s panel cointegration test statistics are based on the resid-
ual dynamics and are appropriate for many situations such as heteroge-
neity and endogeneity. However, it does not account for the cross-
sectional dependence and has the common factor restriction which
means that the long-run parameters for variables at levels and the
short-run parameters for variables at ﬁrst differences are the same.

The second type of panel cointegration tests include Westerlund's
(2007) which, different from the residual-based tests, is based on
structural dynamics and thus does not require the common factor
restriction.14 To examine whether cointegrating relationship exists
between series {yi, t} and {xi,t}, assume the error-correction model as
follows, where Δis the difference operator, yt is the average of all N observations
at time t, and p is the lag lengths of Δyi,t and Δyt which is determined by
an information criterion. The CIPS test statistic is therefore,
where dt is the deterministic component which is assumed to be zero,
one, or a vector of (1,t)′, and pi and qi are the lag and lead orders for
unit i. The cointegration is expressed by yi,t−1−βi′xi,t−1=0. The coefﬁ-
cient αi measures the speed at which the system corrects back to the CIPS,
long-run equilibrium of correction, and a negative value of αi implies
the presence of a cointegrating relationship, while αi = 0 means no
error correction and no cointegration.

Westerlund (2007)’s approach is to test the null hypothesis of no
cointegration that αi =0 for all i. Two alternative hypotheses are:
(1) the panel is cointegrated as a whole, i.e., αi =α b 0 for all i; and
(2) at least one cross-sectional unit is cointegrated, i.e., αi b 0 for at
least one i. The test statistics proposed for the ﬁrst alternative hypothe-
sis are called panel test, which are they,
where ^α is the estimate of the homogenous speed of error correction
for all units and SEð^αÞ is the standard error of ^α. The group-mean test
statistics for the second alternative hypothesis are these, 
and Dumitrescu and Hurlin (2012). Kónya (2006)’s test is based on
seemingly unrelated regressions and Wald tests with bootstrap
critical values for individual cross-sectional units. Dumitrescu and
Hurlin (2012) propose a test based on the average of individual
Wald statistics which addresses the heterogeneity in both the causal
relationship and the model speciﬁcation, and use a block bootstrap
method to account for cross-sectional dependence. Emirmahmutoglu
and Kose (2011) use meta analyses in heterogeneous mixed panels
and the bootstrap method to generate the distribution of the test statis-
tic when there is dependence across units. We adopt Emirmahmutoglu
and Kose's (2011) method to get causality results across provinces
as well as for individual provinces. Assume a heterogeneous panel
model where ^αi is the parameter estimate for unit i, SEð^αiÞ is the associated
standard error.
It is shown that these test statistics are normally distributed asymp-
totically and have good small-sample properties. Furthermore, these
tests are able to accommodate heterogeneity and cross-sectional
dependence by using the bootstrap. More technical details can refer to
Westerlund (2007).

4.3. Panel Cup\\FM estimation with cross-sectional dependence.

Taking into consideration the cross-sectional dependence, we
choose the continuously-updated fully-modiﬁed estimates (Cup\\FM
thereinafter; Bai et al., 2009) over the panel heterogeneous fully
modiﬁed OLS and panel dynamic OLS to investigate the elasticities
with respect to each factor inputs. The cross-sectional dependence is
modelled using the error term in the panel regression which is assumed
to follow a factor model where εit is the stationary error, Ft is a vector of common factors, λi is the
corresponding factor loadings, and uit is the idiosyncratic component of
the error term.

The proposed Cup\\FM estimator is constructed by estimating
the parameters, covariance matrix and factor loadings recursively until
convergence is reached.
ΔXit in which ^ΩFεi and ^Ωuεi are estimated covariance.
The Cup\\FM estimator is proved to have a good small-sample
property which ﬁts the case in our paper.

4.4. Panel granger causality with cross-sectional dependence.
Three panel Granger causality tests that are widely applied in empir-
ical studies include Kónya (2006), Emirmahmutoglu and Kose (2011),
and Dumitrescu and Hurlin (2012). Kónya (2006)’s test is based on
seemingly unrelated regressions and Wald tests with bootstrap
critical values for individual cross-sectional units. Dumitrescu and
Hurlin (2012) propose a test based on the average of individual
Wald statistics which addresses the heterogeneity in both the causal
relationship and the model specification, and use a block bootstrap
method to account for cross-sectional dependence. Emirmahmutoglu
and Kose (2011) use meta analyses in heterogeneous mixed panels
and the bootstrapmethod to generate the distribution of the test statistic
when there is dependence across units.We adopt Emirmahmutoglu
and Kose's (2011) method to get causality results across provinces
as well as for individual provinces. Assume a heterogeneous panel
model,
where d maxi denotes the maximal order of integration of variables in
the system for unit i. To test causality from x to y, Emirmahmutoglu
and Kose (2011) propose a ﬁve-step procedure as follows:

(1) Determine d maxi using the traditional unit root tests; select lag
order ki using OLS regression for each unit and the information
criteria.

(2) Re-estimate the equation by OLS using d maxi and ki from step 1
under the assumption that Aij=0 where j; residuals
obtained are.
(3) Center the residuals using the formula , where k=max(ki)and d=max(d maxi); get a sam-
it from the centered residuals ~εi;t by randomly selecting a
(4) Generate the bootstrap sample.
(5) Re-estimate the equation using cy
it, get the individual Wald
statistics for non-causality test for each unit i and the associ-
ated p-values. The Fisher test statistic is therefore obtained
i¼1 lnðpiÞ which follows a chi-square distribu-
by λ ¼ −2
tion with 2N degrees of freedom.
Steps (3)–(5) can be repeated many times to generate the bootstrap
empirical distribution and critical values. One of the advantages of this
method, as explained by Emirmahmutoglu and Kose (2011), is that it
does not require the pre-tests on integration and cointegration, and
therefore avoid pre-test biases.

5. Empirical results.
Following the econometric methodologies abovementioned, we
present and discuss the test results in Section 5. First, we examine
whether the data are cross-sectionally dependent. After conﬁrming
the presence of cross-sectional dependence, we conduct the panel unit
root test, panel cointegration test, panel estimation, and panel Granger
causality test that allow for cross-sectional dependence to investigate
the cointegrating and Granger causal relationship between energy and
economic growth while controlling for physical and human capital.

Table 3 shows the cross-sectional dependence test results using
three statistics: Frees' Q statistic, Friedman's χ2 statistic, and Pesaran's
statistic, based on the ﬁxed effect model of lnGDP, lnInv, lnHC and lnE
for each energy type. The presence of cross-sectional dependence in
the panel is conﬁrmed by the results of all three cross-sectional depen-
dence test statistics. We thus proceed with the second-generation panel
unit root tests.

Table 4 presents the CIPS statistics for all the variables at levels and
their ﬁrst differences. Two model speciﬁcations, one with only the inter-
cept and the other with both the intercept and trend, are considered.
Variables such as GDP, investment, and human capital are found to
have unit roots at levels and be stationary at ﬁrst differences. Energy
variables such as coal, crude oil, petroleum products and natural gas
are also conﬁrmed to be integrated of order one regardless of the
model used. Total energy and electricity consumption, however, are
observed to be stationary in the ﬁrst model, but integrated of order
one in the second model at the signiﬁcance level of 1%. The only variable
that is found to be not integrated of order one is the coke consumption
where all the statistics reject the null hypothesis of presence of unit
roots. We will therefore drop discussion on the cointegration test of
coke consumption in the next step.

Table 5 shows the four statistics and the associated robust p-values
under two model speciﬁcations with and without constant terms by
various energy variables. The robust p-values are based on the bootstrap
errors from 100 repetitions. The results clearly show that there is a long-
run cointegrating relationship between economic growth, investment,
human capital and a majority of the energy variables at least at the sig-
niﬁcance level of 15% in China (based on the panel statistics Pτ and Pα) as
well as in at least one of the provinces (based on the group-mean statis-
tics Gτ and Gα). The only exception is with the electricity consumption
where the statistics Pτ and Gτ for the model with the constant term
fail to reject the null hypothesis of no cointegration. The other two sta-
tistics Pα and Gα, nevertheless, still suggest the presence of cointegrating
relationship regardless of the model speciﬁcations.

After conﬁrming the presence of cointegrating relationships among
economic growth, investment, human capital and energy consumption
(both aggregate and disaggregate), we now analyze which factor
contributes most to economic growth. Table 6 presents the parameter
estimates and the associated t-statistics for investment, human capital
and energy by types of energy variables considered in the augmented
neoclassical production function. There are several interesting ﬁndings.
First, human capital is the ﬁrst order contributor to economic growth
in China. In the total energy consumption model speciﬁcation, GDP
per capita is found to increase by 0.2% when the per capita human
capital is increased by 1%, while a 1% increase in per capita investment
only leads to an increase of 0.1% in GDP. Overall, human capital exerts
about 2–3 times the effect of investment to the economic growth,
depending on which energy variable is accounted for in the production
function.15 This is consistent with ﬁndings in Auty (2001) who
concludes that human capital has the greatest impact on economic
growth all over the world. Second, looking at the coefﬁcient estimates
on the energy variables, both the aggregate energy and individual disag-
gregate energy sources, are proved to be a signiﬁcant input to the
production function, which justiﬁes the role of energy to economic
growth. Though the impact is relatively small compared to physical
and human capital, a 1% increase in total energy consumption is esti-
mated to signiﬁcantly grow GDP by 0.05%. Across disaggregate energy
sources, there are heterogeneous impacts on economic growth varying
from 0.006 of natural gas to 0.114 of electricity. Compared to Herrerias
et al. (2013) who ﬁnd long-run elasticities for total energy, coal, coke,
oil and electricity in China are between 0.51 and 1.06, our coefﬁcient
estimates are much smaller. However, it is noted that Herrerias did not consider the cross-sectional dependence and use the
panel DOLS in a bi-variate framework of energy and growth.

Causality analysis has important implications on energy conserva-
tive policies and economic development strategies. Given that the pro-
vincial panel data is interdependent across provinces, we resort to
panel Granger causal tests that allow for the cross-sectional interdepen-
dence. Speciﬁcally, the bootstrapped Fisher test statistic proposed by
Emirmahmutoglu and Kose (2011) is applied in this paper.

The panel Granger causality test statistics for each type of energy are
presented in Table 7 where the signiﬁcance is determined by the boot-
strap critical values obtained from 1000 replications. The results suggest
neutrality for oil and one-directional Granger causality running from
economic growth to energy for petroleum products and electricity.
We also observe bi-directional relationship for coal, coke, natural gas
and aggregate energy consumption, consistent with Zhang and Yang
(2013) who support feedback hypothesis in total energy, coal and nat-
ural gas. The feedback hypothesis between coal and GDP is also support-
ed by Bloch et al. (2015) and Li and Leung (2012) for the eastern and
central China; the bi-directional causal relationship between natural
gas and economic development is further evidenced in Long et al.
(2015). Based on the panel causality results presented here, the energy
conservation policies should focus more on reducing consumption in
oil, petroleum products and electricity; as it would not negatively affect
the economic growth across China.

Table 8 presents the provincial test statistics and associated p-values
for the pair of economic growth and total energy consumption. It is
worth noting that there is striking provincial heterogeneity shown in
the Granger causal link between energy consumption and economic
growth. At provincial levels, the feedback hypothesis is not uniformly
supported as observed for China as a whole. Instead, energy Granger
causing economic growth is evidenced in three northern and central
provinces like Hebei, Henan and Shanxi, two in the eastern regions
like Zhejiang and Fujian, and two southwestern provinces Sichuan and
Yunnan, where reduction in energy consumption impedes economic
growth; while in eleven provinces such as Inner Mongolia, Jilin,
Heilongjiang, Jiangsu, Anhui, Shandong, Hainan, Chongqing, Guizhou,
Shannxi and Qinghai, the result of economic growth Granger causing
energy use is identiﬁed, suggesting that conservation policy is not
conﬂicting with growth aims. In the remaining twelve provinces, no
causality relationship is observed where the design of energy policies
is independent of the pursuit of economic development.16 Grouping
the causality test results by seven regions, it is worth noting that there
is a clear trend of clustering in the energy-growth nexus. From the
policy perspective, the conservation policy can be implemented without
hampering economic growth in the resource-rich northeast, northwest
and southern China, while heterogeneity exhibits in the northern,
central, eastern and southwestern part of China where the growth
hypotheses seem to hold for some energy-constrained provinces.17

The last two columns report the target as well as the achievement of
energy intensity reduction broken down in each province during the
11th Five Year Plan from 2006 to 2010. Combined with causality test
results, we ﬁnd that in North China the actual reduction percentages
of energy intensity are lower in provinces where the growth hypotheses
are identiﬁed and the conservation policy are hard to implement. Simi-
lar observations are found for provinces like Zhejiang and Fujian in East
China, Henan in the central region and Yunnan in the Southwest. Our
province-speciﬁc panel causality tests accounting for cross-sectional
dependence thus provide clear evidence, based on which policy makers
might reﬁne the energy intensity targets broken down into province
considering the economic development constraint. Taking the norther
part of China for example, the target set for Inner Mongolia and Shanxi
are 22% which are higher than that set for Beijing, Tianjin and Hebei.
The causality results well indicate that Beijing and Tianjin could take
more responsibilities and make more contributions in reducing energy
consumption; the target set for Inner Mongolia is less controversial
since the growth hypothesis does not hold; while the target set for
Shanxi is more debatable, and the achievement of target might take
longer time. Supporting measures such as economic restructuring, tech-
nology upgrading, and energy efﬁcacy enhancement are imperative to
facilitate the achievement of goals set for province like Shanxi - a large
producer and exporter of the most available energy source in China.

Due to space limitation, detailed statistics of causality tests for vari-
ous disaggregate energy variables are not reported but a summary of
ﬁndings on the direction of Granger causality relationship between
GDP and disaggregate energy is shown in Table 9. Findings of the causal
relationship between total energy consumption and economic growth
across provinces are examined together with ﬁndings on the disaggre-
gate energy use so as to identify the speciﬁc energy source to which
conservation policies can be targeted.

Substantial insights can be obtained from ﬁndings summarized in
Table 9. For example, Shanxi and Hebei are two top coal consumption
provinces. Because total energy consumption is found to Granger
cause GDP in these two provinces, energy conservation policies seem
to be not appropriate. However, if we look at the disaggregate energy-
growth nexus for Shanxi and Hebei, energy conservation policies can
be suggested to many energy sources except for coke use. It is thus
recommended that Shanxi and Hebei increase coke consumption to a
larger extent than the reduction of other energy uses. In this way, energy
and environmental concerns in the two provinces can be addressed
without deteriorating the economy. Jiangsu and Inner Mongolia, the
other two major coal consumers, however, should have different energy
policies. Even though the energy conservation hypothesis is supported
for Jiangsu and Inner Mongolia, policies to reduce coal consumption
are not desirable; because a bi-directional Granger causal relationship
is observed between coal consumption and GDP for Jiangsu and Inner
Mongolia. In the four directly-controlled municipalities of China, the
consumption of coal, coke and electricity in Beijing may be substituted
by oil and natural gas to achieve the sustainable development.
Shanghai's steel industry is heavily dependent on consumption of coal
and coke, thus cutting energy consumption in oil, petroleum products,
gas and electricity can be more desirable. Coal and gas Granger cause
the growth in Tianjin; while the bi-directional relationship for coke
and uni-directional causality from oil to growth are present in Chong-
qing. These interpretations of results illustrate the importance to exam-
ine not only the total energy-growth nexus, but also the causal
relationship between disaggregate energy and GDP for individual
provinces.

<Conclusion> Conclusions and policy implications.
Though the debate on the energy-growth nexus has created a large
body of empirical research, the lack of consensus about the existence
of long-run relationship and the uncertainly of the direction of causality
has been a long-lasting catalyst for new studies using more recent
methods (Smyth and Narayan, 2015). Many existing studies in the
literature are cross-county analyses; of studies with a focus on a single
country, most use data at the national level. There are few studies
which use state level data in United States and Australia (Apergis and
Payne, 2010; Aslan, 2011; Narayan et al., 2010), but they are restricted
to the studies of aggregate energy consumption or a speciﬁc disaggre-
gate energy source. There are also limited studies using provincial
level data in China (Akkemik et al., 2012; Fei et al., 2011; Li and Leung,
2012; Y. Wang et al., 2011; S.S. Wang et al., 2011; Zhang and Xu,
2012). However, none of these studies explore the heterogeneous
causal relationship for various disaggregated energy source to capture
the differentiated energy consumption behavior and energy-saving
strategies in each of the provinces.

The novel aspect of work lies in our consideration of the panel econo-
metric techniques which account for cross-sectional dependence and
provincial heterogeneity to study the cointegrating and Granger causal
relationships between GDP and energy (both aggregate and disaggre-
gate) not only for China as a whole but also in each of Chinese provinces
for a period of 1995–2014. More importantly and different from previ-
ous studies, our analysis sits within an augmented production frame-
work which accounts for the signiﬁcant role played by human capital
in economic growth. Using such unique dataset at Chinese provincial
level makes our paper the ﬁrst of its kind.

There are several interesting ﬁndings. First, we show that a 10%
increase in human capital boosts GDP per capita by 2%, which exerts
about 2–3 times the effect of physical investment to economic growth.
Energy also plays a signiﬁcantly positive role in provincial-level eco-
nomic growth. A 10% increase in total energy consumption is estimated
to grow provincial GDP by 0.5%. Second, we ﬁnd that the impacts on
growth across various disaggregate energy sources are heterogeneous,
which vary from 0.006 of natural gas to 0.114 of electricity. Third,
for China as whole, we observe the long-run bi-directional causal rela-
tionship for coal, coke, gas and total energy consumption, the unidirec-
tional causal relationship from growth to consumption in petroleum
products and electricity, and the neutral role of oil in the growth of
provincial output. Therefore, the energy-saving and environmental pro-
duction measures on oil, petroleum products and electricity might be
adopted without being at the expense of economic growth for China as
a whole. However, such observations do not apply to and the policy im-
plications cannot be generalized to all provinces. After examining the
heterogeneous causality effects across provinces, we ﬁnd that the ener-
gy conservation policy could be implemented without impeding eco-
nomic growth across provinces in the resource-rich northeast,
northwest and southern China, while heterogeneity exhibits in the
north, central, east and southwest part of China where the growth
hypotheses hold for provinces which are likely to be energy constrained.
These key ﬁndings highlight the importance to examine the total energy-
growth nexus, and more importantly, the causal relationship between
disaggregate energy source and growth for individual province within
the augmented production framework, considering the cross-sectional
dependence.

We draw the following policy implications based on the main empir-
ical results: (1) the growth-energy nexus exhibits rich heterogeneity
in different provinces and therefore, local governments cannot blindly
follow the experience of others. The regression results and causality
analyses show that even for provinces with similar geographical location
or economic structure, the roles of human capital and energy
consumption vary across the administrative boundary. For example, in
the four metropolitan cities Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin and Chongqing,
neutrality hypotheses hold for the ﬁrst three metropolises while a unidi-
rectional causality runs from economic growth to energy consumption
in the youngest one, even though the policy implications drawn for
them are the same, that is, energy conservation is implementable.
(2) Our empirical evidence also provides clear guidance for regulators
on how to meet the energy intensity and emission reduction target set
for each of the provinces, considering the energy and economic develop-
ment constraints. The growth hypotheses are found in provinces with
higher level of excessive energy demand. Therefore, in provinces
where the growth hypotheses are identiﬁed, it is suggested to imple-
ment polices to foster energy transmission infrastructure to link supply
and demand, move toward more market-led energy pricing schemes,
improve energy efﬁciency, and make greater investment to tap into
the potential of the renewable energy sources.

References