
1. Introduction

A long strand of literature suggests the great importance of
commodities' predictive power to stock market, in which few, if any,
other commodities have received more attention for their perceived
economic signiﬁcance than oil. Theoretically and empirically, the critical
role of oil market for understanding macroeconomic ﬂuctuations has
been well documented (see, for example, Hamilton, 1983, 2005;
Backus and Crucini, 2000; Kilian and Park, 2009; Bodenstein etal.,
2011; Alquist etal., forthcoming). Among various oil market variables,
oil shock is a noteworthy one as there are voluminous studies, for
instance, on the short and long-runco-movements and causation rela-
tionships between oil shocks and stock volatility (see, e.g.,Arouri etal.,
2011, 2012; Creti etal., 2013; Conrad etal., 2014; Du and He, 2015;
Kang etal., 2015; Ewing and Malik, 2016). It is, therefore, of interest to
deeply investigate the effect of oil market volatility on stock markets.

However, not much has been done on the subject of predictive abil-
ity of oil to stock volatility from an out-of-sample perspective. Existing
researches are largely, almost all, based merely on in-sample empirical
work. Admittedly, it is more of reason to employ an out-ofsampleapproach
in the sense of prediction although in-sample results
appear for reference and comparison (see, e.g.,Campbell and
Thompson, 2005; Rapach etal., 2010). Therefore, in this paper, we investigatewhether
the oil volatility risk is useful in explaining the future volatility
of international stock market returns. In particular, our
forecasting exercise using a recursive out-of-sample test, confirms that
oil volatility risk does exhibit statistically and economically significant
and robust in-sample and out-of-sample forecasting power, clearly exceeding
some of well-known macroeconomic variables. Investigating
such volatility patterns in this way is critical to many fundamental issues
in asset pricing, investment, corporate finance, and risk management
(Bali etal., 2005).
In this paper, oil volatility risk is captured with variance risk premium
(oil VRP) of West Texas Intermediate crude oil (WTI). The variance risk
premium measures the price of a hedge against variance ﬂuctuations,
and it is equal to the difference between the expected variance, under
the physical and the risk-neutral measures, which are thought to capture
a market-wide measure of uncertainty (Bali and Zhou, 2016). We choose
this proxy since it well measures the volatility risk generated within oil
market and its time-varying characteristic better covers information of
the market over time. Therefore, oil VRP better captures macroeconomic
dynamics and tend to perform more accurate in predicting stock volatil-
ities forecast.

While there is strong evidence relating oil prices to the business cycle,
attempts by economists to forecast equity returns using lagged oil prices,
have largely failed to ﬁnd consistent evidence; i.e.,the nature of the rela-
tionship is nonlinear, time varying. Consistent with its perceived econom-
ic signiﬁcance, some empirical results generally imply that oil should be
an important determinant of asset prices (Ferson and Harvey, 1993;
Backus and Crucini, 2000). Confounding this, Chen etal. (1986) who use
deduced oil risk premium Fama-MacBeth type regressions to predict
the cross-section of asset prices yield insigniﬁcant results. Huang etal.
(1996) ﬁnd virtually no relation between futures returns and U.S. stock
market returns. Moreover, even when they have come up signiﬁcantly,
oil-price-based return predictability is not explained by a time-varying
risk premium (Driesprong etal., 2008; Narayan and Sharma, 2011;
Scholtens and Yurtsever, 2012). These negative ﬁndings may due to
geopolitical events, wars, changes in economic structures, technologies,
and other reasons. Until recently, Chiang etal. (2015) introduce a novel
structural approach to extracting the factors, link oil factors to the
macroeconomy, and establish their signiﬁcance in pricing the broader
cross-section of equities. Their results provide evidence that oil risk ade-
quately ﬁltered from noisy price data, is one of a handful of fundamental
factors that affect the pricing effect, whereas information adequately
ﬁltered from derivatives prices does carry signiﬁcant risk premium with
rational economic interpretations. They suggest that stochastic oil volatil-
ity is as important, if not more so, for the macro economy than oil price
itself. Alternatively, factors extracted from derivative prices may provide
less noisy information for future economic fundamentals because they
may be seen as a vehicle for aggregating both differences in interpretation
of news and changes in heterogeneous expectations about the future
state of the economy, shocks to hedging and liquidity demands as well
as market sentiment. Along this of reasoning, oil VRP better captures
macroeconomic dynamics and provides more accurate stock volatilities
forecasts. To provide new insights, we show that the oil VRP provide
more accurate forecasts of stock volatilities than lagged oil prices.

In this paper, oil VRP is computed merely with oil market returns of
WTI oil derivatives (Cushing, OK Crude Oil Future Contract 1, which is
downloaded from the EIA website). Theoretically, we think it is reason-
able to proxy global oil market volatility using VRP estimated in this
way since previous studies have used different evidence to illustrate the
world oil market is globalized and integrated. Early, the world oil market
is deﬁned as ‘one great pool’, that is to say, the changes of a particular oil
market can rapidly spread to other oil markets (Adelman, 1984). Later,
Gülen (1997, 1999) shows the signiﬁcant empirical evidence that the
world oil market is integrated as a unity. In the process of globalization,
this integration tends to be enhanced and the degree of globalization for
the world crude oil market is being further investigated. Recently, Ji and
Fan (2016) document that crude oil markets of adjacent countries or re-
gions tend to link together. Particularly, the crude oil markets in the
U.S., Angola and Saudi Arabia take up the dominant position of the inter-
national oil economy. Based on these studies, it is reasonable to measure
the volatility derived from the world oil market with oil VRP from US.

We contribute to the existing literature on the predictability of stock
return volatility in several ways. Because a model's in-sample predictive
performance tends to correlate poorly with its ability to deliver good
out-of-sample forecasts, we conduct out-of-sample forecasting exercise
using a recursive window, which suggests that the in-sample forecast-
ing relationship holds out-of-sample. Using daily data, we provide a
fresh perspective that oil VRP can forecast stock volatility. We utilize
the standard predictive regression framework to examine the stock
return predictability of the oil VRP indicator for the next-day over the
sample from January 4, 2000 through June 30, 2016, in which the period
from January 4, 2000 to December 30, 2007 is set to perform in-sample
estimates and the remaining part is for out-of-sample forecast evalua-
tion. Time-variationout-of-sample R2 statistic is here employed as the

major evaluation metric to assess the performance of oil volatility risk
premium in forecasting stock volatility. Moreover, we compare the pre-
dictive power of oil VRP over different cyclical periods and volatility
levels since literature (Neely et al., 2014) suggests stock market predict-
ability is affected by different economic times, for example, economic
expansions and recessions. Our forecasting exercise is also conducted
for longer horizons. We ﬁnd the signiﬁcant predictability for the hori-
zons of up-to-ten periods. We also ﬁnd that the predictive power of
oil VRP is robust after controlling for domestic stock market volatility
risk measured as the lagged or daily change of realized volatility. Fur-
ther, to check whether oil VRP has been covered by macro variables con-
sidered in the literature, we include 11 fundamental variables reﬂecting
stock market activity in the benchmark of autoregressive model. Our
empirical results indicate that the oil information is not overlapped
with traditional macro information, which is still helpful in predicting.
These ﬁndings provide insights to one new channel that could drive
time variation in stock market volatility. Existing channels include time-
varying volatility in shocks to fundamentals (Bansal and Yaron, 2004),
nonlinear relations between time-varying expected returns and the
business cycle (Mele, 2007; Choudhry etal., 2016), learning effects
related to investors' uncertainty about fundamentals (Veronesi, 1999;
Adam etal., 2016), information demand and supply (Vlastakis and
Markellos, 2012) and ampliﬁcation of shocks to asset markets via ﬁnan-
cial intermediation (Brunnermeier and Pedersen, 2009). Through this
aforementioned channel, predictability of stock volatility revealed by
oil VRP exhibits solid theoretical basis.

The second contribution arise from the international evidence to the
role of oil VRP in stocks volatilities. Unlike existing researches which main-
ly concentrate on the US market, our study investigates effects of oil VRP
in G7 developed markets. An analysis of this sort seems interesting for sev-
eral reasons. First, as Bodnaruk and Ostberg (2009) proposed, the relation-
ship between uncertainty and stocks returns relies on the shadow cost of
incomplete information, which turns out to depend on relative market
size, institutional development, propensity of herd-like behavior and
overreaction and other country-speciﬁc characteristics. Taking an interna-
tional perspective allows us to test this hypothesis. Second, using interna-
tional stock volatilities provides a natural out-of-sample test for earlier the
US ﬁndings and pooling data across countries increases the power of tests
which yields more reliable estimates (Ang and Bekaert, 2007).

Finally, we explore the economic driving forces of our ﬁndings. The
success of oil VRP in forecasting stock volatilities is no dues ex machina.
It follows from the fact that the oil VRP appears to have an economically
and statistically signiﬁcant predictive ability for international macroeco-
nomic variables, such as industrial production growth, ted Spread, CPI
inﬂation (Producer Price Index/Consumer Price Index) and policy-
related economic uncertainty. In the spirit of the component model
(Engle etal., 2013) and the no-arbitrage model (Corradi etal., 2013),
these indicators should predict stock volatilities.

Our paper is closely related to Chiang etal. (2015), who extract oil fac-
tors from derivative markets and show that oil factors carry signiﬁcant
risk premium and identify them as most important to the macroeconomy
and cross-section of expected returns. Recent works that explicitly
models the role of oil in the pricing of securities also include Baker and
Routledge (2011) and Ready (2012), Ready etal. (2013). Our ﬁndings
are best viewed as a complement and thorough attempt to study the
role of oil risks in pricing securities from the perspective of volatility.

Our work is also related to the literature on the predictability of stock
return volatility using macroeconomic variables. Though a ﬂood of
literature evidence stock return volatility reacts to changes in economic
fundamentals (see, e.g.,Bansal and Yaron, 2004; Mele, 2007; Engle and
Rangel, 2008; Engle etal., 2013; Corradi etal., 2013), the out-of-sample
predictive ability over the benchmark of autoregressive model is
discouraging (Paye, 2012; Christiansen et al., 2012). In this paper, we im-
prove upon existing studies by revealing both in-sample and out-of-
sample predictability of stock volatility using oil VRP indicator, which is
helpful to understand the economic source of changes in stock volatility.
Our main ﬁndings also survive a series of robustness checks. These
include using an alternative evaluation criterion of predictability,
using an alternative proxy of volatility and using a rolling window
estimation scheme.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section2 pro-
vides the data description about dependent and explanatory variables.
This section also describes the data we employ and present the evidence
on the connection between oil VRP and macro variables as well as the
fundamentals used as control variables. Section3 shows the economet-
ric methodology for volatility forecasting. Sections 4 present the
in-sample estimation and out-of-sample results and analysis. The rela-
tionship between oil VRP and real economy is described in Section5.
Section6 retest the predictive power of oil VRP as robustness check.
The last section concludes.
<Middle> Data.
2.1. Measuring stock volatility.
As a widely accepted conditional volatility measurement in literature
(Wu etal., 2015), realized volatility has advantages over the squared
monthly or quarterly returns in capturing the ex-post variance. We, fol-
lowing Paye (2012), proxy stock realized volatility as the square-rooted
monthly summation of the square stock daily return, which is given by this,
where SRVt−τ,t denotes the stock realized volatility at time t with the av-
erage maturity τ and srt denotes the log return of the stock price, τ is the
number of business days in each month. This measure of stock market vol-
atility, i.e. SRVt, well captures the relationship between market volatility
and intra-period market returns. It emphasizes the connection between
the estimation method (1) and the realized volatility literature that em-
ploys Intra-period returns to measure return variation as proposed in
Paye (2012). Andersen etal. (2003) and Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard
(2002) have shown that with the increase of intra-period sample frequen-
cy, this computation converges in probability to the quadratic variation of
a frictionless, arbitrage free asset price process. We choose typical stock
index from G7 countries to calculate stock return realized volatility includ-
ing S&P 500 composite index ofthe U.S., FTSE 100 index of the U.K., NIKKEI
225 stock average index of Japan, CAC 40 index of France, DAX 30 perfor-
mance index of Germany, FTSE MIB index of Italy and S&P/TSX composite
index of Canada. All the daily stock returns are downloaded from Thomp-
son Reuters database. Apart from the realized volatility, the implied vola-
tility also serves an efﬁcient measure of stock volatility (Kim and Lee,
2013; Wu etal., 2015). We obtain the stock implied volatility data of the
G7 countries directly from the Thomson Reuters Database.

2.2. Measuring oil volatility.
In this section, we construct oil volatility risk premium (oil VRP),
which serves as the main predictor of the regressions. As in Carr and
Wu (2011), we deﬁne oil volatility risk premium as the difference
between the risk-neutral and the physical expectation. Simply we calcu-
late it as the difference between oil realized volatility and oil implied
volatility as in it, 
where OVt is the oil volatility risk premium at time t, ORt is the oil real-
ized volatility at time t and OIt is the oil implied volatility at time t. This
approach is widely employed in prediction tests. It makes the oil VRP
can be directly observed at time t without any modeling assumptions
and is consistent with the stylized fact that realized volatility is highly
persistent. Therefore, we can proxy the volatility risk premium over
the [t, t +τ] period as the difference between the ex post realized
volatility and the ex an implied volatility as in Della Corte etal. (2016).
The oil realized volatility is given following the same approach with
the stock realized volatility where ORt denotes the realized volatility of oil on time t, n denotes
thenumber of trading times in a given day and rot−i is the log return
of oil options on time t−i. Remarkably, here we use the price of WTI
oil derivatives (Cushing, OK Crude Oil Future Contract 1, which is
downloaded from the EIA website) to compute the log return instead
of the spot price because the information incorporated in the derivatives
are less noisy as proposed by literature. Since our empirical work are
mainly based on daily data, we use intraday oil returns to compute
the realized volatility index.

The implied volatility of oil, known as OVX index, is directly
downloaded from the FRED Database. Concerning the limitation of oil
market implied volatility, the OVX index released by CME begins in
2007. The data of the front periods before 2007 is calculated using the
same algorithm to construct OVX. Fig. 1 depicts the realized volatility
and implied volatility of oil for the whole sample period, in which both
series are stationary. We note that the OVX constructed before 2007 is
consecutive with the later part as expected, which is theoretical and
reasonable. Table 1 summarizes the basic statistics for the variables used
in this paper, which suggests the time-series are all stationary over time.

2.3. Other variables.
To better detect the predictive power of oil volatility risk premium (oil
VRP) under the traditional regression frameworks, we employ a total of 11
fundamental predictors, which can be seen as macroeconomic variables to
forecast stock returns (see, e.g.,Neely etal., 2014; Dangl and Halling, 2012;
Rapach etal., 2010) and stock volatility (see, e.g., Christiansen et al., 2012),
as control variables, among which the ﬁrst 10 are used in Welch and Goyal
(2008) and available at the homepage of Amit Goyal.

To brieﬂy present these variables, we give a short description of the
predictors as follows:
• Dividend-price ratio (DP): the log of dividends on the S&P 500 index

minus the log of stock prices.

• Earning-price ratio (EP): the log of earnings on the S&P 500 index

minus the log of stock prices.

• Book-to-market ratio (B/M): the ratio of book value at the end of the
previous year divided by the end-of-month market value for the DJIA.
• Treasury bill rate (TBL): the second market rate of the 3-monthUS

Treasury bills.

• Long-term yield (LTY): the long-term government bond yields.
• Net equity expansion (NTIS): the ratio of a twelve-month moving sum
of net equity issues by NYSE-listed stocks to the total end-of-
yearmarket capitalization of NYSE stocks.

• Risk free rate (RF): the risk-free interest rate.
• Inﬂation (INFL): the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for all urban
consumers. The one-month lagged CPI is because CPI is published
with a delay of one month.

• Long-term return (LTR): the returns on long-term government bond.
• Stock variance (SVAR): the sum of squared daily returns on the S&P 500.
• Economic policy uncertainty (EPU): the economic policy uncertainty

index obtained from the FRED Database.

When investigating whether oil volatility risk premium (oil VRP) is
related to the real economy, we try to using oil volatility risk premium
as the explanatory variable of a variety of macroeconomic variables by
both in-sample relationship and out-of-sample prediction, which
includes the economic policy uncertainty (EPU) for G7 countries, the
producer price index (PPI), consumer price index (CPI), ADS indicator
proposed by Aruoba etal. (2009), the macroeconomic uncertainty
(MACU) and ﬁnancial uncertainty (FINU) for h = 1,3, 12 months pro-
posed by Jurado et al. (2015), unemployment rate, industrial production
index and TED spread of the U.S. and Chicago Fed National Activity
Index (CFNAI). As in Rapach etal. (2013), the U.S. has a predictive
power for other countries in stock markets, so the predictability of the
variables of the U.S. can serve as a good detection when investigating
the global economic meaning of oil volatility risk premium.

Due to the limited availability of data, the variables described in this
subsection (Section2.3) are all at monthly frequency. In accordance,
market volatility indexes used in these models are also adjusted to be
at monthly frequency.

3. Econometric methodology

In this section, we present the predictive regression framework. Both
in-sample analysis and out-of-sample tests are employed as to better de-
tect the signiﬁcance and robustness of the predictive power of oil VRP.

3.1. In-sample predictive regressions.
A standard benchmark to forecast stock volatility at horizon of one
month is the following autoregressive model (AR)
where the error term εt is assumed to follow an independent and iden-
tically normal distribution. In this paper, to catch a practical meaning,
the lag order p is set to be 5 and 10 to proxy for one and two trading
weeks, respectively. Moreover, we set the lag order to be 28, which is
the maximum lag order produced by AIC and SC criteria, to optimally
eliminate the impact caused by the autocorrelation in stock volatility.

To investigate the predictive content of oil volatility, the benchmark
model, the conventional econometric predictive framework is employed
as the benchmark model given as this,
where SRVt denotes the stock realized volatility at time t and OVt−1-
denotes the oil volatility risk premium at time t−1. Traditionally, the
null hypothesis of no predictive power, i.e. β=0, can be tested using a
standard t-statistic. Apart from that, a one-sided alternative hypothesis
provided by Inoue and Kilian (2004), which can improve the power
ofin-sample tests, is also adopted, that is to say, we also test the nullof
β=0 against the alternative of βN0 by calculating a heteroskedasticity-
consistentt-statistic.

Empirical literature (Neely et al., 2014) suggests that the strength of
the predictability of stock market is related with different economic
times, such as economy cycles. Here we use NBER-datedbusiness-cycle
expansions and recessions to label economy periods and calculating R2
statistics for cyclical expansions and recessions, respectively. Since R2-
statistic describes the degree of the predictive power and has no deﬁnite
decomposition for full sample regression, we redefine the R2 statistic
following Neely where It is a dummy variable that equals to 1at the NBER-dated
expansion (recession) periods and zero otherwise; dSRVt is the forecast
value and SRVt is the mean of the stock realized volatility. Different
from the full-sample R2 statistics, the Rb 2 statistics can be negative in
value as the forecast error produced by predictive model may be greater
than that for historical average method.

3.2. Out-of-sample forecasts.
3.2.1. Forecast approach.
Theoretically, out-of-sample tests have advantages in the sense
prediction comparing to in-sample regressions (Rapach etal.,
2010). As a widely-accepted method of out of sample tests, ﬁrstly
we separate the full data spanning into two subsamples: the initial
m periods of samples are for in sample parameter evaluation and
the remaining r periods are for out of sample forecast. Parsimoni-
ously identical predictive framework with the in-sample analysis
is adopted to test and compare the predictability. Here the recur-
sive estimation window raised by Welch and Goyal (2008) is
employed and the ﬁrst out-of-sample forecast of stock return real-
ized volatility based on oil volatility risk premium is given by,
where ^αm and ^βm are the ordinary least squares (OLS) regression
on a constant vector and
results from regressing {SRV}t = 2
m − 1. Following this approach the second out-of-sample fore-
{OV}t = 1
cast of stock return realized volatility should be. In this manner, a series of dSRV from period
where ^αmþ1 and ^βmþ1 are, similarly, the ordinary least squares
m + 1 on a constant
(OLS) regression results from regressing {SRV}t = 3
vector and {OV}t = 2
m + 1 to m + r is generated. For the daily-frequency tests, the ini-
tial 1987 periods and 2364 periods are used for the in-sample pa-
rameter estimation, respectively, since both the time points are
NBER business cycle turning points.

3.2.2. Forecast evaluation.
The accuracy of prediction using out-of-sample forecast is empha-
sized in this part. We ﬁrstly calculated out-of-sample R2 (OOS_R2), a
widely-used evaluation, to investigate whether the out-of-sample fore-
cast outperforms the historical average benchmark. The out-of-sample
R2 is calculated by:
where SRVm+k denotes the true value of stock return realized volatility,
the true value.The out-of-sample R2 statistic measures the improve-
ment of forecast power for using out-of-sample prediction comparing

Taking Eqs.(9)and (10) into consideration jointly, a positive value of
OOS_R2 means a reduction in MSFE when using out-of-sample forecast
instead of the historical average benchmark, indicating the better per-
formance of out-of-sample prediction comparing with the historical
average.

Furthermore, the MSFE-adjusted statistic is also used as an evaluation
criteria. Clark and West (2007) provide a one-sided (upper-tail) test
method which is performed to test the null hypothesis that the bench-
mark forecast MSFE is less than or equal to competing forecast MSFE
against the alternative hypothesis that the benchmark forecast MSFE is
greater than the competing forecast MSFE. As an amendment of Diebold
and Mariano (2002) statistic, this MSFE-adjusted statistic has efﬁcient
evaluation power for nested models, which is calculated as:
where MSFEi(i=1,2) denotes the MSFE statistic calculated using model1
and model 2,dSRVt;i ði ¼ 1; 2Þ denotes the forecast of stock return realized

volatility using model 1 and model 2, respectively and r denotes the
length of out-of-sample forecast periods.

Finally, we also adopt an evaluation statistic (GW) proposed by
Giacomini and White (2006) to test the superior predictive ability.
Different from the Clark and West (2007) statistic, GW statistic provides
a two-sided test method whose null hypothesis emphasizes expectations
of the estimated MSFE instead of the population MSFE of two different
predictive models, which is given by,
where E is the expectation operator and F t is the information set as time t.
According to the framework developed by Giacomini and White (2006),
the GW statistic is, where ^σ is a heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent estimator
of asymptotic variance.
4. Empirical results

4.1. In-sample results and analysis.
Firstly, the predictive power of oil VRP is test using the bivariate
model. Table2 reports the full sample regression results which is
based on the econometric model (5). Panel A demonstrates the results
generated by the basic framework, in which the lag order of stock real-
ized volatility in model (5) is set to be 1. The coefﬁcients of oil volatility
risk premium to forecast international stock realized volatility are
shown in the ﬁrst line of panel A, of which the corresponding
t-statistics are shown in the ﬁrst row of panel B. For all the G7 countries,
the slope coefﬁcients are all around 0.004, which are all followed with a
standard error of one basis point. What's more, all the coefﬁcients are
labeled with three asterisks, indicating that all the G7 countries' stock
realized volatility can be signiﬁcantly forecast by oil volatility risk pre-
mium, due to the standard t-statistic absolutes are all N25. Theoretically,
the Stambaugh (1999) bias will inﬂate the magnitude of the t-statistics
potentially. To eliminate this bias the one-sided (upper-tail) test
proposed by Inoue and Kilian (2004), which tests the null hypothesis of
β=0 against β N0, is also performed and the one-sidedt-statistics are
shown in the second row of panel B. We can see that the one-sidedt-
value absolutes are all N20, great enough to make sure the predictive
power is signiﬁcant. The bottom row demonstrates the R2 statistic for
each regression, which shows that the explanatory power of the oil vol-
atility risk premium is considerable. At ﬁrst glance, it seems that the R2
statistics appear too small. However, a monthly R2statistic near 0.5% is
big enough to represent an economically signiﬁcant predictive power
as proposed by Campbell and Thompson (2008). For daily data, a small-
er magnitude of R2 statistic can stand for a strong effect. In the bottom
line, 7 R2 statistics are all above 18%, indicating the explanatory power
of this model is big enough.

Moreover, looking at panel B,C and D, which represent the results
produced by model (5) with 5, 10 and 28 lags of stock realized volatility,
respectively. Generally, we ﬁnd that for most countries, oil VRP still has
a signiﬁcant predictive power although the strong correlation of stock
volatility is eliminated. Overall, our oil volatility risk premium does
have a signiﬁcant in-sample predictive ability to forecast stock market
volatility.

4.2. Out-of-sample results and analysis: basic model.
Although the in-sample analysis provides efﬁcient parameter
estimates and thus more precise pricing differentials forecast, Welch
and Goyal (2008), among others, argue that out-of-sample tests seem
more relevant for assessing genuine predictability in real time and
avoid the in-sampleover-ﬁtting issue. In addition, out-of-sample tests
are much less affected by the small-sample size distortions such as the
Stambaugh bias and the look-ahead bias concern. Hence, it is of interest
to investigate the out-of-sample predictive performance of oil VRP.
Following Goyal and Welch (2008), we run the out-of-sample analysis
by estimating the predictive regression model recursively based on
individual oil VRP indicator.

Table3 summarizes the out-of-sample forecast evaluation metrics
for the bivariate model. This top row gives the mean squared forecast
error (MSFE) computed from the historical average benchmark and
the second row shows MSFE computed from the out-of-sample recur-
sive window based on model (5). A smaller mean squared forecast
error signals a better forecast effectiveness. Comparing the MSFE statis-
tics, we note that the MSFE statistics in the second row are several basis
points smaller than those in the ﬁrst row, suggesting using oil volatility
risk premium as a predictor to forecast stock realized volatility outper-
forms using the historical average method for all G7 countries. The
out-of-sample R2 statistics (OOS_R2 hereafter) are shown in the fourth
row of the table, which exactly measure the proportional reduction in
mean squared forecast error (MSFE) for the predictive method of the
oil volatility risk premium relative to the historical average benchmark.
As has talked above, a positive value of OOS_R2 represents a better pre-
dictive power of the predictor model comparing with the historical av-
erage while a negative value indicates the opposite. All the 7 OOS_R2 are
positive and N10%. Similar with their in-sample counterparts, the pre-
dictive power is signiﬁcant enough as these OOS_R2 statistics are all sig-
niﬁcantly great.

The MSFE-adjusted statistics provided by Clark and West (2007),
also known as the CW statistics, are shown in the third row of the
table, which test the null hypothesis that the historical average
mean squared forecast error (MSFE) is equal to or less than the MSFE
computed from the predictor model against the alternative that the his-
torical average MSFE is greater than that of the predictor model. Accord-
ing to these MSFE-adjusted statistics, the MSFEs for the oil VRP are
signiﬁcantly less than those for the historical benchmark, echoing the re-
sults of the positive OOS_R2 statistics. Besides, looking at the GW statistics
shown at the bottom row of this table, which emphasize the information
of expectation, we ﬁnd that all the GW statistics are 1000 basis points or
so, among which the maximum is 0.3522 and the minimum is 0.2024.
These positive values again prove that the MSFE statistics for the predic-
tive model withoil VRP is less than the MSFE statistics for the historical av-
erage benchmark.

Overall, the predictive power of the model using oil VRP as the
predictor outperforms the historical average method in the sense
of mean squared forecast error. All the OOS_R2 statistics are posi-
tive and N0.5%, even exceeding 10%. Plus, the CW statistics and
the GW statistics prove the reduction in MSFE is signiﬁcant.
Again, matching the in-sample results, the out-of-sample tests
tells that the predictability of stock realized volatility based on oil
VRP is economically signiﬁcant.

To intuitively present the outperformance of oil VRP predictive
framework over the HA benchmark, time-series plots of the difference
between the cumulative square forecast error (CSFE) for the historical
average benchmark prediction and the cumulative square forecast
error (CSFE) for the oil VRPout-of-sample forecasting model is intro-
duced as in Welch and Goyal (2008). Statistically, an increasing trend
means the difference of the cumulative square forecasting error
between the historical average and oil VRP predictive model gets larger
over time, which suggests the out-of-sample framework outperforms
the historical average. Particularly, we compare the height of the plot
at the two points corresponding to the beginning and end of a given
out-of-sample period: if the curve is higher (lower) at the end of the
out-of-sample period than at the beginning, the oil VRP predictive
model (historical average) has a lower MSFE over the out-of-
sampleperiod. A predictive model that always outperforms the histori-
cal average for any out-of-sample period, therefore, will have a curve
that is always sloping up; the closer a predictive regression model is
in this sense, the greater its forecasting power to consistently beat the
historical average in terms of MSFE.

Fig. 2 shows these CSFE-difference graphs. Generally, we ﬁnd that all
the 7 countries see generally sloping-up over time despite of some small
ﬂuctuations. From 2010, the curves are all above the horizontal line,
indicating the positive difference of the error between HA and our
VRP model. This quantitively suggests the outperformance of the out-
of-sample predictive model over the benchmark. Meanwhile, we see
that the curves see some drops during particular periods, in which the
forecasting error of our predictive model may be larger that of HA. Over-
all, during recent times, we document an excessive forecasting power of
oil VRP than the historical average benchmark.

It is of interest to get a sense of potential bias-efﬁciency tradeoffs in
the forecasts. According to the deﬁnition of mean squared forecast error
(MSFE), it is decomposed into squared forecast bias and variance
components,
where a denotes the squared error of the forecasts andVarð^eÞ denotes
the forecast error variance. The results for decomposition of the MSFE
for historical average are reported in the sixth and seventh row in
Table3 and the results for decomposition of the MSFE for out-of-
sample predictive model are reported in the eighth and ninth row in
Table3. It is interesting to note that the squared error of the forecasts
for historical average and the out-of-sample predictive window are
almost equal, at several basis points or so. However, the forecast error var-
iance sees an apparent decrease. From the table, all Varð^eÞs generated
from the out-of-sample predictive model are tens of basis points less
than those generated from historical average, among which the reduction
inVarð^eÞfor S&P/TSX volatility even exceeds seven basis points. Therefore,
the out-of-sample forecast based on the oil volatility risk premium are
generally less variance biased and more efﬁcient than the historical
average.

4.3. Predictability with longer horizons.
The aim of this paper is at the predictability of stock realized volatility
based on the oil volatility risk premium, to deeply study this effect we
investigate the predictability over longer horizons in this subsection. In
this process, the bivariate model (5) is adjusted to:
where SRVt+i denotes the stock realized volatility at time t+i and OVt
denotes the oil volatility risk premium at time t. Different from the bench-
mark bivariate model, this long-horizon forecast model focuses on the
predictive power of more time periods apart, here serving as a robustness
check of the predictability.

Table4 reports the in-sample and out-of-sample results of the pre-
dictive power over long horizons from overnight to ten days apart.
Panel A summarizes the slope coefﬁcients of oil volatility risk premium
estimated from model (15). For all the regressions to forecast 7 stock
realized volatilities, the coefﬁcients of oil volatility risk premium see a
gradual increase, from 0.004 or so for overnight to about 0.04 for ten
days apart, indicating the long-time impact of oil volatility on stock
market volatility may be more powerful comparing with a short time.
The t-statistics produced from the one-sided tests are shown in panel
B. With the increase of time horizon, the t-statistics are dropping
down to a rather small degree. The signiﬁcances of the slope coefﬁcients
are stably over 99%, with even for a ten-day-long time horizon the
t-statistic absolutes all above 20. Then to test the out-of-sample forecast
ability of oil volatility risk premium, out-of-sample tests are performed
and the out-of-sample R2 statistics are shown in the panel C of Table4. A
positive out-of-sample R2 statistic indicates a smaller mean squared
forecast error (MSFE) comparing with the benchmark, which means
the out-of-sample forecast method outperforms the historical average.
Shown in the form of percentage, the out-of-sample R2 statistics are all
positive and bigger than 0.5, making sure the predictability. Since the
data frequency we use is daily and all the R2 statistics are above 10%,

the predictive power of oil volatility risk premium is efﬁcient in practice.
The R2 statistics also see a gradual increase with the increase of time ho-
rizon length, indicating the explanatory degree is decreasing over time.

4.4. Predictability during expansions and recessions.
Economic cyclical periods can have an effect on the predictability of
markets. As literature suggests (Neely et al., 2014), the predictability of
stock market sees some different results during business expansions
and recessions. To take a further insight into the ability of oil VRP to
forecast stock realized volatility, we use OECD-dated business cycle to
deﬁnite the business expansions and recessions and then calculate the
R2 statistics in Eq.(9) for different economic periods in both in-sample
regressions and out-of-sample forecast tests.

Table5 reports the R2 statistics computed for business expansions
and recessions, respectively. The R2 statistics for economic recessions
are all greater and R2 statistics for economic expansions are all less
than the full-sample R2 statistics as the benchmark. All the R2 statistics
for economic recession times are positive while some of the R2 statistics
for economic expansion times are negative, indicating the explanatory
power of oil volatility risk premium mainly comes from its predictive
power at economic recession periods. Six out of seven R2 statistics for
economic expansions even exceed 40% while four out of seven R2 statis-
tics for economic recessions are b0.

Overall, the predictability of stock realized volatility based on oil
volatility risk premium is stronger during economic recessions than
that during economic expansions. The higher the R2 statistics for
economic recessions all exceed the full-sample benchmark while for
economic recessions all below.

4.5. Predictability under the circumstances of high/low volatility .
It is also of interest to investigate the predictive power of oil VRP
during different volatility level of the both stock markets and oil
markets. To classify high and low stock market volatility level, we set
the median of stock realized volatility as the benchmark and compare
it with all the stock realized volatility indexes. The higher ones are
deﬁned as high stock volatility and the lower ones are deﬁned as low
stock volatility. The high/low volatility of oil is also classiﬁed in this
way, which means the higher oil market volatility are deﬁned as high
oil VRP and the lower ones are deﬁnes as low oil volatility. Here we
use the high/low volatility indicator to separate the data spanning and
calculating the R2 statistics during different level of volatility. Since we
focus on the predictability of the stock volatility, we use out-of-sample
tests here to calculate the R2 statistics and make comparison to identify
the high/low volatility effect. The comparison results are illustrated in
Table6.

Panel A of Table6 reports the R2 statistics calculated for different
levels of stock volatility. Three rows ofR2 statistics are all positive in
value, suggesting the predictive power of oil predictor model outper-
forms historical average whether in high or low stock market volatility.
What's more, the R2 statistics for low stock volatility times are signiﬁ-
cantly greater than those for high stock volatility times, representing a
stronger predictive power at low volatility times. Generally, the R2 sta-
tistics at low stock volatility times are several percentiles bigger than
those for the full sample and tens of percentiles bigger than those for
the high stock volatility times. During low stock volatility times, six
out seven R2 statistics exceed 7% and the biggest one even reaches
47%, which shows a strong explanatory power.
Panel B of Table6 reports the R2 statistics computed for different
levels of the oil market volatility. Two out of seven R2 statistics for low
oil market volatility periods are negative, signifying the poorer perfor-
mance of the predictor compared to historical average method. Similar
with the results in panel A, the R2 statistics during low oil volatility
periods are mostly greater than the full-sample R2 statistics, ﬁve of
seven of which are even N40%. Therefore, the ability of oil market vola-
tility to forecast stock volatility performs better at low oil volatility
periods.

To sum up, the predictability of stock volatility based on the oil VRP
performs better at low volatility times. Out-of-sample R2 statistics for
lower stock realized volatility or lower oil market volatility periods are
greater than those for high volatility periods, thus indicating a stronger
predictive power. In particular, the R2 statistics during low volatility
times can even reach 60%, which can lead to a considerable economic
effect.

4.6. Predictive power in an incremental framework.
Apart from the conventional tests of the predictor's ability, it is also
of interest to capture its predictive power in an incremental model.
We employ the framework proposed by Chen:
where ΔSRVt−1 denotes the innovation in stock realized volatility.
Table7 reports the results estimated based on model (16). Panel A re-
ports the in-sample results. It can be seen that when the information
of daily stock volatility change is incorporated, the slope coefﬁcients of
oil VRP are the level of 0.004 or so, all of which are estimated with one
basis point of deviation. Looking at the standard and the one-sided
(upper tail) t-statistics, we ﬁnd the conﬁdence level of this predictive
power far exceeds 99%, signifying the economic signiﬁcance of oil
VRP's ability. Noticeably, the in-sample R2 statistics, which is placed
on the bottom line in panel A, are close to 0.2 (20%), if not above,
representing a strong explanatory power.

The out-of-sample results are reported in Panel B. For sake of com-
paring the additional predictive power of oil volatility risk premium,
we compute the mean squared forecast error (MSFE) statistics based
on two ways, where the one is calculated for using ΔSRVt−1 alone to
forecast stock realized volatility, recorded as MSFE0, and the other is
calculated for using both ΔSRVt−1 and OVt−1 as predictors, recorded
as MSFE1. Using these two MSFEs we obtain the out-of-sample R2 statis-
tics, which is displayed in the bottom line of the panel. It can be seen the
R2 statistics are all positive and ﬁve of them are even N30%, that is to say,
after incorporating the information of oil VRP, the predictability of stock
realized volatility improves to a considerable degree, again suggesting
the forecasting ability of oil VRP to predict stock realized volatility.

4.7. Predictive power with control variables.
Numerous literature provides a series of variables which can inﬂu-
ence stock markets in terms of stock returns and stock market volatility.
To identify whether the predictive power of oil volatility is affected by
these variables, we use these variable as control variables to test the
forecast effectiveness of oil volatility risk premium. Parsimoniously,
we compute the in-sample and out-of-sample R2 statistics to evaluate
the predictive power of oil volatility risk premium, 
where CLt−1 denotes the control variables. In the process, 11 control
variables are employed as explanatory variable one by one, respectively.
Table8 displays the in-sample and out-of-sample R2 statistics
estimated from models (17) and (18). Panel A reports the in-
sampleR2 statistics, in which the ﬁrst line of each row shows theR2 sta-
tistics for model (17) and the second line shows theR2 statistics for
model (18). Clearly can be seen that when incorporating the informa-
tion of oil volatility risk premium, theR2 statistics for the predictive
framework see signiﬁcant increase by dozens of basis points, suggesting
that the predictive power of the model are economically signiﬁcantly
improved. Panel B of Table8 summarizes the out-of-sample R2 statistics
for these two models. Different from the out-of-sampleR2 statistics
using historical average as the benchmark, the out-of-sampleR2 statis-
tics here is calculated by setting model (17) as the benchmark and com-
paring the mean squared forecast error (MSFE) of model (17) and
model (18) to compute the R2 statistics since we focus more on the pre-
dictive power of oil volatility risk premium. For all G7 countries, theR2
statistics are nearly all positive in value for any control variables, indi-
cating the information of oil volatility risk premium do help predict
the stock realized volatility. Remarkably, ten variables show that the
out-of-sample R2 statistics can be N20% and the maximum ofR2 statistics
can even exceed 62%, which strongly supports that capturing oil volatil-
ity risk premium to predict stock volatility outperforms using control
variables alone as a predictor.

5. Link to real economy.
In this section, we conduct a forecasting analysis of future economic
fundamentals using oil VRP and attempt to provide an explanation for
the predictive ability of oil VRP to forecast stock volatilities.

Paye (2012) argues that stock volatilities are driven by global risk
perception, the world business cycle, and traditional macroeconomic
variables. In light of this, we investigate links between the predictive
ability of oil VRP and real economy in terms of global risk, macro uncertainty,
and observable fundamental variables. In specific, we consider
the economic policy uncertainty (EPU) for G7 countries, the producer
price index (PPI), consumer price index (CPI), ADS indicator proposed
by Aruoba etal. (2009), the macroeconomic uncertainty (MACU) and
financial uncertainty (FINU) for h = 1,3, 12 months proposed by
Jurado et al. (2015), unemployment rate, industrial production index
and TED spread of the U.S. and Chicago Fed National Activity Index
(CFNAI). Byusing a number of important economic indicators immediately
upon release to get an updated viewof the overall level of economic
activity, it is designed to track real business conditions at monthly
frequency.
Both in-sample and out-of-sample analysis are performed based on this
where MACt denotes the macroeconomic variables at time t. Due to the
limitation of macro data spanning, here we employ a monthly data
frequency to perform regressions.

Table9 illustrates the in-sample and out-of-sample analysis results.
For in-sample regressions, 16 out of 20 macroeconomic variables can
be forecast by oil volatility risk premium at a N95% conﬁdence level,
among which 13 macroeconomic variables even can be predicted at a
99% conﬁdence level, signifying the strong predictive power of oil vola-
tility to the real economy. Looking at the corresponding one-sided
(upper tail) t-statistics, we can see most of them have absolute values
of N2, which represents the forecasting ability of oil volatility risk premi-
um to these macroeconomic variables are economically signiﬁcant. The
fourth column reports the in-sample R2 statistics, corresponding to each
macroeconomic variable. The right side of the table summarizes the
out-of-sample tests results. Comparing the mean squared forecast
error (MSFE) for historical average benchmark, which is shown in the
ﬁfth column of the table, and the mean squared forecast error for oil vol-
atility risk premium predictive framework, which is shown in the sixth
column of the table, we can see an obvious reduction for all the macro-
economic variables. The MSFE-adjusted statistics are reported in the
seventh column and the out-of-sample R2 statistics are reported in the
eighth column. Consistent with the MSFE reduction, most predictions
produce a positive out-of-sample R2 statistic with the maximum even
N50%, indicating the predictability of those macroeconomic variables
based on the volatility risk premium of oil outperforms the historical
average method.

Overall, the oil VRP can forecast macroeconomic variables in both in-
sample regressions and out-of-sample rolling forecast. This predictive
power of oil VRP substantially explains the forecasting ability to predict
stock market volatility.

6. Robustness check

The robustness of the oil VRP's predictive power is tested in this
section. We employ alternative measures of oil volatility to retest the
forecasting power of oil volatility risk premium.

Since this paper emphasizes the out-of-sample forecast ability of oil
volatility, the out-of-sample test is performed using the recursive
forecasting window proposed by Welch and Goyal (2008), of which
the results are shown in Table10. The R2 statistics in the fourth line all
signal positive in value, indicating the predictive effectiveness of oil
volatility risk premium outperforms that of the historical average
benchmark. What's more, all the out-of-sample R2 statistics exceed
20% and the maximum gets to 44%, signifying a strong forecasting ability
of oil volatility to stock implied volatility. The mean squared forecast
error (MSFE) for historical average and oil volatility predictive frame-
work are shown in the ﬁrst and second row, respectively. Echoing the
positive out-of-sample R2 statistics, the MSFE sees a reduction for all
the tests. The MSFE statistics for oil volatility predictive framework de-
crease by several percentiles compared to those for historical average.
For further investigation, we decompose the MSFE statistics. From the
results, we can see that, similar with the test results for stock realized
volatility, the reduction in MSFE mainly comes from the decrease in
forecast error variance.

Then, we use oil realized volatility and implied volatility as predictors
to forecast stock realized volatility. In line with the empirical framework
(4), both in-sample regressions and out-of-sample forecasts are
performed and the results are depicted in Table11. Panel A ofTable11
summarizes the predictive results of using oil realized volatility to explain
stock realized volatility. The coefﬁcients of oil realized volatility to forecast
G7 stock realized volatility are shown in the ﬁrst line of panel A, of which
the corresponding standard errors and t-statistics, including standard and
one-sided (upper tail) t-statistics, are shown below them. For all the G7
countries, the slope coefﬁcients are 0.003 or so, which are followed with
a standard error of one or two basis point. What's more, all the coefﬁcients
are labeled with three asterisks due to the 99% conﬁdence level, indicating
that all the G7 countries' stock realized volatility can be signiﬁcantly fore-
cast by oil realized volatility. The bottom row demonstrates the R2 statistic
for each regression, which shows that the explanatory power of the oil
volatility risk premium is considerable. At ﬁrst glance, it seems that the
R2 statistics appear too small. However, a monthly R2 statistic near 0.5%
is big enough to represent an economically signiﬁcant predictive power
as proposed by Campbell and Thompson (2008). For daily data, a smaller
magnitude of R2 statistic can stand for a strong effect. In the fourth line,
seven R2 statistics are all above 10% and the largest even exceeds 22%, in-
dicating the explanatory power of this model is considerable enough.

Looking at the out-of-results, we can see a reduction in MSFE statistics
when using oil volatility as a predictor. Also consistent with the previous
results, the reduction in MSFE mainly comes from the decrease in forecast
error variance. Remarkably, the out-of-sample R2 statistics reach dozens
of percentiles, the maximum of which surprisingly exceeds 35%. Again,
this magnitude of R2 statistics represent a considerably economically
signiﬁcance of this predictive power. Panel B shows the test results for
the predictive power of oil implied volatility. Similar conclusions can be
obtained with panel A. Here we also use CFSE difference graphs to
compare the forecasting accuracy of these predictive model with that of
the historical average benchmark, which is shown in Figs. 3 and 4. We
see similar trends in these plots with those generated by oil VRP models.
Generally a sloping-up can be caught in each subplot in spite of some ﬂuc-
tuations. The curves depict positive forecasting error difference of HA over
oil market volatility models, again suggesting the excessive predictive
power covered by oil volatilities.
In general, the predictability of stock volatility can be based on both
oil realized volatility and implied volatility.

<Conclusion> Conclusions.
Though a number of researchers have reported the widespread
statistical correlation between oil factors and stock volatilities, there is
little evidence on the out-of-sample forecasting ability of oil factors for
stock volatilities. Our research therefore aims at investigating the
predictability of the stock market volatility based on the volatility risk
premium of oil (oil VRP).

In both the in-sample regressions and the out-of-sample forecasting
exercises, we show that oil VRP can strongly predict daily stock volatil-
ities of G7 major countries. These results hold up well for both realized
volatilities and implied volatilities. Furthermore, the strength of the
predictive evidence is substantial during relatively high and low level
of stock market, while is substantially higher for recessions vis-á-vis
expansions. Apart from the bivariate model, we also provide positive
evidence by using a long-horizon framework and an incremental
model. What's more, the strength of the predictive is still signiﬁcant
even controlling for some popular macroeconomic variables. Overall,
the substantial ﬂuctuations in stock volatilities appear well captured
by oil VRP.

To link oil VRP to economic activity, we ﬁnd that oil VRP can
effectively predict economic activity. These pieces of evidence provide
an explanation for why oil VRP can predict stock volatilities.

Acknowledgements
