
1. Introduction

Why do ﬁrms engage in corporate environmental responsibility
(CER) activities? Understanding the incentives for CER engagement has
spurred a large academic literature. In general, there are three distinct
perspectives on the determinants of CER. The ﬁrst perspective focuses
on the role of social pressure from nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), suppliers, customers and regulators in CER (Delmas and Toffel,
2008). The second perspective focuses on the ﬁrm-speciﬁc factors shap-
ing CER, such as age, size, and ownership (Etzion, 2007; Zeng et al.,
2010), corporate governance (Kassinis and Vafeas, 2002; de Villiers
et al., 2011; Walls et al., 2012), and ﬁrm performance (Ye et al., 2013;
Sueyoshi and Goto, 2014; Bostian et al., 2016). The third perspective
studies the effects of top executives on CER, which includes CEO demo-
graphic and psychological characteristics (Lewis et al., 2014; Petrenko
et al., 2016), CEO incentives and turnover (Deckop et al., 2006; Meng
et al., 2013).

Nevertheless, the literature is silent on whether political connections
matter for a ﬁrm's propensity to engage in CER. This paucity of research
is somewhat surprising given the fact that many researchers have
highlighted the effects of political connections on ﬁrm behavior and
strategic decisions (Fisman, 2001; Li and Atuahene-Gima, 2001; Faccio,
2006; Zhou, 2013), and CER is increasingly viewed as an important
business strategy by researchers, investors, and society as a whole
(Etzion, 2007; de Villiers et al., 2011). The novel contribution of this
research is to explicitly introduce such political connections dimension
in an empirical study of corporate environmental practices. Speciﬁcally
we are concerned in this paper with how political connections may
affect organizational CER in China.

China offers an ideal setting to investigate this issue. A distinct
feature of China is that the government plays a critical role in the
economy. As a special form of business-government relationship, polit-
ical connections are an important means of government intervention in
ﬁrms (Fan et al., 2007). At the same time, political connections are also
an important channel for Chinese ﬁrms to access to valuable resources
and government protection (Li et al., 2008), which may in turn affect
the costs and beneﬁts of CER activities. Therefore, as a government-
dominated transitional country with severe environmental problems,
China forms a good (quantitative) case study to evaluate the role of
political connections in CER.

Our ﬁrst task is to examine whether political connections inﬂuence
ﬁrm's propensity to engage in CER. For this purpose, we propose a
mechanism-based theoretical model to explore the possible positive
and negative effects of political connections on CER. And we test the
model by constructing a CEO-ﬁrm matched panel data set of 823
Chinese listed ﬁrms in polluting industries from 2008 to 2014. After
controlling for other factors, we ﬁnd that political connections have a
signiﬁcant and positive impact on CER. This ﬁnding is robust to a num-
ber of alternative estimation approaches.

We then go a step further and investigate where and how political
connections are important to CER. We argue that the effects of political
connections on CER are likely to be different depending on contextual
conditions. This is tested through comparing the roles of political
connections in ﬁrms with different ownership and in regions with
different environmental regulatory systems. Our empirical results
show that the positive effect of political connections on CER is more
pronounced for state-owned ﬁrms and in cities with stringent
environmental rules and regulations. With respect to the mechanisms
through which political connections increase CER, we ﬁnd that political
connections help ﬁrms to receive government grants, subsidies and tax
reduction related to the environment protection, and implement
government environmental policies. These mechanisms work better
for state-owned ﬁrms.

To the best of our knowledge, this study is the ﬁrst to establish a link
between political connections and CER. Our work contributes to the
literature on CER by showing that political connections do matter in
determining a ﬁrm's propensity to engage in CER. We also add to the
growing literature on political connections. Previous research has
examined the impact of political connections on ﬁrm's performance
(Fan et al., 2007; Li et al., 2008), corporate bailouts (Faccio et al.,
2006), entrepreneurial investment (Zhou, 2013), workplace fatalities
(Fisman and Wang, 2015) and corporate diversiﬁcation (Li et al.,
2012), but has not examined their effects on ﬁrm's environmental
responsibility. By proposing an initial mechanism-based framework,
this paper examines the possible role of political connections in CER
and when political connections matter more or less in their effects on
CER advances, which advances knowledge of the value of political
connections.

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 develops relevant hypoth-
eses. Section 3 describes the data, sample selection and variables.
Sections 4 and 5 present the empirical results, while Section 6 discusses
the ﬁndings and concludes.

2. Conceptual framework and hypotheses.
As the environmental component of Corporate Social Responsibility
(CSR), CER means that ﬁrms voluntarily integrate environmental
concerns into their core strategy and production processes. The incor-
poration of environmental considerations into the design, manufactur-
ing and distribution of products ranges from local and global pollution
prevention and control, waste management, the protection of water
resources, and the preservation of biodiversity, to energy efﬁciency,
cleaner production, reverse logistics, and managing the environmental
impacts from transportation (Crifo, 2014).

An economic analysis of CER begins with the realization that such
activities have emerged in response to the perception or existence of a
market failure-that is, instances where there is a divergence between
the private and social costs of a ﬁrm's actions. The societal cost is de-
ﬁned as the private cost to the company plus an additional external
cost, e.g. pollution and environmental degradation (Siegel, 2009). In
order to engage in CER, ﬁrms need to spend money on some pollution
control instruments. Similarly, ofﬁce space, supplies, computers, tele-
phones, and other communications equipment may be devoted to CER
activities. To the extent that additional capital is required, capital costs
will be higher, which may affect a ﬁrm's price and thus proﬁtability
(McWilliams and Siegel, 2001). As a result, prior to taking on environ-
mental responsibility projects, CEOs need to conduct a cost-beneﬁt
analysis. Political connections are often cited as an important channel
for ﬁrms to access to scarce and valuable resources (Faccio, 2006; Li
et al., 2008), which would in turn affect the costs and beneﬁts of CER
activities. We therefore develop hypotheses with respect to the effects
of political connections on a ﬁrm's propensity to engage in CER.

2.1. Positive effects.
According to the resource-based view of the ﬁrm (RBV), companies
have bundles of heterogeneous resources and capabilities that are
imperfectly mobile across ﬁrms. If such resources and capabilities are
valuable, rare, inimitable, and non-substitutable, they could constitute
a source of sustainable competitive advantage (Barney, 1991). For a
politically connected ﬁrm, political connections can constitute a re-
source or capability that leads to a sustained competitive advantage.
For example, it has been found that political connections help ﬁrms to
access to key resources such as bank loans (Khwaja and Mian, 2005;
Faccio, 2006), lower tax rates (Adhikari et al., 2006; Wu et al., 2012),
and provide protection of property rights (Zhou, 2013). This would in
turn help to relax the ﬁnancial constraint on environmental invest-
ments, lower ﬁrms' cost of capital related to environmental investment,
share the risks of environmental technology innovation with the
government, and thereby encourage ﬁrms to adopt environmentally
friendly practices. At the same time, CEOs with extensive political and
social networks may excel at accessing information about the latest
government environmental policy, which likely helps to better under-
stand environmental regulations and policymakers' intentions, make
effective decisions regarding CER investment and obtain the ﬁrst-
mover advantage associated with early investments in environmental
technologies.

Politically connected ﬁrms can also get many social and political
beneﬁts in return for their engaging in CER. Beneﬁts that may arise
from CER include enhanced product differentiation, reputation/image
enhancement, and improved relations with workers, customers,
suppliers, government, and the community (Siegel, 2009). More
importantly, CER would be a means to access to the government
bureaucracy, which is an important way to strengthen the business-
government relationship and receive scarce and valuable resources.
For instance, an organization's environmental responsibility projects
often bring attention in the form of praise not just to the ﬁrm, but
often more directly to the CEO. CEOs favored by both the government
and the public are more likely to be elected and win a seat in congress
(Ma and Parish, 2006).

In addition, politically connected ﬁrms are more likely to receive
social and government attention than nonconnected ﬁrms. For
example, as a current or former member of the government, the politi-
cally connected CEO is expected by the public to have high moral stan-
dards and do what is morally right. This pressure may motivate ﬁrms to
act in environmentally responsible ways. Hence the inclusion of envi-
ronmental issues into corporate strategy could be viewed as a means
to improve a company's alignment with the growing environmental
concerns and government's expectations (Buysse and Verbeke, 2003).
In line with the research and reasoning laid out above, the following
hypotheses might be set forth.

Hypothesis 1. There will be a positive relationship between political
connections and corporate environmental responsibility.

2.2. Negative effects.
As mentioned before, CER activities require signiﬁcant investments
in production redesign, new equipment, and cross-functional employ-
ee coordination, whereas the rewards from strong environmental per-
formance may only materialize in the long term. These characteristics
make environmental initiatives unpalatable to risk-averse managers.
Managers may be reluctant to incur expenses that do not have imme-
diate ﬁnancial beneﬁts and therefore often focus on conservative ini-
tiatives that will maximize their reputation and ﬁnancial beneﬁts in
the short term (de Villiers et al., 2011). In this case, political connec-
tions may act as an umbrella of protection that helps ﬁrms to escape
CER.
Speciﬁcally, Firms may bribe local government ofﬁcials through
their political connections in order to form a strong interest group and
get away with environmental regulation and penalties. This is especially
the case in China, where local government ofﬁcials have been evaluated
on the basis of economic development since 1978 (Li and Zhou, 2005).
Gross regional product (GRP) and its growth rates are the main indices
for the evaluation of local ofﬁcials' work achievements. This provides a
major incentive for local ofﬁcials to put economic growth ahead of envi-
ronmental protection. Engagement in the political process might be
used as a form of insurance against environmental regulation. Under
protection of the local government, ﬁrms can sacriﬁce environment
for the sake of short term ﬁnancial beneﬁts. Local government ofﬁcials
can also beneﬁt from higher levels of output in their region as well as
bribes from politically connected polluting producers. A typical example
is Zijin Mining's pollution event in 2010, a Chinese listed company with
political connections. In fact, collusion between ﬁrms and the local
bureaucracy is blamed for the China's pollution problems, allowing
businesses to evade emissions regulations across a range of industries
(Morgan, 2013).

Political connections can also provide an opportunity for ﬁrms to
modify or inﬂuence environmental policy and future regulations in
their favor. In other words, ﬁrms may lobby the local government to
weaken environmental laws and penalties through their political ties.
For example, the relevant state of the world is the environmental dam-
age done by a particular pollutant, which often is unknown to
policymakers (Lyon and Maxwell, 2008). Firms then may convey unver-
iﬁable or wrong information through their political connections to pub-
lic decision-makers that constrain regulators' ability to set tough
standards.

Summarizing the above arguments, we hypothesize the following.

Hypothesis 2. There will be a negative relationship between political
connections and corporate environmental responsibility.

<Middle> Data, sample selection and variables.
3.1. Data and sample selection.
Like Du et al. (2014), our study is based on all the China's public
listed ﬁrms (e.g. mining, petroleum, chemical and biological products,
papermaking and printing etc.) in polluting industries listed on the
Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges. The ﬁrm-level data come
from the China Securities Market and Accounting Research (CSMAR)
database developed by GTA Information Technology Company, a
leading provider of data on Chinese stock markets and listed companies.
The data contain detailed information on all the public listed ﬁrms in
polluting industries, including the nature of each ﬁrm (such as the
geographic location, ownership, size, age and founding date) as well
as accounting and corporate governance data.

Consistent with the existing studies (Faccio, 2006; Fan et al., 2007), a
company is deﬁned as politically connected if its chief executive ofﬁcer
(CEO) is a current or former government bureaucrat—that is, a current
or former ofﬁcer of the central or local governments or the military. In
China, CEO is a relatively new concept and only very recently some
companies have started to use the title (Kato and Long, 2006). In fact,
the chairman of the board holds a distinctive and decisive position
within a ﬁrm. The chairman position is a full time executive position
and it ranks higher than the General Manager (zongjingli). The chairman
chairs the board of directors, deals with external parties, and is respon-
sible for a company's daily operations. The chairman often receives the
highest pay from the ﬁrm and plays an important role in formulating
and implementing business strategies (e.g. CER). Therefore, consistent
with the existing studies (Firth et al., 2006; Kato and Long, 2006;
Zhang, 2017), we consider the chairman as the CEO of the ﬁrm. Since
the Chinese government possesses the right to appoint the chairman

of a state-owned listed company, the chairman's political afﬁliation
provides a suitable proxy for government intervention in state-owned
ﬁrms. It also provides an opportunity to compare and explain the
distinctive impacts of political connections on CER between state-
owned ﬁrms and non- state-owned ﬁrms.

We manually collect CEO data from the annual reports of all listed
companies in polluting industries. For each company, we obtain a
proﬁle of the CEO from the “Proﬁles of Directors, Supervisors and Senior
Management” section of the annual report. The proﬁle typically con-
tains information on CEO's name, age, gender, education, tenure, duality
and employment history. From the proﬁle, we trace the CEO's political
connections by examining whether he or she is currently or formerly
an ofﬁcer of either the central government, a local government, or the
military.

Since the environmental disclosure regulation was launched by
China's Ministry of Environmental Protection (MEP) in 2007, the ﬁnal
sample comprises 4898 ﬁrm-year observations on 823 ﬁrms over the
period 2008–2014.

3.2. Measuring ﬁrm environmental responsibility.
Consistent with the existing studies (Cho and Patten, 2007; Liu and
Anbumozhi, 2009; Meng et al., 2013; Zeng et al., 2010), ﬁrm environ-
mental responsibility is measured with the level of corporate environ-
mental information disclosure (EID). According to the Environmental
Disclosure Rules issued by China's MEP in 2007, EID usually has ten
main components listed in Table 1. And each component is scored
according to its level of disclosure. The score ranges between 0 and
3, where 3 is monetary and quantitative information, 2 is speciﬁc
non-monetary information, 1 is general non-monetary information,
and 0 is no information (Wiseman, 1982; Zeng et al., 2010). Indeed,
Bewley and Li (2000) and Cho and Patten (2007) suggest that using
monetary- and non-monetary-related environmental disclosure is an
effective tool to gauge levels of corporate EID. We manually collect
EID data from the listed company's annual report.

The total score of EID for ﬁrm i in year t is this,
where SCIDijt is the score of the jth component of EID for ﬁrm i, and
j=1,2,3,…,10. According to the voluntary disclosure theory (Clarkson
et al., 2008), the higher the score, the higher the level of environmental
information disclosure, and the higher the level of corporate environ-
mental responsibility.

Table 2 presents the summary statistics for the ten components of
EID. There exists a signiﬁcant difference among the ten components
in terms of the level of environmental information disclosure. Specif-
ically, I4 (government grants, subsidies and tax reduction related to
the environment protection) and I3 (ﬁrm's environmental investment
expenditure for technologies development) are the top two compo-
nents that ﬁrms would like to disclose. Conversely, I8 (loans related
to environmental protection) and I6 (construction and operation of
environmental improvement) are the two components that ﬁrms
would not like to disclose, consistent with the ﬁndings in Zeng
et al. (2010).

In Table 3, Panel A we present descriptive statistics on EID by indus-
try. The lowest average score is 5.3899 and is obtained by the medicine
and biological products manufacturing industry, while the highest aver-
age score, 9.5304, is obtained by the papermaking and printing industry.
In Table 3, Panel B we show descriptive statistics on EID by year. The
level of corporate environmental information disclosure has increased
from 6.6142 in 2008 to 8.3925 in 2014, nearly 1.27 times higher than
before.

3.3. Political connections.
As mentioned before, a company is deﬁned as politically connected if
its CEO is a current or former government bureaucrat—that is, a current
or former ofﬁcer of the central or local governments or the military.
Hence, political connections (POL) are a dummy variable that equals
one when the company is politically connected, and zero otherwise.

3.4. CEO characteristics. We include commonly used control variables for CEO characteristics
(Barker and Mueller, 2002; Petrenko et al., 2016). CEO Age is measured
in years and CEO Education level is measured on a ﬁve-point scale
reﬂecting the highest level of education attained (1 = no college
degree, 2 = three-year college degree (dazhuan), 3 = undergraduate
degree, 4 = master's degree, 5 = Ph.D. degree). CEO Tenure is measured
as the number of years for which the ﬁrm's CEO has been in that posi-
tion. CEO Gender is a dummy variable that equals one when CEO is a
male, and zero otherwise. CEO Duality is measured using a dummy var-
iable that equals one when the Chairman also serves as the General
Manager (zongjinli), and zero otherwise.

3.5. Firm characteristics.
We also include commonly used control variables for ﬁrm character-
istics (Lin et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2014). Firm Age is measured as the
number of years since a ﬁrm's founding date. Ratio of debt to assets
(Leverage) is measured with total liabilities divided by total assets. We
use the percentage of board members who are independent to measure
board composition (Independent). Firm size (Size) is measured as the
natural log of total number of employees. Firm ownership (ownership)
is a dummy variable that equals one when it is a state-owned ﬁrm,
two when it is a private ﬁrm, three when it is a foreign ﬁrm, and four
otherwise. Firm performance is measured as return on assets (ROA),
where ROA is deﬁned as net proﬁt divided by total assets. Given Chinese
ﬁrms' unique ownership structures where share ownership is highly
concentrated, we control for ownership concentration with direct
ownership stakes held by the largest shareholders (CR1).

To control for time-speciﬁc and industry-speciﬁc macroeconomic
effects, we include year and industry dummies in all speciﬁcations. To
control for unobserved city characteristics, we add a dummy variable
indicating the status of being a capital city or being directly under the
central government and a dummy variable indicating whether the city
is located along a coast line. Table 4 presents the summary statistics
for all variables.

The sectoral distribution of politically connected ﬁrms is presented in
Table 5. The percentage of ﬁrms managed by politically connected CEOs
has increased from 31.65% in 2008 to 33.90% in 2014. This suggests that
more and more polluting ﬁrms are establishing political connections via
hiring politically-connected directors. There is a cross-industry variation
in the politically connected ﬁrms. The highest percentage of politically
connected ﬁrms occurs in the textiles, clothes, leather and fur products
sector, and the production and supply of thermal power sector. Above
40% of ﬁrms in those two sectors are politically connected. The lowest
percentage of politically connected ﬁrms occurs in the medicine and
biological products manufacturing sector (between 18.67% and 26.79%).

4. Empirical analysis.
4.1. The empirical model and estimation method.
The following is our main regression model,
where EIDijct stands for the CER (i.e. environmental information
disclosure) of ﬁrm i operating in industry j and city c at time t. POL is a
dummy variable indicating whether ﬁrm i is politically connected.

CEO_Char and Firm_Char are the two sets of control variables related to
CEO characteristics and ﬁrm characteristics, respectively. αi is ﬁrm ﬁxed
effects to control for unobserved ﬁrm heterogeneities. γt is year dummy
and uijct is the error term.

Since CER data are count data, the basic model found in the literature
to handle count data is the Poisson model (Hausman et al., 1984;
Wooldridge, 2002). One advantage of this speciﬁcation is that the
estimated coefﬁcients can be interpreted as elasticities when the
explanatory variables are taken in logarithms. Therefore, we use the
Poisson regression with ﬁxed effects to estimate our main regression
model (1). At the same time, we also use negative-binomial regression
with ﬁxed effects which allows for a greater variance of observations
than is assumed for a Poisson process as a robustness check.

One may raise concern about the endogeneity of political connections,
consistent with the idea that political connections could be affected by
factors that also determine CER. We apply Arellano-Bond two-step
system GMM (Generalized Method of Moments) estimator to our panel
to deal with the endogeneity originated from unobserved heterogeneity,
simultaneity, and dynamic relation between political connections and
CER. Speciﬁcally, consistent with the existing studies (Roodman, 2006;
Wintoki et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2014), all of the independent variables
are assumed to be endogenous except ﬁrm age and the year dummies.
The third and fourth lags of the dependent variable and the endogenous
variables, together with all the lags of the exogenous variables, are
employed as IVs. Heteroskedasticity is controlled by robust standard
errors. The exogeneity of the IVs and the serial correlation of the ﬁrst-
differenced residuals are discussed in Section 4.2.

4.2. Main results.
Table 6 presents the results of our regression analysis related to the
effects of political connections on CER. The results based on the panel
regression with ﬁxed effects method are reported in column (1), the
ﬁxed effects Poisson regression in column (2), the ﬁxed effects
negative-binomial regression in column (3), and the two-step system
GMM in column (4).

As the two-step system GMM method represents a type of instru-
mental variables regression, it is important to consider the validity of
the instruments when using this method. Our test results show that
our instruments are valid, as indicated by a Hansen test of over-
identifying restrictions not being rejected. We test the ﬁrst-differenced
residuals for autocorrelations, and ﬁnd an AR(1) test is signiﬁcant and
AR(2) test is insigniﬁcant.

Recall that our hypotheses focus on how CER is affected by political
connections. It is found that the coefﬁcients of political connections are
positive and statistically signiﬁcant using all four methods, suggesting
that political connections have a signiﬁcant and positive impact on
CER and this result remains robust to different estimation approaches.
This ﬁnding also provides strong support for Hypothesis 1 rather than
Hypothesis 2.

With regard to other CEO and ﬁrm characteristics, the results in
Table 6 show that CEO's education level is positively associated with
CER. This is consistent with the ﬁndings in Fryxell and Lo (2003) and
Lewis et al. (2014). CEOs with higher educational proﬁles are associated
with a more complete understanding of environmental knowledge and
values, which in turn helps to increase the environmental responsibility
of ﬁrms and minimize environmental impacts. The coefﬁcient of CEO
Duality is negative and statistically signiﬁcant, which indicates that
ﬁrms would reduce their CER activities when the CEO also serves as
the board chairman. Focusing on U.S. publicly traded ﬁrms, de Villiers
et al. (2011) also ﬁnd that ﬁrms are more likely to have better environ-
mental performance if they have a chairman who is not the CEO of the
same ﬁrm. They argue that combining the roles of the CEO and board
chairman (CEO-chair duality) places much power in the hands of one
person. If the CEO is faced with a compelling motive for maximizing
short-term ﬁnancial gains at the expense of strategic investments in en-
vironmental opportunities, the presence of a dual CEO-chair will reduce
the likelihood of the board approving immediate investments in envi-
ronmental opportunities with long payback periods. Conversely, the
separation of the CEO and board chairman roles mitigates the tension
between managers and board members. In such instances, the board
chairman is more likely to promote investments in environmental
opportunities with potential for long-term social and ﬁnancial beneﬁts.
Firm size exerts a signiﬁcantly positive impact on CER. The signiﬁcant
relationship between ﬁrm size and CER is consistent with ﬁndings
from the more general voluntary disclosure literature (see, e.g. Patten,
2002; Reid and Toffel, 2009). These studies show that larger companies,
due to visibility concerns, tend to disclose more environmental informa-
tion than smaller ﬁrms.

4.3. Robustness checks.
To conﬁrm the general pattern of our results in Table 6, we conduct a
number of robustness checks. First, following Du et al. (2014), we repli-
cate our results using the Z-score normalization of EID (EID_NORM) as
an alternative measure of CER to assess whether our results are sensitive
to the speciﬁc CER measures we select. Speciﬁcally, EID_NORM is
obtained using the following expression,
where μEID and σEID are the mean and standard deviation of EID, respec-
tively. As shown in columns (1) and (2) of Table 7, our main results
remain robust to this alternate dependent variable.

Second, we use return on sales (ROS) as an alternative measure of
ﬁrm performance, as in Wintoki et al. (2012), where ROS is deﬁned as
net proﬁt divided by sales revenue. As shown in columns (3), (4) and
(5) of Table 7, our main results remain robust to this measure of ﬁrm
performance.

Third, we replace CR1 with CR3, direct ownership stakes held by the
three largest shareholders, as a proxy for ownership concentration. As
shown in columns (6), (7) and (8) of Table 7, our main results remain
robust to this alternative measure of ownership concentration.

5. Further issues.
5.1. Where are political connections important?
In this subsection, we examine the effects of political connections on
CER for ﬁrms with different ownership and in regions with different
environmental regulatory systems.

Since the ownership structure of ﬁrms in China has changed from
dominantly state-owned to a more diverse composition over the course
of the transition (Fu and Hong, 2011), it would be interesting to
investigate whether ﬁrm ownership inﬂuences the relationship be-
tween political connections and CER. To test this idea, we split the sam-
ple into two subsamples: state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and non-
state-owned enterprises (non-SOEs). Column (1) of Table 8 presents
the ﬁxed effects Poisson regression results for the state-owned ﬁrms
subsample and column (2) for the non-state-owned ﬁrms subsample.
It is found that political connections have a signiﬁcant and positive
impact on CER for SOEs rather than non-SOEs, indicating that the
environmental responsibility-adopting effects of political connections
are stronger for SOEs. Since SOEs are an important instrument in the
government's toolbox for societal and public value creation given the
right context, SOEs have a different purpose, mission and objectives
which relate to social responsibility (e.g. environment responsibility)
(Sturesson et al., 2015). In other words, SOEs may have a strategic role
in driving growth that is socially and environmentally sustainable.
Meanwhile, as mentioned before, since the Chinese government
possesses the right to appoint the CEO of a state-owned listed company,
political connections are an important channel of government interven-
tion in SOEs to achieve social goals and objectives (Fan et al., 2007).
Therefore, political connections play a more important role in helping
SOEs to engage in social and environmental responsibility.

In addition, our theoretical framework indicates that political
connections may act as an umbrella of protection that helps ﬁrms to
escape CER if local government ofﬁcials sacriﬁce environmental quality
for short-term economic gains or fail to take environmental aspects of eco-
nomic growth into account. Under this circumstance, political connections
may have a negative impact on CER. Therefore, it would be interesting to
investigate the institutional conditions under which politically connected
ﬁrms are more or less likely to act in environmentally responsible ways.
Speciﬁcally, we test whether a region's environmental regulatory systems
inﬂuence the relationship between political connections and CER.

To test this idea, we split the sample into two subsamples: national
model cities (NMCs) for environmental protection and non-national-
model cities for environmental protection (non-NMCs).2 Columns
(3) and (4) of Table 8 present the ﬁxed effects Poisson regression results
for ﬁrms located in NMCs and non-NMCs, respectively. The results show
that the coefﬁcient of political connections is positive and statistically
signiﬁcant in NMCs rather than in non-NMCs, suggesting that the
positive effect of political connections on CER is more pronounced in
cities with stringent environmental rules and regulations. In other
words, political connections will not have a positive effect on CER
when institutional development undergirding CER is weak. Hence,
politically connected ﬁrms will be more likely to act in environmentally
responsible ways if there are strong and well enforced city regulations
in place to ensure such behavior. This is consistent with theories
emphasizing the role of institutional environment in encouraging
corporate socially responsible behavior (Campbell, 2007).

5.2. Why are political connections important?
The results in Table 6 consistently show that political connections
have a positive effect on ﬁrm's environmental responsibility. In this
subsection, we go a step further and investigate the precise channels
through which political connections help ﬁrms to engage in CER.
More speciﬁcally, our theoretical framework shows that political
connections may help ﬁrms to access to key resources such as subsi-
dies, lower tax rates and bank loans, which would in turn help to
lower ﬁrms' cost of capital related to environmental investment,
relax the ﬁnancial constraint on environmental investment, and there-
by encourage ﬁrms to adopt environmentally friendly practices. At the
same time, CEOs with extensive political and social networks may
excel at accessing information about the latest government environ-
mental policy, which likely helps to better understand policymakers'
intentions and helps the policy implementation. We can carry out
more direct tests of these predications by estimating the effects of
political connections on each of these factors based on the ﬁxed effects
Poisson regression.

First, we test whether political connections help a ﬁrm to gain access
to government ﬁnancial aid. We use the amount of government grants,
subsidies and tax reduction related to the environment protection as
the dependent variable, which is the 4th component of EID listed in
Table 1. As shown in column (1) of Table 9, the coefficient of political
connections is positive and statistically significant, indicating that
political connections help firms to receive government grants, subsidies
and tax reduction related to the environment protection.Moreover, the
coefficient of political connections is positive and statistically significant
for state-owned firms rather than non-state-owned firms (columns
(2) and (3) of Table 9), suggesting that state-owned firmswith political
connections are more likely to receive government financial aid related
to the environment protection. This is consistent with the idea that
state-owned firms enjoy preferential status in obtaining subsidies and
favorable tax treatments compared to non-state-owned firms in China
(Li et al., 2008).
Second, we test whether political connections help a ﬁrm to gain
access to the credit market. We use the amount of loans related to
environmental protection as the dependent variable, which is the 8th
component of EID listed in Table 1. As shown in columns (4) and
(5) of Table 9, the coefﬁcients of political connections are statistically
insigniﬁcant, suggesting that political connections do not help ﬁrms to
borrow from banks or other ﬁnancial
institutions. One possible interpretation is the absence of a functioning green ﬁnancial system in
China. Since the Green Credit Policy and other relevant green loans are
at an early stage of implementation, seeking proﬁts without consider-
ation of environmental and social impacts is still the main way for
Chinese banks to make decisions on lending (Bai et al., 2013).
Meanwhile, banks are reluctant to provide “green” loans to companies
also due to lack of expertise concerning the evaluation of environmental
projects and investments of borrowers, which makes it difﬁcult for
ﬁrms to access to green loans.

Third, we examine whether political connections help ﬁrms to
implement government environmental policies. We use the impact of
government environmental protection policy on corporate environ-
mental practice as the dependent variable, which is the 7th component
of EID listed in Table 1. As emphasized in columns (6), (7) and (8) of
Table 9, we ﬁnd that political connections play a more important role
in promoting state-owned ﬁrms to implement government environ-
mental policies than non-state-owned ﬁrms. This conﬁrms the idea
mentioned previously that political connections are an important
channel of government intervention in SOEs to achieve environmental
objectives.

In summary, we ﬁnd some evidence that political connections exert
a positive effect on CER through a number of mechanisms. In particular,
we ﬁnd that politically connected ﬁrms are more likely to receive
government grants, subsidies and tax reduction related to the environ-
ment protection, and implement government environmental policies.
These mechanisms work better for SOEs. These ﬁndings explain as
well as conﬁrm the general pattern of our results in Tables 6 and 7
that political connections help ﬁrms, especially SOEs, to engage in CER.

<Conclusion> Discussion and conclusions.
The purpose of this study is to explore the relationship between
political connections and CER. In particular, we propose a mechanism-
based framework to show that political connections can have a positive
as well as a negative impact on CER. Our empirical results, based on all
the China's public listed ﬁrms in polluting industries, show that political
connections have a signiﬁcant and positive impact on CER. This ﬁnding
remains robust to a number of alternative estimation approaches.

We then examine where and how political connections may exert a
positive impact on CER. We ﬁnd that the positive effect of political
connections on CER is more pronounced for state-owned ﬁrms, consis-
tent with the view that political connections are an important channel
of government intervention in SOEs to achieve social and environmen-
tal objectives. We also ﬁnd that political connections are more likely to
have a positive effect on CER in cities with stringent environmental rules
and regulations. This emphasizes the role of institutional environment
in promoting the positive effect of political connections on CER. With
respect to the mechanisms through which political connections
increase CER, the results of this research suggest that political connec-
tions help ﬁrms to receive government grants, subsidies and tax reduc-
tion related to the environment protection, and implement government
environmental policies. These mechanisms work better for state-owned
ﬁrms.

Our study contributes to the literature on CER and political connec-
tions in multiple ways. First, although extant work has indicated that
CER may be affected by social pressure and ﬁrm-speciﬁc factors, funda-
mentally researchers know little about whether political connections
matter for ﬁrm's propensity to engage in CER. We advance a new
perspective that locates the impetus for CER in the values of political
connections and argue that political connections as a special form of
business-government relationship play a role in CER decisions, especial-
ly in a government-dominated transitional country like China.

Second, as Matten and Moon (2008) noted, theorizing as well as
examining CER in institutionally constrained environments is in its
infancy. We add theoretical and empirical support to the ‘Institution Dif-
ference Hypothesis’ (IDH) (Campbell, 2007; Matten and Moon, 2008;
Julian and Ofori-dankwa, 2013), suggesting that the effects of political
connections on CER are likely to be different depending on contextual
conditions. Speciﬁcally, political connections are more likely to have a
positive effect on CER when institutional development undergirding
CER is strong.

Third, we also add to the growing literature on political connections.
While prior work has established the implications of political ties for
ﬁrm proﬁts or performance, it is still not very clear how political connec-
tions inﬂuence CER activities. We offer an initial mechanism-based
framework for thinking about the possible role of political connections
in CER and when political connections matter more or less in their
effects on CER advances, which may help understand how political
connections facilitate a ﬁrm's CER engagement.

While offering a new perspective on CER, our study has limitations
that represent opportunities for future research. In particular, the
study sample is constrained to the unique context of ﬁrms in China,
and therefore, the ﬁndings may not be generalizable to ﬁrms in other
countries. Further, while we focus on the important aspect of environ-
mental information disclosure as our measure of CER (e.g. Cho and
Patten, 2007; Clarkson et al., 2008), CER is a multi-faceted concept
with various other dimensions, such as environmental damage costs
reduction. Further research using additional measures tapping into
various other aspects of CER is therefore warranted.

Acknowledgements