
1. Introduction
The notion of ecosystem services has been accompanied by valua-
tion methods to identify human preferences and priorities concerning
nature. Valuation studies are believed to draw decision makers'
attention to the goods and services provided by natural processes
(Laurans and Mermet, 2014). Following the popularity of valuation -
the scientiﬁc practice of evaluating the goodness of nature - the
questions of value and valuing - the process through which people
assign value to objects - have gained increasing attention in literature.
Also critical perspectives have emerged.

The critics of utilitarian welfare economics have argued that the rich-
ness of what is acknowledged as good or valuable is missed in the
existing monetary accounts of nature values (Polishchuk and
Rauschmayer, 2012). Monetary values, as revealed and stated prefer-
ences of self-regarding, narrowly rational individuals, are not consid-
ered to sufﬁciently reﬂect social importance (Laurans et al., 2013;
Parks and Gowdy, 2013). Assigning only economic value to ecosystem
services is argued to make the multiplicity and nuances of human-na-
ture relationships invisible by reducing the dimensions of importance,
worth and meaning (Kosoy and Corbera, 2010; Bowker, 2005). In reali-
ty, the critics argue, things, beings and places matter to people for differ-
ent and often incommensurable reasons (Maris, 2014).
As a response, non-monetary valuation methods have been devel-
oped to enlarge the value categories taken into account from purely eco-
nomic to social and cultural values (e.g. Tengberg et al., 2012; Kelemen
et al., 2014). Often based on qualitative approaches, these methods
broaden the type of information regarded as evidence of nature's signif-
icance to humans. In addition, deliberative valuation methods move be-
yond individual values and address values as collective outcomes (e.g.
Maynard et al., 2015; Parks and Gowdy, 2013).

Despite the broadening scope, the debate has largely remained igno-
rant of the nature of valuing as a dynamical and situated process.
Human preferences are never set in stone but constantly transforming
(Parks and Gowdy, 2013; Gomez-Baggethun et al., 2010). Mapping en-
vironmental values at a particular moment, valuation studies pay little
attention to how human preferences emerge from place and time spe-
ciﬁc, historical and political relations and events (Ernstson and Sörlin,
2013; Bieling, 2014). From this perspective, non-monetary valuation
methods are problematic, too. They address a broadened set of value
categories but maintain the tendency to map values as static reﬂections
of human preferences.

Polishchuk and Rauschmayer (2012) take a step forward by empha-
sizing the need to analyze factors inﬂuencing people's ability to gain
beneﬁts from ecosystems. Maynard et al. (2015), in turn, point out the
importance of identifying which actors value ecosystem services and
beneﬁt from nature. These approaches do not merely argue for the com-
plexity of social processes through which nature values emerge. Knowl-
edge about social dynamics, power relations and accessibility
inﬂuencing human preferences is essential for understanding the rele-
vance of valuation studies and their results.
This article adds up to the debate by discussing the open-endedness
of valuing from a pragmatist perspective. We argue that the turn to the
pragmatist approach in social sciences, pointing out the importance of
practices and activities rather than opinions and perceptions in organiz-
ing social life, offers a fruitful starting point for understanding the emer-
gence and transformation of environmental values.

The pragmatist perspective suggests that value judgments - be it
taste, norms, appreciations, preferences, goods or respect - always
come into being through everyday activities and particular situations
(Heuts and Mol, 2013; Muniesa, 2012; Moor and Lury, 2011). It assumes
that values are practiced and performed rather than inherent character-
istics of natural elements and functions. Following this, the analytical
focus is directed at how values emerge from practical ways of relating
to species, ecosystems and their functions.

We introduce the pragmatist approach and its methodological ori-
entation in the following section. We then present empirical ﬁndings
from three case studies demonstrating how values emerge from real-
life valuing processes: 1) restoration of natural springs in Finland, 2)
protection of the bearded vulture (Gypaetus barbatus) in the Vanoise
National Park in the French Alps, and 3) management of urban biodiver-
sity in the parks of the city of Grenoble in France. The cases render vis-
ible three commonplace ways of relating to nature: domestication,
inheriting, and community building. While the importance of this kind
of relations has to a certain extent been underlined in literature, they
have so far been largely neglected in valuation studies. Paying attention
to mundane activities enables to address social and temporal dimen-
sions as well as speciﬁc modes of valuing leading to the outcomes that
can be grasped by valuation studies. Our ﬁndings lead us to discuss
the importance and implications of the pragmatist perspective for na-
ture conservation and point out its relevance for understanding the
mechanisms that make governance of ecosystem services effective - or
not.

2. Valuing in Practice.
In much of the current literature values have been presented as a
cognitive phenomenon rather than as emerging from practical ways of
living in and engaging with the world (Milton, 2002; Polishchuk and
Rauschmayer, 2012). Although economic valuation methods
operationalize also non-verbal ways of appreciating, for example, mea-
sure preferences in terms of costs, they still focus on the outcomes of
valuing processes. Pragmatist theories, in turn, can explain how values
are enacted through everyday practices (Muniesa, 2012; Moor and
Lury, 2011; Heuts and Mol, 2013). Rather than characteristics that
something has, or meanings depending on social positions and interests,
values are “understood in the sense of a process, a form of mediation, of
something that happens in practice, something that is done to some-
thing else, and so forth; value is deﬁnitely not something that some-
thing just has” (Muniesa, 2012, pp. 32). Hence, “the good is not
something to pass a judgment on, in general terms and from the outside,
but something to do” (Mol et al., 2010, pp.13).

Pragmatist ideas originate in Dewey's philosophy and discussion on
the subjectivity of values. To overcome the subject–object dualism,
Dewey suggested that values emerge from practical situations
(Dewey, 1915; cited by Muniesa, 2012). Following this, pragmatism
calls analytical attention for the activities through which particular as-
pects of nature become signiﬁcant and relevant for people. In this re-
gard,
from social
constructionism which assumes that social groups have different
views about nature based on their ways of framing it and emphasizing
different qualities of its worth. Pragmatism underlines that it is different
ways of engaging with natural elements that make people care about
them - or not.

the pragmatist perspective also stands out

Drawing on the pragmatist approach, Jeannette Pols (2005) has
demonstrated how patients' appreciations are formed in social interac-
tion between other patients and professionals in mental health care. She

analyses the patients' preferences as emerging from particular relations
and situations rather than as reﬂecting individual opinions. The situa-
tions include the material environment that organizes the patients'
lives and affects their preferences by enabling or constraining certain
subject positions. For instance, social activities may be preferred in a
hospital ward with rather than without safe and comfortable corners.
Human preferences are thus a provisional outcome of particular ways
of relating to other people and the materialities of everyday life.

Along these lines, Heuts and Mol (2013) suggest paying attention to
the different modes of valuing, relevant to different practices of engag-
ing with natural elements. In particular, they discuss the difference be-
tween evaluation, classifying things as valuable, and valorizing, the
activity of making something valuable, for instance by taking care of it.
Valuation studies often focus on the former, rating beneﬁts that people
gain from nature although improving may be a crucial aspect of ecosys-
tem services. Thirdly, Heuts and Mol highlight respect as a mode of val-
uing. Respect resembles the so called intrinsic value of nature, often
discussed in regards to nature conservation. However, by analyzing
what makes a good tomato, Heuts and Mol remind that there are also
more mundane forms of admiration and esteem, highly relevant to
the practices of engaging with natural elements, such as the attention
to the tomatoes' ﬂavor and appearance.

<Middle> Case Studies, Materials and Methods.
Inspired by the pragmatist approach we analyze how people are in-
vited to engage with natural elements in new ways and to recognize
their value: Finnish landowners encouraged to restore natural springs
destroyed by construction or forestry operations; national park rangers
monitoring and protecting the bearded vultures which have been
reintroduced in the Alps over the last decades; and Grenoble's gar-
deners persuaded to attend to insects as part of efforts to make urban
green spaces more biodiversity-friendly. We study how these elements
become valued and demonstrate the importance of practice-based rela-
tions with nature as contributing to changing appreciations. This en-
ables us to explore the current limits and scope for improvement of
ecosystem service approach which also aims at making nature more rel-
evant in the society.

3.1. Restoration of Natural Springs as Key Habitats in Finland

In Finland, technological change (tap water, refrigerators) as well as
changing rural livelihoods (dwindling small scale farming) have de-
creased the use value of natural springs as regular source of water for
households and farm animals, or as sites for cooling milk and other
foods. They are currently used as spare source of water or as water
source in less equipped free-time residences. Also sporadic use takes
place when working, hunting, picking up berries or hiking in forest.

While the use value of natural springs and the value of natural pro-
cesses maintaining the availability of clean water have diminished,
many springs have been destroyed in forestry operations or due to con-
struction work during the past decades. Since the mid-1990s, springs
have, however, been identiﬁed as key habitats in forest ecosystems.
They have been protected by the Forest Act1 and become a target of vol-
unteer restoration activities. Our research material about the restoration
of natural springs was collected as part of a research project on forest
biodiversity protection in Finland (Peltola and Tuomisaari, 2015;
Peltola, 2016). We interviewed landowners voluntarily participating
in two Eastern Finnish restoration projects and invited also non-land-
owners to share stories and memories about springs. In addition, we
discussed with the restoration project staff and attended a ﬁeld excur-
sion while they were collecting data about the spring habitats. This
array of materials allowed us to capture and share a variety of practices
and activities related to the springs.

3.2. Protection of the Bearded Vulture in the French Alps

While the populations of vultures have dramatically decreased in
India (van Dooren, 2011), they are currently rising in some European
countries and notably in France. The bearded vulture, a bone-eater erad-
icated due to hunting and poisoning campaigns in France in the ﬁrst half
of the twentieth century, has been reintroduced in the Alps over the last
decades. It is slowly recovering in several mountain ranges, including
the Vanoise range.

Despite the reintroduction programs, the populations remain vul-
nerable and sparse. Therefore, intensive monitoring of breeding pairs
is carried out by the staff of protected areas. In Vanoise, the national
park rangers spend a substantial part of their professional and personal
time looking for and watching the vultures and trying to prevent speed-
riders from disturbing the birds at nest. The Vanoise national park is
surrounded by a large number of extensive ski resorts (Mauz, 2013),
and the development of extreme sports threatens the reproduction pro-
cess which takes place in winter.

For this study, we analyzed research material collected by one of the
authors over the last twenty years on the social importance of iconic
wild species (Mauz, 2002). The material did not speciﬁcally concern
the bearded vulture but this species was regularly and increasingly
spontaneously mentioned by the informants. In 2013 and 2014, the
same author accompanied the Vanoise national park ﬁeld staff observ-
ing the vultures in winter and summer. The ﬁeld notes enabled us to
document how the rangers were affected by the vultures, for instance,
how they reacted on discovering that a breeding pair has managed or
failed to raise their young.

3.3. Managing Urban Biodiversity in the Parks and Gardens of Grenoble

Like in many other cities (about Berlin, see Lachmund, 2013, and
about Geneva, see Ernwein, 2015), the management of public green
spaces in Grenoble has considerably changed over the last decades for
both economic and ecological reasons. Among other changes, the use
of pesticides has been abandoned and replaced by predator insects. A
few beehives have also been introduced in several parks. More recently,
the city's gardeners have been strongly encouraged to shift their atten-
tion to insects that are not directly related to plant health, such as but-
terﬂies. Courses have been organized to teach the gardeners to
identify the butterﬂy species that they could come across in Grenoble
(Arpin et al., 2015).

We used semi-directed interviews with the gardeners involved in
the courses, and with their trainers, to study how the changes have
been received. We relied on the advice of the person responsible for en-
couraging the gardeners to become interested in insects to choose gar-
deners with different levels of interest in the process. In addition, we
accompanied the gardeners twice when they were learning to spot
and recognize insect species.

3.4. Analyzing the Practices and Processes of Valuing

Following the pragmatist approach to valuing, our analytical atten-
tion bears on the accounts of speciﬁc activities, habits, routines and ex-
periences of working or living with natural springs, vultures and insects.
Instead of asking our informants about their generic preferences, we an-
alyze observed situations or narratives of situations in which people
show their preferences and appreciations. Hence, we follow Pols
(2005) in investigating how people “enact appreciations” together and
by being and living in particular ways. This includes identiﬁcation of
how their preferences are inﬂuenced by their practical relations to nat-
ural elements.

Doing such pragmatic analysis requires special attention to the re-
search materials and methods of collecting them (Table 1). Interviews
and written narratives may allow capturing practical ways of relating
with natural elements, provided they invite informants to give concrete
and precise examples of their encounters with the natural elements in
question. Accompanying the informants while they are relating to
these elements is, however, an even more effective way to grasp valuing
in practice. Observing social and material situations enables sharing the
activities involved in valuing, access to non-verbal ways of valuing and
enriched verbal expressions of nature values, as performing an activity
may bring ideas and memories to the informants' mind.

Analyzing the practical relations with nature, we discovered three
complementary ways of relating that seemed to be particularly crucial
to how people came to value the natural elements. First, they inserted
these elements into their lives, domesticating them as it were. Second,
they mobilized them to become or remain connected to past genera-
tions and communities. And third, they weaved together their relation-
ships with these elements and their relationships with other people,
building a complex community mixing humans and non-humans.

While presenting and analyzing these three ways of relating - do-
mestication, inheriting and community building - we sought to identify
different modes of valuing at work. We were not primarily interested in
how people evaluated the natural elements but rather in the verbal and
non-verbal ways in which they attended to, showed respect towards
and cared for these elements. Dedication to particular activities or natu-
ral elements, emotional attachments as well as habits and routines indi-
cate appreciations and respect towards natural elements, and make
them signiﬁcant to people.

4. How Natural Elements Come to Matter

4.1. Domestication

Our informants often designated the natural elements they value as
their own - not because of some property or use right, but because they
are connected with and deeply affected by them. For instance, Vanoise
National Park rangers frequently talked about “their” vultures. Bearded
vultures have been back in the Alps only for some thirty years, and
much less in Vanoise where the vultures were not originally
reintroduced. Our interviews revealed that the experience with and
commitment to birds in general were important in identifying the
roles and subjectivities of the rangers, and thus to their motivations.
The rangers had previous experience of watching other raptors, such
as eagles. Vultures were sufﬁciently new to make them intriguing with-
out their monitoring asking too much effort from them as they were al-
ready experienced bird watchers. Watching the vultures and searching
their nesting places soon became part of their everyday preoccupations.
The possibility to draw on previous observation skills helped the
rangers domesticate the newcomer.

The term domestication usually refers to control or mastery exerted
over animals or plants, and involves a sense of familiarity (for a discus-
sion of domestication, see Ingold, 1994). While control and mastery are
present but rather weak in our case examples, the sense of familiarity
appears very clearly. It is acquired by establishing a close and affection-
ate relationship with natural elements. In that sense, domestication is
not restricted to domestic animals and plants: wild animals, insects
and places can also be looked after and cared for, and become part of
the everyday lives of people. In this process, people learn to know
them well enough to anticipate their reactions, behavior or evolution
in a reasonable number of situations. In other words, domestication
also affects people, making them attuned to the natural elements (see
Lorimer, 2008).

The importance of domestication in valuing processes can also be
identiﬁed in the case of the gardeners who had received very little infor-
mation on insects during their initial training. Their attuning to insects
was much slower and more difﬁcult than in the vulture case as working
with insects was entirely new to the gardeners. However, some of them
could draw on past experiences that helped them integrate insects into
their professional practice and more generally into their lives.

The personal history of a gardener who was one of the most involved
in learning the new management practices is particularly telling. He had
bred exotic insects (tarantulas, praying mantis, etc.) at home since his
childhood. Consequently, he had learned basic knowledge about insects
as well as speciﬁc knowledge about insect behavior, moves and how to
handle them. In other words, he had become attuned to insect ways of
living. The interest of the city's park and garden department in insects
enabled him to pursue his own long-standing interest. Several other
gardeners gradually learned to detect insects and identify some of
them, sometimes painstakingly, and started paying attention to them
beyond their professional activities. One of them explained that he
had spent much time during his holidays looking for and identifying
butterﬂies, honing his newly acquired observation skills.

Familiarity with and getting used to the species can lead to respect
towards them and inﬂuence how they are evaluated and judged
(Milton, 2002). When a species or any other natural element is entirely
new - or represent the “other”, as insects often do (Lorimer, 2015) - or
when there is no previous experience or habit to fuel a sense of familiar-
ity, it takes much effort and time to include them into one's life, and be
able to value them.

The springs brought up the habitual dimension of domestication.
Our attention was caught by the numerous narratives of visiting a spring
when passing by without obvious need or drinking water without real
thirst. The value of the spring did not seem to stem from its use value
as a water source, and not even from its recreational value, often
taken into account in valuation studies as a public good provided by

protected areas (e.g. Brander et al., 2007). It was rather related to the
collective habitual use of space and people's everyday place-making.
People made the springs as their own by regularly visiting them. They
also left drinking cups by the spring or made traditional ‘lippi’ cups
from birch bark (Fig. 1).

The sense of attachment and place-making were not reduced to
owning a spring. The informants often mentioned the cups they have
seen by springs, acknowledging the fact that someone pays visits to
the spring. Similarly, a path leading to a spring was appreciated as a
sign that it was known to, and perhaps important for somebody. The
better the path, the more highly the spring was talked about. As Pols
(2008) reminds, habits may be a form of expressing appreciation or
preferences. Unlike value judgments, appreciations may be expressed
through non-verbal means, such as leaving and cultivating signs of
human presence.

4.2. Inheriting

In addition to a sense of familiarity and attachment, our materials
also suggest that natural elements are valued as carriers of personal
and collective memories:

Landowner's husband: It was a very good spring. When the wells in the

village dried out [people] took their household water from this spring.

Landowner (born 1940): And also for the cattle.
Landowner's husband: And for the cattle. If there were dry years, the
spring still worked well. And when we realized the value of the spring we
marked it with red tapes, at a distance of 40 m. Every tree was marked so
that it would be saved [while the surrounding forest area was drained].
But then… when the excavators came… they made the ditches… they did
not notice it.

Landowner: You know how they-.
Landowner's husband: They did not notice the spring or the markings.

And we were terriﬁed and could only note: “Ok, the spring is gone”.

Landowner: They had made a ditch too close to the spring.
Landowner's husband: They had to make a deep ditch to maintain a
stronger current. They dug below the ground water level. And so it hap-
pened. And now [my wife] can tell what a grief followed. And then she
started searching for possibilities to restore it.”

In this quote, the importance of the spring as a water source for pre-
vious generations had led the current owner to make an effort to protect
the spring. The value of the spring, also demonstrated by the grief expe-
rienced when it was destroyed, rose from the feeling of dependency and
experience of water scarcity, even though not one's own. The resilience
it used to provide to the community made it valuable. The story also
highlights the solidarity between the community members: you could
use someone else's spring if needed. Protecting a spring appears as a
means of maintaining the memory of past ways of life and generations,
and of remaining attached to them and to a speciﬁc culture of preserv-
ing and sharing important natural resources.

The goodness of natural elements can thus be evaluated on a time
line (Heuts and Mol, 2013). In the above example this took place
through inheriting appreciations rather than because of direct beneﬁts
enjoyed by the owners. Barry and Smith (2008) suggest that the expe-
rience of the living connection with the past is a crucial motivation for
conservation. They argue that understanding co-evolutionary processes
between human intentional activities and natural processes may offer
compelling motivation to preserve the environment. Hence, the protec-
tion of landscapes bearing marks of previous human transformation
may be easier to justify than ‘wilderness’ which is lacking such obvious
connection with the past. Milton (2002), however, reminds that some-
times natural things are valued just because they have been created by
natural processes and not humans.

Nevertheless, it is often the knowledge about collective apprecia-
tions that make things matter to people. The history of nature conserva-
tion clearly added to the value of the vultures. The bearded vulture
belongs to those few species that disappeared from the Alps and are
slowly recovering by dint of intensive efforts. It demonstrates the possi-
bility to counteract apparently irreversible trends and acts as a positive
symbol for conservationist movements. The slow increase in the num-
ber of birds is held as a success story in the otherwise somber history

of nature protection. The rangers also regard it as an indicator of the
quality and importance of their work. Caring for the vultures and seek-
ing to favor their expansion over the Alps is a way of continuing the task
started by previous nature conservationists and inscribing oneself in the
tradition of nature conservation. While the historical continuum of con-
servation efforts increased the value of vultures, inheriting clearly plays
a role in how this species is nowadays appreciated.

The case of public gardens also shows the importance of history and
experience of the past, but by contrast. The promoters of new manage-
ment principles have to counteract previous management values and
practices, for instance, by giving written and oral explanations to
visitors:

“We often have problems with families who have lost a loved one and
ﬁnd it difﬁcult to cope with our new management practices. [Graveyards]
used to be clean, well-tended, well organized, but there was no life. We
try to persuade people not to ﬁnd themselves in inert, dead places. Church-
yards are dead enough to avoid having even more death. We also have ex-
planatory boards, small leaﬂets, so we communicate on that” (a gardener).
Indeed, the inhabitants of Grenoble were used to well-tended lawns
and the new aspect of parks and especially churchyards after the aban-
donment of pesticides was criticized. The presence of high weeds in
churchyards was seen as a sign of neglect and disrespect towards the
dead. Inherited appreciations may thus inﬂuence present preferences
and choices negatively: breaking conventions made it harder for resi-
dents and gardeners to appreciate the green spaces. Eventually this ex-
ample also points out how such tensions can be dealt with by raising the
possibility to evoke, discuss and enact new ideas and values, such as the
“liveliness” of graveyards.

4.3. Community Building

For a dozen years, an insect specialist has come twice a year in Gre-
noble to teach the volunteering gardeners to detect and identify insects.
External to the department in charge of managing the parks, she cannot
be suspected of hiding economic motivations behind ecological ones.
Her teaching skills and kindness are much appreciated by the gardeners.
More recently, teaching sessions about butterﬂies have also been set up.
All sessions essentially take place outdoors and are punctuated by jokes
and small games (“Those who see legs on my left, those who see no legs
on my right, and the winner is...”). Some gardeners just look for insects
that they bring to the rest of the group while others seek to identify
them. Learning to spot, handle, name and value the insects is clearly a
collective undertaking. Emulation, game and humor play an important
role in reassuring the gardeners who were at ﬁrst scared of being lost
in the huge, confusing or even creepy world of insects. Valuing is no
spontaneous, “natural” activity: it is learned through social activities,
and it takes time. Values are also maintained through long-term social
relationships.

As Pols (2005) emphasizes, people's perspectives are not character-
istics of individuals but co-produced in social interactions and through
the materialities of the situations in which those interactions take
place. In this sense, becoming interested in or willing to attribute
value to insects is a collaborative undertaking. The insect specialist can
be seen as a facilitator of situations in which certain perspectives, feel-
ings, and desires are enabled.

Social interactions were also essential in the Vanoise National Park,
where the breeding pairs of vultures sometimes make their nests in
places that are accessible to skiers, speed riders and kite surfers. Scared
by sudden or noisy intrusions, the birds may leave their nests,
jeopardizing the nesting as the egg's temperature drops very quickly.
Therefore, the rangers dedicate a lot of time to informing tourism pro-
fessionals about the nests, seeking to convince them to avoid these
places. For example, they put signs indicating the presence of the birds
and ask the skiers to respect the birds by modifying their trajectories
(Fig. 2).

In the winter of 2013, the rangers spotted ski tracks very close to a
nest they had been watching since the beginning of the breeding season.
We accompanied them as they observed the nest through their tele-
scope to check whether the birds were still sitting on the egg. The
rangers were clearly very tense. Not a word was uttered until they
could see one bird at the nest and be sure that the egg was safe. The ex-
ample points out the importance of sharing experiences in ﬁnding out

Fig. 2. A sign inviting skiers to respect the nesting vultures in the French Alps.

about people's appreciations beyond carrying out interviews. In this
case, silence was more telling than words to express the value of the
vultures to the rangers. Affects that are not articulated but shown
through gestures or behaviors may help to capture respect for nature
(for an example in another context see Pols, 2008).

The rangers soon found out that the uncaring skier was somebody
they had met and informed about the nesting site. This deeply upset
the ranger who had shared the information as it meant that she had
failed to convince the skier of the value of the birds - and of her work.
Ultimately, she interpreted the incident as a sign of the park's failure
to build a community of people concerned with the birds. The next win-
ter, the rangers from another part of the park convinced the skiers to
avoid a nest that was very close to a speed-riding spot. They were obvi-
ously happy that a new vulture was born but also that their interaction
with tourism professionals and skiers had led to this success.

These anecdotes suggest that human relations to the vultures cannot
be disentangled from relations between humans. Community building
has been addressed in general as an important aspect of environmental
stewardship and willingness to take care of nature (Barry and Smith,
2008; Singh, 2013). It underlines that what people come to think as
valuable in nature can result from respect towards other people's appre-
ciations. If the ski instructors respect the rangers' commitment and ap-
preciations, they are more likely to avoid disturbing the animals, even if
they do not value the birds as such. Indirect relations with natural ele-
ments may thus play a crucial role in how nature is taken into account
in everyday life. Skiing deliberately close to a vulture's nest reﬂects
low respect and appreciation not only towards the animals but also to-
wards those who care for them.

The spring case also proves the power of community building. In-
spired by our research, one of the interviewees had contacted a friend
and persuaded him to go searching for a forgotten spring. The informant
was planning to restore the spring, get it included in the ofﬁcial data-
bases and notify the landowner to prevent the spring from being
destroyed during future forestry operations. Our research on and dedi-
cation to springs strengthened the value of springs in his eyes - to the
extent that he was ready to take voluntary actions and persuade others
to pay attention to springs.

Another example of the collective nature of valuing concerns the ef-
forts to keep natural springs pleasant for other people to visit. Several
informants in our study explained that they often clear the dirt and fall-
en leaves away. In her study on community forestry, Singh (2013)
pointed out that the mundane practices of care, such as gathering and
patrolling in the forest, potentially strengthen affective ties between
people and the forest. The everyday routines of care also intensiﬁed
the interaction between the members of the local community and trans-
formed their ways of living the forest. Barry and Smith (2008) take the
idea even further and emphasize that fostering social ties is essential to
environmental stewardship and that community building takes place
through acts of keeping the environment livable for the community.
Hence, ordinary tasks can be seen as a form of collective labor:
“Collecting garbage, removing snow, tending gardens and other green
spaces, monitoring air quality, and maintaining energy-efﬁcient hous-
ing” are means of both nurturing the social relations and caring for the
environment, and can be “embraced as the ordinary activities of citizen-
ship” (pp. 580).

5. Tensions and Overlaps Between Modes of Valuing

The three ways of engaging with natural elements we identiﬁed -
domestication, inheriting and community building - are probably com-
monplace and likely to be found in other empirical cases. Other forms of
engaging can probably be found when the scope of everyday practices
relating to nature is extended for research. The ones that proved to be
signiﬁcant in our case studies inﬂuenced valuing processes to various
extents, and sometimes negatively. They also involved various modes
of valuing. In addition to verbal value judgments, which are generally
at the heart of valuation methods, appreciations were expressed in the
form of dedication to particular activities or natural elements. Further-
more, people admired the natural elements and sought to improve
them. These modes of valuing - evaluation, respect, and valorization -
were, however, unequally present and interfered with each other in
complex ways.

In the churchyards of Grenoble the adoption of new management
practices by the gardeners has caused the most vivid tensions. The aes-
thetic value of the weeds thriving in the churchyards after abandoning
pesticides was mainly negative for both the visitors and the gardeners.
Yet, the latter explain that an important “visual effort” has enabled
them to “tolerate” the presence of weeds. But even if they ﬁnd it difﬁcult
to value the beauty of the weeds, some gardeners argue that respecting
and caring for the dead can be reconciled with respect and care for the
weeds and insects that are crucial to biodiversity. They see the arrival
of weeds and insects as a way of improving the value of churchyards
by introducing life into an otherwise “dead” place.

Tensions between modes of valuing also appear in the spring resto-
ration case. In the following written memory, valorizing appears as the
dominant mode of valuing:

“Close to my childhood home there is a spring in the middle of the forest.
That spring offered comfort and calmness to me. For decades, since my
childhood, I've tended the spring with love. I've cleared the mosses and
dirt away. I've cleared the creek and made it ripple and gurgle and bubble
again. The forest around the spring has been clear cut, but the spring
keeps on bubbling.” [woman - age unknown].

The woman's nurturing of the place has made it precious to her and
the value has remained despite the changes in the surrounding environ-
ment that seemingly decreased the aesthetic or recreational value of the
spring and the possibility to enjoy and admire it (Fig. 3). Similarly to the
story about vultures and to explaining churchyard management prac-
tices to visitors, this implies that natural elements are valued not just
because of their qualities or beneﬁts but for the history and process of
their creation, maintenance and protection (see also Milton, 2002), as
well as the time and effort invested.

However, the tending of springs in the form of removing the debris
may be in contradiction with the goals of restoration, for example,
maintaining microbial processes in the water. Several informants men-
tioned how their idea of a good spring had been contrasted with the ob-
jectives of the restoration project, which in fact is another form of
adding value to the springs. One of the interviewees even admitted

that he had improved the ﬂow in the trickle draining the spring after
the restoration project had stanched the ﬂow. Another landowner,
however, told us she had learned to respect her spring in a new way
after the restoration project: because the spring had stopped having
any use value for her as a water source, it could as well be left alone
and admired as such.

The different modes of valuing also introduce different temporali-
ties. While evaluation and judging are focused on present values, valori-
zation is future-oriented (Heuts and Mol, 2013). Respect, in particular,
can bring in the historical timeline and esteem of something that was
important in the past. The temporal dimension of valuing can be sys-
tematically included in research on nature values at least by three strat-
egies. First, asking about habits and routines can reveal how people take
care for natural elements, aiming to improve their future value. Second,
long term studies show the evolution of appreciations. In the case of the
bearded vulture, for example, interviews carried out over a long time
span enabled us to learn how the species was gradually domesticated
by the rangers. Third, asking informants to tell narratives about past en-
counters and relationships with natural elements enables to study how
these relationships evolved over time. We employed this strategy in
both the spring and insect cases.

<Conclusion> Conclusions.
Environmental valuation methods designed to inform conservation
policies are mainly focused on what people do or do not value. However,
we argue that understanding how people come to value what they
value is just as important. Making sense of valuing processes enables
to better acknowledge the various motivations and sources for prefer-
ences, and hence, to understand why people are willing to protect
some aspects of nature - or why they are not. Such an understanding
helps to interpret the outcomes of valuation studies and evaluate their
relevance to conservation.

Understanding real-life motivations and behaviors is fundamental to
the effectiveness of the concept of ecosystem services, promoted as an
approach to induce sustainable behavior (Parks and Gowdy, 2013;
Vatn, 2010; Hiedanpää and Bromley, 2014; Muraldian and Rival,
2012). The pragmatist approach is in line with the critique emphasizing
the need to understand better the factors allowing people to value par-
ticular elements or functions in nature. It suggests that such factors can
be explored by analyzing everyday activities and the modes of valuing

Fig. 3. According to the Finnish forestry regulations, natural springs are deﬁned as “valuable natural objects” which should be left untouched during forestry operations to protect the
biological value of these habitats. A natural spring with a buffer zone of standing trees can be left in the middle of a clear cut area as in this picture. Photo: Taru Peltola.

T. Peltola, I. Arpin / Ecological Economics 142 (2017) 12–20

19

inherent in these activities. Importantly, pragmatism helps to under-
stand how preferences and motivations emerge and change in relation
to everyday activities - and how their transformation can be encour-
aged. Fair and efﬁcient policies build on people's motivations and rea-
sons for valuing their environments rather than downplay them.

Taking valuing processes, not just their outcomes, into account has
several other beneﬁts and implications. First, the pragmatist approach
reminds that people do not value nature in general but those natural el-
ements - species, individual animals, habitats, landscape or places - that
they encounter, domesticate and learn to relate with in their everyday
life. Values are embedded in speciﬁc relationships between people
and their environment. These relationships are not only direct but also
indirect as our empirical examples about collective and inherited appre-
ciations pointed out. Nevertheless, the relations need to be explored to
understand the provisional outcomes of the valuing processes.

Second, abandoning the idea that values are held by individuals or
social groups independently from concrete situations enables a more
dynamic perspective on values. Instead of mapping static values, prag-
matism encourages the exploration of how the activities affecting
value formation overlap and inﬂuence each other, and what kind of syn-
ergies, tensions and contradictions emerge as a consequence. A clear ex-
ample of this is the signiﬁcance of inheriting. Natural elements can be
valued because of their common history with humans. However, tradi-
tions and traditional ways of relating to nature can also become the
source of devaluing some aspects of nature. In the latter case, breaking
the tradition may help to bring change, whereas in the former case,
cherishing tradition may be the key for success in preserving nature
values.

The pragmatist approach demonstrates the possibility to enhance
people's motivations to protect species and habitats by inventing and
experimenting new ways of engaging with natural elements, as illus-
trated by the pesticide-free management of Grenoble's churchyards. In-
stead of making decisions based on current appreciations, the
pragmatist perspective can help to identify ways to alter the relation-
ship with natural elements, and hence the appreciations and prefer-
ences of people.

Third, the pragmatist perspective enables to discuss the politics and
performativity of valuation methods (see also Asdal and Marres, 2014),
and their limits and potential to inform environmental governance. Val-
uation studies have been argued to neglect the fact that values do not
exist independently from valuation techniques but rather get formed,
at least in part, during valuation process (Parks and Gowdy, 2013;
Moor and Lury, 2011; Muniesa, 2012). The pragmatist perspective,
while encouraging the use of methodologies that are sensitive to real-
life valuing processes, can help to understand how the methods used
may affect the outcomes. Our own study demonstrated the importance
of social dimensions of valuing, including the dedication of the authors
to speciﬁc topics.

Finally, the pragmatist perspective enables a two-directional analysis
of the interactions between humanity and nature, avoiding the simplistic
idea of humans as mere users of the beneﬁts that ecosystems provide (see
Bieling, 2014). What is considered valuable and worth preserving in na-
ture may be the result of human labor and human-induced transforma-
tions (Bowker, 2005; Barry and Smith, 2008). Acknowledging humans
as active agents in the complex ecosystem dynamics, the pragmatist ap-
proach to valuing helps to question the dualism between nature and cul-
ture that has been widely criticized (Latour, 1993 [1991]; Descola, 2013
[2005]; Ingold, 1994). It enables to respond to one of the challenges of na-
ture conservation: how to take into account not only the natural elements
but also the practical relations with them that matter to people.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to all our informants who shared insights about their
relations to natural springs, vultures and insects. The work was support-
ed by the Academy of Finland (grants 133451, 1331183). Material

collection for the spring case was done by Tuuli Paajanen at the Finnish
Environment Institute. Veli Lyytikäinen offered valuable insights about
natural spring habitats and Kaisa Lindell from the Finnish Forest Centre
not only gave the inspiration for this case study but helped us to collect
data.

References

Arpin, I., Mounet, C., Geoffroy, D., 2015. Inventaires naturalistes et rééducation de

l’attention. Le cas des jardiniers de Grenoble. Etudes rurales 195, 89–107.

Asdal, K., Marres, N., 2014. Performing environmental change: the politics of social sci-

ence methods. Environ Plan A 46, 2055–2064.

Barry, J., Smith, K., 2008. Landscape, politics, labour and identity: stewardship and the

contribution of green political theory. Landsc. Res. 33 (5), 565–585.

Bieling, C., 2014. Cultural ecosystem services as revealed through short stories from resi-

dents of the Swabian Albs. Ecosyst. Serv. 8, 207–215.

Bowker, G.C., 2005. Time, money and biodiversity. In: Kelly, J.D., Jauregui, B., Mitchell, S.T.,
Walton, J. (Eds.), Global Assemblages: Technology, Politics, and Ethics as Anthropo-
logical Problems. Blackwell, Malden, MA, pp. 107–123.

Brander, L.M., Beukering van, P., Cesar, H.S.J., 2007. The recreational value of coral reefs: a

meta-analysis. Ecol. Econ. 63, 209–218.

Descola, P., 2013. [2005]. Beyond Nature and Culture. The University of Chicago Press.
Dewey, J., 1915. The logic of judgments of practise (part I). J. Philos. Psychol. Sci. Methods

12 (19), 505–523.

van Dooren, T., 2011. Vultures and their people in India: equity and entanglement in a

time of extinctions. Aust. Humanit. Rev.

Ernstson, H., Sörlin, S., 2013. Ecosystem services as technology of globalization: on artic-

ulating values in urban nature. Ecol. Econ. 86, 274–284.

Ernwein, M., 2015. Jardiner la ville néolibérale. La fabrique urbaine de la nature. Thèse en

Sciences économiques et sociales, mention géographie, Genève.

Gomez-Baggethun, E., deGroot, R., Lomas, P.L., Montes, C., 2010. The history of ecosystem
services in economic theory and practice: from early notions to markets and payment
schemes. Ecol. Econ. 69, 1209–1218.

Heuts, F., Mol, A., 2013. What is a good tomato? A case of valuing in practice. Valuation

Stud. 1 (2), 125–146.

Hiedanpää, J., Bromley, D.W., 2014. Payments for ecosystem services: durable habits, du-

bious nudges, and doubtful efﬁcacy. J. Inst. Econ. 10 (2), 175–195.

Ingold, T., 1994. From trust to domination: an alternative history of human-animal rela-
tions. In: Manning, A., Serpell, J. (Eds.), Animals and Human Society. Changing Per-
spectives. 1–22. Routledge, London.

Kelemen, E., García-Llorente, M., Pataki, G., Martín-López, B., Gómez-Baggethun, E., 2014.
Non-monetary techniques for the valuation of ecosystem service. In: Potschin, M., Jax,
K. (Eds.), OpenNESS Reference Book. EC FP7 Grant Agreement no. 308428 Available
via. www.openness-project.eu/library/reference-book.

Kosoy, N., Corbera, E., 2010. Payments for ecosystem services as commodity fetishism.

Ecol. Econ. 69, 1228–1236.

Lachmund, J., 2013. Greening Berlin. The Co-production of Science, Politics, and Urban Na-

ture. The MIT Press, Cambrige (MA), London.

Latour, B., 1993. [1991] We Have Never Been Modern. Harvard University Press.
Laurans, Y., Mermet, L., 2014. Ecosystem services economic valuation, decision-support

system or advocacy? Ecosyst. Serv. 7, 98–105.

Laurans, Y., Rankovic, A., Billé, R., Pirard, R., Mermet, L., 2013. Use of ecosystem services
economic valuation for decision making: questioning a literature blindspot.
J. Environ. Manag. 119, 208–219.

Lorimer, J., 2008. Counting corncrakes: the affective science of the UK corncrake census.

Soc. Stud. Sci. 38 (3), 377–405.

Lorimer, J., 2015. Wildlife in the Anthropocene. Conservation after Nature. University of

Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.

Maris, V., 2014. Nature à vendre. Les limites des services écosystémiques. Versailles: Quae.

Sciences en Questions.

Mauz, I., 2002. Gens, cornes et crocs. Relations hommes-animaux et conceptions du
monde, en Vanoise, au moment de l'arrivée des loups. Thèse pour obtenir le grade
de docteur en sciences de l'environnement. ENGREF.

Mauz, I., 2013. Nature Conservation in Ski Country? The Vanoise national park. http://
www.environmentandsociety.org/arcadia/nature-conservation-ski-country-vanoise-
national-park

Maynard, S., James, D., Davidson, A., 2015. Determining the value of multiple ecosystem
services in terms of community wellbeing: who should be the valuing agent? Ecol.
Econ. 115, 22–28.

Milton, K., 2002. Loving Nature. Towards an Ecology of Emotion. Routledge, London.
Mol, A., Moser, I., Pols, J., 2010. Care: putting practice into theory. In: Mol, A., Moser, I.,
Pols, J. (Eds.), Care in Practice: On Tinkering in Clinics, Homes and Farms. 7–25. tran-
script Verlag, Bielefeld.

Moor, L., Lury, C., 2011. Making and measuring value. J. Cult. Econ. 4 (4), 439–454.
Muniesa, F., 2012. A ﬂank movement in the understanding of valuation. Sociol. Rev. 59

(2), 24–38.

Muraldian, R., Rival, L., 2012. Between markets and hierarchies: the challenge of

governing ecosystem services. Ecosyst. Serv. 1, 93–100.

Parks, S., Gowdy, J., 2013. What have economists learned about valuing nature? A review

essay. Ecosyst. Serv. 3, e1–e10.

Peltola, T., 2016. Metsälähteillä. Ympäristön muutoksesta, luonnon vaalimisesta ja
inhimillisestä hyvinvoinnista [Living with Natural Springs: On Environmental
Change, Stewardship and Human Wellbeing, in Finnish with English abstract.
Vuosilusto 11, 107–120.

20

T. Peltola, I. Arpin / Ecological Economics 142 (2017) 12–20

Peltola, T., Tuomisaari, J., 2015. Making a difference: Forest biodiversity, affective capaci-

ties and the micro-politics of expert ﬁeldwork. Geoforum 64, 1–11.

Polishchuk, Y., Rauschmayer, F., 2012. Beyond “beneﬁts”? Looking at the ecosystem ser-

vices through the capability approach. Ecol. Econ. 81, 103–111.

Pols, J., 2005. Enacting appreciations: beyond the patient perspective. Health Care Anal. 13

(3), 203–221.

Pols, J., 2008. Which empirical research, whose ethics? Articulating ideals in long term
mental health care. In: Widdershoven, G., McMillan, J., Hope, T., Lieke, V.D.S. (Eds.),
Empirical Ethics in Psychiatry. 51–68. Oxford University Press, Oxford, New York.

Singh, N.M., 2013. The affective labor of growing forests and the becoming of environ-
mental subjects: rethinking environmentality in Odisha, India. Geoforum 47,
189–198.

Tengberg, A., Fredholm, S., Eliasson, I., Knez, I., Salzman, K., Wetterberg, O., 2012. Cultural
ecosystem services provided by landscapes: assessments of heritage values and iden-
tity. Ecosyst. Serv. 2, 14–26.

Vatn, A., 2010. An institutional analysis of payments for environmental services. Ecol.

Econ. 69, 1245–1252.


