1. Introduction

Reducing global poverty and mitigating climate change are two
major challenges facing mankind in the twenty-ﬁrst century. Economic
growth leads to absolute poverty reduction, particularly if it is not asso-
ciated with rising income inequality (e.g. Dollar and Kraay, 2002;
Bourguignon, 2003). There is a substantial literature that investigates
the relationship between income and carbon dioxide emissions (the
main driver behind the increase in global surface temperature). This lit-
erature suggests that economic growth, at least up to a certain level of
economic development, increases greenhouse gases (IPCC, 2014;
Jakob et al., 2014). Consequently, from the perspective of a developing
country, economic growth may alleviate poverty, but intensify climate
problems. A related issue is whether there is also a tradeoff between in-
come inequality and carbon emissions, as stated by Ravallion et al.
(2000). As we discuss below, the theoretical and empirical literature
generates mixed results on this question, pointing to different mecha-
nisms and effects (for a survey see Berthe and Elie, 2015). Much of
this literature is, however, based on econometric methods that are bi-
ased in the presence of time-varying unobserved heterogeneity, and
on older data on both inequality as well as emissions. We improve
upon the existing literature in both of these respects.

A particular innovation with respect to the existing literature is that
we use a group ﬁxed effects estimator (Bonhomme and Manresa, 2015)
as opposed to a standard ﬁxed effects estimator. This grouped ﬁxed ef-
fects estimator takes into account that different regions of the world
adopt clean technologies at different rates or face different structural
challenges and dynamics. Furthermore, the estimator arguably deals
better with endogeneity due to unobserved heterogeneity. Finally, the
within transformation associated with the standard country-based
ﬁxed effects estimator would eliminate most of the variation in the
Gini data, leaving only the relatively small intertemporal variation
(see the literature on the debates on inequality and growth literature,
e.g. Forbes, 2000, Banerjee and Duﬂo, 2003, Scholl and Klasen, 2016).

To the best of our knowledge, only ﬁve papers are closely related to
our empirical investigation of the link between per capita carbon diox-
ide emissions, per capita output, and inequality. There are also related
studies investigating the link between inter-country inequality and
emissions (e.g. Guo, 2013; Coondoo and Dinda, 2008). First, Ravallion
et al. (2000) use a pooled OLS model that interacts inequality with a
third-order polynomial of income, a time trend, and population size.
The panel data set consists of 42 countries over the period from 1975
to 1992. The authors use one (average) inequality measure per country.
They ﬁnd that there is a static tradeoff between reducing carbon emis-
sions and reducing income inequality. Second, Borghesi (2006) applies
OLS and ﬁxed effects panel data estimators to a panel data set of 37
countries for the period 1988 to 1995. He prefers the ﬁxed effects esti-
mator and ﬁnds that inequality does not have an effect on emissions.
For the pooled OLS estimator, he ﬁnds a statistically signiﬁcant negative
effect between income inequality and carbon dioxide emissions. Third,
Heerink et al. (2001) use a cross-section design with 65 country obser-
vations from about 1985. The speciﬁcation includes income, its square,
and the Gini coefﬁcient. Similar to Ravallion et al. (2000), they ﬁnd
that income inequality is negatively associated with carbon emissions
per capita. All three studies rely on the inequality measure from the
data set described in Deininger and Squire (1996). Two further studies
use the University of Texas Inequality data which proxies household in-
equality with the between sector wage inequality in non-agricultural
sectors. Drabo (2011) ﬁnds, in a 2SLS ﬁxed effects framework using 86
countries ﬁnds that inequality increases emissions. Gassebner et al.
(2008) use extreme bound analysis for a sample of up to 120 countries
in 1960–2001 and ﬁnd that inequality is robustly associated with small-
er CO2 emissions. The use of the UTIP data, which relates to a particular
aspect of industrial wage inequality, as a proxy for overall inequality is,
however, controversial and can lead to biases (Scholl, 2016).

Our analysis uses expanded and improved data from Solt (2009),
which is derived from the much broader, more consistent, and more re-
liable WIDER2 World Income Inequality Database. This allows us to use
a larger set of countries (158) than the existing literature, and observa-
tions from 1980 to 2008, which is larger and more recent than most
existing studies. Furthermore, we argue that cross-section estimates
based on pooled OLS or related methods are arguably not the most ap-
propriate tools for this analysis, and argue that the group ﬁxed effects
estimator (Bonhomme and Manresa, 2015) is more suitable for the
analysis. We also compare our analysis to a standard ﬁxed effects
estimator.3

We ﬁnd that the relationship between income inequality and emis-
sions depends on income levels. At lower levels of incomes higher in-
come inequality reduces emissions while at higher levels of income,
the effect is reversed. The group ﬁxed effects also generate interesting
differentiated time trends linked closely to trends in energy intensity
in the different groups.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews the-
oretical arguments in the existing literature, emphasizing that the rela-
tionship between income inequality and emissions is ambiguous.
Section 3 describes the panel data set. Section 4 outlines the ﬁxed effects
model for our setting, and reveals its shortcoming in the current con-
text. We then argue that a group ﬁxed effects estimator is more appro-
priate, and describe that model. The main results and a sensitivity
analysis are presented in Section 5. Section 6 concludes.

2. Theory.
Starting in the mid-1990′s, economists have developed several the-
oretical arguments to explain the relationship between economic in-
equality and environmental degradation. For a full review, please see
Cushing et al. (2015) and Berthe and Elie (2015). Here we only provide
a condensed summary of this very large literature. While some of the ar-
guments entail a positive association, namely the “equality hypothesis”
proposed by Boyce (1994), Torras and Boyce (1998) and Borghesi
(2006), others argue that greater inequality could also be negatively as-
sociated to emissions (Heerink et al., 2001; Ravallion et al., 2000;
Scruggs, 1998). If the second argument prevails, there will be a tradeoff
between redistribution policies and environmental quality.

Boyce (1994) proposes that greater inequality could increase envi-
ronmental degradation via the impact on the rate of time preference
and via a modiﬁed cost-beneﬁt analysis that considers power-weighted
costs and beneﬁts. Boyce (1994) and Torras and Boyce (1998) assume
that environmental quality is a public good and effective demand re-
quires public policy solutions to this market failure. The factors which
allow economies to redress market failure more efﬁciently are “vigi-
lance and advocacy”, as pointed out by Grossman and Krueger (1995)
in earlier work. These two factors increase with per capita income be-
cause individuals gain greater power to make their demand effective
through the political process. In particular, some individuals beneﬁt
from economic activities that generate pollution, whereas other citi-
zens, adversely affected by pollution, bear net cost. The latter exercise
vigilance and are in charge to demand for environmental controls,
whereas the former attempt to prevent that those environmental con-
trols are established or strengthened. Assuming that in more unequal
societies those who beneﬁt from pollution are more powerful than
those who bear the cost, the beneﬁt-cost rule will lead to predict an in-
efﬁcient high level of pollution. This implies a positive correlation be-
tween income inequality and pollution. A controversial assumption
they made to reach this outcome is that net beneﬁt from polluting activ-
ities is positively correlated with individual income. However, Scruggs
(1998) claims that wealthy and powerful individuals do not necessarily
prefer more degradation than the rest and he also questions Boyce's un-
derlying assumption that more democratic societies produce better en-
vironmental results than other political regimes. Also, it is unclear
whether this argument, which has been formulated for environmental
degradation more generally, also holds for carbon emissions. In the
case of carbon emissions, costs are not only felt locally but globally
and emission control is a global public good, where it is unclear that na-
tional income inequality will necessarily play a critical role in this
mechanism.

In the same line of reasoning as Boyce (1994), Borghesi (2006)
suggests that an increase in inequality hinders the way for public
policy solutions to environmental problems and therefore greater in-
equality can contribute to increasing emissions. Also Marsiliani and
Renstrom (2003) argue that higher inequality leads to less environ-
mental protection and consequently higher emissions in an overlap-
ping generations model with a majority elected representative. The
author points to the anecdotal evidence that Scandinavian countries
are the most protective of their environment among the developed
countries, being as well the most egalitarian. A different argument
is put forward by McAusland (2003) and Gassebner et al. (2008).
Both suggest that inequality may inﬂuence emissions through the
channel of factor ownership and voting. According to McAusland
(2003), the relationship between income inequality and demand
for pollution policy depends on the level of ownership concentration
and openness to trade in countries. Hence, empirical tests of the re-
lationship between income inequality and environmental quality
are expected to yield ambiguous results. The author suggests con-
trolling for the source of income inequality in each country as well
as for the endogenous price effects of its pollution policy.

Gassebner et al. (2008) argue that, at least in richer countries, rising
income inequality is associated with accelerated industrial decline
(through increasing outsourcing of industrial production as well as
skill-biased technical change), which in turn reduces the political
power of industrial producers and workers, thereby reducing their abil-
ity to bloc measures to reduce pollution or emissions. Extending this
line of argument, one could imagine that in poorer countries, the polit-
ical clout of the rising industrial sector is rising as well, leading to less
environmental regulation, particularly when richer population groups
are associated with the rising industrial sector. Thus this line of argu-
ment could predict a different correlation between income inequality
and emissions in poor and rich countries.
While these studies generally suggest that increasing income in-
equality will increase emissions, a second group of studies predicts ex-
actly the opposite. Ravallion et al. (2000) point out that in a simple
model where the marginal propensity to emit (MPE) varies with in-
come, inequality measures enter the income-emission relationship, a
point also made by Heerink et al. (2001). In fact, they point out that
there will be a biased estimate in the income-emission relationship if in-
come inequality is not included in the estimation. There is considerable
evidence from micro studies in several countries that the MPE does in-
deed vary with the level of income, with most studies ﬁnding that the
MPE falls with income (see Holtz-Eakin and Selden, 1995; Heil and
Selden, 1999; Grunewald et al., 2012; Jakob et al., 2014; Serino and
Klasen, 2015). This suggests that higher inequality reduces emissions.
This would be ampliﬁed if, in poorer countries, higher inequality implies
that a large share of the population lives outside the carbon economy,
i.e. they lack access to electricity and other forms of modern energy.
For that subpopulation, the MPE might be close to zero, thus increasing
their share in the population would lower aggregate emissions.4

Finally, the emulation theory, originally due to Veblen (1899), hy-
pothesizes that in more unequal societies individuals in a given social
class tend to compare themselves with the members of the immediately
superior social class and emulate their consumption patterns. In this
way, more unequal societies might have a higher propensity to con-
sume more polluting intensive goods and services (such as big cars,
long-distance vacations, etc.) that are associated to a higher MPE and
therefore to higher emissions in comparison to egalitarian societies.
The marginal propensity to emit will be higher at all income levels.

In summary, the theoretical literature is ambiguous about the sign of
the relationship between inequality and emissions that is conditioned
to a number of underlying assumptions, see also Cushing et al. (2015)
and Berthe and Elie (2015). In this respect, we aim to contribute with
a novel empirical approach to shed light on some of the above men-
tioned theories. The contrasting theoretical arguments also suggest
that the relationship is probably heterogeneous across countries, lead-
ing to different levels of emissions across countries, as well as to differ-
ences in income and inequality elasticities. In fact, some theories
suggest that high inequality is associated with more emissions in richer
countries, while the relationship might be reversed in poorer countries.
For example, Gassebner et al. (2008) relate rising inequality in rich
countries to industrial decline and reduction of political power of the in-
dustrial producers. This implies limited inﬂuence to stop stringent envi-
ronmental regulations demanded by consumers in rich countries. Our
speciﬁcation below will enable us to examine a non-monotonic rela-
tionship, such as the one implied by their mechanism.

<Middle> Data.
We use an unbalanced panel data set with annual measurements
from 1980 to 2008, covering 158 countries. The total number of obser-
vations is 3966. This data set is much more extensive than those used
in the existing literature on the relationship between income inequality,
GDP, and carbon emissions. The corner stone of our data set are the Gini
coefﬁcients from the Standardized World Income Inequality Database
(SWIID) by Solt (2009). For the SWIID, a missing data algorithm was
used to ﬁll in the Gini measurements and to make the data from differ-
ent sources comparable. Solt (2009) differentiates between before and
after tax income inequality. Many high income countries apply strong
redistributive policies, which lead to overall lower after-tax income in-
equality than before tax income inequality. We use after-tax income in-
equality measure because we are interested in the effect of
redistributive policies, and want to account for those already in place.
The data on carbon dioxide emissions are from the Oak Ridge Na-
tional Laboratory data set, which covers emissions from fossil fuel, nat-
ural gas consumption, and cement manufacturing (Boden et al., 2012).
This data set is widely used in the literature but faces two major short-
comings, see e.g. Borghesi (2006). First, it is estimated data which is
based on the consumption of fossil fuels multiplied with the average
carbon content of the respective fuel type. Second, it does not account
for emissions from agriculture, livestock, deforestation or land use
change. Therefore, it will underestimate the carbon dioxide emissions
for countries with a strong agricultural sector or where deforestation
is a serious issue. But as shown in the recent IPCC report (IPCC, 2014),
our data cover about 75% of total greenhouse gas emissions (when
expressed in CO2 equivalents) and this share is fairly stable over time.
GDP per capita and further control variables are taken from the
World Development Indicators, see World Bank (2012). The measure
of GDP that we use is based on purchasing power parity, and measured
in constant 2005 International Dollars. The WDI also supplies the shares
of value added of agriculture, manufacturing and the service sector in
percentages of total GDP, and the proportion of the population that
lives in cities (“Urban population”). Finally, we use the Polity measure,
see Marshall and Cole (2011), which is a measure of state fragility that
ranges from +10 (strongly democratic) to −10 (strongly autocratic).
An overview of the variables, with summary statistics, are given in
Table 1.

4. Econometric Model.
This section describes the ﬁxed effects model and the group ﬁxed ef-
fects model, which we use to investigate empirically the relationship
between emissions, GDP, and income inequality. We will argue that,
for our empirical application, the group ﬁxed effects estimator, pro-
posed by Bonhomme and Manresa (2015), is an attractive alternative
to the commonly used ﬁxed effects estimator. The results for both
models are described in Section 5.

For country i at time t, let eit be log CO2 emissions per capita, and let
yit denote log GDP per capita. Furthermore, let git denote the log of the
Gini coefﬁcient, which is our preferred measure of income inequality.
Additional explanatory variables are collected in a vector Xit. A useful
starting point for our analysis is the following ﬁxed effects model,
with the standard assumptions on the error term uit, and allowing for an
unrestricted relationship between the country- and time-speciﬁc effects
(αi, λt) and the covariates (“ﬁxed effects”). The quadratic speciﬁcation
in (yit, git) serves as an approximation to a general, nonlinear relation-
ship between emissions, GDP, and income inequality. The squared in-
come inequality term is omitted, as it is highly correlated with git, and
our results are not sensitive to its omission.

Note that the quadratic income term allows the relationship be-
tween emissions and income to be non-monotonic. For example, it al-
lows for the inverted U shape that is documented in the literature on
the environmental Kuznets curve. The interaction term between in-
come and inequality allows the relationship between income inequality
and emissions to depend on income. The inclusion of the interaction
term is therefore crucial, as our discussion in Section 2 led to the conclu-
sion (see the last paragraph in that section) that the elasticity of emis-
sions with respect to inequality depends on income. In our model, this
elasticity is given by.
This elasticity depends on the current level of GDP per capita.5 For
example, if β3 b 0 and β4 N 0, the elasticity is positive only if a country
is rich enough, i.e. yit N y⁎ = −β3⁄β4.

Models such as (1) are widely used in economics, and in the existing
empirical papers on the relationship between income inequality and
emissions. In particular, Ravallion et al. (2000) ignore heterogeneity,
but allow for a cubic income term. Their omission of country-speciﬁc
ﬁxed effects is rejected by our empirical results. Borghesi (2006) and
Drabo (2011) use a ﬁxed effects model, but leaves out the interaction
term between income and inequality.

The ﬁxed effects model (1) provides a ﬂexible way to control for un-
observed heterogeneity at the country level. A drawback is that the time
effect λt is restricted to be the same for all countries. Bonhomme and
Manresa (2015) provide a useful alternative with their group ﬁxed ef-
fects (GFE) model. Assume that we can categorize countries in a number
of groups, indexed by j = 1,⋯, J. The number of groups must be small
compared to the number of countries. Denote by j(i) the group that
country i belongs to. An estimator is proposed for the parameters in,
without requiring the researcher to specify j(i). Rather than deciding on
group membership before the analysis, it is estimated along with the
other parameters in this model. Group membership dummies and re-
gression coefﬁcients are jointly estimated by minimizing the sum of
squares of residuals. Restrictions on the error term uit are not meaning-
fully different from those in model (1).

The most important difference between the ﬁxed effects and GFE
models is the restriction on the evolution of unobserved heterogeneity.
The ﬁxed effects model allows for an effect αit = αi + λt for country i at
time t, which restricts all countries to have the same pattern over time.
In contrast, the GFE model allows for an effect αit = αj(i),t, restricting the
pattern to be the same for all countries within a group, but allowing dif-
ferent groups to have fully distinct patterns. Note that these two models
are not nested.

For our setting, the GFE model is an attractive alternative to the ﬁxed
effects model. To see this, we temporarily abstract from our nonlinear
world and from the inﬂuence of income inequality and consider a very
simple relationship between GDP per capita (Yit) and carbon emissions
per capita (Eit), see e.g. Ikefuji,
where σit and μit are the emissions-to-output ratio and abatement fac-
tors for country i at time t. The emissions-to-output ratio σit can be
seen as a technology parameter that measures the extent to which
clean technology is used in the economy, or the average carbon intensi-
ty of the technology used in production. In this simple model, we would
have.
Using a standard ﬁxed effects model with time dummies restricts,
which requires that the changes in emissions-to-output ratio and abate-
ment policies are the same for all countries. This does not seem plausi-
ble, and is not in line with assumptions of climate-economy models. For
example, when calibrating his Dynamic Integrated Climate-Economy
(DICE) model, Nordhaus (2010) writes: “Technological change is
projected for a frontier region (the United States), and other countries
are assumed to converge partway to the frontier.” This is not consistent
with the ﬁxed effects speciﬁcation. The GFE model, on the other hand,
assumes that the world can be divided into several regions who have
similar trends in these unobservables.

There are two further advantages of the GFE estimator. First, the
time-varying group ﬁxed effects are better suited to deal with
endogeneity in the presence of time-varying unobserved heterogeneity.
Second, since the intertemporal variation in the Gini is relatively small
compared to the cross-country variation,6 The ﬁxed effects estimator
would take out a large share of the between-country variation. We
refer to the debate on the inequality and growth, see e.g. Banerjee and
Duﬂo (2003) and Scholl and Klasen (2016).

5. Results.
This section presents the results of our empirical analysis. It de-
scribes and reports on two benchmark models, and then performs a
sensitivity analysis. Our main ﬁnding is that, below a certain level of
GDP per capita, there is a negative relationship between income in-
equality and per capita emissions. This suggests that, for low income
countries, lowering inequality will result in higher levels of carbon
emissions. For richer countries, reductions in income inequality will si-
multaneously cause emissions to decrease.

Table 2 reports the coefﬁcients for our benchmark models, which do
not include variables other than income and income inequality.

The ﬁrst column contains the results from ordinary least squares
(OLS). The second and the third present the results from the ﬁxed ef-
fects and grouped ﬁxed effects model, respectively. The group ﬁxed ef-
fects model uses ﬁve groups, based on informal investigation of the
change in the criterion function.

Several ﬁndings are worth reporting. First, in all models, we ﬁnd that
the relationship between income inequality and emissions depends on
the level of GDP per capita, i.e. the coefﬁcient of the interaction term is
positive in all speciﬁcations and statistically signiﬁcant in the OLS and
the group ﬁxed effects estimator. In particular, in all models, a country
has to be above a certain threshold income for the elasticity between
emissions and income inequality to become positive.7 For the ﬁxed ef-
fects and group ﬁxed effects model, threshold income y⁎ is in-sample
and around the income levels of upper middle income countries such
as Mexico, Brazil, Romania or South Africa ($8267 and $9605). Fig. 1 dis-
plays a range of estimated elasticities for an arbitrary set of countries in
2005 for the group ﬁxed effects model. This demonstrates our key ﬁnd-
ing: lowering inequality will be good for the environment and decrease
carbon dioxide levels in countries above a certain income threshold of
GDP per capita.

Second, the three models yield quite different results for the estimat-
ed elasticities. The OLS estimate for the threshold y⁎ is out-of-sample,
and the estimated elasticity for the US in 2005 is negative. For India in
2005, the emission-inequality relationship is strongly negative and,
with an elasticity of 1.42, highly elastic. This deviates from the ﬁnding
of the panel data estimators, who ﬁnd an in-sample turning point. The

relatively poor ﬁt of the OLS regression leads us to reject the absence
of heterogeneity. A Hausman test rejects the random effects speciﬁca-
tion at the 1% level. Third, in all models, we ﬁnd an inverted-U relation-
ship between carbon dioxide emissions and income, in accordance with
the literature on the environmental Kuznets curve (EKC).

Fourth, the groups and their time trends, as estimated by the group
ﬁxed effects estimator, can be meaningfully interpreted. The groups are
described in Table 3 and the estimated time trends are depicted in Fig. 2.
The time trends are normalized such that they have an average of zero.
Group membership can be characterized by differences in the ener-
gy intensity (EI) and its evolution over time. On the one hand, groups 2
and 3 contain countries with high levels of EI over the period (0.62 and
1.17 Kg/$1000 US $), whereas countries in groups 1 and 5 have a rela-
tively low average EI (0.32 and 0.23). Group 4 includes countries with
the lowest average EI (0.17). On the other hand, the levels of EI have
been drastically reduced in group 3, moderately reduced in groups 1,
2, and 5 and remain fairly stable in group 4. More speciﬁcally, group 4
contains countries mainly located in Latin America and Africa. Some of
these are resource-abundant countries, e.g. Brazil and Costa Rica, and
have been very active in the recent past in terms of environmental pol-
icies. Most EU countries are in groups 1 and 5, which are the biggest
groups. Group 3 contains only 8 countries, which are all located in Cen-
tral Europe and Asia and are characterized by very high levels of EI in the
1990s, which experienced drastic reductions in the 1990s and 2000s, re-
lated to the strong transformation of their economics.

5.1. Sensitivity Analysis.
We perform robustness checks in several directions. We report some
of the results in Table 4.
We considered many other robustness checks: different number of
groups; different Gini measures (from Gruen and Klasen, 2008); differ-
ent time periods, etc. The results from these models do not change our
main ﬁndings. The starting point for the sensitivity analysis is the
group ﬁxed effects estimator. First, we estimate the model with data av-
eraged to 3-year averages (Table 4, ﬁrst column). This increases the bal-
ance of the data, and checks that our results are not driven by short-run
ﬂuctuations. Note that our main ﬁndings are unchanged: (i) the sign of
the emission-inequality elasticity is negative at low values of income,
and positive for a sufﬁciently rich country; (ii) there is an inverted-U
shaped relationship between income and carbon emissions. However,
the threshold value of income is out of sample, so that both reported es-
timated elasticities are negative. This could be due to lack of precision
because of the reduced sample size, see for example the relatively
high standard error of the interaction term.

Second, we investigate whether the relationship holds even if we in-
clude some plausible transmission channels. In particular, we control for
the quality of institutions that could be a proxy for environmental regu-
lations by including the Polity measure (Table 4, column “Polity”). We
also control for other transmission channels by including as additional
variables the share of population living in cities, and the shares of agri-
culture, manufacturing, and services (Table 4, column “Channels”). The
relationship holds and remains signiﬁcant, even after the inclusion of
plausible transmission channels. This suggests that the income-
contingent effect of inequality on emissions persists beyond these plau-
sible transmission channels.

Third, we estimate a ﬁxed effects model using the data set described
in Gruen and Klasen (2008), which is based on the World Income In-
equality Database (WIID). The adjustments done by Gruen and Klasen
(2008) use a regression-based method to deal harmonize the income
and income unit concepts used in the different data points in WIID.
The results are reported in Appendix A, Table 5. We ﬁnd that the results
are not driven by the choice of WIID versus SWIID (the data set used for
our main results). At the same time, SWIID provides us with a substan-
tially larger number of observations. The small number of observations
in WIID is problematic when we try to estimate the group ﬁxed effects
model. Therefore, although there are some conceptual advantages of
WIID over SWIID (see Jenkins, 2015; Wittenberg, 2015), the advantages
of SWIID dominate those for our purposes.

<Conclusion> Conclusion.
Based on a substantially larger data set (in both regional and tempo-
ral coverage) than the existing literature, we investigate the theoretical-
ly ambiguous link between income inequality and emissions. We ﬁnd
that the relationship depends on the level of income. Using an arguably
superior group-ﬁxed effects estimator, we show that for low and mid-
dle-income economies, higher income inequality is associated with
lower carbon emissions while in upper middle-income and high-in-
come economies, higher income inequality increases per capita emis-
sions. The result is robust to the inclusion of plausible transmission
variables as well as different data sources or aggregations. Our paper
also illustrates the usefulness of the group ﬁxed effects estimator
which helps to address some of the short-comings in standard panel
econometric approaches to this question.

With regard to the theoretical literature discussed above, it may be
the case that the claims made by Ravallion et al. (2000) and Heerink
et al. (2001) are particularly pertinent in poor countries. In highly un-
equal poor societies a large share of the population lives essentially out-
side of the carbon economy and produces few emissions while the very
rich already have lower marginal propensities to emit than middle in-
come groups.9 This is consistent with micro-level estimations of carbon
footprints (e.g. Grunewald et al., 2012; Serino and Klasen, 2015). In con-
trast, in richer economies, the political economy mechanisms proposed
in the literature may be at work, where in more equal societies, it is eas-
ier to arrive at a social consensus on environmental policies and the rel-
ative power of groups that beneﬁt from emissions (e.g. owners of
capital) is weaker. More research is required to better understand the
drivers of this income contingent empirical relationship.

These ﬁndings are important for policy. While for richer countries,
the reduction of inequality can facilitate reductions in emissions, in
poorer countries there is a clear trade-off. That trade-off can only be ad-
dressed if one can ensure that higher incomes of poorer population
groups do not translate into higher emissions by, for example, ensuring
that the higher energy needs are largely met by renewable energy tech-
nologies, see also Jakob et al. (2014).

References