
1. Introduction

Many studies explore the effects of regulatory monitoring and en-
forcement activities on the subsequent behavior of facilities constrained
by regulatory laws. These regulatory activities are effective if they
prompt facilities to improve their compliance with laws. From the stan-
dard theory of deterrence (Becker, 1968), regulatory monitoring and
enforcement activities prompt subsequent improvements in compli-
ance by deterring non-compliance through increases in either the cer-
tainty of punishment, severity of punishment, or both. However, many
studies identify alternative, non-monetary motivations for complying
with regulatory laws.1 As the most prominent alternative motivation,
regulated facilities may be intrinsically motivated to comply with regu-
latory laws. Intrinsic motivation involves many dimensions, such as ex-
ternal refs, e.g., adhering to professional norms, and internal
refs, e.g., adhering to one's own self-identity as law abiding or
cooperative.
Our study extends the standard theory of deterrence by incorporat-
ing these additional motivations into our conceptual framework. Using
this framework, we explore regulated facilities' perceptions of the effec-
tiveness of regulatory monitoring and enforcement efforts for inducing
compliance with regulatory laws. In particular, our study explores the
inﬂuence of these perceptions on facilities' responses to regulatory in-
spections and enforcement actions conducted at a given facility (“spe-
ciﬁc deterrence”) or other similar facilities (“general deterrence”).

No previous study explores this dimension of regulatory monitoring
and enforcement. As the closest topic, various studies explore regulated
facilities' perceptions of the fairness of environmental protection laws
(Lazarus, 1997; Lazarus, 1993; Tarlock, 1992; Hsu, 2004; Schroeder,
1993; Zinn, 2002; Wiener, 1999). For example, environmental regula-
tion can be perceived by regulated entities as “unfair” partially because
it does not provide ﬂexible means of compliance (Zinn, 2002). Within
this literature, surprisingly few studies explore the issue of enforcement
fairness within the realm of compliance with environmental protection
laws (Rechtschaffen, 1998; Kagan, 1994; Costle, 1982; White, 1996).
Earnhart et al. (2016) explores the link from the perceived fairness of
environmental enforcement on regulated facilities' compliance with ef-
ﬂuent limits, ﬁnding that greater fairness undermines the extent of
compliance; speciﬁcally, facilities who perceive that their regulators
treat them fairly “always” comply less with their efﬂuent limits than
facilities who perceive that their regulators only treat them fairly
“sometimes”.

Another literature explores regulated facilities' responses to regula-
tory monitoring and enforcement (e.g., Earnhart, 2004a; Earnhart,
2009; Earnhart and Segerson, 2012). Gray and Shimshack (2011) survey
the evidence regarding environmental enforcement, concluding that
both monitoring and enforcement improve compliance, proving gener-
ally effective deterrents.

None of these previous studies explores the role played by the per-
ception of enforcement effectiveness. In fact, because these studies
adopt the standard theory of deterrence, there is no role for factors
other than pecuniary (extrinsic) motivations. Yet evidence suggests
that non-monetary or intrinsic motivations may be relevant even for
regulated ﬁrms. For example, several studies demonstrate the impor-
tance of enforcement style. Short and Toffel (2010) ﬁnd that explicit
threats can reduce compliance with environmental regulations, while
both Winter and May (2001) and Earnhart and Glicksman (2015) dem-
onstrate that coercive enforcement styles can be counter-productive.
These ﬁndings are consistent with aggressive enforcement styles
crowding out the intrinsic motivation to comply or cooperate with reg-
ulators. To explore the different paths through which perceptions of ef-
fectiveness might inﬂuence compliance decisions, we develop a general
conceptual framework that includes both standard monetary incentives
and behavioral factors such as intrinsic motivation.

Beyond these scholarly contributions, our study's results possess
policy implications. As long as perceptions inﬂuence the effects of gov-
ernment interventions on environmental compliance, policymakers –
the EPA and state environmental protection agencies – should incorpo-
rate this insight into their enforcement of environmental protection
laws.

For our empirical analysis, we examine the Clean Water Act, which
restricts discharges from point sources, such as industrial factories, by
imposing discharge limits through issued permits. Environmental pro-
tection agencies induce compliance with these discharge limits by
conducting inspections and taking enforcement actions. As our sample,
we examine chemical manufacturing facilities permitted under the Na-
tional Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) during the years
2002 to 2004.

Using an original survey of these facilities, we collect data on facili-
ties' self-reported perceptions of the effectiveness of regulatory moni-
toring and enforcement activities. One survey question asks whether
the respondent believes that inspections effectively induce chemical fa-
cilities to comply with discharge limits; a second question asks whether
the respondent believes that monetary ﬁnes effectively induce chemical
facilities to comply. For each question, respondents chose from four cat-
egories: deﬁnitely not, probably not, probably yes, and deﬁnitely yes.
We construct two perception indicators by contrasting “yes” categories
and “not” categories.

Our empirical analysis interacts these perception indicators with
standard measures of inspection- and enforcement-related deterrence
to assess whether facilities that perceive regulatory monitoring and en-
forcement activities as effective respond differently to actual monitor-
ing and enforcement activities conducted against the individual
facility or similar facilities. We investigate both speciﬁc and general de-
terrence and state and federal inspections.

We ﬁnd that, on average, federal inspection-related general deter-
rence is the only effective means of improving the extent of compliance.
However, when we estimate the effects separately for those who per-
ceive enforcement to be effective and those who do not, our conclusions
differ substantially. For facilities that perceive enforcement to be effec-
tive, increased deterrence of any type generates little gain, with only
federal inspection-related general deterrence (marginally) signiﬁcantly
affecting the extent of compliance. For managers who already perceive
enforcement to be effective, increased deterrence does not change the
extent of compliance. The effects on those who perceive enforcement
to be ineffective are very different. In particular, the actual experience
of being inspected (speciﬁc deterrence) by a state agency proves effec-
tive, while greater state inspection-related general deterrence does not.
Greater general deterrence from federal inspections is also effective. Our
results reveal that a complex set of motivations inﬂuence the compli-
ance decisions of environmental managers.

2. Regulatory Context.
Our empirical analysis examines the wastewater discharged by U.S.
chemical manufacturing facilities regulated under the U.S. Clean
Water Act's NPDES system between 2003 and 2004. Environmental pro-
tection agencies issue facility-speciﬁc permits to facilities regulated as
point sources. These permits identify the pollutant-speciﬁc discharge
limits with which facilities must comply. Due to considerations over
local ambient water quality, wastewater discharge limits vary across fa-
cilities and time regardless of sector.

NPDES permits require regulated facilities to monitor and self-report
their discharges on a regular basis.2 By comparing these reported dis-
charges to permitted discharges, we calculate the “discharge ratio”,
which measures the extent of compliance.

To induce compliance with discharge limits, the EPA and state agen-
cies periodically inspect facilities and take enforcement actions as need-
ed. Nearly all states possess “primacy” to implement the NPDES system.
These authorized state agencies are primarily responsible for monitor-
ing and enforcement. However, the EPA retains authority to monitor
and sanction facilities. Inspections are a key component of environmen-
tal agencies' efforts to collect evidence for enforcement (Wasserman,
1984), maintain a regulatory presence (EPA, 1990), and offer technical
assistance as opportunities arise. Federal and state agencies use a mix-
ture of informal enforcement actions (e.g., warning letters) and formal
enforcement actions (e.g., ﬁnes). Our analysis considers both federal
and state inspections and all types of federal enforcement actions:
ﬁnes, other formal enforcement actions, and informal enforcement
actions.

Our empirical analysis focuses on chemical manufacturing facilities
permitted under the U.S. Clean Water Act during the years 2002 to
2004. This focus on a single sector is consistent with other empirical
studies of industrial pollution (e.g., Laplante and Rilstone, 1996; Barla,
2007; Earnhart, 2009; Earnhart and Harrington, 2014).3

3. Conceptual Framework.
This section offers a simple conceptual framework for heuristically
deriving competing hypotheses, which our empirical analysis tests.
Our framework incorporates three motivations for complying with en-
vironmental protection laws: extrinsic motivation, intrinsic motivation,
and social signaling (Ariely et al., 2009; Gneezy et al., 2011; Bowles and
Polania-Reyes, 2012).
Hypothesis H1A. Increases in either the inspection frequency or ﬁne
magnitude are effective at improving compliance.

Compliance involves both beneﬁts and costs. The manager of a reg-
ulated facility chooses the extent of compliance to maximize the net
beneﬁts of compliance. According to the standard model of enforcement
(Becker, 1968; Polinsky and Shavell, 2000), deterrence depends exclu-
sively on explicit monetary disincentives or extrinsic motivation. In-
creases in either the likelihood or severity of punishment increase
compliance; i.e. enforcement is effective at improving compliance. The
manager bears at least partially the costs stemming from compliance ef-
forts as long as her contract connects proﬁts to managerial compensa-
tion and compliance efforts lower proﬁts. Similarly, the manager bears
at least partially the costs of non-compliance, which includes the hassle
of regulatory monitoring inspections, the monetary sting of ﬁnes, and
the external impacts associated with other forms of enforcement
(e.g., loss of consumer and investor support).
Hypothesis H1B. Increases in either the inspection frequency or ﬁne
magnitude are ineffective or counter-productive at improving compliance.

In addition to extrinsic motivation, a manager may be intrinsically
motivated to cooperate with regulators or abide by the law, or use com-
pliance to signal adherence with professional and social norms to regu-
lators, a local community, and the market. Gneezy et al. (2011) and
Bowles and Polania-Reyes (2012) summarize the evidence showing
how raising monetary incentives often crowds out these other motiva-
tions. For example, the signaling potential of compliance decisions is
strongest when extrinsic motivation is weak (Ariely et al., 2009).4 If in-
creased enforcement crowds out the intrinsic or signaling motivations
for compliance, then increased enforcement may fail to improve com-
pliance or may even lower compliance (Winter and May, 2001; Short
and Toffel, 2010; Earnhart and Glicksman, 2015).

Further, while theoretical models assume that inspection probabili-
ties and ﬁne sizes are known, in reality, facility managers must form ex-
pectations of these amounts based on their own experiences (speciﬁc
deterrence) and the experiences of other similar facilities (general de-
terrence). This formation of expectations creates the potential for addi-
tional undermining factors to operate. The manager interprets
observations about other facilities' experiences through the lens of her
perception of how the enforcement process works. For example, if the
manager perceives that inspection budgets are ﬁxed, then observing
more inspections at other facilities may be interpreted as a lower likeli-
hood of future inspections for her own facility, resulting in lower
compliance.5 This effect reﬂects an additional countervailing force in
the event of greater general deterrence.
Hypothesis H2A. Increases in either inspection frequency or ﬁne mag-
nitude generate the same impact on compliance regardless of manager
perceptions.

Facility managers are heterogeneous in their perceptions regarding
the effectiveness of regulatory enforcement. However, according to
the standard model of enforcement, these perceptions are irrelevant
and should not alter managerial responses to regulatory interventions.
Hypothesis H2B. Increases in either inspection frequency or ﬁne mag-
nitude are more effective at improving compliance for managers who
perceive enforcement actions to be effective than for managers who
perceive them to be ineffective.

This hypothesis could hold if manager perceptions are related to the
importance of non-pecuniary factors in their decision making. Speciﬁ-
cally, if non-pecuniary motivations play only a minor role for managers
who believe that enforcement is effective, yet these motivations play a
major role for managers who perceive enforcement to be ineffective,
then the crowding out of alternative motivations from increased
enforcement is greater for managers who perceive enforcement is
ineffective.
Hypothesis H2C. Increases in either inspection frequency or ﬁne mag-
nitude are less effective at improving compliance for managers who
perceive enforcement actions to be effective than managers who per-
ceive them to be ineffective.

Alternatively, manager perceptions might reﬂect their subjective es-
timates of the likelihood and magnitude of enforcement. Managers
might perceive enforcement as effective if they believe that inspection
likelihoods and ﬁne magnitudes are sufﬁciently high and perceive en-
forcement as ineffective when their estimates of enforcement are low.
The observation of greater enforcement should lead both types of man-
ager to revise upwards their subjective estimates of enforcement. How-
ever, this upward revision might be greater for managers who consider
enforcement ineffective.

<Middle> Econometric Framework.
To test these hypotheses, we construct an econometric framework
that reﬂects the theoretical framework, while adding control factors.
In each period, the manager operating a regulated facility decides on
its extent of compliance, measured by the ratio of actual to permitted
discharges (“discharge ratio”), which represents the dependent variable
(Earnhart, 2004a, 2004b, 2004c; Earnhart, 2009; Earnhart and Segerson,
2012). We also formulate a set of primary explanatory variables mea-
suring regulatory enforcement and monitoring.

Each facility must form expectations about monitoring and enforce-
ment before selecting its extent of compliance. Our empirical analysis
assumes that each facility bases its expectations of future monitoring
and enforcement on the experiences of other similar facilities along
with its own recent experiences (Shimshack and Ward, 2005;
Earnhart, 2004a, 2004b, 2004c; Earnhart, 2009). General deterrence re-
ﬂects the ex ante general “threat” of future punishment based on the re-
cent experiences of other facilities with regulatory interventions (Sah,
1991; Cohen, 2000). Speciﬁc deterrence adjusts this general threat
based on the speciﬁc enforcement and monitoring experiences of par-
ticular facilities in the recent past (Cohen, 2000; Earnhart and Friesen,
2013). Since facilities most likely need weeks or perhaps months to re-
spond to their own and others' experiences with monitoring and en-
forcement, our analysis lags the measures of
inspections and
enforcement actions (Earnhart, 2004a, 2004b; Earnhart, 2009;
Shimshack and Ward, 2005).

Based on standard deterrence theory, deterrence divides into pun-
ishment certainty and punishment severity, with inspections and ﬁnes
playing different deterrent roles. We interpret inspections as a measure
of punishment certainty and ﬁnes as a measure of punishment severity.
To improve separation between the certainty and severity of punish-
ment, we use the ﬁne conditional average amount, i.e., dollars per im-
posed ﬁne, as our severity measure.

Based on these measures, we construct particular deterrence factors,
starting with inspection-based measures of punishment certainty. For
the general deterrence measure, we calculate the aggregate count of in-
spections against all other similar facilities – major chemical
manufacturing facilities operating in the same state – over the preced-
ing 12-month period. Then we divide the aggregate count of inspections
by the number of months other major chemical facilities were operating
in each state over the 12-month period. For the speciﬁc deterrence mea-
sure, we assess inspections conducted at the individual facility in the
preceding 12-month period, treating these lagged inspections as an ex-
ogenous regressor.6 As with general deterrence, we divide the number
of inspections by the number of months a particular facility was active
in the preceding 12-month period. Thus, both regressors measure in-
spections per month of activity.

We next construct ﬁne-based measures of punishment severity. For
the general deterrence measure, we examine the aggregate count and
monetary value of ﬁnes (in dollars) imposed against other similar facil-
ities over the preceding 12-month period. To calculate the conditional
average ﬁne, we divide each aggregate monetary value of ﬁnes by the
aggregate count of ﬁnes. For the speciﬁc deterrence measure, we sum
ﬁnes imposed on an individual facility in the preceding 12-month
period.7 For comparability with the general deterrence measure, we di-
vide each summed monetary value of ﬁnes by the summed count of
ﬁnes. We treat this lagged ﬁne-based measure as an exogenous
regressor.8

We construct control factors related to the costs of compliance or
non-compliance. The ﬁrst set of factors reﬂects non-compliance costs,
mostly additional regulatory factors (Helland, 1998a; Earnhart, 2004a,
2004b; Nadeau, 1997). We additionally measure deterrence stemming
from enforcement actions beyond ﬁnes, separately constructing mea-
sures of formal enforcement actions that do not impose ﬁnes, such as
consent decrees, and informal enforcement actions, such as warning let-
ters. We construct both measures of general deterrence and speciﬁc de-
terrence in ways identical to the inspection-based deterrence measures.
We count the number of enforcement actions over the preceding 12-
month period and divide that by the number of months in which facil-
ities were operating. We also include a measure of regulatory stringen-
cy: permitted discharge limit, constructed as an index across all
regulated pollutants discharged by a facility in a given month.9 And
we include EPA region and year indicators.

The second set of control factors reﬂects compliance (abatement)
costs. Facility and ﬁrm characteristics inﬂuence marginal abatement
costs (Earnhart, 2004a; Bandyopadhyay and Horowitz, 2006; Gray and
Shadbegian, 2005). Flow design capacity proxies for facility size,
which we measure by the average ﬂow of wastewater over the preced-
ing 12-month period. We include the ratio of actual wastewater ﬂow to
ﬂow design capacity as a proxy for treatment capacity utilization. Sec-
toral indicators control for variation in regulated facilities' abilities to
modify their production processes according to the type of
manufactured product. Seasonal indicators control for variation caused
by weather conditions.

Table 1 identiﬁes a priori expectations for the control factors.

5. Data.
Our empirical analysis exploits data from a survey of regulated facil-
ities and EPA databases.

5.1. Survey of Regulated Entities.
We ﬁrst describe the survey data. Our survey was administered to a
sample of U.S. chemical manufacturing facilities whose wastewater dis-
charges were regulated by discharge limits imposed within NPDES per-
mits in 2001. The population of 2596 NPDES-regulated facilities in the
chemical manufacturing industry, as of September 2001, was extracted
from the EPA's Permit Compliance System database. We limited the sur-
vey sample to the 1003 facilities meeting these screening criteria:
(1) possessed a NPDES permit, (2) faced limits on their wastewater dis-
charges, (3) discharged into surface water bodies, (4) were operating as
of 2002, and (5) contact information was available. Of the 1003 facilities
contacted between April of 2002 and March of 2003, 267 facilities com-
pleted the survey for a 27% response rate. This rate is comparable to pre-
vious large-scale surveys of industrial sectors (e.g., Arimura et al., 2008;
Arimura et al., 2011; Nakamura et al., 2001) and lies above the average
response rate of 21% identiﬁed by a review of 183 studies based on busi-
ness surveys published in academic journals (Paxson, 1992).10

The survey gathered various data elements, including data on facili-
ties' subjective perceptions of the effectiveness of inspections and ﬁnes
for inducing compliance with Clean Water Act-imposed discharge
limits.11 The speciﬁc wording of the survey questions was: “Do you
think that government inspections are effective ways for inducing indi-
vidual chemical facilities to comply with permitted water discharge
limits?” and “Do you think that the imposition of monetary ﬁnes is an
effective way for inducing individual chemical facilities to comply
with permitted water discharge limits?”. For both questions, respon-
dents were able to choose from four responses: deﬁnitely not, probably
not, probably yes, and deﬁnitely yes.

5.2. Publicly Available Data on Regulated Facilities.
To complement the survey data, we extracted publicly available data
from the EPA Permit Compliance System database. This database pro-
vides information on each facility's (1) location, (2) NPDES major or
minor classiﬁcation, (3) four-digit standard industrial classiﬁcation
(SIC) code, (4) monthly discharge limits, (5) self-reported monthly dis-
charge levels, (6) inspections conducted by federal and state regulators,
(7) ﬁnes and other formal enforcement orders issued by federal admin-
istrative and civil courts, and (8) informal enforcement actions. We ag-
gregate the many sub-sectors in the chemical manufacturing sector into
three broad categories: organic chemicals, inorganic chemicals, and
“other” chemicals.12

Since discharge limits apply to speciﬁc pollutants, we consider each
pollutant separately. In general, discharge limits constrain wastewater
measured as a quantity, e.g., pounds per day, or as a concentration,
e.g., milligrams per liter of wastewater. We calculate the monthly dis-
charge ratio for each regulated pollutant, which enables us to combine
these two disparate forms of measurement. For each month, we ﬁrst
calculate the pollutant-speciﬁc discharge ratio separately for quantity
limits and concentration limits as relevant.13 Then we combine the
two measurement forms, as relevant, into a composite pollutant-
speciﬁc discharge ratio based on the median value. Finally, we identify
the median discharge ratio considering all of the regulated pollutants.14
This median discharge ratio represents a comprehensive measure of the
extent of compliance with all Clean Water Act-based discharge limits
relevant for a single facility in a given month.

We purposely focus on facilities' compliance decisions following
completion of the survey while avoiding compliance decisions prior to
the survey since these historical decisions most likely inﬂuenced the fa-
cilities' perceptions of regulatory effectiveness. Similarly, we avoid reg-
ulatory activities conducted prior to the survey with a 12-month lag.
Thus, for each survey respondent, the sample period begins
12 months after the facility's survey completion. Consequently, our
sample period begins in 2003 or 2004 depending on the individual
facility's survey completion date. Since facilities' perceptions can change
over time, we focus on the few months following survey completion.
While arbitrary, we end our sample period in September of 2004.
Thus, the number of months included in the sample for a given facility
ranges from7 months to 18 months.
The PCS database systematically records wastewater discharges and
discharge limits only for “major facilities”,which receivemore regulatory
attention than “minor facilities” (Earnhart, 2009; Earnhart and
Segerson, 2012).15 Of the 103 survey respondent major facilities, the
PCS database only contains records that provide data on discharge limits
and wastewater discharges over the sample period for 88 major facilities.
For all of our analysis, we focus on these 88 major facilities
for which we possess both survey data and EPA data on limits and discharges.
The unbalanced sample includes 1126monthly observations.

5.3. Summary of Dependent and Independent Variables.
Table 1 provides statistical summaries of the formulated dependent
variable and regressors. Table 1.a summarizes the discharge ratio. The
mean discharge ratio of 0.16 implies that facilities on average generate
discharges that are 84% below their monthly limits. This average indi-
cates a need to analyze the extent of compliance rather than status of
compliance.17 Similarly, the maximum discharge ratio of 2.56 implies
that some facilities allow their discharges to surge as high as 156%
above the permitted limits. This maximum indicates a need to analyze
the degree of non-compliance rather than the status of non-compliance.
Table 1.b summarizes the regressors. We highlight the primary re-
gressor: regulated facilities' perceptions of effectiveness in the case of
inspections and ﬁnes. In order to concentrate the explanatory power
of these regressors, we transform the four response categories into a bi-
nary measure of effectiveness: “yes” versus “no”. Based on these binary
measures, 90% of facilities perceive inspections as either probably or
deﬁnitely an effective means of inducing compliance with wastewater
discharge limits, while 75% of facilities perceive ﬁnes as either probably
or deﬁnitely an effective means of inducing compliance. As a joint bina-
ry measure, we distinguish between facilities that perceive either type
of regulatory activity – inspection or ﬁne – as an effective means of in-
ducing compliance and facilities that perceive neither type of regulatory
active as effective. As shown in Table 1.b, 94% of facilities perceive at
least one regulatory activity type as effective. We regard this joint mea-
sure as our primary regressor.

6. Econometric Issues and Methods.
In order to estimate the relationship between the discharge ratio and
the regressors, we must address a few econometric issues. First, since
discharge ratios are distributed lognormal, we employ a semilog speci-
ﬁcation by logging the dependent variable.18

Second, our sample lacks variation in certain enforcement measures.
Most notable, none of the 88 facilities included in our sample were ﬁned
during our sample period. Thus, we are not able to explore ﬁne-related
speciﬁc deterrence. Moreover, all of the facilities that faced general de-
terrence stemming from ﬁnes during our sample period perceived
ﬁnes as an ineffective means of inducing compliance. Thus, we are not
able to explore how perceived effectiveness inﬂuences ﬁne-related gen-
eral deterrence. Instead, the measure of ﬁne-related general deterrence
applies to all facilities, regardless of their perceptions. With regard to in-
spections, we are only able to estimate the effect of speciﬁc deterrence
from federal inspections when facilities perceive monitoring and ﬁnes
as effective because facilities that perceived enforcement as ineffective
were never inspected by an EPA regional ofﬁce during our sample peri-
od. Table 2 summarizes this discussion by listing all possible links from
government interventions to discharge ratio and then depicting wheth-
er or not the data permit identiﬁcation of each link.

Third, given the lack of exploitable variation in the perceived effective-
ness of ﬁnes, we focus on the joint indicator of perceived effectiveness. To
assess the robustness of our conclusions, we also use the single indicator
of perceived inspection effectiveness because this more focused indicator
may better reﬂect the connection between perceived effectiveness and
inspections. Since the results are robust, we relegate the estimation re-
sults to Appendix Table A-2 and their interpretation to Appendix D.

Fourth, we consider three regressor sets or model sets that differ
based on the control factors. Model Set A includes the deterrence fac-
tors, the joint indicator of inspection and ﬁne effectiveness, and the in-
teractions between this joint indicator and the inspection-related
deterrence factors. Model Set B adds the most basic control factors:
year indicators, seasonal indicators, EPA regional indicators, and sub-
sector indicators. Model Set C further adds facility characteristics and
the composite efﬂuent limit index.

Fifth, we address the panel structure of our data by employing three
standard panel estimators: pooled OLS, random effects, and ﬁxed ef-
fects, while clustering the standard errors on the regulated facility,
which helps to address serial correlation. Based on F-test for Fixed Ef-
fects statistics and Hausman Test for Random Effects statistics (shown
in Table 3), the ﬁxed effects estimates dominate so we focus exclusively
on these estimates. (All time-invariant factors, including the EPA re-
gional indicators, industrial sub-sector indicators, and perceived effec-
tiveness indicator, are subsumed into the facility-speciﬁc ﬁxed effects.)
Sixth, we assess the potential endogeneity of the perceptions held by
regulated facilities regarding the effectiveness of inspections and ﬁnes. To
assess the formation of these perceptions, we explore the relationship be-
tween perceptions, as the dependent variable, and three sets of indepen-
dent variables or “models”. Model 1 focuses on regulatory activities,
namely inspections, ﬁnes, other formal enforcement actions, and informal
enforcement actions taken over the 24-month period preceding comple-
tion of the survey. Model 2 adds the facility's compliance history over the
preceding 24-month period. Model 3 additionally adds facility-speciﬁc
measures of regulatory cooperation, experience in the NPDES system,
and number of employees.20 We estimate this relationship using a probit
model, with the results tabulated in Appendix Table A-3. Regardless of the
regressor set, we ﬁnd no statistical connection between the perception in-
dicator and the independent variables. In all cases, the Likelihood Ratio
(LR) Test of Zero Slope Coefﬁcients reveals that the set of coefﬁcients
are jointly zero (i.e., p N 0.10). Thus, we conclude that facilities' percep-
tions are idiosyncratic. This conclusion conﬁrms the usefulness of
conducting the survey of regulated facilities to obtain self-reported per-
ceptions. Given the idiosyncratic nature of facilities' perceptions, we
could not use objective measures of facility characteristics or regulatory
experiences as proxies for perceived effectiveness.

7. Empirical Results.
Table 3 reports the estimation results based on Model Sets A, B, and
C. As shown, these model sets support identical conclusions for each fac-
tor excepting general deterrence from (non-ﬁne) formal enforcement
where the negative coefﬁcient is statistically signiﬁcant only if the
model set includes control factors beyond regulatory deterrence. Thus,
our conclusions are almost fully robust to the choice of regressor set.

Given the inclusion of interactions between inspection-related
deterrence and facilities' perceptions of regulatory effectiveness,
the main effects for inspections reported in Table 3 capture
the marginal effect under the condition of perceived ineffective-
ness. Table 4.a calculates and assesses the statistical signiﬁcance
of the marginal effects for inspection-related deterrence under
the condition of perceived effectiveness. The reported marginal
effects support the same conclusion regardless of the model
set except for general deterrence from federal inspections, which
is statistically signiﬁcant only once the model set includes control
factors beyond the additional deterrence factors, i.e., Model Sets B
and C.
Drawing from Tables 3 and 4.a, the estimation results support the fol-
lowing conclusions. Consider ﬁrst the effect of speciﬁc deterrence stem-
ming from one's own experience of being inspected. When facilities
perceive inspections and ﬁnes as effective, federal inspections prove
counter-productive, i.e. the marginal effect is positive, although the effect
is borderline signiﬁcant (p = 0.103 in Model sets B and C). This result
weakly rejects Hypothesis H1A while supporting Hypothesis H1B. Speciﬁc
deterrence from state inspections negatively affects discharge ratios
when facilities perceive inspections and ﬁnes as ineffective but not
when facilities perceive inspections and ﬁnes as effective. These results
support Hypothesis H1A but only when interventions are perceived as in-
effective. The difference between the two marginal effects is signiﬁcantly
positive; thus, the perception of effectiveness neutralizes the otherwise
productive impact of state inspection-related speciﬁc deterrence. This re-
sult rejects both Hypotheses H2A and H2B but supports Hypothesis H2C.
Next, consider general deterrence, which stems from observing the
experiences of other facilities. General deterrence from federal inspec-
tions negatively affects discharge ratios regardless of facilities' percep-
tions. These results support Hypothesis H1A, while rejecting Hypothesis
H1B. The switch from perceived ineffectiveness to effectiveness signiﬁ-
cantly increases the coefﬁcient magnitude, i.e., makes it less negative.
Thus, perceived effectiveness weakens the (estimated) actual effective-
ness of federal inspection-related general deterrence. This result rejects
both Hypotheses H2A and H2B, while supporting Hypothesis H2C.

In contrast to federal inspections, general deterrence from state in-
spections positively affects discharge ratios when facilities perceive in-
spections and ﬁnes as ineffective.21 However, when facilities perceive
inspections and ﬁnes as effective, state inspection-based general deter-
rence does not meaningfully affect discharge ratios. These results partially
support Hypothesis H1B. The switch from perceived ineffectiveness to ef-
fectiveness signiﬁcantly lowers the coefﬁcient magnitude, ﬂipping the co-
efﬁcient sign in the process. Put differently, the perception of effectiveness
neutralizes the otherwise counter-productive impact of state inspection-
related general deterrence. This result supports Hypothesis H2B.

As the last form of deterrence, general deterrence from ﬁnes does
not affect discharge ratios.22 Thus, the remaining discussion focuses on
inspections.

Table 5 summarizes these ﬁndings. Our results demonstrate that great-
er enforcement can be effective, ineffective or counterproductive depend-
ing on the intervention type and on perceptions. These results conﬁrm the
importance of alternative motivations, such as intrinsic or signaling moti-
vations in compliance decisions. In the case of general deterrence, greater
enforcement may lower perceptions of future inspections.23

Hypotheses H2A, H2B, and H2C reﬂect the inﬂuence of perceptions.
While standard theory assumes that perceptions do not matter, our em-
pirical results suggest otherwise; somewhat paradoxically, enforcement
is more effective against those facilities who think it is not! These results
are generally consistent with Hypothesis H2C, which relates perceptions
to subjective estimates of enforcement parameters. Why might this be?
One possibility is that managers who perceive enforcement as ineffective
may be insufﬁciently aware of federal inspections, as this type of interven-
tion is less common, and for these managers greater exposure to federal
inspections is informative.24 In contrast, managers are surely well aware
of state inspections, which occur frequently. Rather, for managers who
perceive enforcement as ineffective, actually experiencing a state
inspection, as opposed to observing others being inspected, is crucial.
This ﬁnding is consistent with evidence from behavioral research showing
that learning from experience is different, and in particular, more salient,
than learning from observation or description (e.g., Haselhuhn et al.,
2012; Earnhart and Friesen, 2013).

The stark contrast between speciﬁc and general deterrence from state
inspections when facilities perceive inspections and ﬁnes as ineffective
also requires explanation. Our conceptual framework identiﬁes several
potential countervailing factors, such as the crowding out of intrinsic mo-
tivation and beliefs about ﬁxed inspection budgets, which might counter-
act increases in monetary incentives. Our observation of counter-
productive state inspection-related general deterrence is consistent with
perceptions of the state regulator facing a ﬁxed inspection budget.

General deterrence from state inspections is weaker when facilities do
not perceive inspections and ﬁnes as effective, perhaps stemming from
the reduced awareness of other facilities' recent experiences. To highlight
this difference, when facilities perceive inspections and ﬁnes as effective,
state inspections – in either deterrence form – do not affect compliance.
Our empirical analysis distinguishes between federal and state in-
spections since facilities may (and apparently do) respond differently
to these two types of environmental protection agencies. Table 4.b com-
pares the effects of federal and state inspections. Our conclusions are
fully robust to the choice of model set except in one case as noted.
Based on general deterrence, federal inspections are more effective
than state inspections, as shown in Table 4.b.i. We draw the same con-
clusion when facilities perceive inspections and ﬁnes as effective in
Model Sets B and C. In contrast, federal and state inspections are equally
effective in speciﬁc deterrence terms when facilities perceive regulatory
effectiveness, as shown in Table 4.b.ii.

We do not interpret in detail the coefﬁcients associated with the
control factors. As shown in Table 3, greater deterrence from non-ﬁne
formal enforcement signiﬁcantly improves compliance, facilities are
less compliant in the summer than in autumn, and looser discharge
limits worsen compliance (which implies that facilities take tighter
limits more seriously).

<Conclusion> Conclusions and Policy Implications.
Our study examines the effects of inspections and ﬁnes on chemical
manufacturing facilities' compliance with Clean Water Act wastewater
discharge limits and facilities' perceptions about the effectiveness of in-
spections and ﬁnes at inducing this compliance. In particular, we ex-
plore the inﬂuence of these perceptions on the effects of inspection
and ﬁnes on the extent of facilities' self-reported compliance as mea-
sured by the ratio of actual discharges to permitted discharges. We ex-
ploit data from an original survey of regulated facilities operating in
2002 and publicly available data on actual and permitted discharges in
the period immediately following the completion of the noted survey.
Exploration of these data generates econometric results that support
the following conclusions. When managers perceive interventions as in-
effective, state inspection-related speciﬁc deterrence and federal
inspection-related general deterrence are effective at reducing the dis-
charge ratio, but state inspection-related general deterrence is
counter-productive. In contrast, when managers perceive interventions
as effective, deterrence from state inspections in both forms is ineffec-
tive, while general deterrence from federal inspections reduces the dis-
charge ratio, yet speciﬁc deterrence from federal inspections increases
the discharge ratio (although the two latter effects are only borderline
signiﬁcant). Based on general deterrence, federal inspections are more
effective than state inspections, regardless of facilities perceptions. Yet
federal and state inspections are equally effective in speciﬁc deterrence
terms. We interpret our ﬁndings using the conceptual framework pro-
vided in Section 3.

These conclusions possess important policy implications regarding
state inspections. When facilities perceive inspections and ﬁnes as effec-
tive, state inspections prove ineffective. We conclude that inspections
are less critical for those facilities that are deterred by their inherent effec-
tiveness. In contrast, when facilities perceive inspections and ﬁnes as inef-
fective, state inspections inﬂuence facilities' compliance choices.
Fortunately, speciﬁc deterrence effectively improves compliance; unfor-
tunately, general deterrence undermines compliance. Based on these con-
trasting results, state environmental protection agencies may wish to
eliminate the impression of ﬁxed inspection budgets by demonstrating
their ability to reallocate funds across budget categories.25 Agencies
could focus their resources on facilities who do not ﬁnd inspections and
ﬁnes as effective, which seems counter-intuitive yet revealed in our em-
pirical results. Of course, for this effort, agencies must be able to secure
a measure or proxy of facilities' perceptions.

Federal inspections offer different policy implications. Regardless of
facilities' perceptions, general deterrence is effective. However, speciﬁc
deterrence proves counter-productive when facilities perceive inspec-
tions and ﬁnes as effective. Our results suggest that facilities do not be-
lieve that the federal agency is as budget constrained as state agencies.
While individual state agencies enjoy little ability given their small bud-
gets to re-allocate resources for additional monitoring when compli-
ance from the regulated community degrades, the federal agency
enjoys greater discretion to re-allocate its resources. Put differently, fed-
eral funds are more fungible. This distinction is consistent with the dif-
ferent roles played by federal and state agencies. While state agencies
generally attempt to inspect all major facilities on a regular basis, the
federal agency generally inspects facilities that appear problematic as
shown mostly through their compliance history and previous responses
to state inspections. Thus, the federal agency is better able to ramp up its
pressure on facilities given its smaller population of facilities.

As with state inspections, the federal agency could discern facilities
based on their perceptions regarding regulatory effectiveness and
focus their resources on facilities who do not ﬁnd inspections and
ﬁnes as effective. Again, agencies would ﬁrst need to obtain a measure
or proxy of facilities' perceptions. In the case of federal inspections, the
situation is better or worse depending on the type of deterrence. Unlike
state inspections, general deterrence from federal inspections remains
effective, but speciﬁc deterrence from federal inspections proves
counter-productive. In the latter case, the federal agency could avoid
generating ill will by inspecting facilities who perceive inspections and
ﬁnes as effective. As with state inspections, we conclude that federal in-
spections undermine compliance for those facilities that are deterred by
their inherent effectiveness as opposed to the actual use of this policy
tool. Lastly, we compare state and federal inspections. Regardless of per-
ceptions, to induce compliance, EPA could play a larger role than state
agencies, given general deterrence results.

While our empirical study generates statistically meaningful rela-
tionships and useful policy implications, we acknowledge that our
study only explores a single program's effects on only large facilities op-
erating in a single industrial sector over a speciﬁc period. We encourage
future researchers to explore other environmental protection programs,
small regulated facilities, other industrial sectors, and more recent time
periods. We also recommend future research on tractable policy levers
that relate to regulated facilities' perceptions of regulatory effectiveness.


Acknowledgments
