1. Introduction

Environmental management as a source of competitive advantage
continues to be studied by many researchers from a resource-based per-
spective. The seminal studies by Hart (1995), Hart and Ahuja (1996),
Russo and Fouts (1997), Judge and Douglas (1998), Sharma and
Vredenburg (1998) and Hart and Dowell (2011) provide theoretical
support for abundant empirical literature that does not always conﬁrm
the “it pays to be green” hypothesis. Indeed, studies on whether invest-
ment in environmental protection generates a positive economic per-
formance in ﬁrms continue to feed the controversy (Wagner et al.,
2002; Cainelli et al., 2013; Fujii et al., 2013; Trumpp and Guenther,
2015).

Two signiﬁcant justiﬁcations can be presented to attempt to clarify
this controversy. The ﬁrst is related to the design of environmental
strategy. Environmental strategy can be designed in different ways,
and the chosen design conditions the possibility of obtaining positive
economic results. Russo and Fouts (1997) were some of the ﬁrst authors
to underline the economic consequences of a compliance strategy, rela-
tive to a go-beyond-compliance strategy. Since then, studies by Klassen
and Whybark (1999), Christmann (2000), King and Lenox (2002),
Gonzalez-Benito and Gonzalez-Benito (2005), Aragón-Correa et al.
(2008), Guenster et al. (2011), Sambasivan et al. (2013) or Ghisetti
and Rennings (2014) provide empirical evidence that the largely pre-
ventive (versus corrective) nature and the proactivity of action taken (de-
ﬁned as the tendency to anticipate and go beyond mere regulatory
compliance and normal industry standards) determines the likelihood
of said action having a positive effect on economic performance.

The second argument that can justify mixed results in the study of
the win-win hypothesis is related to the conditions and factors accom-
panying the implementation of environmental strategy. The idea that
the relationship between environmental and economic performance
depends on situational factors and external or internal conditions has
been highlighted by many authors, such as Christmann (2000),
Wagner and Schaltegger (2003), Cainelli et al. (2013), Antonioli et al.
(2014), Amores-Salvadó et al. (2015) and Mazzanti et al. (2016).
This study empirically analyzes the economic consequences of envi-
ronmental protection in ﬁrms and considers how the above two factors
can condition the sign of this relationship. As a ﬁrst precaution, we have
deﬁned our object of study, environmental strategy, by considering
whether it has been designed proactively. In fact, we have not studied
the economic consequences of environmental protection in the broad
sense but those of environmental proactivity. With this purpose and
based on the deﬁnitions proposed by authors such as Sharma and
Vredenburg (1998), Aragón-Correa and Sharma (2003), Buysse and
Verbeke (2003) and Murillo et al. (2008), we interpret environmental
proactivity as the ﬁrm's tendency to voluntarily apply environmental
protection measures, largely based on prevention, to anticipate environ-
mental protection requirements, and to go beyond regulatory compli-
ance and the measures generally adopted in industry. Secondly, we
are interested in the conditions that concur and complement or hinder
the implementation of environmental proactivity and that can condi-
tion the possibility of obtaining economic results.

The objective of this study is to analyze if the economic conse-
quences of environmental proactivity in ﬁrms are better when the
ﬁrms are also proactive in technological innovation and if this
additional advantage is sustainable in dynamic environments.
Therefore, we investigate the possibility of positive complementar-
ities between environmental and technological proactivity, and the
stability and usefulness of these complementarities in dynamic
environments.

The idea that spending resources on environmental protection gen-
erates complementarities with other resources (especially innovation
and organizational change) is rooted in the literature (Wagner, 2007;
Antonioli et al., 2013, 2014; Gilli et al., 2014; Mazzanti et al., 2016 for
a review). The effect of these complementarities on business results
has been less studied, especially regarding the economic results of
ﬁrms. In addition, most of the studies of how complementarities affect
economic results (Christmann, 2000; Hall and Wagner, 2012;
Hottenrott et al., 2012; Antonioli et al., 2014; Amores-Salvadó et al.,
2015; Rivera-Torres et al., 2015) use subjective measures based on in-
formation obtained from surveys and/or place less importance on the
environmental strategy's degree of proactivity.

In this research, we delve deeper into the study of complementar-
ities arising from the implementation of a proactive environmental
strategy. We analyze the effect of these complementarities on the
company's ability to obtain medium- and long-term economic results
and analyze whether such an advantage is sustainable in dynamic envi-
ronments. The conclusions obtained reinforce the interpretation of en-
vironmental proactivity as a dynamic capacity.

Some of this paper's additional contributions to the previous litera-
ture on the topic are, ﬁrstly, a persuasive and objective measurement
of the ﬁrm's efforts regarding both environmental protection and inno-
vation in general, which considers the mean investment efforts made by
industry ﬁrms to calculate the degree of environmental and technolog-
ical proactivity. Unlike most previous studies, we particularly empha-
size the proactivity concept in both environmental and technological
areas. Secondly, this study is based on an objective measurement of eco-
nomic results, which considers the ﬁrm's capability to generate returns
in the medium and long term.

The application of panel data econometrics to the estimation of coef-
ﬁcients is another distinctive aspect of this study. This method enables
the estimation to incorporate the speciﬁc effects of each ﬁrm (for in-
stance, effects related to expertise, culture or resources and capabilities)
that have an impact on its performance, but are not measured by the re-
gressors in the model.

This study is divided into six sections. The second and third review
the related literature and present the theoretical arguments for charac-
terizing environmental proactivity as a dynamic capability, which en-
ables a sustainable advantage to be taken of complementarities with
other resources related to the innovation. The fourth describes the sam-
ples, the variables used and the methodology. The ﬁfth presents the
results, and the last section summarizes and discusses the main conclu-
sions arising from this research.

2. Environmental Proactivity and Innovation as Complementary Re-
sources: The Dynamic Capabilities Perspective.
In some seminal papers that deﬁne the Porter hypothesis, Porter
(1991), Porter and Van der Linde (1995a, b), Esty and Porter (1998),
and others establish arguments against the traditional view that there
is a trade-off between environmental and ﬁnancial results and maintain
that environmental regulations generate stimuli for innovation in the
process of searching for less polluting and more efﬁcient production
methods capable of generating competitive advantages. Hart (1995) re-
fers to these arguments from the natural resource-based view of the
ﬁrm and argues that environmental management capabilities improve
environmental performance while providing competitive advantages
through cost reductions, anticipating competitors and improving stake-
holder relations. These arguments were further supported and extend-
ed in multiple studies identifying the resources and capabilities related
to environmental protection that help to create competitive advantages
(Russo and Fouts, 1997; Sharma and Vredenburg, 1998; Bansal, 2005;
Walls et al., 2008).

Twenty years after the Porter hypothesis, however, the results found
in the empirical literature that has studied this win-win perspective are
contradictory and suggest that the relationship between environmental
and economic performance is not as clear as it would appear.1 The pos-
sibility of complementarities between resources spent on environmen-
tal protection and other internal resources is an aspect scarcely
considered in the empirical literature that can explain the lack of con-
sensus about the relationship between environmental and economic
performance (Cainelli et al., 2013; Amores-Salvadó et al., 2015). In this
regard, Cainelli et al. (2013) maintain that an argument that challenges
the conventional pessimistic view of a trade-off between environmental
and economic performance resides in complementarities and econo-
mies of scale and scope, which might lead to situations where environ-
mental
investment generates greater positive economic results.
Possibly inﬂuenced by the Porter hypothesis, most of the literature on
complementarities between environmental resources and other types
of resources focuses on those related to either technological or organiza-
tional innovation (such as Christmann, 2000; Hottenrott et al., 2012;
Antonioli et al., 2014; Amores-Salvadó et al., 2015; Rivera-Torres et al.,
2015).2 One of the ﬁrst works in this respect is by Christmann (2000),
who highlights the important role of a company's existing resources
and capabilities for innovation. In her research, from data collected
from a sample of US chemical ﬁrms, Christmann (2000) ﬁnds evidence
that capabilities for process innovation and implementation are com-
plementary assets that moderate the relationship between process-fo-
cused environmental practices and cost advantages. Christmann
(2000) focuses on pollution prevention technologies, which, unlike pol-
lution control technologies, have to be integrated in the production pro-
cess and involve signiﬁcant changes in production processes and
practices. Based on this argument, Christmann (2000) suggests and em-
pirically shows that successful implementation of pollution prevention
technologies requires the ﬁrm to be able to innovate and make changes
to its production process. Without these capabilities, the expected ad-
vantage of cost savings from process-focused prevention pollution prac-
tices is not guaranteed.

Hall and Wagner (2012) also analyze the role of innovation activities
for the link between sustainable management and economic and envi-
ronmental performance. Based on a sample of ﬁrms from Germany
and the Netherlands, these authors conﬁrm that environmental strategy
generates a variety of results (both environmental and economic) de-
pending on the type and level of innovation pursued in the ﬁrm.

Antonioli et al. (2014) also analyze whether environmental innova-
tions are complementary with other techno-organizational innovations
in a sample of ﬁrms in north-east Italy. They empirically ﬁnd that ﬁrms
that jointly adopt environmental innovations and other innovations re-
lated to the organization of production (teamwork, quality circle, etc.)
tend to improve productivity performances. These results are consistent
with those previously found by Hottenrott et al. (2012) from German
ﬁrm-level data. In their study, they ﬁnd empirical support for the com-
plementarity between green technologies and organizational change.

In Spain, Rivera-Torres et al. (2015) obtain empirical results from a
sample of ﬁrms in north-east Spain that show that pro-environmental
change improves short- to medium-term economic performance both
directly and indirectly. These authors show that pro-environmental
changes are complemented by changes in organizational design (com-
munication, incentives and employee relations) representing improve-
ments in coordination and motivation systems. These improvements
have a positive impact on economic results and they, therefore, repre-
sent an indirect beneﬁt of pro-environmental change.

The advantages of a proactive environmental strategy, which com-
plements technological proactivity, can be understood from a dynamic
capabilities perspective. Teece et al. (1997: 516) deﬁne dynamic capa-
bilities as “the ﬁrm's ability to integrate, build, and reconﬁgure internal
and external competences to address rapidly changing environments”.
The dynamic capability approach has studied such adaptation process-
es, concluding that ﬁrms capable of rapidly reconﬁguring and accom-
modating their resources and skills are more likely to obtain
sustainable competitive advantages and greater returns than their com-
petitors (Teece et al., 1997; Eisenhardt and Martin, 2000). Following
Aragón-Correa and Sharma (2003), this study interprets environmental
proactivity as a dynamic capability that gives rise to the generation of
sustainable competitive advantages. Unlike reactive environmental
strategies based on compliance, proactive strategies, based on the antic-
ipation and early adoption of environmental practices, involve the adap-
tation and reconﬁguration abilities that Eisenhardt and Martin (2000)
associated with dynamic capabilities. Anticipation of requirements
guarantees more in-depth knowledge, experience and ﬂexibility to ac-
commodate new green preventive technologies in production processes
and to ﬁnd ways to complement them with other resources. Early adop-
tion of environmental practices leaves room for the analysis, experi-
mentation, and reconﬁguration necessary for adequate adaptation to
internal and external circumstances. Taking advantage of complemen-
tarities with technological proactivity is far more likely under these pro-
active circumstances. The company has a greater margin and ﬂexibility
to use its advanced technological knowledge in the design of new forms
of more ecological production based on preventing pollution. Similarly,
environmental innovation will improve the company's general knowl-
edge, know-how and operational skills in a way that is difﬁcult to imi-
tate. Improving the company's performance is far more likely when
the ﬁrm is both environmentally and technologically proactive. The
ability to integrate, build, and reconﬁgure internal and external skills at-
tributed to dynamic capabilities (Teece et al., 1997; Eisenhardt and
Martin, 2000) is expected more when both types of resources are imple-
mented together. The combination of environmental proactivity with
technological proactivity represents a more valuable, harder to imitate,
capability. Environmental proactivity thus meets the deﬁnition of dy-
namic capability established by Grifﬁth and Harvey (2001): The
creation of difﬁcult-to-imitate combinations of resources, including ef-
fective coordination of inter-organizational relationships, on a global
basis that can provide ﬁrms with a competitive advantage.

In this context of dynamic capabilities, we propose that there are
complementarities between resources spent on environmental
proactivity and resources spent on technological proactivity that im-
prove the positive economic effects of environmental protection.

We thus propose the following hypothesis:
H1. “The greater the ﬁrm's degree of technological proactivity, the greater
the improvement in ﬁnancial performance arising from environmental
proactivity”.

3. Sustainable Complementarities of Environmental Proactivity: A
Contingent Approach.
In the study of the economic consequences of environmental
proactivity, several authors have underlined the moderating effect of
external situational factors. Aragón-Correa and Sharma (2003), based
on the contingency theory developed by Lawrence and Lorsch (1967),
justify interest in considering these moderating effects. According to
the contingency theory, organizations' success largely depends on
their ability to adapt their structure and strategy to their type of situa-
tion or external context. This conclusion guided research attempting
to conﬁrm the win-win perspective in the study of the moderating ef-
fects of factors such as industry growth (Russo and Fouts, 1997), uncer-
tainty, complexity and muniﬁcence (Aragón-Correa and Sharma, 2003),
the degree of strictness of environmental requirements (Filbeck and
Gorman, 2004; Aguilera-Caracuel and Ortiz-de-Mandojana, 2013), the
presence of green external economic incentives (Clemens, 2006) and
the ﬁnancial crisis (Fujii et al., 2016).

Consideration of external contingencies is especially relevant in the
dynamic capabilities approach. The interpretation of dynamic capabili-
ties as generators of sustainable competitive advantages in rapidly
changing environments ﬁnds broad consensus in the literature (Teece
et al., 1997; Eisenhardt and Martin, 2000; Zahra and George, 2002;
Wang and Ahmed, 2007). According to this perspective, the ability to
adapt is a fundamental success factor in environments characterized
by change, where uncertainty is high and predicting future scenarios
is complicated.

Zahra et al. (2006) propose that potential gain from dynamic capa-
bilities is greater in dynamic environments. They justify that the ﬁrm
rarely needs to change substantive capabilities when the market or
technological environment is stable. In this stability, economic perfor-
mance may be harmed if the company expends signiﬁcant resources
to develop change capabilities. However, in a highly volatile environ-
ment, businesses often need changes in substantive capabilities. The
economic consequences of dynamic capabilities may be greater in this
situation. Based on these arguments, Zahra et al. (2006) establish that
the potential value of dynamic capabilities is moderated by the dyna-
mism of the external environment.

In the context of our research, certain aspects related to the uncer-
tainty of the environment could moderate the economic beneﬁts from
complementarities between environmental and technological
proactivity. Analyzing the possible moderation of some of these aspects
is useful for our interpretation of environmental proactivity as a dynam-
ic capability that facilitates a competitive advantage in turbulent envi-
ronments. We consider two of these aspects with the objective of
evaluating whether, as predicted by the dynamic capabilities approach,
the beneﬁts of using complementarities between environmental and
technological proactivity are sustainable, and even greater, in highly
volatile environments. The ﬁrst is the global ﬁnancial crisis that began
in 2008 (economic recession in Spain started in the third quarter of
2008 and lasted until the end of 2013). The second is regulatory pres-
sure from the European Union Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) on
ﬁrms generating greenhouse gases. This regulatory tool became effec-
tive in Spain in 2005, applying considerable pressure and uncertainty
on ﬁrms to adapt their production processes.3 The signiﬁcance, pressure
and uncertainty generated by these two phenomena are adequate to
study the sustainability of the competitive advantage of environmental
proactivity in dynamic environments. Through the ﬁrst we can analyze
the economic consequences of complementarities in two periods of time
with varying dynamism. Through the second we can analyze the eco-
nomic consequences of complementarities in two groups of companies
subjected to varying dynamism. These effects are considered through
the following two hypotheses:
H2A. “The economic beneﬁt from the complementarities between environ-
mental and technological proactivity is greater during the period of ﬁnan-
cial crisis”.
H2B. “The economic beneﬁt from the complementarities between environ-
mental and technological proactivity is greater in EU ETS ﬁrms than in non-
EU ETS ﬁrms”.

<Middle> Research Design.
This section describes the information sources, the sample, the design
of the variables and the methodology used in the empirical analysis.
4.1. Data Collection and Sample.
The variable proposed to measure environmental proactivity in
ﬁrms is based on the relative investment effort (compared with mean
effort in the sector) of each ﬁrm in the last few years to improve envi-
ronmental results. In this context, secondary information sources are
scarce; in Spain, only listed ﬁrms are required to systematically publish
information on environmental investment in their annual reports.

The publication of such data has been compulsory in Spain since the
resolution of the Institute of Accounting and Auditing (Instituto de
Contabilidad y Auditoría de Cuentas) dated 25 March 2002.4 This resolution
distinguishes environmental expenses, which are classiﬁed as operating
costs and must be included in the proﬁt and loss account, from environ-
mental investments, deﬁned as “elements added to the organization's
long-term assets, the primary purpose of which is to minimize environ-
mental impact and protect the environment, including the reduction or
elimination of future pollution arising from the organization's operations”
(ICAC Resolution of 25 March 2002. Article ﬁve).

The sample was selected from ﬁrms listed on the Madrid Stock Ex-
change Continuous Market during the 2005–2012 period to obtain an-
nual environmental investment data. The most important Spanish
ﬁrms are listed on this market, and it represents 99.3% of the traded vol-
ume in the Spanish Stock Market. We only selected ﬁrms from industrial
sectors, due to the smaller environmental impact of others (such as ﬁ-
nancial services, real estate, telecommunications and tourism).5 We
then excluded ﬁrms that did not provide information about
environmental investment in their annual reports.6 The ﬁnal database
used for the analysis is a panel with observations for 42 listed industrial
ﬁrms for each year in the 2005–2012 period. They represent around 75%
of all listed Spanish industrial ﬁrms in the considered period. The ﬁnal
sample therefore comprises a panel of 336 observations.
The information required to calculate both the dependent and inde-
pendent variables in the model was obtained from the annual reports
published by the ﬁrms registered in the CNMV (Comisión Nacional del
Mercado de Valores, the Spanish Securities Commission), from the SABI
(Sistema de Análisis de Balances Ibéricos, Analysis System of Iberian
Statements of Financial Position) database and from the Madrid Stock
Exchange database.
4.2. Variable Definitions.
The information required to calculate both the dependent and independent
variables in the model was obtained from the annual reports
published by the firms registered in the CNMV (Comisión Nacional del
Mercado de Valores, the Spanish Securities Commission), from the SABI
(Sistema de Análisis de Balances Ibéricos, Analysis System of Iberian
Statements of Financial Position) database and from the Madrid Stock
Exchange database.
4.2.1. Independent Variables.
The model has three principal independent variables: The ﬁrm's En-
vironmental Proactivity Index (EPIit), the ﬁrm's Technological Proactivity
Index (TPIit) and the interaction between them (EPIit × TPIit), the aim
of which is to analyze whether there are complementarities between
these variables.

4.2.1.1. Environmental Proactivity Index (EPI). As shown in the previous
section, the literature establishes that an environmentally proactive
ﬁrm is one that can implement advanced environmental protection
strategies, which go beyond legal requirements and normal industry
standards.

Most of the reviewed studies try to diagnose this capability from pri-
mary information obtained through interviews or surveys, classifying
ﬁrms based on qualitative aspects describing environmental practices
(for example, Aragón-Correa, 1998; Sharma and Vredenburg, 1998;
Henriques and Sadorsky, 1999; Aragón-Correa and Sharma, 2003;
Gonzalez-Benito and Gonzalez-Benito, 2005; Murillo et al., 2008;
Sambasivan et al., 2013).

The main advantage is that this considers the multidimensional na-
ture of environmental proactivity. However, it also has some disadvan-
tages (subjective perception of the interviewed individuals, lack of
consensus regarding qualitative aspects that determine whether a
ﬁrm should be classiﬁed in one environmental category or another
and, ﬁnally, information obtained from surveys is not exempt from se-
lection or common method bias).

Considering all these aspects, this study proposes a continuous and
objective measure calculated from objective secondary information:
Firms' investment in pollution control and prevention technologies.
This study considers that measuring proactivity involves verifying
that ﬁrms make an environmental protection effort above and beyond
practices required by law or the market that are regularly adopted by
ﬁrms in the sector. Therefore, it proposes an environmental proactivity
measure called the Environmental Proactivity Index (EPI), which enables
a comparison of the environmental proactivity of ﬁrms of varying sizes
from a range of sectors.

The Environmental Proactivity Index (EPIit) of ﬁrm i during year t is
deﬁned where ETCit is the environmental technology capital accumulated by
ﬁrm i in ﬁve years to the period t; Sizeit is the ﬁrm's turnover in period
ratio is the environmental investment effort of ﬁrm i in period
t; the ETCit
Sizeit
t (EIEit); and EIEs is the mean environmental investment effort of the
sector to which ﬁrm i belongs.

This study assumes that a ﬁrm's Environmental Technology Capital
(ETCit) is a direct function of the environmental technology capital accu-
mulated by the ﬁrm in previous periods, not simply the environmental
investment in the last period. The environmental technology innovation
process is thus seen as producing intangible assets that can be accumu-
lated. We use the method proposed by Pakes and Schankeman (1984)
to calculate technological capital stock. A ﬁrm's ETCit is calculated
using a stock measure constructed from a formulation of depreciated
sums of the environmental investments made in the last few periods,
using Koyck lags,
where P is the number of years before the current year in which envi-
ronmental investments affected the stock of Environmental Technology
Capital (ETC). Following the approach of Hirschey and Weygandt
(1985) for R&D investments, the useful life of investments in environ-
mental technology is considered to be ﬁve years; δ is the depreciation
rate, which is set at a constant rate of 20%, as recommended by
Henderson and Cockburn (1994)7 for R&D investments; and Environ-
mental Investmenti,t − p is environmental investment in a speciﬁc year.
Furthermore, the ETCit variable was normalized by each ﬁrm's turn-
over in each year considered in the panel (Sizeit). Given the economies
of scale in R&D activities (Schumpeter, 1961) and the lower risk in-
volved in such activities in ﬁrms with greater resources (Hitt et al.,
1991), it is believed that size is directly related to innovation (Hitt et
al., 1991). A positive relationship has also been suggested between
size and environmental investment (Arora and Cason, 1995).
mental Investment Effort: EIEit ¼ ETCit

This correction gives rise to a new variable, referred to as Environ-Environmental
Investment Effort.
Finally, the possible effect of sector on a ﬁrm's environmental in-
volvement is considered, subtracting mean sectoral Environmental In-
vestment Effort (EIEs) from the previous variable. This correction also
enables us to measure the extent to which ﬁrms go beyond regular prac-
tices in the sector, giving rise to the Environmental Proactivity Index: EPIit.
4.2.1.2. Technological Proactivity Index (TPI). The Technological Proactivity
Index (TPIit) of firmi during year t is defined as:TPIit ¼ TCit
Size it
−TIEswhere
TCit is the Technological Capital accumulated by firm i in the last few
years, calculated using the Koyck lags method. Size is the firm's turnover in period t; the
Size ratio is the Technological Investment Effort of firm i in period t
(TIEit); and TIEs is the mean Technological Investment Effort ðTIEit ¼ TCit
Size of the sector to which firm i belongs.

4.2.1.3. Dummy Variables to Measure External Situational Factors. Two
dummy variables were created to measure the possible moderating im-
pact of the two external situational factors considered in the study, the
ﬁnancial crisis and regulatory pressure from the EU ETS:

Dummy crisis. The value of this variable is 1 in all the crisis years of the
period (2009–2012), and 0 every year before the crisis (2005–2008).

Dummy ETS. The value of this variable is 1 for ﬁrms with activities
that, pursuant to European Directive 2003/87/EC, forces them to man-
age their CO2 emissions through the EU ETS and 0 otherwise.

4.2.1.4. Interaction Between EPI, TPI and External Factors. The complemen-
tarity concept used in the study is Edgeworth's: Activities are Edgeworth
complements if doing (more of) any one of them increases the returns to
doing (more of) the others. The intuitive idea behind this deﬁnition is
that “the whole is more than the sum of the parts” (Milgrom and
Roberts, 1995). The aim of this study is ﬁrst to capture possible synergies
or complementarities between Environmental Proactivity (EPI) and Tech-
nological Proactivity (TPI) and, secondly, to analyze whether the use of
said complementarities depends on external situational factors such as
the economic crisis and regulatory pressure from the EU ETS.

For the ﬁrst analysis, we used the methodology referred to in other
studies that analyze complementarities related to ﬁrms' environmental
strategies (Russo and Fouts, 1997; Christmann, 2000; Amores-Salvadó
et al., 2015), with the regression model including a two-way interaction
term formed by multiplying the Environmental Proactivity Index by the
Technological Proactivity Index8: (EPI × TPI). For the second analysis, the
regression includes a three-way interaction term formed by multiplying
the Environmental Proactivity Index by the Technological Proactivity Index
and the respective dummy variable (Dummy Crisis or Dummy ETS).

4.2.2. Dependent Variable.
The selection of a sample of listed ﬁrms enables the use of a market-
based result measure such as Tobin's q as a dependent variable. It was
previously used in numerous studies relating environmental strategy
to economic results (Dowell et al., 2000; Konar and Cohen, 2001; King
and Lenox, 2001; Guenster et al., 2011; Busch and Hoffmann, 2011;
Misani and Pogutz, 2015).

Market-based measures like Tobin's q are more forward looking
than result measures based on accounting data. Tobin's q speciﬁcally
represents the investor's evaluation of the ﬁrm's ability to generate fu-
ture economic earnings (McGuire et al., 1988). It can, therefore, be
more appropriate than accounting measures to capture the expected fu-
ture impact of long-term investments such as those related to environ-
mental or technological proactivity.

Tobin's q adopts the following expression.
This study speciﬁcally used the approach9 to Tobin's q deﬁned by
Chung and Pruitt (1994), as follows: Tobin
where
MVSit is the Market Value of Shares, calculated as MVSit = No. of shares
outstanding at the end of the yearit ∗ share priceit; MVDit is the Market
Value of Debt, calculated as MVDit = Value of Short-term Liabilities
+ Value of Long-term Liabilities − Value of Net Short-term Assets;
and VTAit is the Book Value of the Firm's Total Assets.

A Tobin's q value greater than one shows that the ﬁrm's stock is val-
ued at more than the replacement cost of its assets. A Tobin's q value of
less than one shows that the market does not value the ﬁrm's invest-
ment effort enough and is therefore unwilling to pay (in the form of cap-
ital or loans) for the capital needed for new investments.

4.2.3. Descriptive Statistics.
The basic descriptive statistics and the Pearson correlation coefﬁ-
cients are shown in Table 2.

4.3. Methodology.
We use panel data econometrics to estimate different regression
models that analyze the hypothetic complementarities between envi-
ronmental and technological proactivity, and its possible effect on eco-
nomic performance.

The advantage of panel data econometrics when estimating the
model's coefﬁcients is that we can consider the possibility of a speciﬁc
effect per ﬁrm, which is not accounted for in the explanatory variables.
In other words, the possible non-observable heterogeneity of ﬁrms,
which could be affecting their economic performance, is corrected in
the estimation. Furthermore, the technique provides for more observa-
tions, which increases degree of freedom, reduces co-linearity between
explanatory variables and, ultimately, increases the efﬁciency of the
econometric estimates (Arellano, 2003).

All estimations were made using STATA 12.0.

5. Results.
Tables 3 and 4 show the results obtained from applying panel data
models.

There are two types of model: The One-Way Model, which controls for
ﬁrm-speciﬁc effects; and the Two-Way Model, which controls for both
ﬁrm-speciﬁc and time-speciﬁc effects and could be uniformly inﬂuencing
the economic result of the panel ﬁrms in a speciﬁc period of time.

The Breusch–Pagan test rejects the null hypothesis that there are no
speciﬁc effects per ﬁrm, implying that non-observable heterogeneity is im-
portant, so the models with OLS estimators are discarded because of possi-
ble bias problems in the coefﬁcients. Moreover, the Hausman test shows
that non-observable heterogeneity is not correlated with the explanatory
variables, so random-effect estimators are consistent and more efﬁcient

9 Chung and Pruitt (1994) compare the ﬁnancial q and Tobin's q values obtained by
Lindenberg and Ross (1981). The results show that ﬁnancial q explains at least 96.6% of
Tobin's q.

that those calculated by ﬁxed effects in all the models except model 6,
where the Hausman test is signiﬁcant, so the model with ﬁxed effects is
the best speciﬁcation. We have included the Mundlak test to complement
the Hausman test results. This technique was proposed by Mundlak
(1978) as a means of relaxing the assumption in the random-effects estima-
tor that observed variables are uncorrelated with unobserved variables.
Other advantages of the Mundlak test over the Hausman test is that the for-
mer can include time-ﬁxed effects and it is cluster robust (Wooldridge,
2010). The results of this test conﬁrm that random-effect estimators are
more efﬁcient in most of the models. As a robustness check, the results
obtained from ﬁxed-effect models are included in the tables, showing
they are largely similar to those from random-effect models.

5.1. Effect of Complementarities Between Environmental and Technological
Proactivity on Economic Performance.
Table 3 shows the results of applying the models required to test
Hypothesis 1. Hypothesis 1 suggests that the greater the ﬁrm's degree
of technological proactivity, the greater the improvement in ﬁnancial
performance arising from environmental proactivity.

The stability of the model used is controlled by ﬁrst analyzing the in-
dividual effect of the Environmental Proactivity Index (EPI) variable on the
economic results (Model 1). Next, the Technological Proactivity Index var-
iable is added to the model (Model 2) and, ﬁnally, a two-way interaction
term between the Environmental Proactivity Index and the Technological
Proactivity Index (EPI × TPI) is added to test Hypothesis 1 (Model 3).

The data suggest that Hypothesis 1 is not rejected. One-Way Model 3
shows that the interaction term (EPI × TPI) is positive and signiﬁcant at
the 1% level. These results show that environmental proactivity generates
far greater returns when the ﬁrm is also technologically proactive and
that there are, therefore, complementarities between resources spent on
environmental proactivity and those spent on technological proactivity.
Two-Way Model 3 captures differences across time periods by addi-
tionally estimating an individual constant term for each time period
(D2005–D2011). This model shows that the interaction term (EPI × TPI)
is positive and signiﬁcant at the 5% level, showing that complementar-
ities between environmental and technological proactivity are
maintained even when heterogeneity is controlled across time periods.
It has been proved that time-speciﬁc effects are jointly signiﬁcant
(the appropriate F-test for joint signiﬁcance conﬁrms their importance
at levels far below 1%), suggesting that they should be included in the
model.

Once the interaction term has been added, the coefﬁcients of the pri-
mary variables (EPI and TPI) are considered, to reﬂect conditional rela-
tionships. Coefﬁcients in an interactive model describe the effects of
each independent variable on the dependent variable as varying,
according to the level of the other independent variable. In this speciﬁc
case, the EPI and TPI coefﬁcients, respectively, imply conditional effects
when the value of the other is 0. This means that the interpretation of
constituents of the interaction term has little implication and that,
once the interaction term is added, we are primarily interested in its sig-
niﬁcance, rather than the terms used to compute it (Friedrich, 1982).
5.2. Moderating Effect of External Contingencies—Global Financial Crisis
and EU ETS—on Complementarities Between Environmental and Techno-
logical Proactivity.

Table 4 shows the results of applying the models required to test
Hypothesis 2A and 2B.

Hypothesis 2A suggests that the economic beneﬁt from the comple-
mentarities between environmental and technological proactivity is
greater during a period of ﬁnancial crisis. To test this hypothesis, a
three-way interaction term between the Environmental Proactivity Index,
the Technological Proactivity Index and the Dummy Crisis control variable
(EPI × TPI × Dummy Crisis) is added (Model 6).10 The data suggest that
Hypothesis 2A is not rejected. Model 611 shows that the three-way inter-
action term (EPI × TPI × Dummy Crisis) is positive and signiﬁcant at the 1%
level. Furthermore, the R2 of the model increases from 0.227 with the
two-way interaction term (Model 4) to 0.302 with the three-way interac-
tion term (Model 6). It can, therefore, be said that the use of
complementarities between resources spent on environmental and tech-
nological proactivity was greater during than before the crisis.

Hypothesis 2B suggests that the economic beneﬁt from the comple-
mentarities between environmental and technological proactivity is
greater in EU ETS ﬁrms than in non-EU ETS ﬁrms. The data suggest
that Hypothesis 2B is rejected. Model 7 shows that the three-way inter-
action term (EPI × TPI × Dummy ETS) is not statistically signiﬁcant. It can,
therefore, be said that complementarities between environmental and
technological proactivity generate a better economic performance, but
that said performance does not depend on whether ﬁrms form part of
the EU ETS or not.

<Conclusion> Discussion and Conclusions.
This study, which analyzes the economic consequences of environ-
mental investment in a panel of listed Spanish ﬁrms, obtained results
that highlight some of the conditions and contexts in which it pays to
be green. The study is based on the initial assumption of two premises.
Firstly, this research assumes that one of the conditions guaranteeing
positive economic results from environmental strategy is the adoption
of a proactive attitude. Based on this premise that it pays to go beyond
compliance in environmental management, the competitive advantages
stemming from this proactive environmental strategy are analyzed in
more detail.

Secondly, the research also starts from the premise that the relation-
ship between proactive environmental strategy and economic perfor-
mance is conditioned by internal factors and external contingencies.

As a ﬁrst conclusion, the paper conﬁrms that the economic advan-
tages associated with environmental proactivity are greater when the
ﬁrm is also proactive in its innovation strategy. This is consistent with
previous literature that ﬁnds complementarities between resources
spent on environmental protection and those spent on technological
and/or organizational innovation (Christmann, 2000; Hottenrott et al.,
2012; Antonioli et al., 2014; Amores-Salvadó et al., 2015;
Rivera-Torres et al., 2015). According to our ﬁndings, Environmental
proactivity thus complements technological proactivity. This means
the advantages of proactively allocating resources to adopting environ-
mental protection measures exceed initial expectations. An improve-
ment in economic performance due to complementarities is more
likely under the conditions that usually accompany early adoption of
technology. This advantageous improvement can arise from applying
economies of scale and scope in the learning process, an increase in
experimenting to combine and reconﬁgure resources to respond to in-
ternal and external demands, and from competitors ﬁnding imitation
more complicated. Our results are consistent with the recommenda-
tions previously established by Hall and Wagner (2012) and Antonioli
et al. (2014) on the convenience of the appropriate combination of re-
sources in the company's strategy. In addition, our conclusions support
the idea previously pointed out by authors such as Aragón-Correa and

Sharma (2003) that environmental proactivity can be considered a dy-
namic capacity. Environmental proactivity thus entails the scope for re-
source reconﬁguration expected in a dynamic capacity.

The study also reaches conclusions regarding the stability and use-
fulness of the complementarities found. The stability of complementar-
ities in two adverse environmental circumstances is analyzed to
discover whether environmental proactivity can complement techno-
logical proactivity in dynamic, uncertain and volatile environments.
On the one hand, the study compares the advantages obtained in a crisis
period with those obtained in the period prior to the crisis. On the other,
the study compares the advantages obtained by a group of ﬁrms subject
to the pressure of the European Union Emissions Trading System (EU
ETS) with the advantages obtained by a group of ﬁrms that are not sub-
ject to this pressure.

Regarding the ﬁnancial crisis, we conclude that the improvement in
economic performance due to complementarities between environ-
mental and technological proactivity was greater during the recession
(2009–2012) than in the previous period of economic growth. While
ﬁrms' economic performance worsened during the crisis, this did not
apply to the beneﬁt of complementarities, which improved. Conse-
quently, proactive environmental strategy ensures the sustainability of
competitive advantage in dynamic environments, thus showing anoth-
er characteristic of dynamic capabilities. This conclusion conﬁrms the
proposition established by Zahra et al. (2006), and reinforces it with
empirical evidence. Our conclusions are also consistent with those re-
cently found by other authors, such as Fujii et al. (2016), in a study of
Japanese manufacturing ﬁrms. They also conclude that the ﬁnancial cri-
sis did not affect environmental efﬁciency despite impacting negatively
on technical efﬁciency. We have interpreted the results obtained in our
study as a sign of a greater need to make use of the resources and advan-
tages arising from environmental proactivity (especially related to cost
savings and the use of complementarities) in a recession. Furthermore,
the need to ﬁnd suitable reconﬁgurations and combinations of re-
sources to respond to the adversity was especially intense in the crisis
period, making complementarities an especially valuable resource.

Regarding the European Union Emissions Trading System (EU ETS)
context, this research concludes that beneﬁts from complementarities
were not greater under these conditions of dynamism in the environ-
ment, although they were sustained. The improvement in economic
performance arising from the complementarity between environmental
and technological proactivity was not signiﬁcantly different for the
group of EU ETS ﬁrms. We can, therefore, conclude that the advantages
of complementarities were maintained in this context of dynamism. Al-
though this result does not seem to support the idea that environmental
proactivity, interpreted as a dynamic capacity, generates superior ad-
vantages in dynamic environments, we can justify this result by
questioning the degree of dynamism caused by the EU ETS in the
study period considered. In fact, the pressure to reduce pollution was
not as high as expected in the ﬁrst (2005–07) and second (2008–12)
trading phases, when too many free permits were allocated, and no con-
sideration was given to the drop in activity caused by the economic cri-
sis starting in 2008. The excess of permits in the market drastically
reduced the pressure for adapting productive processes to less polluting
forms. As for possible future scenarios, ﬁrms must be prepared for the
likelihood of stricter EU ETS conditions in the medium term. European
Union reforms to improve the efﬁcacy of this mechanism (full auction-
ing for power generators, backloading (postponed auctions of about 900
million allowances that will return to the market in 2020), etc., ulti-
mately aim to push CO2 prices up. This opens a future line of research re-
lated to the analysis of more stringent ETS phases, where the search for
complementarities between environmental investments and other or-
ganizational and technological resources could be decisive for adapting
production processes at a reasonable cost.

Our conclusions represent a step forward in the analysis of the rela-
tionship between environmental and economic performance, and are,
therefore, of interest for the academic community. Since they identify
some innovative aspects of the conditions and contexts in which it
pays to be green, they help clarify the controversy surrounding this
topic. Business managers designing environmental strategy might also
ﬁnd this study useful as it can show them that it pays to go beyond com-
pliance and regular sector practices. The beneﬁts of these proactive en-
vironmental strategies are greater than managers initially expect as
they guarantee a win-win situation in which both environmental and
economic results improve and their implementation leads to comple-
mentarities with other resources. A proactive environmental strategy
brings sustainable competitive advantages that are especially valuable
in dynamic environments. Private and public managers' interpretation
of environmental proactivity as a dynamic capacity offers many possi-
bilities to improve competitiveness in companies and in industry.

References
