1. Introduction

The dependence of smallholder farmers on forest resources for their
sustenance and livelihoods is a major driver of deforestation and degra-
dation of forest resources in tropical countries (Amare et al., 2012; FAO,
2007). African nations lead the global list of countries with the highest
deforestation rates (Naoto, 2006). Forest degradation in Ethiopia is pri-
marily being caused by human activities (Reusing, 1998; Teketay et al.,
2010) and has led to considerable habitat fragmentation (Wilcove et al.,
1986), a decreasing population (Laurance et al., 2006) and extinction of
indigenous plant and animal species (Wright and Muller-Landau,
2006), as well as a decline in provision of soil protection, water conser-
vation and favourable microclimate services (Aerts et al., 2011). Forest
degradation is most pronounced in the highlands of the Amhara region,
where natural forests and sacred groves have continuously been
overexploited during past decades. The deforestation has led to high
runoff resulting in degraded landscapes, decreasing crop and livestock
productivity, sedimentation of water bodies, increased food insecurity
and increasingly high loss of the resource base and the attached ecosys-
tem services (Amare et al., 2016; Bongers et al., 2006; Aerts et al., 2016).
Zege peninsula, which is located in the Amhara Regional State, is one
of the remnants of dry Afromontane forest patches in Ethiopia. This for-
est has considerable religious, economic and ecological importance as it
attracts local and international pilgrims, serves as a source of livelihood
for local communities, and is rich in biodiversity (Alelign et al., 2007;
Teklehaymanot and Giday, 2007). However, recent studies have
shown that unsustainable wood extraction and marketing of wood
products by local populations have increased (Teklehaymanot and
Giday, 2007; Alelign et al., 2011) thereby contributing to the degrada-
tion of the forest ecosystem and the nearby Lake Tana (Amare et al.,
2012; Amare et al., 2017). This, in turn, has led to reduced livelihood op-
tions, economic and habitat losses, threatened biodiversity, undermined
the valuable services provided by biological diversity and increased the
risk of climate change.

In order to reverse this trend, innovative approaches are required
that integrate environmental conservation objectives and livelihood im-
provements for the local communities (Alelign et al., 2011). A more de-
tailed understanding of the link between forests and local livelihoods
enables the promotion of more sustainable management practices
while maintaining acceptable levels of utilization (Shaanker et al.,
2004; Lepetu and Oladele, 2009). Hence, investigating the dependence
of local communities on their forest resources is vital to devise appropri-
ate forest management and conservation strategies.

There is no shortage of studies that investigate how socio-economic
household characteristics and local institutions affect deforestation, for-
est degradation and conservation (e.g., Adhikari et al., 2004; Faham et
al., 2008; Bembridge and Tarlton, 1990; Lepetu and Oladele, 2009;
Lockwood et al., 2010; Manyatsi and Hlophe, 2010; Amare et al., 2016;
Mowo et al., 2016). However, these studies are highly speciﬁc to loca-
tion and context (Kaimowitz and Angelsen, 1998; Clark et al., 2008).
Therefore, little consensus exists with regard to which drivers inﬂuence
deforestation and forest degradation on a generalized and abstract level
(Vadez et al., 2005; Indarto and Mutaqin, 2016). Local case studies (e.g.,
Adhikari et al., 2004; McElwee, 2008; Inoni, 2009; Lepetu and Oladele,
2009) are thus considered to provide reliable and useful accounts of
these processes and their causes and dynamics (Kaimowitz and
Angelsen, 1998). Hence, in order to determine the extent of deforesta-
tion and forest degradation at the Zege peninsula and to identify the fac-
tors inducing these processes, a detailed local-level study is needed.
Such a study could also serve as an initial step toward formulating pol-
icies conducive for an equitable and sustainable management of forest
resources (Lepetu and Oladele, 2009).

The following socio-demographic variables have been reported in the
literature as being correlated with household wood extraction: education
(e.g., Ricardo et al., 1998; Baba et al., 2015) or years of schooling of the
household head (Inoni, 2009), age of the household head, dependency
ratio (Rahut et al., 2016), male gender (Eneji et al., 2015) and household
size (Inoni, 2009; Knight and Rosa, 2012). Lack of employment opportu-
nities (Manyatsi and Hlophe, 2010; Usman et al., 2016) was positively
while income from paid wages, total land size and income from farming
(Bwalya, 2013) were negatively correlated with income from forest prod-
ucts (McElwee, 2008). Extension services (Adugna, 2008), remittances
and credit (Berhanu, 2003) enabled engagement of famers in more
remunerable activities and reduced wood extraction. Dysfunctional
local institutions increased the likelihood of deforestation (Lockwood et
al., 2010; Mowo et al., 2016). However, the set of variables included in
these analyses varied, and the direction and strength of these relation-
ships have not always been consistent in the literature. Moreover, most
of these studies fail to differentiate conceptually distinct mechanisms
and motivations of smallholder-driven deforestation and forest degrada-
tion. With the current study we, therefore, aim to undertake a compre-
hensive empirical assessment of the factors driving deforestation and
forest degradation by smallholders at the Zege peninsula.

The objectives of this study are (i) to explore the economic depen-
dence of rural populations in the study area on wood products and their
contribution to household cash income; (ii) to identify the primary moti-
vations of smallholders to extract forest products; and (iii) to assess the
effectiveness of local forest management traditions. We have used wood
extraction by smallholders as a proximate measure for deforestation
and forest degradation. Compared to traditional land use and forest inven-
tory-based attempts to operationalize deforestation and forest degrada-
tion, this approach has the advantage of directly linking these processes
to livelihood activities and household-level indicators of well-being
(Indarto and Mutaqin, 2016). Furthermore, we have used the term
wood rather than fuel wood in our study since wood biomass is used
for various purposes in addition to household energy in the study area.

This paper is novel with regard to the following aspects: (i) we pro-
vide a detailed account of a speciﬁc forest management tradition in the

study area that, as to the best of our knowledge, has not been presented
yet elsewhere; (ii) we apply the Heckman two-steps econometric
model to analyse the drivers of wood extraction and to reveal the small-
holders' motivations to exploit their forest resources; and (iii) we pro-
pose to include livelihood options as a modiﬁer variable when
assessing the relationship between education and gender on smallhold-
er wood extraction.

2. Conceptual Framework.
While large-scale commercial deforestation has become a major
driving force of forest destruction in the Amazon and Indonesia since
the 1980s, smallholders remain the primary agents of forest degrada-
tion and deforestation in most parts of South Asia and sub-Saharan Af-
rica to date (Rudel et al., 2009). Agricultural expansion and wood
extraction are among the main direct or proximate causes of smallhold-
er-driven deforestation, and a variety of economic, political, historical,
institutional, cultural, demographic and technological factors have
been identiﬁed as its underlying causes of
these processes
(Chakravarty et al., 2012; Geist and Lambin, 2001).

Despite numerous studies on smallholder-driven deforestation and
forest degradation, the conceptual understanding of their motivations
to exploit their forest resources remains relatively vague. The point of
departure for our study is the empirical observation that smallholder
farmers utilize and, at times, overexploit the forest driven by two funda-
mentally opposing motivations (cf. Shackleton and Shackleton, 2007;
Wunder et al., 2014), viz. (1) the reliance on forest products as a safety
net in absence of other sufﬁcient livelihood options, in times of food scar-
city or income shortage (we label this motivation “wood extraction for
need”); and (2) the extraction of forest products to maximize household
income when proﬁtable market opportunities for forest products exist
despite the availability of sufﬁcient alternative, non-forest livelihood op-
tions (we label this motivation “wood extraction for greed”). This concep-
tual distinction is supported by the observation that often speciﬁc socio-
economic strata are engaged in and linked to these opposing forms of for-
est utilization: while the safety net function of forests and extraction of
subsistence products is particularly important for the very poor and vul-
nerable parts of the rural population, forest use for cash income genera-
tion is more pronounced among better-off households and their
absolute incomes from forest products are often larger (Angelsen et al.,
2014). Yet, in practice this distinction is less neat, as forest exploitation
by the vulnerable and the better-off rural households may occur in paral-
lel, and many rural households in fact exploit forests for subsistence and
income generation at the same time. However, each of these two mecha-
nisms of forest exploitation requires a particular and distinct set of re-
sponses to be redressed. Separating these concepts analytically may,
therefore, add to an improved understanding of the factors contributing
to deforestation and forest degradation in a particular case, thereby facil-
itating the formulation of effective location-speciﬁc policy responses.

We use the Heckman two-steps model to investigate smallholder
forest exploitation at the Zege peninsula. The ﬁrst model equation iden-
tiﬁes the socio-economic determinants of the households' involvement
in wood extraction. We conceptualize this step to assess the overall de-
pendency of villagers from the forest resources and to reveal incidences
of need and greed based wood extraction, if present. The second model
equation uncovers the factors that determine the amount of annual
household wood extraction from the forest, which we conceptualize
to separate need from greed based forest exploitation.

<Middle> Materials and Methods.
3.1. The Study Area.
The study was conducted at Zege peninsula (°40′ to 11°43′N and
37°19′ to 37°21′E), located at the southern shores of Lake Tana
(Alelign et al., 2011). The main land use type on the peninsula was
coffee forest (1060 ha), with non-coffee forest land uses covering only
12.5 ha. The peninsula harbours seven old Ethiopian orthodox monas-
teries. The average monthly temperature ranged from 11 °C to 27 °C,
while the mean annual rainfall was 1659 mm with a bimodal distribu-
tion (Amare et al., 2012). The ofﬁcial population on the peninsula was
5143 people living in1285 households (ibid.).

The remnant natural forests located at the peninsula have tradition-
ally been considered as a sacred place and, therefore, have remained rel-
atively unaffected by human exploitation in the past. These forests have
great conservation and biodiversity value, serve as sanctuaries for en-
dangered plant and animal species and are indicator sites of the original
ecological landscape (Teklehaymanot and Giday, 2007). Alelign et al.
(2007) found 113 woody plant species of which 56% were trees,
33%shrubs and 11% lianas. Most of the forest area has traditionally
been used by local populations for cultivation of coffee. It is believed
that the monks who ﬁrst inhabited the peninsula provided coffee as
the only income source for the local community and excommunicated
ploughing, livestock production and wood extraction for the sake of
protecting the spirituality of the peninsula (Amare et al., 2012). The pro-
duction of non-timber forest products (NTFPs) has been the main cus-
tomary source of livelihood at the peninsula for generations. As
customary owners of the forest, the community members harvested
coffee, fruits (mango, lemon, papaya, banana, etc.), and Rhamunus
prinoides planted inside the natural forest. Farming activities did not
constitute a livelihood activity in the study area.

Since around the 1970s, wood extraction has increasingly been prac-
ticed by the community to supplement their livelihoods in the after-
math of two heavy storms that devastated the forest and led to a
decline in NTFP production (Amare et al., 2012). Alelign et al. (2007)
found 341 coppiced or dead stumps/stems per ha and concluded that
the forest was heavily exploited for wood extraction. They also found
very few mature trees in the forest and suggested that this would jeop-
ardize the future regeneration of the forest as a whole. Since around
2007, sheep fattening has been promoted by governmental extension
agents as a resilience strategy in light of declining livelihoods, ignoring
the religious ban of livestock on the peninsula.

Currently, the community in Zege is legally allowed to extract NTFPs
and wood from the forest. Apart from the religious ban of farming and
livestock production there exist customary by-laws regulating felling
of mature trees from the forest. According to these by-laws, households
are required to obtain upfront permission from the local forest enforce-
ment committee, which consists of the kebele administrator, the Devel-
opment Agent and three elected individuals from the community. To
obtain permission, households interested to cut trees must present a
convincing reason, such as house construction or income needs. Felling
must be limited to mature and dying trees that do not re-grow. There
was no limitation on the amount of wood extraction, neither at the
level of the entire community nor for individual households.

3.2. Sampling and Data Collection.
Zege peninsula was purposively selected for this study due to the
available natural forest patch and current pressures on the forest re-
sources caused by wood extraction. A multi-stage sampling procedure
was used to select sample households. Simple random sampling and
proportion-to-population-size methods were employed to select the re-
spondents from two kebeles (Ura and Yiganda). For the household sur-
vey, 120 respondents were selected representing 9.3% of the total
population.

The semi-structured survey questionnaire was modiﬁed after pre-
testing and administered to respondents in their local language. Infor-
mation was collected on (a) socio-demographic household characteris-
tics, e.g., sex, age, family size and assets owned; (b) livelihoods, e.g.,
income sources, involvement in coffee production and other livelihood
activities, household wellbeing and risk; (c) wood extraction, e.g.,
amounts harvested and preferred tree products; (d) support services

available, e.g., credit and extension; (e) forest management conditions,
e.g., by-laws and their effectiveness and the respondents' opinions on
forest management; and (f) major problems, e.g., diseases and market
access. Checklists used for Focus Group Discussions (FGDs) and key in-
formant interviews contained general information on the forest-based
livelihood activities and management interventions and were designed
to elicit a range and depth of information on the overall conditions of
the peninsula. Also, non-participant observation was used to triangulate
information obtained from interviews and discussions during the two
months of ﬁeld research at the peninsula from January to March 2010.
The researchers observed the daily interactions within the community,
as well as activities related to management, utilization and marketing of
forest resources. Due to the absence of recorded data an estimation
procedure was used in combination with physical measurements to
determine the actual annual household-level wood extraction.
During the FGDs it became clear that people could estimate the
amount of wood extracted in reed boatloads very easily and with
reasonable accuracy. We determined the average weight of one
load (Ogunkunle and Oladele, 2004) by weighing 12 randomly col-
lected sun-dried loads piled at the farmers' backyards using a 50 kg
spring balance. The weight of wood loads intended for consumption
and sale did not differ as conﬁrmed by 94.17% of the households and
observation. The average weight of a regularly used wood load was
0.34 tons. Survey respondents were asked dichotomous choice ques-
tions of ‘yes’ or ‘no’ for wood extraction from the forest for various
purposes including consumption, providing as gift to relatives and
marketing. Ultimately, the respondents were asked to estimate the
approximate number of boat loads of wood extracted for each of
these purposes during the previous year.

3.3. Data Analysis.
Content analysis, descriptive statistics and econometric modelling
were used to analyse the data. Paired t-test was used to establish signif-
icance levels for difference of means for continuous and categorical in-
dependent variables and participation in wood marketing, measured
as a dichotomous response of ‘wood market participant’ and ‘non-par-
ticipant’, respectively (McElwee, 2008; Rahut et al., 2016).

The analysis was organized on the concept that wood extraction oc-
curs for two main reasons; i.e., consumption and marketing. There is
some non-random segment of the community engaged in wood extrac-
tion for marketing as a source of income. Hence, a sample selection
econometric model was used to analyse the factors that affect the
households' participation in wood extraction and marketing using the
Limdep7 NLogit software. A non-random sample occurs since the sam-
ple is comprised of households who either extract wood for sale or do
not extract for sale in addition to extraction for consumption. To correct
for the sample selection bias, the ﬁrst stage of Heckman analysis (Probit
model) estimates the expected value of the error term that is included
as additional variable in the second stage of the analysis (Hoffmann
and Kassouf, 2005). The model helps to reﬂect an individual's self-selec-
tion (Heckman, 1979; Cameron and Trivedi, 2005) and avoids bias that
could arise from the treatment of different groups having particular
characteristics for making decision choices (Dettmann and Dimitri,
2009; Maddala, 1983; Rahut et al., 2016). The ﬁtness of the Heckman
model was conﬁrmed from a signiﬁcant rho value (selection bias) ob-
tained from the ﬁrst selection equation (Cameron and Trivedi, 2005;
Bärnighausen et al., 2011). Variance inﬂation factor (for continuous var-
iables) and contingency coefﬁcient tests (for discrete variables) showed
absence of multicollinearity among the independent variables used in
the model (O'Brien, 2007). Also, to avoid inﬂation of standard errors
due to multicollinearity between the correction term and the included
regressors, income from coffee was used in the Probit model but exclud-
ed from the regression equation.
<Conclusion> Results and Discussion.
4.1. Socioeconomic Characteristics of the Respondents.
The number of households who were involved in wood marketing as
a source of income was signiﬁcantly greater than the number of non-
participants. There were signiﬁcant differences between both categories
of households with regard to average age, average income from sheep
fattening, land size, annual income from coffee, income from ﬁshing,
amount of household wood consumption, total wood extracted, amount
of remittance received and number of temporal out-migrant family
members (Table 1). Wood market non-participants were signiﬁcantly
older, had higher numbers of out-migrant family members, owned larg-
er land and gained signiﬁcantly higher income from coffee, livestock,
ﬁshing and remittance. Also, the non-participants consumed signiﬁ-
cantly higher volumes of wood. These ﬁndings suggest that primarily
vulnerable and disadvantaged households were involved in wood ex-
traction, which already points toward “wood extraction for need”
being the predominant mechanism of smallholder-based forest exploi-
tation in the study area. Households that participated in wood market-
ing were signiﬁcantly better educated and harvested signiﬁcantly larger
volumes of wood than the non-participants.

Generally, the households of Zege were severely constrained in their
agricultural livelihood options as they lacked access to and ownership
rights in land outside the forest area. This made them entirely depen-
dent on food purchases for their sustenance and their livelihoods very
vulnerable and risky.

4.2. Household Annual Wood Harvest.
Wood extraction was conceived as the total annual amount of wood
(sun-dried) harvested from live trees by a household for consumption,
marketing or a gift to relatives. On average, the total average annual
wood extraction for consumption amounted to 0.32 tons/capita,
which is lower than household wood extraction (1.14–1.36 tons/capita)
elsewhere in Africa (Bembridge and Tarlton, 1990). However, compared
to these reports we may have underestimated household wood
consumption due to the fact that we did not include leaf and dry branch
biomass in our estimates.

Total annual wood extraction in the study area amounted to
3969.4 tons, translating to values greater than 3.75 tons/ha ∗ yr−1. Yet,
recall problems and strategic answering behaviour by respondents
were two potential error sources despite careful data triangulation. Ac-
cording to the perception by the local community, the high regeneration
rate in the forest more than compensated the annual amount of wood
extraction. However, estimates of annual increment for comparable
tropical and sub-tropical dry montane forests typically range between
1.45 and 2.75 tons/ha ∗ yr−1(IPCC, 2016), which suggests that wood ex-
traction in the study area cannot be considered sustainable. From non-
participant observation it was clearly visible that the forest system is
heavily degraded as most big trees were cut and only small to medium
trees and herbaceous plants dominated the forest. Besides, natural trees
species have been replaced by cash crops like Catha edulis and Eucalyp-
tus globulus. Evidence of unplanned and unsustainable forest exploita-
tion in the area was also conﬁrmed by Alelign et al. (2007).

4.3. Factors Affecting Wood Market Participation

Age and education of the household heads were positively correlat-
ed with wood market participation. Households with older heads were
more likely to participate in wood marketing as a source of cash income
by 24.6% (Table 2). From observation and FGDs we conﬁrmed that wood
was frequently sold to middlemen by elder household heads as they
were less likely to engage in other livelihood activities due to their la-
bour limitations. In contrast, McElwee (2008) and Rahut et al. (2016)
found a negative correlation between forest income or livelihood and
age. The main reason our ﬁnding diverged from established literature
is the general lack of sufﬁcient income from other livelihood activities,
such as NTFPs and farming. This is in line with Manyatsi and Hlophe
(2010) and Usman et al. (2016) who suggested that extraction and
sale of wood was related to lack of alternative income opportunities,
and Bwalya (2013) who reported that households allocated less labour
to wood extraction when returns from agriculture or other income
sources increased, thereby lowering their dependence on forest activi-
ties. Hence, we propose that age of household head and engagement
in wood marketing are negatively correlated as long as there exist sufﬁ-
cient income opportunities from other livelihood sources. In situations
where alternative livelihoods are limited, elder households seem to
have less access to these alternative income sources, and the reverse
holds true.

An increase in formal education by one year increased the engage-
ment in wood marketing by 6.56%. This ﬁnding is in contrast to
Adhikari et al. (2004) who argued that fuelwood collection was increas-
ingly unproﬁtable with increasing levels of education due to higher op-
portunity costs of labour; and Rahut et al. (2016) and Inoni (2009) who
found a negative relationship between forest-based livelihood choices
and years of schooling. Our ﬁnding is also inconsistent with Gebre-
Egziabher (2001) and Ricardo et al. (1998) who found an inconsistent
or insigniﬁcant relationship between wood biomass collection and edu-
cation level of the household head. However, other researchers found
that the education level of the household head signiﬁcantly raised the
probability of fuelwood collection (Babulo et al., 2008; Chhatre and
Agrawal, 2008; Damte and Koch, 2011). As already discussed above, ex-
traction and sale of wood in the study area was related to the absence of
alternative income opportunities. We, therefore, propose that the ob-
served relationship is primarily an expression of a general lack of sufﬁ-
cient alternative livelihoods for younger, better educated households.
With a higher level of education these villagers seem to be able to better
and more intensively exploit existing livelihood options, such as
extracting wood from the forest more productively, locating new mar-
kets and/or new customers and hence selling more wood than less ed-
ucated villagers. From observation and FGDs we conﬁrmed that
attending high school was a common strategy for a relatively large
number of young villagers in absence of lucrative employment opportu-
nities or access to land. Wood extraction from the community forest
was the only viable livelihood option for these villagers after graduation.
This ﬁnding implies that, in order to reduce forest degradation and de-
forestation in the study area, more than education and awareness cam-
paigns for sustainable forest management interventions are needed that
improve the access of forest-dependent households to land resources
and/or create sustainable livelihood alternatives, which are decoupled
from primary production (cf. Ricardo et al., 1998; Adugna, 2008).

Dependency ratio, income from ﬁshing and remittance were nega-
tively and signiﬁcantly correlated with the households' market partici-
pation (Table 2). As the dependency ratio of a household increases by
one unit, there was a 3.83% lower likelihood that the households will en-
gage in wood marketing. A similar result was recorded by Rahut et al.
(2016) who found a negative correlation between wood extraction
and the number of family members below 15 years of age. An increase
in income from ﬁshing by 1 ETB reduced the probability of a household
participating in wood marketing by 1.1%. This ﬁnding was in line with
the literature (e.g., Adhikari et al., 2004; Bwalya, 2013; Baland et al.,
2007). Further, the likelihood for a household to engage in wood mar-
keting was reduced by 12.47% if the household received cash remit-
tance. This ﬁnding was congruent with Brown et al. (2006) who
stated that economic support from siblings improved the households'
participation in more remunerable activities and hence reduced their
involvement in wood marketing. Thus, the analysis conﬁrmed that for-
est exploitation by smallholders in the study area was primarily under-
taken to secure their sustenance needs in absence of alternative
livelihood options.

4.4. Factors Affecting the Amount of Annual Wood Extraction.
The amount of wood extracted from the forest by local communities
was inﬂuenced by several factors (Table 3). Male-headed households
harvested 1.04 tons more wood than female-headed households.
From observation and FGDs we conﬁrmed that women preferred to col-
lect leaves and branches, which were abundantly available in the Zege
forest, instead of heavy logs. The result was in line with Bembridge
and Tarlton (1990) who found that women extracted less wood from
forests due to their other household commitments; Eneji et al. (2015)
who found that women, compared to men, harvested more NTFPs and
very little timber; and Lepetu and Oladele (2009) who found evidence
of decreased deforestation in areas where the household heads were
mainly women. However, Bembridge and Tarlton (1990) reported
that women extracted more wood than men if engaged in alternative
livelihood activities; and Gebre-Egziabher (2001) found an insigniﬁcant
impact of household head gender on the amount of wood biomass ex-
traction. Hence, we propose that the relationship between gender and
volume of wood extraction is modiﬁed by the availability of alternative,
more easy-to-collect biomass preferred by women, such as dead wood
and leaves.

In line with an increased likelihood of wood market participation,
the amount of wood extracted increased with an increasing level of for-
mal education by 0.94 tons. As discussed above, this ﬁnding can be relat-
ed to the absence of alternative income opportunities. Additionally,
more educated household heads may have been able to better exploit
forest livelihood options, such as extracting wood from the forest
more efﬁciently, managing a larger customer base and/or identifying
new market opportunities more quickly than less educated villagers.

If a household member served in local decision-making positions,
this household was likely to extract 0.834 tons more wood than other
households. FGDs and key informant interviews conﬁrmed that some
households extracted wood without permission from the forest en-
forcement committee due to kinship relations and bribing. Even when
caught harvesting wood illegally, these households were not ﬁned due
to the protection received from their inﬂuential family members. Simi-
lar evidence was reported by Adhikari et al. (2004); and deforestation
and forest degradation was found to aggravate as a consequence
(Lockwood et al., 2010; Mowo et al., 2016).

Households engaged in apiculture were found to extract 0.87 tons
wood less annually compared to households, which did not practice
beekeeping. Similarly, households receiving remittance extracted
0.881 tons wood less annually compared to households that did not re-
ceive such payments. These ﬁndings are consistent with literature
reporting that economic support and income reduced a household's
propensity to engage in wood extraction for livelihoods (Berhanu,
2003). The selectivity bias, expressed by the inverse Mills ratio, signiﬁ-
cantly affected the households' total amount of wood extracted. There
were other unobserved factors (Cameron and Trivedi, 2005) that signif-
icantly contributed to the probability of wood market participation and
increased the annual amount of wood harvested by 0.771 tons. Overall,
the negative correlation of extraction volumes with apiculture and re-
mittance and the increasing extraction by young, educated households
again represented evidence of forest exploitation for need. Simulta-
neously, these results also conﬁrmed incidences of greed-driven forest
exploitation, as indicated by the increasing extraction volumes by inﬂu-
ential persons and their relatives and, to some lesser extent, by male-
headed households.

4.5. The Effectiveness of Customary Forest Management.
Our results suggest that nepotism and corruption have signiﬁcantly
contributed to the de-facto abandonment of the customary by-laws on
forest management. 91.7% of the respondents considered these by-
laws as irrelevant, as they were either no longer convinced of the neces-
sity of such rules, or the by-law had not affected their actions anymore.
Partiality and lack of fair enforcement of these rules were perceived as
major shortcomings (38.3% and 16.7%, respectively). This decreased
the legitimacy of the regulations and reduced accountability and fair-
ness among the community members (Lockwood et al., 2010). It was re-
ported that community members cut big trees for income, disregarding
the bylaws and claiming their right to harvest trees from their own land
instead. Also, reports on cutting parts of the trunks of big trees to enable
their rapid drying to get the desired permission from the forest enforce-
ment committee were conﬁrmed. There were also reports of theft and
illegal cutting of trees from land owned by other villagers attributed to
aggravating livelihood stress. Such instances increased conﬂict within
the community and depleted trust and social capital.

4.6. Conclusion and Implications for the Management of the Zege Forest.
The results of this study conﬁrmed the hypothesis that forest exploi-
tation was mainly driven by the smallholders' attempts to cater for their
sustenance and livelihood needs. Insufﬁcient income from non-forest
livelihood activities was the main driver of deforestation and forest deg-
radation in the study area. We found evidence that this fact also mediat-
ed the relationship between age and wood extraction, as well as the
relationship between the level of education and wood extraction. Pro-
moting formal or informal employment and livelihood diversiﬁcation
in other sectors such as sustainable ﬁshing, ﬁsh farming or petty trade
could further help to reduce the villagers' dependence on the forest, par-
ticularly of households with young, well-educated household heads.
However, there are clear limitations with regard to which type of alter-
native livelihood options should be introduced or promoted in the
area, and how intensively these activities should be practiced – as
witnessed, e.g., by the detrimental effects that the governmental sheep
husbandry promotion program had on the forest condition, and recent
reports about the over exploitation and consequent depletion of Lake
Tana's ﬁsh stock. Improving infrastructure and facilitating market access
will be essential to support local communities diversify their livelihoods.
The fact that remittances signiﬁcantly decreased wood extraction indi-
cated that establishing a system of long-term credit could signiﬁcantly
help reduce forest degradation. Also, ecosystem services-based pay-
ments could be possible strategies to improve forest management, as
they increase rural incomes and potentially support the accumulation
of productive assets, while simultaneously linking these positive eco-
nomic effects to keeping the ecological forest conditions intact.

The results of the study further clearly indicated that increasing the
total income from NTFPs, such as coffee, R. prinoides, honey and fruits,
could be a strategy to reduce the amount of wood extraction from the for-
est. Further work is required to investigate and promote the use of NTFPs
including currently neglected wild edible plants such as Ficus sur, Ximenia
american, Mimusops kummel or Syzygium guineense in local and interna-
tional markets. To more fully exploit the potential of these species for live-
lihood improvement and forest ‘conservation through use’ it is important
to better understand aspects such as their current contribution to food se-
curity, nutrition and the household economy; their ecology, reproduction
and productive capacity; the morphology and variability of these species
along various environmental gradients as well as their domestication po-
tential; the physical and chemical characteristics of various plant com-
partments including the nutritive, medicinal and/or biochemical value
of secondary plant compounds; current and potential future products
and uses, traditional processing technologies and potential improve-
ments; coordination, the distribution of rents and governance in value
chains of these products; and current and future market demand, cus-
tomer segments and quality requirements. Helping villagers to access
markets and obtain market information, to improve their bargaining
power toward other market participants, and to produce products that
meet customer expectations and conform to deﬁned quality require-
ments could help to reduce wood extraction.

Simultaneously, we found some evidence of “wood extraction for
greed” as represented by the fact that some part of total wood extraction
in the Zege forest was attributed to the relatively better-off and inﬂuential
households with more favourable access to resources and alternative live-
lihoods. The facts that local elites and their relatives misuse their decision-
making positions to extract more wood from the forest than other vil-
lagers and to do this partially illegally illustrate this point. More stringent
forest management and conservation rules and stricter rule enforcement
are required to reduce greed-driven wood extraction. For example, more
exclusive regulations should be deﬁned that limit the group of authorized
forest users to the truly vulnerable and needy villagers; and penalties
should be increased to discourage forest exploitation by those who do not
actually need forest income for survival.

The results further demonstrated a number of equality concerns in
the study area. First, households headed by male farmers extracted
more wood than female-headed households, and male farmers were
generally involved in more remunerative activities in the locality than
female farmers. This suggests that female residents were systematically
excluded from the beneﬁts of wood extraction for sale by current social
norms and gender roles. Female farmers were more often than not en-
gaged in less remunerative livelihood activities such as local brewing.
Our results, therefore, point out the general necessity to further investi-
gate the role of gender equality in the local community, and to address
existing barriers that limit the economic involvement of women
farmers. Second, our data suggest that young villagers were severely
disadvantages with regard to land and resource access, and hence, did
typically not possess attractive non-forest livelihood choices, which
made them highly dependent on wood extraction. These ﬁnding points
out the need to more clearly understand customary land tenure, inher-
itance and (re-)allocation mechanisms in the study area and to devise
institutions that could guarantee a more equitable access to resources
for the inhabitants of the Zege peninsula.

Our study also clearly demonstrates that the partiality in enforcement
of customary forest management by-laws undermined the legitimacy of
these regulations, weakened the position of the forest enforcement com-
mittee and contributed to an increasingly negligent attitude toward forest
protection among the community members. The fact that the by-laws
have been more or less openly violated and sanctions have no longer
been properly enforced seemed to have encouraged an increasing num-
ber of community members to extract unsustainable amounts of wood
from the indigenous trees on their lands. Thus, rather than exerting all
their efforts and energy on developing alternative livelihood activities, vil-
lagers could resort to the more easily accessible option of exploiting their
forest. Halting or reversing degradation of the Zege forest by reducing
wood extractions to sustainable levels would require the community to
revive their customary forest management by-laws complemented by
further regulations that reﬂect changing realities, as well as impartial
leadership by local decision makers.

Finally, our study yields a conclusion with regard to the effectiveness
of religious excommunications and customary rules for forest manage-
ment. While these institutions have undoubtedly been highly effective
over generations in the study area, they have increasingly been
neglected, disregarded or even abandoned in the face of increased def-
icits in daily sustenance by the local inhabitants during the last decades.
Hence, while the case of Zege suggests that natural resources such as
forests can indeed be managed by local by-laws and religious excom-
munications, in order to successfully sustain the resource in times of in-
creasing socio-economic stress and pressures these local and religious
by-laws should be supported by interventions aiming at improvements
in livelihood options. Overall, our study contributes to the literature by
providing contextual and analytical evidence for the relationship be-
tween socio-economic characteristics and forest resource exploitation
in the Zege peninsula's dry afromontane forests.

Acknowledgments
