1.  Introduction.  The P3 is among the most widely studied components in eventrelated potential (ERP) research.  It comprises a family of brain potentials including the novelty P3 and the target P3 (Sutton, Braren, Zubin, & John, 1965.  for reviews, see Donchin & Coles, 1988 .  Picton, 1992.  Polich, 2007).  The novelty P3, or P3a, is a frontocentral positivity evoked by the onset of novel, non-target stimuli.  The target P3, or P3b, has a more posterior distribution and is evoked by the onset of task-relevant stimuli that require some type of mental or motor response.  In this paper, we focus on the P3b and its relationship with the timing and types of mental events culminating in behavioral responses.  A long held view is that the P3b reﬂects context updating.  when an incoming stimulus deviates from the representation maintained in working memory, the representation is updated and a P3b is generated (Donchin & Coles, 1988.  Donchin, 1981.  Polich, 2007.  but see Verleger, 1988).  Implicit in this and other theories is the idea that the P3b is only evoked once a stimulus has been categorized.  According to this stimulus-evaluation account, P3b latency can be used to divide processing into two general stages – stimulusrelated and response-related.  P3b latency is strongly affected by the duration of stimulus-related processing.  Many studies have conﬁrmed that P3b latency increases when stimulus categorization is difﬁcult (Coles, Gratton, Bashore, Eriksen, & Donchin, 1985.  Kutas, McCarthy, & Donchin, 1977.  Magliero, Bashore, Coles, & Donchin, 1984.  Twomey, Murphy, Kelly, & O’Connell, 2015).  Alternatively, P3b latency is weakly affected by manipulations that prolong response planning, particularly if there is little temporal overlap between stimulus categorization and motor preparation.  The relationship between the P3b and responding remains controversial, however.  Donchin and Coles ascribed the P3b (i. e. , the P300) a role in strategic processing (1988).  They proposed that the P3b is not involved in immediate responding per se, but rather in some overarching process that operates in parallel or afterwards.  For example, stimulus categorization could inﬂuence future behavior by causing strategy shifts or changes in cognitive control.  In support of this view, the P3b sometimes follows the response, suggesting that it does not directly relate to responses (for a review, see Donchin & Coles, 1988).  Additionally, correlations between P3b latencies and response times (RTs) are sometimes weak or absent, reinforcing the idea that the P3b does not directly contribute to responses.  Other evidence indicates that the P3b plays a role in tactical processing, however (O’Connell et al. , 2012.  Verleger, Grauhan, & ´Smigasiewicz, in press.  Verleger, Ja´skowski, & Wascher, 2005.  for a review, see Nieuwenhuis, Aston-Jones, & Cohen, 2005).  By this view, the P3b bridges stimulus categorization and response preparation within trials.  In support of this view, many studies have found that the P3b precedes responses, and that P3b latencies correlate with RTs (for a review, see Verleger, 1997).  This suggests that responses depend on the mental process reﬂected in the P3b.  Building on these ﬁndings, O’Connell et al.  (2012) demonstrated that the P3b could be treated as a build-to-decision variable that peaked with behavioral responses in a range of tasks that varied stimulus contrast and modality.  Further evidence comes from studies that compare temporal synchronization of the P3b with stimulus onset and response commission.  Verleger et al.  (2005) compared the amplitudes of the P3b in stimulus-locked and response-locked waveforms.  They reasoned that if the P3b relates only to stimulus processing, it would be time-locked to stimulus onset and its amplitude would be largest in stimulus-locked waveforms.  Conversely, if the P3b signiﬁes the conclusion of stimulus processing and the organization of a response, its amplitude would be equal in stimulus-locked and response-locked waveforms.  P3b amplitude was, in fact, equal in stimulus-locked and response-locked waveforms, consistent with its role in tactical processing.  To summarize, the tactical and strategic views both assume a relationship between stimulus categorization and the P3b.  They differ, however, in whether they ascribe the P3b a role in immediate responses or future behavior.  Existing studies of the P3b latency are limited in key ways.  Some have found little to no relationship between P3b latencies and RTs despite the fact that the experimental manipulations would be expected to affect stimulus processing (for a review, see Verleger, 1997).  This may reﬂect shortcomings of the underlying stimulusevaluation account and the tactical view of the P3b, or limitations of the methods used to measure P3b latency.  Additionally, the relationship between P3b latencies and RTs is typically assessed by comparing their averages in different conditions (McCarthy & Donchin, 1981.  Ritter, Simson, Vaughan, & Macht, 1982), or by binning trials according to RTs and comparing average P3b latencies from trials with fast versus slow responses (Friedman, 1984.  Roth, Ford, & Kopell, 1978).  Both approaches ignore information about trial-by-trial variability in P3b latencies and RTs.  The peak latency of the P3b varies within individuals on the order of tens of milliseconds (Nishida, Nakamura, Suwazono, Honda, & Shibasaki, 1997.  Pfefferbaum, Ford, Roth, & Kopell, 1980a,b), raising the possibility that trial-by-trial ﬂuctuations in P3b latencies relate to changes in RTs (but see Ramchurn, de Fockert, Mason, Darling, & Bunce, 2014 for an alternate view).  The majority of studies comparing P3b latencies to RTs use tasks where stimuli must be categorized before responding.  Simple detection tasks, which require merely detecting the onset of a single repeating target stimulus, also evoke a P3b (Mertens & Polich, 1997.  Polich & Heine, 1996. 