1.  Introduction.  Augmenting/reducing (A/R) is assumed to reﬂect individual differences in the modulation of sensory input, and has usually been studied using amplitude measures of event-related potentials (ERP) elicited at different levels of stimulus intensity (e. g. , Buchsbaum & Silverman, 1968).  A pronounced increase in amplitudes of the auditory N1/P2 component, as a function of stimulus intensity, is thought to reﬂect sensory inhibition at high levels of stimulations (e. g. , Zuckerman, 1994) produced by serotonergic neurotransmission (Hegerl & Juckel, 1993).  This mechanism is essential for the ﬁltering properties of a gating mechanism that regulates sensory input to the cerebral cortex (Buchsbaum, Goodwin, Murphy, & Borge, 1971.  Buchsbaum & Silverman, 1968).  Individuals are classiﬁed as augmenters or reducers depending on whether they show a strong increase or weak increase or decrease on ERP amplitudes with increasing of stimulus intensity.  Beauducel, Debener, Brocke, and Kayser (2000) found that the N1/P2-slope calculated across 5–6 auditory intensity levels, spanning a wide intensity range, are required for a reliable assessment of auditory A/R.  The amplitude-intensity function slope (AIF), deﬁned as the slopes of the linear regression line for the individual P1/N1 and N1/P2 amplitudes across the 5–6 stimulus intensities (Brocke, Beauducel, John, Debener, & Heilemann, 2000.  Brocke, Beauducel, Tasche, 1999.  Hegerl, Gallinat, & Mrowinski, 1994.  Hegerl, Prochno, Ulrich, & Müller-Oerlinghausen, 1989) has been used as index of individual modes of processing sensory input (e. g. , Hegerl & Juckel, 1993).  A rich collection of ﬁndings have been reported by Buchsbaum, Haier, and Johnson (1983) and (Hensch, Herold, Diers, Armbruster, & Brocke, 2008) of psychiatric and psychological phenomena associated with augmenting-reducing.  In addition, reserch has demonstrated that the N1/P2 AIF of the ERPs is one of the numerous endophenotypes that are gaining importance in psychiatry and genetic research (e. g. , Brocke et al. , 2006.  Gottesman & Gould, 2003).  The N1/P2 AIF is considered important for clinical practice as it has been good to predict responses to lithium and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors treatments (Gallinat et al. , 2000.  Juckel et al. , 2004.  Mulert et al. , 2007.  Tien-Wen, Younger, Chen, & Tsai, 2005).  The N1/P2 AIF has been proved to be associated with 5-HTTLPR, a genetic polymorphism of the serotonin transporter coding gene (Gallinat et al. , 2003.  Hensch et al. , 2006.  Strobel et al. , 2003), and thus heritable (Sándor, Áfra, Proietti-Cecchini, Albert, & Schoenen, 1999).  In terms of personality traits, it was found that individuals scoring high on sensation seeking facets, and mainly on its disinhibition subscale, were augmenters and reducers tend to be sensation avoiding (Brocke et al. , 2000.  Brocke et al. , 1999.  Lukas, 1987.  Stenberg, Rosén, & Risberg, 1988.  von Knorring, 1980.  Zuckerman, 1990.  Zuckerman, 1994.  Zuckerman, Murtaugh, & Siegel, 1974.  Zuckerman, Simons, & Como, 1988).  Moreover, Eysenck’s extraversion trait was found positively associated with augmenting (Friedman & Meares, 1979.  Soskis & Shagass, 1974.  Stenberg et al. , 1988).  The validity of these ﬁndings was further supported by linking sensation avoiding and introversion with the defensive reducing pattern.  The N1/P2 AIF was found correlated with a risk factor for bipolar disorder in healthy individuals (Hensch, Herold, & Brocke, 2007), and with sensation seeking trait, which is suggested to be characterized by low serotonergic neurotransmission and a potential risk factor for mental disorders (Brocke et al. , 1999.  Hegerl, Gallinat, & Mrowinski, 1995).  In contrast, individuals with strong sensation-seeking tendencies are believed to be characterized by high dopaminergic, low noradrenergic, and low serotonergic activity (for a review see Zuckerman, 1994).  Augmenting has been also related to impulsivity (Barratt, Pritchard, Faulk, & Brandt, 1987.  Carrillo-De-La-Pena & Barratt, 1993).  Considering that impulsivity is an important trait of the reinforcement sensitivity theory (RST) of personality, it is surprising that no or little research has been done to evaluate the relation between RST traits and A/R of the ERPs.  The most recent version of the RST (Corr & McNaughton, 2012.  McNaughton & Corr, 2004, 2008.  McNaughton & Gray, 2000) postulates three major neuropsychological systems controlling approach and avoidance behavior.  (1) the Behavioral Approach System (BAS) controls active approach behavior in response to signals of reward and non-punishment and is activated by all forms of appetitive stimuli (including relief of nonpunishment).  (2) the Fight-Flight-Freeze system (FFFS) as a primary system that controls active avoidance and is activated by all forms of aversive stimuli (including frustrating nonreward).  (3) the Behavioral Inhibition System (BIS) controls passive avoidance in response to signals of punishment, nonreward, novelty, and by all forms of goal conﬂict, mainly for the co-activation of the FFFS and BAS.  This is a revision of the original RST formulated by Gray (1982) that highlighted only two of these systems, the BIS and the BAS.  In the original RST what is less apparent is the hidden complexity in and between these systems which renders any attempt to provide a psychometric description of them far from ordinary and prone to confusion (Corr, 2016).  As a consequence of this state of affairs existing rRST questionnaires fail to provide a comprehensive descriptive model and all of the existing ones have signiﬁcant theoretical and operational limitations with the result that there are still no comprehensive psychometric measures of the three revised systems.  The most signiﬁcant change to RST is the separation of FFFS/fear and BIS/anxiety processes (for a review see Rafael Torrubia, Caseras, Torrubia, & Caseras, 2008).  Although the newer classes of RST measures have addressed the separation of FFFS and BIS, most of them still conceived the BAS, as a unitary dimension.  However, there is compelling evidence that the BAS is multidimensional, both on the basis of empirical evidence (Carver & White, 1994.  De Pascalis, Varriale, & D’Antuono, 2010) and theoretical grounds (Corr, 2008.  Smillie, Cooper, Wilt, & Revelle, 2012).  In order to move along the temporo-spatial gradient to the ﬁnal primary biological reinforcer, Corr (2008) argued that it is necessary to engage in sub-goal scaffolding.  These processes, at each stage of the temporo-spatial gradient, consists of a number of operations (i. e. , identifying the biological reinforcer, planning behavior, and executing the plan) that involve other systems as working memory, executive control, etc. .  this is in accordance with the type of required cognitive operations.  The function of the BAS is to coordinate these functions as they relate to approach behaviors.  BAS controlled approach may be expected to entail a series of subprocesses, some of which sometimes oppose each other.  (1) behavioural restraint serving to plan and execute effective sub-goal scaffolding.  and (2) impulsive behaviour serving when cognitive planning can be replaced, at short temporo-spatial distance, by fast ‘getting’, or a physical grabbing of the ﬁnal biological reinforcer at near-zero temporo-spatial distance (Carver, 2005.  Corr, 2008).  This theoretical assumption does not imply that the emotional component of BAS behaviour would be attenuated at the early stages of approach behaviour, since the fulﬁlment of sub-goals is likely to entail periodic bursts of emotional excitement to maintain motivation across time/space (’temporal bridging’, Corr, 2008) during which approach behaviour is not being immediately reinforced (goal drive persistence).  Consistent with both theoretical and empirical considerations, Corr and Cooper (2016) developed the Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory Personality Questionnaire (RST-PQ) that is recommended as the most appropriate measure of the rRST that allows the separation of the FFFS and BIS and the important distinction of reward sensitivity and impulsivity (Corr & Cooper, 2016).  Mainly, the four sub-scales of the BAS (Reward Interest, RI.  Goal-Drive Persistence, GDP.  Reward Reactivity, RR.  Impulsivity, Imp) makes this tool to test an open empirical question, i. e. , if the four BAS facets exhibit an unique predictive power, or they are redundant.  According to Corr and Cooper (2016) it is especially important to separate reward interest and reactivity from impulsivity.  This is since the ﬁrst facet concerns with individual disposition to identify the biological reinforcer, the second with individual differences in emotional response to reward, the third reﬂects the need for a rapid action sufﬁcient to ‘capture’ the ﬁnal biological reinforcer, at the later stages of BAS behavior, when continued planning and behavioral caution are not appropriate.  In line with this view, Lang (1995) conceived the emotional system as consisting of the appetitive motivational and aversive system.  The former facilitates approaching behaviors, such as mating, food taking or exploration, whereas the latter facilitates defensive behavior, such as avoidance, escape or defence.  Lang and co-workers (Lang, Bradley, & Cuthbert, 1997) regard arousal and valence as the fundamental dimensions of the emotions, that is, arousal determines the intensity and valence the direction of activation.  A “gating” function exerted by dopamine in regulating access of context representations into active memory in prefrontal cortex (a fuction which is impaired in schizophrenia) has been proposed by Braver and Cohen (2000).  More recently, Berridge (2007, 2012) has examined three competing dopamine hypotheses which are debated in the current literature, i. e. , (i) dopamine mostly mediates the hedonic impact of reward (‘liking’), or (j) mediates learned predictions of future reward (’learning’), or (k) motivates the pursuit of rewards by attributing incentive salience to rewardrelated stimuli (‘wanting’).  Dopamine was neither necessary nor sufﬁcient to mediate changes in hedonic ‘liking’ for sensory pleasures or learning, while dopamine activation was necessary for normal ‘wanting’ and to enhance cue-triggered incentive salience.  The incentive reward system is equivalent to the BAS and produces motivation to approach reward, but the hedonic system is the pleasure system responsible for the enjoyment experienced following the gaining of reward (see Corr, DeYoung, & McNaughton, 2013.  Corr & McNaughton, 2012).  Personality research on A/R has been centered almost exclusively on individual differences in extraversion-related constructs as such as sensation-seeking and impulsivity, while the relation between cortical A/R and approach components of behavior, as deﬁned in the RST, to date, has been neglected.  It is important to establish these relations because RST has largely superseded Eysenck’s arousal theory of personality, and incorporated Zuckerman’s sensations seeking factor under BAS Impuslsivity.  The RST-PQ allows the separation of RI, GDP, RR, and Imp sub-factors of the BAS making feasible to test an open empirical question, i. e. , whether the four sub-scales show unique predictive power, or are they redundant.  According to Corr (2016) it is especially important to separate reward interest and reactivity (which themselves are different) from impulsivity, which serves a different function in the causal cascade from appetitive exploration to ﬁnal capture of the desired object.  We think that the A/R of the ERPs together with the emotional modulation of these responses is a good tool to test this separation conceptualized in the rRST theory (Corr, 2008.  Corr & McNaughton, 2012.  Corr et al. , 2013).  Validation of this theory may be especially informative of the relationship between dimensional nature of the BAS and clinical disorders (Alloy et al. , 2012.  Carver, 2004).  Thus, the aim of the present study was to test speciﬁc revised RST-derived predictions (Corr, 2008.  Corr et al. , 2013) regarding the interaction between BAS trait and positive and negative emotion, and how this interaction inﬂuences the A/R of the ERPs.  We used a visual cue indicating, 2 s in advance, whether participants would see an emotional positive, negative or neutral picture.  The visual cue was used since we assumed that the anticipation of emotional valence of the incoming picture should reduce the inﬂuence of novelty or orienting-response on auditory ERPs.  First, considering that RST-PQ BAS subscales are correlated with Extraversion measure of the Eysenck Personality Questionnaire-Revised (Corr & Cooper, 2016), we expected that highly approach-oriented (i. e. , high GDP, RI, and RR) individuals should be augmenters of N1 and P2 waves of the ERPs in response to increased levels of auditory stimulus intensity.  Second, we expected an enhanced augmenting tendency in higher BAS individuals when positive pictures were presented because positive stimuli might open the gating mechanism.  Findings corroborating this view have been recently reported on startle response (Aluja, Blanch, Blanco, & Balada, 2015).  We did not expect signiﬁcant ERP differences between high and low RST-PQ Impulsivity individuals given that, as theory and research have shown, impulsivity stands apart from the other BAS factors (Corr, 2016.  Dawe, Gullo, & Loxton, 2004.  Smillie, Jackson, & Dalgleish, 2006.  Smillie, Pickering, & Jackson, 2006.  Quilty & Oakman, 2004).  Further aim of this study was to test, in terms of augmenting/reducing of auditory ERPs, if the four BAS facets exhibit a unique predictive power, or they are redundant, especially for the important distinction between reward interest and reactivity versus impulsivity.  Low Resolution Electrical Tomography (LORETA) is a valid tool to identify multiple dipole locations for the N1 and P2 component of the ERPs (Mulert et al. , 2005.  Mulert, Juckel, Augustin, & Hegerl, 2002.  Pascual-Marqui, Esslen, Kochi, & Lehmann, 2002).  Thus, a secondary aim of the present study was to parallel ERP wave analysis, which should identify ERP waves sensitive to individual differences in BAS facets, with LORETA source localizations.  In this way we can integrate auditory ERP waves with their cortical sources sensitive to individual differences in BAS components.  <Middle> 2.  Methods.  2. 1.  Participants.  Forty right-handed healthy women students voluntarily participated in the study (19–33 years.  mean age = 24. 8, SD = 3. 0).  Since gender differences have been observed in augmenting/reducing of the ERPs (Bruneau, Barthelemy, Jouve, & Lelord, 1986) the sample was restricted to women to avoid possible gender differences as a confounding factor.  We excluded participants reporting any lifetime history of hearing problems, treatments of signiﬁcant psychiatric or neurologic disease, head trauma or loss of consciousness, substance dependence or strong use of amphetamine, cocaine, caffeine or nicotine.  Participants who were in a menstrual period were invited for the EEG recordings between the 5th and 11th day after the onset of menses.  This was done to avoid a possible effect of the menstrual cycle on auditory ERPs (Walpurger, Pietrowsky, Kirschbaum, & Wolf, 2004).  Each participant was informed about the nature of the study upon arrival in the laboratory.  Hand preference was measured with the Italian version of the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (Salmaso & Longoni, 1985).  Participants were asked to refrain from smoking or drinking coffee for at least three hours before the EEG recording.  They gave informed consent prior to their inclusion in the study.  The research was conducted according to the ethical standards of the American Psychological Association (APA).  Approval of this study was obtained from the Ethics Committee of the Department of Psychology, La Sapienza University of Rome, Italy (2014).  Participants were seen individually in the laboratory and, upon arrival, were informed about the nature of the study.  All of them gave their written informed consent for participation in the study.  The relation of BIS and FFFS with AIF of N1/P2 complex during emotional visual stimulation have been submitted elsewhere (De Pascalis, Fracasso, & Corr, 2016).  2. 2.  Questionnaires.  We used in the present study a recently developed questionnaire measuring personality traits derived from the revised Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory Personality Questionnaire (RSTPQ.  Corr & Cooper, 2016).  The version of the RST-PQ used in this study consisted 71 statements, measuring three major systems.  Fight/Flight/Fear System (FFFS).  Behavioral Inhibition System (BIS).  and four Behavioral Approach System (T-BAS) factors which are considered in this study.  Reward Interest (RI.  e. g. , “I am always ﬁnding new and interesting things to do”).  Goal-Drive Persistence (GDP.  e. g. , “I put in a big effort to accomplish important goals in my life”).  Reward Reactivity (RR.  e. g. , “I get very excited when I get what I want”).  and Impulsivity (Imp.  e. g. , “I ﬁnd myself doing things on the spur of the moment”).  In the present research Cronbach’s alpha values for Reward Interest, Goal-Drive Persistence, Reward Reactivity and Impulsivity were respectively 0. 73, 0. 88, 0. 77, and 0. 72.  A total BAS (T-BAS) measure can be obtained as the sum of the four BAS facet measures (␣ = 0. 88).  State anxiety was also measured using the State Anxiety Inventory (STAI-Y1.  Spielberger, Gorsuch, Lushene, Vagg, & Jacobs, 1988).  participants rated 20-items on a scale from 1 = not at all, to 4 = very much so, indicating how they felt at that moment.  The STAI-Y1 has been shown to have adequate internal consistency (see e. g. , Metzger, 1976).  2. 3.  Emotional pictures.  Emotional visual stimuli were selected from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS.  Lang, Bradley, & Cuthbert, 2008).  In a pilot study, an independent sample of 30 women (22–36 age range, M = 24. 6, SD = 2. 6 yrs) students rated each image on valence and arousal to verify the initial selection.  The ratings for positive, negative and neutral valence were obtained using a 9point Likert Scale, ranging from 1 to 9 that varies from negative to positive with a neutral point (ﬁve).  A similar scale was used to rate arousal levels, ranging from 1 (calm) to 9 (arousing).  We selected from the IAPS all the positive pictures that had a score equal or higher than 7 in valence and 7 in arousal.  We followed the same procedure for the negative images.  We took the neutral images in a small interval around the 5-value for the valence (4. 5–5. 5).  Since neutral images are typically rated lower in arousal relative to positive or negative images, this was quite difﬁcult to select, from IAPS, a set of neutral images with a high arousal level such as that of emotional images.  To remedy this problem, we selected from the IAPS 28 neutral pictures with the highest score on arousal, but we had to add 18 neutral, potentially highly arousing (but rated as emotionally neutral, i. e.  emotional valence rating ranged from 4. 5 to 5. 5) surreal pictures, downloaded from the World Wide Web, as suggested in a previous study by MouraoMiranda et al.  (2003).  Surreal pictures included scenes (8), objects (3), faces (2), human bodies with undistinguishable faces (2), and animals (3).  The ﬁnal picture set consisted of 45 positive/higharousal images, 45 negative/high-arousal images, and 46 neutral images (see the Appendix A for the numbers of IAPS images used for each affective category).  These selected images were then administered to the present experimental sample (N = 39).  Emotional valence and arousal of the experimental sample for positive images were M = 6. 9, SD = 0. 4, and M = 6. 1, SD = 0. 8, respectively.  For negative images valence and arousal were M = 2. 4, SD = 0. 5, and M = 6. 2, SD = 0. 8, respectively.  However, the mean of arousal for the neutral images was inevitably not as high as we expected (valence.  M = 5. 3, SD = 0. 4, arousal.  M = 4. 2.  SD = 0. 7).  These ratings correspond to the ratings for women reported in the validation study by Bradley and Lang (2007).  2. 4.  Acoustic stimuli and trial format.  During the presentation of each picture, a sequence of 5 tones was binaurally delivered through headphones (Telephonics) by using STIM2 (NeuroScan Inc. , Herndon, USA).  Each tone sequence consisted of a pseudo-randomized presentation of 5 tones (1000 Hz) at 5 different stimulus intensities (59, 70, 79, 88, and 96 dB-SPL).  The auditory stimulus duration was of 30 ms (10 ms rise and 10 ms fall time), and interstimulus interval (ISI) varied pseudorandomly between 1600 and 2100 ms.  Before starting the electrophysiological recording, all participants were screened for intact auditory abilities.  All participants passed this screening.  They were comfortably seated in an armchair placed in a sound attenuated room near the recording equipment.  The presentation of images and tones was done after an initial 5 min recording of resting EEG.  Tones were delivered according to the A/R paradigm (Buchsbaum & Silverman, 1968).  Fig.  1 depicts a schematic view of the time course of a trial.  All stimuli were viewed at a visual angle of 7. 5◦ ×  7. 5◦ and were presented on a monitor with a frame rate of 75 Hz (luminance of about 200 cd/m2).  Each trial began with the presentation of a ﬁxation cue for 1500 ms, in the centre of a computer screen, of one of the following three ﬁxation cue stimuli.  a white dot circle (2 cm diameter), or an equilateral triangle (3 cm side), or a square (2 cm side).  The cue indicated respectively that a positive, or negative, or neutral image would be displayed.  A blank black-screen then appeared for 500 ms and an emotional image was next presented on the screen for a time period ranging, in pseudorandom order, from 8000 to 10500 ms to guarantee the presentation of 5 different intensity tones.  The averaged picture presentation time was kept constant across valenced picture at about 9800 ms.  Each picture presentation was followed by an intertrial interval (ITI) varying between 6 and 8 s (blank screen).  The ﬁrst tone probe occurred between 500 and 1000 ms after the onset of each image presentation.  The duration of each trial was variable between 16 and 20. 5 s.  The images were presented in pseudo-random order in 5 blocks (1-min rest between blocks).  For each block 30 pictures were presented and the duration of each block was of about 10 min.  An equal number of images from each category occurred in each block.  2. 5.  EEG recordings and data reduction.  The EEG, and electro-ocular (EOG) activities were acquired continuously by using a 40-channel NuAmps DC ampliﬁer system (Neuroscan Acquire 4. 3) with tin electrodes located over 30 scalp sites (Fp1, Fp2, F7, F3, Fz, F4, F8, FT7, FC3, FCz, FC4, FT8, T3, C3, Cz, T4, C4, T5, CP3, CPz, CP4, T6, P3, Pz, P4, TP7, TP8, O1, Oz, O2).  Linked earlobes [(A1 + A2)/2] were used as a reference electrode.  Ampliﬁers were set at a gain of 200, sampling rate of 1000 Hz, and with signals band-limited from 0. 1 to 30 Hz (slope 48 dB/octave) with a 50 Hz notch ﬁlter.  Electrode impedance was kept below 5 k(cid. 2).  The ground electrode was positioned 10 mm anteriorly to Fz lead.  The horizontal and vertical EOG was monitored via a pair of tin electrodes placed 1 cm lateral to the outer cantus of each eye and the vertical EOG was monitored via bipolar montage using two electrodes placed above and below the centre of the left eye.  The EEG was ofﬂine processed using Brain Vision Analyzer 2. 1 system (Brain Product).  The EEG was reconstructed into discrete, singletrial 1000-ms epochs.  ERPs were time-locked to auditory tone onset, with a 150-ms pre-stimulus baseline.  Trials that contained an eye blink or eye movement artifacts (EOG > 75 ␮V) were rejected and discarded from analysis.  Ocular artifacts were corrected using the procedure of Gratton and colleagues (Gratton, Coles, & Donchin, 1983). 