1.  Introduction.  Emotional items tend to receive more attention and elaborative processing and are hence remembered more effectively than neutral items (Buchanan, 2007.  Hamann, 2001).  How robust the mnemonic beneﬁt of emotion is and whether emotional items, especially negative ones, are more resistant to intentional forgetting than neutral items are questions that have not been fully examined.  In the present study, we recorded event-related brain potentials (ERPs) when participants engaged in an item-method directed forgetting paradigm in which they received instructions to remember or forget emotionally neutral words embedded in either a negative or neutral context picture.  Item-method directed forgetting is a commonly employed method for investigating intentional forgetting.  In this procedure, a remember (R) or forget (F) cue is delivered to each study item on a trial-by-trial basis.  Studies have shown that, for both recall and recognition memory tests, items that are cued to be remembered (TBR items) are more clearly remembered than those that are cued to be forgotten (TBF items) (Johnson, 1994.  MacLeod, 1998).  One interpretation for this “directed forgetting effect” argues that both TBR and TBF items are stored in the working memory.  When people are provided with an R cue, TBR items receive further elaborative processing and enter the long-term memory, whereas the TBF items are left to decay following the presentation of the F cues.  Supportive evidence for this selective rehearsal interpretation comes from ERP studies showing that, relative to F cues, R cues elicit a larger P3b-like wave, which has been linked to greater attention allocation and stimulus evaluations (e. g. , Hsieh, Hung, Tzeng, Lee, & Cheng, 2009.  Paz-Caballero & Menor, 1999).  However, studies have proposed that TBF items are actively inhibited following the presentation of F cues, rather than being left to decay (Zacks, Radvansky, & Hasher, 1996).  The attentional inhibition account argues that the inhibitory function ceases processing the TBF item when an F cue is received, forgetting thus being an effortful process (Fawcett & Taylor, 2008).  A few ERP studies have indicated that the frontally distributed positivity elicited by the F cues reﬂects the inhibitory process on the TBF items (Cheng, Liu, Lee, Hung, & Tzeng, 2012.  Hsieh et al. 