1.  Introduction.  Emotional items tend to receive more attention and elaborative processing and are hence remembered more effectively than neutral items (Buchanan, 2007.  Hamann, 2001).  How robust the mnemonic beneﬁt of emotion is and whether emotional items, especially negative ones, are more resistant to intentional forgetting than neutral items are questions that have not been fully examined.  In the present study, we recorded event-related brain potentials (ERPs) when participants engaged in an item-method directed forgetting paradigm in which they received instructions to remember or forget emotionally neutral words embedded in either a negative or neutral context picture.  Item-method directed forgetting is a commonly employed method for investigating intentional forgetting.  In this procedure, a remember (R) or forget (F) cue is delivered to each study item on a trial-by-trial basis.  Studies have shown that, for both recall and recognition memory tests, items that are cued to be remembered (TBR items) are more clearly remembered than those that are cued to be forgotten (TBF items) (Johnson, 1994.  MacLeod, 1998).  One interpretation for this “directed forgetting effect” argues that both TBR and TBF items are stored in the working memory.  When people are provided with an R cue, TBR items receive further elaborative processing and enter the long-term memory, whereas the TBF items are left to decay following the presentation of the F cues.  Supportive evidence for this selective rehearsal interpretation comes from ERP studies showing that, relative to F cues, R cues elicit a larger P3b-like wave, which has been linked to greater attention allocation and stimulus evaluations (e. g. , Hsieh, Hung, Tzeng, Lee, & Cheng, 2009.  Paz-Caballero & Menor, 1999).  However, studies have proposed that TBF items are actively inhibited following the presentation of F cues, rather than being left to decay (Zacks, Radvansky, & Hasher, 1996).  The attentional inhibition account argues that the inhibitory function ceases processing the TBF item when an F cue is received, forgetting thus being an effortful process (Fawcett & Taylor, 2008).  A few ERP studies have indicated that the frontally distributed positivity elicited by the F cues reﬂects the inhibitory process on the TBF items (Cheng, Liu, Lee, Hung, & Tzeng, 2012.  Hsieh et al. , 2009.  Paz-Caballero, Menor, & Jiménez, 2004) because this positivity correlates with whether TBF items are subsequently forgotten (Hauswald, Schulz, Iordanov, & Kissler, 2011.  Lin, Kuo, Liu, Han, & Cheng, 2013.  Van Hooff & Ford, 2011).  The ﬁnding that active inhibition contributes to the forgetting of TBF items suggests that the item-method of directed forgetting can be utilized to examine how emotion modulates the control processes during encoding.  A few functional imaging studies have employed emotional materials in item-method directed forgetting to address this issue, but results have been inconsistent.  Nowicka, Marchewka, Jednoróg, Tacikowski, & Brechmann (2011) and Hauswald et al.  (2011) have reported a reliable directed forgetting effect for neutral pictures but not for negative pictures.  This diminished directed forgetting effect for emotional materials was also observed in a study that used neutral and negative words as stimuli (Bailey & Chapman, 2012).  However, studies have also demonstrated that emotional materials yield a directed forgetting effect that is equivalent to (Yang et al. , 2012) or greater than (Brandt, Nielsen, & Holmes, 2013) the effect elicited by neutral items.  ERP results regarding the interaction between emotion and R/F instructions also vary across studies.  Although the frontal positivity associated with the F cues and the P3b-like wave elicited by the R cues have been consistently observed in all related studies, some studies have found the P3b-like effect and frontal positivity elicited by the R/F cues to be modulated by emotional valence (Brandt et al. , 2013.  Yang et al. , 2012) whereas others have reported no signiﬁcant interaction between the R/F instructions and valence of the materials (Bailey & Chapman, 2012.  Hauswald et al. , 2011).  The inconsistency in ﬁndings may be the result of different materials (e. g. , words and pictures) being employed and the manner in which the R/F cues were delivered (e. g. , simultaneously with or subsequent to the presentation of items).  One particular issue that should be considered is the means by which emotion is manipulated.  In previous studies, the manipulation of emotion has been conducted using neutral and emotional materials as the study items.  Naturally, the test items presented in subsequent recognition tests also have comprised emotional values.  Hence, discerning the effects of emotion on memory encoding from those at the retrieval stage is difﬁcult (Maratos & Rugg, 2001.  Smith, Dolan, & Rugg, 2004).  To avoid the potential confounding of retrieval with encoding, the current study manipulated the emotional valence by presenting neutral items in a negative or neutral encoding context at the study phase and without context at the test phase (Erk et al. , 2003.  Erk, Martin, & Walter, 2005.  Maratos, Dolan, Morris, Henson, & Rugg, 2001.  Smith et al. , 2004).  During the study phase, emotionally neutral words were each presented in a background picture that was either emotionally neutral or negative, followed by an R or F cue that instructed the participant to remember or to forget the word.  In the following test phase, all studied old words (regardless of R/F cues) and new words were presented without background pictures.  Because the emotional and nonemotional pictures were presented only in the study phase, if any emotional effect was detected, it could be attributed to the emotion modulation of the encoding processes. 