1.  Introduction.  Emotional items tend to receive more attention and elaborative processing and are hence remembered more effectively than neutral items (Buchanan, 2007.  Hamann, 2001).  How robust the mnemonic beneﬁt of emotion is and whether emotional items, especially negative ones, are more resistant to intentional forgetting than neutral items are questions that have not been fully examined.  In the present study, we recorded event-related brain potentials (ERPs) when participants engaged in an item-method directed forgetting paradigm in which they received instructions to remember or forget emotionally neutral words embedded in either a negative or neutral context picture.  Item-method directed forgetting is a commonly employed method for investigating intentional forgetting.  In this procedure, a remember (R) or forget (F) cue is delivered to each study item on a trial-by-trial basis.  Studies have shown that, for both recall and recognition memory tests, items that are cued to be remembered (TBR items) are more clearly remembered than those that are cued to be forgotten (TBF items) (Johnson, 1994.  MacLeod, 1998).  One interpretation for this “directed forgetting effect” argues that both TBR and TBF items are stored in the working memory.  When people are provided with an R cue, TBR items receive further elaborative processing and enter the long-term memory, whereas the TBF items are left to decay following the presentation of the F cues.  Supportive evidence for this selective rehearsal interpretation comes from ERP studies showing that, relative to F cues, R cues elicit a larger P3b-like wave, which has been linked to greater attention allocation and stimulus evaluations (e. g. , Hsieh, Hung, Tzeng, Lee, & Cheng, 2009.  Paz-Caballero & Menor, 1999).  However, studies have proposed that TBF items are actively inhibited following the presentation of F cues, rather than being left to decay (Zacks, Radvansky, & Hasher, 1996).  The attentional inhibition account argues that the inhibitory function ceases processing the TBF item when an F cue is received, forgetting thus being an effortful process (Fawcett & Taylor, 2008).  A few ERP studies have indicated that the frontally distributed positivity elicited by the F cues reﬂects the inhibitory process on the TBF items (Cheng, Liu, Lee, Hung, & Tzeng, 2012.  Hsieh et al. , 2009.  Paz-Caballero, Menor, & Jiménez, 2004) because this positivity correlates with whether TBF items are subsequently forgotten (Hauswald, Schulz, Iordanov, & Kissler, 2011.  Lin, Kuo, Liu, Han, & Cheng, 2013.  Van Hooff & Ford, 2011).  The ﬁnding that active inhibition contributes to the forgetting of TBF items suggests that the item-method of directed forgetting can be utilized to examine how emotion modulates the control processes during encoding.  A few functional imaging studies have employed emotional materials in item-method directed forgetting to address this issue, but results have been inconsistent.  Nowicka, Marchewka, Jednoróg, Tacikowski, & Brechmann (2011) and Hauswald et al.  (2011) have reported a reliable directed forgetting effect for neutral pictures but not for negative pictures.  This diminished directed forgetting effect for emotional materials was also observed in a study that used neutral and negative words as stimuli (Bailey & Chapman, 2012).  However, studies have also demonstrated that emotional materials yield a directed forgetting effect that is equivalent to (Yang et al. , 2012) or greater than (Brandt, Nielsen, & Holmes, 2013) the effect elicited by neutral items.  ERP results regarding the interaction between emotion and R/F instructions also vary across studies.  Although the frontal positivity associated with the F cues and the P3b-like wave elicited by the R cues have been consistently observed in all related studies, some studies have found the P3b-like effect and frontal positivity elicited by the R/F cues to be modulated by emotional valence (Brandt et al. , 2013.  Yang et al. , 2012) whereas others have reported no signiﬁcant interaction between the R/F instructions and valence of the materials (Bailey & Chapman, 2012.  Hauswald et al. , 2011).  The inconsistency in ﬁndings may be the result of different materials (e. g. , words and pictures) being employed and the manner in which the R/F cues were delivered (e. g. , simultaneously with or subsequent to the presentation of items).  One particular issue that should be considered is the means by which emotion is manipulated.  In previous studies, the manipulation of emotion has been conducted using neutral and emotional materials as the study items.  Naturally, the test items presented in subsequent recognition tests also have comprised emotional values.  Hence, discerning the effects of emotion on memory encoding from those at the retrieval stage is difﬁcult (Maratos & Rugg, 2001.  Smith, Dolan, & Rugg, 2004).  To avoid the potential confounding of retrieval with encoding, the current study manipulated the emotional valence by presenting neutral items in a negative or neutral encoding context at the study phase and without context at the test phase (Erk et al. , 2003.  Erk, Martin, & Walter, 2005.  Maratos, Dolan, Morris, Henson, & Rugg, 2001.  Smith et al. , 2004).  During the study phase, emotionally neutral words were each presented in a background picture that was either emotionally neutral or negative, followed by an R or F cue that instructed the participant to remember or to forget the word.  In the following test phase, all studied old words (regardless of R/F cues) and new words were presented without background pictures.  Because the emotional and nonemotional pictures were presented only in the study phase, if any emotional effect was detected, it could be attributed to the emotion modulation of the encoding processes.  Both the elaborative rehearsal of TBR items and inhibition of TBF items were expected to be disturbed by emotional context because, as suggested by a previous study, emotional pictures are attention-drawing (Talmi, Anderson, Riggs, Caplan, & Moscovitch, 2008) and both the rehearsal and inhibition processes are attention demanding.  When the background pictures were emotionally negative, less attentional resources were expected to be available for the processing of following words and cues.  Thus, a diminished directed forgetting effect may be caused by decreased memory for TBR words and/or increased memory for TBF words.  ERPs were also recorded in the current study because memory performance is the output of a series of cognitive processes (processing on pictures, words, and mnemonic cues).  Behavioral data alone are therefore insufﬁcient for clarifying how emotions affect the memory formation at each stage.  The ERPs, as a high temporal resolution tool, could provide further evidence for understanding the mechanisms underlying each process.  The ERPs correlated with neutral and negative context pictures.  the neutral words, and the R/F cues were recorded and analyzed respectively.  For the context pictures, we focused on the late positive potential (LPP).  This posteriorly distributed slow potential, which onsets at around 250 ms after stimulus presentation, can sustain for 1000 ms after stimulus offset (Hajcak, MacNamara, & Olvet, 2010) and is believed to reﬂect augmented attention toward affective stimuli (Schupp, Junghofer, Weike, & Hamm, 2003).  Compared with the negative pictures, the context pictures were expected to elicit a larger LPP.  For the ERPs time-locked to the onsets of study words, we examined the P2 wave deﬂection and late positive component (LPC).  P2 deﬂection has been linked to phonological processing and the LPC has been linked to semantic processing in visual word recognition (Carreiras, Vergara, & Barber, 2005.  Hsu, Tsai, Lee, & Tzeng, 2009.  Liu, Perfetti, & Hart, 2003.  Van Petten & Senkfor, 1996).  In addition, studies have proposed that the amplitudes of both P2 and LPC are sensitive to attentional inﬂuences (Blanchet, Gagnon, & Bastien, 2007.  Mangels, Picton, & Craik, 2001.  Miniussi, Marzi, & Nobre, 2005).  Therefore, we hypothesized that when the encoding context is negative, the decrement in attention for word processing could lead to smaller P2 and LPC amplitudes than when the context is neutral.  Notably, although the LPP and LPC components can be observed in similar time windows and are interchangeable under some circumstances, the LPP and LPC in the current study were used to denote ERP responses at different time points and in different processes.  The LPP was used to denote the processes triggered by context pictures, whereas the LPC was used to study the effect on word processing.  Regarding the ERPs elicited by the R/F cues, the P3b-like wave elicited by the R cues and the frontal positivity associated with the F cues were used to examine the modulation of the encoding context valence on the selective rehearsal of the TBR items and the active inhibition of the TBF items.  <Middle> 2.  Materials and methods.  2. 1.  Participants.  Twenty college students (8 females, age from 18 to 26) from National Central University participated in this experiment.  All of them were right-handed native Mandarin Chinese speakers with normal or corrected-to-normal vision.  They were paid 500 New Taiwan Dollars (approximately 17 USD) for their participation.  Data from 5 participants were excluded because they contributed insufﬁcient (<16) valid ERP trials in at least one of the critical experimental conditions.  2. 2.  Stimuli.  The critical stimuli consisted of 480 Chinese two-character words and 240 pictures.  The words were all concrete nouns selected from the Academia Sinica Balanced Corpus of Modern Chinese (Huang & Chen, 1992) with the mean frequency of 54 per million.  Half of the words were presented at study and served as the old items in the following test.  The other 240 words were not shown at study and served as the new items in the subsequent recognition test.  At study, each of the 240 study words was paired with a picture.  The pictures were selected from the International Affective Pictures System (IAPS, Lang, Bradley, & Cuthbert, 2008), with 120 being emotionally neutral and 120 being negatively valenced.  The mean valence ratings (SD in parenthesis) of the neutral and negative pictures were 5. 07 (0. 45) and 2. 36 (0. 59), respectively.  The mean arousal ratings of the neutral and negative pictures were 3. 17 (0. 53) and 6. 04 (0. 67), respectively.  All ratings data here were based on the norms provided by the picture system.  The statistical test showed that the negative pictures were more negatively valenced and elicited greater arousal than the neutral pictures [t(119) = 40. 28, p < 0. 001 and t(119) = −36. 52, p < 0. 001, respectively].  For both study words paired with the neutral pictures and those paired with the negative pictures, half of them were followed by an R cue and the other half an F cue.  There were therefore four types of study trials (i. e. , Neutral-TBR, Neutral-TBF, Negative-TBR, and Negative-TBF), with 60 trials in each type.  The assignments of the words and pictures to the four types of study trials were counterbalanced across participants, so was the assignment of the words to the old and new items.  An additional 40 concrete nouns, paired with 20 neutral pictures and 20 negative pictures, were used in the ﬁller trials (see the procedure section for details).  Words in these ﬁller trials were not included in the following recognition2. 3.  Procedure.  The experiment was approved by the local ethical committee.  Written consent was obtained from all participants upon their arrival.  The participants were seated at a viewing distance of 80 cm away from the monitor in a soundproofed shielded room.  They were ﬁtted with an elastic electrode cap and then engaged a study phase followed by a test phase.  During the study phase, participants were presented with a series of study words, each embedded in a neutral or a negatively valenced picture (upper row of Fig.  1).  They were asked to make association between the word and the picture by indicating which part of the picture ﬁts with the object referred by the word.  They were also instructed to remember or to forget the word in response to the following R/F cues.  Each study trial started with a picture presented in full screen.  One second after the presentation of the picture, a cross ﬁxation appeared in the center of the picture for 500 ms and was then replaced by a study word.  The word, shown in white color against a black rectangle, was presented for 2500 ms, during which participants indicated the part of the picture that ﬁts with the word by clicking the mouse on it.  The picture and the word were then replaced by a second ﬁxation.  The second ﬁxation was shown for 500 ms, after which an R cue (*RRRRRR*) or an F cue (*FFFFFF*) was presented in the center of the screen for 1500 ms.  In order to avoid possible carry-over effect of emotion, during the study phase, 6 trials of the same emotion would form a small block.  A ﬁller trial with the same type of emotional background was added in front of the block as the “buffer” for transfer between emotions.  Words presented in these ﬁller trials were not be presented in the test phase.  The ﬁller trials were not included in the behavioral and ERP analyses.  The test phase followed the study phase after an interval of approximately 5 min, during which participants engaged in a video game.  The test trials started with the presentation of the ﬁxation character “+” for 500 ms, followed by the presentation of the test word (lower row of Fig.  1).  The test word was shown for 500 ms, after which the second ﬁxation “@@” was shown for 1500 ms.  Subjects made old/new judgments in response to the presentation of each test word.  Responses were made by pressing one of two response keys with the index ﬁnger of each hand.  The mapping of the hands to response categories (old vs.  new) was counterbalanced across participants.  Participants were instructed to make old responses for all studied words regardless of whether they had been followed by an R or an F cue in the study phase.  2. 4.  ERP recording EEG was continuously recorded in both the study and the test phases from 64 silver/silver chloride electrodes, 62 of which are embedded in an elastic cap (Quick-Cap, Neuromedical Supplies, Sterling, Texas, USA).  The remaining two electrodes were placed on the right and left mastoids.  All channels were referenced to a channel located between Cz and CPz, and a ground electrode was placed on the forehead anterior to the Fz electrode.  Vertical and horizontal EOG were recorded bipolarly from electrodes placed above and below the right eye, and on the outer canthi of each eye respectively.  Data were sampled at 250 Hz and digitized with 32-bit resolution.  All channels were ampliﬁed by SYNAMPS2 (Neuroscan, Inc. , El Paso, Texas, USA) with a bandpass of 0. 05–70 Hz (3 dB points).  Inter-electrode impedance was kept below 5 k(cid. 2).  Only ERP data recorded during the study phase are reported here.  2. 5.  ERP data processing.  The EEG was analyzed with the open-source toolboxes of EEGLAB (Delorme & Makeig, 2004) and ERPLAB (Lopez-Calderon & Luck, 2014).  The data recorded during the study phase were ﬁrst rereferenced to the average of the two mastoids and low-pass ﬁltered at the cut-off frequency of 30 Hz.  The data were then segmented into epochs of 1100 ms, including a 100-ms pre-stimulus interval, that were time-locked to the onsets of the pictures, the study words, and the R/F cues.  All the epochs were baseline-corrected with the pre-stimulus interval and subjected to the Independent Component Analysis (ICA) to identify and remove the components of vertical and horizontal eye movements.  Finally, epochs that contained signals exceeding 80 ␮V from the baseline in any channel were rejected with the threshold-method artifact rejection supplied by the ERPLAB.  3.  Results.  3. 1.  Behavioral data.  Table 1 shows the hit rates to the TBR and TBF words that were presented in the neutral and negative encoding contexts, together with the false alarm rate to the new items.  A repeated measures ANOVA on the hit rates found that both the main effects of encoding context valence (neutral vs.  negative) and R/F cues 2(TBR vs.  TBF) were signiﬁcant [F(1,14) = 5. 27, p = 0. 038,  p = 0. 27and F(1,14) = 63. 74, p< 0. 001,  p = 0. 82], reﬂecting that words presented in the emotionally neutral context were better remembered than those in the negative context and that TBR words were better remembered than TBF words.  Importantly, the interaction between encoding context valence and R/F cues was signiﬁcant [F(1,14) = 15. 48, p = 0. 001, p = 0. 53], revealing a smaller directed forgetting effect for the words presented in the negative context as opposed to those in the neutral context.  Importantly, the modulation of the encoding context on the directed forgetting effect was mainly on the TBR words but not the TBF words.  The hit rate for the TBR words in the negative context was lower than the hit rate for the TBR words in the neutral context [t(14) = 3. 82, p = 0. 002, Cohen’s d = 1. 01].  There was however no signiﬁcant difference between the hit rates for the TBF words in the negative and neutral encoding contexts [t(14) = −0. 48, p = 0. 64, Cohen’s d = −0. 15].  A repeated measures ANOVA employing the factors of encoding context, R/F cues, and response category (hit vs.  miss) on the response times (see Table 2) showed that the three-way interaction between these factors was signiﬁcant [F(1,14) = 5. 69, = 0. 032,2p= 0. 29].  The follow-up analysis on the hit trials found that the effect of R/F cue was significant [F(1,14) = 9. 79,p = 0. 007,2p= 0. 41], reflecting the fact that it took longer to rec-ognize the TBF words than the TBR words.  The analysis on themiss trials, on the other hand, gave rise to a marginally signif-icant effect of encoding context [F(1,14) = 4. 19, p = 0. 06,2p= 0. 23]and a significant interaction between encoding context and R/F cue[F(1,14) = 6. 35, p = 0. 024,2p= 0. 31].  The response times associatedwith the miss trials were slower for the TBR words than the TBFwords that were encoded in the emotional neutral context.  No sucheffect was found when the words were encoded in the negativecontext (Table 3).  3. 2.  ERPs time-locked to the context pictures.  The ERPs elicited by the context pictures were averaged into four types according to their emotional valence and subsequent memory performance for the words embedded in the pictures.  The four categories were “Neutral Hit”, “Neutral Miss”, “Negative Hit”, and “Negative Miss” (see Fig.  2), with the mean trial numbers (range in bracket) of 62 (27–86), 36 (19–54), 61 (28–87), and 41 (24–57) respectively.  ERPs were quantiﬁed by measuring the mean amplitude of the 400–800 ms time period, roughly corresponding to the time window used in previous studies that examined the LPP elicited by valenced pictures (e. g.  Cuthbert, Schupp, Bradley, Birbaumer, & Lang, 2000).  A repeated-measures ANOVA employing the factor of context valence and subsequent old/new judgment (hit vs.  miss) was conducted on the data from 27 electrode sites over nine scalp regions.  left anterior (F7, F5, F3), medial anterior (F1, Fz, F2), right anterior (F4, F6, F8), left central (T7, C5, C3), medial-central (C1, Cz, C2), right central (C4, C6, T8), left posterior (P7, P5, P3), medial-posterior (P1, Pz, P2), and right posterior (P4, P7, P8).  These electrodes were factorized into three levels of caudality (anterior, central, and posterior) and laterality (left, medial, and right).  F ratios are reported with Greenhouse-Geisser epsilon values (␧), adjusted p-levels, and partial eta squared.  The main effect of encoding context valence was signiﬁcant [F(1,14) = 62. 07, p < 0. 001, 2 p = 0. 82], suggesting that the waveforms elicited by the negative pictures were more positivegoing than those elicited by the neutral pictures.  The interaction between encoding context valence and caudality was signiﬁcant [F(2,28) = 5. 78, p = 0. 025,  p = 0. 29], so was the interaction between encoding context valence and laterality [F(2,28) = 4. 99, p = 0. 014,  p = 0. 26], suggesting that the positivity associated with the negative pictures was most pronounced over central and posterior scalp regions along the midline.  The main effect of subsequent memory performance was not signiﬁcant, neither was the interaction of subsequent memory performance and context valence [p > 0. 1 for all statistics].  3. 3.  ERPs time-locked to the study words.  ERPs elicited by the study word were averaged for the “neutralhit”, “neutral-miss”, “negative-hit”, and “negative-miss” trials (see Fig.  3) with the mean trial numbers of 69 (29–86), 39 (21–55), 65 (30–89), and 43 (23–58), based on the valence of the context pictures paired with the words and the old/new judgments to the words in the subsequent recognition test.  ERPs were quantiﬁed by measuring the mean amplitudes of the 150–220 ms and 400–800 ms time periods for the analyses of the P2 waves and the LPC, respectively. 