1.  Introduction.  The P3 is among the most widely studied components in eventrelated potential (ERP) research.  It comprises a family of brain potentials including the novelty P3 and the target P3 (Sutton, Braren, Zubin, & John, 1965.  for reviews, see Donchin & Coles, 1988 .  Picton, 1992.  Polich, 2007).  The novelty P3, or P3a, is a frontocentral positivity evoked by the onset of novel, non-target stimuli.  The target P3, or P3b, has a more posterior distribution and is evoked by the onset of task-relevant stimuli that require some type of mental or motor response.  In this paper, we focus on the P3b and its relationship with the timing and types of mental events culminating in behavioral responses.  A long held view is that the P3b reﬂects context updating.  when an incoming stimulus deviates from the representation maintained in working memory, the representation is updated and a P3b is generated (Donchin & Coles, 1988.  Donchin, 1981.  Polich, 2007.  but see Verleger, 1988).  Implicit in this and other theories is the idea that the P3b is only evoked once a stimulus has been categorized.  According to this stimulus-evaluation account, P3b latency can be used to divide processing into two general stages – stimulusrelated and response-related.  P3b latency is strongly affected by the duration of stimulus-related processing.  Many studies have conﬁrmed that P3b latency increases when stimulus categorization is difﬁcult (Coles, Gratton, Bashore, Eriksen, & Donchin, 1985.  Kutas, McCarthy, & Donchin, 1977.  Magliero, Bashore, Coles, & Donchin, 1984.  Twomey, Murphy, Kelly, & O’Connell, 2015).  Alternatively, P3b latency is weakly affected by manipulations that prolong response planning, particularly if there is little temporal overlap between stimulus categorization and motor preparation.  The relationship between the P3b and responding remains controversial, however.  Donchin and Coles ascribed the P3b (i. e. , the P300) a role in strategic processing (1988).  They proposed that the P3b is not involved in immediate responding per se, but rather in some overarching process that operates in parallel or afterwards.  For example, stimulus categorization could inﬂuence future behavior by causing strategy shifts or changes in cognitive control.  In support of this view, the P3b sometimes follows the response, suggesting that it does not directly relate to responses (for a review, see Donchin & Coles, 1988). 