1.  Introduction.  Augmenting/reducing (A/R) is assumed to reﬂect individual differences in the modulation of sensory input, and has usually been studied using amplitude measures of event-related potentials (ERP) elicited at different levels of stimulus intensity (e. g. , Buchsbaum & Silverman, 1968).  A pronounced increase in amplitudes of the auditory N1/P2 component, as a function of stimulus intensity, is thought to reﬂect sensory inhibition at high levels of stimulations (e. g. , Zuckerman, 1994) produced by serotonergic neurotransmission (Hegerl & Juckel, 1993).  This mechanism is essential for the ﬁltering properties of a gating mechanism that regulates sensory input to the cerebral cortex (Buchsbaum, Goodwin, Murphy, & Borge, 1971.  Buchsbaum & Silverman, 1968).  Individuals are classiﬁed as augmenters or reducers depending on whether they show a strong increase or weak increase or decrease on ERP amplitudes with increasing of stimulus intensity.  Beauducel, Debener, Brocke, and Kayser (2000) found that the N1/P2-slope calculated across 5–6 auditory intensity levels, spanning a wide intensity range, are required for a reliable assessment of auditory A/R.  The amplitude-intensity function slope (AIF), deﬁned as the slopes of the linear regression line for the individual P1/N1 and N1/P2 amplitudes across the 5–6 stimulus intensities (Brocke, Beauducel, John, Debener, & Heilemann, 2000.  Brocke, Beauducel, Tasche, 1999.  Hegerl, Gallinat, & Mrowinski, 1994.  Hegerl, Prochno, Ulrich, & Müller-Oerlinghausen, 1989) has been used as index of individual modes of processing sensory input (e. g. , Hegerl & Juckel, 1993).  A rich collection of ﬁndings have been reported by Buchsbaum, Haier, and Johnson (1983) and (Hensch, Herold, Diers, Armbruster, & Brocke, 2008) of psychiatric and psychological phenomena associated with augmenting-reducing.  In addition, reserch has demonstrated that the N1/P2 AIF of the ERPs is one of the numerous endophenotypes that are gaining importance in psychiatry and genetic research (e. g. , Brocke et al. , 2006.  Gottesman & Gould, 2003).  The N1/P2 AIF is considered important for clinical practice as it has been good to predict responses to lithium and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors treatments (Gallinat et al. , 2000.  Juckel et al. , 2004.  Mulert et al. , 2007.  Tien-Wen, Younger, Chen, & Tsai, 2005).  The N1/P2 AIF has been proved to be associated with 5-HTTLPR, a genetic polymorphism of the serotonin transporter coding gene (Gallinat et al. , 2003.  Hensch et al. , 2006.  Strobel et al. , 2003), and thus heritable (Sándor, Áfra, Proietti-Cecchini, Albert, & Schoenen, 1999).  In terms of personality traits, it was found that individuals scoring high on sensation seeking facets, and mainly on its disinhibition subscale, were augmenters and reducers tend to be sensation avoiding (Brocke et al. , 2000.  Brocke et al. , 1999.  Lukas, 1987.  Stenberg, Rosén, & Risberg, 1988.  von Knorring, 1980.  Zuckerman, 1990.  Zuckerman, 1994.  Zuckerman, Murtaugh, & Siegel, 1974.  Zuckerman, Simons, & Como, 1988).  Moreover, Eysenck’s extraversion trait was found positively associated with augmenting (Friedman & Meares, 1979.  Soskis & Shagass, 1974.  Stenberg et al. , 1988).  The validity of these ﬁndings was further supported by linking sensation avoiding and introversion with the defensive reducing pattern.  The N1/P2 AIF was found correlated with a risk factor for bipolar disorder in healthy individuals (Hensch, Herold, & Brocke, 2007), and with sensation seeking trait, which is suggested to be characterized by low serotonergic neurotransmission and a potential risk factor for mental disorders (Brocke et al. , 1999.  Hegerl, Gallinat, & Mrowinski, 1995).  In contrast, individuals with strong sensation-seeking tendencies are believed to be characterized by high dopaminergic, low noradrenergic, and low serotonergic activity (for a review see Zuckerman, 1994).  Augmenting has been also related to impulsivity (Barratt, Pritchard, Faulk, & Brandt, 1987.  Carrillo-De-La-Pena & Barratt, 1993).  Considering that impulsivity is an important trait of the reinforcement sensitivity theory (RST) of personality, it is surprising that no or little research has been done to evaluate the relation between RST traits and A/R of the ERPs.  The most recent version of the RST (Corr & McNaughton, 2012.  McNaughton & Corr, 2004, 2008.  McNaughton & Gray, 2000) postulates three major neuropsychological systems controlling approach and avoidance behavior.  (1) the Behavioral Approach System (BAS) controls active approach behavior in response to signals of reward and non-punishment and is activated by all forms of appetitive stimuli (including relief of nonpunishment).  (2) the Fight-Flight-Freeze system (FFFS) as a primary system that controls active avoidance and is activated by all forms of aversive stimuli (including frustrating nonreward).  (3) the Behavioral Inhibition System (BIS) controls passive avoidance in response to signals of punishment, nonreward, novelty, and by all forms of goal conﬂict, mainly for the co-activation of the FFFS and BAS.  This is a revision of the original RST formulated by Gray (1982) that highlighted only two of these systems, the BIS and the BAS.  In the original RST what is less apparent is the hidden complexity in and between these systems which renders any attempt to provide a psychometric description of them far from ordinary and prone to confusion (Corr, 2016).  As a consequence of this state of affairs existing rRST questionnaires fail to provide a comprehensive descriptive model and all of the existing ones have signiﬁcant theoretical and operational limitations with the result that there are still no comprehensive psychometric measures of the three revised systems.  The most signiﬁcant change to RST is the separation of FFFS/fear and BIS/anxiety processes (for a review see Rafael Torrubia, Caseras, Torrubia, & Caseras, 2008).  Although the newer classes of RST measures have addressed the separation of FFFS and BIS, most of them still conceived the BAS, as a unitary dimension.  However, there is compelling evidence that the BAS is multidimensional, both on the basis of empirical evidence (Carver & White, 1994.  De Pascalis, Varriale, & D’Antuono, 2010) and theoretical grounds (Corr, 2008.  Smillie, Cooper, Wilt, & Revelle, 2012).  In order to move along the temporo-spatial gradient to the ﬁnal primary biological reinforcer, Corr (2008) argued that it is necessary to engage in sub-goal scaffolding.  These processes, at each stage of the temporo-spatial gradient, consists of a number of operations (i. e. , identifying the biological reinforcer, planning behavior, and executing the plan) that involve other systems as working memory, executive control, etc. .  this is in accordance with the type of required cognitive operations.  The function of the BAS is to coordinate these functions as they relate to approach behaviors.  BAS controlled approach may be expected to entail a series of subprocesses, some of which sometimes oppose each other.  (1) behavioural restraint serving to plan and execute effective sub-goal scaffolding.  and (2) impulsive behaviour serving when cognitive planning can be replaced, at short temporo-spatial distance, by fast ‘getting’, or a physical grabbing of the ﬁnal biological reinforcer at near-zero temporo-spatial distance (Carver, 2005.  Corr, 2008).  This theoretical assumption does not imply that the emotional component of BAS behaviour would be attenuated at the early stages of approach behaviour, since the fulﬁlment of sub-goals is likely to entail periodic bursts of emotional excitement to maintain motivation across time/space (’temporal bridging’, Corr, 2008) during which approach behaviour is not being immediately reinforced (goal drive persistence).  Consistent with both theoretical and empirical considerations, Corr and Cooper (2016) developed the Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory Personality Questionnaire (RST-PQ) that is recommended as the most appropriate measure of the rRST that allows the separation of the FFFS and BIS and the important distinction of reward sensitivity and impulsivity (Corr & Cooper, 2016).  Mainly, the four sub-scales of the BAS (Reward Interest, RI.  Goal-Drive Persistence, GDP.  Reward Reactivity, RR.  Impulsivity, Imp) makes this tool to test an open empirical question, i. e. , if the four BAS facets exhibit an unique predictive power, or they are redundant.  According to Corr and Cooper (2016) it is especially important to separate reward interest and reactivity from impulsivity.  This is since the ﬁrst facet concerns with individual disposition to identify the biological reinforcer, the second with individual differences in emotional response to reward, the third reﬂects the need for a rapid action sufﬁcient to ‘capture’ the ﬁnal biological reinforcer, at the later stages of BAS behavior, when continued planning and behavioral caution are not appropriate.  In line with this view, Lang (1995) conceived the emotional system as consisting of the appetitive motivational and aversive system.  The former facilitates approaching behaviors, such as mating, food taking or exploration, whereas the latter facilitates defensive behavior, such as avoidance, escape or defence.  Lang and co-workers (Lang, Bradley, & Cuthbert, 1997) regard arousal and valence as the fundamental dimensions of the emotions, that is, arousal determines the intensity and valence the direction of activation.  A “gating” function exerted by dopamine in regulating access of context representations into active memory in prefrontal cortex (a fuction which is impaired in schizophrenia) has been proposed by Braver and Cohen (2000).  More recently, Berridge (2007, 2012) has examined three competing dopamine hypotheses which are debated in the current literature, i. e. , (i) dopamine mostly mediates the hedonic impact of reward (‘liking’), or (j) mediates learned predictions of future reward (’learning’), or (k) motivates the pursuit of rewards by attributing incentive salience to rewardrelated stimuli (‘wanting’).  Dopamine was neither necessary nor sufﬁcient to mediate changes in hedonic ‘liking’ for sensory pleasures or learning, while dopamine activation was necessary for normal ‘wanting’ and to enhance cue-triggered incentive salience.  The incentive reward system is equivalent to the BAS and produces motivation to approach reward, but the hedonic system is the pleasure system responsible for the enjoyment experienced following the gaining of reward (see Corr, DeYoung, & McNaughton, 2013.  Corr & McNaughton, 2012).  Personality research on A/R has been centered almost exclusively on individual differences in extraversion-related constructs as such as sensation-seeking and impulsivity, while the relation between cortical A/R and approach components of behavior, as deﬁned in the RST, to date, has been neglected.  It is important to establish these relations because RST has largely superseded Eysenck’s arousal theory of personality, and incorporated Zuckerman’s sensations seeking factor under BAS Impuslsivity.  The RST-PQ allows the separation of RI, GDP, RR, and Imp sub-factors of the BAS making feasible to test an open empirical question, i. e. , whether the four sub-scales show unique predictive power, or are they redundant.  According to Corr (2016) it is especially important to separate reward interest and reactivity (which themselves are different) from impulsivity, which serves a different function in the causal cascade from appetitive exploration to ﬁnal capture of the desired object.  We think that the A/R of the ERPs together with the emotional modulation of these responses is a good tool to test this separation conceptualized in the rRST theory (Corr, 2008.  Corr & McNaughton, 2012.  Corr et al. , 2013).  Validation of this theory may be especially informative of the relationship between dimensional nature of the BAS and clinical disorders (Alloy et al. , 2012.  Carver, 2004).  Thus, the aim of the present study was to test speciﬁc revised RST-derived predictions (Corr, 2008.  Corr et al. , 2013) regarding the interaction between BAS trait and positive and negative emotion, and how this interaction inﬂuences the A/R of the ERPs.  We used a visual cue indicating, 2 s in advance, whether participants would see an emotional positive, negative or neutral picture.  The visual cue was used since we assumed that the anticipation of emotional valence of the incoming picture should reduce the inﬂuence of novelty or orienting-response on auditory ERPs. 