Journal of Sociolinguistics 21/5, 2017: 696–719

Displacement and local linguistic practices:

R-lessness in post-Katrina

Greater New Orleans1

Katie Carmichael

Virginia Tech, Virginia, U.S.A

Variable r-lessness in New Orleans English is a salient linguistic feature tied
to local place-based identity. In this study, I examine rates of r-lessness in
the wake of Hurricane Katrina, which caused large-scale displacement in
the region. Participants come from the linguistically conservative suburb of
Chalmette, where r-lessness is more robust than in New Orleans proper.
Participants’ connections to Chalmette were measured in two ways: (1)
post-Katrina location status, i.e. whether participants returned or relocated
after the storm; (2) place orientation, captured via an ethnographically
informed, multifaceted measure of stance and exposure to places outside of
Chalmette. Analysis revealed that place orientation better predicts rates of
r-lessness than post-Katrina location. I argue that the marked quality of
r-lessness makes it available for identity-driven use to express a connection
to Chalmette. This study demonstrates one way to account for the linguistic
implications of individuals’ shifting allegiances to places they live(d).

KEYWORDS: Sociolinguistic variation, place,
displacement, New Orleans English, r-lessness

identity, mobility,

1. INTRODUCTION

Place has long been cited as an explanatory factor for linguistic variation. For
instance, research in variationist sociolinguistics and dialect geography has
demonstrated how language use across locales can reveal information about
settlement patterns, contact, and sociopolitical developments. Likewise, certain
regional linguistic variants can tie a speaker to a locale, echoing that place’s
particular history and development. But individual places may have contested
identities, resulting in varied views on what it means to be ‘from’ there (Modan
2007; Becker 2009). Moreover, speakers may have ties to more than one
place, as the global population becomes increasingly mobile in contrast with
the targeted NORMs (Non-Mobile Older Rural Males) of early dialectological
research (Chambers and Trudgill 1998). As sociolinguists work to improve our

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

R-LESSNESS IN POST-KATRINA NEW ORLEANS

697

models of variation in situations of movement across dialect areas, factors
relating to place orientation must be considered.

In this study, I employ ethnographic and variationist sociolinguistic methods
to examine a white, working-class dialect in Greater New Orleans (GNO). The
linguistically conservative GNO suburb where this dialect is spoken, Chalmette,
has seen large-scale displacement and reorganization since Hurricane Katrina
devastated the region in 2005. To better understand the effects of this
movement on linguistic features tied to place, I analyzed the speech of both
individuals who returned following the storm (returners), and those who
relocated to a different dialect area within GNO (relocators). Here, I report on
linguistic data from 57 speakers, examining their rates of r-lessness, or variable
absence of post-vocalic /ɹ/. Results demonstrate that overall, (r) patterning
cannot be predicted by whether speakers returned or relocated following the
storm. It is, however, predicted by a multi-faceted measure of place orientation,
developed based on local insights after nine months of ethnographic ﬁeldwork
in the area. I propose, in conclusion, that sociolinguists consider including
more complex measures of place orientation in models of variation. Engaging
more deeply with speakers’ orientation to the places they live(d) would make
our models better able to account not only for situations of displacement, but
also for situations of immigration, gentriﬁcation, and globalization that have
formed the focus of much recent sociolinguistic inquiry (e.g. Shin 2012;
Newlin-Łukowicz 2015; Sharma and Rampton 2015). As the ﬁeld has
developed more ﬂexible ways of measuring and analyzing identity factors like
gender/sexuality (Kiesling 2008; Zimman, Davis and Raclaw 2014) and
ethnicity (Benor 2010; Nagy, Chociej and Hoffman 2014), this paper builds
upon others (e.g. Johnstone 2004; Becker 2009; Reed 2016) providing
evidence that including nuanced treatment of place orientation as an identity
factor in models of sociolinguistic variation can similarly improve our ability to
account for the variation observed.

1.1 Place and displacement in sociolinguistic research

Several foundational variationist studies focus on place in terms of orientation
towards local versus extra-local norms. Labov (1972 [1963]) found that
Martha’s Vineyard residents producing the highest rates of diphthong
centralization were long-term residents that either lived in isolated parts of
the island or expressed a strong desire to stay on the island. Milroy’s (1980)
analysis of working-class neighborhoods in Belfast demonstrated that speakers
with denser social networks – those who interacted with the same groups of
people across different spheres – tended to adhere more closely to local
linguistic norms. Finally, in Detroit, Eckert (2000) examined high schoolers
she dubbed ‘jocks’ and ‘burnouts’ based on participation in school activities
and desire to stay within the Detroit area. While jocks attended more to extra-
local linguistic norms, burnouts featured higher rates of local Northern City

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

698

Shift features,
norms.

indicating each group’s orientation towards local

linguistic

CARMICHAEL

in linguistic expression.

More recent research has noted the crucial role of not only local orientation,
but also place identity,
Johnstone’s work on
Pittsburghese has shown that, as linguistic features become enregistered and
tied to a given place (e.g. Pittsburgh), they become available for performance
and commodiﬁcation, to demonstrate that a given individual aligns themselves
with popular notions of being ‘from’ that place (Johnstone, Bhasin and
Wittkofski 2002; Johnstone 2009). Of course, not all individuals from a given
place agree on what it means to be ‘from there’. Such conﬂicts about the
identity of a locale can impact the linguistic strategies speakers use to construct
a sense of place while challenging others’ ideas of their homeplace (cf. Mt.
Pleasant
the Lower East Side of
Manhattan [Becker 2009]).

in Washington, D.C.

[Modan 2007];

In circumstances of displacement and migration, speakers’ relationships
with places can become especially highlighted (Cotter and Horesh 2015).
Sometimes these relationships are framed in terms of ethnic identity, especially
in the case of immigration and diaspora (Hoffman and Walker 2010; Nagy,
Chociej and Hoffman 2014; Newlin-Łukowicz 2015). However,
in such
contexts ethnicity, heritage, and homeland can become so closely intertwined
as to be indistinguishable. Most research on displacement and migration is
focused on situations where speakers cross oceans or political borders, facing
integration into a new community with an unfamiliar culture and tongue (e.g.
Schleef, Meyerhoff and Clark 2011; Sharma and Sankaran 2011). These sorts
of L2 immigration contexts are fundamentally different from movement across
dialectal boundaries within the same country, as issues of intelligibility and
citizenship render these contexts hyper-salient for migrant and recipient
community alike. For this reason, examination of movement on a smaller scale
– across dialect boundaries but not national boundaries, for example – can
provide a clearer picture of the subtle ways speakers exploit connections
between places and their associated linguistic features.

Geographic mobility in and of itself – even if speakers do not permanently
relocate across dialect boundaries – has been shown to impact both linguistic
production (Meyerhoff and Walker 2007; Urbatsch 2015) and perception
(Clopper and Pisoni 2004). Moreover, the very existence of mobile speakers
may highlight the ties between certain linguistic features and the places they
are most commonly used, providing the opportunity for speakers to agentively
produce variants that express orientation to one place or another (Johnstone,
Andrus and Danielson 2006; Hazen and Hamilton 2008; Barnes 2016). In
second dialect acquisition research, linguistic factors are often the primary
focus, and social factors, if included, are typically limited to time spent in
different dialect areas, or occasionally social networks (Nycz 2015). Such
approaches do not account for personal agency in adhering to linguistic
patterns tied to an identity a speaker values – such as being ‘from’ their

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

R-LESSNESS IN POST-KATRINA NEW ORLEANS

699

original dialect area, or being an ‘honorary member’ of their new dialect area.
Degree of integration into the linguistic norms of a new location has indeed
been shown to be dependent on intangibles, such as:

community (Lybeck 2002); and

(cid:129) desire to return to the homeland (Drummond 2012);
(cid:129) development of positive relationships with individuals in the new speech
(cid:129) awareness of certain linguistic features being tied to social capital
(Solomon 1999; Meyerhoff and Walker 2007; Hazen and Hamilton
2008; Cho 2012).

Thus, a number of extralinguistic factors inﬂuence one’s orientation towards
homeplace versus new terrains, and also the ways those ties are expressed
linguistically. A goal in this study was to capture relevant factors that contribute
to participants’ place orientation and to create a measurable scale of (extra-)local
orientation that could be included in statistical analyses of variation. Quantifying
one’s orientation to certain locales is no trivial task, but similar indices for ethnic
orientation have been successfully operationalized in the past. Hoffman and
associates found that Toronto immigrants’ answers to an ethnic orientation
questionnaire correlated with use of certain L2 features and participation in
regional sound changes (Hoffman and Walker 2010; Nagy, Chociej and Hoffman
2014). Fix (2014) and Newlin-Łukowicz (2015) used ethnographic insights to
score participants according to their orientation to African American and Polish
ethnic identities, respectively, ﬁnding that participation in regional sound
changes differed for speakers who scored at different ends of the orientation
spectra. Though less established than ethnic orientation indices, there have also
been attempts at developing multifaceted indices of place orientation. Solomon
(1999) used insights from ethnographic ﬁeldwork in Valladolıd, Mexico, to
quantify orientation to urban and rural locales; the index proved predictive of /y/
realization in Spanish. In his examination of Appalachian English in Tennessee,
Reed (2016) used a rootedness metric borrowed from sociological place-
attachment questionnaires (Williams and Vaske 2003) designed to assess
speakers’ physical and emotional ties to their hometown, ﬁnding that rootedness
scores predicted the variation observed better than traditional variables such as
socio-economic status or social network. The development of extra-Chalmatian
orientation scores, described in detail below, uses ethnographic insights about
speakers’ physical and emotional ties to their pre-Katrina home of Chalmette,
quantifying place orientation in relation to social and linguistic factors that
existed in the population before the storm.

2. GREATER NEW ORLEANS: SOCIOHISTORICAL CONTEXT AND
ETHNOGRAPHIC INSIGHTS

New Orleans was established as a French colonial outpost in the late 1600s,
but has had diverse inﬂuences since then – African inﬂuences as a result of

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

700

CARMICHAEL

the slave trade, and Irish,
Italian, and German inﬂuences due to the
immigration of dockworkers. These latter European immigrant groups
created a distinct socio-cultural group, referred to as ‘Yats’. In response to
school integration in the 1960s, many Yats moved out of the city, resettling
in suburban towns like Chalmette in St. Bernard Parish, which had a
separate school system from Orleans Parish2 (Campanella 2006). Chalmette
is now viewed as the epicenter of Yat culture and language (Mucciaccio
2009), with the term ‘Yat’
losing ground to the toponymic label
‘Chalmatian,’ demonstrating the centrality of locale to identiﬁcation as part
of this sociocultural group. Used by Chalmette residents, the term Chalmatian
indicates a down-to-earth and fun-loving resident; used by outsiders it is a
derogatory slur associated with classlessness and ignorance, reﬂecting the
stigma of being from Chalmette in the eyes of many New Orleanians.

a

(Justin,

returner)

is

Modern-day Chalmette

predominantly white, working-class
community. The town consists of many dense, multiplex networks of
residents, with the tight-knit pre-Katrina community often described as ‘one
big family’
in which ‘everybody knew everybody’
(JuAllison, relocator). Although all of GNO has been slow to repopulate
since Katrina, Chalmette was particularly affected, with a population decline
of nearly 50 percent. The majority of these displaced Chalmatians have
relocated to other less affected areas in GNO, with about a quarter of them
settling on the Northshore of Lake Pontchartrain (Lasley 2012). The
locations of Chalmette and the Northshore in relation to New Orleans are
presented in Figure 1.

The Northshore was not a heavily populated area until the 1990s, and
population numbers have continued to rise since then. Popular perception on
the Northshore places the blame for recent overcrowding on the post-Katrina
arrival of Chalmatians, though census numbers reveal consistent population
increases before and after the storm. This misperception has resulted in tension
between longstanding Northshore residents and Chalmatian relocators.
Relocated Chalmatians also face pressure from Chalmatians who returned to
rebuild after the storm, due in part
ideologies identifying the
Northshore as the realm of the wealthy elite, which framed relocators as
deserters. Returner Bella summarized this opinion, saying, ‘you move to [the
Northshore] and you think you’re high and mighty. People like that, I don’t
know. Those are not Chalmatians’. Yet many relocators expressed mixed
opinions about whether they had fully integrated into life on the Northshore,
or whether in contrast they were ‘true Chalmatians’. Because of the strong
ideological rift between returners and relocators, but also varied orientations
towards Chalmette coming from both groups, multiple measures relating to
place were implemented in this study to capture the wide-ranging inﬂuences
on linguistic practices in this situation of displacement.

to local

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

R-LESSNESS IN POST-KATRINA NEW ORLEANS

701

Figure 1: Greater New Orleans, with Chalmette in St. Bernard Parish and the
Northshore indicated in relationship to New Orleans proper [Colour ﬁgure can be
viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

3. R-LESSNESS IN GREATER NEW ORLEANS
R-lessness is the variable absence of /ɹ/ in post-vocalic, syllable coda position
followed by a consonant (e.g. ‘card’) or word boundary (e.g. ‘car’) (Nagy and
Irwin 2010). Within the United States, (r) has been studied in black and white
dialects of English spoken in Detroit (Wolfram 1969), New York City (Labov
2006 [1966]; Becker 2009), Alabama (Feagin 1990), Charleston, South
Carolina (Baranowski 2007), Boston (Irwin and Nagy 2007), and New
Hampshire (Nagy and Irwin 2010). In descriptions of New Orleans English,
r-lessness is frequently mentioned as part of the distinctive local dialect
(Rubrecht 1971; Coles 1997, 2001; Eble 2006; Labov 2007; Mucciaccio
2009). Research from 1951 to the present demonstrates an increase in
r-fulness over time, from 4–13 percent r-ful (Reinecke 1951), to 30–50 percent
(Brennan 1983), and ﬁnally to 49–66 percent r-ful (Schoux Casey 2013,
2016). Brennan and Schoux Casey found a tendency for lower rates of
r-fulness amongst men and working-class speakers, but no signiﬁcant
difference between black and white speakers’ rates of r-fulness. Both
researchers concluded that r-fulness has become a prestige marker in New
Orleans, fueling the change in progress away from r-lessness. Chalmette has
been identiﬁed as particularly conservative in retaining distinctive local
linguistic features like r-lessness (Mucciaccio 2009; Carmichael 2014). For this

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

702

CARMICHAEL

reason, and because of the disproportionate levels of Chalmatian displacement
following Hurricane Katrina, the current study focuses on the dialect spoken
by individuals from Chalmette (henceforth referred to as Chalmatian English,
though many of its distinctive features are shared with neighboring dialects).
Language patterns on the Northshore, where many Chalmatians relocated,
are not clearly documented in the literature. Recordings of Northshore residents
reveal no evidence that Northshore dialects feature variable r-lessness.

4. METHODS

The data for this study were collected during nine months of ethnographic
ﬁeldwork in Greater New Orleans in 2012.
In addition to participant
observation, I completed sociolinguistic interviews with 57 participants from
Chalmette, and these are the focus of the linguistic analysis that follows.
Information about these speakers can be found in the Appendix.

Sociolinguistic interviews were recorded in WAV format with a Zoom H4
handy recorder and a Shure SM10A unidirectional headset microphone. At
the end of the interview, speakers were asked to read aloud from a reading
passage and word list. Fifteen to thirty minute segments of the conversational
portion of interviews, plus the entire reading passage and word list, were
transcribed and analyzed. These three elicitation modes may be thought of as
representing a continuum of speech conditions ranging from most monitored
(word list) to least (conversational), though the recordings cannot fully capture
the complex range of stylistic effects on speech patterns, and there are valid
critiques of considering recorded interview speech as a participant’s default or
vernacular form of speech (Wolfson 1976; Eckert and Rickford 2001).

All tokens from the reading passage and word list were included in the coded
corpus, along with the ﬁrst 50 tokens of (r) in the transcribed portion of each
interview. A total of 8,290 tokens of (r) were analyzed (981 from the word list
[~17 per speaker], 4,455 from the reading passage [~78 per speaker], and
2,854 from interview speech [~50 per speaker]). Following research on (r) in
North America, I coded the data impressionistically into binary categories by
marking each token as either r-ful (r-1) or r-less (r-0). Some researchers (e.g.
Hay and Maclagan 2010) have used F3 height as an acoustic measure of (r)
constriction rather than relying on binary categorization as r-ful and r-less,
though others (e.g. Heselwood 2009; Nagy and Irwin 2010) report mixed
results with this approach. In my coding, I used both auditory cues and visual
indications from the spectrogram (i.e. F3 height) in categorizing tokens of (r),
to make use of acoustic information about constriction while retaining
comparability with other studies of rhoticity. As a check on my coding, two
undergraduate interns from Ohio independently coded a sample of 400 (r)
tokens across all
Inter-coder
reliability analysis revealed 80 percent agreement between the three of us,
with a kappa statistic of .73, indicating good reliability (Clopper 2011).

three conditions (5% of

the total corpus).

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

R-LESSNESS IN POST-KATRINA NEW ORLEANS

703

The corpus was coded for a number of linguistic factors based on previous

studies of (r):

/ɝ/, and LETTER /ɚ/);

(cid:129) preceding/containing vowel (START /ɑ/, SQUARE /e/, NEAR /i/, FORCE /ɔ/, NURSE
(cid:129) word type (lexical vs. function word); and
(cid:129) morphological environment

s word-ﬁnal preceding a pause, ‘I don’t care.’
s word-ﬁnal preceding a vowel,3 ‘I don’t care about that’
s word-ﬁnal preceding a consonant, ‘I don’t care to go’
s morpheme-internal in a closed syllable, ‘girl’
s morpheme-internal in an open syllable, ‘early’
s morpheme-ﬁnal in a closed syllable, ‘cares’
s morpheme-ﬁnal in an open syllable, ‘careful’.

consonant). This decision was made because

What I am calling morphological environment collapses both morphological
and phonological information, since it captures where in the word a token is
located (word-ﬁnal, morpheme-ﬁnal, morpheme-internal), syllable type (open
or closed), and the following sound in the case of adjacent word boundary
(pause, vowel,
some
combinations of these factors were not possible (e.g. only word-ﬁnal tokens
can precede a pause; no word-ﬁnal tokens can be closed syllables), and to
make ﬁndings more easily comparable to existing scholarship on variable
rhoticity in North America. Syllable stress is almost entirely captured by the
preceding/containing vowel sets, since unstressed syllables within this corpus
were all reduced to schwar, with a handful of exceptions (0.005% of the
corpus; words like ‘uniform’ which appeared three times, and ‘carcinoma’
which appeared once).

Social factors included in the model were speaker age, gender, social class,
post-Katrina location status, and extra-Chalmatian orientation. Age was
treated as a continuous variable, and gender as binary since no speakers
identiﬁed outside of male/female identiﬁers. While Chalmette is a working-class
community, speakers had different occupations and educational backgrounds,
so social class represented an index calculated based on speaker’s education,
occupation, and high school type (public versus private – a salient class marker
within GNO). Post-Katrina location status captured the speaker’s residential
status at the time of the interview – whether they had returned to Chalmette, or
relocated following Hurricane Katrina. Unlike many other studies of second
dialect acquisition, the amount of time spent in the new dialect area was
controlled for across participants; everyone had been displaced for a period of
seven years at the time of their interviews due to the storm. However,
participant observation and commentary from interviews revealed that this
choice was impacted by more complex factors than desire to live in Chalmette
vs. elsewhere. To capture the variation in place orientation within both returner
and relocator groups, I developed extra-Chalmatian orientation scores.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

704

CARMICHAEL

Extra-Chalmatian orientation scores consist of points assigned to each
participant according to their stance towards and pre-Katrina exposure to
places outside Chalmette, based on ethnographic ﬁeldwork and self-report
during interviews. Five categories of scoring were calculated as detailed in
Table 1, with resulting scores ranging from -5 to 16. Within this metric, to get
a negative extra-Chalmatian orientation score (meaning most strongly
oriented towards Chalmette), an individual must essentially never have lived
outside Chalmette before the storm, express a strong connection to Chalmette
as a place, and explicitly state they never wanted to leave.

Table 1 demonstrates that extra-Chalmatian orientation scores contain
stance indicators (a) and (b), while categories (c), (d), and (e) consist of factual
information about the locations where participants spend/spent time. Yet even
these less stance-based indicators are informed by ethnographic insights. For
example, many participants reported that attending high school or college
outside of Chalmette was a revelatory experience, as Big G (relocator) explains:

once I got [to college] I realized, hey wait a minute, the whole world isn’t
centered around St. Bernard [. . .] a lot of my friends [in Chalmette], they just
shallow. And I mean shallow in the sense that they haven’t experienced
everything else.

The participants who expressed a connection with this less Chalmette-centric
view of the world seemed to orient less to traditional linguistic and cultural
ways of expressing a Chalmatian identity. As participants explained, being a
Chalmatian is not only identifying with Chalmette as a place and participating
in Chalmette’s social structures, it also relates to actively avoiding interactions
with outsiders. Thus, for Chalmatians, seeking out exposure to outsiders in
some sense is a stance-taking action, expressing an orientation to outside
norms. Indeed, part of the reason that this scale is organized in terms of extra-
Chalmatian orientation, or orientation to places outside of Chalmette,
is
because of how many participants expressed that such behavior is meaningful
within St. Bernard, whereas being locally oriented is the norm.

By developing a measure that combines these ways of orienting towards and
away from Chalmette, I was able to include in the statistical model one
coherent way of categorizing individuals according to (extra-)local orientation,
capturing something entirely different from their current physical location, and
grouping individuals in a way that was supported by ethnographic insights.

5. RESULTS

The overall rate of r-fulness in this dataset of Chalmatian English speakers was
65 percent, with interview speech 57 percent r-ful. These numbers are
comparable to Schoux Casey’s (2013, 2016) reported 55–61 percent r-fulness
for her corpus of post-Katrina residents of New Orleans. Interestingly, this
patterning suggests that Chalmette residents are not more r-less than residents

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

R-LESSNESS IN POST-KATRINA NEW ORLEANS

705

Table 1: Extra-Chalmatian orientation scores

Category

a. Identiﬁcation as

Chalmatian

b. Desire to leave

Chalmette

c. Residential history3

d. Schooling

e. Workplace

Measure

 2 Identiﬁes enthusiastically as Chalmatian
 1 Qualiﬁed identiﬁcation (e.g. ‘I guess’)
0 No data1
+1 Qualiﬁed non-identiﬁcation (e.g. ‘I guess’)
+2 Identiﬁes enthusiastically as non-Chalmatian
 1 Never wanted to leave
0 No explicit statement about desire to leave2
+1 Wanted to leave

“
“

“
“

+5 Left Chalmette before Katrina
+1 Lived in GNO outside of Chalmette for <5 years
+2
for >5 years
+5
for >10 years
+5 Lived outside of GNO <5 years
>5 years
+7
+10
>10 years
+1 Evacuated and spent >1 year outside of GNO4
 1 Attended HS in Chalmette
+1 “
+1 Attended college outside of Chalmette, but

“ outside of Chalmette

“
“

“
“

in Louisiana

“ outside of Louisiana

+2 “
 1 Currently works in Chalmette
+1 “

“

outside of Chalmette

1N=1; one participant who had to cut his interview short and was never able to reschedule.
2N=13, because this was not a topic that I explicitly brought up during interviews; this was a
category motivated by the sheer number of participants who discussed it. Thus if this topic did
not come up, it is likely that the participant did not feel strongly either way, which is equally
worth capturing.
3Only years preceding Katrina counted towards extra-Chalmatian orientation scores. Years
after Katrina were accounted for already in post-Katrina location status. Because of this, a
number of relocators received negative extra-Chalmatian orientation scores, indicating their
strong orientation towards Chalmette despite leaving after the storm.
4Since all Chalmette residents were displaced for some period of time following Hurricane
Katrina, participants were only assigned a point if they spent over a year somewhere outside
of GNO, during which time they would have presumably integrated more fully into another
speech community.

of New Orleans proper, despite the commonly held perception in the public
imagination that Chalmatians are more ‘accented’ (Mucciaccio 2009). Schoux
Casey’s sample included white, black, and Creole participants, which may

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

706

CARMICHAEL

account for the similarity between her rates of r-lessness and mine, since black
New Orleanians have been shown to resemble Chalmatians more than white
New Orleanians in terms of r-lessness (Dajko, Schoux Casey and Carmichael
2013).

To examine overall patterning of (r) based on linguistic and social predictors, I
generated a logistic mixed effects regression model for the data, performing a
‘step-up’ analysis, which involves adding predictors one by one to a bare model
in order to complete a model comparison, determining which variables
signiﬁcantly improve the predictive power of the model. Included in the full
model were the following predictors: preceding vowel, word type, morphological
environment, age, speech type, gender, social class, post-Katrina location
status, and extra-Chalmatian orientation, along with random effects of speaker
and word. In building the model, linguistic factors were always added to the
model before social factors, to ensure that the predictive power of internal
factors was accounted for before social factors. Table 2 presents the results of
the best model for (r) in Chalmatian English. In this model, signiﬁcant predictors
– in terms of their relationship to the reference point within each factor group –
are reported with p values set at <0.05. Coefﬁcient estimates provide an
indication of the strength and direction of the effect. For categorical variables,
percentages of tokens that were r-ful are provided in the table for ease of
interpretation; patterning of (r) according to continuous variables age and
extra-Chalmatian variation will be described in further detail below.

Table 2 demonstrates that linguistic effects of preceding/containing vowel
and morphological environment were selected as signiﬁcant predictors of (r),
while word type (lexical or function word) was not. The social factors selected
as signiﬁcant predictors were age, speech type, gender, and extra-Chalmatian
orientation, while social class and post-Katrina location status did not predict
(r). Crucially, this patterning means that Chalmette residents who relocated to
the Northshore post-Katrina were no more likely to produce (r-1) than those
who returned to Chalmette after the storm – but that their orientation towards
Chalmette did affect their r-fulness.

Internal

factors impacting (r)

in Chalmatian English mostly matched
previous studies of post-vocalic r-lessness in New Orleans. Table 2 reveals
that the strongest effect in terms of preceding/containing vowel types was the
contrast between stressed /ɝ/ and the reference point of unstressed /ɚ/, with
/ɝ/ most favoring r-fulness (80% [r-1]) and /ɚ/ least (55% [r-1]). This pattern
is common across studies of (r) in North America, which generally ﬁnd varied
ordering of preceding vowels across dialects,
‘bookended’ by stressed and
unstressed schwar (cf. Nagy and Irwin 2010). Contexts that are morpheme-
ﬁnal (e.g. careful, cares) and word-ﬁnal preceding a consonant (e.g. I don’t care
to go) most strongly disfavor r-ful pronunciations. Based on the similarities
between Schoux Casey’s results and those presented here, the system of
r-lessness in Chalmatian English does not seem qualitatively different from that
found in city limits.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

R-LESSNESS IN POST-KATRINA NEW ORLEANS

707

Table 2: Regression table for (r) (Est. = estimate; SE = standard error)

(Intercept)
Vowel

(reference point: ɚ ‘LETTER’)
ɝ ‘NURSE’
ɔ ‘FORCE’
e ‘SQUARE’
i ‘NEAR’
ɑ ‘START’

Morphological environment
(reference point: word-ﬁnal
preceding a pause)
Word-ﬁnal preceding

a consonant

e.g. ‘I don’t care to go’

Word-ﬁnal preceding a vowel

e.g. ‘I don’t care about that’

Morpheme-internal,

closed syllable

e.g. ‘girl’

Morpheme-internal,

open syllable

e.g. ‘early’

Morpheme-ﬁnal, closed syllable

e.g. ‘cares’

Morpheme-ﬁnal, open syllable

e.g. ‘careful’

Speech type

(reference point: word list)
Reading passage
Interview

Gender

(reference point: men)
Women

Age

Extra-Chalmatian orientation

*< 0.05 **< 0.01 ***< 0.001

% (r-1)

Est.

SE

z value

Pr(>|z|)

6.475 0.810

7.994 < 0.0001***

2.397 0.253
0.708 0.249

55
9.482 < 0.0001***
80
0.0045**
66
2.841
66  0.059 0.350  0.169
0.8656
0.0416*
2.037
63
62  0.054 0.284  0.191
0.8483

0.781 0.384

73
53  1.382 0.162  8.528 < 0.0001***

72

74

0.220 0.18

1.224

0.2207

0.141 0.281

0.501

0.616

71  0.397 0.289  1.372

0.17

55  0.621 0.297  2.091
0.0365*
49  2.373 0.462  5.134 < 0.0001***

87
 6.521 < 0.0001***
66  1.692 0.26
57  2.849 0.261  10.895 < 0.0001***

62
68

2.798

1.417 0.507
0.0051**
 0.082 0.014  5.781 < 0.0001***
4.545 < 0.0001***
0.222 0.049

Age was a signiﬁcant predictor of (r), with younger speakers most r-ful.
Interpreted in terms of apparent time, this patterning follows with the ﬁndings
of previous studies completed in GNO, which have demonstrated a change in

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

708

CARMICHAEL

Figure 2: Rates of r-fulness according to age

progress. Since Chalmette is considered a more conservative area in terms of
traditional New Orleans linguistic features, this ﬁnding reﬂects that the shift
towards r-fulness is quite robust in the region, even impacting Chalmatian
English. Figure 2 presents a closer look at this patterning across participants in
the current study.

Figure 2 demonstrates that the shift towards r-fulness has taken the largest
leap with the youngest speakers. Indeed, speakers under 30 in my sample
featured (r-0) nearly 30 percent less often than the rest of the speakers in this
study. Furthermore, two of the nine participants under thirty were exclusively
r-ful throughout all three conditions, and another two featured fewer than 10
r-less tokens – indicating that the future of Chalmatian English is as a fully r-ful
dialect.

Other signiﬁcant social effects include speech type, speaker gender, and
extra-Chalmatian orientation. Participants were most r-ful during the word list
(87% [r-1]) and least r-ful
in interview speech (57% [r-1]), and women
produced more (r-1) (68%) than men (62%). Brennan (1983) and Schoux
Casey (2013, 2016) found similar patterning in their own New Orleans
English data sets, suggesting that despite local dialectal variation in (r), New
Orleanians orient towards broader Northern American linguistic norms in
terms of producing more (r-1) in more monitored speech conditions. Though
(r-1)
there is covert prestige to using r-less
pronunciations, which along with other ‘Yatty’ features have been shown to
index authenticity, uniqueness, and local pride (Coles 2001; Schoux Casey
2013, 2016; Carmichael and Dajko 2016). These locally valued, covertly

is overtly prestigious,

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

R-LESSNESS IN POST-KATRINA NEW ORLEANS

709

Figure 3: Rates of r-fulness according to extra-Chalmatian orientation

prestigious qualities are likely also behind the signiﬁcant effect of extra-
Chalmatian orientation, the results of which can be seen in Figure 3, which
demonstrates a clear trend in rates of (r) across orientation scores, ranging
from lowest (most oriented to Chalmette) to highest (most oriented to places
outside Chalmette).

Most speakers range between orientation scores of -5 and 5, and for these
speakers there is quite a bit of variation across individuals in terms of r-fulness.
In contrast, all speakers with a score of over 5 exhibit particularly high rates of
(r-1) – thus, it is the speakers who are least oriented towards Chalmette who
are driving this effect. These speakers are the most r-ful in the sample, nearly
20 percent more r-ful on average than speakers with an extra-Chalmatian
orientation score of 1 or less. Below, I discuss the interpretations of these
patterns.

6. DISCUSSION

This study approached the analysis of
language and place in two ways:
through consideration of movement across space (post-Katrina location status)
and through examination of orientation to certain locales (extra-Chalmatian
orientation scores). One of the most striking ﬁndings relating to these metrics
was that whether a speaker had returned or relocated following the storm was
not a signiﬁcant predictor of r-lessness, but that extra-Chalmatian orientation
was. Speakers who were most oriented to places outside of Chalmette were also
those who used the lowest rates of r-lessness in their speech. Thus, physical

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

710

CARMICHAEL

displacement following Hurricane Katrina does not seem to have had a strong
effect on language practices; Chalmatians who relocated to the predominantly
r-ful Northshore featured similar rates of r-lessness to those who returned to
their hometown of Chalmette after the storm. That said, the effect of extra-
Chalmatian orientation on (r) suggests that the role of place in this context is
still crucial; it is just not satisfactorily measured by physical location of the
speaker alone.

Recall that since displacement occurred as a result of Hurricane Katrina, all
relocators had been displaced for a period of seven years. The fact that there were
such wide-ranging rates of r-lessness across this group thus demonstrates that
time of exposure to a new dialect alone is also not necessarily the key to
understanding language patterns. One point worth addressing, however, is that
being displaced for seven years starting at age 78 (the age of the oldest participant
in the sample when Katrina hit) is quite a different affair from relocating at age 11
(the age of the youngest participant when Katrina hit), since age-of-arrival has
been found to be a signiﬁcant contributor to second dialect acquisition (Fix 2013;
Nycz 2015). And indeed, it was noted above that participants under 30 years of
age were more likely to be categorically r-ful than participants over 30, which
suggests there may be linguistic effects of Hurricane Katrina that simply have not
become clear yet in the time that has passed since the storm. If there has been an
effect, it appears to have been an acceleration of the change already in progress
towards r-fulness.

The change in progress towards r-fulness is part of what allows r-less
pronunciations to function as a resource for Chalmatian English speakers to
express afﬁliation with their home dialect area. As the locus of traditional New
Orleans English features shifted to Chalmette in the 1960s, r-lessness in
particular developed strong place-linked associations with Chalmette. The shift
away from r-lessness in GNO makes its use noticeable and marked, and thus
ideal for identity expression – as Becker (2009) found on the Lower East Side of
Manhattan, where speakers used r-lessness as a means of distinguishing
themselves from new arrivals. Like the Lower East Side, post-Katrina GNO has
been a context of population ﬂux, foregrounding place-linked components of
an ‘authentic New Orleans identity’, which may be claimed on the basis of
using these marked, traditional features (Carmichael and Dajko 2016).

The marked quality of r-lessness within GNO is signiﬁcant, since research on
migration and second dialect acquisition has demonstrated that stigmatized
and ideologically marked linguistic features are often those most likely to be
dropped when speakers leave their home dialect area – unless there are
attitudinal or identity-driven reasons for retaining them (Auer, Barden and
Grosskopf 1998, 2000; Meyerhoff and Walker 2007; Hazen and Hamilton
2008; Nycz 2015). Salience of linguistic features has also been shown to be a
signiﬁcant predictor of
linguistic choices in contexts of movement or
displacement (Stanford and Pan 2013; Cotter and Horesh 2015). R-lessness
in Chalmatian English appears to be both socially and linguistically salient.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

R-LESSNESS IN POST-KATRINA NEW ORLEANS

711

Speakers’ increased r-fulness in the reading passage and word list suggest some
level of awareness of (r-1) as the prestige norm. Moreover, while there are
other linguistic features that characterize Chalmatian English, none were
brought up as often by participants as r-lessness was, with a number of
participants commenting speciﬁcally on r-lessness when asked about ‘the
Chalmette accent’:

Benjamin (31, relocator): As far as people from Chalmette and the accent that we
have, it’s uh, you know, instead of – like in Boston when they replace the r with
the w, just kind of glob it all together. ‘Lifeguard’ [laɪfɡɔd] and ‘water’ [wɑɾə] and
things like that, you know.

Buckaroo (25, relocator): The Chalmette accent’s like a mixture of just, it’s like
lazy Brooklyn. You know, you just walk in like, ‘I’ma open up the door [dɔ], get
the computer [kəmpjuɾə] out, get me a glass of water [wɑɾə].’

The quotes above demonstrate an awareness of the link between r-lessness and
being identiﬁably Chalmatian. Participants also described being identiﬁed as
Chalmatian by residents on the Northshore based on their speech, and at times
treated unkindly once that conclusion was drawn. Thus, it is not a minor
identity move to continue use of stigmatized Chalmatian English features such
as r-lessness in response to such treatment.

In contexts of displacement or migration, speakers are prone to orient
between linguistic poles: there are the norms associated with where they came
from, or those associated with where they have relocated to. Expressing a
linguistic link to one pole or another is one way of expressing allegiance to one’s
preferred home – the place with which they most identify. This identity move is
particularly salient if movement was involuntary, as in the result of political
upheaval (cf. Cotter and Horesh 2015) or in the case of the current study,
following a natural disaster, since voluntary mobility has been shown to
correlate with other personality factors that predispose individuals to be more
open to adopting new linguistic variants (Urbatsch 2015). Thus, we can think
of speakers with high extra-Chalmatian orientation scores as those most likely
to dissociate with Chalmette as a place, and we can interpret these speakers’ low
rates of r-lessness as a linguistic expression of their afﬁliation with places
external to their hometown, whether the Northshore or elsewhere. This sort of
extra-local orientation in post-Katrina Greater New Orleans has been
documented within city limits as well: Schoux Casey (2013, 2016) devised a
topic-based, discourse analytic approach to categorizing speakers according to
orientation towards New Orleans versus external orientation, ﬁnding that
externally oriented speakers used lower rates of r-lessness than locally oriented
speakers. That is, even more broadly in GNO outside of Chalmette, those
speakers who least value their local connections are most r-ful, whereas those
wishing to emphasize their local ties appeal to traditional linguistic features
such as r-lessness.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

712

CARMICHAEL

Another factor speciﬁcally impacting place-linked linguistic variation in
post-Katrina New Orleans is the ‘nostalgia culture’ that has come to the fore
since the storm. Schoux Casey (2013: 143) explains:

The disappearance of the city created an absence, a loss, which triggered a
including language [. . .] Locally-
nostalgic valorization of all things local,
branded merchandise provides both an avenue for the consumption and display
of place-bound identity and strengthens,
through its own existence and
dissemination, the perception of local language as valuable.

The commodiﬁcation of local linguistic features like r-lessness in GNO to index
authenticity pre-dates Katrina (Coles 2001), though since the storm such
practices have escalated dramatically (Carmichael and Dajko 2016).
Commodiﬁcation of
linguistic features is part of a dialogic enregisterment
process. For commodiﬁcation to occur, there must be some level of linguistic
awareness surrounding the existence of a given linguistic feature and its
connection to certain social qualities; however, the commodiﬁcation further
circulates and builds on these associations (Johnstone, Andrus and Danielson
2006; Johnstone 2009). In the case of traditional New Orleanian linguistic
features such as r-lessness, the associations are clearly those of unique, fun-
loving, authentic and down-to-earth locals (Carmichael and Dajko 2016;
Schoux Casey 2016). However, this association is at odds with disdain for
these features when uttered by working-class Chalmatians (Carmichael 2015).
That is, the abstract notion of an accented local is marketable – one can literally
buy and wear one’s local status – while genuine use of r-less pronunciations
outside of such self-conscious performances remains stigmatized.

Nostalgia culture and language commodiﬁcation are active in Chalmette as
well as within New Orleans city limits. Imagery and linguistic representations
that evoke nostalgia for an authentic, pre-Katrina past can be seen in
merchandise throughout the parish, though the target audience in this case is
clear: only ‘true’ Chalmatians can appreciate such products. Figure 4, for
example, shows a tee shirt that reads, ‘I (hawt) da Parish: Rebuild St. Bernard,
Louisiana’, with a dialect spelling version of the word ‘heart’ pronounced
r-lessly. In this instance, an r-less pronunciation is tied to an expression of
locality and loyalty, by way of encouraging the rebuilding of St. Bernard Parish
– in which Chalmette is located – after the storm.

Understanding the patterning of r-lessness in Chalmatian English is
intricately tied to understanding the politics of living in post-Katrina Greater
New Orleans. Most locals divide time based on ‘before the storm’ and ‘after the
storm’. Before the storm, Chalmette was a largely homogenous community –
ethnically, socially, and linguistically – without much exposure to outside
norms, which is in part what encouraged retention of externally stigmatized
linguistic features. But since Hurricane Katrina, both returners and relocators
have experienced exposure to outsiders, which has increased their awareness of

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

R-LESSNESS IN POST-KATRINA NEW ORLEANS

713

Figure 4: Image
shirt
9482115/womens_tshirt?productId=37287467)

from Cafe Press

tee

(http://www.cafepress.com/mf/

the distinctive local accent. Similar processes were key in the enregisterment of
Pittsburghese, a dialect that went largely unnoticed until increased geographic
mobility brought outsiders after World War II, providing a point of comparison
against which the traditional working-class features of Pittsburghers began to
build associations of
locality and authenticity (Johnstone, Andrus and
Danielson 2006). Thus, while post-Katrina movement does not appear to
have caused a shift within the speech of relocators in contrast with returners, it
may have contributed to their building awareness about features like r-lessness
and its associations with a Chalmette-based identity, thereby making such links
exploitable for identity work.

7. CONCLUSIONS

Before Hurricane Katrina, New Orleans had one of the highest retention rates
for residents born and raised in the region (Aisch and Gebeloff 2014). The
storm changed the social fabric of the city, redistributing its citizens who were
previously stratiﬁed across neighborhoods according to ethnicity and social
class, bringing into everyday contact cross-sections of New Orleanians who
previously avoided each other. This post-hurricane reshufﬂing has highlighted
claims to locality and authenticity, as well as emotional
ties to home
(Carmichael and Dajko 2016; Schoux Casey 2016). For this reason, post-
Katrina GNO provides an important site for research into the ways place-linked
linguistic variables may be employed in identity construction and performance.
The situation in GNO intersects with issues of interest within sociolinguistics
such as globalization, immigration, and diaspora. How do speakers who live in
one locale, but have physical and emotional ties to another, express that
allegiance linguistically? Additionally, the results of this study inform second
dialect acquisition research, indicating that place orientation may represent

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

714

CARMICHAEL

another dimension that should be considered in research on movement across
dialect boundaries.

The primary goal of this analysis was to understand the relationship between
place orientation and rates of r-lessness in post-Katrina GNO. The analysis
presented in this paper demonstrated that while returning versus relocating
following the storm did not signiﬁcantly predict variation, a multifaceted
measure of orientation towards Chalmette did predict r-lessness, with speakers
who were least oriented towards Chalmette also using locally marked r-less
pronunciations at the lowest rates. These results suggest an agentive, identity-
driven quality to (r) variation in GNO, rather than a merely geographic
motivation to using r-less pronunciations in speech. Through this analysis, I
have argued for the importance of building more complex methods for
characterizing speakers’ orientations to place, to account for an increasingly
mobile, globalized population. The context of post-Katrina movement provides a
natural laboratory for such examinations of language and displacement, in
which place-linked identity and regionally-marked dialectal
features are
foregrounded. Extra-Chalmatian orientation scores were developed to capture the
varied orientations that returners and relocators adopted towards their hometown
of Chalmette, since ‘different speakers may orient to place, linguistically, in very
different ways and for different purposes’ (Johnstone 2004: 66). These scores
provide a model of one way to translate complex ethnographic insights into a single
measure for statistical analysis. Replicability and comparability between studies is
important to the venture of variationist sociolinguistics; however, since the identity
of a place is locally deﬁned, and one’s relationship to it a personal and subjective
matter, the methods for examining place orientation ought to be equally local and
subjective – thus making ethnography the ideal approach for better understanding
this factor. As researchers continue to grapple with capturing the variation
observed in an increasingly mobile population, I encourage further development
across speech communities of measures like the extra-Chalmatian orientation
measure presented in this paper.

NOTES

1. I would like to thank the residents of Chalmette who welcomed me into their
community and took the time to speak with me. I would also like to thank
Kathryn Campbell-Kibler, Cynthia Clopper, Don Winford, Galey Modan, Marivic
Lesho, Allan Bell, David Britain, and the anonymous reviewers for their
comments and suggestions which have greatly improved this paper from
inception to publication. Final thanks go to Katie Garahan for her help preparing
revisions while I juggled academic responsibilities with caring for a newborn.
Any remaining errors in this article are my own.

2. Parishes are the equivalent of counties elsewhere in the U.S. New Orleans proper
is within Orleans Parish; Chalmette is within St. Bernard Parish, which is located
adjacent to Orleans Parish.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

R-LESSNESS IN POST-KATRINA NEW ORLEANS

715

3. While in some variably rhotic dialects word-ﬁnal contexts preceding a vowel
would be the site of consistent sandhi or ‘linking-r’, in this dataset there was
indeed variation in this context, so it was included in analysis.

REFERENCES

Aisch, Gregor and Robert Gebeloff. 2014. Mapping migration in the United States. The New
York Times 15 August. Last accessed 16 July 2015 at https://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/
16/upshot/mapping-migration-in-the-united-states-since-1900.html

Auer, Peter, Birgit Barden and Beate Grosskopf. 1998. Subjective and objective parameters in
determining‘salience’inlong-termdialectaccommodation.JournalofSociolinguistics 2:163–187.
Auer, Peter, Birgit Barden and Beate Grosskopf. 2000. Long-term linguistic accommodation
and its sociolinguistic interpretation: Evidence from the inner-German migration after the
Wendte. In Klaus Mattheier (ed.) Dialect and Migration in a Changing Europe. Frankfurt am
Main, Germany: Peter Lang. 79–98.

Baranowski, Maciej. 2007. Phonological Variation and Change in the Dialect of Charleston, South
Carolina (Publication of the American Dialect Society, No. 92). Durham, North Carolina:
Duke University Press.

Barnes, Sonia. 2016. Negotiating local identity: Rural migration and sociolinguistic perception

in urban Asturias. Lengua y migracion 8(2): 45–77.

Becker, Kara. 2009. /r/ and the construction of place identity on New York City’s Lower East

Side. Journal of Sociolinguistics 13: 634–658.

Benor, Sarah Bunin. 2010. Ethnolinguistic repertoire: Shifting the analytic focus in language

and ethnicity. Journal of Sociolinguistics 14: 159–183.

Brennan, Pamela. 1983. Postvocalic /r/ in New Orleans. Unpublished masters thesis. New

Orleans, Louisiana: University of New Orleans.

Campanella, Richard. 2006. Geographies of New Orleans: Urban Fabrics before the Storm.

Lafayette, Louisiana: Center for Louisiana Studies (University of Louisiana at Lafayette).

Carmichael, Katie. 2014. ‘I never thought I had an accent until the hurricane’: Sociolinguistic
variation in post-Katrina Greater New Orleans. Unpublished PhD dissertation. Columbus,
Ohio: Ohio State University.

Carmichael, Katie. 2015. Linguistic and Local Peripherality: The Case of Chalmatians in Greater
New Orleans (Society of Linguistic Anthropology column at Anthropology News). Last
accessed 18 Nov 2016 at http://linguisticanthropology.org/blog/2015/11/16/an-news-
linguistic-and-local-peripherality-the-case-of-chalmatians-in-greater-new-orleans-by-katie-
carmichael-virginia-tech/

Carmichael, Katie and Nathalie Dajko. 2016. Ain’t dere no more: New Orleans language and

local nostalgia in Vic and Nat’ly Comics. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology 26(3): 1–24.

Chambers, J. K. and Peter Trudgill. 1998. Dialectology (2nd edition). Cambridge, U.K.:

Cambridge University Press.

Cho, John. 2012. Global

fatigue: Transnational markets,

linguistic capital, and Korean-

American male English teachers in South Korea. Journal of Sociolinguistics 16: 218–237.

Clopper, Cynthia G. 2011. Checking for reliability. In Marianna Di Paolo and Malcah Yaeger-

Dror (eds.) Sociophonetics: A Student’s Guide. London: Routledge. 188–197.

Clopper, Cynthia G. and David B. Pisoni. 2004. Homebodies and army brats: Some effects of
early linguistic experience and residential history on dialect categorization. Language
Variation and Change 16: 31–48.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

716

CARMICHAEL

Coles, Felice Anne. 1997. Solidarity cues in New Orleans English. In Cynthia Bernstein,
Thomas Nunnally and Robin Sabino (eds.) Language Variety in the South Revisited.
Tuscaloosa, Alabama: University of Alabama Press. 219–224.

Coles, Felice Anne. 2001. The authenticity of Yat: A ‘real’ New Orleans dialect. Southern

Journal of Linguistics 25: 74–86.

Cotter, William M. and Uri Horesh. 2015. Social integration and dialect divergence in coastal

Palestine. Journal of Sociolinguistics 19: 460–483.

Dajko, Nathalie, Christina Schoux Casey and Katie Carmichael. 2013. New Orleans English:
The r-ful truth. Paper presented at the 79th annual meeting of the Southeastern Conference
on Linguistics (SECOL 79), April 12–14, Lexington, Kentucky.

Drummond, Rob. 2012. Aspects of identity in a second language: ING variation in the speech of

Polish migrants living in Manchester, UK. Language Variation and Change 24: 107–133.

Eble, Connie. 2006. Speaking the Big Easy. In Walt Wolfram and Ben Ward (eds.) American

Voices: How Dialects Differ from Coast to Coast. Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell.

Eckert, Penelope. 2000. Linguistic Variation as Social Practice. Malden, Massachusetts:

Blackwell.

Eckert, Penelope and John Rickford (eds.). 2001. Style and Sociolinguistic Variation. Cambridge,

U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Feagin, Crawford. 1990. Dynamics of sound change in Southern States English: From r-less
to r-ful
in three generations. In Jerold A. Edmondson, Crawford Feagin and Peter
M€uhlh€ausler (eds.) Development and Diversity: Language Variation across Time and Space: A
festschrift
for Charles-James N. Bailey. Arlington, Texas: SIL/University of Texas at
Arlington. 129–146.

Fix, Sonya. 2013. Age of second dialect acquisition and linguistic practice across ethno-racial
boundaries in the urban midwest. University of Pennsylvania Working Papers in Linguistics 19
(2): Article 9.

Fix, Sonya. 2014. AAE as a bounded ethnolinguistic resource for white women with African

American ties. Language and Communication 35: 55–74.

Hay, Jen and Margaret Maclagan. 2010. Social and phonetic conditioners on the frequency
in New Zealand English. In Dennis Preston and Nancy
and degree of
Niedzielski (eds.) A Reader in Sociophonetics (Trends in Linguistics Studies and Monographs
219). New York: De Gruyter Mouton. 41–69.

‘intrusive /r/’

Hazen, Kirk and Sarah Hamilton. 2008. A dialect turned inside out: Migration and the

Appalachian diaspora. Journal of English Linguistics 36: 102–128.

Heselwood, Barry. 2009. Rhoticity without F3: Lowpass ﬁltering and the perception of
rhoticity in ‘NORTH/FORCE,’ ‘START,’ and ‘NURSE’ words. Leeds Working Papers in Linguistics and
Phonetics 14: 49–64.

Hoffman, Michol F. and James A. Walker. 2010. Ethnolects and the city: Ethnic orientation

and linguistic variation in Toronto English. Language Variation and Change 22: 37–67.

Irwin, Patricia and Naomi Nagy. 2007. Bostonians’ /r/ speaking: A quantitative look at (r) in

Boston. University of Pennsylvania Working Papers in Linguistics 13(2): Article 11.

Johnstone, Barbara. 2004. Place, globalization, and linguistic variation. In Carmen Fought (ed.)

Sociolinguistic Variation: Critical Reﬂections. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press. 65–83.

Johnstone, Barbara. 2009. Pittsburghese shirts: Commodiﬁcation and the enregisterment of

an urban dialect. American Speech 84: 157–175.

Johnstone, Barbara, Jennifer Andrus and Andrew E. Danielson. 2006. Mobility, indexicality,

and the enregisterment of ‘Pittsburghese’. Journal of English Linguistics 34: 77–104.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

R-LESSNESS IN POST-KATRINA NEW ORLEANS

717

Johnstone, Barbara, Neeta Bhasin and Denise Wittkofski. 2002.

‘Dahntahn’ Pittsburgh:
localness in southwestern Pennsylvania.

Monophthongal /aw/ and representations of
American Speech 77: 148–166.

Kiesling, Scott F. 2008. Men, masculinities, and language. Language and Linguistics Compass 1:

653–673.

Labov, William. 1972 [1963]. The social motivation of a sound change. In Sociolinguistic

Patterns. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: University of Pennsylvania Press. 1–42.

Labov, William. 2006 [1966]. The Social Stratiﬁcation of English in New York City. Cambridge,

U.K: Cambridge University Press.

Labov, William. 2007. Transmission and diffusion. Language 83: 344–387.
Lasley, Carrie Beth. 2012. Catastrophes and the role of social networks in recovery: A case
study of St. Bernard Parish, LA, residents after Hurricane Katrina. Unpublished PhD
dissertation. New Orleans, Louisiana: University of New Orleans.

Lybeck, Karen. 2002. Cultural

identiﬁcation and second language pronunciation of

Americans in Norway. The Modern Language Journal 86: 174–191.

Meyerhoff, Miriam and James A. Walker. 2007. The persistence of variation in individual
grammars: Copula absence in ‘urban sojourners’ and their stay-at-home peers, Bequia (St.
Vincent and the Grenadines). Journal of Sociolinguistics 11: 346–366.

Milroy, Lesley. 1980. Language and Social Networks. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell.
Modan, Gabriella. 2007. Turf Wars: Discourse, Diversity, and the Politics of Place. Malden,

Massachusetts: Blackwell.

Mucciaccio, Francesca. 2009. ‘A gaggle a’ Y’ats’ and other stories: Tracing the effects of ideology on
language change through indexical formation in Y’at. Unpublished honours thesis. Portland,
Oregon: Reed College.

Nagy, Naomi, Joanna Chociej and Michol F. Hoffman. 2014. Analyzing ethnic orientation in

the quantitative sociolinguistic paradigm. Language and Communication 35: 9–26.

Nagy, Naomi and Patricia Irwin. 2010. Boston (r): Neighbo(r)s nea(r) and fa(r). Language

Variation and Change 22: 241–278.

Newlin-Łukowicz, Luiza. 2015. Language variation in the diaspora: Polish immigrant

communities in the U.S. and the U.K. Language and Linguistics Compass 9: 332–346.

Nycz, Jennifer. 2015. Second dialect acquisition: A sociophonetic perspective. Language and

Linguistics Compass 9: 469–482.

Reed, Paul. 2016. Sounding Appalachian: /ai/ monophthongization, rising pitch accent, and
rootedness. Unpublished PhD dissertation. Columbia, South Carolina: University of South
Carolina.

Reinecke, George F. 1951. New Orleans pronunciation among school children and educated

adults. Unpublished master’s thesis. New Orleans, Louisiana: Tulane University.

Rubrecht, August. 1971. Regional phonological variants in Louisiana speech. Unpublished

PhD dissertation. Gainesville, Florida: University of Florida.

Schleef, Erik, Miriam Meyerhoff and Lynn Clark. 2011. Teenagers’ acquisition of variation: A
comparison of locally-born and migrant teens’ realization of English (ing) in Edinburgh and
London. English World-Wide 32: 206–236.

Schoux Casey, Christina. 2013. Postvocalic /r/ in New Orleans: Language, place, and
commodiﬁcation. Unpublished PhD dissertation. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania: University of
Pittsburgh.

Schoux Casey, Christina. 2016. Ya heard me? Rhoticity in post-Katrina New Orleans English.

American Speech 91: 166–199.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

718

CARMICHAEL

Sharma, Devyani and Ben Rampton. 2015. Lectal focusing in interaction: A new methodology

for the study of style variation. Journal of English Linguistics 43: 3–35.

Sharma, Devyani and Lavanya Sankaran. 2011. Cognitive social

forces in dialect shift:

Gradual change in London Asian speech. Language Variation and Change 23: 399–428.

Shin, Hyunjung. 2012. From FOB to cool: Transnational migrant students in Toronto and the

styling of global linguistic capital. Journal of Sociolinguistics 16: 184–200.

Solomon, Julie. 1999. Phonological and syntactic variation in the Spanish of the Valladolid,

Yucatan. Unpublished PhD dissertation. Stanford, California: Stanford University.

Stanford, James N. and Yanhong Pan. 2013. The sociolinguistics of exogamy: Dialect

acquisition in a Zhuang village. Journal of Sociolinguistics 17: 573–607.

Urbatsch, R. 2015. Movers as early adopters of linguistic innovation. Journal of Sociolinguistics

19: 372–390.

Williams, Daniel R. and Jerry J. Vaske. 2003. The measurement of place attachment: Validity

and generalizability of a psychometric approach. Forest Science 49: 830–840.

Wolfram, Walt. 1969. A Sociolinguistic Description of Detroit Negro Speech. Washington, D.C.:

Center for Applied Linguistics.

Wolfson, Nessa. 1976. Speech events and natural speech: Some implications for sociolinguistic

methodology. Language in Society 5: 189–209.

Zimman, Lal, Jenny Davis and Joshua Raclaw (eds.). 2014. Queer Excursions: Retheorizing

Binaries in Language, Gender, and Sexuality. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.

APPENDIX: Participant information

All pseudonyms were selected by participants. All participants were white, reﬂecting
the demographic history of Chalmette. ECO = extra-Chalmation orientation.

Pseudonym

Acilie
Allie
Bella
Benjamin
Big G
Buckaroo
Cecilia
Chastity
Chocolate
Chris
Christian
Daisy
Dave
Dayle
Ed
Ellie
Frank
Gaston
Greg

Status

relocator
returner
returner
relocator
relocator
relocator
returner
relocator
relocator
returner
returner
returner
returner
relocator
returner
returner
relocator
relocator
returner

Gender

Age

female
female
female
male
male
female
female
female
female
male
male
female
male
female
male
female
male
male
male

62
41
46
31
50
25
70
42
53
21
49
18
19
66
57
18
60
85
31

ECO
 5
0
 5
1
 1
9
 2
0
 4
1
4
 1
 2
 1
 5
 2
0
1
5

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

R-LESSNESS IN POST-KATRINA NEW ORLEANS

719

Appendix (continued)

Pseudonym

Haylie
Herman
Jennifer
JuAllison
Justin
Katherine
Killa B
Lance
Luke
Mandy
Margaret
Maria
Mark
Mary
Max
McKenzie
Molly
Momma B
Mr. B
NiceN’Happy
Nunu
Parrain
Paul
Pauly
Peaches
Rayne
Roger
Ronda
Rosalee
Rosie
Sam
Sandra
Sara
Savannah
Sugar Magnolia
Super
Victor
Yoda

Status

relocator
relocator
relocator
relocator
returner
relocator
returner
relocator
returner
relocator
relocator
relocator
relocator
relocator
relocator
relocator
returner
returner
relocator
returner
returner
returner
returner
returner
returner
returner
relocator
returner
returner
returner
relocator
relocator
returner
returner
returner
returner
relocator
relocator

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Gender

Age

ECO

female
male
female
female
male
female
female
male
male
female
female
female
male
female
male
female
female
female
male
male
male
male
male
male
female
female
male
female
female
female
male
female
female
female
female
female
male
male

22
50
41
33
29
57
50
30
31
45
59
71
34
76
27
20
23
48
68
47
75
42
22
67
56
50
29
85
50
69
62
31
31
32
42
62
47
45

2
0
0
 3
 2
11
 3
12
 5
 3
5
 3
6
 2
6
0
 2
 5
3
 3
 2
 4
 3
 3
8
 5
15
 1
 3
 3
1
3
1
 4
11
 3
16
10

Address correspondence to:

Katie Carmichael
Virginia Tech – English
407 Shanks Hall 181 Turner St. NW
Blacksburg, VA 24061
U.S.A.

katcarm@vt.edu


