J. Child Lang.  (), –. © Cambridge University Press 
doi:./S

Children’s use of evaluative devices in spoken and

written narratives*

ELISE DRIJBOOMS, MARGRIET A. GROEN A N D

LUDO VERHOEVEN

Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen – the Netherlands

(Received  June  – Revised  March  – Accepted  April  –

First published online  June )

A B S T R A C T

This study investigated the development of evaluation in narratives
from middle to late childhood, within the context of diﬀerentiating
between spoken and written modalities. Two parallel forms of a
picture story were used to elicit spoken and written narratives from
fourth- and sixth-graders. It was expected that, in addition to an
increase of evaluative devices with age, written narratives would
exhibit a higher frequency and diversity as a result of the intrinsic
diﬀerences between the two modalities. From a developmental
perspective, the results showed that only few categories exhibited the
expected increase with age. Qualitative analyses provided a fruitful
method to illustrate developmental changes. The results further
indicated that modality had the expected impact on the diversity, and
on the
language.
Speciﬁcally, markers of decontextualized language and categories with
a high degree of
syntactic complexity were prone to modality
diﬀerences.

frequency, of most

categories of

evaluative

they also start

I N T R O D U C T I O N
From an early age, children produce oral stories, and by the time children
enter elementary school,
to compose written stories.
Although narrative writing has its roots in oral narration (Roth, ), it is
generally acknowledged that speaking and writing are diﬀerent modalities
that each require a diﬀerent style (Carvalho, ). As such, children need
to become aware of these modality diﬀerences and learn how to reﬂect
them in the linguistic encoding of their narratives. In both modalities, a
coherent story typically consists of essential story elements including the

[*] Address for correspondence: Elise Drijbooms, Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud
University Nijmegen, Montessorilaan , room A·a, P.O. box ,  HE,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands; tel.: +    ; e-mail: e.drijbooms@pwo.ru.nl



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

D R I J B O O M S E T A L.

main events, actions, and characters of the story – the referential aspects – as
well as information on the thoughts, feelings, beliefs, and motivations that
underlie these essential story elements – the evaluative aspects (Labov &
Waletzsky, ). The present
the development of
evaluative aspects of spoken and written ﬁctional narratives in middle to
late elementary school, by analyzing the diversity and frequency of
evaluative devices in the two modalities in a longitudinal sample.

study compares

Narratives are extended pieces of discourse that can be found in a variety of
meaningful social contexts. According to the Labovian framework (Labov,
; Labov & Waletzky, ), a narrative consists of a series of temporally
ordered events whose importance is highlighted through evaluation. More
speciﬁcally, in Labov’s narrative model, the story’s main events, actions, and
characters are structured in a prototypical narrative structure, comprising an
initial orientation, a complication, and a resolution, which is intertwined
with evaluative information, conveying a meaningful interpretation of the
narrated events. While the recapitulation of successive events is a basic
requirement of a narrative, the evaluative aspects of the narrative stimulate
real interest in the audience and increase the audience’s knowledge state and
involvement in the story (van Beijsterveldt & van Hell, ). The inclusion
of evaluative aspects represents not only what the storyteller believes, but
also what he perceives that the audience needs to be told in order to
comprehend the narrative (Eaton, Collis & Lewis, ), thereby providing
overall coherence to the narrative (Bamberg & Damrad-Frye, ).
Originally, Labov and Waletzky () stated that evaluation is a separate
component, positioned between the complication and the resolution, which
serves to emphasize the highpoint where the complication reaches its climax.
However, Labov () revised the original model and suggested that
evaluative devices can be found distributed throughout the whole narrative.
Evaluative devices can be manifold. They often involve explicit reference to
the feelings, thoughts, and intentions of the story characters, but also more
the narrator’s perspective are considered
implicit devices that
evaluative (e.g. Bamberg & Damrad-Frye, ; Eaton et al., ; Mason,
; Peterson & Biggs, ; Shiro, ; Ukrainetz, Justice, Kaderavek,
Eisenberg, Gillam & Harm, ; van Beijsterveldt & van Hell, ;
Zevenbergen, Whitehurst & Zevenbergen, ). In spoken discourse,
non-linguistic and paralinguistic devices, such as facial expression, gestures,
and prosody, can also serve an evaluative function (Reilly, ).

impart

Since Labov and Waletzky’s paper in , researchers have extensively
studied the use of evaluation in narratives from a developmental perspective.
This is not surprising, given its potential to illuminate the development of
both linguistic as well as socio-cognitive skills. Evaluation relies on
linguistic proﬁciency in both lexicon and syntax, but it also requires two
fundamental abilities of social cognition: the ability to adopt the perspective



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

E VA L U A T I V E D E V I C E S I N N A R R A T I V E S

socio-cognitive development

of the audience and adjust the story to the audience’s needs (van Dongen &
Westby, ), and the ability to understand, talk about, and reﬂect upon
characters’ actions, mental states, and beliefs, and to make inferences about
them (Bamberg & Damrad-Frye, ; Eaton et al., ; Fox, ).
Indeed, populations with atypical
show
diﬀerences in the use of evaluation in narratives. For instance, it has been
found that children with autism, who exhibit impaired social and emotional
understanding, rely on a more restricted amount and range of evaluative
devices (Losh & Capps, ; Tager-Flusberg & Sullivan, ), whereas
the highly social nature of children with Williams syndrome is evident in an
excessive use of evaluation in narratives (Losh, Bellugi, Reilly & Anderson,
; Reilly, Losh, Bellugi & Wulfeck, ). Typically developing
children as young as ;–; are able to adhere to the evaluative function of a
narrative, and have been found to include evaluative devices in their
narratives, although the use of these devices in preschoolers is still scarce
(Burger & Miller, ; Haden, Haine & Fivush, ; Miller & Sperry,
; Umiker-Sebeok, ). With age, the diversity and frequency of
evaluative devices in narratives increases signiﬁcantly, both in personal (e.g.
Peterson & Biggs, ; Peterson & McCabe, ; Peterson & Biggs,
), as well as in ﬁctional narratives (e.g. Bamberg & Damrad-Frye, ;
Eaton et al., ; Longobardi, Spataro, Renna & Rossi-Arnaud, ).
Furthermore, development may not only reside in a quantitative change, but
may also alter the qualitative nature of evaluative devices. The use of FRAMES
OF MIND, for instance, illustrates this qualitative development. Frames of
mind encompass evaluative expressions that refer to cognitive, physical, and
aﬀective states of characters in a narrative. Frames of mind are among the
most commonly used evaluative devices (Sah, ). Similar to other
evaluative devices, they function to qualify the nature of links between events,
and they provoke empathy and interest in the audience (Küntay & Nakamura,
). Research has shown that young children tend to tie frames of mind to a
local outcome, whereas with an increasing age, frames of mind are used to
signal the hierarchical organization of the story from a global perspective,
clustered around the emotional highpoints of a story (Bamberg &
Damrad-Frye, ; Chen & Yan, ).

Although evaluation in narratives is an active area of research, most studies in
typically developing children consider preschoolers (e.g. Burger & Miller, ;
Miller & Sperry, ; Umiker-Sebeok, ) and early childhood (e.g.
Peterson & Biggs, ), or adopt a cross-sectional approach, focusing on the
comparison between preschoolers, middle childhood, adolescence, and
adulthood (e.g. Bamberg & Damrad-Frye, ; Longobardi et al., ;
Peterson & McCabe, ; Ukrainetz et al., ). A limitation of the latter
approach is that improvement in smaller age ranges, such as in the transition
from middle to late childhood, is neglected. The transition from middle to



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

D R I J B O O M S E T A L.

late childhood is a particularly interesting stage in terms of evaluation. From
middle childhood onwards several areas of development undergo substantial
changes, notably the areas of linguistic proﬁciency (Berman, ; Nippold,
) and socio-cognitive skills (Rubin, ). A central component of later
language development is the acquisition of a literate lexicon and ﬁgurative
language, referring to a rich, abstract, and complex vocabulary (Berman, ;
Nippold, ; Ravid & Tolchinsky, ). Another aspect of linguistic
acquisition beyond the early school years is the ability to recruit diﬀerent
morphosyntactic structures (Ravid & Tolchinsky, ). This implies an
increased ability to package information into larger syntactic units, reﬂected in
syntactically denser structures and hierarchically organized texts (Berman,
). Overall, language proﬁciency in later school years is characterized by
the availability of multiple linguistic resources, and the ability to use them
ﬂexibly for diverse communicative purposes (Ravid & Tolchinsky, ).
Linguistically, children’s ability to deploy a larger range of advanced linguistic
forms (Berman, ) might extend to an increased diversity of evaluative
devices in narratives. In addition, evaluative devices, and speciﬁcally those that
require complex language skills, may increase, as children become increasingly
able to call upon their sophisticated lexical and syntactic skills. With
augmented socio-cognitive skills, evaluative devices could be expected to
increase in frequency, as children reﬁne their ability to represent the story
characters’ inner world, and become more conscious of the role of evaluation
in involving the audience in narrative discourse. An empirical investigation of
the development of evaluation in this age group is, however, lacking.

Most of what we know about children’s use of evaluative devices results from
studies on spoken narratives. Little is known about children’s evaluation in
written narratives and how it relates to their evaluation in spoken narratives.
Developmentally, this issue is particularly relevant within the context of
children’s developing linguistic literacy (Ravid & Tolchinsky, ).
Acquisition of linguistic literacy means gaining increased control over a
large linguistic repertoire and simultaneously recognizing that speech and
writing are essentially two diﬀerent linguistic modalities (Olson, ;
Ravid & Tolchinsky, ). Speaking and writing diﬀer, ﬁrst of all, in terms
of processing constraints: compared with rapid speech production, writing
does not suﬀer from the same time constraints and thus allows for more
planning, revising, and monitoring of the production process (Ravid &
Berman, ). A writer thus has a higher control over the linguistic output.
More speciﬁcally, writing provides more oﬀ-line time to look for the
appropriate words or for syntactic structures that provide a diﬀerent
perspective, and to ensure variety in linguistic expression. Written discourse
has therefore been found to exhibit a greater variety of vocabulary (e.g.
Chafe & Daneliewicz, ; Purcell-Gates, ; Strömqvist, Johansson,
Kriz, Ragnarsdöttir, Aisenman, & Ravid, ) and to be lexically and



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

E VA L U A T I V E D E V I C E S I N N A R R A T I V E S

such

as

dependent

constructions

accomplished with

syntactically more complex with many embedded constructions, also referred
to as ‘integration’ (Perera, ; Ravid & Tolchinsky, ; Rubin, ).
Signiﬁcantly more often in written than in spoken narratives, embeddedness
is
clauses,
nominalizations, adjectival and adverbial clauses, and attributive adjectives
(Purcell-Gates, Jacobson & Degener, ). Furthermore, the processing
constraints of speech and writing interact with their communicative
conditions. Speaking is typically produced and comprehended within a
shared physical context, whereas in the most prototypical writing situation,
there exists a physical and temporal distance between writer and audience.
As a consequence, in order for the reader to form the right image, a writer is
forced to lexicalize and grammaticalize all information that in oral discourse
can also be conveyed through non-linguistic and paralinguistic channels,
including gestures, prosody, facial expression, and use of shared context
(Tannen, ). Written discourse is therefore inherently more often than
spoken discourse characterized by highly decontextualized language (Rader,
), that is, language that is explicit, precise, and complex, providing all
the contextual information for the audience (Kantor & Rubin, ). In
other words, more than in speech, a writer must appeal to linguistic means
to control and shape the ﬂow of information (Olson, ; Ravid &
Tolchinsky, ). For written narratives it has been suggested that a writer
must create a more explicit, vivid, and detailed story world, conveyed
strictly through linguistic means, to set in motion the reader’s imagination
(Purcell-Gates, ; Rader, ; Tannen, ).

Taking diﬀerences in processing constraints and communicative context into
account, we might expect the use of evaluative devices to diﬀer between spoken
and written narratives. More speciﬁcally, it can be expected that the lack of
on-line processing constraints in writing aﬀects the range of evaluative devices
that the writer chooses, as writing allows for more accurate and more varied
linguistic choices. Furthermore, evaluative devices in written narratives could
be expected to outnumber those in spoken narratives for two reasons. First,
there is more oﬀ-line time to elaborate the referential plane of the narrative
with evaluative information. This can be expected to have powerful linguistic
consequences for lexically and syntactically complex devices. Second, the
writer solely relies on linguistic means to create a vivid story for the reader,
whereas the speaker may also bring non-linguistic and paralinguistic means
into play to achieve an evaluative eﬀect. The comparison of evaluation in
spoken and written narratives has received little attention in previous
research. A developmental study by De Temple, Wu, and Snow ()
showed that late elementary school grade children used more references to
characters’
internal states in their written as opposed to their spoken
narratives. Nevertheless, the results only encompassed a global narrativity
rating, as their research was not speciﬁcally targeted at the study of evaluation.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

D R I J B O O M S E T A L.

A more recent study by Özyildirim () analyzed evaluative language in
adults’ personal spoken and written narratives. She concluded that the use of
evaluative language was signiﬁcantly more prominent in the written version,
and found the frequency of occurrence of diﬀerent categories of evaluative
devices to be similar in the two modalities, with emotional and cognitive
terms being most frequently used. However, the study did not discuss
modality diﬀerences of individual categories, nor did it address questions
regarding development.

Learning to diﬀerentiate between speaking and writing, as a feature of
linguistic literacy, has a long developmental timecourse. Previous research has
demonstrated that sensitivity to modality diﬀerences is present early in
childhood (e.g. Kaderavek & Sulzby, ; Purcell-Gates, ; Sulzby,
), but does not extend directly into writing tasks in elementary school
(Fey, Catts, Proctor-Williams, Tomblin & Zhang, ; Gillam & Johnston,
; Scott & Windsor, ). Only from the age of nine does a cross-over
eﬀect start to occur, with written texts becoming linguistically superior to
spoken texts. From middle elementary school onwards, speaking and writing
thus become increasingly diﬀerentiated (Kroll, ). An explanation for this
cross-over eﬀect can be found in the interplay of several areas of development,
some of which have been mentioned previously. First, a high control of all the
components of language, typical of later language development (Berman,
; Nippold, ), enables the developing writer to reﬂect diﬀerences
between speaking and writing in the linguistic encoding of discourse to a
greater extent (Ravid & Tolchinsky, ). Second, developing maturity in
socio-cognitive skills enhances writers’ awareness of the absent reader and
increases their desire to engage in interaction with this audience (Kantor &
Rubin, ; Rubin, ). Third, from middle to late elementary school,
children begin to automatize their handwriting and spelling, which frees
cognitive resources
that can be dedicated to higher-level aspects of
composition (Alamargot & Chanquoy, ; Carvalho, ), such as
reﬂecting modality diﬀerences in written texts. Finally, education provides
the school-age child with ample exposure to reading and writing tasks,
increasing their sensitivity to characteristics of written discourse. Similarly,
with increasingly demanding writing tasks, requiring a more thoughtful and
reﬂective approach (Graham, Harris & Olinghouse, ), children start to
plan before they write, learn to revise, and begin to evaluate whether their
texts address the audience’s needs (Bereiter & Scardamalia, ).

The present study
The present study aims to enhance our understanding of the development of
evaluation in narratives from middle to late childhood, within the context of
learning to produce spoken and written narratives. In considering the



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

E VA L U A T I V E D E V I C E S I N N A R R A T I V E S

interaction of modality diﬀerences with evaluation in narratives in this age
group, our research contributes to the literature in two important ways:
ﬁrst, we extend previous research on children’s use of evaluation in
narratives, by conducting a longitudinal study in middle to late childhood,
an age range that has previously been understudied in this respect.
Second, by comparing evaluation in spoken and written narratives, we
assess children’s ability to reﬂect modality diﬀerences in a signiﬁcant, yet
neglected, area of narrative discourse. Investigating these issues in this
population is relevant, given the development of linguistic and socio-
cognitive skills, and the crucial steps in writing development, typically
occurring between middle and late childhood.

We explored and compared the development of evaluative devices in spoken
and written ﬁctional narratives from fourth to sixth grade. Narratives were
elicited with a wordless picture book that provided enough referential
support along with the opportunity for evaluative elaboration. In short, ten
categories of evaluative devices were considered, including direct speech,
emotive terms,
intellectual terms, perceptual terms, negative qualiﬁers,
hedges, modal verbs, ﬁgurative language, evaluative comments, and
intensiﬁers. We chose these categories based on their frequent occurrence in
previous research, or on the fact that they rely on complex language skills
(e.g. modal verbs) or socio-cognitive skills (e.g. ﬁgurative language) that
develop later in childhood, rendering them particularly relevant for this age
group. Both diversity and frequency of evaluative devices were analyzed.

The ﬁrst aim of the study was to investigate how the use of evaluative
language in spoken and written narratives changes from fourth to sixth
grade. We expected to ﬁnd an increase in both the diversity and frequency
of evaluative language, as a result of overall improvement in linguistic
proﬁciency, and increased socio-cognitive maturity. The developmental
increase was expected to be most prevalent in written narratives, as a result
of an increasing automatization of spelling and handwriting, and a gradual
change in writing strategies.

The second aim of the study was to compare the use of evaluative devices
between spoken and written narratives. Based on diﬀerences in processing
constraints and communicative context, we expected that children’s written
narratives would possess a higher diversity and a higher frequency of
evaluative devices compared to their spoken narratives. In terms of particular
categories of evaluative devices, we expected that all categories would exhibit
such a modality diﬀerence. However, we predicted the modality diﬀerence to
be particularly evident for the evaluative categories that in the literature have
also been referred to as markers of decontextualized language, such as
intellectual terms (Curenton & Justice, ; Greenhalgh & Strong, ),
direct speech (Sulzby, ; Sulzby & Zecker, ), and ﬁgurative language
(Halliday, ; Olson, ). Furthermore, we expected the category of



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

D R I J B O O M S E T A L.

modal verbs, requiring advanced syntactic skills, to be particularly prone to
modality diﬀerences. For the categories of emotive and perceptual terms,
evaluative comments, intensiﬁers, negative qualiﬁers, and hedges, no strong a
priori hypotheses were proposed.

M E T H O D
Participants
Participants were tested at two developmental time-points, namely in fourth
grade and later in sixth grade. Children with neurodevelopmental disorders
were excluded from participation. At the start of the study,  Dutch
children in fourth grade (Age M = ;, SD = · months) took part in the
study. The children in the study came from four primary schools in the
Netherlands. Information on socioeconomic status for the individual
children was unavailable, but examining factor scores reﬂecting parental
education, income, and work status provided by the Netherlands Institute
for Social Research for the zip code areas the schools were located in,
suggest a middle to middle-high socioeconomic background for the
children (M = ·, SD = ·; scale in the Netherlands ranges from –·
to ·). Parents gave their active consent for the participation of their
child. Due to dropouts throughout the years, the ﬁnal sample consisted of
ninety-three children (·% girls) in the second testing phase in sixth
grade (Age M = ;, SD = · months). Participants showed normal
non-verbal cognitive ability (M = ·, SD = ·), as assessed by the
Raven’s Coloured Progressive Matrices (standard score: M = , SD = ;
Raven, ) and average vocabulary ability (M = ·, SD = ·), as
assessed by the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (standard score: M =
, SD = ; Dunn & Dunn, , ). Analyses were conducted on
the data of children who participated both in fourth and in sixth grade.

Materials and procedure
Testing was done by the ﬁrst author and by three trained research assistants.
One individual session and one classroom session were organized. The
Raven’s Coloured Progressive Matrices, the Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test, and the elicitation of the spoken narratives were administered during
the individual session, whereas the written narratives were collected during
the classroom session. Individual sessions took place in a quiet room in
each of the schools.

The Expression, Reception, and Recall of Narrative Instrument (ERRNI;
Bishop, ) was used to elicit the spoken and written narratives. The
ERRNI is a wordless picture book that tests children’s ability to tell a
story based on pictures, understand the story, and remember it after a
delay. In the current study, only story-telling ability was assessed. The



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

E VA L U A T I V E D E V I C E S I N N A R R A T I V E S

instrument consists of two parallel forms, the Beach Story and the Fish
Story, that each consist of a series of ﬁfteen sequenced pictures. The
parallel nature of the stories allowed for testing narrative production in the
two modalities whilst minimizing practice eﬀects. The Fish Story was
used to elicit the written narratives, whereas the Beach Story was used to
elicit the spoken narratives.

For the elicitation of the written narratives, children were each presented with
the picture booklet for the Fish Story. They were instructed to familiarize
themselves with the pictures that told a narrative, and to take their time to
look at the pictures, before starting to write a story. The researcher ensured
that the children looked through the pictures carefully prior to writing. The
booklet remained available to the children while writing, so they could
consult the booklet as and when they liked. If the researcher noticed that a
child had diﬃculty starting to write, a prompt was used for that individual
child: “What happened at the beginning of the story?” No other prompts
were provided. Children were allowed to edit their written texts as needed,
until they were satisﬁed and handed in their stories.

For the elicitation of the spoken narratives, the participants were presented
with the picture booklet for the Beach Story and were given the same
instructions as for the written narratives. Similarly, if a child appeared to
have diﬃculty starting to tell the story, he was encouraged with the same
prompt as in the case of the written narratives. If children fell silent during
the task, they were probed with a neutral prompt, such as “What happened
next?” No further support or other prompts were provided throughout the
task. Children were complimented on their story after they ﬁnished.
Children’s spoken narratives were registered using a digital tape-recorder.

Children were encouraged to do their best for these story-telling tasks, by
announcing that the best stories would be rewarded with a prize. The tasks
and the procedure were identical in fourth and sixth grades.

Coding
All narratives were transcribed using CLAN from Childes (MacWhinney,
). In the transcription process, narratives were divided into clauses,
each containing a subject and a predicate. Typical features of spoken
language such as hesitations, intonation, and false starts were ignored in
the transcriptions. Likewise, features of written language such as deleted
words or spelling mistakes were not considered.

Two raters coded the evaluative devices in the narrative, after having
received brief training from the ﬁrst author. Half of the transcripts were
scored by each of the two raters. Inter-rater agreement was assessed for
% of the narratives. Cohen’s kappa was estimated at ·, indicating that
the coding scheme was reliable for the purposes of this study.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

D R I J B O O M S E T A L.

Our coding scheme is adapted from Labov and Waletzky (), and van
Beijsterveldt and van Hell (). The coding scheme included the following
categories of evaluative devices:

. DIRECT SPEECH involves the narrator reporting the speech of characters in
the narrative speaking directly to each other. Labov () considered
direct speech such as “He said I go to the beach” to be evaluative,
because it suspends the action by reporting dialogue taking place
during the described events. Additionally, when using character
speech,
the narrator must adopt a diﬀerent epistemic stance and
interpret how the story character might be thinking or feeling. Clauses
that directly report character speech may also convey referential
content. As the referential function does not exclude the evaluative
eﬀectiveness, such clauses were coded as evaluative. Indirect speech
was not coded in this study, because the evaluative impact of indirect
speech is much more limited (Mason, ). Indirect speech involves
the narrator reporting the speech of characters by rephrasing the
speaker’s original utterance. Grammatically,
indirect speech entails
syntactic transformations of the wording of the original utterance,
often also including semantic adjustments. Compared to indirect
speech, direct speech provides a more direct and authentic reproduction
of wording of the original utterance expressed by the story characters
(Holt, ), which contributes to its vividness and dramatization and
to interpersonal involvement (Mason, ; Tannen, ). In this
respect, Baynham () commented that direct speech foregrounds the
utterance, whereas indirect speech backgrounds the utterance.

. EMOTIVE TERMS refer explicitly to the feelings of the story characters,
leading to audience interest and sympathy. This category included
sad”), verbs
adjectives describing emotional
describing emotional actions (“He was smiling”), or verbs describing
volitional feelings of hopes, intentions, or desire (e.g. “She hopes that
she can ﬁnd him”, “He wants to buy a new ﬁsh”).

(“He was

feelings

. INTELLECTUAL TERMS provide explicit information about the cognitive
processes of story characters. This category comprised verbs denoting
thinking, believing, knowledge, or mental ability (e.g. “He thought”,
“The child knew”, “She believes the watch was lost”).

. PERCEPTUAL TERMS included verbs that refer to seeking or obtaining
information through senses (“He saw the bird”, “The man heard his
dog barking”). These terms enrich the action of
the event by
providing information on the character’s internal perceptual processes.
. NEGATIVE QUALIFIERS provide a means of evaluating events by
comparing them with events that did not happen. Emphasizing the



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

E VA L U A T I V E D E V I C E S I N N A R R A T I V E S

non-occurrence of an event enriches the narration of what did happen,
rendering it therefore evaluative. For example, “I don’t like that”, “He
never listens”.

. HEDGES such as “The watch is probably lost” express the narrator’s or
story character’s uncertainty, and thus characterize the event in terms
of multiple, possible worlds. Hedges function as distancing devices.
. MODAL VERBS can be either epistemic (“He should be home by now”),
expressing the degree of certainty or possibility of a given state of
aﬀairs, or deontic (“He must buy the ﬁsh today”), expressing the necessity
or obligation for such state of aﬀairs to occur (Chung & Timberlake,
; Reilly, Zamora & McGivern, ). As both deontic and epistemic
verbs share the characteristic of non-commitment to the truth-value of
the proposition, we did not distinguish between them in the coding of the
current study.

. FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE included irony and metaphors (“I was burning
with anger”) and nicknames (“He acted like the boss of the class”).
Figurative language has an evaluative function because it involves
imagery, and it adds a non-literal connotation to the conceptual
meaning (van Beijsterveldt & van Hell, ).

. EVALUATIVE COMMENTS are adjectives that express an opinion about an
event or a person (“It was a fun afternoon”). Through this evaluative
device, the subjective perception of the narrator or a story character is
expressed. In clauses such as “The tall man helped him”, “The sky
was blue”, or “The man runs fast”, the italicized words can perform
both a referential and an evaluative function. Such occurrences, where
the evaluative function cannot clearly be distinguished from the
referential function, were not coded.

. INTENSIFIERS are devices for emphasizing particular parts of a narrative,
and include both emphatic lexical markers as well as repetition of words
or ideas. Emphatic lexical markers are adverbs of intensiﬁcation that
function to emphasize the words they modify (“She was really sad”).
They obtain their meaning only within a particular context; on their
own they serve little function. Repetition of words or ideas involves
the literal reiteration of words (“He ran and ran”) or a close
paraphrase of previously mentioned ideas (e.g. “It was a fun day . . .
that was fun”). Repetition has an evaluative function in intensifying a
particular part within a narrative. More
repetition
intensiﬁes the importance of the word or the expressed idea by stating
it multiple times.

speciﬁcally,

Non-linguistic and paralinguistic means of evaluation were not coded in

this study.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

D R I J B O O M S E T A L.

TA B L E . Mean (SD) for number of types of evaluative categories in spoken

and written narratives across development

Fourth grade

Sixth grade

spoken

written

spoken

written

Number of types

· (·)

· (·)

· (·)

· (·)

types of evaluative categories (out of

R E S U L T S
Diversity
The diversity of evaluative categories was calculated by summing the
number of
ten) used in each
narrative. Table  presents the mean number of types in spoken and
written narratives in fourth and sixth grade. A  ×  within-subjects
ANOVA was conducted to compare the diversity of evaluative categories
in spoken and written narratives across development. The analysis showed
a signiﬁcant main eﬀect of modality (F(,) = ·, p < ·, partial η
= ·), with children using a wider range of evaluative categories in their
written as opposed to their spoken narratives. Although the main eﬀect of
development was not signiﬁcant (F(,) = ·, p = ·, partial η = ·), a
statistically signiﬁcant interaction between modality and development was
observed (F(,) = ·, p < ·, partial η = ·). Pairwise comparisons
using t-tests with Bonferroni adjustment for multiple comparisons were
conducted to follow up the signiﬁcant
interaction. The diversity of
evaluative devices did not change across development in written narratives
(t() = –·, p = ·, d = –·), but decreased signiﬁcantly in spoken
narratives (t() = ·, p < ·, d = ·).

The measure of diversity used in this study does not take the length of the
narrative into account. Nevertheless, longer narratives are likely to display a
higher diversity of evaluation, as they provide more opportunities for the
child to produce diﬀerent types of evaluation (Shiro, ). In our study,
however, written narratives were
than spoken
narratives (F(,) = ·, p = ·, partial η = ·). This suggests that the
higher diversity of evaluation in written narratives is not due to length
diﬀerences but reﬂects an actual modality diﬀerence in the extent to which
children employ various linguistic realizations of evaluation.

signiﬁcantly shorter

Frequency
To ensure that appropriate comparisons would be conducted for frequency
measures of evaluation,
it was necessary to control for the length of
children’s stories. Hence, in order to take length diﬀerences into account,



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

E VA L U A T I V E D E V I C E S I N N A R R A T I V E S

TA B L E . Mean (SD) for frequency of evaluative devices in percentages in

children’s spoken and written narratives across development

Fourth grade

Sixth grade

spoken

written

spoken

written

· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)

· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)

· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)

· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)

Direct speech
Emotive terms
Intellectual terms
Perceptual terms
Negative qualiﬁers
Hedges
Modal verbs
Figurative language
Evaluative comments
Intensiﬁers
Total

proportional measures were calculated. The frequency of each evaluative
category was calculated by multiplying the number of occurrences by 
and dividing by the total number of clauses in the narrative. The
frequency of an evaluative category then roughly represents the percentage
of clauses that contain an evaluative device of that speciﬁc category. The
percentage should not be interpreted too strictly, as some clauses may
contain more than one evaluative device. Table  presents the mean
frequency of evaluative devices in children’s spoken and written narratives
across development, including a composite score, summing the percentages
of the individual evaluative categories, which provides a measure for the
total frequency of evaluative devices.

A three-way  ×  ×  within-subjects ANOVA was conducted to evaluate
the eﬀects of modality (i.e. spoken vs. written), development (i.e. fourth
grade vs. sixth grade), and category on the mean frequency of evaluative
devices. Mauchly’s test indicated that the assumption of sphericity had
been violated for the main eﬀects of category (χ() = ·, p < ·),
the interaction between modality and category (χ() = ·,
for
p < ·), for the interaction between development and category (χ() =
·, p < ·), and for the interaction between modality, development,
and category (χ() = ·, p < ·). Degrees of freedom were therefore
corrected using Greenhouse–Geisser estimates of sphericity (ε = · for the
main eﬀect of category,
. for the interaction between modality and
category, . for the interaction between development and category, and
. for the interaction between modality, development, and category). The
analysis showed signiﬁcant main eﬀects of modality (F(,) = ·,
p < ·, partial η = ·), and category (F(·,·) = ·, p < ·,



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

D R I J B O O M S E T A L.

(F(,) = ·, p = ·, partial
partial η = ·), but not development
η = ·). However,
the interactions between modality and category
(F(·,·) = ·, p < ·, partial η = ·), and between development
and category (F(·,·) = ·, p < ·, partial η = ·) proved to
be signiﬁcant. Finally,
the three-way interaction between modality,
development, and category approached signiﬁcance (F(·,·) = ·,
p = ·, partial η = ·).

The two-way and three-way interactions were further explored in a series
of  ×  within-subjects ANOVAs. For each category of evaluative devices, a
separate analysis with modality and development as factors was conducted.
For DIRECT SPEECH, the analyses revealed that direct speech was used
signiﬁcantly more often in written than in spoken narratives (F(,) =
·, p < ·, partial η = ·). In addition, the frequency of use of
direct speech decreased signiﬁcantly from fourth grade to sixth grade
(F(,) = ·, p < ·, partial η = ·). For EMOTIVE TERMS,
for
INTELLECTUAL TERMS, and for PERCEPTUAL TERMS a main eﬀect of modality
found (emotive terms: F(,) = ·, p < ·, partial η = ·;
was
terms: F(,) = ·, p < ·, partial η = ·; perceptual
intellectual
terms: F(,) = ·, p < ·, partial η = ·). Emotive terms and
intellectual
terms were used more often in written than in spoken
narratives. Perceptual terms, by contrast, were used more often in spoken
than in written narratives. Similarly, both for NEGATIVE QUALIFIERS as well
was for HEDGES, the analyses indicated that their use occurred more often
in spoken than in written narratives (negative qualiﬁers: F(,) = ·,
p < ·, partial η = ·; hedges: F(,) = ·, p < ·, partial η = ·).
For MODAL VERBS, the analyses showed that they were used more often in
(F(,) = ·, p < ·, partial
written than in spoken narratives
η = ·). In addition, the use of modal verbs increased signiﬁcantly across
(F(,) = ·, p < ·, partial η = ·). For FIGURATIVE
development
LANGUAGE, we found that it was used more frequently in written than in
spoken narratives (F(,) = ·, p < ·, partial η = ·). Additionally,
the use of ﬁgurative language increased signiﬁcantly across development
(F(,) = ·, p < ·, partial η = ·). For EVALUATIVE COMMENTS, the
analyses showed a signiﬁcant main eﬀect of modality (F(,) = ·,
p < ·, partial η = ·), with evaluative comments being expressed more
frequently in written than in spoken narratives. For
INTENSIFIERS,
signiﬁcant main eﬀects of modality (F(,) = ·, p < ·, partial
η = ·) and development (F(,) = ·, p = ·, partial η = ·) were
interaction (F(,) = ·, p < ·, partial
modiﬁed by a signiﬁcant
η = ·). Pairwise comparisons using t-tests with Bonferroni adjustment
for multiple comparisons were conducted to follow up the signiﬁcant
interaction. The diﬀerence in the frequency of use of intensiﬁers in written
narratives across development was signiﬁcant (t() = –·, p < ·, d = –·),



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

E VA L U A T I V E D E V I C E S I N N A R R A T I V E S

with a higher frequency observed in sixth grade than in fourth grade. No
such eﬀect of development was observed in spoken narratives (t() = ·,
p = ·, d = ·).

D I S C U S S I O N
The transition from middle to late childhood is a particularly interesting
stage of development in terms of linguistic proﬁciency and socio-cognitive
skills. These skills are deemed important for both the development of
evaluative language, a prerequisite of successful story-telling, as well as for
the ability to reﬂect modality diﬀerences in the linguistic encoding of
spoken and written discourse. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study to
directly compare evaluative language in spoken and written narratives from
a developmental perspective in middle to late childhood. We expected
both developmental diﬀerences, revealing an increasing diversity and
frequency of evaluative devices with age, as well as modality diﬀerences,
reﬂecting a higher diversity and frequency of evaluative devices in written
compared to spoken narratives.

The overall picture that emerges from the results is complex, and demands
a diﬀerentiation between diﬀerent categories of evaluative devices, both in
terms of developmental trajectories as well as regarding their susceptibility
to modality diﬀerences. Below, we discuss
the quantitative results
regarding developmental diﬀerences and modality diﬀerences separately,
illustrated by a qualitative analysis when appropriate. In the examples that
support the qualitative analysis, the underlined words or phrases comprise
the evaluative devices.

Developmental diﬀerences
The ability to employ evaluative devices in narrative discourse presupposes a
combination of linguistic proﬁciency and sophisticated socio-cognitive skills
(Bamberg & Damrad-Frye, ), two areas that develop substantially from
middle to late childhood (Berman, ; Nippold, ; Rubin, ). In
this regard, it is surprising that the diversity of evaluative devices used by
the children in this study did not increase between fourth and sixth grade,
and even slightly decreased in spoken narratives. A possible explanation is
that the nature of the story does not trigger a higher diversity of devices.
Alternatively, it may be that, at this age, children already possess the
necessary linguistic skills to use all ten evaluative categories distinguished
in our study, given the high mean number of types of evaluative categories.
Furthermore, only a few categories showed the expected developmental
increase was
change in their frequency of use. A clear developmental
observed for the categories of ﬁgurative language and modal verbs. The
use of ﬁgurative language and modal verbs requires a rich lexicon and



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

D R I J B O O M S E T A L.

advanced syntactic skills, respectively, two hallmarks of later language
development (Berman, ; Nippold, ; Ravid & Tolchinsky, ).
It should be noted that we did not distinguish between epistemic and
deontic modality. Reilly et al.
() have found that, between late
childhood and adolescence, children shift
from predominantly using
deontic types of modal expressions to an increased use of epistemic
modality. Future research might be directed at a more ﬁne-grained
analysis of modality to shed additional light on the emergent use of modal
verbs and related syntactic skills in this age group. Furthermore, the
frequency of use of intensiﬁers increased signiﬁcantly with age in written,
but not in spoken, narratives. Prior research did ﬁnd a developmental
increase in the use of intensiﬁers in spoken narratives, but focused on
younger children (Bamberg & Damrad-Frye, ; Peterson & Biggs,
). A possible explanation is that children use other means to signify
intensiﬁers in speech. For example, when speaking, children may also use
prosodic signals such as a higher pitch, an increased volume, a higher
density of accented syllables, and lengthened pitch accents that highlight
salient clauses of discourse and render them evaluative (Labov, ;
Wennerstrom, ). It might be that sixth-graders do not elaborate
further upon the lexical intensiﬁers in their spoken narratives, as they start
to enrich their spoken discourse with prosodic intensiﬁers instead. In this
sense, we suggest that the developmental increase found for written but
not for spoken narratives is not so much related to language development,
but is caused by diﬀerences between modalities.

A surprising ﬁnding was the substantial developmental decrease of direct
speech in both modalities. Direct speech renders the story dynamic and
vivid. The notable decrease in its use, however, suggests that frequency is
not always directly associated with the quality of the narrative. This
premise can be illustrated by the following two stories told by a
fourth-grader and by a sixth-grader. The excerpt of the fourth-grader’s
story is almost entirely composed of direct speech. Based on the content, it
can be concluded that the fourth-grader switches between characters while
reporting their speech.

()

a. Spoken narrative by a fourth-grader

“Hoe gaat ie?” “Goed ik ben aan het vissen.” “Zie je het?” “Ja ik zie het
inderdaad.” “Wat ga je vissen?” “Misschien baars.” “Misschien zelfs
goudvissen.” “Oke ik ga ervandoor.” “Ik ga naar het strand.” “Hoi.”
“Hoe gaat ie?” “Ja goed.”. “Ik ga lekker in het water.” Dan gaat ze
uit het water.
‘“How are you?” “Fine I am ﬁshing.” “Can you see it?” “Yes, I can
indeed.” “What are you going to ﬁsh?” “Maybe perch.” “Maybe
even goldﬁsh.” “OK I am oﬀ.” “I am going to the beach.” “Hi.”



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

E VA L U A T I V E D E V I C E S I N N A R R A T I V E S

“How are you?” “I am ﬁne.” “I am going into the water.” Then she
gets out of the water.’

b. Spoken narrative by a sixth-grader

Onderweg komt ze iemand tegen. Dat is Bart. Die zit te vissen.
“Hallo”, zegt Ilse. “Hoi”, zegt Bart. “Waar ga je heen?”, vraagt hij.
“Ik ga naar het strand”, antwoordt Ilse blij. Eenmaal bij het strand
komt ze Mohammed tegen. Mohammed zegt “hoi”.
‘She meets someone on the way. It’s Bart. He’s ﬁshing. “Hello”, Ilse
says. “Hi”, Bart says. “Where are you going?”, he asks. “I am going
to the beach”, Ilse answers happily. Once she’s at the beach, she
meets Mohammed. Mohammed says “hi”.’

the characters, nor

is

alternates direct

reported, providing additional contextual

Two important aspects downgrade the evaluative eﬀectiveness of direct
speech in the fourth-grader’s story. First, the excerpt presents a dialogue
between two or more story characters, but no reference is made to the
identity of
turn-taking overtly signalled by
introductory verbs. A listener unknown to the story may experience
diﬃculties in understanding this dialogue. Second, with a predominance
of evaluative utterances, the referential content is entirely neglected. The
sixth-grader, by contrast,
speech with referential
utterances describing the actions that precede the dialogues. In this way,
the listener gets a better grasp of how the characters’ thoughts and feelings
support and aﬀect the story events. As noted by Shiro (), it is the
combination of evaluative and referential content that contributes to the
overall coherence of a story. In addition, the sixth-grader also makes use
of introductory verbs that signal the identity of the character whose speech
is
information. A possible
explanation for the abundant use of direct speech by younger children
resides in its grammatical form. Whereas direct speech reproduces literally
the deictic references of the original speech act, other types of reported
speech, such as indirect speech, require a syntax transformation that
involves embedding the original linguistic form into a subordinate clause,
often also including semantic
this
transformation is a gradual process that extends throughout childhood
(Goodell & Sachs, ). In addition to balancing the evaluative and the
referential content more carefully, it might therefore be that children in
sixth grade start to make use of their improved syntactic skills to manage
the syntactic complexity of other types of reported speech (Berman, ;
Nippold,
than
fourth-graders. The idea that the use of direct speech functions as a tool to
avoid syntactic
signiﬁcant negative
correlation between the frequency of direct speech and the syntactic
complexity of the narratives (as measured by the mean length of a t-unit

adjustments. The mastery of

and consequently use direct

complexity is

supported by a

),

speech less



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

D R I J B O O M S E T A L.

in words, where a t-unit is deﬁned as a main clause with all subordinate
clauses associated with it (Hunt, )), both in speech (r = –·, p
< ·) and in writing (r = –·, p < ·). Coding indirect speech in
future research would be useful
to underpin the idea that with age
children reduce their use of direct speech in favour of grammatically more
complex types of reported speech, such as indirect speech.

Another category that did not show the expected developmental increase is
the category of evaluative comments. A careful observation of the narratives
shows that evaluative comments, through which opinions are expressed,
frequently occur in contexts of direct speech, as in the following examples:

()

a. Written narrative by a fourth-grader

“Kijk”, riep hij. “Een man op een coole, rode motor.”
‘“Look”, he screamed. “A man on a cool, red motorbike.”’

b. Written narrative by a sixth-grader

De mevrouw gaf hem de vis en zei “dit is een speciale vis.” “Bewaar hem
goed.”
‘The lady gave him the ﬁsh and said “this is a special ﬁsh”. “Keep
him safely.”’

These examples demonstrate that the narrator often uses the voice of a story
character to comment upon an object. The lack of an age-related increase in
the use of evaluative comments – its use remains stable across development –
might therefore be related to the decrease in the use of direct speech. In this
sense, it could even be said that children in sixth grade do show progress on
their use of evaluative comments, as they continue to use them as frequently
as in fourth grade, despite the overall decline of direct speech. Example ()
illustrates how a sixth-grader not only uses evaluative comments to overtly
present a story character’s perspective, but also employs the comments to
represent evaluative information on the story events from the perspective
of an omniscient narrator. Mature perspective-taking abilities are required
to shift between this narrator’s stance and the story character’s perspective
(Sah, ).

() Spoken narrative by a sixth-grader

Op een mooie lentedag zat Vera met haar kat te spelen. Opeens ging de
telefoon. Vera pakte de telefoon en hoorde dat het Bram was. Bram is
een hele goede vriend van Vera. Bram vroeg of Vera mee wou naar het
strand. “Wat een leuk idee!”, zei Vera.
‘On a beautiful spring day Vera was playing with her cat. Suddenly, the
telephone rang. Vera took up the telephone and heard that it was Bram.
Bram is a very good friend of Vera’s. Bram asked if Vera wanted to
come with him to the beach. “What a nice idea!”, Vera said.’



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

E VA L U A T I V E D E V I C E S I N N A R R A T I V E S

Also, negative qualiﬁers and hedges failed to show a developmental increase
with age. As children move into middle childhood, they exhibit an increased
tendency to be more concrete and to be more tied to facts (Ely, MacGibbon
& McCabe, ). In the light of this tendency, children in middle to late
childhood may be less willing to make reference to non-events or possible
events. Alternatively, a more detailed coding of speciﬁc forms of negative
qualiﬁers and hedges could reveal whether
some devices are more
evaluative than others, as suggested by Ely et al. (), and are thus more
likely to decrease or increase with age.

to enrich their narratives, none of

these terms

states

increased markedly with age. The

While children used a variety of emotive, intellectual, and perceptual
terms
showed any
developmental change in the sample of our study. This result contradicts
Bamberg and Damrad-Frye (), who found that reference to cognitive
and emotional
lack of
developmental growth may be explained in diﬀerent ways. First, Bamberg
and Damrad-Frye studied evaluation in younger children. It may be that
the use of these terms undergoes signiﬁcant improvement in preliterate
and early elementary school children until becoming one of the dominant
forms of evaluation in late elementary school. Second, the nature of the
story in our study may have inﬂuenced the use of these terms. In older
children and adults, these types of terms tend to be clustered around the
emotional highpoints of the story (Bamberg & Damrad-Frye, ). The
relatively simple story used in this study does not involve a high number
of emotional highpoints, and may therefore not invite the narrator to label
the character’s emotional, intellectual, or perceptual state more than once.
While development does not aﬀect the frequency of these terms, the
quality or strategy of use may change with later development (Bamberg &
Damrad-Frye, ; Chen & Yan, ). Consider the following two
excerpts of a story, one written by a fourth-grader and one by a sixth-grader.

()

a. Written narrative by a fourth-grader

De moeder vraagt waar zijn vis is. De jongen geeft zijn pop en de meisjes
zijn vis. Ze zijn allebei blij. Einde.
‘The mother asks where his ﬁsh is. The boy gives his doll and the
girls his ﬁsh. They are both happy. End.’

b. Written narrative by a sixth-grader

Het meisje gaf de vis terug. Het meisje zei dat het haar speet en dat ze
het nooit meer zou doen. Maar Henk was niet boos. Hij was blij omdat
hij zijn goudvis terug had. “Kom, we gaan hem in het aquarium doen”,
zei hij. En zo kwam het toch nog goed.
‘The girl returned the ﬁsh. The girl said that she was sorry and that
she would never do it again. But Henk was not angry. He was happy



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

D R I J B O O M S E T A L.

because he had his goldﬁsh back. “Come on, let’s put him in the
aquarium”, he said. And that’s how it all turned out ﬁne.’

These excerpts describe the concluding sequence, showing the two girls
returning the ﬁsh they took from the boy and the boy ﬁnally showing his
ﬁsh in the aquarium to the girls. This sequence represents an emotional
highpoint related to the resolution of the story. Both the fourth-grader and
the sixth-grader refer to the positive emotion of the boy after the girls return
his ﬁsh. However, contrary to the sixth-grader, the fourth-grader does not
explicitly express the causal link between the boy’s happiness and the fact
that his ﬁsh was returned. Though the reader can probably infer the causal
link between these two events, the lack of an explicit relationship results in a
fragmented story ending. The sixth-grader, by contrast, does not only refer
to the boy’s emotions but also includes the girl’s expression of regret. In this
justiﬁcation of the boy’s
way, the narrator not only provides a causal
happiness, but also embeds the emotion in a dynamic interaction between
the story characters. The attention towards the resolution of the story helps
the audience in interpreting the plotline and contributes greatly to the
coherence of the story as a whole. This descriptive analysis corresponds to
Bamberg and Damrad-Frye’s () ﬁndings that younger children tend to
tie emotions to a local outcome, but not to the global coherence of the story.

Modality diﬀerences
linguistic
Speech and writing have been shown to diﬀer along several
dimensions. Intrinsic diﬀerences between the two modes of
language
production, i.e. a diﬀerence in processing constraints and in communicative
context, are thought to underlie these modality diﬀerences. Previous research
has shown that, from middle childhood onwards, children start to show
sensitivity to these modality diﬀerences in their written texts, reﬂecting their
acquisition of linguistic literacy. Hence, the use of evaluative devices in
children’s spoken and written narratives was expected to display a modality
diﬀerence as well. Extending previous research by De Temple et al. ()
and Özyildirim (), our results largely support this hypothesis.

In terms of diversity, children recruited a wider range of evaluative devices
in their written as opposed to their spoken narratives. These results are in
agreement with previous ﬁndings of a greater variety of vocabulary in
written than in spoken discourse (e.g. Chafe & Danielewicz, ; Purcell-
Gates, ; Strömqvist et al., ), and conﬁrm our hypothesis that
children are more likely to ensure variety in evaluative expression in
writing, as a result of a lack of on-line processing constraints.

In terms of frequency, the majority of categories exhibited the expected
modality eﬀect, showing a higher frequency of use in written as opposed



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

E VA L U A T I V E D E V I C E S I N N A R R A T I V E S

to spoken narratives. Our ﬁndings suggest that the oﬀ-line beneﬁts of
planning, reﬂection, and revision available to the writer (Ravid & Berman,
) are particularly beneﬁcial for evaluative devices requiring a certain
level of
lexical or syntactic complexity. For instance, modal verbs,
requiring advanced syntactic skills, occurred more often in written than in
spoken narratives. This is convergent with previous ﬁndings showing that
written discourse is syntactically more complex than spoken discourse, as
the writer has more time at his disposal to carefully integrate information into
complex syntactic units (Perera, ; Purcell-Gates et al., ; Rubin,
). A similar explanation may hold for the ﬁnding of a higher frequency of
evaluative comments in written than in spoken narratives. Evaluative
comments mostly take the form of adjectives that modify a noun or verb, also
called ‘attributive adjectives’. In addition to providing a semantically more
rich object or event description, evaluative comments thus also represent a
certain degree of syntactic embeddedness (Purcell-Gates et al., ). Hence,
similar to modal verbs, semantic and syntactic enrichment associated with the
production of evaluative comments may be more diﬃcult to achieve under the
on-line processing constraints imposed by speech. Much in the same way,
regarding the higher frequency of ﬁgurative language in written than in
spoken narratives, it can be assumed that the weaker on-line processing
demands of writing provide the writer with more time to elaborate upon
literal discourse and opt for the more complex use of ﬁgurative language instead.
Besides processing constraints, communicative context is also thought to
result in modality diﬀerences between spoken and written discourse. A writer,
in the absence of his reader, needs to produce an explicit and autonomous text
without the external cues that exist in spoken communication (e.g. Purcell-
Gates, ; Tannen, ). External cues can, among other non-linguistic
and paralinguistic means, refer to prosodic intensiﬁers (Labov, ;
Wennerstrom, ). As previously discussed, this might explain why the
evaluative category of intensiﬁers occurred more often in sixth-graders’
written narratives as opposed to their spoken narratives. Decontextualized
language has also been shown to be particularly suitable for rendering a text
explicit and autonomous (Kantor & Rubin, ; Purcell-Gates, ). In
this study, evaluative devices that have also been identiﬁed as markers of
decontextualized language,
i.e. ﬁgurative language, direct speech, and
intellectual terms, were indeed found to occur more frequently in written
than in spoken language. Figurative language, for instance, has been shown to
serve a self-contextualizing function to render decontextualized discourse,
such as written texts, more autonomous (Halliday, ; Olson, ).
Furthermore, direct speech aids in providing the contextual information in
decontextualized discourse, by making events in a narrative more explicit,
immediate, and realistic (Sulzby, ; Sulzby & Zecker, ). Finally,
intellectual terms have also been associated with decontextualized language, as



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

D R I J B O O M S E T A L.

they provide explicit and elaborated information about the story characters
(Curenton & Justice, ). The idea that intellectual terms render discourse
more explicit may equally hold for emotive terms, which also occurred more
frequently in written than in spoken narratives. These ﬁndings, along with
those by De Temple et al. (), indicate that such explicitness may be
particularly warranted in written discourse, where only linguistic means can
be employed to denote cognition and emotion.

Some categories did not exhibit the expected modality eﬀect. More
speciﬁcally, perceptual terms, negative qualiﬁers, and hedges occurred more
often in spoken than in written narratives. A possible explanation for the
ﬁnding that perceptual terms occurred more often in spoken narratives is
that children used these terms to point out information in the extralinguistic
context to the listener (“In this picture you can see that . . .”) rather than to
portray the characters’ perceptual processes. Regarding negative qualiﬁers
and hedges, this modality eﬀect may also be explained by the tendency to be
more concrete with age (Ely et al., ), previously referred to in order to
explain the lack of a developmental increase. More speciﬁcally, children may
show this tendency more clearly towards the absent audience in writing.

C O N C L U S I O N S A N D F U T U R E R E S E A R C H
The comparison of evaluative language in spoken and written ﬁctional
narratives across development demonstrates that children in middle and
late elementary school are able to recruit a varied range of linguistic means
to meet the evaluative function of a narrative.

From a developmental perspective, we can conclude that diversity of
evaluative devices does not increase, and only few categories show a clear
developmental increase in frequency of use with age. Some considerations
are worth noticing here. First, our hypothesis that a developmental increase
would be most prevalent in written narratives was not conﬁrmed, except for
the category of intensiﬁers. It might be that the increasing automatization of
handwriting skills, typically occurring in late childhood, does not boost the
development of evaluative language more than what would be expected from
normal language development. This would imply that the high-level aspects
associated with attending to modality requirements do not entirely rely on
the availability of cognitive resources. An alternative, but less likely,
explanation is that an inﬂuential change in the degree of automatization of
handwriting skills is yet to occur in this sample. Second, the decrease in the
use of direct speech suggests that frequency of evaluative language is not
always directly associated with excellent story-telling. In this respect, a
qualitative analysis of the narratives proved to be a fruitful method to
underpin this statement. Third, the same qualitative approach was helpful
in demonstrating that developmental changes are not always reﬂected in the



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

E VA L U A T I V E D E V I C E S I N N A R R A T I V E S

frequency of use, but may also reside in the way evaluative language is used to
support the referential content and structure, and thus the overall coherence, of
the narrative. While qualitative analyses have been widely used in the study of
evaluative language in young children (e.g. Bamberg & Damrad-Frye, ;
Losh et al., ; Shiro, ; Ukrainetz et al., ), they might be
particularly interesting for
in older
children, in whom acquisition of linguistic forms is no longer central to
language production. Rather, later language development revolves around
learning to deploy linguistic forms ﬂexibly and appropriately to meet
communicative goals (Berman, ; Ravid & Tolchinsky, ).

studying language development

Based on our results, we can conclude that in this age group modality has a
major impact on the diversity of evaluative language, and on the frequency of
most, but not all, categories of evaluative devices. Speciﬁcally, categories of
evaluative devices that have been referred to as markers of decontextualized
language and those with a high degree of syntactic complexity reﬂect modality
diﬀerences. In considering the interaction between modality and evaluative
language, our study thus demonstrates that children in this age group
understand and reﬂect the greater need for evaluative language in written as
opposed to spoken narratives, resulting from the intrinsic diﬀerences between
the two modes of production (e.g. Berman, ; Ravid & Berman, ).
Such a reﬂection of modality diﬀerences provides evidence for children’s
consolidation of linguistic literacy (Ravid & Tolchinsky, ).

Some limitations of our study are worth noting, and pave the way for future
research. In this study, a ﬁctional picture-description task was chosen to assess
written and spoken narrative production. The predeﬁned content of such a
narrative reduces the inﬂuence of prior topic knowledge, and constitutes an
economical way of assessing narrative skills. Nevertheless, it is important to
note that our results cannot be generalized to other narrative genres. It has
been shown, for instance, that a child’s performance on ﬁctional narratives is
minimally related to performance on personal narratives (McCabe, Bliss &
Barra, ), and might follow a diﬀerent developmental path (e.g. Allen,
Kertoy, Sherblom & Petit, ). In terms of evaluation, there is some
evidence that the ability to evaluate does not transfer from one narrative genre
to the other (Shiro, ), and is engaged in more frequently in personal than
in ﬁctional narratives (Losh & Capps, ). It is therefore warranted that
future studies compare our results to the use of evaluative language in other
narrative genres.

Furthermore, one of the rationales guiding our hypothesis regarding
modality diﬀerences was that written narratives would exhibit more
evaluative devices, because the writer cannot rely on non-linguistic and
paralinguistic channels to achieve an evaluative eﬀect. While our ﬁndings
support this hypothesis, we cannot formulate any conclusions about the
extent to which non-linguistic and paralinguistic evaluative tools were used



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

D R I J B O O M S E T A L.

in children’s spoken narratives. In the current study, spoken narratives were
tape-, but not video-recorded. As such, no information on facial expressions
and gestures is available. From an exploratory observation of the data,
however, it does seem that children often made use of prosodic features in
their spoken narratives to diﬀerentiate between their own voice as the
reporter of events, and the voices of story characters anchored in the story-
world. Explorations along this dimension would provide an additional,
solid foundation for the idea that modality diﬀerences are reﬂected in the
use of evaluation in narratives.

Furthermore, as not all categories showed a developmental increase, future
studies could test the possibility that some evaluative devices contribute
more to the quality of a narrative than others, and are thus more likely to
increase with age. In this context, the relationship between evaluation and
narrative coherence would be a relevant topic for further research.

Finally, fundamental skills for producing a coherent narrative enriched with
evaluation are linguistic skills and socio-cognitive abilities. The present study
could be extended to include variables assessing these skills in order to
determine their role as a source of individual diﬀerences in the ability to use
evaluation in spoken and written narratives. In a similar vein, it is commonly
known that home environment and home literacy can have an impact on the
emerging literacies of children. Parallel to previous studies (e.g. Carmiol &
Sparks, ; Haden et al., ; Küntay & Nakamura, ; Shiro, ),
future research on evaluation could therefore integrate variables such as
socioeconomic status, home literacy practices, or cultural background.

In sum, the present study clearly demonstrates that to fully describe
developmental progression in the use of evaluation in narratives in the upper
elementary grades, one should combine a quantitative and a qualitative
approach to children’s narratives. Importantly, this study is the ﬁrst one to
provide evidence for children’s ability to reﬂect the intrinsic diﬀerences
between speech and writing in the evaluative encoding of their narratives,
conﬁrming an important aspect of the acquisition of linguistic literacy.

R E F E R E N C E S

Alamargot, D. & Chanquoy, L. (). Through the models of writing in cognitive psychology.

Boston, Dordrecht, New York: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Allen, M. S., Kertoy, M. K., Sherblom, J. C. & Petit, J. M. (). Children’s narrative
productions: a comparison of personal event and ﬁctional stories. Applied Psycholinguistics
, –.

Bamberg, M. & Damrad-Frye, R. (). On the ability to provide evaluative comments:
further explorations of children’s narrative competence. Journal of Child Language ,
–.

Baynham, M. J. (). Narrative and narrativity in the English of a ﬁrst generation migrant

community. Unpublished PhD thesis, University of Reading.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

Erlbaum.

Language , –.

Bishop, D. (). Expression, Reception and Recall of Narrative Instrument. London:

Harcourt Assessment.

Burger, L. K. & Miller, P. J. (). Early talk about the past revisited: aﬀect in working-class

and middle-class children’s co-narrations. Journal of Child Language , –.

Carmiol, A. & Sparks, A. (). Narrative development across cultural contexts: ﬁnding the
pragmatic in parent–child reminiscing. In D. Mathews (ed.) Pragmatic development: trends
in language acquisition research, –. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

Carvalho, J. (). Developing audience awareness in writing. Journal of Research in Reading

, –.

Chafe, W. L. & Danielewicz, J. (). Properties of spoken and written language.
In R. Horowitz & S. J. Samuels (eds), Comprehending oral and written language, –.
Orlando, FL: Academic Press.

Chen, L. & Yan, R. (). Development and use of English evaluative expressions in
narratives of Chinese–English bilinguals. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition , –.
Chung, S. & Timberlake, A. H. (). Tense, aspect and mood. In T. Shopen (ed.),
Language typology and syntactic description: grammatical categories and the lexicon, –.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Curenton, S. M. & Justice, L. M. (). African American and Caucasian preschoolers’ use
of decontextualized language: literate language features in oral narratives. Language, Speech,
and Hearing Services in Schools , –.

De Temple, J. M., Wu, H. F. & Snow, C. E. (). Papa pig just left for pigtown: children’s
oral and written picture descriptions under varying instructions. Discourse Processes , –.
Dunn, L. & Dunn, D. (). The Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, th ed. Minneapolis,

MN: Pearson.

E VA L U A T I V E D E V I C E S I N N A R R A T I V E S

Bereiter, C. & Scardamalia, M. (). The psychology of written composition. Hillsdale, NJ:

Berman, R. (). The psycholinguistics of developing text construction. Journal of Child

Dunn, L. M. & Dunn, L. M. (). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-III-NL: Nederlandse

versie Liesbeth Schlichting. Handleiding. Amsterdam: Harcourt Test Publishers.

Eaton, J., Collis, G. & Lewis, V. (). Evaluative explanations in children’s narratives of a

video sequence without dialogue. Journal of Child Language , –.

Ely, R., MacGibbon, A. & McCabe, A. (). She don’t care: negatives in children’s

narratives. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly , –.

Fey, M. E., Catts, H. W., Proctor-Williams, K., Tomblin, J. B. & Zhang, X. (). Oral and
written story composition skills of children with language impairment. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research , –.

Fox, R. (). Developing awareness of mind reﬂected in children’s narrative writing. British

Journal of Developmental Psychology , –.

Gillam, R. B. & Johnston, J. R. (). Spoken and written language relationships in
language/learning-impaired and normally achieving school-age children. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research , –.

Goodell, E. & Sachs, J. (). Direct and indirect speech in English-speaking children’s

retold narratives. Discourse Processes , –.

Graham, S., Harris, K. R. & Olinghouse, N. (). Addressing executive function problems
in writing: an example from the self-regulated strategy development model. In L. Meltzer
(ed.), Executive function in education, –. New York, NY: Guilford.

Greenhalgh, K. S. & Strong, C. J. (). Literate language features in spoken narratives of
children with typical language and children with language impairments. Language, Speech,
and Hearing Services in Schools , –.

Haden, C. A., Haine, R. A. & Fivush, R. (). Developing narrative structure in parent–

child reminiscing across the preschool years. Developmental Psychology , –.

Halliday, M. A. K. (). Diﬀerences between spoken and written language: some
implications for literacy teaching. In G. Page, J. Elkins & B. O’Connor (eds).
Communication through reading: proceedings of the Fourth Australian Reading Conference,
–. Adelaide, SA: Australian Reading Association.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

D R I J B O O M S E T A L.

Holt, E. (). Reporting and reacting: concurrent responses to reported speech. Research on

Language and Social Interaction , –.

Hunt, K. W. (). Sentence structures used by superior students in grades four and twelve,

and by superior adults. CRP -. Tallahassee, FL: Florida State University.

Kaderavek, J. N. & Sulzby, E. (). Narrative production by children with and without
speciﬁc language impairment: oral narratives and emergent readings. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research , –.

Kantor, K. J. & Rubin, D. L. (). Between speaking and writing: processes of
diﬀerentiation. In B. Kroll and R. Vann (eds), Exploring speaking–writing relationships:
connections and contrasts, –. Champaign, IL: National Council of Teachers of
English.

Küntay, A. & Nakamura, K. (). Linguistic strategies serving evaluative functions: a
comparison between Japanese and Turkish narratives. In S. Strömqvist & L. Verhoeven
(eds), Relating events in narrative, vol. : typological and contextual perspectives, –.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Kroll, B. (). Developmental relationships between speaking and writing. In B. Kroll &
R. Vann (eds), Exploring speaking–writing relationships: connections and contrasts, –.
Champaign, IL: National Council of Teachers of English.

Labov, W. (). Language in the inner city: studies in the Black English Vernacular.

Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Labov, W. & Waletzky, J. (). Narrative analysis: oral versions of personal experience. In
J. Helm (ed.), Essays on the verbal and visual arts, –. Seattle, WA: University of
Washington Press.

Longobardi, E., Spataro, P., Renna, M. & Rossi-Arnaud, C. (). Comparing ﬁctional,
personal, and hypothetical narratives in primary school: story grammar and mental state
language. European Journal of Psychology of Education , –.

Losh, M., Bellugi, U., Reilly, J. & Anderson, D. (). Narrative as a social engagement
tool: the excessive use of evaluation in narratives from children with Williams syndrome.
Narrative Inquiry , –.

Losh, M. & Capps, L. (). Narrative abilities in high-functioning children with autism or

Asperger’s syndrome. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders , –.

MacWhinney, B. (). The CHILDES Project: tools for analyzing talk. Mahwah, NJ:

Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Mason, R. (). The use of evaluative devices in the narrative discourse of young second-

language learners. Dallas, TX: SIL International.

McCabe, A., Bliss, L., Barra, G. & Bennett, M. (). Comparison of personal versus
ﬁctional narratives of children with language impairment. American Journal of Speech-
Language Pathology , –.

Miller, P. J. & Sperry, L. L. (). Early talk about the past: the origins of conversational

stories of personal experience. Journal of Child Language , –.

Nippold, M. A. (). Research on later language development: international perspectives.
In R. A. Berman (ed.), Language development across childhood and adolescence (Trends in
Language Acquisition Research (TILAR)), –. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

Olson, D. R. (). From utterance to text: the bias of language in speech and writing.

Harvard Educational Review , –.

Olson, D. R. (). The world on paper: the conceptual and cognitive implications of writing and

reading. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Özyildirim, I. (). Narrative analysis: an analysis of oral and written strategies in personal

experience narratives. Journal of Pragmatics , –.

Perera, K. (). Children’s writing and reading. London: Basil Blackwell.
Peterson, C. & Biggs, M. (). Stitches and casts: emotionality and narrative coherence.

Narrative Inquiry , –.

Peterson, C. & Biggs, M. (). ‘I was really, really, really mad!’ Children’s use of evaluative

devices in narratives about emotional events. Sex Roles , –.

Peterson, C. & McCabe, A. (). Developmental psycholinguistics: three ways of looking at a

child’s narrative. New York, NY: Plenum.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

E VA L U A T I V E D E V I C E S I N N A R R A T I V E S

Purcell-Gates, V.

to decontextualise/
recontextualise experience into a written-narrative register. Language and Education, ,
–.

() Ability of well-read-to kindergartners

Purcell-Gates, V. (). Emergent literacy is emerging knowledge of written, not oral

language. New Directions for Child and Adolescent Development , –.

Purcell-Gates, V., Jacobson, E. & Degener, S. (). Print literacy development: uniting

cognitive and social practice theories. London: Harvard University Press.

Rader, M. (). Context in written language: the case of imaginative ﬁction. In D. Tannen

(ed.), Exploring orality and literacy, –. Norwoord, NJ: Ablex.

Raven, J. C. (). Coloured Progressive Matrices, Sets A AB, B. London: H.K. Lewis

and Co.

Ravid, D. & Berman, R. A. (). Information density in the development of spoken and

written narratives in English and Hebrew. Discourse Processes , –.

Ravid, D. & Tolchinsky, L. (). Developing linguistic literacy: a comprehensive model.

Journal of Child Language , –.

Reilly, J. (). How to tell a good story: the intersection of language and aﬀect in children’s

narratives. Journal of Narrative and Life History , –.

Reilly, J., Losh, M., Bellugi, U. & Wulfeck, B. (). ‘Frog, where are you?’ Narratives in
children with speciﬁc language impairment, early focal brain injury, and Williams
syndrome. Brain and Language , –.

Reilly, J., Zamora, A. & McGivern, R. (). Acquiring perspective in English: the

development of stance. Journal of Pragmatics , –.

Roth, F. P. (). Narrative writing: development and teaching with children with writing

diﬃculties. Topics in Language Disorders , –.

Rubin, D. (). Adapting syntax in writing to varying audiences as a function of age and

social cognitive ability. Journal of Child Language , –.

Rubin, D. (). Social cognition and written communication. Written Communication ,

Tannen, D. (). Talking voices: repetition, dialogue, and imagery in conversational discourse.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Ukrainetz, T. A., Justice, L. M., Kaderavek, J. N., Eisenberg, S. L., Gillam, R. B. & Harm,
H. M. (). The development of expressive elaboration in ﬁctional narratives. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research , –.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234

–.
Sah, W.

(). Emotion expressions and knowledge of story structure: a study of
Mandarin-speaking children’s narrative development. Taiwanese Journal of Linguistics ,
–.

Scott, C. M. & Windsor, J. (). General language performance measures in spoken and
written narrative and expository discourse of school-age children with language-learning
disabilities. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research , –.

Shiro, M. (). Genre and evaluation in narrative development. Journal of Child Language

, –.

Strömqvist, S., Johansson, V., Kriz, S., Ragnarsdöttir, H., Aisenman, R. & Ravid, D. ().
Toward a crosslinguistic comparison of lexical quanta in speech and writing. Written
Language and Literacy , –.

Sulzby, E. (). Children’s emergent reading of favorite storybooks: a developmental study.
In R. B. Ruddell, M. R. Ruddell & H. Singer (eds), Theoretical models and processes of
reading, –. Newark, DE: International Reading Association.

Sulzby, E. & Zecker, L. B. (). The oral monologue as a form of emergent reading. In
A. McCabe & C. Peterson (eds), Developing narrative structure, –. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.

Tager-Flusberg, H. & Sullivan, K. (). Attributing mental states to story characters: a
comparison of narratives produced by autistic and mentally retarded individuals. Applied
Psycholinguistics , –.

Tannen, D. (). Oral and literate strategies in spoken and written narratives. Language ,

–.

D R I J B O O M S E T A L.

Umiker-Sebeok, D. J. (). Preschool children’s intraconversational narratives. Journal of

Child Language , –.

van Beijsterveldt, L. M. & van Hell, J. G. (). Evaluative expression in deaf children’s
written narratives. International Journal of Language and Communication Disorders ,
–.

van Dongen, R. & Westby, C. E. (). Building the narrative mode of thought through

children’s literature. Topics in Language Disorders , –.

Wennerstrom, A. (). Intonation and evaluation in oral narratives. Journal of Pragmatics

, –.

Zevenbergen, A. A., Whitehurst, G. J. & Zevenbergen, J. A. (). Eﬀects of a shared-
reading intervention on the inclusion of evaluative devices in narratives of children from
low-income families. Applied Developmental Psychology , –.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000234


