Journal of Sociolinguistics 21/3, 2017: 397–419

A luta continua1 – black queer visibilities

and philosophies of hospitality
in a South African rural town

Ana Deumert

and Nkululeko Mabandla

University of Cape Town, South Africa

In 1996, the inclusion of sexual orientation in the anti-discrimination
clause of South Africa’s post-apartheid constitution aligned LGBT+ rights
with the larger struggle against oppression and inequality. In this paper we
focus on a small, rural town in the Eastern Cape, a town we call Forestville.
How are LGBT+ identities made visible in this town? How do residents
respond to the diverse sexualities they encounter? How do they talk about
diversity (sexual and otherwise)? The data was collected in the context of a
long-term ethnographic project, which looks at responses to diversity in
non-metropolitan settings. Reconstructing local philosophies of hospitality
and looking at affective-discursive practice, we argue that social life in
Forestville shows traces of what Derrida (2000) calls ‘absolute hospitality’.
There is a sense of welcome and inclusivity, but, unlike in Derrida’s
conception, this hospitality is deeply embedded in the speech act of asking,
indeed in curiosity. At the same time, hospitality remains fragile; it is
always on the border of exclusion and judgment. The article explores
Mignolo’s (2000) idea of ‘critical border thinking’ as a core episteme for
Southern theory and puts academic philosophy and everyday knowledges
into dialogue with one another.

KEYWORDS: LGBT+, South Africa, queer visibilities, hospitality,
Derrida, southern theory, border thinking, discourse analysis, affect

1. INTRODUCTION: LIVING-IN-DIVERSITY, BEYOND THE RAINBOW

In the early 1990s, anti-apartheid stalwart Desmond Tutu coined the
metaphor of ‘the rainbow nation’ to describe the ‘miracle’ of South African
democracy and the diversity of its people. The image of the rainbow also
evoked, probably unintentionally, a well-known Euro-American symbol of
LGBT+ identity and pride: the rainbow ﬂag. And indeed, it was the complex
intersection of these two global discourses – multiculturalism and LGBT+
rights – that positioned South Africa, a country at the southern-most tip of

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

398

DEUMERT AND MABANDLA

Africa, as a model of how to engage with diversity (Munro 2012). The
constitutional recognition of LGBT+ rights was a milestone in this process. In
1994, South Africa became the ﬁrst nation to prohibit discrimination on the
basis of sexual orientation in its constitution. This opened the way for a wide
range of
legal challenges, culminating in the legalization of same-sex
marriages in 2006. However, legal provisions and rights are one thing, the
realities of
living-in-diversity are quite another. Today, the image of the
rainbow nation is heavily contested: socio-economic inequalities, racism, and
white supremacy are persistent; and various forms of violence – systemic
violence as imbedded in institutions, but also physical violence, especially
towards women and sexual minorities – are deeply disturbing aspects of
everyday life. It is in this larger political context that we look at black queer
visibilities and philosophies of hospitality. While previous work on this topic
has focused on metropolitan contexts (Matebeni 2011; Livermon 2014), our
ﬁeldwork took place in a non-metropolitan space: a small town in the largely
rural Eastern Cape province, about 500 kilometres from the next metropolitan
centre. We have argued previously that it is essential to pay attention to places
beyond ‘the city’ – a privileged space in the sociolinguistic imagination – if our
aim is to address existing ‘imbalances and marginalization’ in representation
and theorization (Milani and Lazar, introduction to this Special Issue; see also
Deumert and Mabandla 2016). In addition to moving the gaze from the city to
a non-metropolitan space, we also explore the question of how to formulate
‘southern’ or ‘decolonial’ theories of diversity and hospitality. We draw,
broadly, on the work of Latin-American scholars such as Walter Mignolo
(2000) and Ramon Grosfoguel (2011) who have argued for an approach they
call ‘critical border thinking’. This approach moves beyond Southern and
Northern fundamentalisms
in developing a dialogical perspective that
challenges
and
provincializes (Chakrabarty 2000) such knowledge through a sustained
dialogue with Southern epistemologies (also Sousa Santos 2014).

universalism of Northern

the monologic

theory,

The article is structured as follows: in section 2, we discuss what we call ‘the
politics of inclusivity’, one of the core political strategies of the South African
liberation movement. We reﬂect on the ways in which diverse sexualities have
been contested, and accepted, in South Africa (and Africa more broadly), and
how a politics of inclusivity allowed diverse knowledges and ways-of-being to
become visible. Section 3 introduces the rural
town of Forestville (a
pseudonym). Section 4 provides a discussion of the theoretical lens through
which we look at the visibility of diversity: hospitality. It is in this section that
we engage quite explicitly with the idea of ‘critical border thinking’: we bring
everyday knowledges of hospitality (as expressed in proverbs,
talk and
language), into conversation with academic philosophy (especially the work
of Jacques Derrida). Section 5 further explores, on the basis of interview data,
the role of curiosity in hospitality: curiosity has the potential for engagement,
for dialogue and knowledge creation, but can also create – in the form of

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

A LUTA CONTINUA

399

gossip – in-hospitality and thus violence. Section 6 turns to the possibility of
acceptance without judgement (a local discourse of ‘live and let live’), as well
as the persistence of discrimination. In the conclusion, we argue that – despite
ambivalences and tensions – these diverse non-metropolitan discourses can
help us in theorizing the idea of hospitality – moving it away from a somewhat
repressive sense of duty and obligation (as evident in academic philosophy) to
an affect-driven, lived and everyday praxis.

A note on terminology: in an essay titled How Not to write about Queer in
South Africa, Zethu Matebeni (2014) reminds us about the difﬁculties of
naming. Identities, sexual or otherwise, are inherently diverse and fragmented,
shaped by silences as well as stereotypes that are perpetuated in both popular
and academic writing. Reﬂecting on names and naming is thus essential. Also
addressing the question of terminology, Thabo Msibi (2013) has argued that
the global terms gay/lesbian – as well as the abbreviation LGBT+ – do not
necessarily capture local realities. At the same time, however, these global
terms have been appropriated locally and are being re-shaped through
discourse (Livermon 2012). In our discussion we generally use the terms that
are employed by those we spoke to; however, we also use ‘queer’ as an analytic
category, referring not to any deﬁned or labelled sexuality, but to ‘a critical
space that pushes the boundaries of what is embraced as normative’ (Matebeni
and Pereira 2014: 7). As a general placeholder we use the acronym LGBT+,
indexing the open-ended diversity of sexualities through the [+] symbol.2

2. THE POLITICS OF INCLUSIVITY, LGBT+ RIGHTS AND PUBLIC
ATTITUDES

Andrew Masondo, national commissar of the African National Congress
(henceforth ANC) in exile, referred to the liberation movement as a ‘big bus’.
The metaphor of the ‘big bus’ emphasized the fact that in the struggle against
apartheid, people had to come together; they had to accommodate their
differences and form a diverse but united front. In other words,
it was
imperative to create a broad sense of inclusiveness and belonging, and to be
hospitable to diverse perspectives. This had important political consequences.
The ANC, originally a middle-class male organization, embraced progressive
politics from early on: women’s rights and worker’s rights were an integral
part of its politics from the 1950s, and – since the late 1980s – LGBT+ rights.
The latter were put on the agenda by vocal LGBT+ activists within the
liberation movement: Simon Nkoli, Beverly Ditsie and Alfred Machela.

However, inclusivity can be contested and there were concerns in the early
1990s that the progressive stance of the organization’s leadership – many of
whom had encountered LGBT+ politics during exile in Europe or America –
was perhaps not widely shared by the rank-and-ﬁle. This view was expressed
by Cheryl Carolus, then ANC Deputy Secretary General, at the launch of the
National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality in 1995:

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

400

DEUMERT AND MABANDLA

One must accept that the ANC is made up of very ordinary South Africans who
bring with them many of the misinformed views, perspectives and prejudices that
exist in society as a whole. Those of us that support the equality clause need to
make cognizance of this [fact that] our views as the leadership are not necessarily
the one’s stated by the membership. (cited in Dunton and Palmberg 1996: 47)

In this article we wish to unsettle the leadership/membership dichotomy and
argue that ‘very ordinary South Africans’ should not be seen as misinformed
and prejudiced, struggling to embrace difference-of-being when it comes to
issues of sexuality. We argue that everyday knowledges about diversities
(sexual and otherwise) should not be seen as conservative and backward, but
can be at the vanguard not only of theory-making, but also of progressive
politics.

It is not only ‘ordinary South Africans’ who have been portrayed as
prejudiced, but also Africa as a whole. International media, especially, have
created a ‘simplistic opposition between homophobic Africa and a tolerant . . .
West’ (Awondo, Geschiere and Reid 2012: 149). Similar discourses shape, at
times, also scholarly engagement. For example, in a recent review article Pierre
de Vos (2015: 40) argues that the constitutional anti-discrimination clause did
not help in changing ‘entrenched negative attitudes towards sexual minorities’
among ‘the majority of South African citizens’. Discussions such as these are
ultimately rooted in views of Africa (and Africans) as backward, in need of
Northern modernity, education and development. Yet statistics, such as the
World Values Survey (see Adamczyk, Kim and Paradis 2015), suggest that
attitudes did change over time, inﬂuenced not only by constitutional provisions
but also by popular culture, with LGBT+ characters featuring in TV dramas,
and celebrities openly declaring their sexualities. Today, South Africans accept
same-sex relations at rates that are not much different from those for the
United States (Table 1). While statistical data need to be interpreted with many
pinches of salt – acknowledging bias in sample selection and wording of
questions – they allow us to see broad changes in attitudinal patterns, and to
understand that the South is just as dynamic as the North.

Table 1: Changing attitudes towards ‘homosexuality’ in South Africa (1995 to
2014). In percentages (rounded)

Year (wave)

South African citizens

U.S. citizens

Believe ‘homosexuality’ is always wrong (%)

1995–1999
2000–2004
2005–2009
2010–2014
Source: http://www.worldvaluessurvey.org.

69
46
48
28

42
31
30
24

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

A LUTA CONTINUA

401

There is some indication that it is the urban, Christian middle classes, deeply
shaped by the history of colonialism and persistent coloniality, who struggle
most with their own prejudices. The homophobia – as well as racism and
xenophobia – of this group is one of the themes in K. Sello Duiker’s (2001)
novel The Quiet Violence of Dreams. The novel’s black protagonist, Tshepo,
challenges the idea that same-sex desire is ‘unAfrican’ and locates negative
attitudes instead in (sub)urban middle-class milieus:

I mean, people always say that black culture is rigid and doesn’t accept things
like homosexuals and lesbians. You know the argument – it’s very unAfrican.
It’s a lot of crap. In my experience that kind of thinking comes from urbanised
blacks, people who’ve watered down the real origins of our culture and mixed it
that
with Anglo-Saxon notions of
It’s stupid to even suggest
homosexuality and lesbianism are foreign to black culture. Long ago,
long
before whites, people were aware of blurs. (cited in Hoad 2007: 105)

the Bible.

is

in Sylvia Tamale’s

supported in Marc Eppbrecht’s

The idea that pre-colonial Africa was quite different from contemporary urban
(2013 [2004]) monograph,
milieus
Hungochani, as well as
(2011) anthology, African
Sexualities. These texts show the complexities and diversities of African
sexualities, suggesting that heteronormativity and homophobia, rather than
diversity of sexual expression, might be the true colonial import (see also Reid
2013; and the seminal work by Amadiume 1987).

That homophobic sentiments might be especially common among those who
are considered ‘educated’ is also supported by Thabo Msibi’s (2009, 2013)
work, which suggests that prejudice against LGBT+ people might be especially
rampant at universities. Similarly, the 2010–2014 South African data in the
(above mentioned) World Values Survey suggests that such prejudice is a
function of class position (which is closely linked to educational attainment):
when asked whether one would feel comfortable living next to ‘homosexuals’,
38 percent of South Africans answered in the negative. However,
the
percentage rises to 47 percent for those who self-identify as ‘upper class’.
Historical sociologists and anthropologists writing about South Africa’s
colonial (and postcolonial) middle class have often commented on the great
emphasis this group places on ‘respectability’ – that is, Victorian values of
‘temperance, sobriety and moral rectitude’ (Mkhize 2016: 149). Sexual desires,
especially those not resulting in procreation, are excluded from this social
space, a space that was shaped to a signiﬁcant degree by Christian
missionaries,
institutions and the post-
colonial re-instantiations of these institutions (Chitando and van Klinken
2016). Thus, in early 2016, Rev. Mpho Tutu, an ordained Anglican priest and
daughter of Archbishop Desmond Tutu, had to quit the ministry after she
married her female partner. The reason was pressure from the Anglican
Church of South Africa, which does not recognise same-sex marriages.
Northern missionaries continue to spread conservative discourses about

their religious and educational

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

402

DEUMERT AND MABANDLA

homosexuality on the continent. For example, draconian anti-LGBT+
legislation in Uganda was supported not only by middle-class evangelical
Ugandans, but also by American missionaries (Awondo, Geschiere and Reid
2011).

3. FORESTVILLE: FIELDWORK IN A MARGINALIZED AND DIVIDED TOWN

The article draws on ﬁeldwork that forms part of a larger, long-term project,
going back to 2012 when we ﬁrst began working in the rural towns of the
Eastern Cape province, South Africa. The main focus of our work has been on
international migration, especially migrant traders, and the globalization of the
countryside (Deumert and Mabandla 2016). More recently, we began to look
at diversities more broadly, including sexualities. Our work took place in two
different modes: (a) a long-term, single-researcher ethnography (Mabandla);
and (b) an intermittent collaborative ethnography (Deumert and Mabandla).
This article presents material
from the collaborative ethnography; all
observations and interviews cited were conducted as a team. An important
aspect of our collaboration has been the fact that we have different bodies:
black-male and white-female. These bodies allow us access to different spaces,
and bring with them different perspectives and different modes of interaction.
In analysing the recorded interviews and conversations, we take inspiration
from recent proposals by, for example, Crispin Thurlow (2016) and Tommaso
Milani (2015) to ‘queer’ discourse studies. Queer, as noted in section 1, indexes a
perspective that
In
particular, queer approaches to discourse analysis challenge conventional
concerns with representation and signiﬁcation, and focus on the ‘more-than-
representational’ aspects of social life (Lorimer 2005). This includes materiality,
corporeality and, especially, affect. The latter echoes Raymond Williams’ (1977:
132) ‘structures of feeling’: ‘meanings and values as they are actively lived and
felt’, focusing on ‘impulse, restraint and tone . . . [the] affective elements of
consciousness and relationship’ within the historicity of present power relations
(see also Sharma and Tygstryp 2015). In our analysis, we are especially
interested in the ways in which feeling/affect are articulated in discourse; that is,
the ways in which talking about diversity is an affective-discursive practice
(Wetherell 2013). The data on which we draw was elicited mainly through
interviews. In addition, we draw on our own observations and experiences. Such
an approach might appear ‘anecdotal’
to the more empirically-minded
sociolinguist, yet anecdotalism has a logic of its own and is important in
achieving phenomenological understanding (Simons 1978; Gallop 2002).

is intentionally anti-normative and anti-hegemonic.

Forestville is what we call a ‘rural town’: it is small (with a population of
about 8000) and surrounded by farmland, both commercial and subsistence.
Its demographics – following the classiﬁcations used in the South African
census (2011) – are predominately African (93%), with a small Coloured and
white population. (In South Africa, the category Coloured refers to people who

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

A LUTA CONTINUA

403

were seen to be of ‘mixed’ or ‘creole’ ancestry.) Forestville is a multilingual
space: isiXhosa is the majority language, but English and Afrikaans are also
commonly used. Like many other rural towns in South Africa, Forestville is a
busy commercial centre. On any given day the streets are full, and people from
the surrounding villages and smaller towns arrive to shop at the many stores
run by migrants from China,
India, Bangladesh, Senegal, Somalia and
Pakistan. Diversity is palpable when walking down the streets: it is a mix of
old and new, modern and traditional, global and local. Yet Forestville also
remains a deeply divided place, and the racially exclusive networks of the
apartheid era continue to shape daily life. It is also a marginalized place, and
poverty is signiﬁcantly higher than in metropolitan centres. Table 2 provides
summary statistics for the municipal region where Forestville is located as
well as comparative statistics for the nearest metropolitan centre, eThekwini/
Durban.

Queer visibilities are affected by the overall marginalized status of the area:
there are no LGBT+ support organizations or advocacy groups, and no annual
Pride marches. As a rural town with a fairly small population, Forestville has
only a few public places that are available for sociable interaction and these are
sharply divided according to race. Zodwa, one of the people we interviewed,
described – somewhat tongue-in-cheek – two places that are welcoming to
black residents: ‘the [hair] parlour and the tavern’. Historically, white spaces,
on the other hand, are generally seen as unwelcoming to black residents. The
racial exclusivity of such spaces is communicated not through words, but
through corporeality and affect. Menzi, a young black man who identiﬁes as
gay (see below), experiences these places not as homophobic, but as anti-black:

Table 2: Socio-economic proﬁle for the Forestville municipal region and the nearest
metropolitan centre (eThekwini/Durban). In percentages (rounded)

Socio-economic
indicator

Age proﬁle:

Young (1–14)
Working age (15–64)
Elderly (65+)
Labour market:

Unemployment
Youth unemployment

Living conditions:

Formal dwelling
Flush toilet
Piped water inside
Electricity

Forestville municipal

eThekwini/Durban

region (%)

35
56
8

44
53

33
8
10
46

(%)

25
70
5

30
39

70
63
60
90

Source: Census 2011 (http://www.statssa.gov.za/?page_id=964).

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

404

DEUMERT AND MABANDLA

‘[there are] racial issues . . . you gonna get those stares, you are allowed to go
in, but you just feel the [unwelcoming] vibes’ (Menzi). Following Sara Ahmed
(2004), we argue that such forms of affect (feeling welcomed/unwelcomed)
circulate socially and historically: the ‘vibe’ described by Menzi, is not just a
it reﬂects the historical experience of racism – of being
personal
interpellated and seen as nothing but black. It is the opposite of hospitality, a
notion we explore in the remainder of this paper.

feeling,

Derrida,

in Northern

4. BEYOND TOLERANCE: HOSPITALITY
Difference – of sexuality, race, language, citizenship and so forth – can be
silenced through symbolic practices and institutions, through the patterns of
everyday sociability, or through physical violence. Sometimes, this silencing is
almost invisible: when diversity is tolerated, but not actually welcomed; that is,
when ‘you are allowed to go in, but you just feel the vibes’. Tolerance – as a
practice and speciﬁc form of affect – allows difference to exist but only within
certain parameters. There is always a threshold to tolerance, and tolerance
thus masks underlying power relations (Altman 1971). To move beyond the
conditional acceptance of difference is at the heart of the ethics of hospitality.
Among the philosophers who have written about hospitality is Jacques Derrida
(e.g. 2000, 2005; Borradori 2003). Derrida’s work, commonly referred to as
poststructuralist, has relevance for a special issue on ‘perspectives from the
South’.
post-structuralism
notwithstanding, cannot be understood simply as a Northern, metropolitan
philosopher. Rather, he should be seen as a border-thinker (in the sense
outlined in section 1). His work was shaped by growing up in Algeria; not as a
French colonialist but as an Algerian Jew and colonial subject. The Southern
aspect of his thinking, which is often silenced in discussions of his work, is
perhaps clearest in Monolingualism of the Other (1996). It is also evident in his
work on hospitality which, as Andrew Shyrock (2009) has shown, stands in a
tradition of North African moral thought. Davinder Ahluwalia (2010) has
further argued that
entanglement of North and South shaped
poststructuralism more broadly and is at the root of
its commitment to
dismantle the epistemes of coloniality. Poststructuralism provides a substantial
critique of European universalism and emphasizes the importance of difference
and singularity; thus, disrupting, time and again, various forms of hegemonic/
imperialist thinking. Its critical impetus notwithstanding, poststructuralism as
an intellectual project is located within the Northern academy, an institution
that is shaped by, and also shaping, the coloniality of knowledge. We therefore
need a second level of border thinking: not just North-South but also academic-
everyday. In this, we follow a number of scholars: Houston Baker’s (1987) and
Thomas McLaughlin’s (1996) work on vernacular theory, the decolonial
Latin-American theorists (Mignolo, Grosfoguel, section 1), as well as Michael
Lambek (2010: 1) who has argued that ‘ordinary ethics’ (just like ‘ordinary

his

prominence

the

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

A LUTA CONTINUA

405

language philosophy’)
is ‘embedded in the categories and functions of
language and ways of speaking’. Ordinary ethics is part of the interaction
order as well as reﬂected in discourse. Paying attention to ethics – both
academic and everyday – allows us to rethink power since ethics is at the very
basis of how we treat, and recognize, one another’s subjectivities. By bringing
academic and ordinary philosophy into a non-hierarchical conversation, we
argue that these forms of knowledge are co-eval (to use Fabian’s [2002] term),
and should be seen as forming part of a complex ‘ecology of knowledges’
(Sousa Santos 2014).

Derrida’s ethics of hospitality is a critique of Kant’s Third Article of Perpetual
Peace (1795). Kant positions hospitality as tolerance: the other should be
welcomed, but is required to stay within the threshold of what is deemed
acceptable. Derrida rejects tolerance outright and notes that ‘tolerance remains
a scrutinized hospitality, always under surveillance’ (Borradori 2003: 127–
128). Absolute hospitality, according to Derrida, has
to be entirely
unconditional; it is a gift without expectation of reciprocity:

[A]bsolute hospitality requires that I open up my home and that I give . . . to the
absolute unknown, anonymous other, and that I give place to them, that I let them
come, that I let them arrive . . . without even asking reciprocity (entering into a
pact) or even their names. (Derrida 2000: 25; our emphases)

The coda is curious: ‘or even their names’. Why should we not even ask the
names of our guests? Is asking a form of not-welcoming? Should we repress our
curiosity about others? Language certainly can be violent: names as insults,
naming as an attempt to determine the contours of the others’ diversity, to
press them into sameness and to erase their difference. This is what Derrida
wishes to avoid. Yet by doing so he risks falling into the trap of fetishizing the
stranger (Ahmed 2000). While it is essential that we recognize the other as
singular and unique, to essentialize their alterity as unfathomable is ultimately
a form of silencing: it takes away voice and face, creating a fully anonymous
other, an oriental fantasy (Drabinski 2011). Speaking and indeed asking, we
will argue below, is not necessarily a form of violence or an interpellation that
reduces difference. While we have the right to opacity, the right to resist those
who wish to press us into universalized schemes of understanding, we are not
fully incomprehensible (‘obscure’) to one another (although we might be at
times; Glissant 1997: 190). In their recent work on sexuality and disability,
Don Kulick and Jens Rydstr€om (2015: 117) note that it is important ‘to
recognize both a fundamental sameness, but also, just as important, a crucial
irreducible difference. The space between familiar sameness and the in-many-
ways unknowable difference is the space of ethics’. We thus walk a ﬁne line in
social interaction: asking is risky as our questions can serve to position the
other in ways that violate their uniqueness; yet not asking limits the potential
for engagement and creates fantasies of total difference. Derrida’s ethical

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

406

DEUMERT AND MABANDLA

imperative not to ask requires of the host (and the guest) to suppress a form of
affect that is deeply connected to hospitality, namely, curiosity about the
other.3

Let us turn from academic philosophy to everyday ethics. How is hospitality
practiced and talked about in Forestville? High levels of mobility have long
been a feature of everyday life in the Eastern Cape: from the political migrations
of pre-colonial times, the formation of a diverse amaXhosa polity, to the labour
migrations of coloniality and apartheid, reaching well into the present with
continuing rural-urban migration (Wilson 1979; Njeza 2000; Deumert 2013).
Consequently, the feeling of being an outsider and relying on the hospitality of
others is familiar to many. It is an experience that is not only spoken about in
conversation but it is also – because of
its historical depth – reﬂected in
proverbs and narratives (Mesatywa 1959; Jordan 1973; Soga 2014 [1932]).
Proverbs offer
into ‘normative symbolic systems of meaning’
(Andersson 2012: 9), representing collective ‘wisdom’ and responses to
recurrent ethical problems (Abrahams 1968). Proverbs are interesting sites of
discourse: they do not reﬂect the voices of speciﬁc actors or institutions, but
constitute forms of broadly distributed, shared and historically sedimented
knowledge – a set of presuppositions – which circulate mainly through orality
(on proverbs as communicative signs, see Mieder 2014; on proverbs as
performative ‘wisdom’, see Finnegan 2012). Consider, for example, the local
(isiXhosa) proverb unyawo alunampulo, literally ‘the foot has no nose’; that is,
one’s feet may carry one into a world where one’s face (‘the nose’) is not
recognized, and when one is not recognized one relies on the kindness of
others. It is one of the many proverbs that can be said to someone who is found
to be inhospitable.

insights

There are many stories and proverbs about travellers in isiXhosa, and the
ways in which they are welcomed and treated has long been documented in
anthropological research (e.g. Hammond-Tooke 1963). When travellers were
seen at a distance, a member of the homestead would be sent to bring them to
the house. The unknown, passing traveller, the stranger, thus becomes a
visitor (a part of the household), and the same term is used to refer to both:
umhambi (from ukuhamba ‘to walk’). The presence of a visitor in the house is
typically welcomed and experienced as pleasurable: visitors would bring gifts in
the form of stories from their travels and also share whatever little food they
carried with them. In return, the host would look after the visitor, share space
and food. Thus, the strict division of host-visitor, which seems to underpin
Derrida’s notion of hospitality,
the
relationship is one of reciprocity from the very ﬁrst moment. A positive
relation to that which is distant, and thus to some degree unknown, is also
evident in marriage preferences. It is recommended that one marries not
nearby, within the community, but outside of it: induku entle ikiwa ezizweni ‘a
beautiful stick is picked in other nations/lands’; or intaka yaka ngoboya benye ‘a
bird builds its nest with another bird’s feathers’. There is a desire, an

is blurred: both give; both share;

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

A LUTA CONTINUA

407

aspiration, for that which is distant and unknown; it is seen as enriching
rather than threatening local life. Discussing the situation in the U.K., Ahmed
(2000) writes about discourses that position outsiders as ‘dangerous’, as
ﬁgures who threaten community and who need to be removed or absorbed.
These discourses stand in stark contrast to those discussed here: the presence of
others is (affectively) welcomed and not feared. It is relevant, considering the
observations on the middle classes and Christianity in section 2, that –
according to the perspective of some – hospitality is said to have disappeared
with the arrival of missionaries and the associated violence of colonialism. In
the 1860s, Tiyo Soga wrote an essay about ‘The Believers and the Pagans’
(Amakholwa Namaqaba), where he gives ‘the example of the Pagan traveller
who spent a cold night in the open veld because none of the Christians in the
village would admit him into their homes’ (Jordan 1973: 55). Soga uses the
verb ukuvimba ‘to close, to bar, to refuse to share’ to describe the closing, not
only of the dwelling, but also of human relations. The opposite is ububele
‘maternal love, kindness, hospitality’, a central term in everyday discourse
(see section 6). This local ethos of hospitality was linked by A.C. Jordan
(1973) to the idea of ubuntu, an African socio-political philosophy that speaks
of our entanglements with others and our obligations to others, especially
those that are vulnerable (see Mnyaka and Mothlabi 2005; Chirindo 2016).
It is important not to appropriate this way of thinking as Christianity: ubuntu
is not
‘love thy neighbour as you love thyself’. Ubuntu emphasizes
entanglement and relations, rather than charity and a love that seeks to
absorb the other into the self (thus disrespecting the right to opacity). Ubuntu
is closer to Nietzsche’s (Thus spake Zarathustra) idea of Fernsten-Liebe (‘love for
the most distant’). It is important to note that, because of the ubuntu
philosophy, the notion of ‘stranger’ does not exist in isiXhosa: if everyone is a
person, then no-one is a stranger.4 Thus, while the idea of hospitality that is
expressed here is absolute in the sense of Derrida – it gives place to the other
– it also differs from it: if we are all entangled with one another, then the host
is not in a privileged position; that is, both host and visitor give to one
another.

What about asking? How is this – which constitutes a dilemma for
Derrida – addressed at the level of the everyday ethics? The four well-known
proverbs listed in (1) encourage, and indeed oblige, one to ask if one does
not know.

(1)

(cid:129) imilomo ayibolanga ‘mouths have not decayed’
(cid:129) umlomo awubekwa siziba ‘the mouth is not covered with cloth’
(cid:129) inyathi ibuzwa kwabaphambili ‘you ask about the buffalo from those in
(cid:129) umbuzo awunatyala ‘the question has no crime’ (i.e. it is no offence to

front of you’ (i.e. those who have seen the buffalo)

ask)

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

408

DEUMERT AND MABANDLA

singularity. By contrast,

By encouraging asking, these proverbs license curiosity. Those who are
unknown and different are not only welcomed, their presence is a source of
learning and understanding, the novelty pleasurable and enjoyable. Social
relations are thus managed through the instrumentalization and regulation of
pleasure rather than its repression. Derrida’s critique of Kant unsettles
Northern ideas of tolerance and imagines the possibility of living-in-diversity
without restricting the freedom of others. Yet in order to do so he represses
curiosity: the speech act of asking is framed as problematic, as a form of
violence to the other’s
(isiXhosa) everyday
philosophies, as discussed here, allow curiosity to be present: it is not prying
or nosiness, but interest and dialogue. This makes it easier for hospitality to
become an ordinary, and indeed enjoyable, practice, encouraging dialogue and
engagement, rather than an ethical utopia characterized by notions of
oughtness and obligation. At the same time, however, curiosity can be
destructive (and this is the basis of Derrida’s anxiety): not any question can be
asked, and knowledge obtained through asking can feed gossip, thus closing
down engagement. In the next two sections we draw on interview data,
focusing, in particular, on the discursive expression of affect: being welcomed
or not welcomed, being hospitable or in-hospitable,
is positioned as an
experience, not simply an ethical
imperative. It is here that we see the
collective wisdom of proverbs recontextualized in the voices of individuals
talking about their everyday experiences of living-with-diversity. The next two
sections explore these voices – the articulation of hospitality (and in-
hospitality) in Forestville.

5. QUEER VISIBILITIES: CURIOSITY AND GOSSIP

The ﬁrst time we saw Menzi was at a distance: we were walking near the taxi
rank when we observed a small group of men moving right in the middle of
the road, in the direction of the local township. At the centre of the group
was Menzi: talking vivaciously, sporting a blond weave and dressed in high-
heeled boots, a cream-coloured neatly tailored jacket and designer trousers. It
was impossible to ignore him, not to turn to see what was going on, not to
notice. His presence was dissonant: the space around the taxi rank is mostly
male, drivers and petrol attendants; that is, bodies who conform to normative
ideas of gender and sexuality. On that afternoon Menzi queered the space.
The second time, we heard about Menzi during an interview with three
university students: Linda (male, early 20s), Thandi (female, early 20s) and
Nomonde (female, early 20s). We were talking about people in Forestville
who are known to be gay or lesbian and Menzi was discursively just as visible
as he was on the street.
is co-
experienced, his name is repeated in mutual – joyful
(i.e. affective) –
recognition.

(2)5 the memory of Menzi

In extract

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

A LUTA CONTINUA

409

(2)

Linda:
Thandi:
Linda:
Nomonde:
Linda:
Thandi:
Linda:
Thandi:
Nomonde:
Linda:

[Menzi=

there is one guy I know=
=because there’re quite a [few

=ja, Menzi, ja ((chuckles))
they are like whatever=
=they don’t care, they’re like
((emphatic)) uMenzi6 ((laughs))
everybody knows his name
sure thing
does weaves

Zodwa (female, in her 40s, see above) also pointed us to Menzi. She didn’t
know his name, but directed us to a hair parlour, specializing in weaves: ‘that’s
where he goes, you’ll ﬁnd him there’. And indeed we did. He laughed at the
end of our interview with him, acknowledging his visibility, and said self-
mockingly: ‘everyone knows me, I am a social butterﬂy’. In other interviews
we learnt more about known, and thus visible, gay and lesbian individuals in
the town: the gay son of a church minister and his lesbian friend, the
hairdresser next to the police station, the lesbian who used to work at a fast
food place, but is now training to be a police ofﬁcer, and the other one who
drives an ambulance and recently married. Yet, not everyone is visible and the
notion of ‘closet cases’ also appeared across interviews. Zola (male, mid-30s),
for example, commented that many are ‘shy’ and keep to themselves
(baneentloni ‘they have shyness’). But he nevertheless notices and sees them,
is aware of their presence: uyabona abo nabo ‘you see quite a few here and
there’. Zethu Matebeni (2011) notes with regard to Johannesburg that being
visible is not always easy: visibility can create a sense of community and
belonging, but it can also mark one as an outsider. Being visible attracts
attention and curiosity, and people might ask questions. Robert Ryder (2015)
argues that curiosity is the affect that lies at the heart of hospitality. He draws
on Pierre Klossowski’s erotic trilogy, Les Lois de Hospitalite ‘The Laws of
Hospitality’ (1965), where curiosity is described not simply as reﬂecting a quest
for knowledge but as the ‘potentiality of the hospitable soul’. Asking is the
speech act which brings curiosity to the fore, and in doing so ideas of private
personhood are eroded; we can no longer close ourselves, and others, off –
‘curiosity opens the door, so to speak, between self and other’ (Ryder 2015:
163). In other words, curiosity allows for relationality and entanglement, the
basis of ubuntu.

Ryder’s discussion of curiosity as pleasure resonates strongly with the
everyday philosophies we discussed in the previous section. Queer visibilities
and curiosity about them can be seen to work in tandem: that which is
personal (sexuality) becomes visible if it is displayed-to-be-seen, and can then
be engaged with through the speech act of asking. In our interview with Menzi,
there was an intense discussion on the ethics of asking. Menzi sees asking, and

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

410

DEUMERT AND MABANDLA

indeed curiosity (which in turn is linked to knowledge and learning), as a good
thing (extract 3).

(3) We will be curious, ‘what’s happening there?’, ‘what’s happening here?’, talk
to us and then, that curiosity, rather than to assume, get to know, ask, don’t
assume, ask, ask, put yourself in someone else’s shoes, get to know that person
before you pass judgement.

And with a sense of real disgust he speaks about ‘the WORST place he has ever
been’. It was one of South Africa’s northern provinces where ‘people were so
RUDE, they don’t give you time, they don’t ask, they just assume, they pass
judgement, they attack before knowing’. Menzi is accustomed to answering
questions about his sexuality, especially from older people. As he talks about
this though, his voice moves from patient explanation to slight irritation (thus
displaying, again, affect):

(4) Abantu abadala [‘the old people’], they are not exposed, as I said before, lack of
knowledge, u’ba [‘that’], and then uyintoni wena, uyintombi okanye uyinkwenkwe
[‘what are you? are you a boy or a girl?’], those kinds of questions, so I have to
sit down and explain, and explain and explain [sounding slightly exasperated]:
I am a boy, I am a boy attracted to boys, I am gay. That’s how it is. I am not a
girl. I am not trying to be a girl. [Emphatic] I’ll never be a girl!

The irritation expressed by Menzi shows that asking has an ambiguous
status:
it is preferred to assuming, but can also become annoying (if the
same question is asked repeatedly). Thus, asking can mask speech acts of
mocking, teasing and/or jousting: asking not because one does not know,
but asking as an interactional challenge which makes difference visible
(rather than to pretend that it does not exist). These interactional routines
are often initiated with the phrase yintoni? (‘what is?’). For example, when
one of us started growing dreads a common question, asked by older people,
was: yintoni ke le ilapha entloko? (‘what is this there on your head?’). We
suggest that yintoni can be seen as an example of discursive ritualization (in
the sense discussed by Lempert 2013): even though it can be mocking or
teasing, by asking for clariﬁcation one also opens the space for relation,
engagement and dialogue.

Menzi is astutely aware that it is but a small move from curiosity to gossip;
from opening the door to closing it. While it will ‘never get physical’, certain
people will ‘pass comments’, talk about you (and your sexuality), rather than
with you. In this context he mentioned a particular phrase which indexes, to
him, a sense of tolerance but also exclusion: ‘oh gay, okay’ – the interpellation,
the identiﬁcation of
the other as ‘gay’, closes dialogue and objectiﬁes.
Similarly, Shareen (female, in her 50s) noted that while no one will ever be
excluded from the community, knowledge about diverse sexualities still leads
to gossip:

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

A LUTA CONTINUA

411

(5)

I think it is still a good gossip story if you come to Forestville and they ﬁnd out
that you, or your child is gay, it will give a good gossip but you won’t get like
shut out, you won’t get like no you gay, you sit there to the side, you won’t get
that.

Shareen’s comment positions gossip in two ways: (a) it is located in time (i.e.
being gay is ‘still’, at the present moment, a source for gossip, indicating that
times are changing and that we are at the interface of old and new); and (b) it
expresses an affective stance towards gossip as enjoyable (‘a good gossip’).
However, once curiosity becomes gossip, engagement with the other returns to
the space of privacy: gossip is limited to a speciﬁc group, creating insiders and
outsiders. The discourses discussed here are not simply representational,
talking about what is happening; they are also shot through with affect – from
from curiosity to gossip. These tensions and
pleasure to annoyance,
ambiguities are central
to the ways in which inclusion and exclusion,
hospitality and in-hospitality, are experienced and practiced in everyday life.

6. ACCEPTANCE, KINDNESS/UBUBELE AND THE PERSISTENCE OF
DISCRIMINATION

Making one’s sexuality visible does not always elicit a response: sometimes
people are curious, sometimes they are judgmental, and sometimes they just
accept, without asking. Reﬂecting on his ﬁeldwork in Ermelo, a small town in
Mpumalanga, Graeme Reid (2013: 97) writes: ‘Many gays appeared to enjoy
a high level of social integration and acceptance within local communities’.
The situation was similar in Forestville. Whenever we asked about sexual
discrimination in our interviews, responses were given without hesitation:
there is no problem, here we ‘live-and-let-live’ (John, in his 60s). And no
matter how much we probed, the discourse did, at no stage, move beyond
gossip as to who is and who isn’t gay or lesbian, what they wear and where
they hang out. Only some of those who were strongly involved in one of the
local churches, expressed some reservations: ‘it’s your choice, but for me, in
my religion, I don’t want it for my kids’ (Shareen). We received quite similar
responses whenever we asked about the migrant traders in town: while
xenophobic discourses and violence have been described for South Africa’s
metropolitan areas, they were conspicuous by their absence in Forestville –
again, people felt there is no problem: ‘places like Forestville are pretty chilled
out when it comes to xenophobic attacks and all that, because they really,
like, become part of the community’ (Nomonde). Zodwa, who had worked in
Cape Town and only moved back recently, commented on the difference
between Cape Town and Forestville. Her description of these differences
(extract 6) is imbued, again, with affect: she was ‘shocked’; people are
‘happy’ and ‘free’ in Forestville, and even violence appears to her to be of a
different kind.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

412

DEUMERT AND MABANDLA

(6) The only thing that I was shocked when I came here is that gays and lesbians,

it’s like, a normal thing to them, even the foreigners, the foreigners are just
happy here, it’s just once in a while when they rob them, but they don’t stab
them, like, Cape Town, it’s totally different, no here, they are just free.

Zodwa continued as follows: ‘it is you, and you, you are doing your own thing,
I am doing my own things, that’s all, people are more accepting’. The idea of
freedom, of letting people be, also surfaced in the interview with Zola (extract
7; also extract 9, below):

(7) Babafree, ubone ukuba ufree lo mntu uzenzela le nto yakhe, akhukho mntu
umhoyileyo. So andingeni ndawo andingeni ndawo kwinto yempilo yakhe,
makaziphilele nam ndiqhubekeke nobam ubomi.

‘They are free, you see this person is free to do their thing, no one pays
attention to them. So I have no business to interfere with their way of life, let
them live their way and I should continue with my own life.’

There exists, thus, an important counterpoint to the curiosity described in the
previous section: a non-judgemental acceptance of the other, a sense of ‘letting
be’ (what Chitando and van Klinken [2016: 4] refer to as a ‘culture of
discretion’). Linda, Thandi and Nomonde framed this attitude – which they
positioned as ‘township’ rather than ‘middle class’ – in terms of ‘mentality’
(extract 8).

(8) Thandi:

Linda:
Nomonde:

they have this mentality of, if it doesn’t affect me=
=if it doesn’t affect me, it’s none of my business=
=I don’t mind, I don’t, it’s none of my business

The feeling of being ‘free’ was echoed by Menzi with regard to his own
experience: ‘always free [in Forestville], but, eh, the minute you step out of
Eastern Cape’. Menzi positions the city as the place of social surveillance
(extract 9). This view of the city goes against the ways in which the city is
usually imagined; that is, as a place of freedom (versus the rural, which is
commonly portrayed as a place of surveillance, judgement and prejudice, e.g.
Leitner 2012).

(9) Apha [‘here’] it’s like, you are doing you, I am doing me, what you are doing for
yourself does not concern me, so I don’t bother myself with what you’re doing
. . . [in the city] everyone is in your business!!!

It is here that we see traces of Derrida’s anxiety about the question – the ﬁne
line between asking and being in someone else’s business. Later in our
conversation Menzi went further and argued that what made life possible and
liveable was not only being left to do one’s own thing, but also the quality of
ububele ‘kindness’, an ethno-metapragmatic notion that is linked to ubuntu

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

A LUTA CONTINUA

413

philosophy and emphasizes the non-judgemental acceptance (bayamkela ‘they
are accepting’) of difference. Thus, the everyday ethics-of-living-together is
rarely expressed as a sense of oughtness; rather,
it is located somewhere
between pleasure (providing access to novelty and knowledge) and a kindness
that is integral to human relations.

Others emphasized that because Forestville was idolophu encinci ‘a small
town’, it was important to get along with one another. Andile (in his early 20s)
commented on the need to live together, and recognized that in the end we are
all different from one another, we are all strange to one another.

(10) So mna ndiyitshomi nawe. And ke ngoku uyabona ke ngoku iForestville, incinci

iForestville, so ke ngoku xa ndizakucaphukela igay yakowenu so ndicaphula wena ke
ngoku uyaqonda. So, then ke ngoku into eyenzekayo nathi, sibathathe nje ngabantu
abaright, because nabo baziphilela ngendlela yabo. Uyabona? You can’t change
indlela yomntu afuna ukuphila ngayo because yindldela wena ozikhethele yona.
Ifunny lo nto kuye uba hayi mna ndistraight, uyabona? So nakum ifunny la nto uba
athi, uyabona, mna ndigay. So umntu apha uziphilela loo nto aziphilela yona.

‘So I’m your friend. And now you see now Forestville, Forestville is so small, if
I am now going to hate a gay member of your family, then I am hating you,
you understand? So, then, now what happens, we take them as cool people,
because they are also living their own way. You see? You can’t change the
way a person wants to live because it’s the way you have chosen for yourself.
It’s funny to them that I am straight, you see? So also to me it is funny that
they say, you see, I am gay. So, a person lives for themselves whatever thing
they live for themselves.’

released

crime

statistics

(http://www.saps.co.za)

Are we looking at some kind of rural utopia? Most certainly not. Life in
Forestville is tough, not only socio-economically, but also regarding personal
safety. Recently
for
Forestville show that ‘crimes against the person’ occur just as frequently in
Forestville as in metropolitan contexts, with sexual violence occurring at an
even higher rate (on sexual violence, see Gqola 2015). Thus, rape was a
common theme in several interviews. It was positioned, indeed normalized, as
something one has to live with, especially when being out after hours: ‘if you
get home safe you say “thanks god”, tomorrow you wake up and go again’
(Zodwa). And, at this stage, not all sexualities seem to be equally accepted:
lesbians appeared to us less visible in the town, and it seems that many move
to the cities as the local community ‘struggles more’ with lesbians (Menzi).
Here cities, and not rural towns, emerge as sites of freedom from restrictions,
many of which are deeply rooted in patriarchy and associated norms of
appropriate female demeanour (also Vimbela 1995). And ﬁnally, in addition
to the vulnerabilities of poverty and violence, there is discrimination in those
areas of social life that allow for some kind of upward mobility. Menzi, for
example, struggles to ﬁnd work:

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

414

(11)

DEUMERT AND MABANDLA

In job interviews, I would send my CV, then be called, short-listed, but the
minute, the minute they saw me walk through the door, you get that vibe
u’ba [‘that’; lowers his voice, mimicking the voice of the employer], ‘oh, okay’.
But, they won’t like act on it, but you just know u’ba [‘that’; shrugs his
shoulders], I won’t get that job.

It is, thus, in the institutional context – the context that is regulated by law and
may not actually discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation – that
discrimination is experienced most clearly. The experience narrated here is
akin to the forms of local racism (see above) – one will not be told, but one
knows; that is, ‘you get that vibe’, which again seals one ‘into that crushing
objecthood’ (Fanon 2008 [1952]: 212), and takes away one’s freedom to be
and to be seen and accepted in one’s singularity. Another place where
homophobia sometimes plays itself out is the family context: while people in
the larger community might be accepting, this is not necessarily repeated in
the family and Menzi gives the example of one of his cousins who has moved to
Johannesburg because ‘utata wakhe [‘his father’] would kill him, literally kill
him, [he has] homophobic issues’.

7. CONCLUSION: A LUTA CONTINUA

The argument in this paper is an example of border thinking, an approach to
theory-building that moves beyond Northern or Southern fundamentalisms,
and emphasizes dialogue between different ways of thinking; it listens not only
to academic theory but also to the vernacular theories that are formulated in
everyday life. Border thinking reﬂects a view of Southern theory that is
inherently dialogic, aiming not
to create a new hegemony, but rather
advocating for an episteme that is rooted in the diversity of knowledges.
Vernacular theories – and this is a fundamental premise of this article – are
coeval to academic theories and equally reﬂect on, and contribute to, the ‘big
debates’ in social theory and social life more generally. In this case the ‘big
debate’ is hospitality and living-in/with-diversity (sexual and otherwise): how
is it being talked about, experienced and conceptualized in a place far away
from the city, the core site of most sociolinguistic work. Southern work always
entails a commitment to particularism (and a disavowal of universalism). The
diverse types of discourses that we discussed – proverbs,
interviews and
practices – suggests that hospitality and the encounter with others has unique
features in Forestville: it shares important discursive traits with Derrida’s idea
of absolute hospitality, but does not repress pleasure and enjoyment, nor does
it distinguish clearly between host and visitor. A core affect
linked to
hospitality in these discourses is curiosity, the desire to ask, to ﬁnd out about
the other. The speech act of asking is central to the moral economy of
engagement, of being in relation with others. Yet, and this is crucial to the
experience of freedom, asking does not mean surveillance – it is counteracted by

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

A LUTA CONTINUA

415

the maxim of not getting into other people’s business, giving space to the other
to be who they wish to be. In our discussion we show that academic discourses
and local discourses do not sit at opposite ends, nor is the local positioned
merely as a counter-example to academic philosophy. Rather,
the two
perspectives speak to one another, with local knowledges adding affect – a
core concern of current sociolinguistic work – to our understanding of
hospitality.

In conclusion, we want to reﬂect brieﬂy on the idea of decolonization, a
concept that is gaining traction in the social sciences and that is closely linked
to the idea of Southern theory. Nelson Maldonaldo-Torres (2007) draws on
Fanon in describing decolonization as the ‘restoration of the logic of the gift’. In
the conclusion to Black Skin, White Masks, Fanon (2008 [1952]: 181) imagines
a world of relation and dialogue:

Superiority? Inferiority?

Why not the quite simple attempt to touch the other, to feel the other, to explain
the other to myself?

Was my freedom not given to me then in order to build the world of You?

In other words, a decolonial notion of hospitality, which emerges out of the
border-thinking process we engaged in, moves beyond Derrida’s ‘absolute
hospitality’ in which, ideally, we should not ask ‘even their names’, where the
speech act of asking, the experience of curiosity, is shot through with anxiety,
with the fear of becoming a ‘police interrogation’, and the You therefore cannot
enter into a relation with the Me. While Derrida’s work is essential in its
uncompromising critique of enlightenment ideas of tolerance (as conditional
hospitality), it also positions hospitality as something that only works through
the repression of desire. Yet there are other ways of thinking about hospitality.
Local discourses in Forestville link hospitality to pleasure and the engagement
with others (which is seen as being enriching rather than threatening).
Importantly, this perspective also allows us to move beyond the idea that
‘ordinary people’ in Africa (and elsewhere) are prejudiced towards otherness
(including, but not limited to, sexualities); rather, local, everyday philosophies
emerge as vanguard philosophies, anticipating the turn to affect which is
currently en vogue in the social sciences (section 2). Ours is an argument for the
more careful study of Southern ways of thinking (and talking). These everyday
practices and moral maxims do not constitute a utopia, a primordial space
where the world is better and peaceful existence is possible. This would bring
us back to deeply orientalist ideas of humanity’s innate goodness, which were
destroyed by colonialism. The discourses we describe are contemporary, not
pre-colonial. They are shaped not only by local tradition, but also by long-
standing politics of inclusivity (discussed in section 2), legal/constitutional
changes and the visibility of LGBT+ issues in popular culture (the latter was
emphasized in several
interviews). These discourses carry with them the

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

416

DEUMERT AND MABANDLA

potential for living-in-diversity, but they are also fraught with tensions: asking
can turn into gossip, exclusion or even interrogation, and deeply patriarchal
relations might restrict the freedoms of those who are seen as women. The
latter
better
understanding of sexualities beyond male-gay identities can help to trace the
limits of hospitality more clearly.

in particular,

investigation:

topic,

deserves

further

a

NOTES

1. A luta continua (‘the struggle continues’) was a rallying call during the
independence war in Mozambique. It was popularized across Africa and the
world by the South African musician Miriam Makeba. The phrase remains
popular: it is used by student activists on the continent, and was printed on T-
shirts worn by LGBT+ activists at the funeral of David Kato in Uganda (2011). It
articulates the experience that, in a world where the legacies of colonialism
remain ever present, the struggle for decolonization continues (see Maldonaldo-
Torres 2007).

2. The letters in this acronym stand for: Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transsexual. In

some versions Intersexual, Asexual, Pansexual and Queer are also added.

3. Derrida’s oeuvre is complex and in a later interview (2005) he revised his strict
prohibition of asking. He acknowledges that it is important to understand the
other in their singularity and recognizes that some form of asking can be helpful.
However,
it is always close to ‘police
inquisition’ and ‘border control’.

for him asking remains dangerous:

4. Some dictionaries list umﬁki as a translation equivalent for ‘stranger’. However,
umﬁki is actually not a stranger, rather it is a person who has just arrived, a
new-comer.

5. Transcriptions conventions in extracts (2) and (8):
latching (no gap between the two turns)
overlapping talk
description of actions noted in the transcript

=
[
(( ))

6. The u- is a nominal preﬁx, required for names in isiXhosa.

REFERENCES

Abrahams, Roger D. 1968. Introductory remarks to a rhetorical theory of folklore. The Journal

of American Folklore 81: 143–158.

Adamczyk, Amy, Chunrye Kim and Lauren Paradis. 2015. Investigating differences in how
the news media views homosexuality across nations: An analysis of the United States,
South Africa and Uganda. Sociological Forum 30: 1038–1057.

Ahmed, Sara. 2000. Strange Encounters: Embodied Others in Post-Coloniality. London:

Routledge.

Ahmed, Sara. 2004. The Cultural Politics of Emotion. Edinburgh, U.K.: Edinburgh University

Press.

Ahluwalia, Davinder Pal. 2010. Out of Africa: Post-Structuralism’s Colonial Roots. London:

Routledge.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

A LUTA CONTINUA

417

Altman, Dennis. 1971. Homosexual Oppression and Liberation. New York: New York University Press.
Amadiume, Iﬁ. 1987. Male Daughters, Female Husbands: Gender and Sex in an African Society.

London: Zed Books.

Andersson, Daniel. 2012. Courting is like trading horses, you have to keep your eyes open:
Gender-related proverbs in a peasant society in northern Sweden. Journal of Northern Studies
6: 9–36.

Awondo, Patrick, Peter Geschiere and Graeme Reid. 2012. Homophobic Africa? Toward a

more nuanced view. African Studies Review 55: 145–168.

Baker, Houston A. 1987. Blues, Ideology, and Afro-American Literature: A Vernacular Theory.

Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press.

Borradori, Giovanna (ed.). 2003. Philosophy in a Time of Terror: Dialogues with J€urgen Habermas

and Jacques Derrida. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press.

Chakrabarty, Dipesh. 2000. Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought and Historical Difference.

Princeton, New Jersey/Oxford, U.K.: Princeton University Press.

Chirindo, Kundai. 2016. Bantu sociolinguistics in Wangari Maathai’s peacebuilding rhetoric.

Women’s Studies in Communication 39: 442–459.

Chitando, Ezra and Adriaan van Klinken (eds.). 2016. Christianity and Controversies over

Homosexuality in Contemporary Africa. London: Routledge.

De Vos, Pierre. 2015. Mind the gap: Imagining new ways of struggling towards the

emancipation of sexual minorities in Africa. Agenda 29: 39–53.

Derrida, Jacques. 1996. Monolingualism of the Other or the Prosthesis of Origin. Stanford,

California: Stanford University Press.

Derrida, Jacques. 2000. Of Hospitality (with Anne Dufourmantelle). Stanford, California:

Stanford University Press.

Derrida, Jacques. 2005. The principle of hospitality. Parallax 11: 6–9.
Deumert, Ana. 2013. Xhosa in town (revisited) – space, place and language. International

Journal of the Sociology of Language 222: 51–75.

Deumert, Ana and Nkululeko Mabandla. 2016. Globalization off the beaten track – Chinese
migration to South Africa’s rural towns. In Li Wei (ed.) Multilingualism in the Chinese
Diaspora Worldwide. London: Routledge. 15–31.

Drabinski, John E. 2011. Levinas and the Postcolonial, Race, Nation, Other. Edinburgh, U.K.:

Edinburgh University Press.

Dunton, Chris and Mai Palmberg. 1996. Human Rights and Homosexuality in South Africa (2nd,

expanded edition). Uppsala, Sweden: Nordiska Afrikainstitutet.

Eppbrecht, Marc. 2013 [2004]. Hungochani: The History of Dissident Sexuality in Southern

Africa. Montreal, Canada: McGill-Queen’s University Press.

Fabian, Johannes. 2002. Time and the Other: How Anthropology Makes its Object. New York:

Columbia University Press.

Fanon, Frantz. 2008 [1952]. Black Skin, White Masks. London: Pluto.
Finnegan, Ruth. 2012. Oral Literature in Africa (revised edition). Cambridge, U.K.: Open Book

Publishers.

Gallop, Jane. 2002. Anecdotal Theory. Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press.
Glissant, Edouard. 1997. The Poetics of Relation. Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan Press.
Gqola, Pumla. 2015. Rape: A South African Nightmare. Johannesburg, South Africa: Jacana.
Grosfoguel, Ramon. 2011. Decolonizing post-colonial studies and paradigms of political-
economy: Transmodernity, border thinking, and global coloniality. Transmodernity: Journal
of Peripheral Cultural Production of the Luso-Hispanic World 1. Available at https://eschola
rship.org/uc/item/21k6t3fq#page-6.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

418

DEUMERT AND MABANDLA

Hammond-Tooke, W. D.. 1963. Kinship, locality, and association: Hospitality groups among

the Cape Nguni. Ethnology 2: 302–319.

Hoad, Neville. 2007. African Intimacies: Race, Homosexuality and Globalization. Minneapolis,

Minnesota/London: University of Minnesota Press.

Jordan, Archibald Campbell. 1973. Towards an African Literature: The Emergence of Literary

Form in Xhosa. Berkeley, California: University of California Press.

Kulick, Don and Jens Rydstr€om. 2015. Loneliness and its Opposite: Sex, Disability and the Ethics

of Engagement. Durham, North Carolina/London: Duke University Press.

Lambek, Michael (ed.). 2010. Ordinary Ethics: Anthropology, Language, and Action. New York:

Fordham Press.

Leitner, Helga. 2012. Spaces of encounters: Immigration, race, class, and the politics of
belonging in small-town America. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 102:
828–846.

Lempert, Michael. 2013. No ordinary ethics. Anthropological Theory 13: 370–393.
Livermon, Xavier. 2012. Queer(y)ing freedom: Black visibilities in postapartheid South Africa.

GLQ: Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies 18: 297–232.

Livermon, Xavier. 2014. Soweto nights: Making black queer space in postapartheid South

Africa. Gender, Place & Culture 21: 508–525.

Lorimer, Hayden. 2005. Cultural geography: The busyness of being ‘more-than-

representational’. Progress in Human Geography 29: 83–94.

Maldonaldo-Torres, Nelson. 2007. On the coloniality of being: Contributions to the

development of a concept. Cultural Studies 21: 240–270.

Matebeni, Zethu. 2011. Exploring black lesbian sexualities and identities in Johannesburg.
Unpublished PhD thesis. Johannesburg, South Africa: University of the Witwatersrand,
South Africa.

Matebeni, Zethu. 2014. How not to write about queer South Africa. In Zethu Matebeni (ed.)
Reclaiming Afrikan: Queer Perspectives of Sexual and Gender Identities. Athlone, South Africa:
Modjaji Books. 56–60.

Matebeni, Zethu and Jabu Pereira. 2014. Preface. In Zethu Matebeni (ed.) Reclaiming Afrikan:
Queer Perspectives of Sexual and Gender Identities. Athlone, South Africa: Modjaji Books. 7–9.
McLaughlin, Thomas. 1996. Street Smarts and Critical Theory. Listening to the Vernacular.

Madison, Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press.

Mesatywa, E.W.M. 1959. Ulwimi lwesiXhosa. Johannesburg, South Africa: Bantu’s Publishing

House.

Mieder, Wolfgang. 2014. Behold the Proverbs of a People: Proverbial Wisdom in Culture, Literature

and Politics. Jackson, Mississippi: University Press of Mississippi.

Mignolo, Walter D. 2000. Local Histories/Global Designs: Essays on the Coloniality of Power,
Subaltern Knowledges and Border Thinking. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Milani, Tommaso M. 2015. Sexual cityzenship: Discourses, spaces and bodies at Joburg Pride

2012. Journal of Language and Politics 14: 431–454.

Mkhize, Nomalanga. 2016. Away with Good Bantus: De-linking African language literature
from culture, ‘tribe’ and propriety. Arts and Humanities in Higher Education 15: 146–152.
Mnyaka, Mluleki and Mokgethi Mothlabi. 2005. The African concept of ubuntu/botho, and its

socio-moral signiﬁcance. Black Theology 3: 215–237.

Msibi, Thabo. 2009. Not crossing the line: Masculinities and homophobic violence in South

Africa. Agenda 23: 50–54.

Msibi, Thabo. 2013. Denied love: Same-sex desire, agency and social oppression among

African men who engage in same-sex relations. Agenda 27: 105–116.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

A LUTA CONTINUA

419

Munro, Brenna M. 2012. South Africa and the Dream of Love to Come: Queer Sexuality and the

Struggle for Freedom. Minneapolis, Minnesota/London: University of Minnesota Press.

Njeza, Malinge MacLaren. 2000.

‘Subversive subservience’: A comparative study of the
responses of Tiyo Soga and Mpambani Mzimba to the Scottish missionary enterprise.
Unpublished PhD dissertation. Cape Town, South Africa: University of Cape Town.

Reid, Graeme. 2013. How to be a Real Gay: Gay Identities in Small Town South Africa. Scottsville,

South Africa: University of KwaZulu-Natal Press.

Ryder, Robert G. 2015. The curious case of affective hospitality: Curiosity, affect, and Pierre
Klossowski’s Laws of Hospitality. In Devika Sharma and Frederik Tygstrup (eds.) Structures
of Feeling: Affectivity and the Study of Culture. Berlin, Germany: Walter de Gruyter. 159–168.
Sharma, Devika and Frederik Tygstryp. 2015. Structures of Feeling: Affectivity and the Study of

Culture. Berlin, Germany: Walter de Gruyter.

Shryock, Andrew. 2009. Hospitality lessons: Learning the shared language of Derrida and the

Balga Bedouin. Paragraph 32: 32–50.

Simons, Herbert W. 1978. In praise of muddleheaded anecdotalism. Western Journal of

Communication 42: 21–28.

Soga, John Henderson. 2014 [1932]. The AmaXhosa: Life and Customs. Cambridge, U.K.:

Cambridge University Press.

Sousa Santos, Boaventura. 2014. Epistemologies of the South: Justice against Epistemicide.

London: Routledge/Paradigm Publishers.

Tamale, Sylvia. 2011. African Sexualities: A Reader. Cape Town, South Africa: Pambazuka.
Thurlow, Crispin. 2016. Queering critical discourse studies or/and performing ‘post-class’

ideologies. Critical Discourse Studies 13: 1–30.

Vimbela, Vera. 1995. Climbing on her shoulders: An interview with Umtata’s ‘ﬁrst lesbian’
Vera Vimbela (with Mike Olivier). In Mark Gevisser and Edwin Cameron (eds.) Deﬁant
Desire: Gay and Lesbian Lives in South Africa. London: Routledge. 193–197.

Wetherell, Margaret. 2013. Affect and discourse – what’s the problem? From affect as excess to

affective/discursive practice. Subjectivity 6: 349–368.

Williams, Raymond. 1977. Marxism and Literature. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
Wilson, Monica. 1979. Strangers in Africa: Reﬂections on Nyakyusa, Nguni, and Sotho
evidence. In William A. Shack and Elliot P. Skinner (eds.) Strangers in African Societies.
Berkeley, California: University of California Press. 51–66.

Address correspondence to:

Ana Deumert
School of African and Gender Studies, Anthropology and Linguistics
University of Cape Town
Rondebosch
Cape Town 7701
South Africa

ana.deumert@gmail.com

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd


