Journal of Sociolinguistics 21/4, 2017: 467–496

Phonetics, phonology and social meaning

Penelope Eckert

and William Labov

Stanford University, California, U.S.A. and

University of Pennsylvania, U.S.A.

Linguistic variation has consistently been found to have social meaning in
its association with the status and stance of speakers in the context of
interaction. This indexical
function of variation can contribute to the
advancement of ongoing linguistic change. Style shifting in individual
sociolinguistic interviews is an indirect indication of social meaning, but
the clearest demonstrations are found in studies of speakers in a range of
social contexts. We explore and clarify the nature of social meaning in
variation, and its relation to linguistic change. Phonological variables are
most readily adapted to convey social meaning by their frequency,
ﬂexibility and freedom from referential functions. After providing several
kinds of evidence of social meaning in phonological variation, we argue
that meaning accrues speciﬁcally to concrete sounds – to phonetic elements
– and not to the phonological structures in which those sounds participate.
Mergers, near mergers, splits, chain shifts and parallel shifts are not
generally objects of social perception, conscious or unconscious, and are
motivated by more abstract principles of change.

indication indirecte de la signiﬁcation sociale, mais

On trouve regulierement que la variation linguistique a une signiﬁcation
sociale, ce qui est fondee dans son association avec le groupe sociale et la
position du locuteur dans le contexte de l’interaction. Cette fonction
indexicale de la variation peut contribuer a l’avancement des changements
linguistiques. La variation stylistique dans les interviews sociolinguistiques
est une
les
manifestations les plus claires se trouvent dans les etudes de locuteurs
dans une variete de contextes sociaux. On explore et clariﬁe la nature de la
signiﬁcation sociale, et sa relation avec les changements linguistiques. Les
les mieux adaptees a communiquer la
variables phonologiques sont
signiﬁcation sociale gr^ace a leur frequence, leur ﬂexibilite et leur manque
de fonctions referentielles. Le porteur typique de signiﬁcation sociale est
l’usage d’un allophone donne dans son contexte phonemique; des
structures phonologiques plus complexes sont moins disponibles a servir
cette fonction. On suggere que ce sont les sons eux-m^emes – les elements
phonetiques – et pas
la
signiﬁcation sociale. Les confusions, les quasi-confusions, les scissions, les
les changements paralleles ne sont pas
changements en cha^ıne et
normalement des objets de perception sociale,
soit consciente ou
inconsciente, car ils sont motives par des principes de changement plus
abstraits. [French]

les

structures phonologiques qui portent

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

468

ECKERT AND LABOV

KEYWORDS: Variation, social meaning, phonological structure, sound
change

FOREWORD

The authors of this article approach the study of social meaning from a joint
background in the approach to linguistic variation as ‘orderly heterogeneity,’
reﬂecting the inﬂuence of Uriel Weinreich at Columbia University in the 1960s.
We both spent our youth immersed in the sociolinguistic currents of New
Jersey’s Bergen County, where we learned early that the exponents of social
class were realized as distance from local phonology, and where we
experienced similar day-to-day interaction with socially distinctive and class-
related character types. In the years that followed, Labov has studied the larger
structure of variation with a focus on linguistic change, as evidenced by studies
of random samples, neighborhoods, and small group interaction. Eckert’s
focus, based on long-term ethnographic studies, has been on meaning as
evidenced in the use of a wide range of variables in the stylistic construction of
socially located personae. The variables we consider in this paper are those that
coincide in our work – variables that have been found to show both clear
macro-social patterns and stylistic sensitivity to interpersonal context,
particularly sound changes in progress. And while the authors continue to
debate issues of awareness and agency in this process, our differences are
independent of the observations that follow.

INTRODUCTION

Over the past six decades, sociolinguistic research has correlated linguistic
variation with many aspects of social behavior: characteristics of the speakers,
of interaction with the listeners, and with the speech situation more generally.
This systematic social variability of
form is generally said to have social
meaning, hence to be available for social expression. The ﬁrst quantitative
study of a sound change (Labov 1963) showed that locally-constructed social
meaning, furthermore, can serve as motivation for sound change. With the
accumulation of survey, ethnographic, and case-study evidence, and with the
increasing diversity and sophistication of experimental and statistical methods,
the study of sociolinguistic variation is engaging ever more deeply with social
meaning. Our aim in this paper is to explore and clarify the notion of social
meaning in variation, its role in phonological change, and its locus in the
phonological system. We argue that social meaning accrues to concrete sounds
– to phonetic elements – and not to the phonological structures in which those
sounds participate.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

PHONETICS, PHONOLOGY AND SOCIAL MEANING

469

For the purposes of this discussion, we deﬁne meaning as the conventional
association of distinctions in the world with distinctions in linguistic form. In
other words, variables are signs. Peirce (1931–1935) distinguishes three kinds
of signs on the basis of the relation between form and content: symbols by pure
convention,
icons by resemblance, and indexes by association in fact. The
indexical realm is based in contiguity within the speech situation, as form
‘points to’ the immediate context from the speaker’s perspective. While this
pointing may serve a referential function, as in the case of spatial and temporal
deictics, sociolinguistic variables have no referential function.1 In the case of
morpho-syntactic variables (e.g. negative concord), the presence of negation is
referential, but variation in the number of negative particles is used as an
intensiﬁer; that is, the degree of investment the speaker is making for this
proposition (Labov 1984b). In this case, variation imbues a referential sign
with additional,
indexical, meaning. In the case of some lexico-pragmatic
variables, such as the use of totally with non-gradable predicates, the semantics
of the sign may actually contribute to its indexical potential (Acton and Potts
2014; Beltrama 2016). In this paper, we deal exclusively with phonological
variation, whose indexicality is entirely independent of reference. The double
articulation of language (Hockett 1960; Martinet 1968), in which phonology
provides meaningless elements to combine to yield meaningful elements, leaves
phonological units free to register distinctions in the collective co-existence
that is the social world.

We commonly refer to the meaning of variation as ‘social meaning.’ But in
an important sense, all meaning is social inasmuch as it is constructed for the
purposes of, and in the course of, social exchange. The distinction between
child and adult is based on conventional notions of what makes someone a child
or an adult – notions based in shared understandings of age and development.2
Even the distinction between a table and a bench is social inasmuch as it is
based in conventional understandings of the differential characteristics and
uses of these objects. These conventions will change over time as our needs,
activities etc. affect the distinctions we live by.

While all symbols are social in this sense that they are socially constructed,
the meaning of variation is purely social. It has no reference – it does nothing
but index something about the speaker as a social actor in the speech situation.
It is this indexical association that we refer to when we speak of social
meaning. There can be variation without social meaning – a difference in form
it becomes
becomes a sign through a process of enregisterment, as
term
conventionally
‘enregisterment,’ as introduced by Agha (2003)
the
emergence of RP, is most commonly associated with a higher level sign – a
register (e.g. Johnstone, Andrus and Danielson 2006). Variables become
enregistered in the give and take of discourse, as hearers construe a relation
between form and some aspect of the speaker in the situation, such as stance
(Kiesling 2005) or qualities (Eckert 2016). Macro-social correlations (i.e. class,

distinction. The
in the context of

associated with some

social

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

470

ECKERT AND LABOV

age, gender, ethnicity, geography) are not in themselves indications of social
meaning, inasmuch as it is possible for such correlations to be well below the
level of social awareness (see, e.g., Tamminga 2016). But they do indicate a
probability that such meaning is at work at the local level. For example, gender
correlations on a macro-social scale point to the culturally central male-female
distinction, which in turn abstracts over a range of globally constrained but
locally constructed practices and potentials. Thus, correlation of a variable
with a gender category is likely to index that category only indirectly (Ochs
in virtue of some immediately salient quality that is commonly
1991),
associated with that gender category,
toughness,
emotionality or trendiness. It is at the level of salient qualities that variation
is put to use and takes on meaning, and one could even say that the use of a
variable to index a quality plays a role in making that quality salient.

reﬁnement,

such as

The meaning of a variable emerges not simply in the speaker’s production,
but in the hearer’s interpretation in the moment. Working with the highly
enregistered and robustly studied (ING) variable, Kathryn Campbell-Kibler has
shown that hearers do not interpret the coronal and dorsal variants of (ING) in
the same way on every hearing. Rather, their interpretation in the moment is a
function of their mood and of their social perception of the speaker (Campbell-
Kibler 2008). It is in this process of interpretation that variation takes on
meaning, and that this meaning can change.

Like reference, the indexicality of a variable emerges in use and can change
over time, along with changes in the social distinctions it picks out. The
potential for continual change in meaning is speciﬁcally related to variation in
Silverstein’s (2003) notion of orders of indexicality, through which a variable
can progress from indexing a social position (e.g. with a region, a class
position, an ethnic group) to indexing some quality apparently associated with
the people occupying that social position. Indexical order primarily concerns
change in social meaning. It is related to levels of awareness, but in a different
way from the indicator, marker, stereotype taxonomy which is based on the
behavior of speakers in the interview context (Labov 1971). Both approaches
register theoretical points in a continuum of awareness through which
variables may progress as they become increasingly enregistered (Agha 2003).
We become aware of indexical orders as variables achieve marker status, but
how much awareness is required for a speaker to exercise agency in this
process remains an empirical question.

This report will begin by reviewing the evidence for the social meaning of
phonological variation, before considering the extent of its intersection with
linguistic structure and its role as a driving force in changes within that
structure. It will appear that socially meaningful variation is not equally
distributed over all phases of language structure, and that the more abstract
categories and processes may not be socially evaluated by users of the
language. We will explore the most characteristic and vigorous domains of

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

PHONETICS, PHONOLOGY AND SOCIAL MEANING

471

social evaluation, yet show how the impact of social meaning can reach
beyond its normal limits in the most favorable situations.

FIELDS OF EVIDENCE FOR SOCIAL MEANING

Since meaning is constructed in the interaction between speaker and hearer,
evidence of social meaning ultimately must be sought by bringing together
data on production and perception. Over the years, work on perception from
the earliest matched guise tests (Lambert et al. 1960) has shown that hearers
use phonetic cues to place speakers in the social order, and that those perceived
placements evoke a range of social evaluations. When these placements
correspond to production facts (e.g. Labov 2006 [1966]), there is potential for
social meaning. But if the evaluations associated with those placements are
evidence of social meaning, they must be reﬂected in speakers’ situated use of
the variation. Because the meanings of variables are not ﬁxed but constitute
something like an indexical ﬁeld (Eckert 2008a), the study of perception must
ﬁnd a way to get at situated meaning. More recent work on perception (e.g.
Campbell-Kibler 2008; Podesva et al. 2015) has shown that hearers perceive
meanings as a function of their perceptions of the context of utterance. This
work is extremely promising, but in its early stages. In what follows, we will
focus on evidence of social meaning in production only.

We take as evidence of social meaning a patterning of variation along some
aspect of differentiation in the local social context. Thus, we ﬁnd social
meaning where variables shift signiﬁcantly across local social settings and
situations, across different communities of practice, and in the speech of
individuals who stand out as exceptional or prototypical.

The same individual in varying social settings

The original studies of the speech community focused on random samples of
single speakers, each in a similar social setting – the sociolinguistic interview.
In the interview, the degree of formality is deliberately varied, in order to vary
the amount of attention the interviewee pays to his or her speech (Labov
1984a). The resulting shift of stylistically sensitive variables gives an indirect
indication of how they may operate in community interaction. In actual
practice,
factors giving rise to
variability, as will attention to speech. A direct view of how speakers change
their variable resources from one social context to another has been obtained
in several studies in which unobtrusive recordings were made of a given
individual in changing social settings.

formality will be only one of a variety of

Coupland (1980) recorded the speech of a travel agent in Cardiff over ﬁve
days at work, talking with friends and work-associates, clients and tour
operators, in person and over the telephone. He examined the shifts of ﬁve
phonological variables with the status of Cardiff markers across these social

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

472

ECKERT AND LABOV

contexts, and found that while the topic of conversation was not important in
style shifting, channel,
friendship status and work relations were. The
speaker’s use of the Cardiff variants decreased from casual chat to informal
work-related conversation to talk with clients, and ﬁnally to doing business on
the telephone. Coupland also noted that these variables did not all vary in the
same way – that
the more highly stigmatized stereotypes (h-dropping,
intervocalic /t/ ﬂapping, and word-ﬁnal cluster reduction) appeared regularly
in informal speech with her ofﬁce mates, but quite rarely with clients or on the
phone, while the remaining variables showed a more gradual variability across
all situations.

In the early stages of

the study of Linguistic Change and Variation
(henceforward LCV) in Philadelphia (Labov 1980, 2001), Arvilla Payne
recorded ‘Carol Meyers’ (CM), a 48-year-old Philadelphia woman whom she
knew intimately, over a two-day period. These recordings took place in three
social contexts: in the travel agency where Carol worked (Ofﬁce:O); at dinner
with CM’s family (Home:H); and at a weekly bridge session, featuring lively
interaction among four close female friends (Game:G). Hindle (1979) analyzed
the shifts of CM’s vowel system across these three social contexts, using the
LPC analyses then available to the LCV project. The FAVE program
(Rosenfelder et al. 2011) has allowed us to complete the analysis for 18,352
vowels.3 Figure 1, publishing this reanalysis for the ﬁrst time, shows the values
of normalized F1 and F2 in the three social contexts for the back upgliding
vowels of Philadelphia.

(cid:129) (aw): the raising of /aw/ (down, out)
(cid:129) (owC): the fronting of /ow/ in non-ﬁnal position (boat, road, lower)
(cid:129) (owF): the fronting of /ow/ in ﬁnal position (go, snow)
(cid:129) (Tuw): the fronting of /uw/ after coronals (two, noon)
(cid:129) (Kuw): the fronting of /uw/ after non-coronals (move, who)

Table 1 shows the results of regression analysis of the effect of social setting on
the fronting of these vowels with stress and duration taken into account. This
single speaker’s contextual shifting takes place against the background of a
community pattern in apparent time, where all Vw vowels are fronting and
/aw/ is raising (Labov 2001: Ch. 5). For each vowel, the Game context is at the
forefront of the change in progress and the Home context is the most
conservative. We also ﬁnd that for these Philadelphia shifts, as for most sound
changes, women are in the lead (Labov 1990, 2001). Thus, Hindle (1979:
142) notes that CM’s pronunciation of these vowels in the Game context
contributes to a particular female and perhaps youthful persona that she
assumes in intimate and lively interaction with peers.

Before proceeding, it can be noted that an alternative interpretation of these
data looks to the character of CM’s behavior in terms of the phonetic gestures
involved. In four vowels of Figure 1, the Game setting is shifted further front.
Gordon and Heath (1998) have argued that the frequency code (Ohala 1994),

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

PHONETICS, PHONOLOGY AND SOCIAL MEANING

473

1900

1800

1700

1600

F2

1500

1400

1300

1200

H

G

O

H

O

G

G

H

H

O

G

O

G

O

H

400

F1

450

500

550

owC

owF

Kuw

Tuw

aw

600

650

700

750

800

850

Figure 1: Mean values of ﬁve vowels of Carol Meyers in three social settings: Bridge
Game
at
wileyonlinelibrary.com]

(G); Home

(H); Ofﬁce

(O).

[Colour

ﬁgure

can be

viewed

Table 1: Mixed level analysis of effect of social setting on realization of back
upgliding allophones of Carol Meyers

Social setting

/owF/

/owC/

/uwC/

/aw/

Vowel

Dependent variable
Bridge Game
Travel agency
Dinner at home

n
p

F2
66
4
-70

490
.0002

Not signiﬁcant: stress, duration.

F2
45
1
-43

934
0004

F2
87
3
-84

115
.0002

F1
-28
9
18

422
.0006

by which high and low acoustic frequency are associated with small and large
size respectively, leads female speakers to lead in vowel fronting. If this is so,
one would expect it to hold regardless of the direction of the change. Thus, we
might have expected CM to front (aw) in the Game setting, but she instead
emphasizes the raising component of the change. We note also that the

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

474

ECKERT AND LABOV

centralization of (ay) is male-dominated in one community (Philadelphia,
Labov 1990) and female-dominated in another (Detroit, Eckert 2000). This is
not to say that the frequency code plays no role in variation (see below), but it
is unlikely to explain gender on its own. If the frequency code is at work in the
construction of gender,
it is based on an embodied experience of relative
smallness – or of desired smallness. And while smallness plays a role in
hegemonic ideologies of femininity, it does not ﬁgure in all feminine expression
(e.g. Mendoza-Denton 1996, 2008). Thus, one can expect the frequency code
to actually differentiate among women.

A parallel

investigation of the effect of social setting on speech style is
reported in Podesva (2011), comparing the speech of Regan, a young Asian
American gay man, in three settings that vary along dimensions similar to the
CM study: a meeting with his supervisor at work; dinner with a close friend;
and ‘Boys’ Night Out,’ a weekly gathering of friends for dinner, drinks, and
dancing. Podesva emphasizes that Regan’s linguistic style in the Night Out
situation is part of a ‘partier’ persona, quite possibly analogous to CM’s card
game persona.

Podesva analyzed Regan’s vowels in these three settings in relation to the
California Vowel Shift (CVS), one of the objects of study by the Voices of
California group.4

short-a before nasals (BAN) and elsewhere (BAT) (Eckert 2008b);

(cid:129) incrementation of the nasal system,
increasing the distance between
(cid:129) a chain shift involving the low back merger of BOT and BOUGHT, backing of
/æ/ (BAT) and lowering and backing of /e/ (BET) (D’Onofrio 2015;
D’Onofrio et al. in press);
(cid:129) the parallel fronting of /ow/ after coronals (TOE) and non-coronals (BOAT)
and of /uw/ after coronals (TOO) and non-coronals (BOOT) (Eckert 2011b;
Podesva et al. 2015).

Figure 2 shows mean values of F1 and F2 for eight vowels in the three social
settings. Three of the CVS shifts are more advanced in the Night Out setting. It
is evident that BAN is much more different from BAT in the Night Out than in
the other settings, and the shifts of BOAT and BOOT and are most fronted in that
setting5 (thus closing the gap between vowels with non-coronal onsets and the
TOO, TOE vowels with coronal onsets).

At this point we must note the aspect of Figure 2 that is parallel to the
gestural interpretation of Figure 1, more general than the conﬁguration of
speciﬁc vowels. For all eight of Regan’s vowels, F1 is clearly highest for the
Night Out setting, indicating greater sonority. For the high and mid vowels, F1
values for the Friend setting are intermediate between Night Out and
Supervisor. Podesva also observes Regan’s use of
falsetto intonation:
frequent in Night Out, intermediate in Friend and rare in Supervisor. Thus,
we observe global shifts of articulation in the construction of a social persona,

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

PHONETICS, PHONOLOGY AND SOCIAL MEANING

475

400

500

600

2
F
700

800

900

BEAT

Supervisor

Friend

Night Out

BOOT

TOO

BOAT

TOE

BAN

BOT

BAT

1000

2400

2200

2000

1800

F1

1600

1400

1200

1000

Figure 2: Mean F1 and F2 values for Regan in three social settings (based on the
Appendix to Podesva 2011)

while reﬂections of linguistic change in progress are embedded in these shifts in
the relative positions of particular vowels.

lexical

Situations can also differ in affective key. The merged low back vowel in
California is in the process of backing and raising as part of the California Shift
(D’Onofrio et al. in press), commonly replaced by /æ/ as the lowest vowel in
the system. Backed variants of this vowel emerge frequently in negative
expressive uses of particular
items and perhaps particularly
exclamatives (e.g. gosh, oh my God). But it emerges as well in longer affective
stretches. Eckert (2011a) compared the realization of this vowel in the speech
of a preadolescent girl, ‘Colette,’ in two conversations with different affective
keys: one in which Colette presented herself as a happy-go-lucky girl, talking
about the things she liked to do, and one in which she complained at some
length about what jerks boys are. Her merged /o~oh/ vowel was signiﬁcantly
higher and further back (F1 p<.001; F2 p<.025) in the negative conversation
than in the positive one, as was the nucleus of (ay) (F1 p<.025; F2 p<.001).
Affect in and of itself is eminently social, but in addition, it is clear that Colette

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

476

ECKERT AND LABOV

considers her negative affect in this conversation to be indicative of her
emerging status as a teenager – as having boys to complain about.

The affective use of vowel fronting and backing conforms to the frequency
code mentioned above, and corresponds closely to Silverstein’s (1994) ﬁnding
in Wasco Wishram of an association between positive and negative judgment
and vowel
fronting and backing. This raises broader issues of phonetic
processes and even embodiment, which we return to below.

The studies discussed above each focus on a single individual, but they bear
crucially upon the social patterns that emerge in the larger community studies.
As mentioned in the introduction, the demographic patterns found in large
survey studies abstract over a variety of adaptations of semiotic resources to
speciﬁc situations. The individual’s use of variation animates distinctions found
in the patterns of increasingly broader communities. Intermediate between
individuals such as those discussed above and the macro-social structure are
local social networks and communities of practice.

Social networks and communities of practice

Linguistic change ﬂows through networks of contacts between and among
individuals. These contacts cluster, and they cluster differently depending on
the nature of the tie on which the network is based. Each individual’s social
network will include a variety of clusters – a friendship group, a neighborhood,
an ofﬁce, a garage band. These clusters arise in response to the conditions of
life encountered jointly in institutions, regions, social classes, etc., and
constitute communities of practice (Lave and Wenger 1991; Eckert and
McConnell-Ginet 1992). The network outlines individual contacts, which
underlie the mechanics of spread. But while the mechanism of some
innovations may be mechanical, most innovations are adopted in the service
of the joint meaning-making enterprise that constitutes practice, and that is
central to the construction of communities of practice. The situational shifting
discussed in the previous section in some cases commonly involves individuals’
movement among multiple communities of practice. In this section, we will
take up the community of practice as a locus of social meaning.

In an ethnographic study in the all-white high schools of the Detroit
suburbs, Eckert (2000) found a hegemonic opposition between two class-based
communities of practice – the Jocks, a middle-class, institution-based suburban
culture; and the Burnouts, a working-class, neighborhood-based and urban-
oriented one. While the Jocks avoid the urban area, the Burnouts frequent the
parks and strip malls of the urban periphery, and seek out contact with their
more urban peers, whose toughness and street
they admire.
Comparisons of schools across the suburban area (Eckert 2000) show that
three sound changes – the backing of (ʌ) and (e) and the backing and raising of
the nucleus of (ay) – are spreading outwards from the urban periphery, giving
them the potential to index urban status and the qualities that go with that

smarts

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

PHONETICS, PHONOLOGY AND SOCIAL MEANING

477

status.6 As shown in Figure 3, the Burnouts’ urban orientation shows up in
their lead in the use of all three of these changes.

While the correlation of the urban variants with these two communities of
practice is evidence of their indexical value, further evidence emerges when we
look to the more general school population, including those who afﬁliate with
neither the Jocks nor the Burnouts, and who commonly refer to themselves as
‘In-Betweens.’ People across the school population who engage in the practice
of urban cruising (driving repeatedly along designated urban strips) use the
urban variants signiﬁcantly more than those who do not (Figure 4).

In their ethnographic work on Ocracoke Island, Wolfram and Schilling Estes
(1995) identiﬁed a community of practice in the ‘Poker Players,’ a group of
men who engaged in a regular poker game several times a week. They also
socialized in other contexts, worked in marine-related jobs, and shared strong
ideologies about maintaining the traditional island life in the face of tourism
and migration from the mainland. These men stood out signiﬁcantly from their
peers in their retention of the conservative mid back [ɔy] pronunciation of (ay),
as stereotyped in the designation of islanders as hoi toiders (high tiders). This
case is strikingly similar to Labov’s (1963) ﬁndings on Martha’s Vineyard,
where the use of the conservative central nucleus of (ay) and (aw) indexed an

Figure 3: Urban variables in Belten High by gender and community of practice
(p values: ****< .0001; *** < .001; **<.01; * < .05)

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

478

ECKERT AND LABOV

Figure 4: Correlation of urban variables with cruising in the general Belten High
population (p values: ****< .0001; *** < .001; **<.01; * < .05)

emerging local ideological alignment against the threat of mainland economic
incursion. There, also, it was those engaged in the traditional local ﬁshing
economy who were most opposed to this incursion and who led in the reversal
of the lowering. Thus, the original centralized form, a ﬁrst order index of
island-born status, was recruited to create a new (‘second order’) index of
island-based ideology.

Prototypical and exceptional individuals

If variables had no social meaning, we would expect speakers to conform
linguistically to those around them, with differences between individuals
predictable purely on the basis of density of contact. We ﬁnd, though, that
some speakers stand out from their linguistic surroundings as exceptional in a
way that indicates a meaningful use of variables.

Nathan B. A striking linguistic standout is Nathan B., discussed in Labov
(2006 [1966]: 157–161). An upper-middle-class and highly educated man
from New York’s Lower East Side, Nathan B. stood out starkly from the other
speakers in his socio-economic stratum, with a use of stopped variants of (th)
and (dh) that matched that of lower or working-class speakers. Whatever the
cause of the pattern, it had clear social meaning for those around him, for it

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

PHONETICS, PHONOLOGY AND SOCIAL MEANING

479

was sufﬁcient to bar him from an academic position. He was told that
continuing at the university would be contingent on improving his speech –
something he was unwilling or unable to do.

Variation works in an analog fashion. The augmentation of a variable can
intensify its social meaning. This intensiﬁcation can be achieved through
increased frequency of use, and through phonetic intensiﬁcation as well. In the
case of sound change, it can be an exaggerated movement in the direction of
variation – or away from it. By intensifying her use of
female-led sound
changes in her bridge game with ‘the girls,’ Carol Meyers (Figure 1) achieved
heightened expressivity appropriate to that particular context. Some speakers
are particularly prone to stylizing more generally, and consequently become
outliers in the use of variables. These speakers, whom we’ve referred to as
‘linguistic icons,’ (e.g. Eckert 2000) have been pinpointed as leaders of
linguistic change.

Celeste S. The study of linguistic change and variation in Philadelphia focused
on ten socially stratiﬁed neighborhoods. Celeste S. was a central ﬁgure in Clark
Street, studied by Anne Bower, who was introduced to leading members of the
neighborhood social networks at the weekly coffee hour at Celeste’s home.
Social network analysis showed Celeste to have the highest index of interaction
within the neighborhood (Labov 2001: Ch. 12). She was also the most
advanced in the raising and fronting of (eyC) in made, pain and (aw) in out,
down. Celeste was not only a prototypical exponent of Philadelphia phonology;
she exempliﬁed the social ethos of the working-class community in her
insistence on correcting violations of the social order. This often led to
violations of correct and polite behavior on her part, echoing another aspect of
her linguistic pattern, a relatively high use of stops in the (dh) variable (but not
as high as that of Nathan B.).

Celeste’s life pattern supports the general conclusion of the Philadelphia
study that the leaders of linguistic change were among the highest status
persons in their local neighborhoods. Her position as a social
leader was
doubtless enhanced by her moral strength and powerful stances. These
characteristics show a striking parallel with Haeri’s description of the leaders of
linguistic change in Cairene Arabic, women who refuse to conform to the
conventions of proper behavior and denounce those conventions when they
recognize them as unjust (Haeri 1996; Labov 2001: 409). In this respect, we
can see some connection with the adolescent patterns of rebellion from
established norms in the next case to be considered.

The Burned-out Burnouts. The Jocks and Burnouts are distinguished by
multiple ethnographic means, from their membership in distinct clusters in the
school’s social network to their practices to what they even call themselves.
They mark the two extremes in the school’s culture. But they are, nonetheless,
grouped speakers, and just as the rest of the school’s population falls between

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

480

ECKERT AND LABOV

Figure 5: Burned-out Burnouts’ use of urban variables

them, there are differences within the two polar categories. Most particularly,
the Burnout girls constitute two distinct network clusters. The majority of the
Burnout girls, commonly referred to as the ‘Regular Burnouts,’ identify as
Burnouts primarily on the basis of ideologies related to friendship and school
participation, and they are connected loosely to the rest of the school
population. There is also a small cluster of girls commonly referred to as the
‘Burned-out Burnouts.’ These girls are at the edge of the Burnout cluster,
connected not to Jocks or In-Betweens, but to people outside the school. They
pride themselves on being the ‘biggest Burnouts,’ on being ‘wilder,’ and on
being quite separate from the other Burnouts. The Burned-out Burnouts lead
the entire school, including the other Burnouts, in their use of the urban
variants of (ay), (e) and (ʌ). Since there is no similar distinction among male
Burnouts, Figure 5 shows the relation of the Burned-out Burnouts to other
girls – Regular Burnouts and Jocks. One of the Burned-out Burnouts, Judy,
stands out in the school as a clear stylistic icon as THE most Burned-out
Burnout. She leads all speakers in all categories in the raising of (ay) and the
backing of (ʌ).

WHAT KINDS OF PHONOLOGICAL STRUCTURES TAKE ON SOCIAL
MEANING?

We then approach the central question of
types of
phonological structures carry social meaning? In the case studies considered
so far, social meaning accrues to variables that are composed of alternate
realizations of particular phonological objects. But the nature of linguistic
objects is to combine with other objects in hierarchical
levels of abstract

this report: what

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

PHONETICS, PHONOLOGY AND SOCIAL MEANING

481

relations. This raises the issue of the level of abstraction at which linguistic
variation is identiﬁed and social meaning assigned.

First, it may be pointed out that the socially meaningful variants we have
been discussing are not the physical sounds that are subject to measurement.
People frequently say, in rejecting a certain social variant, that it ‘sounds so
ugly.’ However, it is not the sound that is so evaluated, but rather the use of
that sound as the particular allophone representing a certain phoneme. Thus,
the use of high ingliding [i:ə] in man or bad is stigmatized in the Middle Atlantic
States, but no one reacts in the same way to the use of the same sound in idea.
The use of a medial voiced ﬂap in brother as [brʌɾɚ] is widely rejected as
uneducated and vulgar speech, but the same sound in utter is accepted as
normal or as a regional variant. In other words, social meaning is assigned to
sounds at a ﬁrst level of abstraction from concrete production. The variables we
have considered so far are changes in the range and frequency of allophones of
a given phoneme.

We have seen that such sound changes take on social meaning as they move
through communities.
In English, continuous variation in the phonetic
realization of vowel allophones is the most heavily employed resource for the
construction of social meaning. Having no referential function, a phonological
variable is free to take on purely contextual meaning as it ranges within the
limits set by neighboring phonemes. Furthermore, the high frequency of
occurrence of most phonological variables in discourse offers a potential for the
construction of social meaning through momentary situated use.

While phonological variables seem well designed to take on social meaning,
the same may not be true for more abstract structures, inferred from relations
among phonological entities. For these, the evidence for the absence or
presence of social meaning needs to be examined separately. Variables take on
social meaning in the fast give and take of interaction, as people associate what
they articulate and what they hear with aspects of the context. It follows that
social meaning attaches to forms close to the surface, and not to the structural
relations behind those forms. While these structural relations may in some
cases achieve meta-discursive status – usually in the very late stages of change
– they do not play a role in the actual use of variables. In this section, we
consider a variety of structural relations that play an important role in sound
change, beginning with the simplest structural change: the opposition of two
distinct phonemes to a single merged one.

Mergers

Major factors differentiating North American dialects have to do with the
inventory of phonological categories. The records of dialect geography show
some sixteen mergers in North America (Kurath and McDavid 1961; Labov,
Ash and Boberg 2006) – all but one are conditioned mergers, and all but one
concern vowels:

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

482

ECKERT AND LABOV

(cid:129) The merger of /hw/ and /w/ in which and witch
(cid:129) The merger of /ohr/ and /ɔhr/ in four and for
(cid:129) The merger of /iw/ and /uw/ in dew and do
(cid:129) The merger of /eyr/ and /er/ in Mary and merry
(cid:129) The merger of /er/ and /ær/ in merry and marry
(cid:129) The merger of /iyr/ and /eyr/ in fear and fair
(cid:129) The merger of /iyrV/ and /irV/ in nearer and mirror
(cid:129) The merger of /o/ and /oh/ in cot and caught
(cid:129) The merger of /uwr/ and /owr/ in moor and more
(cid:129) The merger of /in/ and /en/ in pin and pen
(cid:129) The merger of /iyl/ and /il/ in feel and ﬁll
(cid:129) The merger of /uwl/ and /ul/ in fool and full
(cid:129) The merger of /owl/ and /ʌl/ in goal and gull
(cid:129) The merger of /ahr/ and /ohr/ in far and for
(cid:129) The merger of /owl/ and /ul/ in pole and pull
(cid:129) The merger of /iyg/ and /ig/ in big and league
(cid:129) The merger of /æg/ and /eyg/ in haggle and Hegel
Evidence for the presence or absence of a merger is quite different from the
quantitative measures of the stream of speech we have been considering so far.
Mergers are detected by paratactic examination of the phonemic inventory,
most commonly by metalinguistic discourse (minimal pairs or commutation
tests). This does not form a part of ordinary discourse, even when it focuses on
the use of
language. In fact, these have one feature in common: their
invisibility to social observation, comment or pressure. Whether we are dealing
with nearly completed mergers like /w/ and /hw/ or incipient mergers like
/owl/ and /ʌl/, the structural facts are equally immune to the acquisition of
social meaning. This is not to say that the movement of either of the variants in
the accomplishment of merger is socially meaningless. The merger of /i/ and
/e/ before nasals in California,
is clearly associated with an
‘outdoorsy’ lifestyle (Geenberg 2014) and is often the subject of comment. But
when social comment about a merger does arise,
focuses on the
pronunciation of
two words rather than on the
absence of the distinction. Thus, the merger of /i/ and /e/ before nasals is more
likely to be noted as ‘He says pin for pen,’ than ‘He says pin and pen the same.’7
Mergers are sometimes perceived as reversals. The merger of /ahr/ and /ohr/
in Utah and St. Louis has been encapsulated in the stereotyped phrase, ‘Put the
harse in the born,’ indicating some degree of social awareness (Labov, Yaeger
and Steiner 1972: 267). The merger of oil and Earl in New York City is often
reported by outsiders as ‘He says oil for Earl and Earl for oil’ (Labov 1972b:
316).

the more common of

for example,

it

The social invisibility of mergers may be related to the kinds of paradigmatic
inspection required to detect their presence or absence. But frequency, cited so
often in our discussion of sociolinguistic variables, is also involved. Consider

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

PHONETICS, PHONOLOGY AND SOCIAL MEANING

483

the frequencies involved in the style shifting of ﬁnal /ow/ by Carol Meyers in
Figure 1. In the three hours and 27 minutes of the three recorded sessions, she
used 10,389 measurable vowels. The fronting of ﬁnal /ow/ in the Bridge Game
is based on 137 tokens; the values for the Ofﬁce on 203, and for Home, on 70.
In the course of these three conversations, listeners were subjected to a stream
of 400 of Carol Meyers’ productions of know, go, so, no, etc., at approximately
the rate of one a minute.

Let us suppose that we wanted to use the same data to detect the state of a
potential merger in Carol Meyers’ speech. One candidate is the merger of /uw/
and /ow/ before /r/. This is the result of a long-standing chain shift in
Philadelphia, the backing of car, mar, bar towards core, more, bore and the
raising of those allophones towards Coor, moor, boor. Since most speakers do
not front the high back vowel /uw/ before /r/, this can lead to a merger of Coor
and core, moor and more, boor and bore.

In the Carol Meyers data, the most common words in the /uwr/ class are
sure, you’re and your. These do occur in small numbers in the Bridge Game and
Ofﬁce, where we also ﬁnd brochure and they are considerably fronted from the
/owr/ class. But that fronting effect must be ascribed to the palatal onsets /y, S/
unless we can contrast it with shore or chore, which are not present in the data
set. The only hard evidence for a contrast between /uwr/ and /owr/ is seen in
Figure 6, based on two pronunciations of tour in the Ofﬁce as against /owr/ in
door, store and torn. The contrast is marginal. But even if the listener came to a
conclusion about the state of Carol Meyers’ system in the Ofﬁce, there is no
basis for contrast with the other discourse settings. We conclude that low
frequency and sparse distribution prevent most of these potential mergers from
developing social meaning.

The one unconditioned merger in our list of mergers is an exception to the
low frequency feature and may therefore show that mergers in general may
have the potential for carrying social meaning. The low back merger of /o/ and

1500

F2

1300

1100

900

700

500

300

door

store

tour

torn

door

tour

door

uwr
owr

400

500

600

700
F1

Figure 6: Data on /uwr/ and /owr/ in the Ofﬁce recording of Carol Meyers

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

484

ECKERT AND LABOV

/oh/ in cot and caught, hock and Hawk, Don and dawn, etc., involves much
higher frequencies of the vocabulary involved but also illustrates the social
invisibility of a major language division. Merged areas now cover half of North
America (eastern New England, western Pennsylvania, Canada, the West) and
the process is advancing in every boundary area. But this ongoing process has
never taken on the traits of a sociolinguistic variable in the way of style
shifting, gender construction, or association with a community of practice.8
Moreover, the literature has yet to record a single case of speakers being
reprimanded, ridiculed, or corrected for their failure to distinguish cot from
caught, don from dawn. Rather, social meaning attaches to the individual shifts
that bring about the merger.9

The evidence for the absence of social signiﬁcance of mergers is necessarily
negative but it is extensive (see Labov 1994: 343–353). We have seen that the
actual events that identify mergers – misunderstandings where one word class
is wrongly identiﬁed as another – are of too low a frequency to play a part in
the exchange of social meanings in daily interaction. We ﬁnd evidence for this
in a collection of 923 misunderstandings in everyday life recorded by
linguistically trained observers (Labov 2010: Ch. 2). Of these, 53 can be
speciﬁcally attributed to phonological mergers, and 27 to the low back merger.
Many do not
the most common
confusions is between copy and coffee (11 instances). The rounded allophone
before /p/ of the merged dialect is mistaken for the back rounded /oh/ of the
unmerged dialect, and the /p ~ f/ opposition does little to prevent the
confusion.

include strictly minimal pairs; one of

David Sankoff (Montreal): It’s time to make the copies.

William Labov (northern New Jersey): But I’ve already had my coffee.

This misunderstanding was repeated several times during the 1988 NWAV
meeting in Montreal. Traveling in the West, Ohioan Kyle Gorman reports:

I am currently at a cafe in Portland, OR. The barista, who was born and raised in
Oregon, asked me if I’d like a ‘copy [of] the receipt.’ I heard ‘coffee with the
receipt,’ though I recovered from the misunderstanding a second later.

is

that

they reﬂect

is

these reports

startling about

What
repeated
misunderstandings on the part of individuals who are fully informed of the
linguistic situation, yet continue to process language as if they knew nothing
about it. This is quite different from someone who reacts negatively to an
advanced allophone [i:ə] in bad but correctly identiﬁes it with the phoneme /æ/.
One exceptional case of merger reversal has appeared in the sociolinguistic
record: the unmerger of fear and fair, beer and bare in Charleston, South
Carolina, a case that deﬁes Garde’s principle on the irreversibility of mergers.
Baranowski (2007: Fig. 5.27) shows that the restoration of contrast follows an

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

PHONETICS, PHONOLOGY AND SOCIAL MEANING

485

s-shaped curve, decade by decade, without any social class differentiation. He
also points out that this rare reversal is subject to some comment in the
community. From an upper-class lawyer, John M.:

When I was in the Navy, I would say I want a brew, in order to avoid the usual
laughter and good-natured teasing I got about the way that I pronounced the
word, and I tried to learn to say BEER [high vowel]. (Baranowski 2007: 236)

Such comments are as unusual as the reversal of the merger itself.10

While the realization of a phonological variable is a short (and frequent)
event in a syntactic series of events, merger is a paratactic phenomenon
whose location in time is not a particular event in the chain of speech. We
pointed to the high frequency of phonological variables as a factor in their
acquisition and transfer of social meaning. The listener’s search for evidence
for or against merger must extend over a considerable period of time given
the rarity of the critical data cited above – minimal pairs in ambiguous
contexts.

The spread of mergers

When a community shows a variable merger, one can expect that it will
expand in a unidirectional manner at the expense of distinctions (Herzog’s
principle; Labov 1994: Part C). This holds true for all of the regional mergers
studied in The Atlas of North American English (ANAE; Labov, Ash and Boberg
2006: Ch. 8, 9). This expansion is normally complete in a single generation
(Herold 1990; Johnson 2007). Johnson attributes the expansion of the low
back merger of Don and dawn in Seekonk to the in-migration of families from
the Boston area, where the merger is complete. One might project a scenario
in which the prestige of the great metropolis is associated with the merger.
However, Yang (n.d.) calculates the likelihood of the merger being adopted
by word frequency and vowel confusability of
the two classes, with a
minimum of 21.7 percent of the population using the merged system, and
this ﬁgure corresponds closely to the percent of in-migrants in the schools
studied by Johnson. In this case, no further contribution of social meaning is
required.

Near mergers

The traditional evidence for phonemic contrast is provided by minimal pair
tests, and this is expected to correspond to statistically signiﬁcant differences in
production as heard or measured. This agreement
in production and
perception is shown in Table 2 as cases 1 and 4. Cases 1 and 4 show the
expected agreement of production and perception. Case 2, where speakers
pronounce the pairs in the same way but judge them to be different is a
common result of orthographic differences, and is of little linguistic interest.
But case 3, where speakers make a difference that they cannot hear, was until

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

486

ECKERT AND LABOV

Table 2: The four possible outcomes of a minimal pair test

Production

Same
Different

Judgment

Same

1
3

Different

2
4

recently thought to be empty; for how could speakers learn to produce a
difference that they cannot hear? But beginning in 1972, sociolinguistic
studies of vowel systems found an increasing number of such near-mergers:

(cid:129) r-less source vs. sauce in New York City (Labov, Yaeger and Steiner 1972);
(cid:129) fool vs. full in Salt Lake City (Di Paolo and Faber 1990);
(cid:129) palatalized Russian consonants (Diehm and Johnson 1997);
(cid:129) voicing contrasts in German ﬁnal obstruents (Dinnsen 1985);
(cid:129) ferry vs. furry in Philadelphia (Labov, Karen and Miller 1991).

It should be clear that the ‘same’ judgments made in minimal pair tests do not
represent an absence of perception so much as a suspension of the labeling
function.11

From the point of view of our present inquiry, the near-mergers present the
clearest case of
the divergence between social meaning and linguistic
structure. When we try to direct speakers’ attention to the difference, they
cannot ﬁnd it. But it is not only the absence of the labeling function that
removes these contrasts from social meaning. Every case found so far shows
idiosyncratic social distributions. In the case of Philadelphia ferry vs. furry,
about one third of the subjects showed a clear distinction, one third a complete
merger, and one third the near-merger in question. This might be considered
the opposite of enregisterment: let us say deregisterment.

Splits

Throughout the Mid-Atlantic States, the short-a word class undergoes a split
into tense and lax forms which may be described by a lexically conditioned rule
(Kiparsky 1995). These are if anything less visible than mergers. In both New
York City (Trager 1930; Labov 2006 [1966]) and Philadelphia (Ferguson
1975; Labov 1989), such structural developments involve lexical and
grammatical irregularities that in themselves carry no social meaning, do
not vary with social situations, and are never the topic of comment in meta-
discourse. Thus, the traditional Philadelphia pattern has:

(cid:129) Tense mad, bad, glad but lax in sad, brad, lad, cad, had and all other words

with /d/ codas.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

PHONETICS, PHONOLOGY AND SOCIAL MEANING

487

began.

(cid:129) Tense man, hand, ham, slam but lax in the irregular verbs ran, swam,
(cid:129) Tense pan, pants, panning but lax in open syllable words like panel.
(cid:129) Tense ask but lax in the polysyllables asterisk, aspirin.
(cid:129) Tense aunt, ant, can’t, [tin] can but lax in the function words and, am, [I]

can.

There is nothing here comparable to the social meaning of the lexical distribution
of the British ‘broad a’ class, an essential feature of Received Pronunciation,
which speciﬁes /ah/ in answer but not in cancer, in grass but not in lass. The
Philadelphia distributions are invisible to social observation, which focuses only
on the height of the tense vowel rather than on the distribution of tense and lax.
Recently, a new system has arisen in competition with this, among a rather
large population of young speakers oriented to higher education (in non-
Catholic schools with special admission requirements; Labov et al. in press).
This is the nasal system, rather similar to that found with increasing frequency
in many parts of the U.S. It is easy to describe:

Tense all and only all vowels before nasal consonants.

But to shift from the traditional Philadelphia to the nasal system requires a
number of opposing moves:

a. Tense /æ/ before intervocalic nasals (Spanish, Miami, damage).
b. Tense /æ/ before velar nasals (bank, bang, hang).
c. Tense /æ/ in function words with nasal codas (can, am, an).
d. Lax all other /æ/.

In tracing this development across the last two decades, we ﬁnd that steps (a)–
(d) occur simultaneously. It is not a step-by-step conversion that terminates in
the nasal system but rather a single shift from traditional to nasal. The new
nasal system is well deﬁned in macro-social terms. It remains to be seen if its
use ﬂuctuates with changing social context in a way comparable to the
linguistic variables in the studies of Carol Meyers and Regan, above.

Some lexical splits are triggered by the opacity of a phonological rule, the
result of a separate following process. Thus, the Philadelphia raising of /ay/
before voiceless obstruents became opaque when intervocalic /t/ was voiced to
a ﬂap. Then Snyder and tiger were raised, joining bike and right (Fruehwald
2007). Though the raising has been referred to in recent popular videos of
‘Philly Tawk’ as buyght and ruyght, any public recognition is limited to the
original core group of words with underlying voiceless consonants.

The origins of lexical splits are obscure but challenging. In Old English,
short-a underwent a backing to short-o before nasals which was almost
complete in the Durham region of England, except for Class III preterit strong
verbs. The sole surviving members of this class are ran, swam and began, which
are sole exceptions to the tensing of short-a before front nasals in Philadelphia.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

488

ECKERT AND LABOV

Whatever factor has led to a similar partitioning of the short-a word class after
a millennium is not likely to be an object of social perception.

Chain shifts

The obverse of a merger is a chain shift, which rotates two or more vowels in a
way that preserves their capacity to signal referential meaning. This end result
is not visible to the speakers involved in the rotation of the system: the chain
shift as a whole is not an object of social perception.

The Northern Cities Shift is a set of ﬁve intimately related vowel shifts
(Figure 7). It is one of the most complex conﬁgurations that have been
recognized in the study of chain shifts, past and present. Labov traced the
progress of the ﬁrst four stages in a vast area from western New York State to
the Great Lakes Region (Labov, Yaeger and Steiner 1972; Labov, Ash and
Boberg 2006). The ﬁnal link, the backing of /ʌ/, emerged in Eckert’s study of
Belten High in the suburbs of Detroit.12 Our question is whether this complex
phenomenon itself has social meaning.

Stages 4 and 5 (Figure 7), the backing of (ʌ) and (e), have been traced in the
discussion of social meaning in Figures 3, 4 and 5. In the Detroit area, they are
still spreading outwards from the urban periphery, while the older changes
show less geographic differentiation. And while the older changes show only or
primarily a gender difference with girls leading, these ‘urban’ changes show
Burnouts leading with few gender differences.

This is evident in Figure 8 for the ﬁve stages of the Northern Cities Shift: the
three black lines follow a completely different pattern from the two grey lines.
The ﬁrst two stages of the Northern Cities Shift are correlated primarily with
gender, while the later three are associated primarily with the Jock/Burnout
opposition. Yet it is also evident here that two adjacent components of a chain
can share social meaning. The backing of (e) and (ʌ) in the Detroit suburbs co-
vary, but neither of them shares social meaning with earlier stages of the shift

Figure 7: Five components of the Northern Cities Shift in the notation of Atlas of
North American English. Numbers represent relative ordering in time.

1. Raising and fronting of short-a, (æ) in bat, ban, etc.
2. Fronting and unrounding of short-o, (o) in bot, don, etc.
3. Lowering and fronting of long open-o, (oh) in bought, dawn, etc.
4. Backing of short-e, (e) in bet, bend, etc.
5. Backing of short-u, (ʌ) in but, bun, etc.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

PHONETICS, PHONOLOGY AND SOCIAL MEANING

489

Figure 8: Northern Cities Shift in Belten High (p values: ****< .0001; *** < .001;
**<.01; * < .05)

the fronting of

(ae) and (o)). The lowering and fronting of

(e.g.
(oh),
furthermore, combines the social constraints of the backing and fronting
portions of the shift, led by both girls and Burnouts. The internal correlations of
the Northern Cities Shift across the entire Northern region in the ANAE data
conﬁrm this view of its bipartite character. The two highest correlations among
the vowel shifts of Figure 7 are found for:

(cid:129) the fronting of /æ/ and the fronting of /o/ (.46); and
(cid:129) the backing of /e/ and the backing of /ʌ/ (.42).

We conclude that it is possible that two adjacent members of a shift can share
social meaning, but more complex chains do not seem to be objects of social
perception.

Parallel shifts

Some sequences of vowel shifts may appear as the generalization of a single
phonological process. Thus, the raising of car and the raising of core may be
seen as a general raising of back vowels before /r/, rather than a structurally
motivated sequence. And social meaning might be attributed to this general
raising.

The social evaluation of parallel shifts appears in the series of sociolinguistic
changes that took place in the Philadelphia Neighborhood Corpus following

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

490

ECKERT AND LABOV

the study of Carol Myers in Figure 1. The ﬁrst two-thirds of the century showed
a steady fronting of /aw, ow, uw/, with women in the lead (Labov, Rosenfelder
and Fruehwald 2013: Fig. 14). Beginning with speakers born in 1950, this
movement was reversed. This phenomenon was attributed to the general
recession of Southern dialect features under the pressure of the negative social
evaluation that has been documented in recent years (Preston 1996). The
social motivation of the Philadelphia reversal is further indicated by the fact
that it is conﬁned to the female component of the Philadelphia Neighborhood
Corpus: men preserve their lower values until they converge with women in
the most recent period. Speakers with higher education are also seen to lead in
this reversal of Vw.

A good part of the motivation for parallel shifts must be attributed to the
general tendency of rules to expand their domain of application and so simplify
their form. Thus, the generalization of the fronting of /uw/ to include /ow/ and
/aw/ may be represented by
½þhigh  [½ back=

  [½ back=

w ! ½

The addition of social motivation to this generalizing process cannot easily be
motivated by the social evaluation of structure at this level. It may seem more
plausible to argue that the degree of fronting of the nuclei of /aw/, /ow/ and
/uw/ are evaluated independently. This seems more likely in the light of the
fact that, in Philadelphia, /uw/ after coronals is exempted from the general
reversal. While the general
long been
characteristic of the South, the fronting of /uw/ after coronals is now found
throughout North America (Labov, Ash and Boberg 2006: Ch. 12). Though
Figure 1 and Table 1 show parallel response of Vw allophones to changes of
social setting, there is no evidence that such parallel shift of allophones has a
social meaning in addition to the general tendency of rules to expand their
application and so be simpliﬁed.

/Vw/ vowels has

fronting of

The analysis of parallel shifts is not easily separated from the analysis of
chain shifts. In place of the tendency towards maximal dispersion, stages 4 and
5 of the Northern Cities Shift may be considered as a generalized backing of
short mid vowels. However, this argument cannot be applied to all ﬁve stages
as a whole: there is no generalized feature adjustment that will produce this
pattern. Following through, we can suggest that social meaning may be
assigned to those portions of a chain shift that can be analyzed as a parallel
shift but not to the maximal dispersion of vowels within a single subsystem.
The question, then, is what are the limitations on the generalization of social
meaning to more than one variable?

Eckert (2011b) found that the same local use was made of the fronting of
/ow/ and /uw/ among Northern California preadolescents. And evidence of
sound symbolism, as in the case of the frequency code discussed above, leads us
to consider that some parallel shifts may be a generalization of a phonetic

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

PHONETICS, PHONOLOGY AND SOCIAL MEANING

491

gesture that in itself has some potential meaning. Eckert (2011a) found the
frequency code at work in both (o) and (ay), indexing positive and negative
affect among preadolescents in Northern California, with anecdotal evidence
that it is also at work in /ow/. Silverstein (1994) found the frequency code at
work also indexing affect in multiple vowels in Wasco Wishram as well. Eckert
(2008a) has suggested that the use of stop release to express emphasis and
even anger and impatience could be based in the iconization (Irvine and Gal
2000) of fortition – the association of fortis consonants with physical and
affective force, and that the process of fortition could itself take on meaning,
generalizing to other consonants. Sound symbolism would build on both
acoustics and proprioception. Bourdieu (1990: 63) has described the habitus
as ‘society written into the body,’ and equates class with articulatory setting,
based in norms of how to use the mouth more generally (eating, laughing, etc.;
Bourdieu 1977). This is a meta-view of articulatory setting that connects to
general ideological dispositions having to do with social tension, which we
may or may not be able to link to phonetics. But any such link would be likely
to function above the level of the individual variable.

CONCLUSION

Our review ﬁrst assembles evidence that social meaning is deeply involved in
phonological variation and that phonological change is frequently motivated
and accelerated by the association of social meaning with the more concrete
components of
linguistic structure. The transmission of social meaning is
enhanced by the basic design of human language – a small number of empty
elements that combine to form an unlimited number of meaningful sentences.
Without the burden of referential meaning, variation in these ‘empty’ elements
is free to signal information about the speakers and their social relations.
Though sound change is only one of many mechanisms of change, it is the
most intimately connected to the give and take of everyday life and it is likely to
be found whenever we listen closely to what people are saying.

On the other hand, change in the more abstract levels of phonological
organization is not likely to generate social meaning. The great majority of
mergers proceed well below the level of social awareness. The details of a
lexical split that distinguish one dialect from another are hidden from the
speakers who follow this pattern. The full scope of a complex chain shift is
beyond the grasp of speakers whose vowel systems are being re-organized. The
parallel structure of phonological space will be reﬂected in social distributions,
but social awareness will normally be focused on individual elements. The
unobservability of paradigmatic structure appears to be a general operating
characteristic of phonology and phonological change. Social meaning is not
generally assigned to the paradigmatic relations among phonological
categories, which are not freely perceived and evaluated by speakers of the
language.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

492

NOTES

ECKERT AND LABOV

1. For an in-depth discussion of these issues see Silverstein (1976).
2. An attempt was made to apply the framework for the study of variation in the
designation of concrete objects (Labov 1972a) to the distinction between child
and adult. It was abandoned because no deﬁnition could be found independent
of the particular social privileges in view.

3. Hindle’s (1979) analysis was based on a total of 871 measurements, while here

we are dealing with 18,352.

4. We preserve the lexical identiﬁers of the vowel classes to maintain continuity

with Podesva (2011).

5. And Podesva argues that this sound change is reﬂected in the fact that BOT is
frontest in Night Out, reducing the Euclidean distance between BOT and BAT.
6. The backing of (e) and (ʌ) are late stages of the more complex Northern Cities

Shift, to be presented in Figure 7.

7. Among the many mergers listed here, the lexical pair pin/pen comes closest to
serving as a symbol of public recognition. It remains to be shown that social
meaning is equally attached to the raising of the vowel in wend and win.

8. We can ask, how would this be possible? Of the four known mechanisms of
merger (Trudgill and Foxcroft 1978; Herold 1990), implosion is the most likely
candidate: the rapid reorganization of one phoneme into a space once occupied
by two. One might imagine the imploded system in one social context and the
binary one in another.

9. One of our reviewers recalls vividly being reprimanded for the failure to

articulate the initial /h/ in /hw/ words.

10. This Charleston development may be related to the unusual relation of the
upper class to the community as a whole. The general trend towards a North
Midland phonology is led by the prominent upper class who were formerly the
chief exponents of the traditional Charleston dialect.
11. We are indebted to Leigh Lisker for this observation.
12. The numbers in Figure 7 represent the best consensus on the ordering of these
events in time. There remains some evidence that the unrounding of /o/ may
have preceded the raising of /æ/, and the downward movement of /oh/ appears
to be quite variable.

REFERENCES

Acton, Eric K. and Christopher Potts. 2014. That straight talk: Sarah Palin and the

sociolinguistics of demonstratives. Journal of Sociolinguistics 18: 3–31.

Agha, Asif. 2003. The social life of a cultural value. Language and Communication 23: 231–

273.

Baranowski, Maciej. 2007. Phonological Variation and Change in the Dialect of Charleston, South

Carolina. Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press.

Beltrama, Andrea. 2016. Bridging the gap: Intensiﬁers between semantic and social meaning.

Unpublished PhD dissertation. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago.

Bourdieu, Pierre. 1977. The economics of linguistic exchanges. Social Science Information 16:

645–668.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

PHONETICS, PHONOLOGY AND SOCIAL MEANING

493

Bourdieu, Pierre. 1990. The Logic of Practice (transl. Richard Nice). Stanford, California:

Stanford University Press.

Campbell-Kibler, Kathryn. 2008. I’ll be the judge of that: Diversity in social perceptions of

(ING). Language in Society 37: 6–37.

Coupland, Nikolas. 1980. Style-shifting in a Cardiff work setting. Language in Society 9: 1–12.
Diehm, Erin and Keith Johnson. 1997. Near-merger in Russian palatalization. Ohio State

Working Papers in Linguistics 50: 11–18.

Dinnsen, Daniel. 1985. A re-examination of phonological neutralization. Journal of Linguistics

21: 265–279.

Di Paolo, Marianna and Alice Faber. 1990. Phonation differences and the phonetic content of

the tense-lax contrast in Utah English. Language Variation and Change 2: 155–204.

D’Onofrio, Annette. 2015. Persona-based information shapes linguistic perception: Valley girls

and California vowels. Journal of Sociolinguistics 19: 241–256.

D’Onofrio, Annette, Penelope Eckert, Robert Podesva and Janneke Van Hofwegen. In press.
Low vowel variation in California’s Central Valley. In Betsy Evans, Valerie Fridland, Tyler
Kendall and Alicia Wassink (Eds.) Speech of the West. Volume I: The Paciﬁc Coast. Durham,
North Carolina: American Dialect Society, Duke University Press.

Eckert, Penelope. 2000. Linguistic Variation as Social Practice. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell.
Eckert, Penelope. 2008a. Variation and the indexical ﬁeld. Journal of Sociolinguistics 12: 453–

476.

Eckert, Penelope. 2008b. Where do ethnolects stop? International Journal of Bilingualism 12:

25–42.

Eckert, Penelope. 2011a. Where does the social stop? In Jeffrey K. Parrott, Pia Quist and Frans
Gregersen (eds.) Language Variation: European Perspectives III. Amsterdam, The Netherlands/
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: John Benjamins. 13–30.

Eckert, Penelope. 2011b. Language and power in the preadolescent heterosexual market.

American Speech 86: 85–97.

Eckert, Penelope. 2016. Variation, meaning and social change. In Nikolas Coupland (ed.)

Sociolinguistics: Theoretical Debates. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press. 68–85.

Eckert, Penelope and Sally McConnell-Ginet. 1992. Think practically and look locally:
Language and gender as community-based practice. Annual Review of Anthropology 21:
461–490.

Ferguson, Charles. 1975. ‘Short a’ in Philadelphia English. In M. Estellie Smith (ed.) Studies in
Linguistics in Honor of George L. Trager. The Hague, The Netherlands: Mouton. 259–274.
Fruehwald, Josef. 2007. The spread of raising: A case of lexical diffusion. Unpublished Honors

Senior thesis. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: University of Pennsylvania.

Fruehwald, Josef. 2013. The phonological inﬂuence on phonetic change. Unpublished PhD

dissertation. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: University of Pennsylvania.

Geenberg, Katherine. 2014. The other California: Marginalization and sociolinguistic
variation in Trinity County. Unpublished PhD dissertation. Stanford, California: Stanford
University.

Gordon, Matthew and Jeffrey Heath. 1998. Sex, sound, symbolism, and sociolinguistics.

Current Anthropology 39: 421–449.

Haeri, Niloofar. 1996. Why do women do this?: Sex and gender differences in speech. In
Gregory R. Guy and John Baugh (eds.) Towards a Social Science of Language. Amsterdam, The
Netherlands: John Benjamins. 101–114.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

494

ECKERT AND LABOV

Herold, Ruth. 1990. Mechanisms of merger: The implementation and distribution of the low
back merger in Eastern Pennsylvania. Unpublished PhD dissertation. Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania: University of Pennsylvania.

Hindle, Donald. 1979. The social and situational conditioning of phonetic variation.

Unpublished PhD dissertation. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: University of Pennsylvania.

Hockett, Charles F. 1960. The origin of speech. Scientiﬁc American 203: 88–111.
Irvine, Judith T. and Susan Gal. 2000. Language ideology and linguistic differentiation. In
Paul V. Kroskrity (ed.) Regimes of Language: Ideologies, Polities, and Identities. Santa Fe, New
Mexico: SAR Press. 35–83.

Johnson, Daniel Ezra. 2007. Stability and change along a dialect boundary: The low vowels of
southeastern New England. Unpublished PhD dissertation. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania:
University of Pennsylvania.

Johnstone, Barbara, Jennifer Andrus and Andrew E. Danielson. 2006. Mobility, indexicality,

and the enregisterment of ‘Pittsburghese’. Journal of English Linguistics 34: 77–104.

Kiesling, Scott. 2005. Variation, stance and style. English World-Wide 26: 1–42.
Kiparsky, Paul. 1995. The phonological basis of sound change.

In John Goldsmith

(ed.) Handbook of Phonological Theory. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell. 640–670.

Kurath, Hans and Raven McDavid. 1961. The Pronunciation of English in the Atlantic States.

Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan Press.

Labov, William. 1963. The social motivation of a sound change. Word 18: 1–42.
Labov, William. 1971. Some principles of linguistic methodology. Language in Society 1: 97–

120.

Labov, William. 1972a. The boundaries of words and their meanings. In Charles-James Bailey
and Roger Shuy (eds.) New Ways of Analyzing Variation in English. Washington, D.C.:
Georgetown University Press. 340–373.

Labov, William. 1972b. Sociolinguistic Patterns. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: University of

Pennsylvania Press.

Labov, William. 1980. The social origins of sound change. In William Labov (ed.) Locating

Language in Time and Space. New York: Academic Press. 251–266.

Labov, William. 1984a. Field methods of the project on linguistic change and variation. In
John Baugh and Joel Sherzer (eds.) Language in Use: Readings in Sociolinguistics. Englewood
Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall. 28–66.

Labov, William. 1984b. Intensity. In Deborah Schiffrin (ed.) Meaning, Form, and Use in Context:
Linguistic Applications/Gurt ‘84 (Georgetown University Roundtable on Language and
Linguistics). Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press. 43–70.

Labov, William. 1989. The exact description of

the speech community: Short a in
Philadelphia. In Ralph Fasold and Deborah Schiffrin (eds.) Language Change and Variation.
Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press. 1–57.

Labov, William. 1990. The intersection of sex and social class in the course of linguistic

change. Language Variation and Change 2: 205–251.

Labov, William. 1994. Principles of Linguistic Change: Internal Factors. Oxford, U.K.: Basil

Blackwell.

Labov, William. 2001. Principles of Linguistic Change. Volume II: Social Factors. Cambridge, U.K.:

Blackwell.

Labov, William. 2006 [1966]. The Social Stratiﬁcation of English in New York City (2nd edition).

Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Labov, William. 2010. Principles of Linguistic Change. Volume III: Cognitive and Cultural Factors.

Oxford, U.K.: Wiley Blackwell.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

PHONETICS, PHONOLOGY AND SOCIAL MEANING

495

Labov, William, Sharon Ash and Charles Boberg. 2006. The Atlas of North American English:

Phonetics, Phonology and Sound Change. Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.

Labov, William, Sabriya Fisher, Duna Gylfadottir, Anita Henderson and Betsy Sneller. In press.

Competing systems in Philadelphia phonology. Language Variation and Change.

Labov, William, Mark Karen and Corey Miller. 1991. Near-mergers and the suspension of

phonemic contrast. Language Variation and Change 3: 33–74.

Labov, William, Ingrid Rosenfelder and Josef Fruehwald. 2013. 100 years of sound change in

Philadelphia: Linear incrementation, reversal and re-analysis. Language 89: 30–66.

Labov, William, Malcah Yaeger and Richard Steiner. 1972. A Quantitative Study of Sound

Change in Progress. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: U.S. Regional Survey.

Lambert, Wallace, Richard C. Hodgson, Robert C. Gardner and Samuel Fillenbaum. 1960.
Evaluative reactions to spoken language. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 60: 44–
51.

Lave, Jean and Etienne Wenger. 1991. Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation.

Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Martinet, Andre. 1968. Elements de linguistique generale. Paris, France: Colin.
Mendoza-Denton, Norma. 1996. Muy macha: Gender and ideology in gang girls’ discourse

about makeup. Ethnos 61: 47–63.

Mendoza-Denton, Norma. 2008. Home Girls. Cambridge, U.K./New York: Blackwell.
Ochs, Elinor. 1991. Indexing gender. In Alessandro Duranti and Charles Goodwin (eds.)

Rethinking Context. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Ohala, John. 1994. The biological bases of sound symbolism. In Leanne Hinton, Johanna
Nichols and John J. Ohala (eds.) Sound Symbolism. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University
Press. 222–236.

Peirce, Charles Sanders. 1931–1935. Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce (Volumes 1–6).
Charles Hartshorne and Paul Weiss (eds.). Volumes 7–8 (1958), Arthur W. Burks (ed.).
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

Podesva, Robert J. 2011. The California vowel shift and gay identity. American Speech 86: 32–

51.

Podesva, Robert J., Annette D’Onofrio, Janneke Van Hofwegen and Seung Kyung Kim. 2015.
Country ideology and the California Vowel Shift. Language Variation and Change 27: 157–
186.

Preston, Dennis. 1996. Where the worst English is spoken. In Edgar Schneider (ed.) Focus on

the USA. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Benjamins. 297–360.

Rosenfelder, Ingrid, Joe Fruehwald, Keelan Evanini and Jiahong Yuan. 2011. FAVE (Forced

Alignment and Vowel Extraction) program suite. Available at http://fave.ling.upenn.edu

Silverstein, Michael. 1994. Relative motivation in denotational and indexical sound
symbolism of Wasco-Wishram Chinookan. In Leanne Hinton, Johanna Nichols and John
J. Ohala (eds.) Sound Symbolism. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press. 40–60.

Silverstein, Michael. 2003. Indexical order and the dialectics of sociolinguistic life. Language

and Communication 23: 193–229.

Tamminga, Meredith. 2016. Individual differences in matched guise performance. Paper
presented at Sociolinguistic Variation and Language Processing (SVALP) conference, March
31–April 2, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia.

Trager, George L. 1930. The pronunciation of

‘short A’ in American Standard English.

American Speech 5: 396–400.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

496

ECKERT AND LABOV

Trudgill, Peter and Tina Foxcroft. 1978. On the sociolinguistics of vocalic mergers: Transfer
and approximation in East Anglia. In Peter Trudgill (ed.) Sociolinguistic Patterns in British
English. London: Edwin Arnold. 69–79.

Weiner, Judith and William Labov. 1983. Constraints on the agentless passive. Journal of

Linguistics 19: 29–58.

Wolfram, Walt and Natalie Schilling-Estes. 1995. Moribund dialects and the endangerment

canon: The case of the Okracoke Brogue. Language 71: 696–721.

Yang, Charles. No date. Population structure and language change. Unpublished manuscript.

Address correspondence to:

Penelope Eckert
Department of Linguistics
Stanford University
Stanford CA 94305-2150
U.S.A.

eckert@stanford.edu

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd


