J. Child Lang.  (), –. © Cambridge University Press 
doi:./S

How do language-speciﬁc characteristics aﬀect the

acquisition of diﬀerent relative clause types? Evidence

from Finnish*

MINNA KIRJAVAINEN

University of Manchester, UK, and
Osaka Gakuin University, Japan

EVAN KIDD

Australian National University, Australia

ARC Centre of Excellence for the Dynamics of Language

A N D

ELENA LIEVEN

University of Manchester, UK

(Received  October  – Revised  May  – Accepted  November  –

First published online  January )

A B S T R A C T

We report three studies (one corpus, two experimental) that investigated
the acquisition of relative clauses (RCs) in Finnish-speaking children.
Study  found that Finnish children’s naturalistic exposure to RCs
predominantly consists of non-subject relatives (i.e. oblique, object)
which typically have inanimate head nouns. Study  tested children’s
comprehension of subject, object, and two types of oblique relatives.
No diﬀerence was found in the children’s performance on diﬀerent
structures, including a lack of previously widely reported asymmetry
children’s
between
comprehension was modulated by animacy of the head referent. Study

relatives. However,

object

subject

and

[*] We would like to thank the nursery staﬀ and children in Kotka, Finland, for their
participation in the study, and the corpus child and her family for the data collection
they conducted. We would also like to thank the three anonymous reviewers for their
helpful comments. The study was funded by a post-doctoral research grant from the
Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology to the ﬁrst author. Address for
correspondence: Minna Kirjavainen, Language Education Institute, Foreign Languages
Department, Osaka Gakuin University, -- Kishibe-minami, Suita-Shi, Osaka -
, Japan. e-mail: leimk@ogu.ac.jp.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

R E L A T I V E C L A U S E A C Q U I S I T I O N I N F I N N I S H

 tested children’s production of the same RC structures using sentence
repetition. Again we found no subject–object asymmetry. The pattern of
results suggested that distributional frequency patterns and the relative
complexity of the relativizer contribute to the diﬃculty associated with
particular RC structures.

I N T R O D U C T I O N
Cross-linguistic research is essential to theoretical development in language
acquisition research, allowing us to determine universal as opposed to
language-speciﬁc constraints on the acquisition process. One structure that
has
acquisition
literature is the relative clause (henceforth RC) (see Kidd, ). In this
paper we present three studies that investigated the acquisition of RCs in
children acquiring Finnish, a language for which there is little data on RC
acquisition.

attention in the grammatical

received considerable

Acquisition of relative clauses
Most research on the acquisition of RCs has focused on age of acquisition
and the level of diﬃculty children experience in naturalistic and
experimental contexts with subject RCs such as (), object RCs such as
(), and oblique RCs such as ().

() The dog that __ chased the cat.
() The cat that the dog chased ___.
() The dog to whom the boy gave the bone ___.

The general consensus amongst many scholars is that subject RCs are
essentially easier to acquire than non-subject RCs, based on the following:

(a) subject RCs have been reported to emerge at an earlier developmental
stage in naturalistic child language than non-subject RCs (e.g. Brandt,
Diessel & Tomasello, ; Diessel, ; Diessel & Tomasello, );
(b) the majority of experimental evidence suggests that children perform
best on subject RCs in comparison to other RC types (e.g. Adani,
; de Villiers, Tager Flusberg, Hakuta & Cohen, ; Diessel &
Tomasello, ; Friedmann, Belletti & Rizzi, ; Goodluck, ;
Guasti, Stavrakaki & Arosio, ; Kas & Lukács, ), although
more recently some scholars have noted that this eﬀect appears to be
modulated by distributional and typological
features of individual
languages (Arnon, ; Brandt, Kidd, Lieven & Tomasello, ;
Diessel, ; Kidd, Brandt, Lieven & Tomasello ).



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

K I R J AVA I N E N E T A L.

Even though there is general agreement on subject RC advantage over
other RC types, there are several competing theoretical explanations for
the eﬀect, ranging from appeals to the primacy of subjects in syntactic
derivation (either typologically: Keenan & Comrie, ; or formally:
Rizzi, ), appeals
to processing routines and memory capacity
(O’Grady, ), and appeals to distributional frequency (Diessel, ;
Kidd et al., ). These approaches often make very similar predictions
to distinguish. In the current paper we take a
and can be diﬃcult
usage-based perspective,
representations of
structure are constructed on the basis of experience. From this perspective
we consider why, for Finnish, we do not observe a clear subject advantage
in RC acquisition.

assuming that

linguistic

Subject–non-subject RC asymmetry. The evidence for the subject–object
asymmetry largely comes from a fairly narrow range of languages where
RCs display distinct structural similarities (e.g. English, German, and
Hebrew). In terms of RCs, these all are ‘head-ﬁrst’ languages (i.e. the RC
comes after the (head)noun that it modiﬁes). Data from languages whose
RCs do not display ‘head-ﬁrst’ syntactic structure are less clear. For
instance, acquisition studies with children acquiring Basque (Carreiras,
Duñabeitia, Vergara, de la Cruz-Pavía & Laka, ; Gutierrez-Mangado,
), Chinese (Chan, Matthews & Yip, ; Chen & Shirai, ),
Japanese (Ozeki & Shirai, ; Suzuki, ), and Quechua (Courtney,
) either show no diﬀerence between subject and object RCs (the most
common comparison),
an object RC advantage, or mixed results
depending on the methodology used.

Even though data from Basque, Chinese, Japanese, and Quechua suggest
that there may be no universal subject RC dominance, comparing data from
these languages directly with languages like English, German, and Hebrew
can be problematic for two reasons. First, Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and
Basque are ‘head-ﬁnal’ languages (i.e. the RC precedes the noun that it
modiﬁes). This means that RCs in these languages are structurally
distinctly diﬀerent from languages like English, which might explain the
cross-linguistic diﬀerences
in developmental and processing patterns
observed between these two language groups. Second, the comparison
might not be warranted because, at least for some head-ﬁnal languages
(e.g. East Asian languages), typologists have questioned whether true RCs
actually exist (Comrie, ).

Finnish RCs, like English, German, and Hebrew RCs, are head-ﬁrst
structures. Due to the highly inﬂected nature of Finnish, its ﬂexible word
order, and the distributional
the acquisition of
Finnish RCs is relevant to the question as to whether all head-ﬁrst
languages show subject dominance.

frequencies of RCs,



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

R E L A T I V E C L A U S E A C Q U I S I T I O N I N F I N N I S H

Linguistic properties of relative clauses in Finnish, and their acquisition
Finnish is a head-ﬁrst, nominative–accusative language. Prototypically, a RC
directly follows its head noun. Finnish has three relative pronouns: JOKA
and KUKA, which often refer to animate entities, and MIKÄ, which often,
but not necessarily, refers to inanimate entities (Hakulinen, Vilkuna,
Korhonen, Koivisto, Heinonen & Alho, ). This is similar to English
speakers having the option of using that, who, or which. Unlike English,
but similarly to German, Finnish relative pronouns are inﬂected for case
and number. Relative pronouns are obligatory, and their case usually
indicates what role the relativized element plays within the RCs. The
nominative predominantly expresses the grammatical case of subject; the
accusative, partitive, and, in some instances the genitive and nominative,
express the object; genitive expresses the possessive; and the rest of the
ﬁfteen cases are locative or marginal (Hakulinen et al., ; Laaksonen
& Lieko, ). Indirect objects are expressed in the same way as oblique
cases (i.e. by using a locative inﬂection on the noun). Examples ()–()
exemplify subject, object, and oblique RCs.
() Kissa

[SUBJ]

koiraa

mikä

löi

Cat-NOM which-NOM hit-past-sg dog-PART

[SUBJ]

[OBJ]

‘The cat which hit a dog’

() Koira

mitä

kissa

löi

[OBJ]

Dog-NOM which-PART cat-NOM hit-past-sg

[OBJ]

[SUBJ]

‘The dog which the cat hit’

() Sohva

miltä

koira

putosi

[OBL]

Sofa-NOM which-ABL dog-NOM fall-past-sg

[SUBJ]
‘The sofa from/oﬀ which a dog fell’

[LOC]

Acquisition of relative clauses in Finnish. A small number of previous
studies have touched upon Finnish RC acquisition (e.g. Kauppinen, ;
Lieko, ; Toivanen, ). However, to our knowledge there is only one
past study focusing exclusively on early RC acquisition in Finnish.
Kirjavainen and Lieven () reported on a naturalistic corpus analysis of
one Finnish child, Piia, and her caregivers’ data between the child’s ages of
approx. ; and ;. Piia’s earliest RCs (N = ) were subject RCs, which
preceded any other RC structure found in the child’s data by several months.
This is consistent with naturalistic data from other nominative–accusative

 Words in capital letters refer to all forms of that word.
 ‘Marginal’ refers to often archaic and/or unproductive cases that are infrequent in adult

language and absent from children’s language.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

K I R J AVA I N E N E T A L.

languages (Brandt et al., ; Diessel & Tomasello, ). Piia’s use
of RCs clauses changed when she approached her third birthday. At this point
in development, oblique RCs became her most frequent RC structure (%),
with subject and object RCs produced less frequently (each used in around %
of all RC types). Compared to other languages this is a fairly striking result (e.
g. Keenan & Comrie, ). For instance, English- and German-speaking
children produce oblique RCs proportionally much less frequently (English:
%; Diessel and Tomasello, ; German: %; Brandt et al., ).

At least two factors can explain the discrepancy between Finnish and
English/German children’s use of oblique RCs. First, oblique RCs are the
conventional way in Finnish to express many meanings for which English-
and German-speakers are more likely to use subject or object RCs; see
examples () and ().

() Minä

rikkoin
break-ps-past
sinisiä raitoja

I-NOM
oli
be-ps-past blue stripe-plural-PART

sen kupin
the cup-ACC which-INE

missä

Corresponding English oblique RC: ‘I broke the cup on which there was

blue stripes’

Corresponding English subject RC: ‘I broke the cup that had blue stripes

(on it).’

() Se tyyppi

kelle

me

mennää

That person-NOM who-ALL we-NOM go-pl-pres

tänää
today

Corresponding English oblique RC: ‘The person to whom we will go today.’
Corresponding English object RC: ‘The person who we will go and see

today.’

Consequently, oblique RCs are more frequent in Finnish children’s input
(% of RC structures; Kirjavainen & Lieven, ) than in English (%;
Diessel, ) or German (%; Brandt et al., ). This appears to
result in quicker acquisition of these structures.

These distributional features of RCs in naturalistic child and caregiver
Finnish would suggest that, in Finnish, oblique RCs are not more diﬃcult
than subject (or object) RCs. Thus, testing Finnish children’s behaviour
in experimental contexts with subject, object, and oblique RCs could shed
light on the question as to whether oblique RCs are universally more
diﬃcult than subject and object RCs (e.g. Keenan & Comrie, ), or
whether the previously observed asymmetry/hierarchy has been created by
distributional properties of those structures in previously studied languages.
Second, it has been suggested that oblique RCs are more diﬃcult than
subject and object RCs because in languages such as English and German



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

R E L A T I V E C L A U S E A C Q U I S I T I O N I N F I N N I S H

oblique RCs usually consist of a relative pronoun and a preposition, which
either occur adjacent to each other (e.g. German: Das ist der Mann, mit
dem ich getanzt habe, and English: That was the man with whom I danced)
or are separated by at least two words (English: That was the man who I
danced with)
(Diessel & Tomasello, ). Because in Finnish both
grammatical and locative case information can be expressed by a single
case-marked relative pronoun, in terms of lexical complexity, subject, object,
and single-word oblique relativizers can be seen as being equally easy/
diﬃcult. However, two types of oblique relatives occur in Finnish: one-word
oblique (henceforth oblique) RCs (see example ()) and two-word oblique
(henceforth oblique) RCs (see example ()). This feature of Finnish allows
us to test whether oblique RCs are inherently more diﬃcult than subject and
object RCs, or whether the reported diﬃculty of oblique RCs is created by
the complexity of the oblique relativizer.

() Toi

on se sänky
is

missä

kissa

nukkui

that bed-NOM which-INE cat-NOM slept

That
illalla
evening-ADE
‘That’s the bed in which/where a cat slept in the evening’

minkä sisään

hiiri

() Toi

on se sukka
is

that sock-NOM which-GEN in-ILL mouse-NOM

That
kiipesi
climbed
‘That’s the sock in which a mouse climbed’

The current research
In comparison to many other head-ﬁrst languages, Finnish children hear and
use an overwhelmingly high number of non-subject RCs. This usage
pattern, as assumed by usage-based constructivist theoretical stances (e.g.
Tomasello, ), should have a strong inﬂuence on children’s acquisition,
such that Finnish-speaking children should be less likely to show a
subject-advantage in comparison to children acquiring languages such as
English, German, and Hebrew.

We tested these predictions across three studies. Study  reanalysed
Kirjavainen and Lieven’s () naturalistic data, focusing on one major
variable that has been shown to aﬀect the distribution of subject and
object RCs: the animacy of the head noun. Animate nouns make good

 Note that English also has a one-word relativizer that can be used in (inanimate) oblique
RCs, where (e.g. That’s the café where I proposed to my ex-wife) and a temporal relativizer
when (e.g. That was the holiday when I left my wife). However, given that the research of
RCs in English has heavily focused on subject and object RCs, we have relatively little
information about the acquisition patterns of oblique RCs in English.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

K I R J AVA I N E N E T A L.

agents, whereas inanimate nouns are typically patients (Fox & Thompson,
). Accordingly, many studies have shown that subject RCs are more
likely to have animate heads than non-subject RCs, which typically have
inanimate heads (e.g. Diessel, ; Kidd et al., ). We thus asked
whether this is also the case in Finnish. In Studies  and  we then
investigated whether these distributional diﬀerences across diﬀerent RC
types signiﬁcantly inﬂuence Finnish-speaking children’s comprehension
and production of RCs.

STUDY : CORPUS ANALYSIS

Corpus
Piia is a monolingual ﬁrst-born child in an upper-working-/middle-class
family, in Kotka, southeast Finland. The language used in her corpus is
colloquial speech typical to the geographical area. Piia was audio-recorded
by her parents for approximately three hours per week between the ages of
;· and ;· (approx.  recordings, approx.  hours of data in
total; Kirjavainen-Max Planck corpus). The interaction during the
recordings was completely spontaneous, most commonly involving an
interaction between the child and one or both of her parents (or other
relatives) during meal times or play sessions. After the age of ; her
younger sister was often present during the recordings, although she rarely
took part in the interaction.

The data was transcribed using the CHAT software (MacWhinney, ).
In the current study we include data recorded between ;· and ;·
(N =  recordings, approx. , word tokens, approx. , child
utterances, approx. , adult utterances).

searched on the ﬂo-transcription line of Piia’s

Searches
Morphological coding has yet to be carried out on the Piia-corpus. We
therefore
and her
interlocutors’ speech for each possible forms of diﬀerent relative pronouns.
The ﬂo-line semantically mirrors the main transcription line, but represents
colloquial (i.e. often shortened yet morphologically marked) word forms in
standard language (see example ()). Our search was therefore likely to
extract standard as well as colloquial relativizer forms from the data, and
because the relative pronoun is an obligatory part of Finnish RC
constructions, our search is likely to have extracted all RCs in the data.
() Main-line: Miä juoksin siihe taloo mis oli punanen katto

Flo-line: Minä juoksin siihen taloon missä oli punainen katto.

‘I ran to the house which had a red roof’



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

R E L A T I V E C L A U S E A C Q U I S I T I O N I N F I N N I S H

The KWAL program of the CLAN software (MacWhinney ) was
used to extract sentences with relative pronouns (MIKÄ, JOKA, KUKA)
in fourteen cases (nominative, accusative, partitive, genitive, translative,
inessive, elative,
illative, adessive, ablative, allative, sublative, temporal,
and causative) in the singular and plural. Cases that are unlikely to occur in
relative clauses (e.g. abessive) and/or that are unlikely to be found in
colloquial spoken (child) language (e.g. essive) were excluded from the search.
Because some relative pronoun forms are identical to interrogative pronouns
(e.g. mikä), the output was manually searched for target structures. Both
restrictive and non-restrictive RCs were included in our analysis, and no
distinction was made between the two. The child’s repetitions and imitations
of adults’ language as well as songs and rhymes were excluded.

Coding
The search output was coded for the following:

i. the syntactic function of the NP within the RC (SUBJ, OBJ, OBL). For
the purpose of this analysis, we did not distinguish between oblique and
oblique RCs because (a) Piia did not produce any oblique RCs in the
data sampled and (b) only a handful of oblique RCs (% of oblique
RCs) were found in the adults’ data.

ii. animacy of the head noun (animate, inanimate).

This was done separately for the child and her interlocutors. In Finnish, case
marking on the relative pronoun often indicates the role that the relativized
element plays within the RC. Because of some overlap, for instance, between
subject and object pronouns, (a) the pronoun form, (b) the argument
structure, and (c) semantics of the sentence were used to determine the
syntactic role of the relativized NP. Toys that can be perceived as animate
were coded as such. If it was impossible to determine the syntactic
function or
the sentence was coded as
ambiguous. The coding is illustrated in Table .

the animacy of

the head,

To determine reliability for the coding of the relativized element (subject,
object, oblique, ambiguous), % (N = ) of the input and % (N = ) of
the child’s targets were recoded by a second coder. The agreement was high:
Child ·% (к = ·), Input %. Disagreement in the coding for the
child’s targets was adjudicated by the ﬁrst author.

R E S U L T S
We found  RC structures (SUBJ: %, OBJ: %, OBL: %) in Piia’s
speech and  (SUBJ: %, OBJ: %, OBL: %) in her input. The
small number of RCs found in Piia’s data are likely due to the relatively
early developmental period sampled (;–;). Piia’s data is nevertheless



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

K I R J AVA I N E N E T A L.

TA B L E . Examples of coding

Animate

Inanimate

Animacy ambiguous

SUBJ Muistat siä sen pikku

Kato ku se oli
semmonen ohjelma
joka tuli telkkarist
(MOT ;·)
See, because it was that
kind of a program that
was on TV.
Entä ne vanhat tutit
mitä olen käyttänyt?
(CHI ;·)
What about the old
dummies that I have
used?
Sulla oli se punainen
lapio millä siä teit
lumitöitä.
(MOT ;·) You had
that red shovel with
which you ploughed
snow.

Tää mikä mulla
on (CHI ;·)
This that is at me.

Mikä tää oli
minkä siä piirsit?
(MOT :·)
What was this that
you drew?

Se keltanen missä
on ne punaiset.
(MOT ;·) The
yellow one in/on
which is the red
ones.

prinsessan mikä eilen tuli
siin Pikkukakkoses? (MOT
;·)
Can you remember that little
princess that was on TV
yesterday?
Otat siä sen hauvan minkä siä
heitit sinne?
(FAT ;·) Can you fetch that
doggie that you threw there?

Se kelle mennää tänään.
(CHI ;·)
The person to whom we’ll go
today

OBJ

OBL

Fig. . RC types and the animacy of head NPs in input.

included here to illustrate that the animacy of the head NP in diﬀerent RC
structures in her language corresponds to the pattern displayed by the
Finnish adults. In four (<%) of the input sentences the syntactic function
of the relativized element was ambiguous and so they were excluded from
the analysis. Figures  (input) and  (output) illustrate the proportions of
animate and inanimate head referents found for each RC type.

The input and child data looked very similar. First, there were more
non-subject RCs than subject RCs overall, but this was moderated by the



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

R E L A T I V E C L A U S E A C Q U I S I T I O N I N F I N N I S H

Fig. . RC types and the animacy of head NPs in child’s speech.

structure

signiﬁcantly diﬀered across

animacy of the head noun. In Piia’s input the distribution of animate and
inanimate head nouns
types
(Chi-square result: χ = ·, df = , p < ·, ϕ = ·). This signiﬁcant
diﬀerence was driven by the more even distribution of animate and
inanimate heads in subject RCs: although when analyzed separately all
structures contained signiﬁcantly more inanimate than animate heads
(binomial tests: subject RCs: p = ·, object RCs: p < ·; oblique RCs:
p < ·), the subject RC result is not signiﬁcant following Bonferroni
(α = ·/ = ·). Indeed, removing subject RCs from the
adjustment
overall Chi-square
and
little variance explained (χ = ·, df = , p = ·, ϕ = ·), suggesting that
the subject RCs were driving the initial signiﬁcant result. Piia did not
produce enough tokens of each structure type to have a good degree of
conﬁdence in any statistical analyses, and thus we merely interpret her
data qualitatively.

in a non-signiﬁcant

analysis

results

result

D I S C U S S I O N
The corpus analysis shows similar results to previous RC studies in which an
eﬀect of animacy and RC type has been found (e.g. Diessel, ; Fox and
Thompson, ; Kidd et al., , Mak, Vonk & Schriefers, , ).
Our Finnish-speaking child and adults rarely produce object or oblique
relatives with animate heads. Consistent with Diessel
(), subject
relatives, although commonly produced with inanimate head referents,
were more likely to have animate heads than the other two RC types. The
close correspondence between Piia’s input and her own speech suggests
that children’s language experience heavily shapes language use.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

K I R J AVA I N E N E T A L.

STUDY : RELATIVE CLAUSE COMPREHENSION

The ﬁndings from Study  suggest that, (i) as in more well-studied
languages, RC formation is signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the animacy of the
head referent, and (ii) Finnish-speaking children hear and use considerably
more non-subject than subject RCs, a result that seems almost entirely due
to the greater use of oblique RCs. In Study  we investigated whether
these usage facts about Finnish aﬀect children’s comprehension of subject,
object, and oblique/oblique RCs. In addition, by including oblique
and oblique RC test items, we were able to test some potential reasons
for previously reported diﬃculty associated with oblique RCs.

Based on the assumption that animate entities make better subjects and that
inanimate entities function better as objects, the usage-based prediction is that
(a) children should perform better with subject than object RCs when the test
sentences contain an animate head and (b) inanimate head nouns should
improve performance on non-subject RCs. Furthermore, the usage-based
stance assumes that distributional properties of linguistic items play an
important role in aﬀecting children’s language acquisition and processing.
Thus, the usage-based stance predicts that the large preponderance of
non-subject RCs in Finnish children’s input should aﬀect Finnish children’s
representation of RCs. Speciﬁcally, the preponderance of non-subject RCs
reduces the strong expectation that a relativized NP takes a subject role, such
that the diﬀerence between subject and non-subject RCs observed in many
other languages should be attenuated or even non-signiﬁcant in Finnish. That
is, no overall subject advantage is predicted for Finnish.

Three- to four-year-old children were tested on a referent selection task
that measured their comprehension of subject, object, oblique, and
oblique RCs that contained either animate or inanimate head nouns.

M E T H O D
Participants
Forty children aged ;–; were recruited from nurseries in Kotka,
southeast Finland and participated in our two studies (Study  and Study
). Thirty-eight of these children took part in Study . However, the
fourteen oldest children (;–;) were excluded from the analysis due to
them being at ceiling. Thus, data from twenty-four children ( female)
aged ;–; (mean ;, SD = ·) were included in the current study.
Apart from one child, who was tested in the home environment, the
children were tested in a quiet area of their nursery. All participants were
typically developing monolingual Finnish-speakers.

Materials
Thirty-two test items were created. Each of these items consisted of
background sentences, one distractor sentence, and one test sentence. The



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

R E L A T I V E C L A U S E A C Q U I S I T I O N I N F I N N I S H

test sentences were manipulated for the RC type (subject, object, oblique,
oblique) and animacy of the head NP (animate, inanimate). The test
sentences were nine or, in the case of the two-word relativizer sentences
(oblique), ten words long. Each background and test sentence had two
NPs. Apart from a handful of test verbs (pomppia ‘bounce’, pomputtaa
‘make something bounce’, piiloutua ‘hide’,
luikerrella ‘slither’, ryömiä
‘crawl’), all head NPs and verbs were found in the Finnish CDI (–
months)
the verbs used should be
familiar to our children aged ;–;. To speciﬁcally address the subject–
object asymmetry found in previous studies, half of our materials had
animate heads, and were reversible (i.e. both nouns within the RC could
have plausibly been the subject or object of the sentence). In addition,
speciﬁcally to test animacy eﬀects (Fox & Thompson, ), half of our
test sentences had inanimate heads.

(Lyytinen, ),

indicating that

for the frequency of

Finnish has an intricate case-marking system and consequently it was
impossible to choose only one relativizer for our test sentences. We
therefore searched for the frequencies of diﬀerent relativizers in the child’s
output in the Kirjavainen-Max Planck corpus. Because the frequency of
diﬀerent relativizers in RC and non-RC constructions (e.g. interrogatives)
varies, we were unable to tightly control
the
relativizers used between diﬀerent types of target sentences. However,
several
instances of our subject, object, and oblique relativizers were
found in the Kirjavainen-Max Planck corpus, which we took to indicate
that our experimental children were familiar with each of these relativizers.
The relative pronouns in the subject RCs were in the nominative case, and
in the object RCs in the partitive case. The relativizers used in the
animate oblique RCs were kenelle(ALL) ‘for whom’ (oblique) and kenen
(GEN) kanssa ‘with whom’ (oblique) and inanimate oblique RCs missä
(INE) ‘in(side) which’ (oblique) and minkä(GEN) sisään(ILL) ‘in(to)
which’ (oblique). Table A in the ‘Appendix’ lists the relativizers used
and their distributional frequencies.

on Study

Procedure
The children were tested in two sessions. In each session, they completed
half of Study  materials (comprehension) and half of Study  materials
(repetition). Half of the children were tested on Study  materials ﬁrst,
half
between sessions was
counterbalanced so that for half of the children one set of items occurred
in the ﬁrst session, half in the second. For most of the children the two
sessions were administered during one day so that the ﬁrst session took
place in the morning and the second in the afternoon. For six children the
sessions took place on two consecutive days.

 materials. The

order



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

K I R J AVA I N E N E T A L.

The task in Study  was similar to the one used by Brandt et al. ().
Presented as the ‘slide-game’, children were shown a small slide, and the
experimenter explained that she had a lot of toys that wanted to go down
the slide, but that the toys must go down one at a time. The experimenter
said that she would tell the child whose turn it was to have a go, after
which the child could slide the toy down.

For every target sentence, the child was shown three toys (e.g. two tigers
and an elephant). The experimenter labelled the toys (e.g. “Look, I have two
tigers and an elephant here”). The pair of animals (e.g. tigers) were always
distinguishable by a prominent attribute (e.g. colour, size). Each of the
toys then performed a diﬀerent action (e.g. one tiger chased an elephant,
the other tiger stroked the elephant) and was placed in front of the child.
The location of the two tokens of head referent with reference to the child
(i.e. left or right) was counterbalanced. Half of the correct referents for
each target sentence type were placed on the right, and half on the left of
the child. After the head NP toys (e.g. tigers) had been placed in front of
the child, a distractor scene was acted out. For this,
the additional
(non-target) NP (e.g. elephant) performed an intransitive action and the
experimenter explained what the toy was doing (e.g. “Look, now the
elephant stomps in the jungle!”). The distractor NP was then placed
between the target toys in front of the child, i.e. there were three toys (or
combinations of the three toys) to choose from when the children were
making their
referential choices. The child was asked to give the
experimenter one of the items by sliding it down the slide (e.g. “Give me
the tiger that chased the elephant”). Table B in the supplementary on-line
content lists the background and target sentences (see http://dx.doi.org/.
/S.

Coding
The experimenter coded for the children’s choices on-line as either (a)
Correct (e.g. the correct tiger), (b) Head token errors (e.g. the incorrect
tiger), (c) NP other errors (e.g. the elephant), (d) Other (i.e. the correct
tiger with the elephant, the incorrect tiger with the elephant, both tigers
selected with or without the elephant selected, or no choice was made).

R E S U L T S
Figure  reports the mean proportion correct and standard errors for each
condition. Figure  shows that the children performed above chance (%)
in each condition. They scored higher on sentences containing inanimate
heads
the oblique structure.
Additionally, they appeared to perform marginally better overall on the
subject and object RCs than on the oblique RCs.

structural

except

for

all

types

for



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

R E L A T I V E C L A U S E A C Q U I S I T I O N I N F I N N I S H

Fig. . Proportion correct for each test structure in Study . Error bars denote standard

error.

The data were analyzed using Generalized Linear Mixed Models (Baayen,
Davidson & Bates, ; Jaeger, ), which were calculated using the lme
package for Linear Mixed Eﬀects (Bates & Maechler, ) in R (version
.·; R Core Development Team, ). Factor labels were centred at 
with a range of . An initial model that included (zero-centred) age and
gender as independent variables showed that these two variables did not
signiﬁcantly inﬂuence performance. These variables were not included in
subsequent analyses. We ﬁtted a model to the data that included the
independent variables of structure ( levels: (i) subject RC, (ii) object RC,
(iii) oblique RC, and (iv) oblique RC) and animacy ( levels: animate,
inanimate), as well as participants and items as random eﬀects. Random
slope parameters for main eﬀects and interactions were included in the
models using forward selection: each random slope was added sequentially
to the model, ﬁrst for participants and then items, and the ANOVA
function was used to determine whether the additional random slope
signiﬁcantly improved the model (Baayen, ). None of the random
slopes improved the ﬁt of the model and were therefore not included.
Additionally, the structure × animacy interaction did not improve the ﬁt of
the model (χ = ·, df = , p = ·) and was therefore removed. The ﬁnal
model results are shown in Table .

Table  shows that animacy signiﬁcantly aﬀected children’s performance:
across all sentence types children performed better on sentences that
contained inanimate head nouns. Subject RCs were comprehended
marginally better than the oblique RCs, but
the overall diﬀerences
between performance on the subject RCs and the object and oblique RCs
were not signiﬁcant. Subsequent analyses revealed that the children’s
performance on the object RCs was signiﬁcantly better overall than on the
oblique RCs (β = –·, z = –·, p = ·) but not the oblique RCs
(β = –·, z = –·, p = ·). There was no diﬀerence in performance on
the oblique and oblique RCs (β = ·, z = ·, p = ·).



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

K I R J AVA I N E N E T A L.

TA B L E . Final model for referential choice data in Study 

Intercept
Structure(Obj)
Structure(OBL)
Structure(OBL)
Animacy

β

·
·
−·
−·
·

Std. error

·
·
·
·
·

Wald-Z

·
·
−·
−·
·

p-value

<·***
·
·
·
·*

NOTES: *** p < ·; * p < ·; reference levels (intercept terms) for ﬁxed-eﬀects predictors:
Structure: Subject RC, Animacy: Animate. (log likelihood = –·).

TA B L E . The number of diﬀerent types of errors produced by the children

overall in the referential choice test

RC type

Head token errors

NP other errors

Other

Total

subject-ani
subject-inani
object-ani
object-inani
oblique-ani
oblique-inani
oblique-ani
oblique-inani
Total









































Error analysis
When children erred they most often chose the incorrect token of the head
referent (% of responses), although the frequency of this response did
not diﬀer across conditions. The children also sometimes chose the
distractor (%) or made a selection that was coded as ‘Other’ (%). Table 
lists the frequencies of these error types by condition.

D I S C U S S I O N
The results from Study  suggest that, overall, three- to four-year-old
Finnish-speaking children comprehend diﬀerent types of RC structures
very well. Based on our corpus analysis (Study ), and due to typical
animacy features of subject and object entities (Fox & Thompson, ),
we predicted that Finnish children would not show an overall subject–
object asymmetry, but that they would show animacy eﬀects.

Consistent with our prediction, we did not ﬁnd evidence of subject–object
asymmetry, not even in the in the condition where the head and embedded
NP were both animate (e.g. Friedmann et al., ; Kidd et al., ). Note



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

R E L A T I V E C L A U S E A C Q U I S I T I O N I N F I N N I S H

also that, due to the nature of Finnish, each noun in the background
sentences for each target sentence type (subject, object, oblique) was
inﬂected (e.g. NOM, PART, INE, ALL). The main clause of each test
sentence had the same structure Anna mulle se X ‘Give me the X-ACC/
NOM’. This means that the only sentence type in which the target head
noun had the same case marking in the background and the target
sentences were subject RCs (see examples ()–()). Furthermore, the
only sentence type in which both nouns within the RC were inﬂected
exactly as they were in the background sentences were animate subject
RCs. If we assume that children are yet
to acquire an adultlike
case-marking system at the age of ;–; (e.g. Krajewski, Lieven &
Theakston, ; Krajewski, Theakson, Lieven & Tomasello, ), the
mismatch in noun forms between background and target sentences may
have made it more diﬃcult for the children to process object and oblique
targets, as not only did the children have to determine the meaning of the
background and target sentences, they also had to pay attention to the
diﬀering forms of the key lexical item in these. Regardless of this potential
extra layer of diﬃculty in object and oblique RCs, no subject–object
asymmetry was found.
() Tää tiikeri

norsua
elephant-PART

jahtaa
This tiger-NOM chases
‘This tiger chases the elephant’
Tää tiikeri
paijaa
This tiger-NOM strokes
‘This tiger strokes the elephant’
Anna mulle
Give me
‘Give me the tiger who chased the elephant’

norsua
elephant-PART

kuka

() Kirahvi

se tiikeri
that tiger-ACC who-NOM chased elephant-PART

jahtas norsua

tätä hiirtä
this mouse-PART

puree
Giraﬀe-NOM bites
‘The giraﬀe bites this mouse’
Kirahvi
Giraﬀe-NOM washes
‘The giraﬀe washes this mouse’
Anna mulle se hiiri
Give me
‘Give me the mouse that the giraﬀe bit’

pesee

tätä hiirtä
this mouse-PART

puri
that mouse-ACC that-PART giraﬀe-NOM bit

kirahvi

mitä

 In these types of constructions, the accusative form is identical to the nominative form.
 With reference to noun cases, our animate and inanimate materials were identical. Hence,

due to lack of space, we only give examples of animate test sentences here.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

K I R J AVA I N E N E T A L.

() Lapsi

soittaa

tälle palomiehelle
this ﬁreman-ALL

irvistää

Child-NOM rings
‘The child rings this ﬁreman’
Lapsi
Child-NOM grins
‘The child grins at this ﬁreman’
Anna mulle se palomies
Give me
‘Give me the ﬁreman at whom the child grinned’

tälle palomiehelle
this ﬁreman-ALL

that ﬁreman-ACC who-ALL child-NOM grinned

kelle

lapsi

irvisti

The only structure type that created a marginally increased level of
diﬃcultly were oblique targets, which were driven by the children’s
relatively high error rate when choosing referents for animate oblique
targets (e.g. “Give me the cockerel for/to whom the girl read”). The
children’s performance in this condition may have been aﬀected by the
relative pronoun kenelle, whose frequency in adult–child conversation is
relatively low in comparison to the relative pronouns in our other conditions.
The main eﬀect of animacy showed that the children performed best when
sentences contained an inanimate head, which did not interact with structure
type. This result reﬂects our frequency analysis in Study , but might be
considered surprising with reference to the assumption that animate
entities make good subjects (Fox & Thompson, ). That is, one might
have expected better performance with animate subject than non-subject
RCs.

Performance in the animate subject RC condition (similarly to kenelle
above) may have been aﬀected by our relative pronoun kuka. Even though
this pronoun is relatively frequent in Finnish, its frequency is somewhat
lower than that of our animate object relativizer. Thus, this decrement in
performance may be due to experience-based phenomena.

Inconsistent with assumptions of animacy characteristics of subject and
non-subject entities (Fox & Thompson, ), we did not ﬁnd the
children perform better with inanimate non-subject than subject RCs. The
fact that we controlled for the noun types and used only lexical nouns
across our test sentences (subject, object, oblique, and oblique RCs)
could explain this eﬀect, given that several studies suggest that inanimate
object relatives are easier to comprehend if the embedded subject is a
. . . the dog that I stroked) (e.g. Gordon,
pronoun than a noun (e.g.
Hendrick & Johnson, , ; Kidd et al., ; Warren & Gibson,
). Thus, the fact that our test sentences consisted of embedded noun
subjects (e.g. granddad instead of he) might have hindered the children’s
performance with inanimate non-subject RCs.

Last, we did not ﬁnd oblique relatives to be more diﬃcult than the other
RC structures. Our Finnish comprehension data therefore do not support



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

R E L A T I V E C L A U S E A C Q U I S I T I O N I N F I N N I S H

()

suggestion that

Diessel and Tomasello’s
increased structural
complexity in terms of the relativizer form used results in children ﬁnding
oblique sentences more diﬃcult than the other RC structures (subject,
object, oblique). This ﬁnding is diﬃcult to accommodate within the
usage-based approach, since oblique relatives were largely absent from
our corpus data. Indeed, this ﬁnding is diﬃcult to accommodate within
any current theory of RC acquisition (Keenan & Comrie, ; O’Grady,
, ; Rizzi, ). One potential explanation for the eﬀect might be
methodological. Our method tested comprehension and hence simply
requires children to establish an aboutness relationship with the head
referent in comparison. Even so, this result is interesting, and raises the
question of whether it would be observable in production. Study  tested
this possibility.

STUDY : SENTENCE REPETITION

Study  showed that Finnish-speaking children are inﬂuenced by the
animacy of the head noun in their comprehension of RCs, but that, unlike
children acquiring many other languages, they do not show a subject RC
advantage. This result is important because it can potentially help shed
light on psycholinguistic processes that take place during RC acquisition.
However, null eﬀects are diﬃcult to interpret; thus there is a need to
follow up Study  using a diﬀerent method. Study  did so using sentence
repetition. The method is a particularly sensitive measure of children’s
grammatical knowledge (Lust, Flynn & Foley, ), and has been shown
to both be sensitive to and predict children’s knowledge of diﬀerent RC
structures (Boyle, Lindell & Kidd, ; Diessel & Tomasello, ; Kidd
et al., ). As Study  raised some questions in relation to animacy
eﬀects, in Study  we conducted a detailed error analysis to investigate the
source of errors in diﬀerent RC types.

M E T H O D
Participants
The forty children described in our Study  also took part in the current
study. Of these, three children ( female,  male) were tested but were not
cooperative and testing was discontinued. Thus, thirty-seven (N = , 
female) children aged ;–; (Mean = ;, SD = ·) were included in the
study.

Materials
Thirty-two test sentences and fourteen ﬁllers were created. The test
sentences were manipulated for the RC type (subject, object, oblique,



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

K I R J AVA I N E N E T A L.

oblique) and animacy of the head NP (animate, inanimate). The sentences
were controlled for length (– syllables long). Because we assumed that
the shorter colloquial word forms would be easier for the children than the
longer more formal variants, the sentences were created in colloquial
dialect typical for the area where the children lived (e.g. tossa was used for
tuossa ‘there’, kelle for kenelle ‘for whom’, kenen kaa for kenen kanssa ‘with
whom’). The ﬁllers were short simple sentences such as Ulkona sataa ‘It’s
raining outside’. Table C in the supplementary on-line content lists the
test and ﬁller sentences (see http://dx.doi.org/./S.

Familiarity of items to children
Nouns. We carefully selected the head NPs and nouns within the relative
clauses in the test sentences. All of these were lexical nouns, and all are
listed in the Finnish MacArthur CDI (– months) (Lyytinen, ),
which we took to mean that they should be familiar to Finnish children
aged ;–;. A selection of data ﬁles of the Kirjavainen-Max Planck
Finnish child corpus was searched for the frequency of these nouns
between the ages of ; and ; (approx. , word tokens produced
by the child at the time of the searches). The head nouns were selected so
that they had relatively similar frequencies in the child’s speech. See
Table D in the ‘Appendix’ for the relative frequencies of head nouns used
in our study. Because of the limited number of nouns that children can be
assumed to be familiar with (Lyytinen, ), and that appeared with
similar frequencies in the naturalistic speech of our Finnish corpus child,
and because we needed both head and RC nouns, some nouns were used
in more than one test sentence. Whenever possible, these sentences were
presented to the children in separate test sessions. The fact that we
manipulated for head noun animacy (animate vs.
limited
ourselves to familiar nouns with similar frequencies, and did not want to
repeat the same nouns several times during the test session, also meant
that many of our test sentences were not reversible, or were biased towards
one interpretation.
Relativizers. The same relativizers were used as in Study .
Verbs. Due to the limited number of verbs young children know, and
because only a relatively small number of verbs can be easily represented
pictorially (as required by our method), it was impossible to control for
test sentence verb frequency. However, we set a criterion for our test verbs
whereby each verb type (i) had to be listed in the Finnish MacArthur
CDI (– months) (Lyytinen, ), and (ii) appear at least once in our
Finnish corpus child’s speech. Highly frequent verbs (such as ‘go’) were
excluded. Therefore, our test verbs should be familiar to children aged
between ; and ;, but there should not be huge diﬀerences in the verb

inanimate),



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

R E L A T I V E C L A U S E A C Q U I S I T I O N I N F I N N I S H

frequency overall. Apart from three verbs (halata ‘to hug’, leikkiä ‘to play’,
siivota ‘to clean/tidy up’), all verbs appeared in only one test sentence. These
three verbs were each used in two test sentences, which were presented in
diﬀerent test sessions and occurred in diﬀerent sentence types.

The main clauses were always predicate nominal of copular clauses (e.g.

‘That is X(NOM)’).

Procedure
A PowerPoint slideshow was created in which each test sentence was paired
up with a picture of the head referent. A native Finnish speaker (the ﬁrst
author) prerecorded the test sentences using Audacity software. Four
diﬀerent orders were created of the PowerPoint slideshows and children
were randomly assigned to one order.

The test was presented to the children as a ‘parrot-game’. The children
were told that they would see pictures on the computer screen and that
they would have to pretend that they are parrots and say the same thing as
the computer.

Prior to beginning the experiment, the children completed six practice
trials, which presented six simple sentences. The ﬁrst practice sentence
(e.g. Siinä on nostokurki ‘That is a crane’) was repeated by the experimenter
to demonstrate what was required of the child. The second sentence was
then played back to the child and s/he was asked to repeat it (e.g. Siinä on
palapeli ‘That is a jigsaw puzzle’). To motivate the children in the task,
when the child repeated (or attempted to repeat) the sentence, they were
given a sticker to put on a colourful drawing. If the child did not produce a
verbatim repetition of the warm-up sentence, the experimenter reminded
the child that they were pretending to be a parrot and had to say exactly the
same thing as the computer. If the child did not repeat the sentence,
the experimenter played the sentence back to the child again and asked the
child to repeat it. Once all warm-up sentences had been repeated in this
manner the experimenter proceeded to the actual test items.

If during testing the child did not produce a response after hearing the test
sentence, the sentence was played back once more and the experimenter
encouraged the child to try to repeat the sentence. If the child did not
attempt to repeat the sentence, the experimenter moved to the next item.
If the child did not attempt to repeat ﬁve consecutive sentences, the
testing was discontinued and the child excluded from the study.

The materials were counterbalanced as per the description in our Study .
The test situations were audio-recorded. The experimenter transcribed the
children’s responses on-line and checked the transcriptions against the
recordings oﬀ-line. Data from one session of eight children (·% of data)
were transcribed and coded for reliabilities by a native Finnish speaker
RA. Inter-coder agreement was very good (·%, к = ·).



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

K I R J AVA I N E N E T A L.

Coding
Each repetition attempt was coded for using a similar coding scheme as
Diessel and Tomasello (). The child’s ﬁnal attempt was taken as the
response, i.e. children were given credit for self-correction (e.g. ‘That is
the pig that . . . with whom the sheep ran outside’).

The children were given a score of  if they produced a verbatim repetition
of the test sentence. Minor errors were overlooked (and were coded as ).
These included:
. The child changed the relativizer to a diﬀerent one but with the same
function (e.g. joka-NOM for kuka-NOM). This is comparable to an
English-speaking child changing, e.g. which for that/who or vice versa.

. The use of colloquial or standard language form of a given word (e.g. kelle

vs. kenelle ‘for whom’).

. Change in the position of the adverbial within the RC. Because Finnish
has a ﬂexible word order, changing the place of an adverbial does not
justify penalization.

. Change of the adverbial to a diﬀerent one (e.g. ‘yesterday’ for ‘a moment

ago’).

. Addition of an extra adverbial (e.g. ‘That’s the boy who helped Granddad
in the forest yesterday’ for ‘That’s the boy who helped Granddad in the
forest’).

. Minor changes to the main-clause demonstrative (e.g. ‘That is the boy . . .’

for ‘There is the boy . . .’).

. Exclusion of a deﬁnite marker in the main clause, e.g. Toi on poika . . . for
Toi on SE poika . . . (‘That is boy . . .’ for ‘That is THAT boy . . .’). This
decision was made because deﬁniteness is not very clear or systematic in
Finnish.

. When the child made minor changes to NPs within the RC or the head

referent (e.g. ‘a boy’ for ‘a child’).

A score  was given:
. When there was no attempt at repetition.
. When the child did not produce a RC structure, e.g. the child produced

a simple or coordinate sentence.

. When the child changed the relativizer to one with a diﬀerent function

(e.g. kelle-ALL ‘for whom’ for kuka-NOM ‘who’).

. Distinctly incorrect word order within the RC clause (e.g. Possu minkä
lammas kaa juoksi ‘A pig whom a sheep with ran’ for Possu minkä/kenen
kaa lammas juoksi ‘A pig with whom a sheep ran’).

. When the utterance had a resumptive pronoun.
. Errors other than minor lexical errors (e.g. the use of a diﬀerent verb,

omitting nouns, verbs, or relativizers).



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

R E L A T I V E C L A U S E A C Q U I S I T I O N I N F I N N I S H

TA B L E . Error categories in the sentence repetition task

Response type

Verbatim or near verbatim
repetition
No response/No RC produced
Wrong relativizer with the same
function as the target
Wrong relativizer with a diﬀerent
function as the target
Omission of the relativizer

Resumptive (pro)noun was used

Major lexical errors
Word order errors

A number of errors produced
within a given response

Example

–

–
jota-OBJ for mitä-OBJ

mitä-OBJ for mikä-SUBJ

Tossa on se hassu vauva (kelle) setä nauroi ‘That’s the
funny baby (at whom) a man laughed’
Tossa on se laiva mikä laiva työnsi jäätä ‘That’s the boat
that the boat pushed ice’
Non-target verb used within the RC
Toi on se ankka kenen kukko kaa äsken leikki ‘That’s the
duck whom the cockerel with played a moment ago’
Tossa on se tyttö kuka luki usein kirjaa for Tossa on se
tyttö kenelle mummo luki usein ‘That’s the girl who
often read a book’ for ‘That’s the girl to whom a granny
read often’

In addition to coding the responses as incorrect () or correct (), we also
coded the responses into nine more detailed categories to assess the types of
errors that the children made. It is important to note that some errors that we
coded in the binary error analysis as correct responses were coded as errors in
this more detailed analysis. For instance, repetitions in which the child
produced a non-target relativizer whose case was nevertheless the same as
joka-NOM for kuka-NOM) were coded as
the target relativizer’s (e.g.
correct in our binary analysis but as errors in our detailed error analysis.
Table  illustrates the error categories for our detailed error analysis.

R E S U L T S
Figure  reports the mean proportion correct and standard errors for each
condition. Figure  shows that the children performed best on subject and
object RCs. Animacy had an uneven eﬀect on performance across the test
structures: inanimate heads only resulted in better performance for object
and oblique RCs, whereas the opposite was the case for the subject and
oblique relatives.

The data were analyzed using Generalized Linear Mixed Models (Baayen,
Davidson & Bates, ; Jaeger, ), which were calculated using the lme
package for Linear Mixed Eﬀects (Bates & Maechler, ) in R (version
.·; R Core Development Team, ). Factor labels were centred at 
with a range of . An initial model that included (zero-centred) age and
gender as independent variables showed that these two variables did not



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

K I R J AVA I N E N E T A L.

Fig. . Proportion correct for each test structure in Study . Error bars denote standard

error.

TA B L E . Final model of elicited imitation data in Study 

Intercept
Structure(Obj)
Structure(OBL)
Structure(OBL)
Animacy
Structure(Obj):Animacy
Structure(OBL):Animacy
Structure(OBL):Animacy

β

·
−·
−·
−·
−·
·
·
·

Std. error

Wald-Z

·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·

·
−·
−·
−·
−·
·
·
·

p-value

<·***
·
<·***
<·***
·
<·**
<·***
·

NOTES: *** p < ·; ** p < ·; * p < ·. Reference levels (intercept terms) for ﬁxed-eﬀects
predictors: Structure: Subject RC, Animacy: Animate.

signiﬁcantly inﬂuence performance. These variables were not included in
subsequent analyses. We ﬁtted a model to the data that included the
independent variables of structure ( levels: (i) subject RC, (ii) object RC,
(iii) oblique RC, and (iv) oblique RC) and animacy ( levels: animate,
inanimate), as well as participants and items as random eﬀects. Random
slope parameters for main eﬀects and interactions were included in the
models using forward selection: each random slope was added sequentially
to the model, ﬁrst for participants and then items, and the ANOVA
function was used to determine whether the additional random slope
signiﬁcantly improved the model (Baayen, ). The ﬁnal model only
included the by-participants random slope for the ﬁxed variable of
structure. The ﬁnal model results are shown in Table .

Table  shows that, whereas the children did not diﬀer in their overall
performance on subject and object RCs, the subject RCs were more often
repeated correctly than were both categories of oblique RCs. Subsequent
analyses revealed that the children’s performance on the object RCs was



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

R E L A T I V E C L A U S E A C Q U I S I T I O N I N F I N N I S H

also signiﬁcantly better overall than on both the Oblique- RCs (β = –·,
z = ·, p = ·) and Oblique- RCs (β = –·, z = –·, p = ·), but
that their overall performance on the two Oblique categories did not diﬀer
(β = –·, z = –·, p = ·). The main eﬀect of animacy was marginal; a
series of
suggested animacy aﬀected
performance depending on the structural type.

structure × animacy interactions

The structure × animacy interactions were explored further by splitting the
data by animacy. The same analysis strategy as per the previous analysis was
employed. The sentences containing animate head nouns were analyzed ﬁrst.
The random slope for items did not signiﬁcantly contribute to the model
and was therefore not included in the ﬁnal model; the random eﬀects of
participants and items and the random slope for participants were included.
The results showed that the diﬀerence in children’s performance on subject
(β = –·, z = –·,
and object RCs was marginal and not signiﬁcant
p = ·). In contrast, performance on the subject RCs with animate heads
was signiﬁcantly higher than on the Oblique (β = –·, z = –·, p < ·)
and Oblique RCs (β = –·, z = –·, p < ·). Subsequent analyses
revealed that the children’s performance on object RCs with animate heads
was signiﬁcantly better than their performance on both Oblique RCs with
animate heads (β = –−·, z = –·, p = ·) and Oblique RCs (β = –·,
z = –·, p = ·), which did not diﬀer from each other (β = –·, z = –
·, p = ·).

We next analyzed children’s performance on sentences that contained
inanimate head nouns. The random eﬀect and the random slope for items
were not signiﬁcant and were therefore not included in the model; the
random eﬀect and the random slope for participants were included. The
results showed that children performed signiﬁcantly better on object RCs
with an inanimate head than with both subject RCs (β = –·, z = –·,
p = ·) and oblique RCs (β = –·, z = –·, p < ·), but not oblique
RCs (β = –·, z = –·, p = ·). The diﬀerence between performance on
subject and oblique RCs with inanimate heads was not signiﬁcant (β = ·,
z = ·, p = ·), but performance on both of
these sentence types
was signiﬁcantly higher than performance on oblique RCs (subject RCs:
β = –·, z = –·, p < ·; oblique RCs: β = –·, z = –·, p < ·).

Finally, we analyszed whether animacy of the head referent aﬀected
performance on each individual
structure type. Children performed
signiﬁcantly better on subject RCs with an animate head than with an
inanimate head (β = –·, z = –·, p = ·). In contrast, they performed
better on object and oblique RCs with inanimate heads than with
animate heads (object RCs: β = ·, z = ·, p = ·; Oblique: β = ·,
z = ·, p < ·). Finally, the children performed marginally better on
Oblique RCs with animate heads than with inanimate heads, but the
eﬀect was not signiﬁcant (β = –·, z = –·, p = ·).



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

K I R J AVA I N E N E T A L.

Detailed error analysis
In addition to our statistical analysis above, we conducted a descriptive error
analysis separately for each RC type. Recall that not all repetitions coded as
errors in our detailed error analyses were coded as such in our statistical
analyses above. Hence, the proportions of errors below do not directly
correspond to the proportions of errors reported above.

Subject

gapped relatives. The

children produced (near) verbatim
repetitions of animate subject RCs % (N = /) of the time. For
inanimate subject RCs the proportion was % (N = /). When
producing non-verbatim repetitions, the children most commonly changed
the target for a non-target relativizer that had the same function (i.e. same
case) as the target. This is comparable to an English speaker producing which
for that. These types of responses were not coded as errors in our statistical
analysis but were coded as errors here. Repetitions like these were particularly
prevalent in animate subject RCs (% [N = /]). Instead of producing
the target relativizer, kuka-NOM, the children produced an alternative
relativizer correctly in the nominative case (mikä [%], joka [%]). Fifteen
percent (N = /) of inanimate subject RC repetitions were instantiations
of these (joka-NOM [%], kuka-NOM [%] for mikä-NOM).

the target

The children also commonly changed the case of the subject relativizer
(animate: %, N = /; inanimate: %, N = /) and hence created
grammatically deviant sentences. These errors are comparable to an
English speaker producing whom instead of who. In both animate and
inanimate subject RCs
relativizers were most commonly
replaced with mitä-PART (animate: %, inanimate: %) or jota-PART
(animate: %, inanimate: %). The partitive case is used for the object
function, and hence in these contexts the use of the partitive results in
deviant sentences with two object and no subject referents. Note, however,
that structurally most of
look like subject RCs as
illustrated by (). That is, our participants rarely changed the location or
the case of the other NPs within the RCs to reﬂect the needs of the
incorrectly case-marked relative pronoun. Because the children only
changed the case of the relativizer, it is likely that they understood the
grammatical roles for each participant, but for one reason or another failed
to inﬂect the relativizer correctly. Thus, we do not take these types of
repetitions as object-for-subject conversions. On the other hand, three
animate and four inanimate object-for-subject conversions were found. In
these,
the relative pronoun was produced incorrectly in the partitive
(object) case, the target object referent was produced incorrectly in the
nominative case and it preceded the verb, as shown in ().

these sentences

() Toi

That

on se poika mitä
is

the boy that-PART helped granddad-PART

auttoi

pappaa



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

R E L A T I V E C L A U S E A C Q U I S I T I O N I N F I N N I S H

metsässä
forest-INE
‘That is the boy *whom helped granddad/old man in the forest’
For the target sentence:
on se poika kuka
Toi
That
is
metsässä
forest-INE
‘That is the boy who helped granddad/old man in the forest’

the boy who-NOM helped granddad-PART

pappaa

auttoi

() Toi

on se poika mitä
is

pappa

the boy
metsässä

that-PART granddad-NOM

That
auttoi
help-sg-past forest-INE
‘That is the boy whom granddad/old man helped in the forest’

i.e.

function,

Object gapped relatives. Fifty-ﬁve percent (N = /) of animate object RC
responses were (near) verbatim repetitions. In inanimate object RCs these
accounted for % (N = /) of responses. The error
type the
children most commonly produced when repeating animate (%, N =
/) and inanimate (%, N = /) object targets were repetitions
in which the target relativizer was replaced with a relativizer with a
diﬀerent
the children produced grammatically deviant
sentences. In these, the children most commonly (animate: N = /;
inanimate: N = /) changed the object relativizer (mitä-PART) into a
subject relativizer (mikä-NOM,
joka-NOM, kuka-NOM). Five animate
and one inanimate subject-for-object RC conversions were found in
which the target object RC was converted incorrectly into a subject RC
by using a nominative marking on the relative pronoun, moving the RC
subject referent in the canonical object position (following the verb),
and inﬂecting the subject referent for the object
(partitive) case; see
example ().

() Toi

on se kana
is

joka
that-NOM tease-sg-past

kiusasi

the chicken
eilen

That
poikaa
boy-PART yesterday
‘That is the chicken that teased a boy yesterday’
For
Toi
That
kiusasi
tease-sg-past
‘That is the chicken that a boy teased yesterday’

se kana
that chicken
eilen

yesterday

mitä
that-PART boy-NOM

poika

on
is



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

K I R J AVA I N E N E T A L.

One-word oblique relatives. The children struggled to repeat animate
oblique relatives – they produced (near) verbatim repetitions only %
(N = /) of the time. A further % (N = /) of the responses
contained a correctly inﬂected, non-target relativizer, (joka-ALL (%),
mikä-ALL (%) for kuka-ALL). Thirty-one percent of repetitions were
such that the children changed the relativizer to one with a diﬀerent
function. Most commonly they produced nominative or partitive forms
instead of the target allative form (kuka-NOM (%) joka-NOM (%),
mikä-NOM (%),
jota-PART (%), mitä-PART (%)). The children
also frequently produced repetitions of animate oblique RCs which had
more than one error (%, N = /).

Contrary to animate oblique RCs, the children performed very well with
inanimate oblique relatives, producing (near) verbatim responses % (N =
/) of the time. A further % of their responses were repetitions in which
the target relativizer was replaced with another correctly inﬂected relativizer.
That is, the children’s repetition accuracy was much better with inanimate
than animate oblique RCs regardless of whether we consider producing a
correctly inﬂected non-target relativizer as an error or not. The most
common error type with inanimate oblique RC was the use of a
relativizer with a diﬀerent function to the target relativizer (%, N = /
, of oblique RC responses). There was no clear pattern in these, but
the most common erroneous relativizers used were mitä-PART (%),
joka-NOM (%), and jota-PART (%), such as is exempliﬁed by ():

() Toi

on se sänky mitä
is

kissa

nukkui

that bed that-PART cat-NOM slept

That
illalla
in the evening
‘*That is the bed that a cat slept in the evening’
For
Toi
That
illalla
in the evening
‘That is the bed in which a cat slept in the evening’

se sänky missä
that bed that-INE

kissa
cat-NOM slept

nukkui

on
is

Two-word oblique relatives. The children performed badly with animate
and inanimate two-word oblique relatives. They produced (near) verbatim
repetitions of these only % (N = /; animate) and % (N = /;
inanimate) of their responses. A further % and % of the repetitions,
respectively, had a correctly inﬂected non-target
two-word relativizer
replacing the target relativizer, e.g. minkä + kaa ‘with whom’ for kenen +
kaa ‘with whom’.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

R E L A T I V E C L A U S E A C Q U I S I T I O N I N F I N N I S H

The error pattern for the two-word oblique relatives was relatively clear.
The children most commonly produced errors in which they replaced the
two-word relativizer with a one-word relativizer (animate: %, N = /
; inanimate: %, N = /). The incorrect single word relativizers
produced in repetitions of inanimate oblique RCs had similar semantics
as the two-word target relativizer. Instead of producing minkä sisään ‘into
which’,
(‘into
which’), minne ‘which-SUBL’ (‘into which’), or missä ‘which-INE’ (‘in
which’). However, the responses for animate oblique targets very rarely
resembled the target either semantically or structurally. These responses
were overwhelmingly such that the children replaced the relativizer with a
semantically unacceptable one (subject or object case), or produced
repetitions with a number of errors; see example ().

the children commonly produced mihin ‘which-ILL’

se possu mikä
that pig that-NOM sheep-NOM run-sg-past

lammas

juoksi

() Toi

on
is

That
ulos
out
‘That is the pig *who the sheep ran outside’
For
se possu kenen kaa lammas
Toi
that pig who with
That
juoksi
ulos
run-sg-past out
‘That is the pig with whom the sheep ran outside’

sheep-NOM

on
is

D I S C U S S I O N
Several results from Study  bear on theoretical issues relevant to RC
acquisition. First, we did not ﬁnd an across the board signiﬁcant subject
RC advantage when test sentences contained animate or inanimate head
nouns. In particular, the diﬀerence between subject and object RCs was
not signiﬁcant. Furthermore, unlike some previous studies (e.g. Diessel &
Tomasello, ) which report that children relatively frequently convert
object RCs into subject RCs (e.g. That’s the cat that bit the dog for That’s
the cat that the dog bit) we only found a handful of subject-for-object
conversions (N = / of which  heads were animate,  inanimate), and
an equal number (N = /,  animate,  inanimate) of object-for-subject
conversions. Relative pronoun case errors were also equally prevalent in
both directions. Eighty-eight percent (N = / of which animate: /,
inanimate: /) of the subject relativizer case errors were such that the
partitive (object) was produced instead of the nominative, whereas %
(N = / of which animate: /,
inanimate /) of the object



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

K I R J AVA I N E N E T A L.

relativizer case errors were such that the nominative (subject) was produced
instead of the partitive. This result, even though not completely comparable
to the materials (namely, reversibility) or method (comprehension vs.
repetition) of some previous studies (e.g. Friedmann et al., ), points
towards the possibility that no universal subject dominance exists in RC
acquisition.

Second, the children’s performance on the subject, object, and oblique
RCs is broadly consistent with the distributional properties of Finnish
found in Study . In particular, object and oblique RCs were best
repeated when they contained inanimate heads. In contrast, subject RCs
were best repeated when they contained animate heads. Although subject
RCs in Study  were most often produced with inanimate heads, there are
several reasons to suggest that the children’s performance is consistent
with usage patterns. First, animate nouns are typically agents. This is
likely to have contributed to children’s better performance on animate in
comparison to inanimate subject RCs. Second, the animacy eﬀect for
subject RCs was inﬂuenced by our coding scheme. If only verbatim
repetitions are counted, the children performed better on the inanimate
subject RCs. The animate subject RC advantage only emerged when we
allowed grammatically correct relative pronoun substitution to count as a
correct repetition.

Third, our results diﬀer from some previous studies that have found
oblique RCs diﬃcult for children (e.g. Brandt et al., ; Diessel &
Tomasello, , ; Rahmany, Marefat & Kidd, ). Our results do
not support the suggestion that oblique RCs are more diﬃcult than object
RCs because object RCs are semantically similar to simple transitives
while oblique RCs are not (Diessel, ). The semantic dissimilarity
between these two structures is present in Finnish yet certain oblique RCs
were as easy for our Finnish children as object RCs. Diessel and
Tomasello () suggested that oblique RCs are diﬃcult in English and
German because the relativizer in these constructions consists of two
words and the other RC types consist of just one. The fact that we found
that our Finnish children perform worse with oblique than (inanimate)
oblique RCs could be taken as support for Diessel and Tomasello’s
suggestion. Many (animate: %;
inanimate: %) oblique repetitions
were such that the children erroneously replaced the two-word relativizer
with a one-word relativizer. In almost all repetitions in which the child
substituted the inanimate two-word relativizer (minkä sisään ‘into which’),
they did so by producing a semantically similar one-word relativizer
(mihin-ILL ‘into which’, minne-SUBL ‘into which’, missä-INE ‘in
which’). This created a semantically sound, but incorrectly repeated, RC
structure,
the target
sentence but struggled to repeat it. There is no one-word relativizer in

they understood the meaning of

indicating that



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

R E L A T I V E C L A U S E A C Q U I S I T I O N I N F I N N I S H

Finnish the semantics of which correspond to our animate oblique
relativizer. Regardless of this, % of the children’s animate oblique
responses were such that the child replaced the target with a one-word
relativizer (commonly nominative or partitive forms). This ﬁnding is
similar to Diessel and Tomasello’s () study, which found that English
and German children also erroneously replaced two-word with one-word
relativizers.

G E N E R A L D I S C U S S I O N
We conducted three studies investigating the acquisition of relative clauses in
Finnish-speaking children. Study  analyzed the naturalistic productions of
one Finnish-speaking child and her caregivers. In comparison to other
languages for which there is comparable data, we found that Finnish
contains a comparatively higher proportion of non-subject RCs. We also
found that RCs are most typically used with inanimate head nouns. In
Study  we conducted a comprehension experiment and found that, in
contrast to other head-ﬁrst languages (e.g. English, German, Hebrew),
there does not appear to be a subject–object asymmetry in Finnish.
Instead of structure, consistent with the usage patterns observed in Study
, children’s comprehension was most aﬀected by the animacy of the head
referent. Finally, in Study  we conducted a sentence repetition study, the
results of which revealed a good degree of consistency with Studies  and .

No subject–object asymmetry
Let us ﬁrst consider the fact that we found no diﬀerence between subject and
object RCs. This is cross-linguistically an unexpected result, given that
studies investigating RC acquisition in many other head-ﬁrst languages
have reported strong subject RC dominance (Adani, ; de Villiers
et al., ; Diessel & Tomasello, ; Friedmann, et al., ;
Goodluck, ; Guasti, et al., ; Kas & Lukács, ).

Consistent with the predictions of the usage-based approach to language
acquisition, the lack of subject–object asymmetry in our study can be
explained by the children’s behaviour in our experiments heavily reﬂecting
distributional features of Finnish. For instance, in German, subject RCs
are much more frequent than object or oblique RCs in the input (Brandt
et al., ), contributing to the subject advantage observed in German.
However, in English (Diessel, ) and Finnish children’s input, subject
and object RCs are roughly equally frequent. This means that, all things
being equal, Finnish and English children’s performance with subject and
object RCs might be predicted to be similar, yet it is only in Finnish
where the subject advantage is not present.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

K I R J AVA I N E N E T A L.

Importantly, not all things are equal between these two languages. First,
the much greater proportion of non-subject than subject RCs in Finnish,
relative to English, means that the expectations Finnish speakers have
about the head noun is less strongly skewed in favour of subject function
than it is for English speakers.

Second, English has a relatively rigid word order. The strong agent/actor +
Verb schema of simple sentences in English has been argued to aﬀect
expectations of sentence-/clause-initial nouns, contributing to the subject–
object asymmetry (e.g. Diessel & Tomasello, ; Slobin and Bever, ).
Finnish having a more ﬂexible word order than English means that
Finnish speakers may not have as strong a preference for placing agents/
actors in sentence-/clause-initial positions as English speakers.

Third,

in Finnish it is usually the relative pronoun that ultimately
determines the participant roles within the relative clause. Thus, the
relativized syntactic role is often reliably disambiguated as soon as the
relativizer is heard. In languages such as English,
in which identical
relative pronoun forms are used for subject and object RCs, speakers/
hearers are more likely to be garden-pathed than in Finnish.

found that,

in terms of

Given that we found no subject–object asymmetry, it may be worth brieﬂy
discussing our age range and its implications. Our experimental studies
included children from a relatively narrow age range (;–;). Thus, even
though WE did not ﬁnd a subject–object asymmetry, this asymmetry might
be found in younger or older age groups. Let us address the younger
children ﬁrst. Without experimental evidence it is diﬃcult to determine
whether very young Finnish children (<;) would show a subject
advantage. However, our corpus study, which extracted RCs between the
ages of ; and ;,
frequency of use, no
preference for using subject RCs was present in the child’s language. If a
Finnish child does not show a preference for subject over non-subject RCs
in naturalistic situations, it is likely that they do not show a preference for
using them in experimental situations either, and consequently make
subject for non-subject RC errors, for instance. Furthermore, our corpus
analysis showed that the corpus child’s input contained fewer exemplars of
subject relatives than non-subject relatives. Based on a large body of ﬁrst
language research which shows that children’s language is signiﬁcantly
inﬂuenced by the language input
they hear (e.g. Cameron-Faulkner,
Lieven & Theakston, ; Huttenlocher, Vasilyeva, Cymerman &
Levine, ; Kidd, Lieven & Tomasello, ; Kirjavainen, Theakston &
Lieven, ; Rowland, ), it is not likely that Finnish children would
go through a stage during which they show subject dominance,
in
particular if at the age of ;–; they do not show it.

The second possibility is that subject advantage arises after the upper limit
of our age range (>;). Two facts suggest this is not the case. First, our



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

R E L A T I V E C L A U S E A C Q U I S I T I O N I N F I N N I S H

corpus analysis did not ﬁnd subject RCs to be more prevalent in the adults’
language, i.e. Finnish adults do not prefer to use subject RCs over object/
oblique RCs, at least not when they are interacting with children. Even
though it is not impossible, it is improbable that, while Finnish speakers
do not show a subject advantage before ; or in adulthood, they go
through a period somewhere in between when subject–object asymmetry is
present. Second, if a subject RC advantage arose after a developmental
stage during which children are
in
comprehending and producing subject and object RCs (as they were in
our Study  and Study ), the emerged subject preference would not tell
us much about the processes that take place in language acquisition but
about something else.

already extremely competent

Oblique relatives
We next turn to oblique relatives. Our study provided little support for
Diessel’s () suggestion that semantic dissimilarity between oblique
RCs and transitive sentences results in children’s poorer performance with
oblique than object RCs. On the other hand, our data support Diessel and
Tomasello () and suggest that it is the two-word relativizer that
contributes to the diﬃculty associated with oblique structures in languages
such as English and German. The fact that in our Study  the children
comprehended oblique relatives as well as they did subject, object, and
oblique relatives indicates that the children’s poor performance with
oblique relatives in the sentence repetition task did not derive from the
children not understanding who is doing what
the
production of the more complex sentence structure relative to the other
structures created the diﬃculty. It seems that, if oblique relatives and their
relativizers are structurally similar to subject and object relatives, no
apparent diﬃculty is associated with oblique relatives. Future experimental
research investigating children’s performance with oblique and oblique
RCs in other languages would help to assess the role of relativizer
complexity in the diﬃculty associated with oblique RCs.

to whom, but

factors

There are some other

that are likely to aﬀect children’s
performance with oblique RCs. First,
if a speaker has two or more
constructions to choose from to express similar meanings (e.g. oblique vs.
oblique), these constructions might compete for production, and the
stronger variant
is selected (e.g. Bates & MacWhinney, , ).
Factors such as frequency, complexity, and semantic predictability can be
assumed to contribute to the strength of a given variant. The ﬁnding
(Study ) that our children commonly replaced the two-word relativizers
with one-word relativizers can be taken as support for this suggestion.
Second, when producing oblique RCs, children have to engage in



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

K I R J AVA I N E N E T A L.

inﬂection and sequencing within the sentence of two relativizer words. This
is likely to put more pressure on the processing system – in particular during
production – relative to relative clauses with a one-word relativizer. Third,
most two-word relativizers (in English, German, and Finnish) are much
less
frequently represented in naturalistic interaction than one-word
relativizers, which is likely to contribute to speakers’ proﬁciency with
oblique and oblique constructions, in the favour of the latter.

than subject/object

relatives

Two results did not reﬂect our corpus analysis and hence require some
consideration. First, we found that oblique relatives were the most
frequent (%) RC type in our corpus analysis, but our children did not
perform better with oblique
in our
experiments. In fact, they performed worse with animate oblique and
animate and inanimate oblique RCs in our Study . At face value, this
could be taken as evidence against the usage-based account. However, the
usage-based account does not assume a complete input–output mirroring.
Even though language-speciﬁc distributional
features are expected to
mould children’s language, other factors also contribute to patterns of
acquisition. Such factors include (a) the degree with which a construction
resembles other constructions the child already knows (e.g. Abbot-Smith
& Behrens, ; Diessel & Tomasello, ) and (b) speakers’ ability to
memorize chunks of varying lengths and combine these to create longer
and more complex utterances (e.g. Ellis, ; Pine & Lieven, ).
Furthermore, it is not only the frequency of the syntactic constructions
that aﬀects the acquisition, but the frequency of key lexical items within
those constructions, and in other (related or unrelated) constructions. The
fact that our animate oblique relativizer and animate and inanimate
oblique relativizers occur in Finnish naturalistic language less frequently
than our other relativizers is likely to explain at least partly why the
children found these
the
usage-based account does not assume that children acquire the oblique (or
any other) relative clause structure as one single category, but that initially
diﬀerent locative cases are learned one by one. This means that the
acquisition trajectory of one instantiation of a construction (e.g. oblique
with the relativizer missä) could be acquired more quickly than another
instantiation of that same syntactic construction (e.g. oblique with the
relativizer kenelle). Last, our corpus analysis found only a handful of
oblique relatives in the input (and none in the corpus child’s output).
Consequently, the usage-based account would predict that oblique RCs
are more diﬃcult and learned later in development than many subject,
object, and oblique RCs.

types diﬃcult. Furthermore,

sentence

Second, we found that both animate object and animate oblique RCs
were infrequent in our corpus analysis. If we assume that usage patterns
have a major eﬀect on children’s language development, both of these



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

R E L A T I V E C L A U S E A C Q U I S I T I O N I N F I N N I S H

sentence types should be diﬃcult for children in experimental contexts.
However, the children performed signiﬁcantly better with animate object
than animate oblique RCs. One might suggest that animate objects make
bad head referents for oblique RCs, resulting in a poor performance with
those items, but there is no clear perceptual reason to assume that locative
cases would be incompatible with animate heads, in particular since our
children found animate oblique RC easier than inanimate oblique RCs.
However, some locative cases may be perceptually more compatible with
animate than inanimate head referents and vice versa. For instance, the
inessive case (in X) could be more likely to occur with inanimate heads
(e.g. ‘the cup in which’ vs. ‘the man in whom’).

An alternative reason for the animate object–oblique asymmetry is diﬀerences
in lexical frequencies of the relativizers. Even though Finnish children are not
likely to experience the animate object relativizer used in our test sentences in
animate object constructions frequently,
they do relatively frequently
experience it as a relativizer in inanimate object RCs and as a question word in
interrogative constructions. On the other hand,
the animate oblique
relativizer is infrequent in animate oblique structures, as well as in other
constructions. We suggest that the fact that the children were more familiar
with the animate object than oblique relativizer resulted in children having a
sound understanding of the meaning of the former lexical item, which helped
them to comprehend and produce RCs with that relativizer.

Conclusion
Our results suggest that (a) the frequency of a given RC construction as well as
the frequency of a given relativizer within RC (and, importantly, also in
non-RC) constructions contributes to children’s proﬁciency of diﬀerent RC
structures, and (b) the syntactic function of the relativized element alone does
not determine the diﬃculty associated with comprehending and repeating
those structures. It seems to be that, in Finnish, subject, object, and oblique
RCs are more or less equally easy/diﬃcult to comprehend and produce, but
that the diﬃculty associated with some structures seems to be created largely
by the syntactic/lexical frequency and the complexity of the relativizer.

S U P P L E M E N T A R Y M A T E R I A L S

For supplementary material for this paper, please visit http://dx.doi.org/.
/S.

R E F E R E N C E S

Abbot-Smith, K. & Behrens, H. (). How known constructions inﬂuence the acquisition
of other constructions: the German passive and future constructions. Cognitive Science ,
–.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

K I R J AVA I N E N E T A L.

Adani, F. (). Rethinking the acquisition of relative clauses in Italian: towards a

grammatically based account. Journal of Child Language , –.

Arnon, I. (). Rethinking child diﬃculty: the eﬀect of NP type on children’s processing of

relative clauses in Hebrew. Journal of Child Language , –.

Baayen, H. (). Analyzing linguistic data: a practical introduction to statistics using R.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J. & Bates, D. M. (). Mixed-eﬀects modeling with crossed

random eﬀects for subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language , –.

Bates, E. & MacWhinney, B. (). Competition, variation, and language learning. In
language acquisition, –. Hillsdale, NJ:

B. MacWhinney (ed.), Mechanisms of
Lawrence Erlbaum.

Bates, E. & MacWhinney, B. (). Functionalism and the competition model. In
B. MacWhinney & E. Bates (eds), The crosslinguistic study of sentence processing, –.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Bates, D. M. & Maechler, M. (). lme: linear mixed-eﬀects models using S classes. R

package version –, online: <http://lme.r-forge.r-project.org>.

Boyle, W., Lindell., A. K. & Kidd, E. (). Investigating the role of verbal working

memory in young children’s sentence comprehension. Language Learning , –.

Brandt, S., Diessel, H. & Tomasello, M. (). Acquisition of German relative clauses: a case

study. Journal of Child Language , –.

Brandt, S., Kidd, E., Lieven, E. & Tomasello, M. (). The discourse bases of
relativization: an investigation of young German- and English-speaking children’s
comprehension of relative clauses. Cognitive Linguistics , –.

Cameron-Faulkner, T., Lieven, E. V. M. & Theakston, A. L. (). What part of no do
children not understand? A usage-based account of multiword negation. Journal of Child
Language , –.

Carreiras, M., Duñabeitia, J. A., Vergara, M., de la Cruz-Pavía, I. & Laka, I. (). Subject
relative clauses are not universally easier to process: evidence from Basque. Cognition ,
–.

Chan, A., Matthews, S. & Yip, V. (). The acquisition of relative clauses in Cantonese and
Mandarin. In E. Kidd (ed.), Acquisition of relative clauses: processing, typology, and function,
–. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

Chen, J. & Shirai, Y. (). The acquisition of relative clauses in spontaneous child speech in

Mandarin Chinese. Journal of Child Language , –.

Comrie, B. (). Rethinking the typology of relative clauses. Language Design , –.
Courtney, E. H. (). Adult and child production of Quechua relative clauses. First

Language , –.

de Villiers, J. G., Tager Flusberg, H. B., Hakuta, K. & Cohen, M. (). Children’s

comprehension of relative clauses. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research , –.

Diessel, H. (). The acquisition of complex sentences. Cambridge: Cambridge University

Press.

Diessel, H. (). On the role of frequency and similarity in the acquisition of subject and
non-subject relative clauses. In T. Givón & M. Shibatani (eds), Syntactic complexity,
–. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

Diessel, H. & Tomasello, M. (). The development of relative clauses in spontaneous child

speech. Cognitive Linguistics (/), –.

Diessel, H. & Tomasello, M. (). A new look at the acquisition of relative clauses.

Language , –.

Ellis, N. C. (). Constructions, chunking, and connectionism: the emergence of second
language structure. In C. Doughty & M. H. Long (eds), Handbook of second language
acquisition, –. Oxford: Blackwell.

Fox, B. A. & Thompson, S. A. (). A discourse explanation of the grammar of relative

clauses in English conversation. Language , –.

Friedmann, N., Belletti, A. & Rizzi, L. (). Relativized relatives: types of intervention in

the acquisition of A-bar dependencies. Lingua , –.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

R E L A T I V E C L A U S E A C Q U I S I T I O N I N F I N N I S H

Goodluck, H. (). Object extraction is not suitable to Child Relativized Minimality.

Lingua , –.

Gordon, P. C., Hendrick, R. & Johnson, M. (). Memory interference during language
processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition ,
–.

Gordon, P. C., Hendrick, R. & Johnson, M. (). Eﬀects of noun phrase type on sentence

complexity. Journal of Memory and Language , –.

Guasti, M. T., Stavrakaki, S. & Arosio, F. (). Crosslinguistic diﬀerences and similarities
in the acquisition of relative clauses: evidence from Greek and Italian. Lingua , –.
Gutierrez-Mangado, M. J. (). Children’s comprehension of relative clauses in an ergative

language: the case of Basque. Language Acquisition , –.

Hakulinen, A., Vilkuna, M., Korhonen, R., Koivisto, V., Heinonen, T. R. & Alho, I. ().
Iso suomen kielioppi [The large grammar of Finnish]. Helsinki: Suomalaisen Kirjallisuuden
Seura.

Huttenlocher, J., Vasilyeva, M., Cymerman, E. & Levine., S. (). Language input and

child syntax. Cognitive Psychology , –.

Jaeger, T. F. (). Categorical data analysis: away from ANOVAs (transformation of not)

and towards logit mixed models. Journal of Memory and Language , –.

Kas, B. & Lukács, Á. (). Processing relative clauses by Hungarian typically developing

children. Language and Cognitive Processes , –.

Kauppinen, A. (). Mikon kielioppia:  vuoden  kuukauden ikäisen pojan kielestä ja sen
kehittymisestä vuoden aikana [Mikko’s grammar: one  year and  month old boy’s
language and its development over a one year period]. Unpublished licentiate thesis,
University of Helsinki, Department of Finnish Language.

Keenan, E. & Comrie, B. (). Noun phrase accessibility and universal grammar. Linguistic

Inquiry , –.

Kidd, E. (ed.) (). The acquisition of relative clauses: processing, typology, and function.

Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

Kidd, E., Brandt, S., Lieven, E. & Tomasello, M. (). Object relatives made easy: a
cross-linguistic comparison of the constraints inﬂuencing young children’s processing of
relative clauses. Language and Cognitive Processes , –.

Kidd, E., Lieven, E. V. M. & Tomasello, M. (). Examining the role of lexical frequency
in the acquisition and processing of sentential complements. Cognitive Development ,
–.

Kirjavainen, M. & Lieven, E. (). The acquisition of relative clauses in Finnish; the eﬀect
of input. In E. Kidd (ed.), Acquisition of relative clauses: processing, typology, and function,
–. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

Kirjavainen, M., Theakston, A. & Lieven, E. (). Can input explain children’s me-for-I

errors? Journal of Child Language , –.

Krajewski, G., Lieven, E. V. M. & Theakston, A. L. (). Productivity of a Polish child’s

inﬂectional noun morphology: a naturalistic study. Morphology , –.

Krajewski, G., Theakston, A. L., Lieven, E. V. M. & Tomasello, M. (). How Polish
children switch from one case to another when using novel nouns: challenges for models
of inﬂectional morphology. Language and Cognitive Processes , –.

Laaksonen, K. & Lieko, A. (). Suomen kielen äänne- ja muoto-oppi [Finnish language

phonology and morphology]. Helsinki: Oy Finn Lectura Ab.

Lieko, A. (). The development of complex sentences: a case study of Finnish. Helsinki:

Suomalaisen Kirjallisuuden Seura.

Lust, B., Flynn, S. & Foley, C. (). What children know about what they say: elicited
imitation as a research method for assessing children’s syntax. In D. McDaniel,
C. McKee & H. Smith Cairns (eds), Methods for assessing children’s syntax, –.
London: MIT Press.

Lyytinen, P. (). Varhaisen kommunikaation ja kielenkehityksen arviointimenetelmä [Early
communication and language development assessment method]. Jyväskylä: Niilo Mäki
Instituutti & Jyväskylän Yliopiston Lapsitutimuskeskus.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

K I R J AVA I N E N E T A L.

MacWhinney, B. (). The CHILDES project. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Mak, W. M., Vonk, W. & Schriefers, H. (). The inﬂuence of animacy on relative clause

processing. Journal of Memory and Language , –.

Mak, M. M., Vonk, W. & Schriefers, H. (). Animacy in processing relative clauses: the

hikers that rocks crush. Journal of Memory and Languagem , –.

O’Grady, W. (). Syntactic carpentry: an emergentist approach to syntax. Mahwah, NJ:

Erlbaum.

O’Grady, W. (). Relative clauses: processing and acquisition. In E. Kidd (ed.),
Acquisition of relative clauses: processing, typology, and function, –. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.

Ozeki, H. & Shirai, Y. (). The consequences of variation in the acquisition of relative
clauses: an analysis of longitudinal production data from ﬁve Japanese children. In
Y. Matsumoto, D. Oshima, O. Robinson & P. Sells (eds), Diversity in language:
perspectives and implications, –. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.

Pine, J. & Lieven, E. (). Slot and frame patterns and the development of the determiner

category. Applied Psycholinguistics , –.

R Core Development Team (). R: A language and environment for statistical computing.
R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. ISBN ---, online:
<http://www.R-project.org/>.

Rahmany, R., Marefat, H. & Kidd, E. (). Persian-speaking children’s acquisition of

relative clauses. European Journal of Developmental Psychology , –.

Rizzi, L. (). Relativized minimality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rowland, C. (). Explaining errors in children’s questions. Cognition  –.
Slobin, D. I. & Bever., T. G. (). A crosslinguistic study of word order and inﬂections.

Cognition , –.

Suzuki, T. (). A case-marking cue for ﬁller–gap dependencies in children’s relative

clauses in Japanese. Journal of Child Language , –.

Toivanen, J. (). The acquisition of Finnish. In D. Slobin (ed.), The crosslinguistic study of
language acquisition, vol. , –. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc.
Publishers.

Tomasello, M. (). Constructing a language; a usage-based theory of language acquisition.

London: Harvard University Press.

Warren, T. & Gibson, E. (). The inﬂuence of referential processing on sentence

complexity. Cognition , –.

APPENDIX

TABLE B.
Please see http://dx.doi.org/./S.
TABLE C.
Please see http://dx.doi.org/./S.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768

R E L A T I V E C L A U S E A C Q U I S I T I O N I N F I N N I S H

TA B L E A. Frequencies of the relative pronouns in our corpus child’s data that

were used in our experimental materials

Pronoun

Function Animacy

Overall
freq

% of all word
tokens

% of all
relativizer use

kuka
mikä
mitä
mitä
kenelle
missä
kenen
kanssa
minkä
sisään

SUBJ
SUBJ
OBJ
OBJ
OBL
OBL
OBL

OBL

animate
inanimate
animate
inanimate
animate
inanimate
animate

inanimate











·%
·%
·%
·%
<·%
·%
·%

·%

%
%
%
%
%
%
%

%

TA B L E D. The frequency of head nouns used in Study  relative to all word

tokens in the Kirjavainen-Max Planck corpus

SUBJ-ani

SUBJ-inani

OBJ-ani

OBJ-inani

OBL-ani

OBL-inani

OBL-ani

OBL-inani

Noun

Täti
Setä
Poika
Mummo
Laiva
Kynä
Mehu
Auto
Kana
Lintu
Koira
Pupu
Kakku
Auto
Ruoka
Talo
Tyttö
Lapsi
Pappa
Vauva
Talo
Kauppa
Sänky
Kuppi
Kissa
Pöllö
Possu
Ankka
Paita
Sukka
Kauppa
Kaappi

Gloss

Lady
Man
Boy
Granny
Ship
Pen
Juice
Car
Chicken
Bird
Dog
Rabbit
Cake
Car
Food
House
Girl
Child
Granddad
Baby
House
Shop
Bed
Cup
Cat
Owl
Pig
Duck
Shirt
Sock
Shop
Cupboard



Frequency

·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:26:29, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000915000768


