J. Child Lang.  (), –. © Cambridge University Press 
This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/./), which permits
unrestricted re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original work is properly cited.
doi:./S

Introducing the Infant Bookreading Database (IBDb)*

CARLA L. HUDSON KAM A N D LISA MATTHEWSON

Department of Linguistics, University of British Columbia

(Received  February  – Revised  July  – Accepted  September  –

First published online  November )

A B S T R A C T

Studies on the relationship between bookreading and language
development typically lack data about which books are actually read
to children. This paper reports on an Internet survey designed to
address this data gap. The resulting dataset (the Infant Bookreading
Database or IBDb)
includes responses from , caregivers of
children aged – months who answered questions about
the
English-language books they most commonly read to their children.
The inclusion of demographic information enables analysis of subsets
of data based on age, sex, or caregivers’ education level. A comparison
between our dataset and those used in previous analyses reveals that
there is relatively little overlap between booklists gathered from proxies
such as bestseller lists and the books caregivers reported reading to
children in our survey. The IBDb is available for download for use by
researchers at <http://linguistics.ubc.ca/ubc-ibdb/>.

I N T R O D U C T I O N
Books have long been recognized as a source of input for children learning
language in cultures with widespread literacy. Investigations into the
relationship between books and language development have typically been
of two types. One is research showing a relationship between frequency of
children’s book experiences and broad measures of language development
such as literacy or preliteracy skills (see Bus, van IJzendoorn & Pellegrini,

[*] This research was supported in part by a grant from the UBC Oﬃce of the Vice-President
Research and International SSHRC Reapplication Assistance Fund. We thank Macaela
MacWilliams and Alannah Turner for their assistance in compiling and cleaning the
dataset. Address
correspondence: Carla L. Hudson Kam, Department of
Linguistics,  West Mall, The University of British Columbia, V T Z. e-mail:
Carla.HudsonKam@ubc.ca

for



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000490

H U D S O N K A M A N D M A T T H E W S O N

, for a review) or vocabulary size (e.g. Lyytinen, Laasko & Poikkeus,
; Raikes et al., ; see Fletcher & Reese, , for a review).
Second are studies examining the occurrence of speciﬁc linguistic elements
in children’s books,
for
instance, there are recent studies showing that children’s books contain
more
spoken input
(Cameron-Faulkner & Noble, ), and that there exists a correlation
between text exposure and the production of more complex syntactic
structures (Montag & MacDonald, ).

trying to link them directly to knowledge;

complex sentence

than naturalistic

structures

This latter kind of investigation ultimately relies on knowing the actual
books children are being read. However, examinations of children’s books
have not typically been done with access to this information. Instead,
proxies for this information have been used in selecting the books for
examination. Cameron-Faulkner and Noble (), for instance, used sales
information to select books
examination, while Montag and
MacDonald () analyzed corpus data (speciﬁcally,
the Corpus of
Contemporary American English, Davies, –). Although this way of
selecting text for analysis can tell us a great deal about the overall nature
of the language that is generally contained in children’s books,
it is
diﬃcult to make any more speciﬁc claims, given that the books that
children have are not necessarily the books that they are read. One must
also take into account the fact that children’s books, even ones targeted to
the same age range, can diﬀer in the amount and nature of text they
contain, sometimes in ways which are predictable due to genre. For
instance, storybooks contain complete sentences, whereas word books are
often pictures accompanied by single words labelling the pictures, and
storybooks expose children to culturally normative narrative structures
whereas information books may not. Moreover, genre diﬀerences carry
with them interactional
input
(Nyhout & O’Neill, ; cf. Leech & Rowe, ). For instance, there is
evidence that there is more variability in what parents say when reading
vocabulary-focused books as compared to storybooks (Price, Van Kleeck &
Huberty, ). Thus, having a more accurate picture of the books
children are being read would be useful for researchers interested in the
potential role of bookreading activities in language development.

can further

implications

aﬀect

for

that

To this end we conducted an Internet survey of parents and caregivers,
asking about the English-language books they frequently read to their
children. Because of the linguistic features we are ultimately interested in
examining in books (the ultimate reason we wanted this information), the
survey targeted people reading to children aged – months, an age
group we know relatively little about in terms of bookreading (Fletcher &
Reese, ). This short notice is a description of the resulting dataset,
which is available to researchers in multiple formats at the following



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000490

T H E I N F A N T B O O K R E A D I N G D A T A B A S E

web-address: <http://linguistics.ubc.ca/ubc-ibdb/>, or by request
from
the ﬁrst author. It is hosted by the Department of Linguistics at the
University of British Columbia and there is a commitment to retain
the link permanently. We ask that people cite this report when using the
database.

D E S C R I P T I O N O F T H E D A T A B A S E
Data collection
The survey was conducted beginning in January of  through to June of
. The invitation to participate was posted on a lab website, which
described the study brieﬂy and contained a link to the actual survey at
FluidSurveys.com. (FluidSurveys is a Canadian company, and all their
data are hosted at a site in Canada, in accordance with the requirements of
our IRB.) The study was described as being about children’s books in
English for parents and caregivers of children ages – months. It did
not speciﬁcally mention picture books. The link to the lab webpage was
circulated via the lab’s Twitter account, and from there it was recirculated
via Twitter and Facebook by other Twitter and Facebook users. Although
many of the initial recirculaters were friends and family, the invitation was
also recirculated by people we did not know,
including more generic
Twitter accounts (i.e. accounts not associated with a speciﬁc person’s name).

Overview of survey questions
The survey ﬁrst asked participants to list the ﬁve books they currently most
frequently read to their child. There was another place where the respondent
could list any other books they frequently read to their child. Then the
information about
frequently read books was used to
populate further questions asking about their reading habits for each book.
Speciﬁcally, participants were asked how much they stick to the text on
the page versus say things not written in the book. They provided this
additional information (about reading habits) for each of the ﬁve most
frequently read books individually. They did not provide this additional
information for any extra books they listed.

the ﬁve most

Participants were also asked questions about the child’s age (in -month
increments), sex, gestational status (full-term or not), and about
the
occurrence of any hearing, language, or cognitive diagnoses. (We use the
term sex here as a child’s primary sexual characteristics are more apparent
than their gender at this age.) We also asked about the child’s language
production (which might be expected to inﬂuence book choices) to get a
very general
language development.
Speciﬁcally we asked whether the child was (i) producing any words,
(ii) producing more than ten understandable words, (iii) producing any

sense of

level of

the

child’s



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000490

H U D S O N K A M A N D M A T T H E W S O N

two-word sequences, and (iv) producing any sequences of more than three
words. The four language production questions were in a Y/N format.

We also asked questions about the respondent: their gender, age, and level
of education. The speciﬁc wording of each question appears in Appendix A.

Responses
The database that is posted on-line contains , responses. , of these
are fully complete (meaning they answered the questions about the child and
the respondent, and entered at least one English book title). Thirty-four
responses were missing some or all of
the
respondent, but had complete information on the child. Four were missing
some information about both the child and the respondent. All in all,
there are , responses with complete information about the child and at
least one book.

the information about

We did not restrict the questionnaire to respondents who were in any
speciﬁc geographic location, but it was clear that we were interested in
books in English. IP information (not included in the database) indicates
that most of the responses came from North America, although there were
numerous responses from people in other countries as well, mostly
predominantly English-speaking countries (e.g. Australia, New Zealand),
but not entirely. Some respondents included non-English book titles in
their ﬁve most frequently read books. Those titles are not included in the
released data.

Brief overview of the data
The data were not collected from a random sample; rather, respondents
tended to be people we knew, people who knew the people we knew,
people who knew those people, etc., in addition to being people who read
to their children and are interested enough in reading to children that they
were willing to participate in a survey on the topic. In some sense, surveys
are never conducted with truly random samples as people have to select
into the sample voluntarily. However, given the fact that our friends and
family were possibly more likely to complete and recirculate the survey
invitation and link, at least initially, and given the nature of our immediate
circle of friends and family (e.g. high SES), it is important to understand
the distributional properties of the data.

Children. Five hundred and ninety-one of the responses were from
caregivers of boys and  responses were from caregivers of girls. Table 
shows the age distribution by child sex. Age information was not provided
for two children: one boy and one girl. The other questions about the
child are incomplete for three boys – one aged – months, one aged
– months, and one aged – months – and ﬁve girls – two aged



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000490

T H E I N F A N T B O O K R E A D I N G D A T A B A S E

TA B L E . Number of children in each age category (in months) by sex

Age category

Sex of child
Boy
Girl

Boy
Girl

Boy
Girl

–



–



–



–



–



–



–



–



–



–



–



–



–



–



–



–



–



–



– months, one aged – months, one aged – months, and one aged
– months.

Sex information was not supplied for four children. One was in the –
months age group, one was in the – months group, one was in the
– months group, and the fourth was in the – months age group.
These children are not
the child
information is complete for these four children.

included in Table . The rest of

One thousand and thirty-six of the children were born full-term. Twenty-
six had been identiﬁed as having a diagnosed hearing, language, or cognitive
delay. This information was not provided for two of the children (both girls).
Eight hundred and forty-eight of the children were producing at least some
words, with  producing more than ten understandable words. Two
hundred and ﬁfty-seven children were not yet producing any words. Five
hundred and eighty-three of
the children were producing two-word
sequences at
the children were
producing sequences of more than three words. Some of the language
development information was missing for seven of the children (three
boys, four girls).

the survey, and  of

the time of

Parents/caregivers. This is the biggest source of missing information,
although most of the parents/caregivers did provide this information; some
or all of the information about the respondent is missing for only eighteen
of the boys and nineteen of the girls, and one child whose sex was not
speciﬁed. One thousand and seventy-three parents/caregivers provided
information about their gender; , identiﬁed themselves as female, 
as male, and one selected other. Thus, there are not enough non-female
respondents in the dataset to be able to carry out meaningful comparisons
based on parent/caregiver gender. The ages of
the respondents who
answered the age question are as follows:  parents/caregivers were under
,  were – years of age,  were –,  were –,  were



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000490

H U D S O N K A M A N D M A T T H E W S O N

–,  were –,  were –, and one was over . The educational
level of the sample was highly non-representative of the general population
in North America – % of our respondents who answered the question
about education had completed a bachelor’s degree or higher, which
contrasts with a rate of % for the population in Canada (Statistics
Canada, ) and around % for the United States (United States
Census Bureau, ),
the two countries from which most of our
responses came. Note that the ages included in the data from the two
countries are slightly diﬀerent, both from each other, and from the age
categories we used in our questionnaire. The Canadian data only include
adults aged – from  (Statistics Canada, ), while the US data
are for adults aged  years and above (United States Census Bureau,
), whereas our sample includes some caregivers who are younger than
 years of age. (We do not know the location of all respondents. We did
not ask about location; however, the program sometimes, but not always,
automatically supplied it, presumably on the basis of the IP address. As
we did not ask any questions about location, it is not part of the oﬃcial
dataset, and so information about respondents’
locations is not being
shared.) No respondent had only completed elementary school. For 
respondents the highest level of education completed was high school. One
hundred and ﬁfty-four respondents had completed some higher education
and  had completed a Bachelor’s degree. Three hundred and seven
respondents had completed a Master’s degree of some kind, while  had
a PhD. A further  had completed a professional post-graduate degree.

Books. The book responses appearing in the posted dataset are the result of
some data cleaning and organization. First, research assistants went through
the survey, looking for book titles that appeared to be the same despite being
entered in the survey diﬀerently by diﬀerent respondents. When such
examples were found the titles were adjusted to be consistent. An example:
some respondents typed “The Very Hungry Caterpillar” and others typed
“Very Hungry Caterpillar”. Instances of Very Hungry Caterpillar were
adjusted to read The Very Hungry Caterpillar. Then authors’ names were
entered into the dataset. Some titles are too generic to deﬁnitively associate
with an author – there are numerous children’s books available with that
title and none are common, or there is no title that is a complete match.
In such cases, no author name was entered. Occasionally respondents
provided author information, but this was the exception rather than the
rule. When they did so, this information was retained. In several instances
respondents provided authors for titles that would otherwise have been too
generic to assign an author to. The result of this is that books with the
same title appear in the dataset with and without authors. (In one instance
only, these rules resulted in a title being associated with two diﬀerent
authors; it was a well-known children’s title and so all instances of the title



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000490

T H E I N F A N T B O O K R E A D I N G D A T A B A S E

reported without an author were associated with the well-known version of
the title, but the one instance where an author’s name was provided was
retained. Presumably the respondent provided the author’s name because
it was not the more common book of the same name.) Sometimes the
author information is actually publisher/series information that is part of
the title rather than true authorship, e.g. “Usborne” or “Scholastic”, as
this was sometimes enough to deﬁnitively identify the book. Sometimes
respondents entered series names rather than individual book titles. That
information is retained, and whenever possible author/publisher names are
provided for series. Books entirely in languages other than English were
removed from the dataset, as the survey speciﬁcally asked about books in
English; bilingual books were not removed.

things

thirteen are

There are , unique entries, , of which are either titles of or
references to a single book or a series title. (Not every respondent listed
like “library book”,
ﬁve books.) The other
“newspaper”, or “custom made book”. One thousand six hundred and
seventeen of the titles are uniquely identiﬁable, at least in terms of their
text. A small number of the titles in the dataset do not have accompanying
author or publisher information; sometimes their unique identity was clear
from the title (e.g. National Geographic’s Special Dinosaur Issue), or
author/publisher information was diﬃcult to discern but its lack did not
make the identity of the book unclear (e.g. Goodnight My Sweet Pea).
Within these , titles, , are also identiﬁable as to their likely
version, while  are not: Cars Look and Find by Disney, Twas the Night
before Christmas, and Baby Beluga. This is relevant
for researchers
interested in illustrations rather than / in addition to text. There are an
additional  titles that are not identiﬁable. These include very generic
titles like “Planes” as well as titles like “Peek-a-boo Elmo: Puppies” that
we could not ﬁnd a match for. There are seventy-ﬁve series or periodicals
listed, many accompanied by author information. These range from things
like “Little Golden books”, which encompasses a range of stories, and
“Touch and feel books”, which again covers a number of books by the
same publisher but this time united by a theme, to things like “Maisy
book series” and “Sandra Boynton books”, where the author is the same
for all books in the series, even though the stories diﬀer. Note that entries
are not coded as unidentiﬁed or series in the dataset; entries that we are
counting as series or periodicals in this description are plural (e.g. “Sandra
Boynton books”), and entries that are not identiﬁed have no accompanying
author or publisher information. Thus, we left the information provided
by respondents in the dataset even when it did not refer to a uniquely
identiﬁable title.

While we will not provide much in the way of in-depth analysis of the data
here (as our intention is instead to provide the dataset to people who might



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000490

H U D S O N K A M A N D M A T T H E W S O N

be interested in doing just that), we did do some exploration of the data to get
a sense of broad trends. One of the most striking things about the identiﬁable
titles is how much variation there is in which books children are hearing.
Only one book was listed by more than  respondents; Goodnight Moon
by M. Wise Brown was listed  times (·% of respondents). Two
more were listed more than  but less than  times: The Very Hungry
Caterpillar by E. Carle ( times) and Brown Bear, Brown Bear, What
do you See? by B. Martin and E. Carle (). Only four books were listed
– times, that is, by at least ·% of our sample. Ten books were
mentioned – times, and  books were listed – times. (No books
were listed more than  but less than  times). Note that  responses
equals just under % of our sample. The overwhelming majority of
titles – , of the , uniquely identiﬁable book titles – were only
listed by one respondent. Figure  shows the number of books by the
number of times the book was reported in the survey. Note that the x-axis
treats numerosities as ordered categories with bins of diﬀering sizes; the
intention is to convey the variation without taking up too much space;
were it to contain all numerosities from – as individual bins it would
be too large (due to the number of empty categories).

Continuing with an exploration at a database-wide level, we created a “top
” list. These are the  most frequently listed books. It turns out that, to
be included in this list, a book only needed to be listed seven or more times.
That means that books listed by less than % of the respondents are on this
list, which appears in ‘Appendix B’. Note that this list is actually the 
most frequent, since there was no way to non-artiﬁcially cap the list at 
given the number of books – ten – listed seven times.

The top  list only considers speciﬁc individual books, but there are
series or sets of books that are also popular. For instance, fourteen
respondents listed speciﬁc identiﬁable (but diﬀerent) Elmo books, and one
listed “Elmo books”, which is counted as a series. Thus, while ﬁfteen
children represented in the survey were being read Elmo books at the
time, there was some variety in which Elmo book(s) they were hearing.
There are several series that show the same pattern; any individual book is
listed only once or twice, but more than one book in the series is listed
(e.g. Olivia books, Curious George books, Little Critter books.) Given that
the writing (and illustrations) tend to be similar within series or sets, if
one were interested in books as input, it would be reasonable to include a
representative book from a series that is listed frequently even though no
single book in the series is listed frequently enough to be included in a
‘most-frequently listed’ list.

The questionnaire was designed to allow for more ﬁne-grained analysis,
for instance, by age and sex, and it may be the case that the high degree of
variation in books being read is at least partially a function of changes in



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000490

T H E I N F A N T B O O K R E A D I N G D A T A B A S E

Fig. . Number of books by the number of times reported in the survey.

what children are being read by age. As pointed out by one reviewer,
children often get ﬁxated on a set of books, with this set of books shifting
over time. (However, if all children are selecting their current favourites
from the same larger set of books, which may or may not be the case, we
would expect to see more similarity than we do, suggesting this isn’t
necessarily what is driving the variation.) Moreover, the degree to which
the child her- or himself can select the books being read changes over the
age range examined: a -month-old is read whatever books the parent
selects, but a one-year old can be quite insistent about their choices.

To look at this, we examined the percentage of children in each age group
being read (i) one of the three most popular books (books listed more than
 times) and (ii) any book listed  or more times (or by at least ∼% of
the sample), shown in Figure . (Of course, the second number subsumes
the ﬁrst: if a child is being read a book listed more than  times they are
by deﬁnition being read a book listed more than  times.) On the ﬁrst
metric there do appear to be some diﬀerences in books by age; % of the
children in the youngest age group are being read one of the three most
in contrast to just over % of children aged –
popular books,
months. The diﬀerences are not as large when we consider all the books
listed  or more times, in contrast. These are quite popular with parents
of the youngest children (almost % of the youngest children are being
read a book listed more than  times) and remain quite popular even
with the older children (·% of the children aged – months are



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000490

H U D S O N K A M A N D M A T T H E W S O N

Fig. . Percentage of children at each age being read a book reported more than

 times / more than  times.

being read a book listed more than  times), who presumably have more
personal choice over the books they are being read.

Although the percentage of children being read books listed more than 
times is fairly constant, there could of course be a lot of diﬀerences in which
particular books in that set children are hearing across the age groups. As this
paper is not intended as an in-depth discussion of books by age, we will not
break this down too ﬁnely, but we did look at how much of the ‘over ’
children are the same or diﬀerent from the ‘over ’ children at the two
youngest and two oldest age groups. (We grouped two ages together at the
youngest and the oldest ranges just to get a larger sample.) Considering
the children aged – months of age, ·% of all the children in that age
range are being read a book listed more than  times plus another book
listed more than  but not + times. No child in this age range is only
being read one of the books listed + times but not another book listed
+ plus times; however, ·% of the children aged – months of age
are being read a book listed more than  but not  or more times. For
children aged – months, only ·% are being read a book listed more
than  times as well as another book listed over  but fewer than 
times. In this age range as well, no child is only being read a book listed
+ times but no other book listed more than  but less than  times.
What does this mean for analyses of children’s books? It suggests that any
analysis that focuses on only the highly frequently reported books (i.e. those
reported + times in this survey) will do a middling job at capturing the
younger children’s input, as ·% of the youngest children in our survey



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000490

T H E I N F A N T B O O K R E A D I N G D A T A B A S E

were being read one of those three very frequently reported books. And it
will do a poor job at capturing the older children’s input, as fewer than
% of the children in this age group were being read one of the three
books listed + times. However, an analysis of the books listed less
frequently (i.e. more than  but less than  times) will capture the
input children at all age ranges are receiving. This brief breakout analysis
shows that the choice of books to analyze will aﬀect the generalizability of
ﬁndings in diﬀerent ways for diﬀerent ages.

A C O M P A R I S O N B E T W E E N O U R D A T A S E T A N D P R E V I O U S S E T S O F B O O K S

A N A L Y Z E D
This leads to the question of how our dataset compares to lists that have been
analyzed by recently published work interested in the link between books
and language development. Previous lists of books did not include as
many titles as we have in our list. Thus, we will present comparisons
between their
list overall, but we will also present
comparisons between the other lists and the most frequently provided
books on our list at a level that makes sense given the number of books on
the other list.

lists and our

Cameron-Faulkner and Noble () compiled a database of twenty books
from the Amazon UK website bestsellers list to compare sentence types in
child directed speech (CDS) and book text. Only two of the titles they
analyzed appear in our top  titles: One Fish, Two Fish, Red Fish, Blue
Fish by Dr Seuss (listed  times in our dataset) and Hug by J. Alborough
(mentioned  times), and only six of
their twenty books appeared
anywhere in our dataset. One of the books they list is actually a collection
of fairy tales and they note which speciﬁc ones they analyzed for their
study. Of those fairy tales, one is listed as a separate item eight times in
our data (Three Little Pigs), another occurred six times in various forms in
our dataset (Cinderella), another is listed three times (Little Red Riding
Hood), another two times (Sleeping Beauty), and one did not occur at all
(The Story of Rumplestiltskin). The generic “Fairy tales” also shows up
once in our dataset, “Grimm’s fairy tales” once, and “World fairy tales”
once as well. Even with these various fairy tale accountings, it appears that
the books Cameron-Faulkner and Noble analyzed are not very popular
with children aged – months or their caregivers, and so may not be the
best books to analyze if one cares about the input children are actually
hearing.

One possible reason for the large discrepancy is the fact that Cameron-
Faulkner and Noble () were using sales data from the UK Amazon
site, whereas most of our respondents came from North America: it is
entirely possible that the books which are popular in the two places are



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000490

H U D S O N K A M A N D M A T T H E W S O N

diﬀerent. As mentioned previously, although we did not ask for geographic
information, sometimes the survey provider recorded it. Thus, it is possible
to examine just the responses of respondents who were known to be in the
UK. Keeping in mind that our conﬁrmed UK sample was quite small (N
= ),
the books analyzed by
Cameron-Faulkner and Noble were listed by these respondents. Although
people are clearly buying those books for children, they may not be ones
children are hearing.

is interesting to note that none of

it

Montag, Jones, and Smith () compared lexical diversity in CDS and
children’s books. They selected  children’s books for analysis (p. )
“from lists of librarian-recommended picture books, amazon.com best
sellers, and circulation statistics from the Infant and Preschool sections of
the Monroe County (Indiana) Public Library”. As with the selection
method used by Cameron-Faulkner and Noble (), this seems to be a
reasonable method for selecting a sample of books young children are
hearing. However, we again see some mismatches between the books
appearing in the IBDb and their sample.

Montag et al.’s () database is larger than Cameron-Faulkner and
Noble’s (), including  titles, and the overlap between our two
datasets is greater. Sixty-two of their  books appear in our dataset, but
only  occur in our top  books. An additional four of their titles occur
in series that are mentioned in our dataset. So while about / of the
books they analyze are mentioned by the caregivers who responded to our
survey, only / of their books are even relatively frequent in our data
(listed seven or more times). Another third were listed very infrequently:
 of the books in their sample were mentioned once in our survey, a
further  were mentioned twice,  were mentioned three times, and  titles
were listed by four respondents.

Another way to compare the lists is to start with our list and see whether
the books that are listed most frequently by our respondents are on the lists
of books other researchers have analyzed. The previous paragraphs provide
the information regarding the top  books on our list. Here we discuss
the top . These are books listed  or more times by our respondents.
Twelve of our top  books were also in the Montag et al. () list; only
one was in the list of books analyzed by Cameron-Faulkner and Noble
().

We should point out that our survey targeted parents and caregivers of
children aged – months. Cameron-Faulkner and Noble () state
they were looking at books for two-year-olds, and Montag et al. ()
were targeting books for children aged – months. So the three datasets
are targeted at diﬀerent aged children. However, there is enough overlap
that we do not think it likely that the diﬀering age targets are solely
responsible for the diﬀerences in books included in the three datasets (e.g.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000490

T H E I N F A N T B O O K R E A D I N G D A T A B A S E

almost  of the children represented in our dataset are aged – months,
i.e. more-or-less two-year-olds, and the entire age range is within the age
range Montag et al., are concerned with). Note that we cannot look just at
the number of two-year-olds given the age ranges in our age categories.
The earliest two-year-old category is – months, including both one-
and two-year-olds, and the oldest is – months, so including new
three-year-olds as well.

It is clear, then, that there is not a tremendous amount of overlap between
the books in our dataset and those that have been used for previous analyses.
Whether or not this is a problem is a separate question, and one we are not
going to attempt to answer. Interestingly, the genres of the books are largely
the same in all three databases – storybooks. Because they are all primarily of
the same type, the books in our dataset and those used in previous analyses
may present children with fairly equivalent input, in terms of sentence
complexity or lexical diversity, the variables the previous researchers were
interested in.

However, we know that children are read other kinds of books, especially
word books. Importantly, these other kinds of books do show up in our
dataset, in contrast to the other datasets; they are just either not in the top
 (and so weren’t mentioned in the comparisons just reported) or are
not uniquely identiﬁed. For example, there were eight diﬀerent identiﬁed
color/colour books mentioned (accounting for  responses in total) and
ten diﬀerent identiﬁed word books (accounting for  responses in total)
(e.g. Richard Scarry’s Best Word Book Ever). There were also twenty-eight
mentions of colour/color books that could not be identiﬁed, and thirty-
four non-identiﬁable mentions of word books (e.g. “First words”). Thus,
our dataset can provide a broader picture of what children are hearing in
the books they are being read.

Additionally, recall that we also asked parents whether and how much they
stick to the text in the book for each of the ﬁve books they listed, something
that clearly aﬀects the input children are receiving in bookreading sessions. It
not clear how reliable this information is, as it was asking people to recall
how they typically read a book, something they may not be very good at.
In addition, this information was not provided by all respondents, or for
every book each person listed. However, it is part of the dataset and so
available to researchers interested in how reading practices might diﬀer by
age, language development, or book genre.

Another advantage of our dataset is that it is possible to analyze subsets of
the data, for example, books being read to preverbal versus verbal children,
or boys versus girls. Or one can look at books being read to children at
diﬀerent ages, or by parents with diﬀerent levels of education. It is these
latter possibilities that we feel make the dataset so useful. The brief
analysis we conducted above looking at the distribution of ‘popular’ or



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000490

H U D S O N K A M A N D M A T T H E W S O N

(somewhat) frequently listed books across age is an example of the potential
of this kind of break-out analysis.

One issue raised by the comparisons (and an anonymous reviewer) is the
question of representativeness. That is, what does it mean for a sample of
children’s books to be representative of books children are actually being
exposed to? Previous researchers have taken pains to construct what
seemed to be reasonable samples of books to analyze, yet their samples do
not overlap much with the books listed frequently in our survey, even
when ‘frequent’ was deﬁned very minimally (i.e. reported by less than %
of our sample). But is a book being read by less than % of our sample
really any more representative than the books in the other lists analyzed?
It’s not entirely clear how to answer that question other than to say that
we would argue it is more representative than a book that no parent or
caregiver reports reading, as was the case for fourteen of the books in the
Cameron-Faulkner and Noble () sample and thirty-two of the books
in the Montag et al. () sample. Note that we asked about books the
caregiver was reading ‘most often’ to the child at the time, that is, books
that were being read over and over. Given this, our survey would have
missed books that were read once or twice and then left aside. It is
possible that the books that are popularly purchased or frequently checked
out of the library (i.e. those included in the other analyses) are ones that
are read once or twice to children but then not much thereafter. Thus,
they would be books that children would receive less exposure to. Whether
the books analyzed by Cameron-Faulkner and Noble and Montag et al.,
are diﬀerent in any notable or input-relevant ways from the books listed
frequently (or at all) in our data is an empirical question but, going
forward, it would seem to us to be more prudent to analyze books that we
know for certain that at least some children are being read. Although we
cannot know that books not listed in our survey are not being read, we do
know that books listed in our survey are. It is also worthwhile considering
why the discrepancies exist between our sample and theirs. We can only
speculate, but our suspicion, based on our experience as parents and
therefore book-selectors, is that the best-seller and library lists are books
that appeal to adults doing the purchasing as opposed to children. Once
children can exert some agency over the books they hear, this distinction
becomes increasingly important. Therefore, any analysis concerned with
books read to older children needs to consider the nature of the sampling
technique more carefully than one looking at books read to younger children.

C O N C L U S I O N
Although we initially created this dataset to conduct our own research on a
speciﬁc aspect of input and children’s books, we quickly realized the



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000490

T H E I N F A N T B O O K R E A D I N G D A T A B A S E

potential the dataset had, and so decided to share it with the wider research
community. It is our hope that this database (the Infant Bookreading
Database or IBDb) will help researchers interested in children’s books,
language acquisition, and input for many years to come.

R E F E R E N C E S

Bus, A. G., van IJzendoorn, M. H. & Pellegrini, A. D. (). Joint book reading makes for
success in learning to read: a meta-Analysis on intergenerational transmission of literacy.
Review of Educational Research , –.

Cameron-Faulkner, T. & Noble, C. (). A comparison of book text and Child Directed

Speech. First Language , –.

Davies, M. (–). The Corpus of Contemporary American English:  million words, –

Present. Online: <http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/>.

Fletcher, K. L. & Reese, E. (). Picture book reading with young children: a conceptual

framework. Developmental Review , –.

Leech, K. A. & Rowe, M. L. (). A comparison of preschool children’s discussions with

parents during picture book and chapter book reading. First Language , –.

Lyytinen, P., Laasko, M. & Poikkeus, A. (). Parental contributions to child’s early
language and interest in books. European Journal of Psychology of Education , –.
Montag, J. L., Jones, M. N. & Smith, L. B. (). The words children hear: picture books

and the statistics for language learning. Psychological Science , –.

Montag, J. L. & MacDonald, M. C. (). Text exposure predicts spoken production of
complex sentences in eight and twelve year old children and adults. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General , –.

Nyhout, A. & O’Neill, D. (). Mothers’ complex talk when sharing books with their

toddlers: book genre matters. First Language , –.

Price, L. H., Van Kleeck, A. & Huberty, C. J. (). Talk during book sharing between
parents and preschool children: a comparison between storybook and expository book
conditions. Reading Research Quarterly , –.

Raikes, H., Pan, B. A., Luze, G., Tamis-LeMonda, C. S., Brooks-Gunn, J., Constantine, J.,
Tarullo, L. B., Raikes, H. A. & Rodriguez, E. T. (). Mother–child bookreading in low-
income families: correlates and outcomes during the ﬁrst three years of life. Child
Development , –.

Statistics Canada (). Data table for Chart : population aged  to  with university
education and their employment rate, Canada, provinces and territories, and selected OECD
countries,
. Online: <http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/--x//c-g/desc/
desc-eng.htm> (last accessed  November ).

United States Census Bureau (). Educational attainment table . Detailed years of school
completed by people  years and over by sex, age groups, race and Hispanic origin: 
[Data File]. Online: <https://www.census.gov/hhes/socdemo/education/data/cps//
tables.html> (last accessed  November ).

Appendix A

The survey questions and response possibilities are listed here in order. They
are numbered here for convenience, but note that not all questions were
numbered in the survey. The actual survey was separated into six diﬀerent
pages plus the initial consent page (not copied here).



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000490

H U D S O N K A M A N D M A T T H E W S O N

. What is your child’s age?

To answer this, the respondent clicked on one of the following choices:
– months, – months, – months, – months, – months, –
months, – months, – months, – months, – months,
– months, – months, – months, – months, –
months, – months, – months, – months.

. Is your child a: girl/boy? (each response had its own circle that the

respondent clicked on)

. Was your child born full-term (at  weeks or more)? Yes/No (For this
and all other Y/N questions, Yes and No selections (circles to click on)
were placed under the question. Yes was always on top of No.)

. Does your child have any diagnosed hearing, language, or cognitive

delays? Yes/No

. Does your child produce any words yet? Yes/No
. Does your child say more than  words that you can understand? Yes/

No

. Does your child produce any two-word sequences yet? Yes/No
. Does your child produce any sequences of more than three words yet?

Yes/No

. List the ﬁve books that you currently read most often to your child. Put
your child’s favorite (or the one you read most often) ﬁrst, the next
favorite (the one you read second most often) second, etc.
For this question there were ﬁve empty text boxes labeled Book One,
Book Two, Book Three, Book Four, and Book Five. The boxes were
arranged vertically, with Book One at the top and Book Five at the
bottom. The respondent typed their responses into each box.

. Are there any other books that your child hears frequently? If so, please

enter their titles into the spaces below.

. Next we have a question about how you read the books that you listed.
Speciﬁcally, we are interested in whether you stick to reading the words
in the book or do you say things not written in the book. Do you just
read the words, or do you do things like point out other parts of
pictures, mention other features of the objects in the book not listed,
or use diﬀerent words than those written in the book?
Thinking about “Book One” (ﬁeld populated by participant’s earlier
response), do you:

– always just read the words printed in the book
– mostly just read the words printed in the book but sometimes say

other things

– read the words in the book and say other things about equally often
– sometimes read the words in the book/mostly say other things
– never read the words in the book/always say other things.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000490

T H E I N F A N T B O O K R E A D I N G D A T A B A S E

This was repeated for books –. Each of the options was preceded by a
circle that the respondent could click on to make their selection. They
could only select one option.
And ﬁnally, some questions about you.

. Your gender (male/female/other)
. Your age (under , –, –, –, –, –, –, over )
. Your highest level of education completed: elementary school, HS, some
higher education (e.g. trade certiﬁcate, some university or college),
Bachelors degree, Masters degree, PhD, Professional Postgraduate
degree
For these ﬁnal three questions, each of the options listed after the
question was a possible response that the respondent could select.

Appendix B

Top  most frequently listed books

Title

Author

Times reported

Goodnight moon
The very hungry caterpillar
Brown bear, brown bear, what
do you see?
Little blue truck
Moo, baa, la la la!
The going to bed book
The gruﬀalo
Guess how much I love you
Chicka chicka boom boom
Love you forever
Go dog. Go!
Are you my mother?
Barnyard dance!
Dr. Seuss’s ABC
Green eggs and ham
On the night you were born
The cat in the hat
I love you through and through
Goodnight, goodnight construction
site
Hand, hand, ﬁngers, thumb
Hop on pop

M. Wise Brown
E. Carle
B. Martin & E. Carle

A. Schertle
S. Boynton
S. Boynton
J. Donaldson
S. McBratney
B. Martin & J. Archambault
R. Munsch
P. D. Eastman
P. D. Eastman
S. Boynton
Dr. Seuss
Dr. Seuss
N. Tillman
Dr. Seuss
B. Rossetti-Shustak
S. Rinker

A. Perkins
Dr. Seuss













































Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000490

H U D S O N K A M A N D M A T T H E W S O N

Title

(cont.)

Author

Times reported

H. A. Rey
P. Rathman
Dr. Seuss
P. Zelinsky
Raﬃ
M. Fox
S. Boynton
S. Boynton
M. Sendak
Dr. Seuss
R. Campbell
J. & A. Ahlberg
S. Boynton
R. Munsch
S. Boynton
M. Wise Brown
E. Hill
D. Kunhardt
M. Wise Brown
G. Andreae
M. Rosen
K. Katz
R. Scarry

Ten little ﬁngers and ten little toes M. Fox
Curious George
Good night, gorilla
Mr. Brown can moo! Can you?
The wheels on the bus
Baby beluga
Time for bed
But not the hippopotamus
Pajama time!
Where the wild things are
One ﬁsh two ﬁsh red ﬁsh blue ﬁsh
Dear zoo
Each peach pear plum
Hippos go berserk!
Mortimer
Snuggle puppy!
The runaway bunny
Where’s Spot?
Pat the bunny
Big red barn
Giraﬀes can’t dance
We’re going on a bear hunt
Where is baby’s belly button?
I am a bunny
Sometimes I like to curl up in a ball V. Churchill
The paper bag princess
There’s a wocket in my pocket!
Little blue truck leads the way
Oh, the thinks you can think!
Blue hat, green hat
Llama llama red pajama
The foot book
The very cranky bear
Belly button book!
Busytown: cars and trucks & things
that go
Good night Vancouver
I love you, stinky face

R. Munsch
Dr. Seuss
A. Schertle
Dr. Seuss
S. Boynton
A. Dewdney
Dr. Seuss
N. Bland
S. Boynton
R. Scarry

D. Adams
L. McCourt













































































Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000490

T H E I N F A N T B O O K R E A D I N G D A T A B A S E

Title

(cont.)

Author

Times reported

O. Jeﬀers
S. Boynton
B. Martin & E. Carle

K. Wilson
D. Cronin
E. Carle
S. Boynton
B. Degen
L. Bemelman
Dr. Seuss
I. Falconer
B. Potter
N. Tillman

Lost and found
Are you a cow?
Baby bear, baby bear, what do
you see?
Bear snores on
Click, clack, moo: cows that type
From head to toe
Horns to toes and in between
Jamberry
Madeline
Oh, the places you’ll go!
Olivia
The tale of Peter Rabbit
Wherever you are my love will ﬁnd
you
R. Priddy
B is for bear
K. Lewis
Chugga-chugga choo-choo
Cliﬀord the big red dog
N. Bridwell
Don’t let the pigeon drive the bus! M. Willems
Fox in socks
Hug
I want my hat back
If you give a mouse a cookie
Knuﬄe bunny
Llama llama nighty-night
Night-night, little pookie
Oh my oh my oh dinosaurs!
Pete the cat: I love my white shoes
Polar bear, polar bear, what do you
hear?
Tails
M. van Fleet
The gruﬀalo’s child
J. Donaldson
The little engine that could
W. Piper
The monster at the end of this book J. Stone
Corduroy
Doggies
Grumpy bird
Peepo!

Dr. Seuss
J. Alborough
J. Klassen
L. Numeroﬀ
M. Willems
A. Dewdney
S. Boynton
S. Boynton
J. Dean
B. Martin & E. Carle

D. Freeman
S. Boynton
J. Tankard
J. & A. Ahlberg









































































Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000490

H U D S O N K A M A N D M A T T H E W S O N

Title

Thomas & friends: Thomas the tank
engine
Tickle time!
Dogs
Harry the dirty dog
How to catch a star
Ten little ladybugs
The lorax
The many adventures of Winnie the
Pooh
The pout-pout ﬁsh
The snowy day
Thomas and friends: go, train, go!
Where is the green sheep?

(cont.)

Author

Reverend Awdry

S. Boynton
E. Gravett
G. Zion
O. Jeﬀers
M. Gerth
Dr. Seuss
A. A. Milne

D. Diesen
E. Keats
Reverend Awdry
M. Fox

Times reported



























Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:31, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000490


