Applied Psycholinguistics 38 (2017), 571–600
doi:10.1017/S0142716416000333

Listening comprehension of
academic and everyday language in
ﬁrst language and second language
students

ALEXANDRA MARX
Humboldt University of Berlin and University of Potsdam

BIRGIT HEPPT and SOFIE HENSCHEL
Humboldt University of Berlin

Received: October 2, 2015

Accepted for publication: May 17, 2016

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Alexandra Marx, Department of Education, University of Potsdam, Karl-Liebknecht-Straße 24–25,
Potsdam 14476, Germany. E-mail: alexandra.marx@uni-potsdam.de

ABSTRACT
Listening comprehension in academic contexts is an important prerequisite for the acquisition of
school-related skills. However, the concept of academic language is generally the subject of much
debate, and there is no consensus yet on what constitutes academic listening comprehension. To
date, it remains unclear whether listening comprehension of academic language may be regarded as
a distinct construct. The present study investigates the distinction of academic and everyday listening
comprehension in 459 ninth-grade students speaking German as a ﬁrst language or as a second
language. Empirical results provide preliminary evidence that academic listening forms a separate
facet of listening comprehension. Contrary to theoretical assumptions, second language students were
not particularly disadvantaged in terms of academic listening comprehension.

Learning in any school subject depends on students’ proﬁciency in listening com-
prehension in academic contexts (Rost, 1994). Classroom discourse has, for exam-
ple, repeatedly been found to facilitate the acquisition of reading comprehension
(cf. Nystrand, 2006; Wolf, Crosson, & Resnick, 2005). Consequently, listening
comprehension in academic contexts may be regarded as a basis for the acquisition
of knowledge and academic achievement.

For the most part, communication in academic contexts is marked by a high
level of “writtenness,” whether information is presented written or orally. Aca-
demic listening texts possess characteristics of formal and planned discourse as
they are lexically dense, context reduced, and characterized by textual structures
that resemble those of written texts (Flowerdew & Miller, 1997). Classroom talk

© Cambridge University Press 2016 0142-7164/16

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

572

may thus be localized at the interface of an oral–literate continuum where “oral”
refers to prototypical speaking in everyday conversations and “literate” refers to
prototypical writing in academic prose (Biber, 1995; Tannen, 1982). Although oral
academic language is often less complex and contains fewer academic language
features than written academic language (cf. Corson, 1997; Nagy & Townsend,
2012), oral and written academic language share important features, such as an in-
formational focus and an abstract, impersonal style (Csomay, 2006). Oral language
in academic settings is therefore more complex and more difﬁcult to process than
oral language in everyday conversations. Accordingly, several researchers have
assumed that everyday listening and academic listening comprehension may rely
on different sets of subskills and have proposed deﬁnitions of academic listening
comprehension and its components (cf. Ferris & Tagg, 1996; Richards, 1983; Tay-
lor & Geranpayeh, 2011). Most of these deﬁnitions are based on the presumption
that academic listening comprehension requires the listener to concentrate on as
well as understand long stretches of speech without being able to use the facilitat-
ing functions of interactive discourse (Flowerdew, 1994). For this particular type of
listening comprehension, some authors propose speciﬁc comprehension subskills,
such as the “differentiation between relevant and irrelevant information,” “com-
mand of strategies that support understanding (i.e., taking notes),” “the ability to
identify the topic, purpose and scope of a lecture,” or “making inferences” (e.g.,
Buck, 2001; Flowerdew, 1995; Richards, 1983). Yet it remains unclear how these
skills may be operationalized and to what extent they are speciﬁc for listening in
academic contexts. To describe challenges of academic listening comprehension,
it thus seems useful to resort to more general conceptualizations of academic
language.

CHALLENGES OF ACADEMIC LANGUAGE

The general differentiation between language skills needed to interact with others
in informal contexts and those needed to understand school-related language has
been addressed by various researchers (e.g., Bailey & Butler, 2003; Schleppegrell,
2004). An important conceptual basis of this line of research was the distinction
between basic interpersonal communication skills (BICS) and cognitive academic
language proﬁciency (CALP) proposed by Cummins (1980). According to Cum-
mins (1980), BICS are deﬁned as the language skills needed in social situations.
When people interact with each other, their communication usually requires BICS
because it occurs in a meaningful context and is thus relatively easy to understand
and cognitively not very demanding. In contrast, CALP is needed to understand
language in context-reduced settings and is cognitively demanding, such as when
abstract ideas or concepts are presented. CALP thus primarily pertains to language
typically used in academic contexts and can be deﬁned as “the extent to which an
individual has access to and command of the oral and written academic registers
of schooling” (Cummins, 2000, p. 67).

The differentiation between BICS and CALP served as a basis for further con-
ceptualizations of academic language. To date, there is no single deﬁnition of
what constitutes academic language, and a variety of terms have been suggested
to label the construct, such as “language of schooling,” “scientiﬁc language,” or

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

573

“advanced literacy” (cf. Snow & Uccelli, 2009). The US-based National Center
for Research on Evaluation, Standards, and Student Testing (CRESST) has devel-
oped a conceptualization of academic language that adds additional features to the
CALP deﬁnition of academic language (Bailey & Butler, 2003). According to this
view, academic language can be deﬁned as “the language that is used by teachers
and students for the purpose of acquiring new knowledge and skills, imparting
new information, describing abstract ideas, and developing students’ conceptual
understanding” (Chamot & O’Malley, 1994, p. 40). On the content level, aca-
demic language is characterized by cognitively demanding school-related topics,
such as lectures on abstract concepts or ideas (Bailey & Butler, 2003; Eckhardt,
2008). It is also context reduced to a certain extent: the information conveyed is
often removed from its immediate context (i.e., there is a very limited amount of
shared knowledge or context between speaker and listener; cf. Curenton & Justice,
2004).

Academic language is associated with the mastery of speciﬁc genres, com-
mand of speciﬁc reasoning and argumentative strategies that are characteristic for
academic domains (Snow & Uccelli, 2009), as well as with language features
that pertain to speciﬁc cognitive procedures, such as generalization or abstraction
(cf. Feilke, 2012; Gottlieb & Ernst-Slavit, 2014; Heller & Morek, 2015; Nagy &
Townsend, 2012). To convey these functions, it is characterized by a more so-
phisticated use of grammar and vocabulary than everyday language and requires
the mastery of an extensive range of linguistic features (Scarcella & Rumberger,
2000). On the semantic level, academic language is characterized by functional
academic vocabulary (e.g., synthesize and denominator) that students encounter
at school but rarely in less formal social settings (Bailey & Butler, 2003; Uesseler,
Runge, & Redder, 2013). English academic language has also been described
as lexically dense and, on the syntactic level, comprising verb forms in passive
voice, long and complex noun, and prepositional phrases, nominalizations, and
participial modiﬁers (Abedi & Lord, 2001; Schleppegrell, 2004).

During the last few years, a number of authors have also proposed taxonomies
of academic language in German (e.g., Feilke, 2012; Gogolin & Lange, 2011;
Uesseler et al., 2013; Vollmer & Th¨urmann, 2010). Morek and Heller (2012)
offer a synopsis of the lexical, grammatical, and discourse features that have
been described in these taxonomies. According to this conceptualization, the
academic register is characterized by the features described in Table 1. For the most
part, these features correspond to the language features that have been suggested
as characteristics of academic language in English (e.g., Bailey, Huang, Shin,
Farnsworth, & Butler, 2007; Snow & Uccelli, 2009).

Academic language in German and English is marked by a frequent use of
the features described above, whereas these features occur to a lesser extent in
everyday language (cf. Bailey, 2007; Schleppegrell, 2004). Accordingly, several
researchers have argued that texts may be located on a continuum, with texts
containing everyday language and academic language features at the end points
(Berendes, Dragon, Weinert, Heppt, & Stanat, 2013; Snow, 2010). However, to
date it remains unclear whether understanding listening texts that contain predom-
inantly academic versus everyday language features is associated with different
cognitive processes and hence with different facets of listening comprehension.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

Table 1. Features of academic language

574

Lexical features
(cid:129) Quality of lexis: diverse, subject speciﬁc

Preﬁx verbs (e.g., to reverse, to preempt, to substitute)
Nominal compounds (e.g., bar graph, two-digit number, bottom line)
Standardized technical terms (e.g., rectangular, rule of three)

(cid:129) Lexical density

Content words instead of pronouns
Nominalizations and elaborate noun phrases (e.g., legilization, editing, average
breath-holding capacity)

Syntactic features
(cid:129) Sentences instead of prosodic segmentation
(cid:129) Local coherence by

Cohesion markers (e.g., conjunctions)
Complex sentences (e.g., relative, conjunctive, and disjunctive clauses; inﬁnitival,
participle clauses)

(cid:129) Mode of representation

Declarative mood
Impersonal expressions (e.g., agentless passives)

Discursive features
(cid:129) Speaker roles and turn taking organization (pre)determined
(cid:129) Monological forms (e.g., lecture, presentation, essay)
(cid:129) Subject-speciﬁc text types (e.g., minutes, report)
(cid:129) Stylistic standards (e.g., objectivity, well structured, adequate length of text)

Note: Adapted from “Academic Discourse as Situated Practice: An Introduction,” by
V. Heller and M. Morek, 2015, Linguistics and Education, 31, p. 176. Copyright 2015
by Elsevier. Adapted with permission.

ACADEMIC LANGUAGE IN SECOND LANGUAGE (L2) LEARNERS

L2 and ﬁrst language (L1) students both need to acquire academic language when
they enter school because it forms the basis of the acquisition of school-related
skills. However, L2 children may face a double challenge: they need to learn the
school-speciﬁc register, and they need to do so in a language that is not their native
one (Aarts, Demir, & Vallen, 2011). Some researchers assume that L2 speakers
acquire conversational language faster than academic language (Collier, 1989;
Roessingh, Kover, & Watt, 2005). Cummins (2008), for example, reports a gap of
several years between the attainment of conversational ﬂuency, which is usually
acquired within 2 years of exposure to a particular language, and the attainment of
academic language proﬁciency, which may take 5 to 7 years. Analyzing data from
four different school districts in the United States, Hakuta, Butler, and Witt (2000)
conﬁrmed this assumption and showed that it took English language learners 3 to
5 years to develop everyday language skills in English while the acquisition of
academic language proﬁciency in English took 4 to 7 years. The rate of academic
language attainment in L2 may depend on the age of arrival and prior schooling in
L1: older children from ages 8 to 12 and adolescents who have already completed

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

575

several years of schooling in their L1 tend to acquire L2 academic language
faster than younger children who did not attend school in their L1 (Collier, 1989).
However, even the academic language skills of advanced L2 learners may not
reach those of L1 students (Mason, 1995).

CRITICISM OF AND EMPIRICAL RESULTS ON ACADEMIC LANGUAGE

The differentiation between BICS and CALP proposed by Cummins (2000) has
been criticized for a variety of reasons (for an overview, see Cummins, 2008).
The concept might be of limited practical utility (Scarcella, 2003) because it does
not specify which language skills are encompassed in CALP (Snow & Uccelli,
2009) and thus may not sufﬁce to construct tasks and promote learning. Given the
absence of a detailed description of CALP skills, Edelsky et al. (1983) propose that
academic language is an artifact of the way it is measured and hence represents
nothing but a form of “testwiseness.” Furthermore, it is questionable whether
everyday language is always contextualized and less cognitively demanding than
academic language. Persuasion, deceiving, or winning over others in everyday life,
for example, requires cognitive abilities as complex as those needed to comprehend
a persuasive argument in a social studies textbook (Bailey & Huang, 2011).

To date, only few studies have sought to differentiate academic language and
everyday language empirically. Evidence concerning the assumed differences be-
tween everyday conversational listening and academic listening is particularly
scarce (Buck, 2001). In Germany, ﬁrst studies are presently carried out to identify
German academic language features on an empirical basis. Most of these studies
analyze language features occurring in German academic textbooks in the upper
grades (Ahrenholz, 2013; Ahrenholz & Maak, 2012; Meurers, Berendes, Vajjala,
& Bryant, 2015). Furthermore, a current research project aims at establishing a
corpus of the German language used in schools. This corpus comprises transcripts
of oral communication in German classrooms as well as textbooks and written
texts by students in the primary grades (K¨ohne, Kronenwerth, Redder, Schuth, &
Weinert, 2015). Although conclusive results from these projects are not yet avail-
able, preliminary ﬁndings indicate that the features discussed as characteristics of
German academic language on a theoretical basis do occur in classroom discourse
and textbooks.

Research that focused on written English language has also provided some
empirical support for the assumption that academic and everyday language might
be separable. Schleppegrell (2004) analyzed linguistic features of academic texts
and transcripts of everyday conversations and found evidence for the theoretically
postulated differences between academic and everyday language. In a similar vein,
a number of studies indicated that the linguistic complexity of test items in math-
ematics or science tests impacted item difﬁculties differentially (e.g., Martiniello,
2008; Shaftel, Belton-Kocher, Glasnapp, & Poggio, 2006). The speciﬁc difﬁculty
of test items containing academic language features compared to items containing
everyday language features provides some support for the assumption of different
language registers.

For listening comprehension of academic language, Shohamy and Inbar (1991)
investigated the effects of different types of listening texts (oral oriented vs. literal

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

576

oriented) on L2 students in 12th grade. The authors did not explicitly mention
that they were measuring academic and everyday listening comprehension, but
the operationalization of the oral/literate listening texts is in line with central
assumptions on academic and everyday listening. The results indicate that listening
texts containing academic language features were signiﬁcantly more difﬁcult to
process for the L2 listeners than everyday listening texts, thus supporting the
notion that academic listening poses special demands on L2 listeners. Because
Shohamy and Inbar (1991) did not include an L1 comparison group in their study,
however, it remains unclear whether differences in academic versus everyday
listening comprehension may also be found in native students and whether L2
listeners are differentially affected by academic language. Furthermore, the main
focus of this study was on oral versus literate texts, such that the authors did not
include all features that may be relevant to differentiate academic from everyday
listening.

An initial study in Germany offers empirical support for the differentiation
of German academic versus everyday listening in terms of the underlying mor-
phosyntactic and lexical features (Gantefort & Roth, 2010; Roth, Neumann, &
Gogolin, 2007). In this study with bilingual elementary students in Grade 4, oral
classroom discourse was videotaped, transliterated, and then analyzed using con-
ﬁrmatory factor analysis. The authors thus were able to identify different modes
of oral language within the classrooms: First, a conversational mode, in which
students used colloquial language, such as high-frequency words or colloquial ex-
pressions, and second, an academic mode, which was marked by a high frequency
of nominalizations, compounds, clause connectors, and impersonal expressions.
Third, the authors identiﬁed an elaborated mode, which was characterized by the
frequent use of subjunctives and constructions in passive voice. The authors postu-
late that the main features of German academic language are those typical for the
academic and the elaborated mode (cf. Gantefort & Roth, 2010). However, it must
be noted that no transcripts of conversational language outside the classroom were
made, thus leaving unclear whether the conversational mode adequately reﬂects
the conversational language students use in their everyday lives.

In line with theories on academic language in L2 students, some studies with En-
glish language learners have lent support to the notion that academic language may
be especially difﬁcult to acquire for these students. Uccelli, Galloway, Barr, Mene-
ses, and Dobbs (2015), for example, investigated academic language proﬁciency in
elementary school students. Their operationalization of academic language skills
not only pertains to the linguistic features of the register but also offers a more
integrated conceptualization of academic language, including further skills such
as connecting ideas logically or tracking participants and themes. The results from
this study indicate that L2 students performed more poorly than L1 students on the
academic language test. Similarly, Townsend, Filippini, Collins, and Biancarosa
(2012) showed that L1 middle school students outperformed their L2 counterparts
on a measure of academic vocabulary. It must be noted that both studies focused
on academic language competencies, but did not investigate students’ everyday
language competencies. Hence, these studies do not provide evidence that differ-
ences in L1 and L2 students’ academic language competencies might be more
pronounced than differences in their everyday language competencies.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

577

A number of other studies have challenged the assumption that academic lan-
guage is particularly difﬁcult for L2 students (Eckhardt, 2008; Heppt, Stanat,
Dragon, Berendes, & Weinert, 2014). Eckhardt (2008) reported for German ele-
mentary students that L1 and L2 students performed less well on listening com-
prehension tasks that contained complex grammatical features and academic vo-
cabulary. Furthermore, she found weaker performance for both groups of students
on texts with school-related contents as opposed to texts with everyday contents.
In a third study, Eckhardt (2008) varied the contextual embedding of the listen-
ing comprehension tasks. Texts that were context reduced (verbally described
ﬁlm scenes) were clearly more difﬁcult to understand for elementary school
students than texts that were supported by visual context (acted ﬁlm scenes).
Contrary to the author’s expectation, these characteristics did not generally af-
fect the performance of L2 students more than the performance of L1 students.
Only for texts that contained school-related content, Eckhardt (2008) found L2
students’ performance to be more strongly affected than L1 students’ perfor-
mance, but this effect disappeared when students’ socioeconomic background was
controlled.

This ﬁnding adds to a number of studies indicating that children from different
socioeconomic backgrounds differ considerably in terms of language proﬁciency
(Hoff, 2013). Aarts et al. (2011), for example, point out that mothers from families
of high socioeconomic status (SES) tend to use more academic language features
when talking to their children than mothers from families of lower SES. Given that
L2 students are often disadvantaged in terms of their socioeconomic background
(Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2010), it is necessary
to disentangle effects of language background and SES when comparing academic
language skills in L1 and L2 students.

Taken together, empirical research has supported the assumption that processing
academic language can be more difﬁcult than processing everyday language.
Contrary to theoretical assumptions on academic language, however, studies have
not consistently shown that L2 students are disproportionally disadvantaged in
their comprehension of academic language when compared to L1 students. This
may result from the fact that most studies have focused on beginning level L2
learners with limited language skills, or on students in elementary grades. Because
academic language closely resembles everyday language in elementary grades, it
may be assumed that disadvantages of L2 students with academic language texts
do not become visible until the later grades, when language becomes increasingly
demanding in terms of academic features (Chudaske, 2012).

Furthermore, previous research has focused on academic language in terms of
classiﬁcation of texts and tasks. Yet, academic language is associated with speciﬁc
language characteristics, such as sophisticated grammatical and lexical features
that are associated with speciﬁc cognitive processes and demand a more elaborated
language proﬁciency than that needed to process everyday language (cf. Gottlieb
& Ernst-Slavit, 2014; Scarcella & Rumberger, 2000). It may therefore be assumed
that the processing of academic language constitutes a speciﬁc facet of language
proﬁciency. It remains unclear, however, whether listening comprehension of
academic language and everyday language are associated with distinct facets
of language proﬁciency.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND HYPOTHESES

578

To date, the ﬁndings on academic language comprehension in older students are
inconclusive and empirical evidence on the differentiation between academic and
everyday language comprehension is scarce. In our study, we varied features of
academic language and investigated whether listening comprehension of academic
language and listening comprehension of everyday language may be separable
on the basis of these features in a sample of adolescent L1 and L2 students.
Because grammatical features and, even more so, vocabulary knowledge are the
most important aspects of academic oral proﬁciency in learning another language
(Nagy & Townsend, 2012; Saville-Troike, 1984), we based our study on the
CRESST deﬁnition of academic language that puts a special emphasis on linguistic
features of academic language. The following research questions and hypotheses
are addressed:

1. Can listening comprehension of academic language and everyday language be
differentiated on the basis of features of academic language suggested in the liter-
ature (school-based content, reduced context, linguistic complexity)? We expect
that academic language comprehension and everyday language comprehension
may be distinguished empirically and that they show differential correlations
to students’ vocabulary and syntactic knowledge. More speciﬁcally, we assume
students’ vocabulary and syntactic knowledge to be more closely associated
with their academic language comprehension than with their everyday language
comprehension because academic language is assumed to entail vocabulary and
syntactic features that are more difﬁcult to process.

2. Are there performance differences between adolescent L1 and L2 students in
listening comprehension of academic and everyday language? We expect L2 stu-
dents to generally perform lower than L1 students on measures of listening com-
prehension. Based on theoretical assumptions that assume academic language to
be more challenging for L2 adolescents than for L1 adolescents, we predict that
these performance differences are more pronounced for listening comprehension
of academic language than for listening comprehension of everyday language.

METHOD

Participants

There were 479 students from 20 schools who took part in the study. Of these,
20 students did not complete any of the test items and were therefore excluded
from the analyses, resulting in a total of 459 students (45% female, 55% male).
All students were in ninth grade, and their mean age was 16.3 years (SD = 0.9).
The majority of students (43%) attended the lowest secondary school track of the
German educational system (Hauptschule), 25% attended the intermediate track
(Realschule), and 32% attended a comprehensive school (Gesamtschule), which
provides several courses of education under one roof. All schools were public
schools with 60% or more students with an immigration background and were
located in urban districts with a high proportion of low-income or immigrant
background population. Students who reported to have learned German as their

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

579
L1 within their families were designated as the L1 group (n = 173). Students
who reported a language other than German as their L1 were designated as the
L2 group (n = 286). The most frequent L1s in the latter group were Turkish
(70.0%), Arabic (7.2%), and Italian (6.7%). Although most L2 students were
born in Germany (76.6%), the majority indicated speaking a language other than
German in their homes (67.9%). Most of the L2 students (89.9%) started speaking
German before the age of 6 years, such that they had been speaking German for at
least 10 years. Another 3.2% of L2 students had acquired German for more than 7
years, and the remaining 6.9% of L2 students had started acquiring German after
the age of 10 years. The latter students’ teachers evaluated their German language
skills as being sufﬁciently developed; hence, none of these students was excluded
from the analyses. All L1 students were born in Germany and had parents who
were born in Germany. L1 and L2 students of our sample were distributed across
the educational tracks in a similar manner, χ2 (2) = 0.44, p = .80. The language
groups did not differ in terms of age, F (1, 421) = 1.28, p = .26, or gender, χ2
(1) = 0.10, p = .75. Furthermore, we found no group differences in students’
basic cognitive abilities, F (1, 391) = 2.43, p = .12, as measured with a test on
ﬁgural analogies (Kognitiver F¨ahigkeitstest f¨ur 4. bis 12. Klassen, Revision [Test
of Cognitive Abilities for Grades 4 to 12, Revised]; Heller & Perleth, 2000).

Instruments

Listening comprehension of academic and everyday language. To assess listen-
ing comprehension of academic and everyday language, we developed a computer-
based test. Students listened to German texts with a length of 100 to 150 words
varying between 42 and 65 s in duration. All listening passages were written for the
test and were spoken by German native speakers. Four texts (50%) were dialogues
between two persons (1 male, 1 female), two texts were narratives delivered by
one speaker (25%), and two texts were expository texts (25%) delivered by one
speaker. After listening to each of the eight texts, students answered 3 to 5 items,
resulting in a total of 32 questions. Questions were either in multiple-choice for-
mat with four response options (19 items, 59%) or in constructed-response format
requiring a short written response (13 items, 41%). Items either pertained to the
texts’ main idea, for example, deciding on where a conversation may have taken
place (17 items, 53%), or aimed at local details included in the listening passage,
for example, remembering a given deﬁnition (15 items, 47%). Students were given
1 point if they chose the correct answer from the multiple-choice questions and
0 points if they chose a wrong option. Constructed response items were coded
following a coding scheme and were scored in the same way. The texts were only
presented acoustically, while all test items were presented acoustically as well
as in written form on the computer screen. As the focus of our study was on
verbal aspects of academic language, we did not use visual input (e.g., videos) to
accompany the listening texts.

The listening comprehension test consisted of two subtests: one was designed
to capture listening comprehension of academic language and the other listening
comprehension of everyday language. Both subtests included four listening texts
with 16 items, respectively. Academic texts had contents pertaining to more formal

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

580

settings (e.g., a job interview) and were context reduced, that is, provided less
information on the characters and the setting of the plot than the everyday texts. On
the linguistic level, academic texts had more syntactic features that are typical for
written discourse and have been discussed as being relevant for German academic
language (cf. Morek & Heller, 2012), namely, passive voice, complex subordinate
clauses, and complex noun phrases. Vocabulary was rated as academic following
the CRESST coding scheme for academic vocabulary (Butler, Bailey, Stevens, &
Huang, 2004). Two associate professors of German linguistics who were blind
to the research questions and the designated classiﬁcation of the texts rated the
difﬁculty of the syntactic features, the vocabulary, and the context on a scale
ranging from 1 = very easy to 6 = very difﬁcult. Units with academic listening
texts were rated to be more difﬁcult in syntactic features (M = 3.88, SD = 1.79),
vocabulary (M = 3.25, SD = 0.71), and content (M = 3.25, SD = 0.50) than
units with everyday language (M = 2.75, SD = 0.89 for syntactic features; M =
2.75, SD = 0.71 for vocabulary; and M = 1.5, SD = 1.03 for content). Interrater
reliability for the two raters was acceptable for syntactic features (κ = 0.69, p <
.01), vocabulary (κ = 0.70, p < .01), and content (κ = 0.66, p < .01).

Besides the variation of syntax and content, academic listening texts were
constructed such that they contained more academic vocabulary (e.g., syllable
and to curtail) than everyday listening texts. To classify vocabulary as academic
or everyday vocabulary, three raters classiﬁed each word in the listening texts
following the CRESST criteria (Butler et al., 2004). Interrater reliability for the
three raters was κ = 0.66 (p < .01). Appendix A provides an overview of the
listening text features for academic and everyday language units. Sample texts
and items can be found in Appendix B.

As described above, academic listening and everyday listening texts differed in
terms of their linguistic features, their content, and their contextualization. How-
ever, items for academic units as well as those for everyday units were constructed
such that they were comparable in terms of their linguistic difﬁculty. Academic
language and everyday language units were comparable pertaining to the num-
ber of items in multiple-choice versus constructed-response format, as well as in
terms of items on main ideas versus local details from the text. The tests’ internal
consistency was α = 0.71 for academic listening comprehension and α = 0.59
for everyday listening comprehension. The manifest correlation between the two
subtests was r = .54 (p < .01).

Vocabulary. We assessed vocabulary using the Culture Fair Intelligence Test—
Scale A (Weiß, 2006). The test consists of 30 multiple-choice items that require
students to ﬁnd a synonym for a given German word from a list of ﬁve words. Its
internal consistency was α = 0.81.

Syntactic knowledge. To assess students’ syntactic knowledge, we developed a
computer-based test that consists of written sentences with various syntactical
structures. Students had to decide for each sentence whether it was syntactically
correct or not. To control for guessing, students could choose between the answers
incorrect, correct, and unclear, with the latter option indicating that they were
uncertain in their judgment (sample item: Is the following sentence grammatically

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

581

correct or incorrect? “I to bed went late yesterday.” correct—incorrect—unclear).
The unclear option was later coded as wrong. The test includes 22 items and had
an internal consistency of α = 0.86 in the study sample.

SES. We used the Index of Economic, Social, and Cultural Status (ESCS; Or-
ganization for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2010) as an indicator of
students’ SES. This measure is also employed in the Programme for International
Student Assessment (PISA) studies and has a mean of 0 and a standard deviation
of 1 in the PISA student population. The components comprising the ESCS are
the families’ home possessions (such as books at home, cars, and televisions),
the highest parental occupation as measured by the International Socioeconomic
Index of Occupational Status (Ganzeboom, De Graaf, & Treiman, 1992), and the
highest parental education in years of schooling. When levels of parental occupa-
tion or education differ for mother and father, the highest level is used to indicate a
families’ occupational and educational status, respectively. All data were obtained
with student and parent questionnaires.

Analyses

We ﬁrst tested the measures of listening comprehension, vocabulary, and syntactic
knowledge for items displaying differential item functioning (DIF) as a function
of language background. DIF occurs when students with comparable abilities but
from different groups have different probabilities of success on an item (Clauser
& Mazor, 1998). Item DIF can be adverse or benign (e.g., Gierl, 2005). Benign
item DIF is typically due to a multidimensionality of the construct and should
therefore not be eliminated from the test. Adverse DIF can be attributed to the
presence of nuisance dimensions and therefore threatens construct validity, such
that items displaying adverse DIF between L1 and L2 students should be omitted.
DIF for each item was operationalized as the difference of item logit parameters
between L1 and L2 students. The values were judged not only in terms of statistical
signiﬁcance but also in terms of effect size. Logit differences above 0.64 are
considered as large magnitude DIF (cf. Wilson, 2005, p. 167). DIF, which persists
in a two-dimensional Rasch model of listening comprehension, is considered
to be adverse. Items that displayed adverse and large magnitude DIF for the
language groups were excluded from the following analyses. The DIF analyses
were conducted using the computer program ConQuest 2.0 (Wu, Adams, Wilson,
& Haldane, 2007).

To test the ﬁrst hypothesis on the separability of everyday listening and academic
listening comprehension, we conducted a conﬁrmatory factor analysis using Mplus
7.11 (Muth´en & Muth´en, 1998–2012). Students’ ESCS score was entered as
a manifest covariate into the analyses. We estimated a two-dimensional model
with items loading either on an academic or on an everyday language factor
and then compared this model to a unidimensional model with a global factor
of listening comprehension. Parameter estimates for the models are based on
the robust weighted least square estimator for categorical outcomes (Muth´en &
Muth´en, 1998–2012). We used the comparative ﬁt index, the Tucker–Lewis index,
and the root mean square error of approximation to evaluate goodness of ﬁt.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

582

Models with a Tucker–Lewis index and comparative ﬁt index coefﬁcient higher
than 0.95 and a root mean square error of approximation coefﬁcient smaller than
0.06 are regarded as good approximations to the data (Hu & Bentler, 1999). The
models were then compared using chi-square difference tests. A signiﬁcant chi-
square difference of nested models suggests that the less restrictive model ﬁts the
data better than the more restrictive model.

To further investigate dimensionality, we estimated correlations between lis-
tening comprehension of academic and everyday language and receptive vocabu-
lary and syntactic knowledge within the models. As listening comprehension of
academic language is more complex than listening comprehension of everyday
language in terms of vocabulary and syntax, listening comprehension of aca-
demic language should be more strongly associated with vocabulary and syntax
than listening comprehension of everyday language. Both external criteria were
modeled as unidimensional latent variables. We used Wald chi-square tests to de-
termine differences in the correlations between the external criteria and listening
comprehension of academic and everyday language (Wald, 1943).

In order to compare latent variable means between L1 and L2 students, as
mentioned in our second hypothesis, we ﬁrst tested the resulting listening compre-
hension model for measurement invariance to ensure applicability of the model
to both groups of students (Baumgartner & Steenkamp, 1998). We initially esti-
mated a baseline model, with the factorial structure set to be equal for the language
groups but factor loadings and means allowed to vary (conﬁgural invariance). Sub-
sequently, factor loadings (metric invariance) and, ﬁnally, means were restricted
to be equal across groups as well (scalar invariance). Again, we evaluated good-
ness of ﬁt according to model ﬁt parameters and chi-square difference tests. We
then compared latent variable means between L1 and L2 students using Wald
chi-square tests (Wald, 1943).

RESULTS

Descriptive results

Table 2 provides the means, standard deviations, and intercorrelations for all mea-
sures. The results indicate that the majority of students in our sample grew up
in low-SES families. The samples’ ESCS mean was –0.63 (SD = 0.92), which
is more than 0.5 SD below the German average (Organization for Economic Co-
operation and Development, 2010). The language groups differed in terms of their
socioeconomic background, with L2 students coming from families with lower
SES than L1 students (M = –0.33, SD = 0.84 for L1 students; M = –0.79, SD =
0.94 for L2 students), F (1, 363) = 17.50, p < .01. Table 2 also shows that ESCS
is only correlated with syntactic knowledge, vocabulary, and academic listening
comprehension, but not with everyday listening comprehension. Therefore, it is
appropriate to include ESCS as a covariate.

We did not ﬁnd any language-group differences in the syntactic knowledge
measure, which appeared to be relatively easy for all students. The L1 and L2
students solved 88% and 84% of the tasks, respectively, F (1, 382) = 3.21, p =
.07. Although students also performed well on the vocabulary test, L2 students

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

Table 2. Means and standard deviations of all measures

583

Intercorrelationsa

N

M

SD

2

3

4

5

6

1. ESCS
363
2. Vocabularyb
392
3. Syntactic knowledgeb
382
4. Listening comprehension (total)b 417
5. Listening comprehension (EL)b
417
6. Listening comprehension (AL)b
417

–0.63 0.92 .26* .16* .16* .09
0.75 0.15
0.84 0.18
0.61 0.17
0.68 0.18
0.54 0.20

.20*
.33* .44* .33* .43*
.45* .42* .37*
.85* .90*
.54*

Note: ESCS, Index of Economic, Social, and Cultural Status, reported as weighted likeli-
hood estimates. EL, Everyday language; AL, academic language.
aZero-order correlation coefﬁcients with sample sizes of 357 ࣘ N ࣘ 417.
bReported as percentage of correct answers.
*p < .01.
showed signiﬁcantly weaker vocabulary skills than L1 students (M = 0.80, SD =
0.12 for L1 students and M = 0.72, SD = 0.16 for L2 students), F (1, 392) =
14.30, p < .01. L2 students also performed less well than L1 students on the
listening comprehension test in general (M = 0.66, SD = 0.14 for L1 students
and M = 0.58, SD = 0.17 for L2 students), F (1, 417) = 29.48, p < .01. Both
groups of students showed weaker performance on the academic listening subtest
(M = 0.60, SD = 0.18 for L1 students and M = 0.50, SD = 0.21 for L2 students)
than on the everyday listening subtest (M = 0.73, SD = 0.15 for L1 students and
M = 0.65, SD = 0.18 for L2 students), yet the difference was not signiﬁcant within
either of the groups, t (153) = –0.86, p = .93 for L1 students and t (262) = 0.69,
p = .95 for L2 students.

Detecting DIF

The results of the DIF analyses indicated that the listening comprehension test as
well as the vocabulary test and the test of syntactic knowledge contained several
items displaying signiﬁcant DIF as a function of language background. We identi-
ﬁed three items (two everyday listening items and one academic listening item) as
displaying adverse and large magnitude DIF for the listening comprehension test
(9.4%), seven items (23.3%) for the vocabulary test, and two items (9.1%) for the
test of syntactic knowledge. These items were excluded from further analyses.

Dimensionality of listening comprehension

Table 3 shows the data ﬁt for the unidimensional and the two-dimensional model
of listening comprehension. The ﬁt indices suggest that both models ﬁt the data
well. However, the comparison of the models using chi-square difference testing
indicates that the ﬁt differs. The less restrictive two-dimensional model ﬁts the data
signiﬁcantly better than the more restrictive unidimensional model. Furthermore,

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

584

Table 3. Test of dimensionality for the listening comprehension test (controlling
for ESCS)

Model

χ2

df

p

RMSEA CFI TLI Compared to χ2

df

p

A: unidimensional
B: two dimensional 473.49 403

492.04 405 <.01
.01

0.02
0.02

0.94 0.94
0.95 0.95 Model A

—

— — —
2 <.01

18.15

Note: ESCS, Index of Economic, Social, and Cultural Status; RMSEA, root mean square error of
approximation; CFI, comparative ﬁt index; TLI, Tucker–Lewis index; N = 459.

the ﬁt indices comparative ﬁt index and Tucker–Lewis index improved in the two-
dimensional model, thus providing further support for the assumption that the two-
dimensional model better ﬁts the data. At the same time, listening comprehension
for academic language and listening comprehension for everyday language are
highly correlated (r= .84, p < .01), suggesting substantial overlap between the two
facets. We therefore conducted a post hoc test to analyze whether this correlation
is signiﬁcantly lower than one. For this purpose, we ﬁxed the correlation between
the two facets to one and compared this model with a model where the correlation
was not restricted. The nested model test indicates that the correlation between
the latent variables is signiﬁcantly different from 1 (χ2 = 11.92, p < .01).

We further examined the dimensionality by estimating the correlations between
the two listening comprehension scores and vocabulary and syntactic knowledge
as external criteria. Figure 1 shows the concurrent correlations between listening
comprehension of academic and everyday language on the one hand and students’
receptive vocabulary and syntactic knowledge on the other hand, controlling for
ESCS. The results indicate that syntactic knowledge is more strongly associated
with listening comprehension of everyday language than with listening compre-
hension of academic language (χ2 = 11.33, p = .01). Receptive vocabulary, in
contrast, correlates somewhat more strongly with listening comprehension of aca-
demic language than with listening comprehension of everyday language, yet the
difference is not signiﬁcant (χ2 = 0.38, p = .54). Thus, we did not ﬁnd that vo-
cabulary and syntactic knowledge were more strongly associated with academic
language comprehension as suggested by our ﬁrst hypothesis. The proportion of
explained variance was R2 = .46 for listening comprehension of everyday language
and R2 = .49 for listening comprehension of academic language.

Group differences in listening comprehension of academic language and
listening comprehension of everyday language

In order to test our second hypothesis on group differences between L1 and L2 stu-
dents in terms of listening comprehension of everyday and academic language, we
examined whether measurement invariance is given for the two groups and, thus,
whether latent means can be compared. As goodness of ﬁt does not signiﬁcantly
decrease in the more restrictive models (Table 4), scalar measurement invariance
can be assumed and means can be reasonably compared across groups.

Figure 1. Correlations between listening comprehension of academic and everyday language vocabulary and syntactic knowledge. Indica-
tors are not depicted. χ2 = 2,720.58, df = 2,546, p < .01, root mean square error of approximation > 0.01, comparative ﬁt index = 0.95,
Tucker–Lewis index = 0.95 (N = 459).

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

586

Table 4. Test of measurement invariance for the two-dimensional model (controlling
for ESCS)

Model

χ2

df

p RMSEA CFI TLI Compared to  χ2

df

p

Conﬁgural 859.73 806 .09
870.46 833 .18
Metric
Scalar
897.40 860 .18

0.02
0.01
0.01

0.95 0.94
0.96 0.96
0.96 0.96

—

Conﬁgural

Metric

— — —
21.52 27 .76
28.00 27 .41

Note: ESCS, Index of Economic, Social, and Cultural Status; RMSEA, root mean square
error of approximation; CFI, comparative ﬁt index; TLI, Tucker–Lewis index; N = 459.

Table 5. Variable means for L1 and L2 students

L1

(n = 173)

L2

(n = 286)

Difference Testing for
Latent Variable Means

M

0.73
0.60

SD

0.15
0.18

M

SD Wald χ2

p

d a

0.65
0.50

0.18
0.21

12.98
4.68

<.01
.03

–0.65
–0.45

Listening comprehension (EL)
Listening comprehension (AL)

Note. L1, First language; L2, second language; EL, everyday language; AL, academic
language.
aDifference between latent means of the L1 group (reference group) and the L2 group.

We then tested our second hypothesis on differences in listening comprehen-
sion of academic and everyday language scores between L1 and L2 students by
comparing latent variable means between the two language groups using Wald χ2
tests (Wald, 1943). Latent variable means of L2 students were compared to the
reference group of L1 students for which the latent means were ﬁxed to zero. The
results in Table 5 indicate that L2 students performed less well than L1 students on
both facets of listening comprehension. Contrary to what we expected, differences
between L1 and L2 students’ listening comprehension of everyday language were
more pronounced than differences between listening comprehension of academic
language (χ2 = 8.72, p < .01).

DISCUSSION

The study investigated listening comprehension of academic and everyday lan-
guage in students speaking German as their L1 or as their L2. We hypothesized that
academic language and everyday language form separate facets of listening com-
prehension. For both groups of students, we assumed that listening comprehension
of academic language would be more difﬁcult than listening comprehension of ev-
eryday language. We also expected that L2 students would generally perform less
well than L1 students, yet that the performance gap would be more pronounced for
listening comprehension of academic language than for listening comprehension
of everyday language.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

587

Dimensionality of listening comprehension in L1 and L2 learners

Concerning the ﬁrst research question on the structure of listening comprehen-
sion, ﬁndings of a conﬁrmatory factor analysis indicated that a two-dimensional
model ﬁts the data better than a unidimensional model. Our results thus provide
preliminary evidence that listening comprehension of academic and everyday lan-
guage may be distinguished from each other empirically. This differentiation is
in line with theoretical assumptions by Richards (1983), who postulated that con-
versational listening and academic listening rely on different skills as well as with
conceptualizations that suppose academic language to be associated with the mas-
tery of speciﬁc genres, strategies, and linguistic features (Gottlieb & Ernst-Slavit,
2014; Nagy & Townsend, 2012; Scarcella & Rumberger, 2000; Snow & Uccelli,
2009). As Heller and Morek (2015) propose, the register of academic language
has speciﬁc functions, such as transmission of knowledge or acting as a tool for
thinking. While the ﬁrst function is closely related to deﬁning academic language
as a register that serves speciﬁc communicative demands (e.g., producing or un-
derstanding decontextualized and explicitly structured complex information), the
latter function of academic language pertains to qualitatively different ways of
thinking as compared to everyday language: students who use academic language
correctly are supposed to be capable of executing the complex cognitive opera-
tions (e.g., abstraction and generalization) that are central to scientiﬁc thinking
(Morek & Heller, 2012; Vollmer & Th¨urmann, 2010). The two-dimensional struc-
ture of listening comprehension is in line with this notion of qualitatively different
cognitive processes that are closely associated with the use of academic features.
It must be noted that our study does not allow us to differentiate whether our
two-dimensional model reﬂects different aspects of language comprehension or
differences in listening texts’ difﬁculty. However, as academic language is by
deﬁnition more complex and difﬁcult to process than everyday language, a greater
difﬁculty of academic language demands is inherent to the construct and is hence
also reﬂected in our operationalization of academic listening comprehension. Our
ﬁndings thus may also be seen to corroborate results by Shohamy and Inbar
(1991), who found that the amount of oral language features in listening texts
had an impact on L2 test takers’ listening comprehension. The present study
adds to this research and indicates not only that differences in the processing
of academic versus everyday listening texts may be a matter of text type and
difﬁculty but also that listening texts that are located near the extremes of the
language continuum from academic language to everyday language may also be
associated with different facets of listening comprehension.

Although the results from the conﬁrmatory factor analysis lent support for the
proposed two-dimensionality of listening comprehension, an additional validation
procedure using students’ vocabulary and their syntactic knowledge as external
criteria did not clearly support our assumption. Contrary to our predictions, stu-
dents’ listening comprehension of everyday language correlated more strongly
with their syntactic knowledge than students’ listening comprehension of aca-
demic language. As hypothesized, vocabulary correlated somewhat stronger with
listening comprehension of academic language than with listening comprehension
of everyday language. However, these differences were not signiﬁcantly different.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

588

The lack of expected associations between the vocabulary measure and listening
comprehension of academic language might be due to our operationalization of
students’ vocabulary because this measure (Culture Fair Intelligence Test—Scale
A; Weiß, 2006) does not provide a differentiation between academic and everyday
vocabulary.

However, it is possible to classify the target words used in the test as either
academic vocabulary or everyday vocabulary. Based on the coding scheme by
the CRESST (Butler et al., 2004), we classiﬁed 7 (30.4%) words as academic
vocabulary and 16 words (69.6%) as everyday vocabulary (κ = 0.66, p < .01
for three raters). The vocabulary measure thus entails words from both facets of
language comprehension, which may explain the lack of differences in correla-
tions between the vocabulary test and listening comprehension of academic and
everyday language, respectively. This assumption is supported by the fact that the
elimination of items containing everyday language from the vocabulary measure
resulted in a signiﬁcant correlation between vocabulary and academic listening
comprehension (r = .30, p = .02) but a nonsigniﬁcant association between vocab-
ulary and everyday language comprehension (r = .16, p = .23). The difference
between the correlation coefﬁcients is signiﬁcant (z = 2.24, p = .03). Furthermore,
the syntactic knowledge measure only included everyday language. The higher
correlation between syntactic knowledge and everyday listening as compared to
the correlation between syntactic knowledge and academic listening may thus also
result from the operationalization.

Taken together, these results suggest that listening comprehension of academic
texts might be differentiated from listening comprehension of everyday texts,
although both facets of listening comprehension are closely associated. Addi-
tional analyses that only included the academic vocabulary items of our general
vocabulary measure also indicate that listening comprehension of academic lan-
guage might pose special demands on students’ vocabulary. Our ﬁndings are thus
not in line with assumptions by Scarcella (2003), who has criticized the dichoto-
mous conceptualization of academic versus everyday language as not being “useful
for understanding the complexities of academic English or the multiple variables
affecting its development” (p. 5). According to her view, both academic language
and everyday language are complex registers that share a number of important de-
terminants (e.g., processing strategies). Against this background, Scarcella (2003)
notes that the deﬁnition of academic language as being per se more complex and
more difﬁcult to process than everyday language might not be appropriate. Rather,
both registers might exhibit a range of overlaps, and certain aspects of academic
language might be acquired prior to the acquisition of some everyday language
features. However, our ﬁndings provide preliminary evidence that a distinction be-
tween listening comprehension of everyday language and listening comprehension
of academic language seems warranted.

Differences in academic and everyday listening comprehension between L1
and L2 learners

Concerning our second hypothesis on group differences in latent variable means for
listening comprehension of academic and everyday language, our data indicated

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

589

that both groups of students showed weaker performance on the test of academic
listening comprehension than on the test of everyday listening comprehension, and
L1 students generally outperformed their L2 peers. However, our results failed
to support the assumption that academic listening comprehension is especially
demanding for L2 students. We thus could not ﬁnd support for a central assumption
by Cummins (1980) and other researchers (cf. Collier, 1989; Roessingh et al.,
2005), namely, that academic language is disproportionally more difﬁcult for
L2 students than for L1 students. These ﬁndings are in line with results from
previous studies with elementary school students in Germany that also did not
ﬁnd L2 students to be especially disadvantaged in terms of academic listening
comprehension (Eckhardt, 2008; Heppt et al., 2014).

Contrary to what was expected, differences between L1 students’ and L2 stu-
dents’ everyday listening comprehension were even more pronounced than differ-
ences in their academic listening comprehension. A possible explanation for this
ﬁnding pertains to the restricted variance in students’ socioeconomic background.
The majority of students in our sample were from low-income and low-SES fam-
ilies. As research has indicated, the attainment of academic language is closely
associated with students’ socioeconomic background (Aarts et al., 2011; Hoff,
2013). Students who rarely encounter an “academic culture” of literacy (Corson,
1997, p. 672) outside school are thus less likely to develop academic language
competencies than students from more privileged families. It is possible that low-
SES L1 students in our study did not have sufﬁcient opportunities to acquire aca-
demic language and were therefore also compromised in their academic language
skills.

In a similar vein, the sociocultural component of academic language, that is, its
function as instantiating a social identity, may have inﬂuenced the attainment of
academic language in our low-SES sample (cf. Heller & Morek, 2015; Uccelli,
Barr, et al., 2015). As Galloway, Stude, and Uccelli (2015) have shown for mono-
lingual students from low-income families, middle school students reported to be
aware of the academic register and its features; however, they mainly regarded it
as a “vehicle for social positioning in the accomplishment of social situations”
(Heller & Morek, 2015, cited after Galloway et al., 2015) and thus not necessarily
evaluated it as a tool for communicating in classrooms. Because our sample also
consisted of students from low-income families, it may be assumed that both L1
and L2 students did not perceive academic language primarily as a means for
communicating efﬁciently and consequently did not make strong efforts to attain
this register.

The more pronounced differences in listening comprehension of everyday lan-
guage as compared to listening comprehension of academic language may also
result from the fact that linguistic competencies are, to some extent, language
speciﬁc and are acquired in either the L1 or the L2, depending on the time-on-task
(Gathercole, 2002). As students from low-SES families rarely encounter academic
language features outside the classroom (Reese, Garnier, Gallimore, & Golden-
berg, 2000), both L1 and L2 students acquire this register within their schools
and hence in the language of instruction. Even if academic language is rarely
conveyed explicitly by teachers (cf. Corson, 1997), L1 and L2 students thus share
the same learning opportunities to gain proﬁciency in German academic language.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

590

At the same time, most of the L2 students in our study speak their respective L1
in their everyday life and have less contact to the register of German everyday
language than their L1 peers. It can therefore be reasonably assumed that the
pronounced differences between L1 and L2 students in listening comprehension
of everyday language may result from the differential opportunities to acquire the
conversational register in German.

Although our study does not allow us to test these assumptions, it may be sur-
mised that the social context in which listening comprehension is acquired shapes
its attainment in L1 and L2 students through the allocation of speciﬁc learning
opportunities. As a result, L1 and L2 students’ competencies may vary for lan-
guage features that L1 and L2 students learn in different contexts, but may be more
comparable for language features for which students share the same context of
acquisition and hence the same time on task. In terms of the acquisition of general
language features, empirical research has already demonstrated that L1 and L2
students from similar backgrounds exhibit comparable levels of language com-
petencies (e.g., Kieffer, 2010). As our results suggest, the attainment of listening
comprehension of academic language in L1 and L2 students may also be shaped,
at least partially, by the context of acquisition.

Limitations

The present study has some limitations that have to be noted. Our sample was
restricted to low-SES students from the lowest tracks of the educational system.
Further studies are needed that investigate whether listening comprehension of
academic and everyday language are more clearly distinguishable in students
who have had more opportunities to gain proﬁciency in the register of academic
language. Furthermore, the aim of the present study was to compare listening
comprehension of academic and everyday language with a special emphasis on
lexical and grammatical features of academic language that constitute this reg-
ister (cf. Butler et al., 2004). However, academic language not only is char-
acterized by linguistic features but also includes sociocultural aspects, such as
knowledge about social and cultural norms, values, and habits that shape the
context of academic language (Heller & Morek, 2015; Scarcella, 2003). These as-
pects were not considered in our operationalization of academic language. There-
fore, internal validity is ensured, but ecological and external validity may be
limited.

Although our results seem to support the assumption that academic and every-
day registers may be regarded as different aspects of language comprehension, it
must be noted that our structural perspective on academic language and its lexical,
syntactic, and textual features may neglect other aspects of academic language
that could lead to similar results as we observed. It was beyond the scope of our
study to investigate the complex cognitive operations, such as abstraction, gen-
eralization, or logical argumentation, that are assumed to be closely intertwined
with the exertion of linguistic academic language features. The present study
therefore does not allow for responding to a main point of criticism on the con-
struct of academic language, namely, that it is not necessarily more cognitively
demanding than everyday language (cf. Bailey & Huang, 2011). While we found

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

591

support for the assumption that, from a structural perspective, academic and ev-
eryday listening comprehension may be regarded as different facets of listening
comprehension, further research is needed that investigates the cognitive opera-
tions that are associated with these two registers. Future studies could build on
recent work by Uccelli, Barr, et al. (2015), who have proposed a more compre-
hensive conceptualization of the language skills needed in academic contexts.
The authors describe a set of core academic language skills, which are deﬁned as
“knowledge and deployment of a repertoire of language forms and functions that
co-occur with oral and written school learning tasks across disciplines” (p. 1079).
Further research is needed to investigate the acquisition of these skills as well
as to explore the strategies students use and the cognitive processes they engage
in when confronted with academic versus everyday listening tasks (e.g., using
think-aloud procedures).

Furthermore, it is important to note that we did not investigate naturalistic aca-
demic discourse in our study, but modeled listening comprehension at the extremes
of the language continuum from academic language to everyday language. It is
conjecturable that listening texts that occur in actual classroom discourse contain
a wider range of everyday and academic language features, thus resulting in lis-
tening demands that may be located somewhat more to the middle of the language
continuum. Including such texts might lead to different results or even result in
unidimensionality of listening comprehension.

Conclusion

Despite its limitations, the present study indicates that listening comprehension
of academic and everyday language may describe separable facets of listening
comprehension. However, as the external validation procedure did not fully sub-
stantiate this ﬁnding, and as we did not ﬁnd the expected performance differences
between L1 and L2 students, our results only partially support the notion that
academic language and everyday language are associated with distinct facets of
listening comprehension. Nonetheless, they may serve as a starting point to fur-
ther examine the cognitive processing of listening comprehension of academic
language and everyday language. Such studies should also aim at investigating
academic and everyday listening competencies in other populations than the low-
track, low-SES students we considered in our study. For example, international
studies indicate that academic language is more prevalent in the higher tracks of the
educational system, thus providing high-track students with more opportunities
to gain proﬁciency in this language register (e.g., Harklau, 1994). Everyday and
academic listening comprehension may therefore require more distinct cognitive
processes in higher tracks, where the materials used are more demanding in terms
of academic language features. Notwithstanding the need for further research, our
results provide ﬁrst evidence that the understanding of academic versus everyday
listening texts, at least when located somewhere near the extremes of the language
continuum from academic language to everyday language, may require somewhat
different cognitive processes.

As L2 students performed signiﬁcantly below their native peers not only when
listening to academic language texts but also when processing everyday language,

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

592

our results further indicate that L2 instruction should focus on academic language
and everyday language skills to help L2 students gain proﬁciency in all registers
of their L2. In Germany, second-generation L2 students typically attend regular
German classrooms. However, as our results suggest, simply exposing L2 students
to an immersion context seems not to be sufﬁcient for developing listening compe-
tencies that are comparable to those of their monolingual peers. Further research
is needed to investigate which approaches can effectively help L2 students gain
proﬁciency in all aspects of L2 listening comprehension.

APPENDIX A

Table A.1. Variation of linguistic features for academic and everyday
listening texts

Feature

1. Number of words per text

Lexical features
2. Number of nominalizations per text

3. Number of academic vocabulary per text

Syntactic features
4. Sentence length (words per sentence)

5. Number of complex subordinate clauses per text

6. Number of passive constructions per text

7. Number of structural words per textc

Mean number of items correct

Total sample

L1 students

L2 students

ELa

ALb

M (SD)

138.25
(21.78)

M (SD)

108.25
(14.08)

0.75
(0.96)
2.50
(2.08)

10.50
(4.68)
0.75
(0.96)
0.00
(0.00)
58.08
(2.82)

0.70
(0.17)
0.74
(0.15)
0.68
(0.18)

1.00
(0.00)
8.50
(3.42)

15.18
(2.13)
1.00
(0.00)
3.25
(2.87)
56.32
(6.29)

0.53
(0.20)
0.59
(0.19)
0.49
(0.20)

Note: EL, Listening comprehension of everyday language; AL, listening com-
prehension of academic language
aContents: going shopping, doing homework, getting a driver’s license, friend-
ship.
bContents: haikus, ocelots, doing a job interview, planning a hike.
cStructural words are words that are used for grammatical purposes only (e.g.,
prepositions, conjunctions).

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

593

APPENDIX B

Haiku

Short poems have been known since ancient Japan, where they were called haiku. The
society at the emperor’s court developed them from a sort of tournament because they were
frequently bored. Back then, the high society liked to compete in rhyming verses; however,
strict rules had to be obeyed. With regard to content, for instance, a haiku had to portray
an image from nature. Furthermore, it was allowed to include only a certain amount of
syllables and always had to exhibit the same length. The haiku, therefore, was the shortest
poetic form in the world. Even today lots of people engage in composing haikus in their
leisure time. For the most part, the old rules were adopted, so that a lot of modern haikus
appear as if they were written in ancient Japan. Thus, the haiku is often declared to be a
timeless form of poetry.

Question 1

What do you need to make a good haiku?

A You need to be good at writing.
B You need to be good at listening.
C You need to be good at competing.
D You need to be good at drawing.

Code 1: A: You need to be good at writing.
Code 0: All other responses

Question 2

What is a haiku?

A A Japanese game.
B A short poem.
C A name for ancient Japan.
D A Japanese form of song.

Code 1: B: A short poem.
Code 0: All other responses

Question 3

In the text, something is said about why haikus are special. Which kind of “record” do they
hold?
________________________________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________

Code 1: Mentions the fact that haikus are the shortest poetic form in the world

• They are the shortest.
• They are very short.
• The shortest poetic form (of the world).

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

594

Code 0: Answer is insufﬁcient or vague. Shows insufﬁcient understanding of the text or
gives an implausible or irrelevant answer.

• A high record.
• They have strict rules.
• They are a timeless form of poetry.

Shopping

Salesperson: May I help you?
Client:

Oh . . . well . . . yes, you can. I am looking for a . . . this magazine for

teens. That has a lot on music inside.

Salesperson:
Client:

Salesperson:
Client:
Salesperson:
Client:

“Melody,” right?
Yeah, exactly, that was it. Unfortunately, I forgot my shopping list at

home, it was on it. Do you have it, “Melody”?

Look at your left, next to the box with the lighters.
Where? I only see comics.
No, one box further to the left.
Ah, now I got it! Usually, my daughter gets the money from me and then
buys her stuff by herself, you know. That’s why I’m not familiar here.
But now she’s broken her leg.

Question 1

What does the client want to buy?

A A lighter
B A newspaper
C A comic
D A magazine for teens

Code 1: D: A magazine for teens
Code 0: All other responses

Question 2

The client has problems ﬁnding what she is looking for. Why is that? Use the information
you have heard to answer the question.
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Code 1: Refers to the fact that the client is in the shop for the ﬁrst time OR on the fact
that the daughter is usually going shopping herself OR to the shopping list that has been
forgotten

• Because, normally, the daughter goes shopping.
• She is in the shop for the ﬁrst time and doesn‘t know where things are.
• She forgot her shopping list.
• Because she is not familiar with the shop.
• She’s there for the ﬁrst time.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

595

Code 0: Answer is insufﬁcient or vague. Shows insufﬁcient understanding of the text or
gives an implausible or irrelevant answer.

• The daughter has broken her leg.
• She is looking for a magazine.
• Because there are so many comics.
• Because it is somewhere else.

Question 3

In what kind of shop does this conversation may have taken place? Use the information
you have heard to answer the question.
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Code 1: Mentions at least one sort of shop that usually sells magazines, comics, and tobacco
supplies.

• At a kiosk
• At a lottery shop
• At a newspapers stand
• At a supermarket

Code 0: Answer is insufﬁcient or vague. Gives an implausible or irrelevant answer or
mentions shops that do not sell magazines and tobacco supplies at the same time.

• A shop where comics and magazines are sold.
• In Germany.
• In a comic store.

Question 4

In the text, the clients’ daughter is mentioned. What do you think she does?

A She goes to the kindergarten.
B She visits high school.
C She‘s studying in another city.
D She lives abroad.

Code 1: B: She visits high school.
Code 0: All other responses.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The present study was supported by grants from the German Science Foundation (Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft STA 626/1-6 and SCHN 315/40-1).

REFERENCES
Aarts, R., Demir, S., & Vallen, T. (2011). Characteristics of academic language register occurring
in caretaker–child interaction: Development and validation of a coding scheme. Language
Learning, 61, 1173–1221. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9922.2011.00664.x

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

596

Abedi, J., & Lord, C. (2001). The language factor in mathematics tests. Applied Measurement in

Education, 14, 219–234. doi:10.1207/S15324818AME1403_2

Ahrenholz, B. (2013). Sprache im Fachunterricht untersuchen [Investigating language in content
area classrooms]. In C. R¨ohner & B. H¨ovelbrinks (Eds.), Fachbezogene Sprachf¨orderung
in Deutsch als Zweitsprache—Theoretische Konzepte und empirische Befunde zum Erwerb
bildungssprachlicher Kompetenzen (pp. 87–98). Weinheim: Beltz.

Ahrenholz, B., & Maak, D. (2012). Sprachliche Anforderungen im Fachunterricht: Eine Skizze mit
Beispielanalysen zum Passivgebrauch in Biologie [Linguistic demands in content area class-
rooms: A draft with exemplary analyses on the use of passive voice in biology]. In H. Roll
& A. Schilling (Eds.), Mehrsprachiges Handeln im Fokus von Linguistik und Didaktik (pp.
135–152). Duisburg: UBRR Verlag.

Bailey, A. L. (Ed.) (2007). The language demands of school: Putting academic English to the test.

New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Bailey, A. L., & Butler, F. (2003). An evidentiary framework for operationalizing academic language
for broad application to K–12 education: A design document. Los Angeles: University of
California.

Bailey, A. L., & Huang, B. H. (2011). Do current English language development/proﬁciency stan-
dards reﬂect the English needed for success in school? Language Testing, 28, 343–365.
doi:10.1177/0265532211404187

Bailey, A. L., Huang, B. H., Shin, H. W., Farnsworth, T., & Butler, F. A. (2007). Developing academic
English language proﬁciency prototypes for 5th grade reading: Psychometric and linguistic
proﬁles of tasks. CRESST report 727. Los Angeles: National Center for Research on Evaluation,
Standards, and Student Testing.

Baumgartner, H., & Steenkamp, J.-B. E. M. (1998). Multi-group latent variable models for varying
numbers of items and factors with cross-national and longitudinal applications. Marketing
Letters, 9, 21–35. doi:10.1023/A:1007911903032

Berendes, K., Dragon, N., Weinert, S., Heppt, B., & Stanat, P. (2013). H¨urde Bildungssprache?
Eine Ann¨aherung an das Konzept “Bildungssprache” unter Einbezug aktueller em-
pirischer Forschungsergebnisse [Academic language as an obstacle? Approaching the
concept of “academic language” considering recent empirical ﬁndings].
In A. Red-
der & S. Weinert (Eds.), Sprachf¨orderung und Sprachdiagnostik: Perspektiven aus Psy-
chologie, Sprachwissenschaft und empirischer Bildungsforschung (pp. 17–41). M¨unster:
Waxmann.

Biber, D. (1995). Dimensions of register variation. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Buck, G. (2001). Assessing listening. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Butler, F. A., Bailey, A. L., Stevens, R., & Huang, B. H. (2004). Academic English in ﬁfth-grade
mathematics, science, and social studies textbooks. Los Angeles: National Center for Research
on Evaluation, Standards, and Student Testing.

Chamot, A. U., & O’Malley, J. M. (1994). The CALLA handbook: Implementing the cognitive academic

language learning approach. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Chudaske, J. (2012). Sprache, Migration und schulfachliche Leistung [Language, migration, and school

performance]. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag.

Clauser, B. E., & Mazor, K. M. (1998). Using statistical procedures to identify differentially functioning

test items. Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice, 17, 31–44.

Collier, V. P. (1989). How long? A synthesis of research on academic achievement in a second language.

TESOL Quarterly, 23, 509–531. doi:10.2307/3586923

Corson, D. (1997). The learning and use of academic English words. Language Learning, 47, 671–718.

doi:10.1111/0023-8333.00025

Csomay, E. (2006). Academic talk in American university classrooms: Crossing the boundaries of oral-
literate discourse. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 5, 117–135. doi:10.1016/j.jeap.
2006.02.001

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

597

Cummins, J. (1980). The construct of language proﬁciency in bilingual education. In J. E. Alatis (Ed.),
Current issues in bilingual education (pp. 81–103). Washington, DC: Georgetown University
Press.

Cummins, J. (2000). Language, power, and pedagogy: Bilingual children in the crossﬁre. Clevedon:

Multilingual Matters.

Cummins, J. (2008). BICS and CALP: Empirical and theoretical status of the distinction. In B. Street
& N. H. Hornberger (Eds.), Encyclopedia of language and education: Vol. 2. Literacy (2nd ed.,
pp. 71–83). New York: Springer Science + Business Media LLC.

Curenton, S. M., & Justice, L. M. (2004). African American and Caucasian preschoolers’ use of
decontextualized language: Literate language features in oral narratives. Language, Speech,
and Hearing Services in Schools, 35, 240–253. doi:0161-1461/04/3503-0240

Eckhardt, A. G. (2008). Sprache als Barriere f¨ur den schulischen Erfolg: Potentielle Schwierigkeiten
beim Erwerb schulbezogener Sprache f¨ur Kinder mit Migrationshintergrund [Language-related
barriers in educational success: Potential difﬁculties in the acquisition of academic language
in immigrant students]. M¨unster: Waxmann.

Edelsky, C., Hudelson, S., Flores, B., Barkin, F., Altwerger, B., & Jilbert, K. (1983). Semilingualism

and language deﬁcit. Applied Linguistics, 4, 1–22. doi:10.1093/applin/4.1.1

Feilke, H. (2012). Bildungssprachliche Kompetenzen-f¨ordern und entwickeln [Fostering and develop-

ing academic language competencies]. Praxis Deutsch, 233, 1–13.

Ferris, D., & Tagg, T. (1996). Academic oral communication needs of EAP learners: What subject-

matter instructors actually require. TESOL Quarterly, 30, 31–58. doi:10.2307/3587606

Flowerdew, J. (1994). Academic listening: Research perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University

Press.

Flowerdew, J. (1995). Research of relevance to second language lecture comprehension: An overview.
In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic listening: Research perspectives (pp. 7–29). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Flowerdew, J., & Miller, L. (1997). The teaching of academic listening comprehension and the question
of authenticity. English for Speciﬁc Purposes, 16, 27–46. doi:10.1016/S0889-4906(96)00030-0
Galloway, E. P., Stude, J., & Uccelli, P. (2015). Adolescents’ metalinguistic reﬂections on the aca-
demic register in speech and writing. Linguistics and Education, 31, 221–237. doi:10.1016/
j.linged.2014.10.006

Gantefort, C., & Roth, H.-J. (2010). Sprachdiagnostische Grundlagen f¨ur die F¨orderung bil-
dungssprachlicher F¨ahigkeiten [Assessment of academic language proﬁciency in German].
Zeitschrift f¨ur Erziehungswissenschaft, 13, 573–591. doi:10.1007/s11618-010-0163-2

Ganzeboom, H. B. G., De Graaf, P. M., & Treiman, D. J. (1992). A standard international socio-
economic index of occupational status. Social Science Research, 21, 1–56. doi:10.1016/0049-
089X(92)90017-B

Gathercole, V. C. M. (2002). Monolingual and bilingual acquisition: Learning different treatments of
that-trace phenomena in English and Spanish. In D. K. Oller & R. E. Eilers (Eds.), Language
and literacy in bilingual children (pp. 220–252). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.

Gierl, M. J. (2005). Using dimensionality-based DIF analyses to identify and interpret constructs that
elicit group differences. Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice, 24, 3–14. doi:10.1111/
j.1745-3992.2005.00002.x

Gogolin, I., & Lange, I. (2011). Bildungssprache und Durchg¨angige Sprachbildung [Academic lan-
guage and intergrated language education]. In S. F¨urstenau & M. Gomolla (Eds.), Migration
und schulischer Wandel: Mehrsprachigkeit (pp. 107–128). Wiesbaden: VS Verlag.

Gottlieb, M., & Ernst-Slavit, G. (2014). Academic language in diverse classrooms: Deﬁnitions and

contexts. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.

Haag, N., Heppt, B., Stanat, P., Kuhl, P., & Pant, H. A. (2013). Second language learners’ perfor-
mance in mathematics: Disentangling the effects of academic language features. Learning and
Instruction, 28, 24–34. doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2013.04.001

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

598

Hakuta, K., Butler, Y. G., & Witt, D. (2000). How long does it take English learners to at-
tain proﬁciency? Santa Barbara, CA: University of California Linguistic Minority Research
Institute.

Harklau, L. (1994). Jumping tracks: How language-minority students negotiate evaluations of ability.

Heller, K. A., & Perleth, C. (2000). Kognitiver F¨ahigkeitstest f¨ur 4. bis 12. Klassen, Revision: KFT

Anthropology and Education Quarterly, 25, 347–363. doi:10.1525/aeq.1994.25.3.04x0149s
4–12+ R [Test of Cognitive Abilities for Grades 4 to 12]. Weinheim: Beltz.

Heller, V., & Morek, M. (2015). Academic discourse as situated practice: An introduction. Linguistics

and Education, 31, 174–186. doi:10.1016/j.linged.2014.01.008

Heppt, B., Stanat, P., Dragon, N., Berendes, K., & Weinert, S. (2014). Bildungssprachliche An-
forderungen und H¨orverstehen bei Kindern mit deutscher und nicht-deutscher Familien-
sprache [Academic language demands and listening comprehension in children with German
and non-German home language]. Zeitschrift f¨ur P¨adagogische Psychologie, 28, 139–149.
doi:10.1024/1010-0652/a000130

Hoff, E. (2013). Interpreting the early language trajectories of children from low-SES and language
minority homes: Implications for closing achievement gaps. Developmental Psychology, 49,
4–14. doi:10.1037/a0027238

Hu, L.-T., & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for ﬁt indexes in covariance structure analysis: Con-
ventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling, 6, 1–55. doi:10.1080/
10705519909540118

Kieffer, M. J. (2010). Socioeconomic status, English proﬁciency, and late-emerging reading difﬁculties.

Educational Researcher, 39, 484–486. doi:10.3102/0013189X10378400

K¨ohne, J., Kronenwerth, S., Redder, A., Schuth, E., & Weinert, S. (2015) Bildungssprach-
licher Wortschatz—Linguistische und psychologische Fundierung und Itementwicklung [Aca-
demic vocabulary—Linguistic and psychological foundations and development of items].
In A. Redder, J. Naumann, & R. Tracy (Eds.), Forschungsinitiative Sprachdiagnostik und
Sprachf¨orderung—Ergebnisse (pp. 67–92). M¨unster: Waxmann.

Martiniello, M. (2008). Language and the performance of English-language learners in math word prob-
lems. Harvard Educational Review, 78, 333–368. doi:10.17763/haer.78.2.70783570r1111t32
Mason, A. (1995). By dint of: Student and lecturer perceptions of lecture comprehension strategies
in ﬁrst-term graduate study. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic listening: Research perspectives
(pp. 199–218). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Meurers, D., Berendes, K., Vajjala, S., & Bryant, D. (2015). Leseanforderungen in der Sekundarstufe:
Ein Vergleich der linguistischen Komplexit¨at von Schulbuchtexten [Reading demands in sec-
ondary schools: A comparison of the linguistic complexity of textbooks]. Paper presented at
the 3rd Tagung der Gesellschaft f¨ur Empirische Bildungsforschung, March. Retrieved from
http://purl.org/dm/handouts/gebf15.pdf

Morek, M., & Heller, V. (2012). Bildungssprache: Kommunikative, epistemische, soziale und in-
teraktive Aspekte ihres Gebrauchs [Academic language: Communicative, epistemic, social,
and interactive aspects of is utilization]. Zeitschrift f¨ur angewandte Linguistik, 2, 67–101.
doi:10.1515/zfal-2012-0011

Muth´en, L. K., & Muth´en, B. O. (1998–2012). Mplus users guide (7th ed.). Los Angeles: Author.
Nagy, W., & Townsend, D. (2012). Words as tools: Learning academic vocabulary as language acqui-

sition. Reading Research Quarterly, 47, 91–108. doi:10.1002/RRQ.011

Nystrand, M. (2006). Research on the role of classroom discourse as it affects reading comprehension.

Research in the Teaching of English, 40, 392–412.

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. (2010). PISA 2009 results: Over-
coming social background—Equity in learning opportunities and outcomes (Vol. 2). Paris:
Author.

Reese, L., Garnier, H., Gallimore, R., & Goldenberg, C. (2000). A longitudinal analysis of the an-
tecedents of emergent Spanish literacy and middle-school English reading achievement of

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

599

Spanish-speaking students. American Educational Research Association Journal, 37, 633–
662. doi:10.3102/00028312037003633

Richards, J. C. (1983). Listening comprehension: Approach, design, procedure. TESOL Quarterly, 17,

219–240. doi:10.2307/3586651

Roessingh, H., Kover, P., & Watt, D. (2005). Developing cognitive academic language proﬁciency:

The journey. TESL Canada Journal, 23, 1–27.

Rost, M. (1994). Introducing listening. London: Penguin.
Roth, H.-J., Neumann, U., & Gogolin, I. (2007). Evaluation des Schulversuchs Bilinguale Grund-
schulen Hamburg: Abschlussbericht an die Beh¨orde f¨ur Bildung und Sport Hamburg [Evalua-
tion of the pilot project Bilingual Elementary Schools in Hamburg]. Hamburg: Universit¨at zu
Hamburg.

Saville-Troike, M. (1984). What really matters in second language learning for academic achievement?

TESOL Quarterly, 18, 199–219. doi:10.2307/3586690

Scarcella, R. (2003). Academic English: A conceptual framework. Santa Barbara, CA: University of

California Linguistic Minority Research Institute.

Scarcella, R., & Rumberger, R. W. (2000) Academic English key to long-term success in school.

University of California Linguistic Minority Research Institute Newsletter, 9, 1–2.

Schleppegrell, M. J. (2004). The language of schooling: A functional linguistics perspective. Mahwah,

NJ: Erlbaum.

Shaftel, J., Belton-Kocher, E., Glasnapp, D., & Poggio, J. (2006). The impact of language characteristics
in mathematics test items on the performance of English language learners and students with
disabilities. Educational Assessment, 11, 105–126. doi:10.1207/s15326977ea1102_2

Shohamy, E., & Inbar, O. (1991). Validation of listening comprehension tests: The effect of text and

question type. Language Testing, 8, 23–40. doi:10.1177/026553229100800103

Snow, C. E. (2010). Academic language and the challenge of reading for learning about science.

Science, 328, 450–452. doi:10.1126/science.1182597

Snow, C. E., & Uccelli, P. (2009). The challenge of academic language. In D. R. Olson & N. Torrance
(Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of literacy (pp. 112–133). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Tannen, D. (1982). The oral literate continuum of discourse. In D. Tannen (Ed.), Spoken and written

language (pp. 1–6). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Taylor, L., & Geranpayeh, A. (2011). Assessing listening for academic purposes: Deﬁning and
operationalising the test construct. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 10, 89–101.
doi:10.1016/j.jeap.2011.03.002

Townsend, D., Filippini, A., Collins, P., & Biancarosa, G. (2012). Evidence for the importance of
academic word knowledge for the academic achievement of diverse middle school students.
Elementary School Journal, 113, 497–519. doi:10.1086/663301

Uccelli, P., Barr, C. D., Dobbs, C. L., Galloway, E. P., Meneses, A., & S´anchez, E. (2015). Core
academic language skills: An expanded operational construct and a novel instrument to chart
school-relevant language proﬁciency in preadolescent and adolescent learners. Applied Psy-
cholinguistics, 36, 1077–1109.

Uccelli, P., Galloway, E. P., Barr, C. D., Meneses, A., & Dobbs, C. L. (2015). Beyond vocabulary:
Exploring cross-disciplinary academic-language proﬁciency and its association with reading
comprehension. Reading Research Quarterly, 50, 337–356. doi:10.1002/rrq.104

Uesseler, S., Runge, A., & Redder, A (2013). “Bildungssprache” diagnostizieren: Entwicklung eines
Instruments zur Erfassung von bildungssprachlichen F¨ahigkeiten bei Viert- und F¨unftkl¨asslern
[Diagnosis of academic language: Development of an instrument for assessing academic lan-
guage in four- and ﬁfth-graders]. In A. Redder & S. Weinert (Eds.), Sprachf¨orderung und
Sprachdiagnostik: Interdisziplin¨are Perspektiven (pp. 4–67). M¨unster: Waxmann.

Vollmer, H. J., & Th¨urmann, E. (2010). Zur Sprachlichkeit des Fachlernens: Modellierung eines Ref-
erenzrahmens f¨ur Deutsch als Zweitsprache [Language in learning: Formulating a framework

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Marx et al.: Listening comprehension of academic language

600

of reference for German as a second language]. In B. Ahrenholz (Ed.), Fachunterricht und
Deutsch als Zweitsprache (pp. 107–132). T¨ubingen: Gunter Narr.

Wald, A. (1943). Tests of statistical hypotheses concerning several parameters when the number
of observations is large. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 54, 426–482.
doi:10.2307/1990256

Weiß, R. H. (2006). Grundintelligenztest Skala 2, CFT 20—Revision [Culture Fair Intelligence Test—

Scale 2]. G¨ottingen: Hogrefe.

Wilson, M. (2005). Constructing measures: An item response modeling approach. Mahwah, NJ:

Erlbaum.

Wolf, M. K., Crosson, A. C., & Resnick, L. B. (2005). Classroom talk for rigorous reading compre-

hension instruction. Reading Psychology, 26, 27–53. doi:10.1080/02702710490897518

Wu, M. L., Adams, R. J., Wilson, M. R., & Haldane, S. A. (2007). ACER ConQuest Version 2:

Generalised item response modelling software. Camberwell, Australia: ACER Press.


