Journal of Sociolinguistics 21/3, 2017: 307–319

Seeing from the South: Discourse, gender
and sexuality from southern perspectives1

Tommaso M. Milania

and Michelle M. Lazarb

a. University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa

b. National University of Singapore, Singapore

This article frames the Special Issue on ‘Discourse, Gender and Sexuality
from the Global South’. It does so by providing an overview of the notion of
the South in the social sciences and the humanities. We engage,
in
particular, with current theoretical discussions around a set of concepts
and approaches that have been labelled ‘southern theories’, ‘theories from
the south’, or ‘southern epistemologies’. Against this backdrop, we explain
why southern perspectives are needed in the study of discourse, gender and
sexuality, and sociolinguistics more broadly. We then offer a reﬂection on
our (and our contributors’) ‘loci of enunciation’ (Bhabha 1994), before
concluding with a summary of the articles in this Special Issue and their
relations to the points raised in this introduction.

KEYWORDS: Gender, sexuality, discourse, geopolitics of knowledge,
southern epistemologies, borderlands, southern theories

MAKING THE SOUTH AN ISSUE

More than ten years ago, one of us commented on the geopolitics of knowledge
production in research about language and society, pointing to the sometimes
‘benevolent inclusion of critical and/or feminist discourse studies from non-
western geographical regions in international fora, but marked as “other”
instead of mainstreamed’ (Lazar 2005: 19), whilst maintaining Western
scholarship as the normative point of reference. Related to this, it should be
added that some key post-colonial theorists – Frantz Fanon, Amiena Mama,
Mahmoud Mamdani, Chandra Talpade Mohanty, Edward Said, Boaventura de
Sousa Santos, Gayatri Spivak to name just a few – are either absent or
underrepresented in sociolinguistic research. A decade later, the picture does
not seem to have changed considerably. In a recent book (Coupland 2016)
promoted by Cambridge University Press as ‘the most substantial account
available of the core contemporary ideas and arguments in sociolinguistics’, no
contribution substantially engages – except for the occasional reference – with
either theory or data outside Western Europe and North America (see also
Levon 2017 for a critique).

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

308

MILANI AND LAZAR

This is not a question of the intentional exclusion of scholars outside
European and North American metropoles, or of wilfully ignoring alternative
it highlights a normative erasure that
theoretical
is
insights. Rather,
structural asymmetry in the geopolitics of
symptomatic of a broader
knowledge across disciplines. As Connell powerfully puts it,
‘[p]riority for
theory produced in the metropole, and marginality for anything of the sort
from the periphery,
the global economy of
knowledge. This is a highly political economy’ (2014: 527, our emphasis; see
also Miskolci 2014). For scholars in the South, this imbalance is compounded
by a complex positioning of being simultaneously part of global academic
networks while located in and working on postcolonial contexts outside large
EU-funded and North American research networks, and traditionally far from
the locations of key sociolinguistic and applied linguistic conferences, although
this trend seems to be changing recently.2

is the normal

functioning of

It is with a view to partly redressing these epistemological imbalances and
marginalisation that this Special Issue is entirely dedicated to southern contexts,
and brings with it different perspectives on current theoretical discussions in
sociolinguistics. We aim to do so by mobilising the notion of the South as a
heuristic vantage point from which to interrogate discourses on gender and
sexuality – our chosen analytical foci. By highlighting southern perspectives, we
do not wish to suggest a ‘radical separateness of Southern theory from Northern’
but ‘a critical appropriation of Northern ideas, in combination with ideas that
come from radically different experiences’ (Connell 2014: 527). In turn, a critical
approach to the geopolitics of knowledge in sociolinguistics is posited with a view
to broadening the kind of ‘reﬂexive engagement’ and ‘contemplatory’ insights
which Coupland (2016) sees as a key prerequisite for sociolinguistic theorising to
remain ‘fresh’ and avoid falling into ‘complacency’ (2016: 12), theoretically and
ideologically. Because of the reliance of all the contributors of this Special Issue on
an eclectic blending of theories from ‘within’ and ‘without’ sociolinguistics
(Coupland 2016), the aim of this Special Issue is to open up a discussion about
why it is important to ‘reinﬂect and retheorise’ existing concepts and approaches
from a variety of southern perspectives,
‘rather than dispense with them
altogether’ (Coupland 2016: 12).

In what follows, we provide an overview of current discussions about the South
in the social sciences and the humanities, clarify our own position, explain the
need for southern perspectives in the sociolinguistics of discourse, gender and
sexuality, and offer a reﬂection on our (and our contributors’)
‘loci of
enunciation’ (Bhabha 1994).

The South as geo-political reality and heuristic vantage point
The South – and any other word indicating a cardinal point – is typically
employed to indicate a particular geographical position measured in relation to
an alleged central point which is, however, not necessarily the geographical

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

SEEING FROM THE SOUTH

309

mid-point, but is often, but not necessarily, the political centre of the area in
question. From a world-scale perspective, the expression ‘Global South’3
encapsulates the conﬂation between geographical positionality and political
marginality, as well as captures the complexity of contemporary postcolonial
conditions. Indeed, all contributions to this Special Issue focus on contexts that
occupy a southern position on the world map – Brazil, Singapore, South Africa
and New Zealand – at least if viewed from a North American and European
viewpoint.4 These are also contexts that, differences notwithstanding, typically
share a past of colonialism and decolonisation, and self-identify as belonging to
the Global South.

For us, however, an engagement with the South has not just to do with
casting the spotlight on a set of speciﬁc geographical, historical and political
conditions. It is also a way of bringing sociolinguistic scholarship into dialogue
with current theoretical discussions around a set of concepts and approaches
that have been labelled ‘southern theories’,
‘theories from the south’, or
‘southern epistemologies’ (Comaroff and Comaroff 2012; Connell 2007, 2014;
de Sousa Santos 2014; Mignolo 2009; Miskolci 2014). It is important to point
out that what southern approaches propose is not necessarily new – Anzaldua
(1987) and Mohanty (1984), for example, had raised similar points earlier
about the geopolitics of knowledge in feminist and queer studies without
overtly calling their arguments ‘southern’. Our focus on the South aligns both
with the epistemologies of southern and similarly resonant feminist and queer
theorists. However, these ideas are by no means an all-encompassing or
coherent singular body of work; rather, they are a motley assemblage of ideas,
concepts and lenses. Therefore, we would rather call them southern perspectives
or viewpoints and, in so doing, highlight the visual metaphor of these heuristics
as an ‘angle of vision’ (Comaroff and Comaroff 2012: 42).

of

concepts

and

It goes beyond the scope of this introduction to offer an exegesis of the
different approaches to what we call southern perspectives (see, however, Rosa
2014 for a useful critical intervention). As a starting point, however, one could
usefully distinguish between what may be termed ‘inward looking’ and
‘outward looking’ southern viewpoints, although as we shall argue a plurifocal
way of seeing is needed. Inward looking perspectives ultimately centre the gaze
on the South arguing for a refusal to engage with Northern theorising, and the
development
theoretical
approaches that emerge out of the historical, economic and socio-political
speciﬁcities of southern conditions (see e.g. Mernissi 1987; Nnaemeka 2005).
Inward looking perspectives lead to what Connell calls ‘mosaic epistemologies’,
in which ‘separate knowledge systems or projects sit beside each other like tiles
in a mosaic. Each is based on a speciﬁc culture, religion, language, historical
experience or fragment of identity and therefore has its own terminology and
categories’ (Connell 2014: 522). While in the short term a refusal to engage is
a politically and ideologically bold tactic through which to mark a cleavage
between the South and the North and resist the unidirectional North-South

incommensurably

different

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

310

MILANI AND LAZAR

that

are

economic

and

social,

cultural,

forms

of

for

several

reasons.

It

conditions

inherently

in southern contexts

it relies on essentialist assumptions;
pathway of knowledge circulation,
and
namely,
ontologically different from those in the North, or that data generated in the
South necessarily need to be read through non-Northern theoretical heuristic
lenses. As poststructuralism has taught us, dyadic thinking is intrinsically
reductionist
is bound up with processes of
epistemological power whereby one element of the binary is recast as better,
more suitable, or academically ‘cooler’ than the other. Moreover, binaristic
understandings fail to account for the interconnectedness of the elements of a
dyad. For example, it would be too simplistic to understand the colonies as
locales that are spatially and temporally external to the metropole. Quite the
contrary, colonies and metropoles were mutually constitutive, creating
complex
epistemological
interdependencies. Besides, the increased intensity and scale of global social,
economic and political interconnectedness of late modernity make binaristic
separations artiﬁcial and untenable. Finally, across the South, and within the
countries in the South, too, there exists immense unevenness (as in the North),
in terms of socio-economic differences and privately-owned wealth. In fact,
commenting on ‘postcolonial elites’, Appadurai has written that ‘globalisation
has shrunk the difference between elites’ (1996: 9) in the North and the South.
instead, are premised on the
inevitability of transnational circulation of theoretical ideas, and strategically
employ such linkages for the possibility of cross-fertilisation. Here, a focus on
the speciﬁcities of the South is geared to speaking back to the North, and thereby
enhancing a reﬂexive practice on the geopolitics of knowledge production.
Connell’s (2007) work is a case in point (see also Roy’s [2016] ‘scalar
approach’ to transnational
feminism). By the same token, the Comaroffs
(2012) underscore the Eurocentric bias of much contemporary scholarship in
the social sciences and the humanities, in which the North is consistently and
unashamedly posited as ‘the wellspring of universal learning’ and the South as
‘a place of parochial wisdom, of antiquarian traditions, of exotic ways and
means. Above all, of unprocessed data’ (Comaroff and Comaroff 2012: 1). They
suggest, instead, that the Global South holds promise as a site which ‘affords
privileged insight into the workings of the world at large’ (2012: 47), thus
ultimately leading us to surpass the North/South dichotomy.

Outward looking southern perspectives,

By ‘privileged insight’, the Comaroffs are clearly not referring to a ‘centred’
hegemonic privilege, but that which ironically emerges from a location of de-
centredness or ‘ex-centricity’ (Bhabha 1994). Here, we ﬁnd the metaphor of
borders (Mohanty 1984) and borderlands (Anzaldua 1987) particularly
instructive in enabling us to understand the South as positioned at the
margins or at
the borders (i.e. outside the centre), and that borders,
importantly, signify points of exclusion as well as connectedness. Seeing from
the South, then, for us, is a vantage point afforded by the borderlands. It is an
interstitial space from which North-South, South-North, South-South and other

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

SEEING FROM THE SOUTH

311

engagements become possible, not in a way that necessarily transcends borders
but that offers a contingently situated pluri-sitedness/pluri-sightedness. A
plurifocal perspective, we argue, is one that seeks dialogic entanglements and
inclusiveness in a trans-local/national production of knowledge and in the pluri-
directionality of knowledge circulation.

DISCOURSE, GENDER AND SEXUALITY FROM THE SOUTH

The study of gender and sexuality in discourse is an important growing focus
within sociolinguistics. In earlier years, emphasis was almost exclusively on
gender; however, based on developments within queer and feminist studies
over more than a decade, attention has shifted increasingly to the imbrication
of gender and sexuality in language and discourse (see Ehrlich, Meyerhoff and
Holmes 2014). The gender and sexuality nexus itself has become a productive
site to investigate how other systems of power and identity markers based on,
for example, race, social class, and nationalism intersect in crucial ways. Onto
this matrix of identity and power relations, we bring into focus a hitherto
undertheorised overarching system of power and marginalisation relevant to
studies on gender and sexuality in sociolinguistics, namely, the southern lens.
By drawing attention to the South, we do not mean merely to increase the
visibility of non-Western/Northern, postcolonial contexts in sociolinguistics
inquiry, although such strategic highlighting itself remains an important
corrective to the existing geopolitics of knowledge. While noting that, in terms
of visibility, this is slowly changing in the ﬁeld of discourse and gender/
sexuality (see Atanga et al. 2013), theorisation of the ﬁeld remains largely
Northern-centric. Also, even while afforded visibility internationally, southern
contexts do not seem to escape the continuing dilemma of benevolent
inclusion, as noted above. For example, in the Handbook of Language, Gender and
Sexuality (Ehrlich, Meyerhoff and Holmes 2014), chapters overtly dealing with
contexts in the Global South are separately classiﬁed with others under the
marked category ‘Global and Cross-Cultural Contexts’.

then,

Beyond the issue of visibility, our objective is to use the South as a
conceptual and analytical lens through which to understand the discursive
dynamics of gender and sexuality in non-Northern contexts, and, in so doing,
strive towards more inclusive transnational theoretical projects. In this Special
Issue,
the aim is to critically examine global connectivities and
divergences between the North and the South, and within the Global South,
in terms of ﬂows and the recontextualisation of meanings and practices.
Heteronormativity in Brazil and New Zealand,
transsexuality in Brazil,
homonormativity in Singapore, and hegemonic masculinity and racial
stereotypes in South Africa are all materialisations of complex encounters
between transnational ﬂows and speciﬁc local conditions. These speciﬁcities,
however, are not ‘exotically’ different from the rest of the world; they are
powerful means through which to ‘speak back’ to global discourses in locally

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

312

MILANI AND LAZAR

sensitive ways. Some of the authors offer a critique of Northern identity
categories and discourses in Brazil; others propose a conceptual rethinking of
homonormativity in Singapore, re-read queer theory through the lenses of race
in South Africa, or complexify the notion of heteronormativity in New Zealand.
Inasmuch as the South (as an analytical category) has implications for a
sociolinguistics of discourse, gender and sexuality, the discursive analyses of
gender and sexuality demonstrated in the articles of the Special Issue, in turn,
collectively argue for the importance of southern viewpoints.

THE LOCI OF ENUNCIATION AND THE CONUNDRUM OF WRITING ABOUT
OTHERS

In arguing for a southern viewpoint, self-reﬂexivity regarding our own
positionalities and trajectories does matter. Drawing upon Bhabha (1994),
Menezes de Sousa reminds us that ‘All representations, colonial or anti-
colonial, are discursive products “enunciated” from within speciﬁc socially,
ideologically, and historically located discursive “loci of enunciation”’ (Menezes
de Sousa 2007: 137). Researchers’ loci of enunciation in relation to global
geopolitics of knowledge have been highlighted by Mignolo (2009) in writings
about decolonial epistemologies and epistemic disobedience. Mignolo ﬂips
upside down the Cartesian motto cogito ergo sum (‘I think therefore I am’)
proposing instead that ‘I am therefore I think.’ This means that

Rather than assuming that thinking comes before being, one assumes instead
that it is a racially marked body in a geo-historical marked space that feels the
urge or gets the call to speak, to articulate, in whatever semiotic system, the urge
that makes of living organisms ‘human’ beings. (Mignolo 2009: 2)

All the contributors to this Special Issue inhabit a pluriversal aggregate of
intersectional positions in which the privilege that accrues with hegemonic
subjectivities (e.g. cis-gender, able-bodiedness, middle-class professional status,
whiteness, maleness)
is compounded by the historical oppression or
marginalisation of non-normativities (e.g. gay, queer, racial and geopolitical
othering). Some of us grew up in the southern contexts we investigate, for
whom our life experiences have been shaped in part by a postcolonial
consciousness; others, instead, have moved to the South of the world later in
life. However, all of us are part of transnational networks that link us to a
variety of Northern and Southern contexts simultaneously. Take our complex
positionalites and trajectories, individually and combined, as the editors of this
Special Issue, for instance. On the one hand, Lazar, a straight woman of colour
and of Southern ancestry is a native of post-independent Singapore, in which
she is an ethnic minority. Although having lived and worked in Singapore for
most of her life, she had also lived in the North for a period of years as a
postgraduate student in Britain. Present day Singapore itself occupies an
interstitial space between the South and the North in that, in terms of its

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

SEEING FROM THE SOUTH

313

national GDP,
it ranks among the ‘developed’ nations of the North; yet,
historically, geopolitically and culturally it identiﬁes with the Asian South. On
the other hand, Milani, a queer, white male of European descent, who lived,
studied and worked in various parts of the North for most of his adult life, has
been living in South Africa for the past eight years. South Africa, too, occupies
a complex position characterised by former president Thabo Mbeki as ‘a
country of two nations’: one rich with access to sophisticated infrastructure,
the other poor and marginalised.

In an attempt to theorise such complexity, Heugh (2017) advances an
interesting, but we
‘mestizo
consciousness’. Originally coined by the Argentinian philosopher Rodolfo
Kusch, ‘mestizo consciousness’ encapsulates the experience of

somewhat problematic, notion of

feel

displacement
(from the Northern centre), being of migrant background,
recognizing not-belonging; yet living and working in and recognizing the
complexities of community relationships with (well-) being, knowledge, and the
cosmos. (Heugh 2017: 222)

Admittedly, ‘mestizo’ here ‘does not refer to people of mixed ancestry (Mignolo
2010) but rather to a consciousness arrived at through a lived understanding
of both Indigenous and European (northern) world views’ (Heugh 2017: 212).
However, re-signiﬁcation and re-appropriation of ‘mestizo’ do not lead to the
erasure of the semantic pedigree of a word (cf. the history of the word ‘queer’).
Therefore, it is in our view problematic to brush over the colonial and racial
loading of the term ‘mestizo’ in an attempt to theorise the pluriversality of
southern positionalities, especially when proposed by a white scholar.
Although not necessarily done intentionally, ‘mestizo consciousness’ has the
potential to bring with it a racial tinge that legitimises established white
scholars’ work on southern contexts and concomitantly allows them to re-
centre themselves and their whiteness on the sociolinguistic world stage.

We prefer,

instead, the notions of the ‘borderland’ and the ‘interstice’,
inspired by Anzaldua’s (1987) important, but somewhat neglected, work on
gender, sexuality and multilingualism at
the boundaries between U.S.
hegemonic discourses and Chicanx minority positions (see also Heugh
2017). As Anzaldua powerfully puts it:
‘In the Borderlands you are the
battleground where enemies are kin to each other; you are at home, a stranger
[. . .]’ (Anzaldua 1987: 216–217).

It

that are,

is these contradictions

in our view, key for southern
perspectives. Our objective is not to resolve, not to try and create harmony,
because ‘[w]hat matters is not whether accords are bound to be good or
bad, but how we might ﬁnd in the dissonance of the interstice the capacity to
construct new accords, to enter into new becomings’ (Colucciello Barber
2014: 94; emphasis added), and to create new theoretical and discursive
possibilities.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

314

MILANI AND LAZAR

A crucial interstice that needs ﬂagging up at this juncture, also, is that
between us – academics – and the participants in our studies. Of course, none
of ‘us’ is claiming to speak on behalf of ‘them’ (see also Alcoff 1991 for an
incisive discussion on the ‘problem of speaking for others’). There is a long
debate in ethnographic approaches in sociolinguistics about the importance of
fostering research with, about and by the people involved in our research (e.g.
Cameron et al. 1992). None of the articles in this Special Issue was co-written
with a participant in the study in question. This choice is often viewed as
deeply problematic by many sexual and gender activists who bemoan any
scholarship in which researchers are not themselves members of the groups
they are studying. Without being dismissive of this view, we note, however, the
‘although there is an
postcolonial scholar Edward Said’s response that
irreducible subjective core to human experience,
this experience is also
historical and secular, it is accessible to analysis and interpretation’ (1994:
35). Therefore, we shouldn’t ‘build analyses of historical experience around
exclusions, exclusions that stipulate,
for instance, that only women can
understand feminine experience, only Jews can understand Jewish suffering,
only formerly colonial subjects can understand colonial experience’ (1994:
35). These become rather extreme, problematic positions. Viewed from an
intersectional perspective (Crenshaw 1991), our lived experiences are shaped
very differently because of the dynamic interaction between, on the one hand,
a plethora of mutually constituting ‘macro’ social factors – class, gender, race,
sexuality, citizen/refugee status, etc. – and, on the other hand, a variety of
individual speciﬁc ‘micro’ circumstances. So to a certain degree there is
something irreducibly unique in each individual’s experience of the world.
However, to say that one can only speak for oneself is based on the ‘illusion
[. . .] that a self [. . .] consists in a uniﬁed whole capable of autonomy from
others’ (Alcoff 1991: 21). Whether speaking for oneself or with and about
others, ‘we are collectively caught in an intricate, delicate web in which each
action I take, discursive or otherwise, pulls on, breaks off, or maintains the
tensions in many strands of a web in which others ﬁnd themselves moving
also’ (Alcoff 1991: 21). In the articles in this Special Issue, the participants’
semiotic performances are interwoven with the authors’ own complexly
positioned voices,5 and create a plurivocality about southern experiences at the
crossroads with broader transnational ﬂows.

OVERVIEW OF CONTRIBUTIONS FROM THE SOUTH

The articles in this Special Issue are based on empirical data analysis, drawing
on a wide variety of data sources such as interactional discourse, tele, print and
online mediated communication, as well as stage performances. Through
careful, substantiated semiotic and discourse analyses of the data the articles
advance a variety of ways of deploying the heuristic of ‘the South’ to examine

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

SEEING FROM THE SOUTH

315

patterns of discursive colonisation from the North and, where possible,
alternative insights that arise from the interstitial sites of the South.

Rodrigo Borba’s ethnographic study examines the global circulation of
authoritative Euro-American medical epistemologies regarding psychiatric
diagnoses at a Brazilian gender identity clinic. Borba ﬁnds that the tacitly
universalising diagnostics have discursive and material consequences in
constraining Brazilian transsexuals and their doctors to perform and conform
to very particular deﬁnitions of the ideal transsexual, who may then receive
government-subsidised treatments at
the clinic. The epistemological and
discursive colonisation of Northern institutional texts on the South, Borba
argues, eclipses radically contextualised local forms of transsexualism in the
Brazilian context, in favour of an imported model of identity that has little
resonance in the lives of people in the South. He calls for a need to resist a
‘Northern-normativity’
in order to allow alternative and multiple local
understandings.

Ana Ostermann’s study of a different Brazilian healthcare context similarly
reveals a hegemonic North-South circulation of meanings. Ostermann’s article
is a conversation and membership categorisation analysis of calls to a
Brazilian government helpline, which gathered information about female
callers’ sexual orientation. On the one hand, the format of questioning
revealed that the call takers assumed heterosexuality as the default sexual
orientation, and that Northern sexual identity labels would also be familiar to
less economically and educationally privileged Brazilian callers. Ostermann
notes that in assuming the role of
‘educating’ callers about the ‘correct’
(imported) terms to describe their own sexual identities, the call takers were
implicated in the practice of discursive colonisation. On the other hand, her
analysis sheds light on the locally emergent sense-making at work. For
example, she found that heterosexuality as a default category did not circulate
in discourse, and if referred to explicitly, was assumed by the callers to mean
homosexuality instead.

female masculinity)

Mooniq Shaikjee and Christopher Stroud aim to advance a decolonial
approach to a sociolinguistic analysis of cultural texts. They do so with the
help of Frantz Fanon’s ideas about the interconnectedness of race, gender
and sexuality, the unbearable coloniality of this imbrication and the need
for decolonial disentanglement. The authors focus on drag king shows
(performances of
in Cape Town, along with semi-
structured interviews of the performers. Drag king shows, as a discursive
genre, are known for their potentially subversive nature, which is corroborated
by the performers’ expressed intent behind their shows in the present study.
Shaikjee and Stroud note, however, that the subversive element was not found
in the framing of the shows under study; in fact, a reliance on Western popular
culture and an overlay of white privilege were troubling from a decolonising
perspective, as colonial gender
systems got maintained. Moments of
decoloniality, though, became evident in the interruptions and slippages

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

316

MILANI AND LAZAR

during the shows’ delivery, at the interstice of performed persona and personal
witness.

‘hospitality’. Drawing on what

Ana Deumert and Nkululeko Mabandla opt to focus on a non-metropolitan
locale – a rural town in Eastern Cape province – as a corrective to an emphasis
on cities as a privileged space in much recent sociolinguistics research. They
examine the possibility for black queer visibilities, using the theoretical concept
of
they refer to as a ‘border-thinking’
perspective, the authors bring into conversation poststructural academic
theory with vernacular understandings made manifest in South African
proverbs and interview data. An analysis of the local discourses allows
Deumert and Mabandla to go beyond Derrida’s theorisation of
‘absolute
hospitality’, by considering alternative dimensions of engagement made
possible in encounters with people of sexual diversity in the rural African
town. Their ﬁndings reveal a potential for living-in-diversity, which debunks
Northern stereotypes of the homophobic African. The authors are quick to
point out, however,
that rather than simplistically viewing this non-
metropolitan site as utopian, a careful historicisation of local traditions and
an existing ‘politics of inclusivity’ since South African liberation movements
are necessary.

Michelle Lazar’s article also revisits and extends a theoretical concept
developed in Northern contexts in the light of a grounded situated practice in
the southern context of Singapore. Her study deals with a critical multimodal
analysis of an ofﬁcial online video issued by an LGBTQ social movement that
holds large annual public rallies in Singapore – a national context in which
gay sex is criminalised, and public spaces are closely monitored. Lazar argues
that the visibility of a mass queer presence in an otherwise conservative Asian
public sphere is made possible through the deployment of a homonationalist
discourse, which strategically aligns LGBTQ concerns with broader Asian
nationalist values. Rather than adopt a contestative politics or emphasising a
liberal discourse of individual rights typical of LGBTQ movements in the North,
the alternative Singapore-style homonationalism performs a tactical politics of
pragmatic resistance. Viewed in terms of a ‘southern praxis’, Lazar’s study
‘speaks back’ to Northern theorisations of ‘homonormativity’. At the same
time, it points to how this local discursive practice becomes pluri-sited through
its appropriation and recontextualisation elsewhere in the North and South of
the globe.

Finally, in dealing with New Zealand in the context of the Special Issue,
is
Brian King recognises New Zealand’s status as idiosyncratic for it
‘marginally Northern and problematically Southern’. He exploits
this
tension through an alignment with various indigenous Oceanic (Maori,
Cook Island, Hawaiian and Samoan) academic perspectives. In his study of a
New Zealand sexuality education classroom, King throws open the notion of
‘heteronormativity’ developed in Northern contexts, and raises questions
about how the narrowly focused entanglement of heterosexuality with gender

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

SEEING FROM THE SOUTH

317

in Northern theorisation needs unpacking in different ways when viewed
from an Oceanic vantage point. In his study, Pasiﬁka young men in the
classroom positioned themselves in ways that were non-hegemonically
masculine
their
masculinity or their heterosexuality.

non-heteronormative,

yet without

disrupting

and

CONCLUSION

tantamount

Rather than offering conclusive answers, however, the aim of this Special
Issue is to open up a space for further discussions and engagement with the
South as a heuristic lens for the study of discourse, gender and sexuality,
and the study of
language and social processes more broadly. What the
articles have collectively demonstrated is that taking the South as a vantage
point
to the promotion of a Southern essentialised
indigeneity, rather it offers an ‘ex-centric window on the world at large’
(Comaroff and Comaroff 2012: 47)
through which to capture the
reproduction of and resistance to well-established concepts and global
discourses.
is not always a loud
outright cry but happens fairly modestly in the ‘nooks and crannies of
everyday life’
in interstitial sites through small or
ruptures against hegemonic Northern and colonial
strategic acts of
discourses and practices. What
to be investigated more
closely is how practices of decoloniality and alternative discourses struggling
to emerge from within local ecologies take shape in a variety of contexts,
and how these translate into South-North and South-South dialogues.

‘Speaking back’ to the North, however,

(Besnier 2009: 11),

remains

is not

still

In this Special Issue, we have put the spotlight on gender and sexuality as
analytical foci of empirical investigation, because we believe that these axes of
social categorisation are still at the margins of mainstream sociolinguistics. We
hope, however, that future sociolinguistic work will explore the potentials of a
Southern lens for understanding a variety of sociolinguistic phenomena. Also,
while our focus has been more about what the South heuristically brings to the
study of
language, gender and sexuality, a reverse focus on gender and
sexuality as entry points for understanding the South, we believe, is equally
insightful. It is a direction that could be deployed also in regard to a variety of
other sociolinguistic phenomena in the South.
seeing (from)

the South in mainstream
sociolinguistic research lies in part in Spivak’s famously incisive observation
that even when the subaltern (in our case, the South) speaks, does it get heard?
Perhaps it becomes possible only when, like the South, the North, too, in
sociolinguistic research, is opened up for theoretical and political scrutiny and
(self)reﬂection.

the value of

Ultimately,

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

318

NOTES

MILANI AND LAZAR

1. We are grateful to the editors and all reviewers for their help with the Special

Issue.

2. For example, the IGALA conference hosted in Brazil in 2012 and Hong Kong in
in 2017; and the Sociolinguistics

the AILA conference in Brazil

2016;
Symposium in New Zealand in 2018.

3. Apart from the North/South terminology, other ways to refer broadly to the
global divisions and inequities include West/East, First World/Third World,
Developed/Developing, Centre/Periphery and Metropole/Colony. Even in these
binary terminologies, we note that one consistently occupies ﬁrst position
conceptually and linguistically, whereas the other follows after it.

4. Geographically, the nation-states of Latin America, the Caribbean, sub-Saharan
Africa, South and Southeast Asia, China, and Oceania constitute the parameters
of the Global South.

5. The authors’ voices, in part, rely on locally emergent academic scholarship
about the communities studied so that it is never simply transplanting ‘our’
knowledges into ‘their’ experiences.

REFERENCES

Alcoff, Linda. 1991. The problem of speaking for others. Cultural Critique 20: 5–32.
Anzaldua, Gloria. 1987. Borderlands/La Frontera. San Francisco, California: Aunt Lute Books.
Appadurai, Arjun. 1996. Modernity at Large. Minneapolis, Minnesota: University of Minnesota

Press.

Atanga, Lilian L., Sibonile E. Ellece, Lia Litosseliti and Jane Sunderland (eds.). 2013. Gender and
Language in Sub-Saharan Africa: Tradition, Struggle and Change. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania:
John Benjamins.

Besnier, Niko. 2009. Gossip and the Everyday Production of Politics. Honolulu, Hawai‘i:

University of Hawai‘i Press.

Bhabha, Homi. 1994. The Location of Culture. London: Routledge.
Cameron, Deborah, Elizabeth Frazer, Penelope Harvey, Ben Rampton and Kay Richardson

(eds.). 1992. Researching Language: Issues of Power and Method. London: Routledge.

Colucciello Barber, Daniel. 2014. Deleuze and the Naming of God: Post-Secularism and the Future

of Immanence. Edinburgh, U.K.: Edinburgh University Press.

Comaroff, Jean and John L. Comaroff. 2012. Theory from the South: Or, How Euro-America is

Evolving toward Africa. Boulder, Colorado: Paradigm.

Connell, Raewyn. 2007. Southern Theory: The Global Dynamics of Knowledge in the Social Science.

Cambridge, U.K.: Polity.

Connell, Raewyn. 2014. Rethinking gender from the South. Feminist Studies 40: 518–539.
Introduction: Sociolinguistic theory and the practice of
Coupland, Nikolas. 2016.
sociolinguistics. In Nikolas Coupland (ed.) Sociolinguistics: Theoretical Debates. Cambridge,
U.K.: Cambridge University Press. 1–34.

Crenshaw, Kimberle. 1991. Mapping the margins: Intersectionality, identity politics, and

violence against women of color. Stanford Law Review 43: 1241–1299.

de Sousa Santos, Boaventura. 2014. Epistemologies of the South: Justice against Epistemicide.

Boulder, Colorado: Paradigm Publishers.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

SEEING FROM THE SOUTH

319

Ehrlich, Susan, Miriam Meyerhoff and Janet Holmes (eds.). 2014. The Handbook of Language,

Gender and Sexuality (2nd edition). Malden, Massachusetts: Wiley Blackwell.

Heugh, Kathleen. 2017. Re-placing and re-centering southern multilingualisms. In Caroline
Kerfoot and Kenneth Hyltenstam (eds.) Entangled Discourses: South-North Orders of
Invisibility. London: Routledge. 209–229.

Lazar, Michelle M. 2005. Politicizing gender in discourse: Feminist critical discourse analysis
as political perspective and praxis. In Michelle M. Lazar (ed.) Feminist Critical Discourse
Analysis: Gender, Power and Ideology in Discourse. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 1–28.

Levon, Erez. 2017. Situating sociolinguistics. Coupland – Theoretical Debates. Journal of

Sociolinguistics 21: 272–288.

Menezes de Sousa, Lynn Mario. 2007. Entering a culture quietly: Writing and cultural
survival in indigenous education in Brazil. In Sinfree Makoni and Alastair Pennycook (eds.)
Disinventing and Reconstituting Languages. Clevedon, U.K.: Multilingual Matters.

Mernissi, Fatima. 1987. Le Harem Politique: Le Prophete et les Femmes. Paris, France: Albin

Michel.

Mignolo, Walter. 2009. Epistemic disobedience, independent thought and de-colonial freedom.

Theory, Culture & Society 26: 1–23.

Mignolo, Walter. 2010. Introduction: Immigrant consciousness. In Rodolfo Kusch (ed.)
Indigenous and Popular Thinking in America. Durham, North Carolina: Duke University
Press. xiii–lxxiv.

Miskolci, Richard. 2014. Queering the geopolitics of knowledge. In Elizabeth S. Lewis, Rodrigo
Borba and Branca Falabella Fabricio (eds.) Queering Paradigms: Dialogues on Queer
Epistemologies, Embodiments and Activisms. Frankfurt, Germany: Peter Lang. 13–30.

Mohanty, Chandra Talpade. 1984. Under western eyes: Feminist scholarship and colonial

discourses. Boundary 2: 333–358.

Nnaemeka, Obioma. 2005. Mapping African feminisms. In Andrea Cornwall (ed.) Readings in

Gender in Africa. Oxford, U.K.: James Currey. 31–40.

Rosa, Marcelo C. 2014. Theories of the South: Limits and perspectives of an emergent

movement in social sciences. Current Sociology Review 62: 851–867.

Roy, Srila. 2016. Women’s movements in the Global South: Towards a scalar analysis.

International Journal of Politics, Culture and Society 29: 289–306.
Said, Edward W. 1994. Culture and Imperialism. London: Vintage.

Address correspondence to:

Tommaso M. Milani
Linguistics
School of Literature, Language and Media
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg
Private Bag 3, WITS 2050
South Africa

Tommaso.Milani@wits.ac.za

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd


