Applied Psycholinguistics 38 (2017), 633–656
doi:10.1017/S0142716416000357

Resolving referential ambiguity
across ambiguous situations in young
foreign language learners

CHIEH-FANG HU
University of Taipei

Received: December 29, 2015

Accepted for publication: June 28, 2016

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Chieh-Fang Hu, Department of English Instruction, University of Taipei, Taipei, Republic of China.
E-mail: chfu@utaipei.edu.tw

ABSTRACT
First language learners can track word-referent co-occurrence information across situations and eval-
uate co-occurrence probabilities across situations to determine the best-of-ﬁt mappings. However,
cross-situational word learning can be difﬁcult to foreign language learners, because in addition to ag-
gregating information across situations, they have to build robust representations for foreign-sounding
words. In Experiment 1, third-grade Mandarin-speaking children learned four English word-referent
pairs in two conditions, varying in within-trial ambiguity. In one condition, information about word-
referent association was determinable across trials but not within a trial. In the other, word-referent
association within a trial was inferable. In Experiment 2, participants learned words in a condition
where referential ambiguity across trials, though not within a trial, was reduced by successive presen-
tation of certain word-referent pairs. The results revealed that participants learned more word-referent
pairs than expected by chance. Reducing ambiguity within a trial facilitated word mapping and word
retention (Experiment 1), but reducing ambiguity across trials did not (Experiment 2). Across two
experiments, word mapping and retention performance was associated with phonological awareness,
whether measured in children’s ﬁrst language or a foreign language, but not with digit span, suggesting
that success in cross-situational word learning in a foreign language rests on speciﬁcation of word
forms.

The present study investigates cross-situational word learning in school-age for-
eign language (FL) learners. Further, it takes an individual difference framework,
exploring learner variables that may affect cross-situational learning in school-age
FL learners. FL learners constantly encounter ambiguous situations (Ely, 1989).
Ambiguity can occur in many aspects of a linguistic message, including sound
pattern, word boundary, and/or word meaning. Current pedagogical trends em-
phasize contextualized vocabulary learning in nonostensive contexts where words
are mentioned but not directly taught. Not all input needs to be comprehensible
(White, 1987). There are occasions when novel words are mentioned but not ex-
plicitly taught, rendering ambiguity in form to meaning mappings, such as listening

© Cambridge University Press 2016 0142-7164/16

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

634

to stories, shared book reading, watching videos, or following directions in the
classroom. In those ambiguous occasions, even when a word form is appropriately
chunked from the continuous speech stream and encoded, a FL learner may still
encounter multiple possible referents for that word. For example, during shared
storybook reading, young FL leaners may hear a novel word in a picture that de-
picts several objects that they cannot name yet. While FL learners nowadays have
a greater chance to learn words in a variety of nonostensive contexts, not much
is known about how FL learners resolve referential ambiguity and what learner
variables are associated with their ability to disambiguate a word’s meaning.

Children’s ability to make informed guesses about a word’s meaning in referen-
tially ambiguous situations has been widely discussed and investigated in studies
of ﬁrst language (L1) acquisition. When the situation is highly constrained, for
example, when there is only one name-unknown object, children seem to circum-
vent the problem of referential indeterminacy with some built-in biases. They are
more likely to map a novel name onto an object for which they do not have a label
than an object for which they already have a name (e.g., Au & Glusman, 1990;
Golinkoff, Hirsh-Pasek, Bailey, & Wenger, 1992; Golinkoff, Mervis, & Hirsh-
Pasek, 1994; Markman & Wachtel, 1988; Merriman & Bowman, 1989). Such
lexical biases have been consistently demonstrated in L1 children and are con-
sidered robust and fundamental in learning early L1 words (de Marchena, Eigsti,
Worek, Ono, & Snedeker, 2011; Golinkoff et al., 1992). This pattern of responses
has been replicated in children learning a nonnative language (e.g., Davidson &
Tell, 2005; Hu, 2012; Kan & Kohnert, 2008; Wilkinson & Mazzitelli, 2003). For
example, Hu (2012) found that when hearing a novel FL word in the presence of
three objects, two name-known and one name-unknown, fourth-grade FL learners
selected the name-unknown object as a referent for the novel word over 97% of
the time. Nevertheless, the above learning condition is highly constraining, with
one novel word in the presence of one name-unknown referent. Like L1 learners,
FL learners also encounter situations where they hear multiple novel words in the
presence of multiple name-unknown referents. Do school-age FL learners make
connections between FL-sounding words and referents in those situations?

WORD MAPPING ACROSS AMBIGUOUS SITUATIONS

In recent years, researchers are interested in children’s ability to sort out poten-
tial word to referent associations across multiple ambiguous situations, known
as cross-situational word learning. Instead of one to one fast mapping through
the application of some built-in lexical biases, the cross-situational word learn-
ing paradigm requires learners to track word-referent co-occurrence information
across learning trials and evaluate co-occurrence probabilities across trials to de-
termine the best-of-ﬁt mappings (e.g., Scott & Fisher, 2012; Smith & Yu, 2008;
Vlach & Johnson, 2013; Yu & Smith, 2007). Consider a situation in which a child
hears a word clamp in the presence of multiple name-unknown objects. The child
cannot determine the referent of the word by applying the strategy of lexical biases.
However, the child can determine the referent of the word after hearing the word
clamp in multiple situations where clamp consistently co-occurs with a particular
type of object. Studies on L1 learners have demonstrated that adults, children, and

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

635

infants are able to determine the intended referent of a word across situations de-
spite referential uncertainty in each situation (e.g., Smith, Smith, & Blythe, 2011;
Suanda, Mugwanya, & Namy, 2014; Vlach & Johnson, 2013; Yu & Smith, 2007,
2011). There is evidence that the processes involved in cross-situational learning
undergo developmental changes (Fitneva & Christiansen, 2015; Vlach & Johnson,
2013). For example, young children beneﬁt from initial correct mappings whereas
adults beneﬁt from erroneous associations in initial trials (Fitneva & Christiansen,
2015).

The cross-situational learning paradigm has rarely been investigated in school-
age FL learners probably due to the assumption that in FL classrooms, the referent
of a word is explicitly and directly pointed out by teachers. This assumption does
not hold because many FL classrooms in today’s world involve activities that do not
strictly control language. Can school-age FL learners discover a word’s referent
by tracking FL-sounding words and ambiguous referents across situations? Cross-
situational FL word learning can be seen as consisting of two steps. First, FL
learners encode heard FL words in the presence of multiple potential referents. The
encoding process can be highly demanding even for a single novel word because a
FL-sounding word can be obscure in all aspects of phonological features, including
overall word and syllabic shapes, segmental details, and articulatory gestures.
Efﬁcient encoding may depend, to a substantial extent, on the learners’ sensitivity
to the sound structure of the language (Hu & Schuele, 2005). Second, FL learners
have to carry the word forms, partially or completely encoded, from one situation
to the next situation so that they can accumulate and compare information across
situations and discover the correct referents of the heard words. Thus, the encoded
forms have to be durable and recognizable as the same forms when they are heard
again across situations. The two steps may occur simultaneously or sequentially
and may interfere with each other. For example, tracking information encoded
in a previous learning event may be disrupted when one attempts to encode a
newer word in the current situation. Thus, the task of tracking multiple ambiguous
mappings across situations, plus the difﬁculties in encoding FL forms on the ﬂy,
may tax young FL learners’ memory resources to such an extent that they may
not actively and effectively resolve ambiguity in word-referent mappings and may
even ignore the FL forms that are referentially ambiguous.

Studies on cross-situational word learning have proposed several mechanisms to
account for how L1 learners discover referents for words across multiple ambigu-
ous situations. While these mechanisms revealed the nature of cross-situational
word learning in L1 learners, they generally do not consider the additional dif-
ﬁculties FL learners may face in encoding novel FL-sounding forms. According
to the associative learning account (Smith & Yu, 2008; Vouloumanos, 2008; Yu
& Smith, 2007), when encountering multiple novel words with referential inde-
terminacy, learners track and maintain multiple hypotheses about the meanings
of the words until sufﬁcient information from subsequent encounters conﬁrms or
disconﬁrms the hypotheses. According to the hypothesis testing account (Medina,
Snedeker, Trueswell, & Gleitman, 2011; Trueswell, Medina, Hafri, & Gleitman,
2013), learners attend to one form at a time and do not attempt a second hypothesis
until the ﬁrst hypothesis is veriﬁed (Medina et al., 2011). The debate is similar
to the debate about delayed and immediate decisions made in syntactic parsing

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

636

(Carroll, 2008). Whether by entertaining one or multiple associations at a time,
mapping new words onto referents across time is a difﬁcult task due to the un-
certainty in every learning trial. In addition to the uncertainty in word-referent
mappings, FL leaners face another challenge, namely, efﬁciently encoding FL
forms into durable and recognizable representations that allow comparison across
time. Given the double difﬁculties, FL learners may experience total failure in
cross-situational word learning. In that case, cross-situational word learning is not
a realistic mechanism in FL acquisition. Thus, the ﬁrst goal of the study is to ex-
amine FL learners’ capacity of resolving referential ambiguity cross-situationally.

LEARNER VARIABLES

Another goal of the study is to identify individual learner variables that may affect
FL cross-situational word learning. It follows from the above discussion that some
aspects of individual differences, such as phonological awareness and memory
span, may be associated with school-age FL learners’ capacity for cross-situational
learning. Phonological awareness refers to the awareness of the phonological
composition of a spoken word. It is a universal predictor of reading abilities across
alphabetic orthographies (Ziegler et al., 2010) and may also play a nontrivial role in
learning to read a nonalphabetic orthography (Hu, 2013; Newman, Tardif, Huang,
& Shu, 2011). In addition to reading, children with weakness in phonological
awareness exhibit difﬁculties encoding phonological details for novel words in
another language, whether in ostensive or nonostensive contexts (de Jong, Seveke,
& van Veen, 2000; Hu, 2012; Hu & Schuele, 2005; McBride-Chang, Cheung,
Chow, Chow, & Choi, 2006; Palladino & Ferrari, 2008). With reduced sensitivity
to the phonological structure of a language, they demonstrate reduced capacity
to extract recurring phonological patterns from input to support word learning
(Hu, 2014). Sensitivity to the phonological composition of a word may also affect
cross-situational learning. Escudero, Mulak, and Vlach (2015) found that adult
learners had greater difﬁculty learning vowel minimal pairs (e.g., deet–det) than
nonminimal pairs (e.g., deet–bon) or consonant minimal pairs (e.g., bon–ton).

Another relevant learner variable is memory span. Memory capacity has been
shown to be associated with FL learning difﬁculties (Palladino & Ferrari, 2008).
It plays a constraining role when learning involves aggregating and comparing
information over learning events and has been discussed in many published stud-
ies of cross-situational learning (e.g., Kachergis, Yu, & Shiffrin, 2013; Medina
et al., 2011; Smith et al., 2011; Trueswell et al., 2013; Vlach & Johnson, 2013;
Yurovsky, Yu, & Smith, 2013). Children with better memory capacity are expected
to ﬁnd word mapping across multiple ambiguous situations easier whether they
hypothesize about a word’s meaning at one time (Medina et al., 2011) or track
and store all the possible referents until they discover the correct mapping (Yu &
Smith, 2007).

THE CURRENT STUDY

With two experiments,
the study explored situational disambiguation skills
in school-age FL learners and the learner variables that might contribute to

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

637

individual differences in such learning. In both experiments, learners’ differences
in memory span and phonological awareness were measured. Experiment 1 in-
vestigated whether school-age FL learners were capable of mapping heard words
onto their referents across ambiguous trials as opposed to nonambiguous trials.
After establishing that school-age FL learners were capable of word mapping
across multiple ambiguous situations but the overall learning was low, Experiment
2 replicated the ﬁrst experiment and further investigated whether structuring the
input into temporally contiguous trials facilitated mapping performance. Previous
studies have shown that L1 learners demonstrate better mapping performance
when some of the word-referent pairs appear in successive trials (Kachergis, Yu,
& Shiffrin, 2013; Vlach & Johnson, 2013). It is thus interesting to see whether FL
learners would beneﬁt from experiencing consecutive encounters with FL words
in cross-situational learning. In typical FL settings, children are more likely to hear
a novel word a number of times before hearing other novel words. For example,
listening to the story Seven Blind Mice, FL learners will hear the novel animal
name “mouse” on successive pages, each in conjunction with another novel animal
name.

It is worth noting that in order to evaluate word mapping in a more realistic
setting, the target words were not presented in isolation as in the traditional cross-
situational paradigm. Instead, the target words appeared in multiword, compre-
hensible utterances, which helped narrow down the potential referents of a novel
word. In FL classrooms, learners are unlikely to encounter multiple novel words
with multiple ambiguous referents without any contextual support or without any
direct and explicit instruction.

EXPERIMENT 1

Third-grade FL learners were randomly assigned to two word-mapping condi-
tions: contrastive and noncontrastive. The two conditions were equivalent in terms
of the total occurrences of each target word but differed in within-trial ambigu-
ity. In the contrastive condition, children could determine word referents within
a trial by resorting to lexical biases of mutual exclusivity or mapping a novel
word to a nameless category. In the noncontrastive condition, children could not
determine word referents unless they aggregated information across trials. Across
trials, each novel word co-occurred consistently with only one referent. It was not
clear whether FL learners would demonstrate any learning in the noncontrastive
condition. It was also unclear which condition would result in better word map-
ping performance. FL learners should intuitively demonstrate inferior mapping
performance in the more ambiguous, noncontrastive condition when compared
with the contrastive condition. However, it was also possible that the ambiguity in
the noncontrastive condition might result in better retention as it required sustained
attention to form-referent pairings over the learning trials, leading to elaborate and
durable memory encoding (Vlach & Sandhofer, 2010, 2014).

Method

Participants. The participants were 120 third-grade Mandarin-speaking students

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

638

recruited from six classes of an elementary school. The mean age of the children
was 8 years 10 months. These students had received formal instruction of English
as FL since Grade 1, with two 40-min classes per week. Third grade was con-
sidered as the earliest point of development at which the FL learners were able
to understand the carrier sentences in the present study. The students were not
reported to have any evidence of neurological damage, emotional problems, sen-
sory deﬁcits, or history of articulation/language impairments. All the participants
had permission for participation from parents. The participants were randomly
assigned to two learning conditions (N = 60 for each condition). The two groups
of participants did not differ in general receptive vocabulary of English measured
by a standardized vocabulary test, the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, t (118) =
0.45, p > .05.

Learner variables.

PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS. Phonological awareness was measured in chil-
dren’s FL (English) and L1 (Mandarin Chinese). FL phonological awareness was
composed of two subtests: oddity and deletion. The two subtests probed into
the two essential aspects of phonological awareness, sound categorization (sound
oddity) and phoneme segmentation (deletion), and have been successfully used
in Mandarin-speaking children (e.g., Chen et al., 2004; Hu, 2013; Newman et al.,
2011; Wang, Perfetti, & Liu, 2005). Sound oddity required the child to choose
from three monosyllabic consonant–vowel–consonant words the one that sounded
different than the others. Half of the 16 test trials required the child to contrast
the words according to the initial consonants (e.g., pin, pig, top) and the other
half according to the rimes (e.g., peg, cot, leg). Deletion required the child to
say English words (e.g., book) without saying the initial consonants (e.g., –ook).
There were 10 trials. For each individual, a composite score of FL phonological
awareness was obtained by averaging the proportional scores from English sound
oddity and deletion. L1 phonological awareness was also composed of the two
subtests, except that the stimuli were Chinese words. For example, the stimuli
for oddity were mao2 (hair), mei2 (plum), and niou2 (cow). In deletion, the child
heard a Chinese word (e.g., fang2zi5 “house”) and said what was left after remov-
ing the ﬁrst sound (e.g., –ang2zi5). The proportional scores from Chinese sound
oddity and deletion were averaged to create a composite score of L1 phonological
awareness for each individual.

DIGIT SPAN. Participants’ memory capacity was measured by an auditory digit
span test. The test giver read aloud lists of digits in children’s L1 at a rate of
one digit per second, starting with two digits and continuing by increasing one
digit at a time until the participant failed in two consecutive trials in the same
span length. Given that children were already highly familiar with digit names,
the digit span test reﬂected the storage and maintenance components of children’s
memory capacity, independently of stimuli familiarity and phonological aware-
ness. There were two practice trials. Span was the longest list length correctly
recalled.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

Word mapping.

639

STIMULI AND DESIGN. Stimuli included four words: clamp, wedge, snood, and
dart. These words were chosen because they were novel to the participants, they
represented concrete objects, and they were not phonologically similar to one
another. There were four blocks of six learning trials each. Each learning trial
consisted of two pairs of target word-referent associations. Each target word-
referent association appeared three times in each block. Participants heard a story
about some kids taking two items to school and leaving one at home. In the
contrastive condition, the two word-referent pairs in each trial were contrasted:
one was described as an item taken to school and the other as the item left at home.
In the noncontrastive condition, the two word-referent pairs referred to the two
items taken to school.

For each trial, the target words were embedded in a carrier sentence. The carrier
sentence was “He/she takes an X and a Y to school, but he/she does not take a Z.”
The three slots X, Y, and Z were ﬁlled in with two target words and one familiar
word (e.g., book, pen, or dog). A pictured scene was simultaneously presented
with the carrier sentence. As shown in Figure 1, the items taken to school were
displayed on one side and the item left at home on the other. The referent locations
for X and Y (left or right) and the order of the labels (ﬁrst or second) were
counterbalanced across the learning trials in both conditions.

In the contrastive condition, the target words were mentioned in slots X
(or Y) and Z. Given that only one target word referred to one nameless object
in the schoolbag, the referent of the target word was determinable, in a single
learning trial, by mutual exclusivity and by the contrast between what was taken
to school and what was left at home. In the noncontrastive condition, the target
words were mentioned in slots X and Y, with no information about which target
word referred to which object in the pictured scene in a single learning trial. Thus,
the two conditions varied in within-trial ambiguity with respect to form-referent
mappings.

Each block was immediately followed by a referent selection test to assess
children’s word mapping performance. In each test, there were six test items: four
target words, one familiar word, and one novel word not heard in the learning trials
nor carried over into the next referent selection test (i.e., sieve, chime, whisk, knob,
or tong). The novel name-unknown object in the referent selection test allowed
for an examination of whether the participants had acquired some knowledge of
the target words even though they failed in exact one to one mappings.
Procedure. The participants were randomly assigned to a condition (N = 60 for
each condition) and were tested individually in a quiet room in the school. They
were informed that they would hear a story about some students who took some
items to school and left some at home each day. To familiarize the participant
with the task, the test giver showed a pictured scene where a boy was on his way
to school, with a book and a toy dog on one side of the scene and a pen on the
other. The test giver made the comment, “He takes a book and a dog to school,
but he does not take a pen.” The participant was then shown a second picture

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

640

Figure 1. (Color online) Sample stimuli for the two conditions in Experiment 1. The object
pictures were redrawn for illustration. The layout and the arrangement of the objects are
identical to the stimuli used in the study.

of six familiar objects, a book, a dog, a pen, a ball, a pig, and a cup, and asked
to identify the three items mentioned in the sentence just heard. Following the
familiarization task was the four blocks of learning, each followed by a referent
selection test. In each learning trial, the participant experienced two target word-
referent pairings together with one familiar word-referent pairing. The test giver
presented a pictured scene and orally described the scene with a carrier sentence,
where two target words, along with a familiar word, were embedded according
to the designated slots of each condition. The test giver did not point to the
corresponding referent.

For each block, immediately after experiencing six learning trials, the participant
took a referent selection test. The participant was shown six pictures, four target
objects, one familiar nameable object (e.g., book), and one novel name-unknown
object not shown in the learning trials (e.g., sieve). The test giver named the objects
randomly, and the participant was instructed to point to the picture just named.
Children received no feedback during the test. In total, each participant took the
referent selection test ﬁve times: once immediately after each of the four blocks
of learning and once in a delayed test taken 15 min after the last block of learning.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

641

Table 1. Descriptive statistics of the principle variables for the two
experiments

Experiment 1

Immediate

Target words (max = 16)
Known words (max = 4)
Novel words (max = 4)
Target words (max = 4)
Known words (max = 1)
Novel words (max = 1)

Delayed

Digit span
L1 phonological awareness
FL phonological awareness

Experiment 2

Immediate

Target words (max = 16)
Known words (max = 4)
Novel words (max = 4)
Target words (max = 4)
Known words (max = 1)
Novel words (max = 1)

Delayed

Digit span
L1 phonological awareness
FL phonological awareness

Contrastive

Noncontrastive

M

10.5
4.0
3.2

2.9
1.0
0.8
8.8
78.6
74.8

SD

3.7
0.0
1.1

1.3
0.0
0.4
1.3
19.5
18.7

M

7.6
4.0
3.2

2.0
1.0
0.8
9.1
85.3
82.9

SD

4.1
0.0
1.1

1.4
0.0
0.4
1.2
13.4
13.9

Interleaved

Repetitive

M

5.7
4.0
2.7

1.6
1.0
0.5
9.2
85.9
81.2

SD

3.4
0.0
1.2

1.3
0.0
0.5
0.9
12.0
13.8

M

6.4
4.0
2.7

1.8
1.0
0.6
8.8
78.5
79.3

SD

3.9
0.0
1.3

1.4
0.0
0.5
1.4
14.2
15.7

Note: L1, First language; FL, foreign language.

Results and discussion

Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics of the principal variables in the study.
Figure 2 displays mean accuracy scores in referent selection for each block in
the noncontrastive and contrastive conditions. The results for the target words are
shown in the top panel of the ﬁgure (max = 4 for each block); those for the novel
words ﬁrst heard in the referent selection tests are shown in the bottom panel (max
= 1). Children scored perfectly for the familiar words. The two conditions were
identical, except that the referents of the target words were inferable by mutual
exclusivity within a trial in the contrastive condition but had to be inferred by
tracking co-occurrence information across trials in the noncontrastive condition.
To examine whether children demonstrated word learning in the noncontrastive
condition, single-sample t tests were performed to test whether children’s word
mapping performance for the target words tests was above the level that would

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

642

Figure 2. Mean accuracy for the noncontrastive and the contrastive conditions for the (top)
target words and (bottom) novel words. Error bars show standard errors.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

643

Table 2. Percentages of learners that had 100% or 0% accuracy for all the immediate
tests and the delayed test

Learners With 100% Accuracy

Learners With 0% Accuracy

Experiment 1

Contrastive

Noncontrastive

Contrastive

Noncontrastive

Block 1
Block 2
Block 3
Block 4
Delayed

16.7
43.3
43.3
58.3
46.7

8.3
26.7
28.3
31.7
23.3

8.3
8.3
3.3
3.3
3.3

36.7
13.3
10.0
16.7
20.0

Experiment 2

Interleaved

Repetitive

Interleaved

Repetitive

Block 1
Block 2
Block 3
Block 4
Delayed

3.2
11.1
12.7
19.0
14.3

0.0
13.3
23.3
30.0
16.7

38.1
14.3
36.5
19.0
22.2

25.0
30.0
21.7
18.3
16.7

be expected from chance. The chance level was estimated to be 0.8 for the four
target words. Although for each target word, there was an array of six referents
(four target objects, a familiar object, and a still novel, nameless object), only
ﬁve were competitors because the participants were all accurate in the selection
of the familiar object. Thus, the chance level was estimated to be 0.2 (1 out 5)
for each target word. The chance level for the summed score of the four target
words was thus 0.8 (0.2 × 4). The results of the t tests revealed that participants
performed signiﬁcantly above chance in all the immediate and delayed tests of
referent selection for the target words (ps < .01). These results indicate that even
after one block of exposure, the FL learners were able to acquire some word-
referent association from a small number of learning trials involving ambiguous
referents.

Nonetheless, resolving referential ambiguity cross-situationally appeared difﬁ-
cult to many school-age FL learners. As shown in Table 2, after experiencing six
trials of learning in Block 1, 36.7% of the participants in the noncontrastive condi-
tion scored zero in selecting target referents, in contrast to 8.3% in the contrastive
condition. In the ﬁnal immediate test, there were still 16.7% of the participants in
the noncontrastive condition who scored zero in selecting referents for the target
words.
To examine whether word mapping differed across the two conditions, scores
for target referent selection were subject to a 2× 4 analysis of variance (ANOVA)
with learning condition (contrastive vs. noncontrastive) as a between-participants
factor and block (1, 2, 3, 4) as a within-participants factor. The results revealed
signiﬁcant effects of learning condition, F (1, 118) = 16.55, p < .001, partial
η2 = 0.12, and block, F (3, 354) = 25.79, p < .001, partial η2 = 0.18. There was
no interaction effect, F (3, 354) = 1.20, p > .05.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

644

Table 3. Intercorrelations of the principal variables for the contrastive and
non-contrastive conditions for Experiment 1

Variable

1

2

3

4

5

1. L1 phonological awareness
2. FL phonological awareness
3. Digit span
4. Referent selection (immediate)
5. Referent selection (delayed)

—

.64***
.27*
.37**
.22

.54***

—

.09
.47***
.38**

.27*
.22
—
−.09
−.16

.49***
.44***
.08

—

.70***

.27*
.26*
.06
.58***

—

Note: Correlations above the diagonal are for the contrastive condition, and correlations
below the diagonal are for noncontrastive condition. L1, First language; FL, foreign
language.
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.

To examine whether children’s target word-referent mappings dropped differ-
entially in the delayed test, children’s performance for target words in the last
referent selection test and the delayed test was subject to a 2 × 2 ANOVA with
learning condition (contrastive vs. noncontrastive) as a between-participants factor
and time (last immediate vs. delayed) as a within-participants factor. The results
revealed an effect of learning condition, F (1, 118) = 15.17, p < .001, partial
η2 = 0.11, but no effects of time or interaction between learning condition and
time (ps > 0).

With respect to the novel words the participants had not heard in the learning
trials but heard the ﬁrst time in the referent selection test, the two groups of
participants demonstrated a high rate of mapping accuracy (around 80%) for these
words in both the immediate and the delayed tests, as shown in Figure 2. The
results of a 2× 5 ANOVA with learning condition (contrastive vs. noncontrastive)
as a between-participants factor and test time (blocks 1, 2, 3, 4, and delayed) as
a within-participants factor revealed that none of the effects were signiﬁcant (all
ps > .05).

Table 3 displays the correlations between learner variables and word mapping
performance in the two conditions. The referent selection scores for the immedi-
ate tests in the two tables were the scores for target words summed over the four
blocks. The correlations above the diagonal are the correlations for the contrastive
condition, and those below the diagonal are for the noncontrastive condition. As
shown in Table 3, referent selection in the noncontrastive condition was associated
with the two phonological awareness variables in the immediate tests (r = .37 and
.47) and with FL phonological awareness in the delayed test (r = .38). Neither
the immediate nor the delayed referent selection was correlated with digit span. A
similar pattern of the correlations was found for the contrastive condition. Chil-
dren’s mapping performance was associated with the two phonological awareness
variables both in the immediate tests (r = .49 and .44) and in the delayed test
(r = .27 and .26), but not with digit span.

Overall, the results of the current experiment indicated that school-age chil-
dren, as a group, were capable of resolving referential ambiguity across trials,
each involving multiple ambiguous FL-sounding words. Nonetheless, introducing

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

645

ambiguity within a trial posed substantial challenges to some young FL learners. A
substantial portion of the participants in the noncontrastive condition (37%) scored
zero in word mapping for the target words after one block of learning. Moreover,
participants in the noncontrastive condition consistently performed more poorly
than participants in the contrastive condition across the four blocks of learning and
the delayed test. It should be noted, however, that the difﬁculty in word mapping
did not result in more fragile representations for retention. The word mapping per-
formance for the target words in the noncontrastive condition did not decay faster
than that in the contrastive condition. In addition, the word mapping performance
for the still novel word in the referent selection test was not worse in the noncon-
trastive condition than in the contrastive condition, indicating that children in the
noncontrastive condition, though performing inferiorly in the one to one mapping,
were not less able to distinguish the set of target words from the still novel word.
The most interesting ﬁnding was perhaps that the word mapping performance
in the two conditions was associated with children’s phonological awareness of L1
and FL, but not with the commonly proposed variable: memory span. Phonological
awareness, whether measured in L1 or FL, was particularly associated with target
word mapping performance not only in the immediate tests but also in the delayed
tests, probably reﬂecting the speciﬁc demand of encoding FL sound sequences.
The lack of a correlation between digit span and word mapping performance in
cross-situational learning warrants explanations. Memory capacity, as measured by
digit span, should have affected how much information could have been carried
and aggregated from one learning trial to another. One possibility was that the
current task was too demanding of memory resources of school-age FL learners.

EXPERIMENT 2

Experiment 2 served three purposes: to replicate the results regarding cross-
situational word learning in Experiment 1; to examine whether structuring word-
referent pairs according to temporal contiguity facilitated learning; and to see
whether children’s memory capacity emerged as a contributor to accounting for
word mapping performance in a less demanding condition. Although young FL
learners were able to learn words across situations, they showed signiﬁcantly lower
accuracy in mapping when the within-trial ambiguity was high. In Experiment 1,
the sequence of the word-referent pairs in the noncontrastive condition was ran-
domly determined. However, in naturalistic settings, naming events for a particular
object or a particular construction are not randomly and evenly distributed but fol-
low a Zipﬁan distribution (e.g., Ellis & Ferreira, 2009; Goldberg, Casenhiser, &
Sethuraman, 2004). Some words are just heard more often than others within
a speciﬁc time window (Frank, Tenenbaum, & Fernald, 2013), due to the topic
of a discourse or the focus of a story. In addition, given the time constraints in
a FL class, FL teachers usually structure and manipulate FL input to maximize
students’ learning. Structuring input affects different aspects of FL acquisition,
for example, novel phonological contrast (Perrachione, Lee, Ha, & Wong, 2011)
and sentence construction (McDonough & Nekrasova-Becker, 2012).

Experiment 2 compared the effectiveness of word mapping in two cross-
situational learning conditions: repetitive and interleaved. In both conditions,

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

646

participants had to infer the correct word-referent mapping by tracking co-
occurrence information across trials. In the repetitive condition, initial ambiguity
was reduced by presenting certain word-referent pairs in successive trials. Kacher-
gis et al. (2009) found that adult learners demonstrated better word mapping per-
formance when some word-referent pairs were repeated in successive trials than
when none of the pairs were repeated. Vlach and Johnson (2013) found that 16-
month-old infants were capable of solving referential ambiguity for words pre-
sented in successive trials but not for words evenly distributed in time. The authors
attributed infants’ failure in the evenly distributed condition to memory constraints
of the infants. Given that repetition of word-referent pairs seems to reduce memory
load in resolving ambiguity across multiple trials, it is interesting to see whether
school-age FL learners beneﬁt from such structuring and whether, in this less
demanding cross-situational word learning task, FL learners’ memory capacity
emerges as a contributor to accounting for their word mapping performance.

Method

Participants. The participants were 126 third-grade Mandarin-speaking students
recruited from six classes of the same elementary school 2 years after Experiment
1. Three were absent for testing, and thus the number of students in the two
conditions was not equal (N = 63 for the interleaved condition, N = 60 for the
repetitive condition). All the participants had permission for participation from
parents. The mean age of the children was 8 years, 10 months. The two groups of
participants did not differ in general receptive vocabulary of English measured by
the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, t (121) = 0.21, p > .05.

Learner variables. The measures of learner variables, including phonological
awareness of L1 and FL and digit span, were identical to those used in Experiment
1.

Word mapping.

STIMULI AND DESIGN. The target words, the manner of presentation, and the
test procedure were identical to the noncontrastive condition of Experiment 1. The
difference was in the manipulation of the sequence of the word-referent pairs. In the
repetitive condition, two target words (e.g., A and D) appeared in three successive,
adjacent trials (AB–AC–AD–BD–CD–CB) at some points during exposure. In the
interleaved condition, no target words appeared in more than two successive trials
(AB–CD–BD–AC–AD–CB). The ﬁrst trial and the last trial of the two conditions
were made equal to control the potential primacy and recency effects in word
mapping performance. In both conditions, the order of the labels and the positions
of the referents within a trial were randomized so that the mapping between a
word and its referent was uncertain in a single trial.

Procedure. Like Experiment 1, participants were tested individually and were
randomly assigned to condition. The procedure of the learning blocks and
the referent selection test after each learning block were identical to those of

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

647

Experiment 1. For each condition, there were four blocks of six learning trials.
Each block was immediately followed by a referent selection test. After a 15-min
delay, the participants took the referent selection test again. For each referent
selection test, there were six test items, four target words, one familiar word, and
one novel word just heard in the referent selection test.

Results and discussion

The descriptive statistics are shown in Table 1. Figure 3 displays mean accuracy
scores in referent selection for each block in the interleaved and the repetitive
conditions. The results for the target words are shown in the top panel (max
= 4); those for the novel words ﬁrst heard in the referent selection tests in the
bottom panel (max = 1). Children scored perfectly for the familiar words. With
the exception of the ﬁrst block in the interleaved condition, t (62) = 1.67, p > .05,
target referent selection for both conditions was signiﬁcantly above chance in all
the immediate and the delayed tests (ps < .01). Nevertheless, as in Experiment
1, there was a substantial portion of participants scoring zero after the ﬁrst block
of exposure to the target words in the interleaved condition (38.1%) and in the
repetitive condition (25.0%). See Table 2 for the percentages of learners that had
100% or 0% accuracy for the immediate and delayed tests.
Children’s scores in target referent selection were subject to a 2 × 4 ANOVA
with learning condition (interleaved vs. repetitive) as a between-participants factor
and block (1, 2, 3, 4) as a within-participants factor. The results revealed a signiﬁ-
cant effect of block, F (3, 363) = 12.09, p < .001, partial η2 = 0.09. There were no
effects of learning condition, F (1, 121) = 0.90, p > .05, or interaction, F (3, 354)
= 1.20, p > .05. To examine whether children’s form-referent mapping dropped
differentially in the delayed test, children’s performance in the last immediate test
and the delayed test was subject to a 2 × 2 ANOVA with learning condition (in-
terleaved vs. repetitive) as a between-participants factor and test (last immediate,
delayed) as a within-participants factor. None of the effects were signiﬁcant (all
ps > .05).

To further understand whether consecutive presentation affected item-based
mapping performance, scores obtained from each of the two words presented in
three successive trials in the repetitive condition were analyzed by a 2×4 ANOVA
with learning condition (interleaved vs. repetitive) as a between-participants fac-
tor and block (1, 2, 3, 4) as a within-participants factor. The results revealed a
signiﬁcant effect of block, F (3, 363) = 5.50, p = .001, partial η2 = 0.04 for the
ﬁrst repeated word; F (3, 363) = 2.59, p = .05, partial η2 = 0.02 for the second
repeated word. None of the effects involving learning condition were signiﬁcant
(ps > .05).

Another way to delve into the potential effect of temporal contiguity was to ex-
amine whether words with varying degrees of successive repetitions were learned
at different rates. Two words in the repetition condition were presented with three
consecutive repetitions in each block, one with two repetitions and one with no
consecutive repetitions. Scores for the four target words in the repetitive condition
were subject to a 4× 4 ANOVA with number of repetition (ﬁrst three consecutive
repetitions, second three consecutive repetitions, two consecutive repetitions, and

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

648

Figure 3. Mean accuracy by the interleaved and the repetitive conditions for the (top) target
words and (bottom) novel words. Error bars show standard errors.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

649

Table 4. Intercorrelations of the principal variables for the repetitive and interleaved
conditions collapsed together for Experiment 2

Variable

1. L1 phonological awareness
2. FL phonological awareness
3. Digit span
4. Referent selection (immediate)
5. Referent selection (delayed)

1

—

.41***
.13
.19*
.28**

Note: L1, First language; FL, foreign language.
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.

2

3

4

5

—

.15
.12
.35***

—
.13
.05

—

.62***

—

no repetitions) and block (1, 2, 3, 4) as within-participant factors. The results re-
vealed a signiﬁcant effect of block, F (3, 177) = 7.84, p < .001, partial η2 = 0.12.
The effect concerning the number of repetition was only marginally signiﬁcant,
F (3, 177) = 2.47, p = .064. There was no interaction effect, F (9, 531) = 0.33,
p > .05. Figure 4 displays the mean accuracy performance for words with varying
degrees of consecutive repetitions in the repetitive condition. There is no indi-
cation that words with varying degrees of successive repetitions in the repetition
condition were learned at different rates.

With respect to the novel words the participants just heard in the referent
selection test, the two groups of participants demonstrated a fairly high rate of
mapping accuracy (60%–70%) in the immediate tests, considering the presence
of ﬁve unfamiliar and one familiar referents. The mapping accuracy for the novel
word dropped slightly 15 min later in the delayed test, as shown in Figure 3. The
results of a 2 × 5 ANOVA on the mapping performance of the novel words with
learning condition (interleaved vs. repetitive) as a between-participants factor and
test time (Blocks 1, 2, 3, 4 and delayed) as a within-participants factor revealed a
signiﬁcant effect of test time, F (4, 484) = 3.4, p < .01, partial η2 = 0.03. Neither
of the effects involving learning condition was signiﬁcant (ps > .05).

Table 4 displays intercorrelations of the principal variables for the two learning
conditions. Because none of the effects involving learning condition were sig-
niﬁcant in the above analyses, scores obtained from the two learning conditions
were collapsed and correlated with each other. As in Experiment 1, the scores
for immediate referent selection were the scores summed over the four blocks of
referent selection tests for the target words. Overall, the correlation pattern was
similar to that in Experiment 1. Children’s referent selection was associated with
L1 phonological awareness in the immediate tests (r = .19) and with both L1
and FL phonological awareness in the delayed test (r = .28 and .35). Neither the
immediate nor the delayed mapping performance was correlated with digit span.
The results of Experiment 2 replicated the ﬁndings of Experiment 1, showing
that despite difﬁculties encoding FL sound sequences, school-age FL learners
acquired some word-referent association when the only clues to the association
were the co-occurrence information across ambiguous situations. Presenting some
word-referent pairs consecutively did not seem to facilitate word mapping to any

Figure 4. Mean accuracy for words with varying degrees of consecutive repetitions in the repetitive condition. Error bars show
standard errors.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

651

degree in school-age FL learners. None of the effects involving learning condition
were signiﬁcant whether the analyses were based on the target words as a whole,
the individual target words repeated successively, or the still novel words in the
referent selection tests.

GENERAL DISCUSSION

The present study extends earlier research on cross-situational word learning to
school-age FL learners. Overall, the results of the two experiments reveal that like
L1 adults and children, school-age FL learners are able to acquire word-referent
mappings despite decoding difﬁculties and despite trial-by-trial ambiguity in the
three cross-situational word learning conditions (one in Experiment 1 and two
in Experiment 2). In both experiments, all the target words were referring FL
words presented in FL utterances containing multiple nouns to better mimic the
common practice FL learners were likely to encounter in nonostensive word
learning situations. The school-age FL learners were able to map words at above-
chance levels after experiencing a word three times, although from any one trial
the referent was not inferable.

Such learning appeared robust against decay in time, at least for short times.
First, children’s mapping performance on the target words was still above the
chance level in the delayed test taken 15 min after the last trial of learning in both
experiments. Particularly in Experiment 1, the mapping performance in the cross-
situational, noncontrastive condition did not decay to a larger extent than that in
the more favorable, contrastive condition, where the participants could ascertain
the referent of a target word in a single trial by resorting to lexical biases of mutual
exclusivity (Markman & Wachtel, 1988) or novel name to nameless category
(Golinkoff et al., 1992). Second, with respect to the novel words just heard in
the referent selection test, the participants could map them onto their referents
at a fairly high rate of accuracy not only after the very ﬁrst block of learning
but also in the delayed test. To map a just-heard novel word to its referent in the
presence of four other referents for the target words, the participants had to know
that the word was not one of the target words and eliminate the target referents
as a possible referent for the novel word (Horst, Scott, & Pollard, 2010). These
results suggest that the participants had acquired some knowledge of the target
words and their referents even though they failed in some one to one mappings
and that the knowledge was durable 15 min after learning.

Though school-age FL learners demonstrated robust learning despite trial-by-
trial referential uncertainty, there was evidence that this uncertainty led to less
reliable and slower learning when compared with a condition where the referent
was deterministic in one trial. In Experiment 1, the major difference between the
noncontrastive and the contrastive conditions was in whether referential ambiguity
could be resolved in one single trial. FL learners performed consistently more
inferiorly in the noncontrastive condition from the ﬁrst learning block till the
delayed test than in the contrastive condition. In addition to the group-level results,
the advantage of decreasing within-trial referential uncertainty was also evident
when we looked at individual children’s performance. In the contrastive condition,
only 8% of the participants failed to acquire any word-referent mapping after six

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

652

trials of learning. However, 37% of the participants scored zero when the referent
of a target word was not inferable in a single trial. Similarly in Experiment 2, there
was a substantial portion of FL learners scoring zero after experiencing a block of
cross-situational word learning (25%–38%).

Although reducing referential ambiguity within a trial facilitated word-referent
mapping in school-age FL learners, reducing trial-by-trial ambiguity did not fa-
cilitate such learning. In Experiment 2, some word-referent pairs were repeated in
successive trials. Theoretically, repetitive presentation of some word-referent pairs
should have reduced trial-by-trial ambiguity and thus facilitated resolving map-
ping ambiguity across time because it allowed participants to quickly strengthen
the association that had just been correctly built or verify the hypothesis just made
before anything already stored faded away. However, unlike the ﬁndings from adult
L1 learners (e.g., Kachergis et al., 2009), there was no evidence in the immediate
or the delayed tests that such manipulation beneﬁted FL learners in word mapping
for the whole set of words or for the individual words presented in successive
trials. To some extent, the null facilitative effect of repetitive presentation, coupled
with the lack of correlation between mapping performance and digit span (to be
discussed below), suggests that word mapping with trial-by-trial ambiguity is not
a simple matter of rote memory process to young FL learners. The participants in
the two conditions might have applied different approaches to resolving mapping
to meaning ambiguity (Smith et al., 2011) even though the overall rate of success
in the repetitive and the nonrepetitive (interleaved) conditions was similar. Future
studies are needed to see whether successive repetition of some word-referent
pairs enhances word mappings in more naturalistic contexts, for example, in the
contexts where the words are the focus of a conversation or a story plot.

The present study also contributed to our understanding of individual learner
variables associated with FL cross-situational word learning. Unlike L1 learn-
ers, FL learners experience another source of difﬁculty in mapping referentially
ambiguous words, namely, in encoding and retaining FL words. A FL-sounding
sequence is obscure along both the phonemic and the subphonemic dimensions
at both segmental and suprasegmental levels. Consistent with the ﬁndings from
previous research on the role of phonological awareness in FL word learning under
ostensive instruction or in single ambiguous trials (de Jong et al., 2000; Hu, 2012;
Hu & Schuele, 2005; McBride-Chang et al., 2006; Palladino & Ferrari, 2008), the
results of the present study indicate that resolving FL mapping ambiguity across
situations may rely on one’s sensitivity to the phonological composition of a spo-
ken word. In the present study, FL learners with weaker phonological awareness
demonstrated weaker mapping performance in the three cross-situational learn-
ing conditions as well as in the contrastive condition, not only in the immediate
tests but also in the delayed tests. FL learners with weak phonological awareness
relative to their peers might have built some representations with underspeciﬁed
segmental details or they might have encoded spoken words solely on the ba-
sis of perceptual information without any segmental details. These impoverished
representations were susceptible to disruption or degrading each time when their
meanings were not yet resolved and when newer forms were added to the sys-
tem. It is worth noting that in the present study, phonological awareness (whether
measured in L1 or FL) is associated with target word mapping performance in

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

653

both the immediate and the delayed tests. Thus, it seems that FL learners’ general
sensitivity to the phonological structure of a language, as opposed to sensitivity
to a speciﬁc language, contributes to encoding, representation, retention, and re-
trieval of FL sound sequences over the course of resolving referential ambiguity.
It is worth noting that the syllable structure of the children’s mother tongue, Man-
darin Chinese, is relatively simple, containing only two coda consonants and no
consonant clusters. Mandarin-speaking children may have particular difﬁculties
encoding English word forms due to their limited insight into the phonological
composition of words with complex syllable structure (Cheung, Chen, Lai, Wong,
& Hills, 2001). Thus, future research may probe further into whether the pattern
of the results in the present study is generalizable to other FL learners whose L1
has relatively complex syllable structure.

In contrast to phonological awareness, individual differences in memory span
were not associated with word mapping performance in school-age FL learners.
Caution should be taken to interpret the lack of correlations as the absence of
memory processes in cross-situational word learning. The lack of correlations only
suggests that FL learners with a longer memory span do not have an advantage in
resolving referential ambiguity across trials. One reason for the lack of correlations
may be the relatively small range of scores in the digit span. Digit span was used in
the present study because unlike other memory tasks such as nonword repetition,
which implicates phonological awareness and articulatory output skills (Metsala,
1999; Snowling, Chiat, & Hulme, 1991), digit span is a relatively simple and pure
measure of memory storage capacity. Another reason for the lack of correlations
may be that the cross-situational learning in the present study was too demanding
of attentional resources for school-age FL learners, leaving them with too few
resources available to efﬁciently control for the multiple possible mappings in
memory. As shown in Figure 2 and Figure 3, despite the small number of words
to learn (four target word-referent pairs), children in the three cross-situational
conditions learned no more than two target words in each block after experiencing
six learning trials. In the present study, the referents of two newly heard forms
were uncertain until children heard the words in a different trial, adjacent or not.
When children could not determine the referents of the two forms in the ﬁrst
encounter, they had to store and recall them in memory as meaningless sound-
string representations and compare them with another new sound string whose
reference was not yet determined either. Mapping words to meaningless pictures
can be difﬁcult, even for adult learners (Cunillera, Laine, C`amara, & Rodr´ıguez-
Fornells, 2010). It follows that retrieving, identifying, and distinguishing sound-
string representations void of meaning might tax memory resources of young FL
learners, rendering a lesser role of memory span in accounting for performance
differences in word-referent mapping across trials.

Alternatively, young FL learners might attend to one form at a time until its
reference was determined or disconﬁrmed (Medina et al., 2011; Trueswell et al.,
2013). They might not attend to multiple forms at a time because attending to
multiple meaningless FL forms might be beyond their limits of processing. Young
FL learners’ low capacity in retaining newly learned mappings was reﬂected
by their performance in the contrastive condition. Children in the contrastive
learning condition, on average, learned only two mappings after experiencing

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

654

each word-referent pairing three times under a relatively low degree of referential
uncertainty. If one form was attended at a time, success in such learning might
rest on speciﬁcation of that form rather than the amount of information stored at
a time. Obviously, the above interpretations on the role of memory span are only
suggestive. Further research is needed to reveal the exact contribution of memory
span to individual differences in cross-situational FL word learning.

Limitations

It is important to note that the results of the present study only reveal the extent
to which FL learners resolve referential ambiguity in the moment of intensive
exposure to multiple novel word-referent pairings. Longitudinal research will need
to investigate whether the results hold for long-term learning. On the one hand,
studies on adult L1 learners have shown that learning that is initially challenging
(e.g., in a situation with a higher degree of referential ambiguity) may lead to better
long-term retention (Fitneva & Christiansen, 2015; Vlach & Sandhofer, 2014). On
the other hand, referential ambiguity may interact in a complex way with other
cognitive and affect factors in FL acquisition such as ambiguity tolerance, anxiety,
motivation, and learning styles as well as the long interval between exposures in
FL acquisition settings.

Conclusion

The evidence from the current study suggests that although school-age FL learners
are able to solve ambiguity across situations like L1 learners, their vocabulary
learning may need to be guided in situations where referential uncertainty is
high, particularly for learners with weak phonological awareness relative to their
peers. When the short-term learning effect is considered, word mapping and
word retention performance can be enhanced by reducing ambiguity within a
single learning trial. Reducing the ambiguity of the system without reducing the
ambiguity within a single trial is not as effective in facilitating word mapping and
word retention in school-age FL learners.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by grants from the National Science Council (NSC101-2410-H-
845-009-MY2) and the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan, Republic of China
(MOST103-2410-H-845-004-MY2).

REFERENCES
Au, T., & Glusman, M. (1990). The principle of mutual exclusivity in word learning: To honor or not

to honor. Child Development, 61, 1474–1490.

Carroll, D. W. (2008). Psychology of language (5th ed.). Belmont, CA: Thomson Wadsworth.
Chen, X., Anderson, R. C., Li, W., Hao, M., Wu, X., & Shu, H. (2004). Phonological awareness of
bilingual and monolingual Chinese children. Journal of Educational Psychology, 96, 142–151.
Cheung, H., Chen, H. C., Lai, C. Y., Wong, O. C., & Hills, M. (2001). The development of phonological
awareness: Effects of spoken language experience and orthography. Cognition, 81, 227–241.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

655

Cunillera, T., Laine, M., C`amara, E., & Rodr´ıguez-Fornells, A. (2010). Bridging the gap between
speech segmentation and word-to-world mappings: Evidence from an audiovisual statistical
learning task. Journal of Memory and Language, 63, 295–305.

Davidson, D., & Tell, D. (2005). Monolingual and bilingual children’s use of mutual exclusivity in the

naming of whole objects. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 92, 25–45.

de Jong, P. F., Seveke, M. J., & van Veen, M. (2000). Phonological sensitivity and the acquisition of

new words in children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 76, 275–301.

de Marchena, A., Eigsti, I., Worek, A., Ono, K., & Snedeker, J. (2011). Mutual exclusivity in autism

spectrum disorders: Testing the pragmatic hypothesis. Cognition, 119, 96–113.

Ellis, N. C., & Ferreira, F., Jr. (2009). Constructional learning as a function of frequency, frequency

distribution, and function. Modern Language Journal, 93, 370–386.

Ely, C. M. (1989). Tolerance of ambiguity and use of second language learning strategies. Foreign

Language Annals, 22, 437–445.

Escudero, P., Mulak, K. E., & Vlach, H. A. (2015). Cross-situational learning of minimal word pairs.

Cognitive Science. Advance online publication.

Fitneva, S. A., & Christiansen, M. H. (2015). Developmental changes in cross-situational word learning:

The inverse effect of initial accuracy. Cognitive Science. Advance online publication.

Frank, M. C., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Fernald, A. (2013). Social and discourse contributions to the deter-
mination of reference in cross-situational word learning. Language Learning and Development,
9, 1–24.

Goldberg, A., Casenhiser, D., & Sethuraman, N. (2004). Learning argument structure generalizations.

Cognitive Linguistics, 15, 289–316.

Golinkoff, R. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Bailey, L., & Wenger, N. (1992). Young children and adults use

lexical principles to learn new nouns. Developmental Psychology, 28, 99–108.

Golinkoff, R. M., Mervis, C., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (1994). Early object labels: The case for lexical

principles. Journal of Child Language, 21, 125–155.

Horst, J. S., Scott, E. J., & Pollard, J. A. (2010). The role of competition in word learning via referent

selection. Developmental Science, 13, 706–713.

Hu, C. F. (2012). Fast-mapping and deliberate word-learning by EFL children. Modern Language

Journal, 96, 439–453.

Hu, C. F. (2013). Predictors of reading in children with Chinese as a ﬁrst Language: A developmental

and cross-linguistic perspective. Reading and Writing, 26, 163–187.

Hu, C. F. (2014). Extracting phonological patterns for L2 word learning: The effect of poor L1

phonological awareness. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 43, 569–585.

Hu, C. F., & Schuele, C. M. (2005). Learning nonnative names: The effect of poor native phonological

awareness. Applied Psycholinguistics, 26, 343–362.

Kachergis, G., Yu, C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2009). Temporal contiguity in cross-situational statistical
learning. In N. Taatgen, H. Van Rijn, J. Nerbonne, & L. Schomaker (Eds.), Proceedings of the
31st Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1704–1709). Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.

Kachergis, G., Yu, C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2013). Actively learning object names across ambiguous

situations. Topics in Cognitive Science, 5, 200–213.

Kan, P., & Kohnert, K. (2008). Fast mapping by bilingual preschool children. Journal of Child

Language, 35, 495–514.

Markman, E. M., & Wachtel, G. A. (1988). Children’s use of mutual exclusivity to constrain the

meanings of words. Cognitive Psychology, 20, 121–157.

McBride-Chang, C., Cheung, H., Chow, B. Y., Chow, C. L., & Choi, L. (2006). Metalinguistic skills and
vocabulary knowledge in Chinese (L1) and English (L2). Reading and Writing, 19, 695–716.
McDonough, K., & Nekrasova-Becker, T. (2012). Comparing the effect of repetitive and interleaved
input on English as foreign language learners’ comprehension of the double-object dative
construction. Applied Psycholinguistics, 24, 1–24.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Hu: Resolving referential ambiguity

656

Medina, T. N., Snedeker, J., Trueswell, J. C., & Gleitman, L. R. (2011). How words can and cannot be

learned by observation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108, 9014–9019.

Merriman, W. E., & Bowman, L. L. (1989). The mutual exclusivity bias in children’s word learning.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 54(3–4, Serial No. 220), 1–132.
Metsala, J. L. (1999). Young children’s phonological awareness and nonword repetition as a function

of vocabulary development. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 3–19.

Newman, E. H., Tardif, T., Huang, J., & Shu, H. (2011). Phonemes matter: The role of phoneme-
level awareness in emergent Chinese readers. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 108,
242–259.

Palladino, P., & Ferrari, M. (2008). Phonological sensitivity and memory in children with a foreign

language learning difﬁculty. Memory, 16, 604–625.

Perrachione, T. K., Lee, J., Ha, L. Y., & Wong, P. C. (2011). Learning a novel phonological contrast
depends on interactions between individual differences and training paradigm design. Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 130, 461–472.

Scott, R. M., & Fisher, C. (2012). 2.5-year-olds use cross-situational consistency to learn verbs under

referential ambiguity. Cognition, 122, 163–180.

Smith, K., Smith, A. D. M., & Blythe, R. A. (2011). Cross-situational learning: An experimental study

of word-learning mechanisms. Cognitive Science, 35, 480–498.

Smith, L. B., & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn word-referent mappings via cross-situational

statistics. Cognition, 106, 1558–1568.

Snowling, M., Chiat, S., & Hulme, C. (1991). Words, nonwords, and phonological processes: Some
comments on Gathercole, Willis, Emslie, and Baddeley. Applied Psycholinguistics, 12, 369–
373.

Suanda, S. H., Mugwanya, N., & Namy, L. L. (2014). Cross-situational statistical word learning in

young children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 126, 395–411.

Trueswell, J. C., Medina, T. N., Hafri, A., & Gleitman, L. R. (2013). Propose but verify: Fast mapping

meets cross-situational word learning. Cognitive Psychology, 66, 126–156.

Vlach, H. A., & Johnson, S. P. (2013). Memory constraints on infants’ cross-situational statistical

learning. Cognition, 127, 375–382.

Vlach, H. A., & Sandhofer, C. M. (2010). Desirable difﬁculties in cross-situational word learning.
In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2470–2475). Portland, OR: Cognitive Science Society.

Vlach, H. A., & Sandhofer, C. M. (2014). Retrieval dynamics and retention in cross-situational word

learning. Cognitive Science, 38, 757–774.

Vouloumanos, A. (2008). Fine-grained sensitivity to statistical information in adult word learning.

Cognition, 107, 729–742.

Wang, M., Perfetti, C. A., & Liu, Y. (2005). Chinese–English biliteracy acquisition: Cross-language

and writing system transfer. Cognition, 97, 67–88.

White, L. (1987). Against comprehensible input: The input hypothesis and the development of L2

competence. Applied Linguistics, 8, 95–110.

Wilkinson, K. M. & Mazzitelli, K. (2003). The effect of “missing” information on children’s retention

of fast-mapped labels. Journal of Child Language, 30, 47–73.

Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2007). Rapid word learning under uncertainty via cross-situational statistics.

Psychological Science, 18, 414–420.

Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2011). What you learn is what you see: Using eye movements to study infant

cross-situational word learning. Developmental Science, 14, 165–180.

Yurovsky, D., Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2013). Competitive processes in cross-situational word learning.

Cognitive Science, 37, 891–921.

Ziegler, J. C., Bertrand, D., T´oth, D., Cs´epe, V., Reis, A., Fa´ısca, L., & Blomert, L. (2010). Ortho-
graphic depth and its impact on universal predictors of reading a cross-language investigation.
Psychological Science, 21, 551–559.


