Journal of Sociolinguistics 21/5, 2017: 672–695

Cosmopolitan stance negotiation in

multicultural academic settings

Luisa Martın Rojo

and Clara Molina

Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Spain

Our analysis of an informal event involving Chinese and Spanish students
and lecturers displays the cumulative nature of stance negotiation in
multicultural settings. It also highlights the role of sociocultural and
ideological elements in stancetaking, not only in relation to the positions
adopted by the participants, but also in the successive redeﬁnition and
reframing of the stance objects. Sociocultural and ideological elements are
also crucial for the collective construction of intersubjectivities, particularly
among mobile citizens. The way in which our international students
managed to overcome misalignments, the values and ideologies evoked
within the interaction, reveal nuances of cosmopolitanism that point to a
globalization of tastes triggered by multiculturalism and the worldwide
expansion of capitalism. Sharing a cosmopolitan orientation, however, did
not prevent ideological contradictions among the participants. An analysis
of how these were voiced and negotiated allows grasping the remarkably
wide spectrum of cosmopolitanism(s) today.

de modo

acumulativo

socioculturales e ideologicos

Nuestro analisis de un evento comunicativo informal con estudiantes de
intercambio chinos y espa~noles muestra como la toma de posicion se va
negociando
en entornos multiculturales.
Subrayamos tambien la importancia de los elementos socioculturales e
ideologicos tanto en el posicionamiento de los participantes como en las
sucesivas redeﬁniciones del objeto respecto al que estos se situan. Los
son clave tambien para la
elementos
construccion conjunta
entre
ciudadanos internacionales. El modo en que nuestros estudiantes superan
los valores e ideologıas que evocan al hacerlo,
sus desalineamientos,
revelan un cosmopolitismo que apunta a una globalizacion del gusto
derivada del caracter multicultural de la sociedad y de la expansion del
capitalismo. Pese a una disposicion cosmopolita compartida, nuestros
participantes se enfrentan con contradicciones ideologicas. Al analizar
como estas se verbalizan y negocian nos acercamos al amplısimo espectro
de matices del cosmopolitismo. [Spanish]

intersubjetividades,

de

en especial

KEYWORDS: Accretive stance-object negotiation, cosmopolitanism,
ideologies, intersubjectivities, Chinese exchange students

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

COSMOPOLITAN STANCE NEGOTIATION

673

1. FOREWORD

Aiming at analyzing the effects of the internationalization of universities, a
joint research team from Universidad Autonoma de Madrid (UAM) and Hong
Kong University (HKU) studied the socialization process experienced by a group
of Chinese and Spanish students enrolled in mobility programs. Since exchange
students must show ﬂuency in both relational and academic discourses (which
includes the ability to move through institutional and social spaces with ease;
Blommaert 2013), we tried to identify which practices international students
deploy in order to enter the alien environment. To do so, we traced a group of
exchange undergraduates and analyzed their interactional practices at
institutional and non-institutional spaces. The socialization networks in
which students take part are suitable sites for analyzing the negotiation of
ideologies and subjectivities, and for exploring the relationship between
stancetaking and recent forms of cosmopolitanism.

This is why, in this paper, we address such networks in our analysis of a
communicative event situated on the fringe of a focus group (a research
technique) and an informal gathering (naturally situated interaction). Over a
dinner party organized to inaugurate the research project in Madrid, the
participants (two local researchers, ﬁve Chinese students and two local
students, one originally from Taiwan) share meanings, recall semiotic
resources to interpret the meaning of elements of sociocultural life, jointly
construct
identities within
interaction (Jaworski and Thurlow 2009). However, shared enactments of
stance require complex strategies that go beyond the customary understanding
of stance negotiation (cf. Jaffe 2009 for an overview of sociolinguistic research
on stance). In this respect, our paper aims at making two contributions.

intersubjectivities and negotiate their social

On the one hand, within sociolinguistic theory, it explores the extent to
which sociocultural and ideological factors underlie stance alignment and the
collective construction of identities (intersubjectivity being the link between
both threads). On the other hand, concerning cosmopolitanism, we advance a
more nuanced approach to the notion based on positioning. Cosmopolitanism
remains an elusive concept, both in its deﬁnition and in its various kinds. The
subjects in our study position themselves as cosmopolitans, but not in ways
that distinctly reﬂect an ‘ability to stand outside of having one’s life written and
scripted by any one community’ (Vertovec and Cohen 2002: 4). Rather, their
cosmopolitanism points to a globalization of tastes resulting from increasingly
multicultural societies and widespread capitalism (Calhoun 2002). However,
in spite of
ideological
contradictions emerged during the interaction, and negotiation was required
to overcome the misalignments. The analysis of these tensions shows the
extent
the elements involved in the stancetaking process
(evaluation, positioning, and the deﬁnition and framing of the object of
stance) are shaped by social values and ideologies.

sharing a cosmopolitan orientation,

signiﬁcant

to which all

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

674

MARTIN ROJO AND MOLINA

the theoretical

In order to present our contributions, the paper is organized as follows. After
frame is presented in section 2. The
this introduction,
communicative event is described in section 3. Section 4 analyzes two case
studies (one on bullﬁghting, another on shopping trips to European capitals)
excerpted from the transcription of the video-recorded event (see the Appendix
for transcription conventions). A rounding-up discussion of cosmopolitanism is
presented in section 5, and the main conclusions are summarized in section 6.

2. DIALOGICAL POSITIONING: FROM SITUATEDNESS TO IDEOLOGIES

the ethnography of communication,

We follow a ﬁne-grained discourse analytic approach (drawing from the ﬁelds
of
the micro-ethnography of social
interaction and sociolinguistic ethnography) that highlights the role of local
complexities in interactional activities. Often, supposedly stable social processes
are projected onto discourse as background facts (Blommaert and Bulcaen
2000; Rampton 2001). Such an aprioristic approach conceals how
participants, in particular situations, enact language patterns in unexpected,
creative and heterodox ways (Gumperz 1982; Roberts, Davies and Jupp 1992;
Rampton 2001). At the same time, we think that ideologies and social
processes (such as cosmopolitanism, the internationalization of universities or
consumption patterns in global societies) should be part of the analysis, since
interactions shape and are shaped by other social practices and processes
across space and time (Heller 2006, 2011; Rampton 2006).

Stancetaking implies an evaluative, affective and cognitive act to which
participants react. For this reason, our study of dialogical positioning addresses
the interplay between intersubjectivity and interactional stances. However, our
study of stance is not restricted to the situated interactional level, but moves
onto the ideological domain of constructed values. During the collaborative
process of successive stance realignments upon which the construction of
intersubjectivities rests, the sociocultural values and beliefs deployed by the
participants have a most signiﬁcant impact.

As presented by Du Bois (2007), the stance alignment process rests upon a
coincident evaluation and positioning with regard to a given object (Figure 1),
and both the mediating framework of linguistic structures and the values
invoked by participants are crucial
factors. To our mind, however, the
successive reframing of the object itself is also crucial, since it allows the
emergence of new stances upon which alignment can happen.

In Du Bois’s approach (2007: 141), ‘sociocultural value is mobilized and
deployed through stance processes. Via speciﬁc acts of stancetaking, value can be
focused and directed at a precise target, as locally relevant values are activated to
frame the signiﬁcance of participant actions’. Also (2007: 173), ‘stance always
invokes, explicitly or implicitly, presupposed systems of sociocultural value,
while at the same time contributing to the enactment and reproduction of those
systems’. Our proposal places much more emphasis on sociocultural values and

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

COSMOPOLITAN STANCE NEGOTIATION

675

Figure 1: The stance triangle (Du Bois 2007: 163)

ideologies for a number of reasons: to begin with, stances are interactional moves
in which face (Goffman 1967) is negotiated, and face is rooted in sociocultural
values. These values, as we will see, shape the positioning of interlocutors and
the co-construction of intersubjectivities. Secondly, stances are also moves in
which the expression of values and beliefs can trigger misunderstandings,
particularly if the participants were ﬁrst socialized in signiﬁcantly different
settings and conditions. Finally, sociocultural values and ideologies are evoked to
reframe and redeﬁne the object of stance, which is therefore not a static and
automatically shared entity, but an object of collision. In fact, as discussed below,
repeated enactments of stance ingrain particular subject positions layered into
particular ideologies (Jaffe 2009; Jaworski and Thurlow 2009). Along these
lines, the pages that follow address a series of research questions:

1. To what extent do convergence and divergence depend on the accretive
co-construction of the stance object? What role do sociocultural values
and ideologies play in such a reframing of the object, and how does it
allow for repositioning and alignment? Which role do interactional moves
(such as contextualization in interactional
inferential processes and
accretion) play in stance alignment within multicultural dialogical
interactions? These questions, in relation to interactional stancetaking,
are addressed in section 4.1.

2. What communicative practices foster the interactional construction of a
cosmopolitan-oriented identity among young mobile citizens? What kinds

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

676

MARTIN ROJO AND MOLINA

of cosmopolitanism do they exhibit? What (local and/or transnational)
cultural experiences and ideologies are they based on? These questions, in
relation to cosmopolitanism, are addressed in section 4.2.

3. AN INFORMAL DINNER AS A SETTING FOR INTERCULTURAL
COMMUNICATION

Once the Chinese exchange students (registered in language and communication
classes taught in Spanish and/or English by the local researchers) had
volunteered to take part in the project, an informal launching gathering took
place at the home of one of the researchers. Despite the difﬁculties of being a
lecturer, a participant and an analyst at the same time, our multi-faceted position
was particularly valuable, as it allowed tracing the students’ everyday life at the
university with both participant and non-participant observation for an
extended period. The ﬁve exchange students taking part in the event included
three women (student 1, aged 20; student 2, aged 20; and student 3, aged 19)
and two men (student 4, aged 20; and student 5, aged 21). They came from small
cities in northern and southern China, but studied elsewhere: four had been
taking Spanish for three years at the International Studies University of Beijing;
another one at the Sun Yat-Sen University in Guangdong. In all cases, their ﬁrst
language was Mandarin (one also spoke Cantonese) and all of them had studied
English for years (student 3 was schooled at a private bilingual school).

While in Madrid, the two men (students 4 and 5) shared a ﬂat with a
Spanish student of Chinese (with whom student 4 had become friends in
Beijing when the Spanish student was on exchange); among the females,
students 1 and 2 also shared a ﬂat; student 3 lived at the UAM hall of
residence, where she only spoke Spanish. The rest spoke Chinese at home,
although all of them were friends with Spanish and international classmates,
with whom they socialized a lot. Among them, the exchange students used
WeChat to text one another in Chinese, but used WhatsApp to communicate
in Spanish with their UAM classmates. Their Spanish was good (a B2 level
upon arrival in Madrid) and they achieved top grades while at UAM. This is not
surprising if considering that, in China, they had entered university through a
very competitive process which only allows one student per province, and that
their home universities selected them for the exchange program because of
their excellent academic records. Of the destinations available for a semester
abroad, the decisive factor for choosing Spain rather than Latin America was
security, and the reason for choosing UAM was its location in a capital city.
Our students make for an afﬂuent set: although none had ever been in an
exchange program before, all of them (except student 4) had travelled abroad as
tourists in Asia (Korea, Japan, Singapore). Their friends and family had
commissioned them to bring luxury brands as presents from the (many) trips
they took while in Europe. They always had lunch on campus even if the class
timetable allowed them to go home. They all thought Madrid was a safe, friendly

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

COSMOPOLITAN STANCE NEGOTIATION

677

and inexpensive place and, having anticipated rejection, they were surprised at
the welcome they received from their Spanish classmates. While other Chinese
friends and classmates initially identiﬁed as potential participants for the study
ﬁnally chose not to take part, the core group remained committed to the project
and their overall impression of their stay abroad was very positive.

In addition to the exchange students, a female Taiwanese PhD candidate in
linguistics at UAM, also the deputy director of a travel agency specializing in
luxury Chinese tourism in Spain living in Madrid for over 10 years and with
Spanish nationality, attended the gathering. Also present was a male Spanish
undergraduate at UAM recently returned from an exchange in France, who audio-
video recorded the event and eventually ended up playing a signiﬁcant role in it.
The local researchers, both female, were there too. They have a long record of
academic experiences abroad, in Europe and in the U.S., and one experiences
interculturality at home. They both lecture on communication in intercultural
settings and often involve students in their research. At the meeting, they overtly
displayed their positioning regarding a number of controversial topics (such as
bullﬁghting or Franco’s dictatorship). This, which is common practice in Spain (a
country fraught with political and ideological strife, particularly at the time of the
gathering, with the economic crisis at its peak) was the source of struggle. In
communicative events, participants extract a range of salient biographical
information about co-participants
stance
interpretation, in addition to what the speaker is saying (Du Bois 2007: 155).
On this occasion, there was virtually no previous acquaintance among most of
the participants, so the negotiation of meaning proved challenging, and a
considerable amount of contextualization was required for reaching alignment.
The communicative event, convivial and easy-going, lasted for two and a
half hours and can be divided into two parts: the dinner, buffet-style around a
table; and after dinner, when the participants sat in sofas and armchairs and
chatted about various aspects of the exchange program and about life in Spain
and China. The recorded material was transcribed in full and translated into
English; the fragments in standard modern Chinese were also transcribed and
translated (see the Appendix for transcription conventions).

into their

that will

impact

4. STANCETAKING IN INTERCULTURAL CONTEXTS: NEGOTIATING
COSMOPOLITANISM

4.1 Struggling with national identities: The controversial condition of being
a Spaniard
The gathering starts with a buffet-style dinner where everyone stands around the
table and tastes different dishes. This is the ﬁrst time the participants meet outside
the university context, some have never met before, and all of them have to
renegotiate their relationships. The analysis of the ﬁrst fragment (4.33 minutes
altogether) allows us to delve deeper into the role of the experience lived by the
exchange students and how they intersubjectively position themselves with

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

678

MARTIN ROJO AND MOLINA

regard to local values. The selection takes place during the ﬁrst half hour of the
meeting, once everyone has been introduced to each other and the ice has been
broken. At one point (turn 4), the convivial ambiance is unexpectedly disturbed.
The fragment deals with a culturally salient activity, bullﬁghting, which is both a
touristy must-have and the source of bitter confrontation among Spaniards.
While increasingly large numbers of Spanish citizens demand the end of
bullﬁghting, many tourists still attend a show; reproducing what Hannerz
(1996: 103) calls a genuine form of cosmopolitanism:
‘an orientation, a
willingness to engage with the Other. It entails an intellectual and esthetic
openness toward divergent cultural experiences, a search for contrasts rather
than uniformity. To become acquainted with more cultures is to turn into an
aﬁcionado’. This is why negotiating stances in relation to bullﬁghting becomes a
signiﬁcant concern for the Chinese exchange students, as it affects their
enactment of cosmopolitanism.

Fragment 1.1: Bullﬁghting case study 1/3 (SS=student subject; Rsrch=Researcher)

1. Spanish SS: y os han llevado alguna

vez aaaa a ver ciudades? =

2. Rsrch 1:

= excursiones de turismo y eso?

3. SS 4:

4. Rsrch 1:

5. SS 4:

6. Rsrch 1:

7. SS 1:

8. Rsrch 1:

Toledo=
=>HABEIS IDO A LOS TOROS?
((abriendo los ojos))<

emm, TOLEDO
sı

TOLEDO
>AH, TOLE:DO<. Entendı torero

9. SS 1:

[pero toros tambien] hemos ido

and have they taken you
((pl)) sometime to::: see
((other)) cities?=
= tourist trips and things
like that?
Toledo=
=>HAVE YOU ((pl)) GONE
TO THE BULLFIGHTS?
((eyes widen))<

emm, TOLEDO

Yes

TOLEDO
>AH, TOLE:DO<. I
understood bullﬁghter

[but to bullﬁght] we’ve also
gone

10. SS 4:

11. Rsrch 1:

[toros tambien]
tamBIEN?=
=sı=

12. SS 1:
13. Spanish SS: =ah sı?

14. SS 1:

sı

[bullﬁght too]
that TOO?=
=yes=
=oh yeah?

yes

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

COSMOPOLITAN STANCE NEGOTIATION

679

15. Spanish SS: donde?

where?

16. Rsrch 1:

17. Spanish SS:

18. SS 4:

19. Rsrch 2:

(y?) [yo nunca he ido] a los
toros. NUNCA, nunca,
nunca, ni. . .

[donde? En Las Ventas?]
((plaza de toros en Madrid))
sı

[ni ire jamas, vamos], yo no

he ido y NO voy a ir=

20. Rsrch 1:

=yo NO he ido y NO voy a ir.
¿Y que os parecio?

(aand?) [I’ve never been] to
a bullﬁght. NEVER, never,
never, nor. . .

[where? At Las

Ventas?] ((bullring in Madrid))

yes

[I will never go,

0

I mean], I haven’t gone and
I’m NOT going to go=
=I HAVEN
NOT going to go. And
what did you (pl) think
of it?

T gone and I’m

21. SS 1:

(.) puess [es que. . .]

(.) well [it’s that..]

22. Rsrch 2:

23. Rsrch 1:

[pero FUIS]TEIS?=
=que SI, que han ido a LAS
VENTAS, A LOS TOROS!

[but you WE]NT?=

=I’m TELLING you, they
have gone to LAS VENTAS,
TO A BULLFIGHT!

this point,

the nonverbal aspects of

The fragment begins with the local
student and researcher 1 co-
constructing the question of whether the exchange students have been
taken on excursions outside Madrid. Students 4 and 1 advance the same
answer at about the same time: a university-based student organization
seeking to facilitate the integration of exchange students took them to
Toledo, a sightseeing city. At
the
interaction available from the video become salient. As researcher 1 says,
‘Have you (pl) gone to the bullﬁghts?’ (turn 4) her voice becomes louder,
her eyes widen as she looks directly at student 4 and leans slightly in his
direction. Her eyebrows rise and the phrase ends in a marked intonation,
slightly up and then down. Hearing ‘Toledo’ as ‘bullﬁght’ comes from the
phonetic resemblance of ‘torero’ (bullﬁghter) with a possible equivalence of
‘r’ and ‘l’
in Chinese followed by a softened second ‘r’ phoneme. The
combination of gaze, body posture, volume and intonation suggests an
evaluative reaction to the notion that the exchange students have attended
a bullﬁght. Du Bois (2007: 143) understands evaluation as the process
whereby a stancetaker orients to an object of stance and characterizes it as
having some speciﬁc quality or value. Here, researcher 1 is taking an
evaluative stance on attending bullﬁghts, and although the nature of the
evaluation is not entirely clear, the ﬁnal downward intonation suggests
negativity. Students 4 and 1 (turns 5 and 7) both repeat ‘Toledo’ in slightly

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

680

MARTIN ROJO AND MOLINA

louder voices, making clear that their pronunciation of ‘l’ was intentional.
Researcher 1 repeats ‘AH, TOLE:DO’ to conﬁrm that she now understands
the reference was to a city, not bullﬁghts, and speciﬁes her previous
response with ‘I understood bullﬁght’, in a softer tone. Physically, she leans
back and gazes away from the students, smiling.

The trouble, however, has

just begun. Students 1 and 4 overlap
researcher 1’s response invoking bullﬁghts to say that they have actually
attended one. Her response (‘that TOO?’ in turn 11) is louder and ends in
an upward intonation. Her eyes widen, she looks directly at student 1,
shakes her head brieﬂy, then gazes off camera in the direction of researcher
2 and the Spanish student. The gaze shift, combined with the headshake
and pause that follows it, suggest disbelief. The whole set of turns in this
interaction shows how all the participants dispute the ﬂoor to either conﬁrm
some have actually attended a bullﬁght or to express incredulity about it.
The dispute inaugurates a long-lasting stance accretion process by means of
which the gradual accumulation of repeatedly taken stances in the run of
conversation ends up making for reinforced, enduring positionings and
identity structures (Du Bois 2002; Rauniomaa 2003).
In this respect,
observe how researcher 1 positions herself: ‘I’ve never been to a bullﬁght.
Never, never, never, nor . . .’ (turn 16), somehow forcing the object of
stance, which could have gone back to sightseeing but
remains at
bullﬁghting. The subjective dimension is overtly indexed by discrete
linguistic elements (i.e. personal pronouns and a reiterated negation) that
reveal the subject’s feelings and positions her along a scale of affective
value. These linguistic elements are also contextualization cues (cf. Gumperz
1982, for a theory of interactional inferential processing): the emphatic use
of the ﬁrst-person pronoun in a null subject language, which presupposes a
contrast between her and those who attend bullﬁghts; and the repetition of
‘never’, which contributes to the management of information.

With both resources, researcher 1 is helping her interlocutors interpret what
the object of her stance is, and what the nature of the stance she is taking is.
Student 4’s laugh, as an interactional answer, may suggest hesitation and
stress. In turn 19, researcher 2 aligns with researcher 1’s stance: ‘I will never
go, I mean, I haven’t gone and I’m not going to go’. Once again, the personal
pronoun marks a contrast with those who do; also again, the reinforcement of
‘no’ with ‘never’ act as contextualization cues with regard to the general
interactional framework (Martın Rojo and Meeuwis 1993). In choosing these
cues, researcher 2 restricts the ﬁeld of application and emphasizes the lack of
alignment. In adopting this stance, she entails a positioning with which
researcher 1 aligns, although she tries
to mitigate the interactional
consequences of
the stance misalignment and its impact on face-work
(Goffman 1967). Here we see intersubjectivity in action, when the subjective
stances of two participants coincide within a dialogic exchange and, at the
same time, collide with the positioning of others. Researcher 1’s reiteration of

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

COSMOPOLITAN STANCE NEGOTIATION

681

her questions (‘but did you go?’) and other markers such as intonation, which
point to incredulity, act as cues to indicate to the interlocutor that these are not
genuine questions, but illocutionary acts expressing rejection. This explains
why student 1 feels it is necessary to justify herself (Fragment 1.2, turn 24):

Fragment 1.2: Bullﬁghting case study 2/3 (SS=student subject; Rsrch=Researcher)

24.

SS 1:

pero desde por el principio
querıamos ver como son
la cultura, [espa~nola, perooo. . .]

but since at the beginning
we wanted to see what are
the [Spanish culture like,
but. . .]

25. Rsrch 1:

[no sı, si es interesan]te

[no, yes, I mean, it’s

26.

SS 4:

27.

SS 1:

28.

SS 1:

29.

SS 5:

30.

SS 1:

despues de ve:r?lo=
=es que hay seis::

斗牛士怎么说

[torero?]
[habıa seis] personas que
mataban a los toros, y
una vez habıa una
personas que seguıa
matando pero no
consiguio matar=

31. Rsrch 1: =AH, SII, SI, [SI:, SI:]

interes]ting
after see:?ing it=
=the thing is, there are six::

what? How do you say
bullﬁghter?

[bullﬁghter?]

[there wer]e six people who
killed to the bulls, and once
there was a persons who
kept ((pushing hand forward
repeatedly, as though
holding a sword)) killing,
but didn’t manage to kill=

AH, YE:S, [YE:S, YE:S]

[muchas veces]=

[many times]=

=many times. [many, many
times]

[and stabbed
((making stabbing motion))
to the head many times]=
=OH, [GOODNESS] ME

[I don’t like] them at

all have you ((pl)) seen a
bull?
YES=
=yes, in bullring

32.

SS 2:

33.

SS 1:

34.

SS 4:

=muchas veces.
[muchısimas veces]
[y pincho a la cabeza
((making stabbing motion))
muchas veces]=

35. Rsrch 1: =AY, POR [DIOS]

36. PhD SS:

[no me gustan] nada

¿habeis visto un toro?

37. Rsrch 1:

38.

SS 2:

SI=
=sı, en plaza de toros

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

682

MARTIN ROJO AND MOLINA

39. PhD SS:

una vez y nunca [mas]=

once and never [agai]n =

SS 4:

40.
41. Rsrch 1: =no, pero si yo supongo que el

[sı ]

espectaculo es bonito, los
colores, el traje
bue[no, sı::::]

42.

SS 1:

43. Rsrch 2:

[que dicen] que el origen es

para aprender a enfrentar la
muerte ¿no? Pero a mı. . . [no
me interesa]

[pero
es que creemos que] si solo hay
una persona y un toro, pues
[creemos que que. . .]
[mas o menos justo], es justo
sı
而已。 这不公平

44.

SS 1:

45. Rsrch 1:

46.

SS 4:

47.

SS 1:

[yes]

=no, I mean, I suppose that
the show is beautiful, the
colors, the suit

we[ll, yes::::]

[some say] that the origin
is to learn to confront death,
no? but to me . . . [ I’m not
interested]

[but we

think that] if there’s just one
person and one bull, well,
[we think that that. . .]

[it’s more or less fair], it’s fair

yes

that’s it. It isn’t fair

48. PhD SS:

sı, estoy de acuerdo

yes, I agree

Fragment 1.2 starts with ‘but’, which shows student 1 has clearly detected the
cues and has interpreted the researchers’ stances as a disagreeing negative
evaluation, so she provides a counterargument: ‘but since at the beginning we
wanted to see what are the Spanish culture like’ (turn 24). Her justiﬁcation is
also an attempt to reframe the object of stance. As Jaworski and Thurlow
(2009) and Thurlow and Jaworski (2011) note, willingness to engage with
local people and culture is a form of ‘cosmopolitanism’. This explains why
student 1 reframes attending bullﬁghts as a ‘cultural activity’, and generalizes
it to the whole group (‘we’). The shift allows detecting two signiﬁcant
phenomena. First, that the object of stance in interactions is not necessarily
static and shared, as suggested by Du Bois, but reframed and redeﬁned by
successive alignments and misalignments. Secondly, that sociocultural and
ideological elements are part of the process of reframing and redeﬁning the
object of stance (which goes beyond Du Bois’ acknowledgement of the role of
sociocultural elements
in the evaluation taken by participants). The
willingness to become involved with the other as a form of cosmopolitanism,
and the concern with achieving competence at a foreign culture also relate to
considerations of the self (Hannerz 1996). In this respect, observe how (in turn
24) student 1 is also contributing to building face, both hers and that of the
group, by presenting their attendance at a bullﬁght as a sign of the interest to
be expected from an international student willing to become part of the host
culture. Their trip to the bulls is therefore an attempt to approach the other

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

COSMOPOLITAN STANCE NEGOTIATION

683

(and also, as discussed in section 5, a form of ‘consumerist cosmopolitanism’).
The enunciation, however, opens a new dimension of the controversy: what
the exchange students understand as ‘Spanish culture’ clashes with the
opinion of the locals, who do not regard bullﬁghting as any form of culture
(‘torture is neither art nor culture’ is a popular motto in Spain). We observe
how, by means of relating bullﬁghting and cultural traditions, the object of
stance is gradually shifting while the participants co-build their subjectivities.
In this fragment, the mediating role of the Taiwanese PhD student stands
out (turns 36 and 39). Recall she was at one point an exchange student, but
has now been living in Madrid for years. Her stance aligns with that of the
locals, but she admits that, like the international students, she did once go to a
bullﬁght. With her evaluative stance, she shows how rejecting a local cultural
event does not threaten the image of the host interlocutors. This opens the
door for students 1 and 4 to state their displeasure regarding certain aspects of
the bullﬁght. From this moment on, the movements of all the interlocutors
(which now also include students 5 and 2) bring stances closer: researcher 1
recognizes an interesting folklore aspect
in bullﬁghting (turn 41) and
researcher 2 (turn 43) recognizes it may have a deeper anthropological
value (although she ends up saying, ‘but I’m not interested’). Both moves point
towards an alignment regarding bullﬁghting, now reframed as a cultural good.
However, students 1 and 4 make a new move in the construction of face (turns
44 and 46), and ﬁnd a new space for the co-construction of intersubjectivity
which is ideological in nature. These students start a narrative that describes the
savage nature of the show and take a stance over which there is widespread
agreement: the ﬁght is a bloody and unfair practice. Later on in the conversation,
subtle degrees of affection (‘it’s not fair’) and agreement (‘I agree’) would align
stances. As participants gradually converge after a conﬂictive process of accretive
stancetaking, affective stance gradually became more explicit (‘I don’t like it’, ‘I
dislike it’). The connection between stance alignment and intersubjectivity also
comes to the fore. However, the movement also seems to announce a new
reframing of the stance object. From this moment on, the divergence there was
with regard to the object of the stance, whether attending bullﬁghts is
worthwhile or a practice to be avoided, a cultural event or a brutal tradition,
has gradually converged around the shared condemnation of violence.
Regarding the latter there is alignment, as displayed in the fragment that follows.

Fragment 1.3: Bullﬁghting case study 3/3 (SS=student subject; Rsrch=Researcher)

49. Rsrch 1:

50. SS 4:

en Portugal se hace diferente,
en Portugal=
=¿en el caballo?

in Portugal it’s done differently,
in Portugal=
=on the horse?

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

684

51. Rsrch 1:

52. SS 4:

53. SS 1:

sı, no tiene, es igual pero
no matan. . .
ah, no matan al toro=
=[ah]
=[me]jor

54. SS 5:
55. Spanish SS: aquı tambien lo hacen en

Espa~na, pero no es
[digamos lo que la gente ve]

MARTIN ROJO AND MOLINA

yes, it doesn’t have, it’s the
same but they don’t kill. . .
ah, they don’t kill the bull=
=[ah]
=[bett]er

they do that here in Spain too,
but it’s not [let’s say what
people see]

56. Rsrch 1:

[no es LA FIESTA NACIONAL]

[it’s not THE

NATIONAL FIESTA]

In this excerpt, several accretive evaluative stances point to less bloody
variants of bullﬁghting, a preferred alternative for all the participants. Having
arrived at a point of agreement following the previous misalignment, all
participants co-build their subjectivity as people who reject animal abuse, an
ideological position they all share. The national
issue reappears in this
in both cases evoked by researcher 1, who ﬁrst refers to a
fragment,
neighboring country that keeps the tradition without sacriﬁcing the bull, then
to an underlying issue: the controversial declaration of bullﬁghting as ‘the
national ﬁesta’, a category it was included in during Franco’s rule. Her
sarcastic comment (turn 56) shifts the stance object once more, reframing it
within the political arena. The association of the ‘ﬁesta’ not with Spanish
culture but with politics and, more speciﬁcally, with the Francoist deﬁnition of
the Spanish identity and the one-sided use of some traditions would appear
again later on in the conversation. At that time, researcher 1 recalled the
recurrent broadcasting of bullﬁghts at prime time when she was a child, and
the Spanish student stressed the fabricated nature of the ﬁesta. Thus, what had
started as small talk ended up reﬂecting the controversies that exist between
different value systems, and helped redeﬁne bullﬁghting not as cultural good,
but as a political issue.

In the dialogic

The evocation of the ‘ﬁesta nacional’, an expression coined during Franco’s
is a very effective resource for reframing the stance object and
regime,
reorganizing the alignment process.
construction of
intersubjectivity, the local participants want to remove themselves from
elements considered from abroad (among some Spaniards too) a salient part of
Spanish culture, in spite of the decadence of a tradition which has already been
banned in some parts of the country. In doing so, they question its essentiality
and bring the international students closer to a more complex reality: there is
still a division between the so-called ‘two Spains’. As Jaworski and Thurlow
(2009) point out, stances (particularly if they are accretively constructed) are
unavoidably sites of ideological constructions and contestation. The bullﬁght
episode closes with the alignment of all the participants, who jointly manage to

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

COSMOPOLITAN STANCE NEGOTIATION

685

create an intersubjectivity removed from the national boundaries the debate
started with.

alignment

process,

three

stance

With regard to the questions we posed for this section, we already have some
answers. Throughout the negotiation to ﬁx the shifting object of stance, and
through successive convergences and divergences over the value system they
relate to, intersubjectivity emerges as individuals within a group who condemn
violent traditional practices. Within the construction of the stance object and
the
proven crucial:
contextualization, inferencing and stance accretion. The outcomes of such a
complex procedure are signiﬁcant: not only intersubjectivity has been built; the
participants have also co-constructed their social identities. Having reached
this point, the conversation changes topic and moves onto football. Just
beforehand, laughter suggests an alignment has been reached and the face of
all the participants has been saved. All in all, the foregoing section has shown
that:

factors have

1. stance objects are negotiated and gradually co-constructed within

interaction in a shared attempt to build a working consensus;

2. sociocultural values and ideologies shape face-work; and
3.

intersubjectivity is the link joining both strands.

Through this negotiation of stance towards bullﬁghting, the Chinese students
may be able to position themselves as more sophisticated cosmopolitan
subjects, who do not simply view local cultural traditions as exotic, but show
sensitivity to values shared with local people, such as the humane treatment of
animals.

4.2 From local to cosmopolitan: The distinction of being a citizen of the
world

Once dinner was over, the participants started an after-dinner chat, now sitting
down. The conversation kicks off with a question from researcher 2 about the
exchange students’ plans for the Christmas break. This particular fragment
(Fragment 2.1) starts with spatial and temporal deixis pointing at the mobility
scenario and the opportunities that the location provides: ‘And now that you
are here, you’ll take the chance to go to other countries’ (turn 57). The referent
‘here’ is both Spain and the city of Madrid, to which they refer on several
occasions as a place from which is it easy to get to other European capitals. The
turn initiates a conversation in which the stances taken by the participants can
be understood as reﬂections of different ways of being cosmopolitan. Their value
systems, however, are different, which triggers misalignments between some
for whom luxury shopping is endowed with a romantic allure and others with a
more pragmatic orientation, who favor budget deals. At this point, the cultural
premises that contextualize the object of stance are sometimes problematic once
again. The fragments (4.50 minutes altogether) show how the interpretation of

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

686

MARTIN ROJO AND MOLINA

the stance object
is not always shared. Thus, during their dialogue,
interlocutors have to agree on what the object of stance is, and to modify the
value system that frames the stance object.

Fragment 2.1 comes 45 minutes later than Fragment 1.3 and starts with

researcher 2’s suggestion of taking advantage of the location for traveling.

Fragment 2.1: Shopping case study 1/2 (SS=student subject; Rsrch=Researcher)

57. Rsrch 2:

58. SS 3:

59. SS 1:

60. SS 4:

61. SS 1:

y ahora que estais aquı vais a
aprovechar para ir a otros
paıses::::?=
=SI:::: en la semana proxima
semana voy a Parıs

pero vamos a la navidad para
tambien hacer compras
[hacer compras]
[para hacer compras] sı sı sı

y luego Italia ((risas)), tambien
para hacer compras=

62. Spanish SS: =pero compras en Italia o

aquı en Madrid?
no, lo que querıan comprar son
marcas famosas

and now that you’re here
you’ll take the chance to
go to other countries::::?=
=YE:S in the week next
week I’m going to Paris

but we’ll go at Christmas
too to shop [to shop]

[to shop] yes

yes yes

and later on Italy
((laughter)), also to shop=
=but shopping in Italy or
here in Madrid?

no, what they wanted to
buy was famous brands

63. PhD SS:

64. All:

65. SS 1:

66. Rsrch 2:

((incomprensible: hablan
todos a la vez))
pero es que aquı los (ininteligible)
de marca son mas baratas
que en

((unintelligible: all talk at
once))

but here (unintelligible)
brand names are cheaper
than in

claro, porque (ininteligible), pero
Italia es mucho mas caro
que esto. . .

of course, because
(unintelligible), but Italy
is much more expensive
than this. . .

[and France. . .]

[and France] much more
still

67. Spanish SS:

68. Rsrch 2:

[y Francia. . .]
[y Francia] muchısimo mas
todavıa

69. SS 1:

no sabemos si hay un descuento
en navidad

we don’t know if there are
Christmas discounts

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

COSMOPOLITAN STANCE NEGOTIATION

687

70. Rsrch 2:

en enero son las reba[jas]

in January there are sa[les]

71. SS 1:

72. Rsrch 2:

73. SS 5:

74. PhD SS:

75. SS 5:

76. Spanish SS:

77. Rsrch 2:

[SI]

[YES]

las mejores rebajas, aquı y en
Londres
sı, pero no podemos ir a buscar
ropas porque con el pasaporte
de visa con
podeis pedir aquı, pero MUY
difıcil
[sı, muy difıcil]
[pero por que no] podeis ir
con el pasaporte?
necesitaran un visado

the best sales, here and in
London

yes, but we can’t go look
for clothes because with
the passport, of visa with

you ((pl)) can apply here,
but VERY difﬁcult

[yes, very difﬁcult]

[but why can’t] you go
with your passport?

0

they
stamp

ll need an approval

78. SS 2:

podemos ir, pero tenemos dejar
nuestro [pasaporte en el mm]

79. SS 1:

80. SS 5:

81. SS 2:

[embajada]=

=por unos dıas
sı, y no podemos ir a
(ininteligible)

we can go, but we have to
leave our [passport in
the mm]

[embassy]=

=for a few days

yes, and we can’t go to
(unintelligible)

82. SS 5:

(ininteligible)

(unintelligible)

83. Rsrch 2:

porque PARA REBAJAS, en
Londres es mucho mejor

because FOR SALES,
London is much better

Three exchange students respond afﬁrmatively to researcher 2’s question: their
plans include visiting other European cities. The aim of such trips is quickly
speciﬁed: ‘to shop, to shop’ (turn 59). As student 1 mentions shopping twice in
rapid succession, student 4 conﬁrms the point (‘yes yes yes’), after which
student 1 expands on the statement: shopping over Christmas will happen not
just in Paris, but also in Italy. Her laughter and the burst of unintelligible
overlapping talk that follows highlight the emphasis placed on shopping as the
reason for travelling abroad. Later on in the evening, student 5 would
comment on the cultural
interest of Italy, but at this point nothing but
shopping is mentioned. Although no explicit evaluation is produced by the
local participants,
the Spanish student starts his turn with a counter
argumentative marker (‘but’) and a request for conﬁrmation (turn 62).
Researcher 2’s subsequent utterance suggests that shopping could happen in
Madrid as well, which is implicitly a negative evaluation of the stance object,

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

688

MARTIN ROJO AND MOLINA

the

dynamics, we need

to

To understand

i.e. shopping trips. She responds to students 1 and 4’s stance, comparing price
reductions in Madrid with prices elsewhere. Although the full statement is
unintelligible, both researcher 2 and the local student seem to be suggesting
that the exchange students might ﬁnd better prices in Madrid (in fact, the full
transcript reveals that researcher 2 had unsuccessfully tried to introduce the
point three times already). The sales imaginary (turn 83) evoked by the
researcher,
focused on budgeting, clearly contrasts with the glamorous
imaginary the students have in mind: luxury shopping in Paris and Milan,
as we will soon discover. Hence, there is a conﬂictive misalignment regarding
shopping and what shopping means.
alignment

explore
contextualization in further detail, tracing salient indexical meanings and
identifying those aspects of context that participants must know to gather a
successful interpretation of stances. To do so, we pay particular attention to
how the contextualization move of the Taiwanese PhD candidate (the only
participant familiar with both sociocultural contexts) creates the necessary
common ground. Her move (turn 63) provides information that contributes to
the contextual deﬁnition of the object in relation to which stance is being
taken, i.e. luxury brands. Hence, in helping reframe the stance object, she is
paving the way for alignment. In further conversation, the exchange students
would complete the contextual
information highlighting the obstacles to
ﬁnding luxury brands in China at even less affordable prices, and explaining
how their families had speciﬁcally asked for these products as travel presents.
The foregoing fragment has shown our participants taking a different stance
in relation to the object (i.e. shopping abroad as an opportunity for purchasing
luxury items versus shopping abroad as seeking cheaper deals). Despite the
differences, both stances can be seen as different ways of being cosmopolitan,
in that both groups profess their knowledge and experience of traveling to
different places in the world. Thus, the fragment reveals the complex relation
between consumption and cosmopolitanism (a more detailed discussion is
presented in section 5). The reference to the (very hard to obtain) visa needed
for the Chinese exchange students to go to Britain shows cosmopolitanism is
still a mode of social stratiﬁcation. Likewise, the fact that relatives put in orders
for branded items shows that, for these students, mobility is also a means of
gaining access to social distinction (Bourdieu 1984).

The fact that both groups display cosmopolitan-oriented stances allows
addressing another research question, namely, the extent to which the
enactment of cosmopolitanism depends on encounters with interlocutors who
themselves exhibit cosmopolitan features. In this regard, the romantic imaginary
put forward in Fragment 2.2 forms the basis for going beyond the initial lack of
alignment about shopping. In turn 84, researcher 2 restates her original
question in the form of an afﬁrmative statement, and a negotiation ensues among
the participants in an attempt to align stances. During the process, the mediating
role of the Taiwanese PhD student stands out once again.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

COSMOPOLITAN STANCE NEGOTIATION

689

Fragment 2.2: Shopping case study 2/2 (SS=student subject; Rsrch=Researcher)

84.

Rsrch 2:

85.

86.

SS 5:

PhD SS:

87.

Rsrch 2:

88.

89.

All:

Rsrch 1:

90.

PhD SS:

91.

92.

93.

94.

Spanish SS:

Rsrch 1:

SS 4:

Rsrch 2:

entonces en navidad. . .
vais a aprovechar navidad
para viajar
am Parıs yyy Italia
es que ALLI en Asia
siempre es un, no se, es
un un sue~no, algo parece
romantico que si
puedes ir a Italia [o ir a
Parıs

[a mı
tambien me lo parece]

((risas)) (incomprensible)
para mı tambien es
romantico

bueno, pero no estoy de
acuerdo, lo siento
pero luego lo estaras

no, pero siempre tienes
ganas de ir a Venecia,
Parıs
sı
a Milan de COMPRAS,
a Milan de compras?

then over Christmas. . .
you’ll take advantage
of Christmas to travel

am Paris aaand Italy

the thing is THERE in
Asia it’s always, it’s a
I don’t know a dream,
something seems
romantic that you can
go to Italy [or go to
Paris

[it seems so to

me too]

((laughter)) (unintelligible)

for me it’s romantic
too

well, but I don’t agree,
I’m sorry

but later on you will

no, but you always
want to go to Venice,
Paris

yes

to Milan to SHOP, to
Milan to shop?

95.

All:

((risas))

((laughter))

In turn 86,
the PhD student provides information she considers local
participants must bear in mind in order to contextually ground and
understand their co-positioning. In doing so, she is introducing sociocultural
differences between Asia and Europe and displaying ethnic identities. The use
of the deictic ‘there’ builds an implicit opposition between ‘there’ and ‘here’,
reframing the interaction in cultural terms. In choosing to mediate this way,
she is assuming the participants do not have enough information about each
other to make sense of differences. Once France and Italy have been targeted as
the desired destinations for the holidays, the Taiwanese student makes the
premise behind such travelling explicit: ‘there in Asia it seems like a dream’.
Researcher 2’s alignment (turn 87), an endorsement of the stance of the
exchange students, draws laughter and incomprehensible comments. Her cleft

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

690

MARTIN ROJO AND MOLINA

sentence emphasizes the lack of differences (‘to me’ [stance subject],
‘too’
[position]) and neutralizes the PhD student’s polarization, thus bringing the
subjective positions into alignment. Laughter eliminates the tension of previous
moves, and researcher 1 (turn 89) immediately adheres to the newly emerged
alignment. This is not constructed on the grounds of shopping, nor on the idea
of
it being an impossible dream (unlikely within a setting in which the
destination is already geographically close and travelling already a reality for
these students), but rather on the romance attached to the destinations. The
common acknowledgement of France and Italy as romantic places reveals the
presence of a shared object of stance, and that the participants share socio-
cultural values too. The statement of the Spanish student in turn 91 (‘but later
on you will’), aimed at
the
participants. The shared imaginary is clearly a sign of distinction for all of
them. Nothing to do with the practical logic of low-cost ﬂights avoiding and
high prices implicit in researcher 2’s recommendation which led to the former
misalignment (a logic from which, for the sake of alignment, she distances
herself
in turn 94, which elicits laughter as a welcoming response). The
alignment on the romantic nature of transnational mobility marks a departure
from the consumerist dimension of cosmopolitanism. In fact, besides the
‘consumption’ of foreign places, both exchange students and locals come up as
global connoisseurs who perform cosmopolitan practices in their interaction.

the only person who disagrees,

levels all

Overall, the foregoing section has shown:

1. the relevance of common ground for understanding stances and reaching

points of interactional alignment;

2. the impact of ideologies in the alignment process; and
3. how some current forms of cosmopolitanism (e.g. the consumption of
romantic places) tend to trigger alignment much more expediently than
others (e.g. the consumption of luxury goods).

5. COSMOPOLITANISM REVISITED FROM THE VIEWPOINT OF
STANCETAKING

So far, we have observed the enactment of cosmopolitanism in interaction. The
orientation of our participants towards different cultures and locations
constitute interactional-level manifestations of cosmopolitanism, and the
analysis of the fragments reveals the many tendencies and strands that
coexist within cosmopolitanism. The participants in our study might be seen as
exemplars of today’s cosmopolitanism. They can be said to be cosmopolitans in
that they manage to make their way into other settings and successfully
renegotiate meanings. However, we cannot assess the extent to which they are
indeed developing a symbolic personal repertoire (along the lines of the
cosmopolitan competence suggested by Hannerz 2004; Vertovec and Rogers

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

COSMOPOLITAN STANCE NEGOTIATION

691

1998). This is why, although they present themselves as such, our participants
cannot be unmistakably called cosmopolitans nor the opposite.

Nonetheless, they do seem to enact some of the main trends detected in the
literature in relation to current forms of cosmopolitanism. The bullﬁghting case
study reveals how international students act as tourists (albeit with an academic
slant) and, although they dip into the national culture of the host community,
they remain rooted in their own culture at the point of origin: this is why
mediators are needed to ‘get the point’. We therefore acknowledge the presence
of a form of ‘touristy’ cosmopolitanism that includes the search for varied
experiences and a delight in understanding contrasts between societies rather
than a longing for uniformity or superiority, as well as the development of some
skills at interpreting cultural meanings (Vertovec and Cohen 2002). However,
as Hannerz (1996: 103) notices, cosmopolitans do not accept particular
elements of the alien culture and refuse others; they do not negotiate with the
other culture, but rather accept it as a package deal. And this is precisely where
tensions emerge. Locals, even if oriented towards cosmopolitanism, cannot
embrace culture as a package, because they are committed to it and need to face
and act against the cultural elements they reject. This tendency to see the
experience of cultural diversity as a value in itself is linked to Urry’s (1995)
notion of ‘aesthetic cosmopolitanism’, by means of which not only elites, but
also tourists (and, in this case, international students) have developed more
cosmopolitan or far-reaching aesthetic tastes. The consumption of foreign places
seems to be based on exoticism, on commodiﬁcation and on a consumerist
culture (for a revision of the notion of commodiﬁcation, cf. Pujolar 2017).
However, engaging with locals and negotiation stances, international students
face the contradictions raised by superﬁcial cultural immersions, and they
develop cultural competence in the stricter sense of the term.

The analysis of the fragments on shopping reveals another signiﬁcant trend
in relation to current forms of cosmopolitanism. Although the excerpt does not
allow discerning if the reason behind Paris and Milan-based shopping goes
beyond the actual purchase of goods, it clearly points to a distinction-seeking
identity-building practice: I got it in Paris. Following Jaworski and Thurlow
(2009: 196), we observe how a form of elitism is enacted by:

making a claim to exclusivity, superiority, and/or distinctiveness on the grounds
of status, knowledge, authenticity, taste, erudition, experience, insight, wealth,
or any other quality warranting the speaker/author to take a higher moral,
aesthetic, intellectual, material, or any other form of standing in relation to
another subject (individual or group).

In this respect, places are signiﬁcant. As the analysis reveals, speciﬁc cultural
practices and commodities offer a means of self-deﬁnition that removes subjects
from a restrictive local context. Also indisputably, it reveals that cosmopolitanism
is linked to transnational mobility and distinction. To be sure, there is cultural

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

692

MARTIN ROJO AND MOLINA

capital in saying ‘I am off to Paris next week’, just as much capital as in the actual
Chanel scarf eventually bought there. Would the same scarf carry less value if
bought during a January sale in Madrid? Probably not: it is not the object itself that
lends distinction to contemporary cosmopolitans, but having bought it at the right
place, just as having had a picture taken at whatever iconic spot (Thurlow and
Jaworski 2011). Participants in this interaction were socialized in particular
consumption patterns at one place but currently they are relocated, again as
customers, in another one (Hannerz 1996: 153). As a result, they have access to
commodities, such as luxury brand names, that have a signiﬁcant part of their
value derived from their original (and not peripheral) location/locus of production.
Thus, the analysis of the shopping case study seems to refer to what Calhoun
‘consumerist cosmopolitanism’, manifested in the
(2002) describes as
globalization of tastes (such as the massive transfer of
foodstuff, artworks,
music,
literature and fashion), which represents the multiculturalization of
society, and also the advanced globalization of capitalism. As Calhoun notes,
cosmopolitanism still refers to ‘the class consciousness of frequent travellers’; it is
embodied in the emergent culture of the transnational capitalist class described by
Sklair (2000). In being associated with such elites, cosmopolitanism is now largely
a matter of consumption, an acquired taste for cultural artifacts from around the
world. However, concerning these consumption patterns, spatial and ideological
positions give rise to contradictions.

Finally, in connection with places, our paper shows a diversiﬁcation of origins:
a Chinese elite is now being formed under the auspices, among others, of
university internationalization schemes and exchange programs. The
transnational capitalist class, however,
fragment of the
population. Mobility is endowed with nuances that go further beyond
travelling itself, and this is clearly linked to social inequality: some subjects can
travel the world, others cannot or not to every country; some can access given
consumer goods, others cannot. If cosmopolitanism is a matter of distinction, it
must be recognized by others beyond biographic and/or cultural differences.

is only a small

6. CONCLUSION

To conclude, let us review the most signiﬁcant contributions of our study. First,
and in relation to stancetaking, we have shown that the actual objects of stance
are a matter for negotiation, and cultural values and ideologies play a crucial role
in the process. Interacting with participants from different backgrounds is always
a source of uncertainty and often the reason behind inconsistent stances. For this
reason, we propose an interactional understanding of stancetaking that overtly
focuses on the negotiation of stance objects. Objects are not static items situated
outside the interaction: their meaning ﬂuctuates and, therefore, their co-
construction is as dialogic as positioning itself. The contextualization and
negotiation of stance objects, as well as stance accretion, allows participants to
interpret
the positioning of others and gradually construct compatible

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

COSMOPOLITAN STANCE NEGOTIATION

693

subjectivities. In intercultural settings, misalignments are often the result of
misunderstandings because stance objects are implicit and the background
knowledge that participants evoke does not coincide. In positioning themselves,
subjects respond both to the stances of others and to the values rooted in a
community. For this reason, the stance triangle model (Figure 1) should expand
to accommodate the sociocultural and ideological aspects without which
contextualization cannot succeed.

Secondly,

legitimacy.

that provides interactional

try to repair misalignments. However,

interactional negotiations are inherently related to the co-
construction of interpersonal relations. For this reason, face-work stands out
as a key factor within the dialogical negotiation of stance. At this point,
cultural values and ideologies play a crucial role as well: presenting oneself as a
cosmopolite is a social asset
In
negotiating face and co-constructing identities, many stances and responses
within interaction have a sense of it being ‘the right thing to say’ to display
social distinction. This, together with an inclination towards cooperation,
explains why participants
in
multicultural settings interlocutors often ignore the historical processes,
cultural meanings and value systems associated to social practices, that is,
the larger context without which a convergent interpretation of facts and
events is impossible. Thus, while our exchange students were not aware of the
controversial nature of bullﬁghting and its politicization in Spain today, the
locals ignored the symbolic value associated with luxury shopping in European
capitals among Chinese citizens, and difﬁculties emerged. Once the participants
negotiated meaning and overcame their lack of shared background knowledge,
their
the
neutralization of
face-threatening acts and helps repair misalignments,
stressing the embodied and situated nature of communication is paramount
for a successful understanding of stancetaking.

emplacement allows

stances

could come

together. Since

that

Thirdly, ideologies play a much more critical role in stance negotiation than
often acknowledged in the literature. Misalignments have allowed us to
capture the contradictions, and coincidences,
the enactment of a
cosmopolitan orientation raises between locals and newcomers. The stances
taken in the construction of the stance object show the powerful role of
ideologies in interactional clashes, and how overcoming such clashes is often a
matter of ideology too. Repeated enactments of stance embody positions that
sediment
Integrating ideology into the study of
stancetaking is therefore theoretically relevant, as it helps explain the role of
underlying sociocultural processes in stance negotiation. It also sheds light
onto processes that shape contemporary communicative practices, such as the
commodiﬁcation of cultural and linguistic skills or the need for a cosmopolitan
habitus in order to succeed in university exchange programs.

into ideological stands.

Fourthly, and consequently, in joining detailed analyses of local discursive
practices with ideological issues and current social processes, our study goes
beyond the here and now of
interactional analysis. Also relevant at a

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

694

MARTIN ROJO AND MOLINA

theoretical level is the pertinence of approaching ideology from a micro rather
than a macro standpoint, since there is an often-disregarded link between
micro situated practices and social/ideological aspects and processes. To our
mind, focusing on the local and situated construction of social processes and
on the reproduction of ideologies allows novel insights into the ways in which
globalization is modifying access to symbolic capitals, and also into promising
routes for sociolinguistic enquiry.

REFERENCES

Blommaert, Jan. 2013. Ethnography, Superdiversity and Linguistic Landscapes: Chronicles of

Complexity. Bristol, U.K.: Multilingual Matters.

Blommaert, Jan and Chris Bulcaen. 2000. Critical discourse analysis. Annual Review of

Anthropology 29: 447–466.

Bourdieu, Pierre. 1984. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. London:

Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Calhoun, Craig. 2002. The class consciousness of frequent travelers: Towards a critique of
actually existing cosmopolitanism. In Steven Vertovec and Robin Cohen (eds.) Conceiving
Cosmopolitanism: Theory, Context and Practice. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press. 86–109.
Du Bois, John W. 2002. Stance and consequence. Paper presented to the Annual Meeting of

the American Anthropological Association, 20–24 November, New Orleans, Louisiana.

Du Bois, John W. 2007. The stance triangle. In Robert Englebretson (ed.) Stancetaking in
Discourse: Subjectivity, Evaluation, Interaction. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Benjamins.
139–182.

Goffman, Ervin. 1967. On face-work: An analysis of ritual elements in social interaction. From
Interaction Ritual: Essays in Face-to-Face Behavior. Chicago, Illinois: Aldine Transaction. 5–45.

Gumperz, John. 1982. Discourse Strategies. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Hannerz, Ulf. 1996. Transnational Connections: Culture, People, Places. New York: Taylor and

Francis.

Hannerz, Ulf. 2004. Cosmopolitanism. In David Nugent and Joan Vincent (eds.) A Companion

to the Anthropology of Politics. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell. 69–85.

Heller, Monica. 2006. Linguistic Minorities and Modernity: A Sociolinguistic Ethnography (2nd

edition). London: Continuum.

Heller, Monica. 2011. Paths to Post-Nationalism: A Critical Ethnography of Language and Identity.

Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.

Jaffe, Alexandra (ed.). 2009. Stance: Sociolinguistic Perspectives. New York: Oxford University

Press.

Jaworski, Adam and Crispin Thurlow. 2009. Talking an elitist stance: Ideology and the
discursive production of social distinction. In Alexandra Jaffe (ed.) Stance: Sociolinguistic
Perspectives. New York: Oxford University Press. 195–226.

Martı´n Rojo, Luisa and Michael Meeuwis. 1993. Referentes del sujeto pronominales y tacitos

en la conversacion en espa~nol: Un enfoque pragmatico. Dialogos Hispanicos 12: 87–118.

Pujolar, Joan. 2017. Post-nationalism and language commodiﬁcation. In James Tollefson and
Miguel Perez-Milans (eds.) The Oxford Handbook of Language Policy and Planning. Oxford, U.K.:
Oxford University Press.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

COSMOPOLITAN STANCE NEGOTIATION

695

Rampton, Ben. 2001. Language crossing, cross-talk and cross-disciplinarity in sociolinguistics.
In Nikolas Coupland, Srikant Sarangi and Christopher Candlin (eds.) Sociolinguistics and
Social Theory. London: Longman Pearson Education. 261–296.

Rampton, Ben. 2006. Language in Late Modernity. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Rauniomaa, Mirka. 2003. Stance Accretion: Some Initial Observations. Santa Barbara,

California: University of California at Santa Barbara.

Roberts, Celia, Evelyn Davies and Tom Jupp. 1992. Language and Discrimination. London:

Longman.

Sklair, Leslie. 2000. The transnational capitalist class and the discourse of globalisation.

Cambridge Review of International Affairs 14: 67–85.

Thurlow, Crispin and Adam Jaworski. 2011. Banal globalization? Embodied actions and
mediated practices in tourists’ online photo-sharing. In Crispin Thurlow and Kristine
Mroczek (eds.) Digital Discourse: Language in the New Media. New York: Oxford University
Press on Demand. 220–250.

Urry, John R. 1995. Consuming Places. London: Routledge.
Vertovec, Steven and Robin Cohen (eds.). 2002. Conceiving Cosmopolitanism: Theory, Context

and Practice. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.

Vertovec, Steven and Alisdair Rogers. 1998. Muslim European Youth: Reproducing Religion,

Ethnicity and Culture. Aldershot, U.K.: Avebury.

APPENDIX: Transcription conventions

[ ]
=
::
UPPERCASE
. ? ,
> <
< >
( )
(( ))

beginning and end of overlap
latching
indicates pitch rise
volume is greater than surrounding talk
falling, rising and continuing intonation
the talk between them is rushed
the talk is slower than surrounding talk
the talk or item could not be heard
transcriber’s description of events, rather than representations of them

Address correspondence to:
Luisa Martın Rojo
Universidad Autonoma de Madrid – Departamento de Ling€uıstica
Campus de Cantoblanco
Madrid 28049
Spain

luisa.rojo@uam.es

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd


