J. Child Lang.  (), –. © Cambridge University Press 
This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/./), which permits
unrestricted re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original work is properly cited.
doi:./SX

The eﬀect of shyness on children’s formation and

retention of novel word–object mappings*

MATT HILTON A N D GERT WESTERMANN

Lancaster University

(Received  February  – Revised  July  – Accepted  October  –

First published online  December )

A B S T R A C T

This study set out to examine whether shyness, an aversion to novelty
and unfamiliar social situations, can aﬀect the processes that underlie
early word learning. Twenty-four-month-old children (n =) were
presented with sets of one novel and two familiar objects, and it was
found that shyer children were less likely to select a novel object as
the referent of a novel
label. Furthermore, not-shy children then
showed evidence of retaining these novel mappings, but shy children
did not. These ﬁndings suggest that shy children’s aversion to novelty
and to the unfamiliar context can impact on their word learning.

I N T R O D U C T I O N
In learning language, young children face a challenging task. Not only
must they work out what the words they hear mean, but they must also
remember these words and their referents. Given the complexity of the
speech that children hear and the limitless potential meanings of these
words, this task seems almost impossible (Quine, ), and there has been
much interest in the general mechanisms by which children are able to learn
words. For example, children constrain the potential meaning of words
they hear according to the shape (Landau, Smith & Jones, ) and
taxonomic category (Markman & Hutchinson, ) of potential referents.
Constraining the potential meaning of heard words in these ways is the ﬁrst
step towards successful word learning (McMurray, Horst & Samuelson, ).

[*] Matt Hilton is now in the Department of Psychology at the University of Potsdam,
Germany. This research was supported in part by the ESRC (LuCiD; ES/L/).
Address for correspondence: Matt Hilton, Universität Potsdam, Karl-Liebknecht-
Strasse -, OT Golm,  Potsdam, Germany. e-mail: matt.hilton@uni-potsdam.de



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600057X

S H Y N E S S A N D W O R D L E A R N I N G

While a focus on the general mechanisms underlying word learning has
helped to better understand the processes by which children acquire
language, the vast variability in early language development must also be
more thoroughly examined. At the age of two, the number of diﬀerent
words that a child can typically produce as reported by parents can range
from  to  (Dale & Fenson, ), and a similarly wide range is
demonstrated in two-year-old children’s spontaneous speech production
(Huttenlocher, Haight, Bryk, Seltzer & Lyons, ). Nevertheless, the
large majority of children with low productive vocabularies will go on to
develop language normally (Desmarais, Sylvestre, Meyer, Bairati &
Rouleau, ; Kelly, ; Whitehurst & Fischel, ).

Variability in vocabulary scores has been traditionally explored by
examining the extrinsic factors that can serve to aﬀect a child’s language
exposure, with a particular focus on the eﬀect of socioeconomic status.
Children from poorer backgrounds are consistently shown to have lower
vocabularies than their better-oﬀ peers (Evans, ). While at ﬁrst this
eﬀect was understood to be due to diﬀerences in the amount of language
to which a child is exposed (Hart & Risely, ), more recent research
has emphasized that the quality of early language exposure is also critical
(Hirsh-Pasek et al., ). While this research has been inﬂuential
in
highlighting that the quality of language exposure impacts on language
acquisition, there have also been calls for a more thorough examination of
the intrinsic factors that aﬀect cognitive development (Mareschal, Johnson,
Sirois, Spratling, Thomas & Westermann, ). Children’s behavioral styles
vary widely, yet the eﬀect of these variations is often neglected in explaining
language development. One intrinsic factor that has, however, been shown
to aﬀect early language acquisition is temperament (Slomkowski, Nelson,
Dunn & Plomin, ), speciﬁcally shyness (Coplan & Evans, ).

There have been many attempts to operationalize the construct of shyness
in young children, from general constructs such as behavioral inhibition as
studied in young infants (Kagan, Reznick & Snidman, ), to more
speciﬁc conceptualizations focusing on the speciﬁc shy-type behaviors
exhibited in certain contexts (e.g. peer-to-peer interactions; Gazelle, ).
The current work draws on a broader deﬁnition of shyness, based on
Putnam, Gartstein, and Rothbart’s () operationalization of shyness as
an enduring, biologically based individual diﬀerence characterized by
discomfort in (predominantly novel) social situations, as measured via the
Early Childhood Behavior Questionnaire (ECBQ). Reports on use of the
ECBQ have shown that shyness can be reliably measured in children from
the age of  months (Putnam et al., ).

The eﬀect of shyness on verbal communication has been well documented;
for example, it is known that shyness reduces children’s verbal interaction in
novel and familiar contexts (e.g. Asendorpf & Meier, ). While this and



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600057X

H I L T O N A N D W E S T E R M A N N

the eﬀect of

shyness on language has

similar research has established a clear link between shyness and language
development,
typically been
measured relatively late in development, when children are at least four
years old (Asendorpf & Meier, ; Broberg, Lamb, Hwang & Bookstein,
; Coplan & Weeks, ; Crozier & Badawood, ; Crozier &
Perkins, ; Evans, ; Reynolds & Evans, ). Recently, however,
interest has turned to the eﬀect of shyness on the critical early stage of
language acquisition during the second year of life (Smith Watts et al.,
). Smith Watts and colleagues examined how shyness impacts on
receptive and productive language development, and reported that shyness
is more strongly related to expressive than receptive vocabulary size. These
authors argued that shy children’s lower language ability during the
second year of life can be explained in terms of a reticence to respond,
rather than any diﬃculty in learning the meaning of words. Shy children’s
reticence to respond has been demonstrated in home settings (Reynolds &
Evans, ) and in experimental settings (Crozier & Perkins, ), and
it is also supported by research in non-Western cultures (Crozier &
Badawood, ).

One critical limitation of the extant literature in support of a reticence to
respond explanation is that it does not predict an eﬀect of shyness on
receptive vocabulary. However,
there are many reports of a relation
between shyness and receptive vocabulary (Crozier & Badawood, ;
Crozier & Hostettler, ; Crozier & Perkins, ; Rudasill, Prokasky,
Tu, Frohn, Sirota & Molfese, ; Slomkowski et al., ; Spere,
Schmidt, Theall-Honey & Martin-Chang, ). Interestingly, even
Smith Watts and colleagues () found relations between receptive
vocabulary and shyness, but they argued that their data supported a
reticence to respond explanation because the relations between shyness and
productive vocabulary were more pronounced. Here we suggest
that
further
language
development can be achieved by investigating the role of shyness in the
processes that support word learning.

in which shyness

aﬀects

insights

into the ways

Laboratory examinations of children’s “remarkable” ability to acquire
words during the second year of life often employ fast mapping tasks that
demonstrate the ability to rapidly associate novel labels with novel objects
(Axelsson, Churchley & Horst, ; Halberda, ; Horst & Samuelson,
; Horst, Samuelson, Kucker & McMurray, ; Spiegel & Halberda,
; Vlach & Sandhofer, ). In these tasks, children are usually
presented with a novel object alongside objects for which a label is already
known and are asked to identify the object referred to by a novel pseudo-
word (e.g. “Where’s the blicket?”; Markman & Wachtel, ). Children
begin to demonstrate the ability to pick the novel object from the age of
 months (Markman, Wasow & Hansen, ), and more recent work



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600057X

S H Y N E S S A N D W O R D L E A R N I N G

indicates that some children may do this as early as  months (Xu, Cote &
Baker, ).

classed % of

Nevertheless, a closer look at the literature reveals considerable individual
diﬀerences in fast mapping ability. For example, in a study investigating the
age-related development of fast mapping, Wilkinson, Ross, and Diamond
()
the under -month-old children in their
experiment as unreliable fast mappers. In other studies -month-old
children selected the novel object only on approximately three-quarters of
trials (Horst & Samuelson, ; Twomey, Ranson & Horst, ).
Similarly, in a study by Mervis and Bertrand () with –-month-
old children, half of the children did not reliably select the novel object
upon hearing a novel label.

Critically, children’s selection of the novel object as the referent of a novel
label has been attributed to a novelty bias, which is so strong at  months
that it leads children to select the novel object as the referent of even a
familiar word (Samuelson, Kucker & Spencer, ). Even at  months
of age, children reliably select a familiar target object (Horst & Samuelson,
), but they also select a novel object as the referent of a novel label
when competitors are nameless but pre-familiarized objects (Horst et al.,
), demonstrating the importance of novelty preference in driving
children’s object
Individual
diﬀerences in performance on referent selection trials may therefore be
explained in terms of diﬀerences in novelty preference. That novelty
preference is critical in supporting referent selection would indicate that
shyness could come to bear on this ability, because we know that shy
children are averse to novelty (Kagan et al., ). This aversion to
novelty could mean that shy children’s novelty preference is reduced in
comparison to not-shy children.

selection on referent

selection trials.

Even once the novel object is selected as the referent of a novel word, this
novel word–object mapping is not necessarily learned. A number of studies
have argued that children’s ability to select the correct referent and the
ability to retain the label–object mapping over a period of time are
governed by related, but separate, processes (Axelsson et al., ;
Horst & Samuelson, ; Kucker, McMurray & Samuelson, ;
Munro, Baker, McGregor, Docking & Arciuli, ). In tests of retention,
children are presented with (usually three) objects for which they have fast
mapped novel labels and are asked for one of these objects using its novel
label. Despite success in forming the initial word–object mappings,
children often have diﬃculty retaining these mappings. For example, in
one typical study Horst and Samuelson () found that after a -minute
delay, -month-old children were unable to select the correct object
above levels that would be expected by chance.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600057X

H I L T O N A N D W E S T E R M A N N

We know that extrinsic factors can aﬀect whether a mapping is retained.
Horst and Samuelson () found that by reinforcing the mapping by
ostensively naming the object (e.g. by pointing and labeling) after the
child had made the initial word–object mapping, the likelihood that it
would be retained was increased. This ﬁnding suggested that attention to
the referent during referent selection determines whether the novel word–
object mapping will be retained, supported by subsequent work which
found that highlighting the target object by illuminating it and dampening
attention to competitors by partially covering them also increased retention
(Axelsson et al., ). This work suggested that the attention directed
toward the target during referent selection alone is not suﬃcient
to
support retention. Again, then, shy children’s aversion to novelty could
modulate their attentional pattern across the objects during referent
selection, which would impact on their retention of any word–object
mappings.

Children are clearly variable in their demonstration of the mechanisms
that support word learning, and we suggest that shyness could explain
some of this variability. If shyness impacts on the most basic and early
processes of word learning, this could help to explain the relation between
shyness and language development as measured more generally (e.g. Spere
et al., ). Speciﬁcally, one can assume that children who are better able
to focus their attention on the novel object during labeling should be
better able to retain the word–object mapping. We hypothesize that
shyness can aﬀect retention of novel word–object mappings formed via
referent selection by modulating children’s attention during referent
selection. Such a hypothesis is in line with recent accounts arguing that
diﬀerences in engagement with objects can explain diﬀerences in word
learning and categorization of these objects (e.g. Perry, ). If shy
children demonstrate lower levels of retention than their not-shy peers, it
would mean that shyness is aﬀecting the acquisition of language from one
of its earliest stages: the initial mapping of a label to its referent. Such a
ﬁne-grained analysis of the eﬀects of shyness on the formation of label–
object mappings,
rather than focusing solely on vocabulary size or
language production, means that we can begin to understand the precise
ways in which language is shaped by shyness.

In the present study, two-year-old children took part in both referent
selection and retention tests of mapping novel labels to novel objects. A
sample of children who varied in their shyness completed the same
referent selection trials in which they were presented with one novel object
alongside two familiar objects and were asked for a novel label. Trials were
included in which children were asked for a familiar object. After a
-minute break, all children then took part in retention trials. We also
investigated whether external directing of attention to the target object via



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600057X

S H Y N E S S A N D W O R D L E A R N I N G

ostensive naming of
children’s retention.

targets during referent

selection facilitated shy

M E T H O D
Participants
Thirty-two typically developing -month-old children participated (M =
 m,  days, SD =  days; range =  m,  days to  m,  days; 
girls and  boys). All children were monolingual, predominantly from
middle-class families of Caucasian ethnicity living in the north-west of
England, UK. Families were recruited by contacting parents who had
previously indicated interest
in participating in child development
research. Parents’ travel expenses were reimbursed and children were
oﬀered a storybook for participating. Data from nine additional children
were excluded from analyses due to experimenter error (n = ), parental
involvement (n = ), refusal to complete the task (n = ), and the parent
not returning the questionnaire (n = ).

the shyness

low-intensity pleasure,

The Early Childhood Behavior Questionnaire (ECBQ) was used to assess
children’s shyness as an enduring, biologically based individual diﬀerence.
The ECBQ asks parents to rate on a scale from  to  how often their
child has demonstrated particular behaviors over the previous two weeks
( = ‘never’,  = ‘all the time’), as a means of assessing the child’s score
on eighteen ﬁne-grained subdimensions of
temperament. While these
subdimensions include areas such as attention focusing, activity level, and
high- or
subdimension was of
particular interest for the current study. The shyness scale consists of
twelve items that assess how children react in situations that elicit shy
behavior, for example “When approaching unfamiliar children playing,
how often did your child watch rather than join?” and “In situations
where s/he is meeting new people, how often did your child become
quiet?”. Each child was scored from  to  by averaging their parents’
responses to the twelve questions relating to shyness (after correcting for
reverse coded questions). A score of  is considered the least shy, and a
score of  is considered the most shy. Standardized Cronbach’s alpha for
the shyness measure was .. Once all data were collected, the median
score for all children was calculated (·). Children scoring above the
median formed the shy group and those scoring less than the median
formed the not-shy group. Three children’s scores equaled the median,
and they were randomly assigned to a group, ensuring equal sample size
(n = ). There were equal numbers of boys and girls (n = ) in each
group. There was no diﬀerence between groups in age (t() = ·, p
= ·). Unsurprisingly, children in the not-shy group were scored as less
shy (M = ·, SD = ·) than children in the shy group (M = ·, SD =



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600057X

H I L T O N A N D W E S T E R M A N N

·) (t() = –·, p < ·). Shyness scores were calculated after the testing
session had taken place, which meant that the shyness grouping of the
participants was not evident during testing.

In order to examine whether ostensive naming interacts with shyness to
aﬀect referent selection and retention, eight boys and eight girls were
assigned to an ostensive naming and a no ostensive naming condition.
Assignment of children to ostensive and no ostensive naming conditions
occurred before it was possible to calculate a median shyness score, so
children were randomly assigned to each condition prior to each testing
session. There was no diﬀerence between conditions in age (t() = –·,
p = ·). As expected by a random assignment, there were equal numbers
of not-shy children in the ostensive naming (n = ;  girls), and no
ostensive naming (n = ;  girls) conditions. Similarly, there were equal
numbers of shy children in the ostensive naming (n = ;  girls) and no
ostensive naming (n = ;  girls) conditions.

(duck, elephant, ﬁsh, pig), vehicles

Stimuli
The same stimuli were used in both conditions. Eleven objects, selected
because they are easily named by -month-olds, acted as familiar objects,
and consisted of animals
(car,
motorbike, helicopter), and household objects (spoon, fork, cup, and ball).
Four novel objects, selected because they are not normally familiar to -
month-old children, were a plastic roller, a wooden massager, a tea
strainer, and a miniature dumbbell (see Figure ). Four distinct nonwords
(cheem, koba, sprock, tannin) were used to name the novel objects, taken
from previous research using similar methodology (Behrend, Scoﬁeld &
Kleinknecht, ; Horst & Samuelson, ; Markson & Bloom, ;
Samuelson & Horst, ). The assignment of each name to each novel
object was randomized across participants. To ensure the objects would be
familiar and novel to each participant as expected, parents were shown
photographs of the objects before the experiment began and conﬁrmed
their familiarity or novelty. All objects were similar in size (approximate
mean size  cm ×  cm ×  cm). The objects were presented on a wooden
tray, divided into three equal compartments for the objects to be placed.

P R O C E D U R E A N D D E S I G N
Prior to their visit to the lab, parents completed the ECBQ, and during their
visit children took part in the word learning task.

Word learning task

Warm-up trials. During the task children sat on their parent’s lap across a
white table from the experimenter. Once settled, the warm-up trials began.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600057X

S H Y N E S S A N D W O R D L E A R N I N G

Fig. . A subset of the stimuli used in the experiment. Panel (a) shows examples of the
familiar objects used in the experiment. Panel (b) shows the four unfamiliar objects that
were used in the experiment.

the experimenter. For each trial

All trials consisted of three objects being presented to the child on the tray.
For warm-up trials, the three objects were familiar and their purpose was to
introduce the child to the forced-choice task, and to ensure that they
understood the instructions of
the
experimenter presented the objects and asked for the target six times (i.e.
“Wow a duck! Where’s the duck? See the duck! Find the duck! Get the
duck! Can you get the duck?”). The experimenter then slid the tray
forward into reaching distance for the child, and gave the child the
opportunity to retrieve the requested object. If correct, the child was
praised, and if incorrect, the child was corrected. The order in which the
objects were requested was randomly determined prior to testing. The
three familiar objects presented on warm-up trials were not presented in
subsequent
selection trials. Warm-up trials continued until
children had correctly selected each referent once. The majority of
children needed no more than three warm-up trials ( children needed
four warm-up trials and one child needed six warm-up trials.)

referent

Referent selection trials. The referent selection trials began immediately
after the warm-up trials. Referent selection trials proceeded in the same
manner as the warm-up trials, but diﬀered in three ways. First, two of the
objects were familiar and one was novel. Second, neither praise nor
corrections were given following the child’s referent selection. Third,
children were oﬀered the chance to explore the three objects for 
seconds before they were asked to select an object. During this exploration
time, the three objects were presented on the tray to the child, and the
child and caregiver played with the objects for  seconds. During this
exploration, parents were instructed to avoid labeling or asking for labels
for the objects, and if needed the experimenter directed the child’s
attention to each of the objects at least once, either by pointing at it, or if



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600057X

H I L T O N A N D W E S T E R M A N N

that was unsuccessful, by maneuvering it into the child’s line of vision. Once
 seconds had elapsed, the objects were returned to their positions on the
tray, and the child was asked for the target object.

Once children had selected an object, it was returned to its position on the
tray. Children in the ostensive naming condition then saw the target object
ostensively named (irrespective of whether they had correctly chosen the
target object or not), meaning that the experimenter pointed at the target
object and labeled it (e.g. “It’s a car.”). Children in the no ostensive
naming condition saw the experimenter point to the target object and say
“There it is”. To ensure that children in each condition heard the label an
equal number of times (which was relevant for the subsequent retention
test), children in the ostensive naming condition heard the label one time
fewer during the initial request, by removing a labeling phrase (e.g.
“Where’s the koba?”). This arrangement meant that children in both
conditions heard the object labeled six times. The object label was spoken
multiple times, in line with previous research (e.g. Axelsson et al., ).

Each child was presented with four sets of three objects, and each set was
shown twice. In one of these presentations the child was asked for a novel
object, and in the other was asked for a familiar object. The objects
comprising each set and the labels assigned to each novel object were
randomized across children. The order of sets and trials was pseudo-
randomized, ensuring that any trial type (i.e. familiar or novel) was not
presented on more than two consecutive trials.

the product of

Retention trials. Following the referent selection trials there was a
-minute break, during which the child was oﬀered crayons and paper for
coloring. This break was to ensure that any retention in the following
trials was
long-term memory (following Horst &
Samuelson, ). After the -minute break, the child participated in four
retention trials, which did not diﬀer between conditions. Again, children
were presented with sets of three objects. These were all novel objects that
had been presented and labeled during referent selection. Across the four
retention trials, each novel object was the target once. The two novel
objects presented alongside the target were randomly determined. On
presentation of each set, the child was asked to select the target once (e.g.
“Where’s the koba?”). The tray was slid forward and the child indicated
the chosen object. The order of trials was randomized across participants.

R E S U L T S
Word learning tasks
Each child took part in four familiar and four novel referent selection trials.
For each, a ‘proportion of correct choices’ measure was calculated by
dividing the number of correct responses by the total possible (i.e.  for



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600057X

S H Y N E S S A N D W O R D L E A R N I N G

familiar and  for novel referent selection trials). One participant (shyness
score = ·) did not respond on two referent selection trials, and one
participant (shyness score = ·) did not respond on one referent selection
trial. A response was elicited from children on all other referent selection
trials. A response was elicited for all retention trials.

Performance on referent selection trials replicated previous work (e.g.
Horst & Samuelson, ). Overall, selection of the correct familiar object
was higher than would be expected by chance (M = ·, SD = ·)
(t() = ·, p < ·; d = ·). Furthermore,
in trials where a novel
label was heard, children selected the novel object signiﬁcantly above
chance, demonstrating the ability to fast map (M = ·, SD = ·)
(t() = ·, p < ·; d = ·). Overall, children were better at selecting
the familiar than the novel object (t() = ·, p < ·; d = ·). As
expected, because the critical manipulation happened after children had
selected the referent, there was no diﬀerence between ostensive naming
conditions on either familiar referent selection trials (t() = ·, p = ·),
or novel referent selection trials (t() = ·, p = ·).

The following analyses only included retention trials in which the child
had correctly selected the target during the corresponding novel referent
selection trials. For example, if the child had chosen the car when asked
for the cheem during referent selection, the retention trial for the mapping
of cheem was not included (following Horst & Samuelson, ). Overall,
children were unable to retain the object–label mappings they had made
during referent selection, selecting the target object no more often than
would be expected by chance (M = ·, SD = ·) (t() = ·, p = ·).
We investigated whether particular objects were more likely to be selected
than others during referent selection and retention trials. We found that
children did not select certain familiar objects more often than others (χ
(, N = ) = ·, p > ·). Likewise, novel object selection was not
greater for any particular object (χ (, N = ) = ·, p = ·). Again
during the retention task children did not choose any novel objects more
often than others (χ (, N = ) = ·, p = ·).

Shyness and referent selection. Shyness was not signiﬁcantly related to
children’s referent selection on familiar label trials (rs () = –·, p = ·),
but shyness was signiﬁcantly related to children’s referent selection on
novel label trials (rs () = –·, p = ·), demonstrating that an increase
in shyness score meant a decrease in proportion of trials on which the
novel object was selected as the referent of a novel label.

The observed eﬀects were speciﬁc to scores on the shyness subscale of
the ECBQ. There was no relation between novel referent selection and
negative aﬀectivity, the core factor of temperament of which shyness is a
subscale (rs () = –·, p = ·), or with the other core factors: surgency
(rs () = –·, p = ·) and eﬀortful control (rs () = ·, p = ·). There



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600057X

H I L T O N A N D W E S T E R M A N N

was also no relation between novel referent selection other subscales of
Negative Aﬀectivity, such as fear (rs () = –·, p = ·), cuddliness
(rs () = –·, p = ·), or sociability (rs () = –·, p = ·).

We also wanted to examine the extent to which shyness impacted on
referent selection by examining performance in relation to chance. Shyness
groups were thus compared.

As shown in Figure , children in the not-shy group were better than
would be expected by chance at selecting the familiar object (t() = ·,
p < ·; d = ·) and novel object (t() = ·, p < ·; d = ·). In
contrast, children in the shy group were better than would be expected by
chance only at selecting the familiar object (t() = ·, p < ·; d = ·),
but not at selecting the novel object (t() = ·, p = ·).

In order to further examine how shyness aﬀects children’s referent
selection, a  (trial type: familiar or novel) ×  (shy group) mixed Analysis
of Variance (ANOVA) was performed. This analysis revealed a main eﬀect
of trial type (F(,) = ·, p < ·, ηp
 = ·), meaning that children
chose the target often more often on familiar trials (M = ·, SD = ·)
than novel trials (M = ·, SD = ·). There was no interaction between
trial type and shyness (F(,) = ·, p = ·). As expected, there was a
shyness group (F(,) = ·, p = ·,
signiﬁcant main eﬀect of
 = ·), meaning that children in the not-shy group chose the target
ηp
object more often (M = ·, SD = ·) than children in the shy group
(M = ·, SD = ·).

Shyness and retention trials. There was no relation between shyness and
retention (rs () = –·, p = ·) when trials testing retention of novel
mappings not formed during referent selection were excluded. However,
as shown in Figure , children in the not-shy group were signiﬁcantly
better at retaining the word–object mappings than would be expected by
chance (t() = ·, p = ·; d = ·). In contrast, children in the shy
group performed at chance during retention (t() = –·, p = ·). A 
(shy group) ×  (ostensive naming) Analysis of Variance (ANOVA)
revealed no main eﬀect of ostensive naming (F(,) = ·, p = ·), no
(F(,) = ·, p = ·), and no signiﬁcant
main eﬀect of
interaction (F(,) = ·, p = ·), demonstrating that ostensive naming
had no eﬀect on retention.

shyness

It was possible that shy children learned the novel word–object mappings
even though they did not select the novel object during referent selection.
Therefore, we also examined whether shyness aﬀected children’s retention
when averaged across all retention trials, regardless of whether the novel
object was selected as the referent of the novel word during referent
selection. No relation was found (rs () = –·, p = ·). Shy children did
not retain the word–object mappings above levels expected by chance



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600057X

S H Y N E S S A N D W O R D L E A R N I N G

Fig. . Shy and not-shy children’s proportion of target choices during referent selection
trials. The dotted line represents chance (·). Error bars represent  SE. * p < ·, ** p
< ·, *** p < · (Bonferonni corrections apply to between-groups comparisons).

Fig. . Proportion of word–object mappings retained by not-shy and shy children after a
-minute break, split by ostensive naming condition. The dotted line represents chance
(.). Error bars are  SE.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600057X

H I L T O N A N D W E S T E R M A N N

(M = ·, SD = ·) (t() = ·, p = ·), whereas not-shy children did
retain the mappings (M = ·, SD = ·) (t() = ·, p < ·; d = ·).

D I S C U S S I O N
The present study found that shy children were less likely than not-shy
children to correctly identify a requested familiar or a novel object from a
set of three. Speciﬁcally, shy children performed at chance in trials in
which a novel object was requested using a novel label, whereas not-shy
children performed above chance. Furthermore, after a -minute break,
shy children did not show evidence of retaining the mappings that they
had previously made, whereas not-shy children demonstrated retention
above levels expected by chance. This study found no evidence that
ostensive naming aﬀected children’s
retention of novel word–object
mappings. Importantly, our results emphasize that a child’s emerging
temperament can aﬀect basic processes involved in word learning. When
considered alongside the ﬁnding that shy children do not reliably retain
any mappings that they have made, this study suggests that intrinsic
factors, and not just diﬀerences in input, are important contributors to
variability in early language acquisition.

The results of our study suggest that the mapping of a novel label to a
novel object is not as robust and automatic for all children as has been
previously reported (Halberda, ; Horst & Samuelson, ), and it
shows that shy children as a group do not demonstrate use of fast mapping
to disambiguate the referents of words that they hear in a lab setting.
Furthermore, the mappings that were formed by shy children were not
then subsequently retained. The present study also indicated that selection
of a correct familiar referent is similarly aﬀected by shyness, as expected in
light of recent suggestions that familiar word recognition is supported by
the same processes as the mapping of a novel word to a novel object
(McMurray et al., ).

Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain shy children’s lower
vocabulary scores, and each hypothesis oﬀers a diﬀerent explanation for
the ﬁndings of the present study. The “I know it but won’t say it”
hypothesis (Coplan & Evans, ) suggests that shy children learn words
normally, but are reticent to demonstrate this ability. This hypothesis thus
assumes that shyness does not aﬀect receptive vocabulary, supported by a
recent paper which reported that expressive vocabulary size is more
aﬀected by shyness than receptive vocabulary size (Smith Watts et al.,
). However,
the present study employed a measure of receptive
language ability, which suggests that a reticence to respond is not an
adequate explanation of
the relation between shyness and language
development, instead supporting earlier work that has reported a relation



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600057X

S H Y N E S S A N D W O R D L E A R N I N G

between shyness and receptive language development (e.g. Spere et al.,
).

Furthermore, while the present study found that shy children were less
likely to respond correctly when asked to select a familiar object, and to
map novel labels onto novel objects, shy children did not simply refuse to
respond. In fact, across all participants only three trials (out of a possible
) were coded as non-responses. The “I know it but won’t say it”
hypothesis does not explain why shy children will oﬀer a supposedly
incorrect response; their behavior may be better described as “I may know
it, but won’t say it, but I will say something anyway.” Importantly, then,
this study demonstrates that simply eliciting a response from a shy child
may not provide a valid measure of their knowledge.

The present study found that shy children do not show evidence of
retaining the (few) word–object mappings that they successfully made
during referent selection. Pre-familiarization of stimuli prior to labeling
usually boosts levels of retention (Kucker & Samuelson, ), so it is
remarkable that even under these conditions shy children showed no
retention of any novel word–object mappings. This ﬁnding clearly
demonstrates that shyness does not only impact on in-the-moment online
processes, but also the longer-term processes that support retention
necessary in the acquisition of vocabulary. Beyond demonstrating that
receptive language is not immune to the eﬀects of shyness, these ﬁndings
suggest that previous research describing poor retention on the group level
(Horst & Samuelson, ) might be explained by not having included
shyness as a covariate. Again,
the failure of shy children to retain
mappings cannot be explained by reticence to respond; they oﬀered a
response on all retention trials, too.

Apart from the reticence to respond explanation, several alternative
explanations have been put forward to account for the diﬀerences between
shy and not-shy children on measures of language development. One,
known as the “lack of practice” hypothesis (Coplan & Evans, ), argues
that shy children tend to avoid social situations, and in doing so limit both
their exposure to others’ language and an opportunity to practice language
while receiving contingent feedback. Empirical support for this hypothesis
has been found, for example, in the discovery that shy children speak less
than their not-shy peers in experimental settings (Crozier & Perkins, )
and at home (Reynolds & Evans, ). Again, this explanation draws
heavily on language development as measured in terms of vocabulary size,
and in light of the present ﬁndings, assumes that children’s ability to form
and retain object–label mappings can be moderated by experience and
practice. To explain our results according to this hypothesis, one would
have to assume that children’s previous experience and interactions are
shaped by shyness to such an extent that either shy children miss out on



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600057X

H I L T O N A N D W E S T E R M A N N

the opportunity to develop the understanding that requests should be
responded to correctly, or that they restrict their language input to the
extent that they cannot acquire the mechanisms needed to map novel
labels onto novel objects. Therefore, while the lack of practice might well
explain a lower vocabulary size in young children due to lack of exposure,
it is unlikely that it aﬀects the mechanisms of word learning per se,
particularly given the shift towards an understanding of the domain-
general nature of the processes that support this ability (e.g. Samuelson &
Smith, ).

A third hypothesis is based on ﬁndings that older shy individuals are less
likely to take risks (Addison & Schmidt, ; Levin & Hart, ). While it
is still unclear whether such an aversion to risk has emerged in shy children
at this young age, we argue that it is possible that shy children are less likely
to rely on a guess when responding, which also explains the eﬀect of shyness
on expressive vocabulary (Coplan & Evans, ). The eﬀect may be
particularly pronounced in tests of word learning that involve novel words
with ambiguous referents, as in the present study where children were
required to map the novel word to the novel object using only novelty as a
cue. Novelty is inherently ambiguous and does not rule out competitors as
potential referents with certainty. Therefore, an aversion to risk could
disrupt children’s use of novelty as a cue to referent selection.

inhibited approach may also have

Alongside an aversion to risks, shy children also demonstrate inhibited
approach and discomfort in social situations involving novelty (Putnam
et al., ). Most experimental settings are fundamentally unfamiliar to a
young participant. Tests are typically carried out by a researcher who is
unknown to the child, often in an unfamiliar room (Heibeck & Markman,
; Horst & Samuelson, ; Horst et al., ; Horst, Scott &
Pollard, ; Spiegel & Halberda, ; Zosh, Brinster & Halberda,
). This
come to bear on
performance in the present study. When shy children were certain that
their response was correct, they were able to overcome the problems posed
by the unfamiliar setting to some extent, because as a group they reliably
selected a familiar object when requested. Yet shy children selected the
correct familiar object less often than not-shy children, suggesting that an
unfamiliar setting can impact on shy children’s demonstration of label
referents. Furthermore, when asked for a novel label, shy children were
just as likely to select a familiar object as the novel object. It is therefore
likely that shy children’s reluctance to rely on ambiguity in responding to
requests, alongside their aversion to novelty, produce a familiarity
preference on novel label trials.

These eﬀects must, however, be further teased apart in order to better
to tailor the testing environment so as to not
the testing

understand how best
disadvantage shy children. Reducing the unfamiliarity of



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600057X

S H Y N E S S A N D W O R D L E A R N I N G

procedure could reduce shy children’s preference for familiar objects, and
may allow children to feel more comfortable in taking a risk and making
use of novelty as a cue to the correct referent on novel
label trials.
However, shy children’s aversion to novelty may aﬀect their responses by
label–object
restricting their attention to and encoding of
mapping, supported by the ﬁnding that even on trials where they attended
to the novel object enough to select it during referent selection, these
mappings were not retained, unlike the mappings formed by the not-shy
children. It may be the case that the encoding of the word–object mapping
by shy children is diﬀerent to that of not-shy children, calling for more
implicit measures of children’s mapping of novel labels to novel objects in
order to explore the eﬀect of shyness on attention during the formation of
the mappings.

the novel

Interestingly, ostensive naming did not facilitate shy children’s retention
of the novel word–object mappings, but no eﬀect of ostensive naming was
found overall either. This ﬁnding may then suggest that pointing at and
labeling the object was not a robust enough cue to support retention.
Instead, it may be necessary to move the object away from competitors
during ostensive naming (e.g. by lifting the target oﬀ of the tray before
labeling; see also Axelsson, Perry, Scott & Horst, ), and future work
will take this suggestion into account.

This study has shed further light on previous explanations for the eﬀect of
shyness on measures of language development, and examined whether they
can account for the eﬀect of shyness on the processes used to form word–
object mappings. While researchers have been conﬁdent in claiming that
this eﬀect can be best explained in terms of shy children’s reticence to
respond (Smith Watts et al., ), the current study found that shy
children will respond to questions even when they are posed by an
unfamiliar adult. The ‘lack of practice’ argument also oﬀers an inadequate
explanation for these ﬁndings, given that it is based on the unlikely
assumption that lack of practice has impaired the very mechanisms by
which they map words to objects. The explanation that best ﬁts the
present data is that shy children’s aversion to risk-taking and novelty
serves to enhance their preference for familiar objects on novel label trials,
and their attention to and encoding of any possible word–object mappings
is disrupted.

Most importantly, this study is a clear demonstration that intrinsic factors
related to emerging temperamental domains can aﬀect the acquisition of
language by moderating the processes by which shy children disambiguate
and retain word–object mappings. Therefore, variability in early language
acquisition must be explored in terms of diﬀerences in the mechanisms by
which language is acquired, not only diﬀerences in input. The present
study has shown that, given the same input and cues to word learning, shy



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600057X

H I L T O N A N D W E S T E R M A N N

children respond diﬀerently from their not-shy peers. In further exploring
the eﬀect of emerging temperament on the processes involved in word
learning, the ﬁeld can be better informed in identifying children for whom
language acquisition is more diﬃcult, or just diﬀerent.

R E F E R E N C E S

Addison, T. L. & Schmidt, L. A. (). Are women who are shy reluctant to take risks?
Behavioral and psychophysiological correlates. Journal of Research in Personality , –.
Asendorpf, J. B. & Meier, G. H. (). Personality eﬀects on children’s speech in everyday
life: sociability-mediated exposure and shyness-mediated reactivity to social situations.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology (), –.

Axelsson, E. L., Churchley, K. & Horst, J. S. (). The right thing at the right time: why
ostensive naming facilitates word learning. Frontiers in Psychology . Online: <https://doi.
org/./fpsyg..>.

Axelsson, E. L., Perry, L. K., Scott, E. J. & Horst, J. S. (). Near or far: the eﬀect of
spatial distance and vocabulary knowledge on word learning. Acta Psychologica , –.
Behrend, D. A., Scoﬁeld, J. & Kleinknecht, E. E. (). Beyond fast mapping: young
children’s extensions of novel words and novel facts. Developmental Psychology (),
–.

Broberg, A., Lamb, M. E., Hwang, C. P. & Bookstein, F. L. (). Factors related to verbal
abilities in Swedish preschoolers. British Journal of Developmental Psychology (), –
.

Coplan, R. J. & Evans, M. A. (). Shyness and language [Special issue]. Infant and Child

Development (), –.

Coplan, R. J. & Weeks, M. (). Shy and soft-spoken: shyness, pragmatic language,
and socio-emotional adjustment in early childhood. Infant and Child Development (),
–.

Crozier, W. R. & Badawood, A. (). Shyness, vocabulary and children’s reticence in Saudi

Arabian preschools. Infant and Child Development , –.

Crozier, W. R. & Hostettler, K. (). The inﬂuence of shyness on children’s test

performance. British Journal of Educational Psychology (), –.

Crozier, W. R. & Perkins, P. (). Shyness as a factor when assessing children. Educational

Psychology in Practice , –.

Dale, P. & Fenson, L. (). Lexical development norms for young children. Behavior

Research Methods, Instruments & Computers (), –.

Desmarais, C., Sylvestre, A., Meyer, F., Bairati, I. & Rouleau, N. (). Systematic review
of the literature on characteristics of late‐talking toddlers. International Journal of Language
& Communication Disorders (), –.

Evans, G. W. (). The environment of childhood poverty. American Psychologist ,

–.

Evans, M. A. (). Reticent primary grade children and their more talkative peers: verbal,
nonverbal, and self-concept characteristics. Journal of Educational Psychology (),
–.

Gazelle, H. (). Behavioral proﬁles of anxious solitary children and heterogeneity in peer

relations. Developmental Psychology (), –.

Halberda, J. (). The development of a word-learning strategy. Cognition , B–.
Halberda, J. (). Is this a dax which I see before me? Use of the logical argument
disjunctive syllogism supports word-learning in children and adults. Cognitive Psychology
, –.

Hart, B. & Risley, T. R. (). Meaningful diﬀerences in the everyday experience of young

American children. Baltimore, MD: Paul H Brookes Publishing.

Heibeck, T. H. & Markman, E. M. (). Word learning in children: an examination of fast

mapping. Child Development , –.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600057X

S H Y N E S S A N D W O R D L E A R N I N G

Hirsh-Pasek, K., Adamson, L. B., Bakeman, R., Owen, M. T., Golinkoﬀ, R. M., Pace, A., . . .
Suma, K. (). The contribution of early communication quality to low-income
children’s language success. Psychological Science (), –.

Horst, J. S., and Samuelson, L. K. (), Fast mapping but poor retention by -month-old

infants. Infancy , –.

Horst, J. S., Samuelson, L. K., Kucker, S. C. & McMurray, B. (). What’s new? Children

prefer novelty in referent selection. Cognition (), –.

Horst, J. S., Scott, E. J. & Pollard, J. (). The role of competition in word learning via

referent selection. Developmental Science , –.

Huttenlocher, J., Haight, W., Bryk, A., Seltzer, M. & Lyons, T. (). Early vocabulary

growth: relation to language input and gender. Developmental Psychology (), –.

Kagan, J., Reznick, J. S. & Snidman, N. (). The physiology and psychology of behavioral

inhibition in children. Child Development (), –.

Kelly, D. J. (). A clinical synthesis of the ‘late talker’ literature: implications for service

delivery. Language, Speech & Hearing Services in Schools (), –.

Kucker, S. C., McMurray, B. & Samuelson, L. K. (), Slowing down fast mapping:

redeﬁning the dynamics of word learning. Child Development Perspectives , –.

Kucker, S. C., and Samuelson, L. K. (). The ﬁrst slow step: diﬀerential eﬀects of object

and word-form familiarization on retention of fast-mapped words. Infancy , –.

Landau, B., Smith, L. B. & Jones, S. S. (). The importance of shape in early lexical

learning. Cognitive Development (), –.

Levin, I. P. & Hart, S. S. (). Risk preferences in young children: early evidence of
individual diﬀerences in reaction to potential gains and losses. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making , –.

Mareschal, D., Johnson, M. H., Sirois, S., Spratling, M., Thomas, M. S. C. & Westermann,
G. (). Neuroconstructivism – I: how the brain constructs cognition. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Markman, E. M. & Hutchinson, J. E. (). Children’s sensitivity to constraints on word

meaning: taxonomic versus thematic relations. Cognitive Psychology (), –.

Markman, E. M. & Wachtel, G. W. (). Children’s use of mutual exclusivity to constrain

the meanings of words. Cognitive Psychology , –.

Markman, E. M., Wasow, J. L. & Hansen, M. B. (). Use of the mutual exclusivity

assumption by young word learners. Cognitive Psychology , –.

Markson, L. & Bloom, P. (). Evidence against a dedicated system for word learning in

children. Nature (), –.

McMurray, B., Horst, J. S. & Samuelson, L. K. (). Word learning emerges from the
interaction of online referent selection and slow associative learning. Psychological Review
(), –.

Mervis, C. B. & Bertrand, J. (). Acquisition of the Novel Name-Nameless Category

(NC) principle. Child Development , –.

Munro, N., Baker, E., McGregor, K., Docking, K. & Arciuli, J. (). Why word leaning is

not fast. Frontiers in Psychology , –.

Perry, L. K. () To have and to hold: looking vs. touching in the study of categorization.

Frontiers in Psychology. , . Online: <https://doi.org/./fpsyg..>.

Putnam, S. P., Gartstein, M. A. & Rothbart, M. K. (). Measurement of ﬁne-grained
aspects of toddler temperament: the Early Childhood Behavior Questionnaire. Infant
Behavior and Development (), –.

Quine, W. V. O. (). Word and object. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Reynolds, K. P. & Evans, M. A. (). Narrative performance and parental scaﬀolding of shy

and nonshy children. Applied Psycholinguistics , –.

Rudasill, K. M., Prokasky, A., Tu, X., Frohn, S., Sirota, K. & Molfese, V. J. (). Parent
vs teacher ratings of children’s shyness as predictors of language and attention skills.
Learning and Individual Diﬀerences , –.

Samuelson, L. K. & Horst, J. S. (). Dynamic noun generalization: moment-to-moment

interactions shape children’s naming biases. Infancy (), –.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600057X

H I L T O N A N D W E S T E R M A N N

Samuelson, L. K., Kucker, S. C. & Spencer, J. P. (). Moving word learning to a novel
space: a dynamic systems view of referent selection and retention. Cognitive Science.
Online: <https://doi.org/./cogs.>.

Samuelson, L. K. & Smith, L. B. (). Memory and attention make smart word learning:
an alternative account of Akhtar, Carpenter, and Tomasello. Child Development , –.
Slomkowski, C. L., Nelson, K., Dunn, J. & Plomin, R. (). Temperament and language:
relations from toddlerhood to middle childhood. Developmental Psychology (), –.
Smith Watts, A. K., Patel, D., Corley, R. P., Friedman, N. P., Hewitt, J. K., Robinson,
J. L. & Rhee, S. H. (). Testing alternative hypotheses regarding the association
in toddlerhood. Child
between behavioral
Development , –.

inhibition and language development

Spere, K. A., Schmidt, L. A., Theall-Honey, L. A. & Martin-Chang, S. (). Expressive
and receptive language skills of temperamentally shy preschoolers. Infant and Child
Development , –.

Spiegel, C. & Halberda, J. (). Rapid fast-mapping abilities in -year-olds. Journal of

Experimental Child Psychology , –.

Twomey, K. E., Ranson, S. L. & Horst, J. S. (). That’s more like it: multiple exemplars

facilitate word learning. Infant and Child Development , –.

Vlach, H. A. & Sandhofer, C. M. (). Fast mapping across time: memory processes
support children’s retention of learned words. Frontiers in Psychology , . Online:
<http://doi.org/./fpsyg..>.

Whitehurst, G. J. & Fischel, J. E. (). Practitioner Review: Early Developmental
Language Delay: What. If anything. Should the clinician do about it? Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry (), –.

Wilkinson, K. M., Ross, E. & Diamond, A. (). Fast mapping of multiple words: insight
into when ‘the information provided’ does and does not equal ‘the information perceived’.
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology , –.

Xu, F., Cote, M. & Baker, A. (). Labeling guides object individuation in -month-old

infants. Psychological Science , –.

Zosh, J. M., Brinster, M. & Halberda, J. (). Optimal contrast: competition between two

referents improves word learning. Applied Developmental Science , –.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:25:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600057X


