
I N T R O D U C T I O N
The acquisition and processing of nouns and verbs, two word categories that
diﬀer both syntactically (i.e., for their grammatical role) and conceptually
(denoting diﬀerent entities: objects and actions), has received much
attention recently. There is empirical evidence that verbs and nouns are
two cognitively distinct word categories,
involving diﬀerent kinds of
representations and processing demands. Studies of children’s early lexical
development have shown evidence of a gap in the acquisition of nouns and
verbs, with nouns being acquired earlier than verbs in some languages
(English, French, German, and Italian: Bassano, ; Bates et al., ;
Gentner, ; Gentner & Boroditsky, ; MacNamara, ; Nelson,
), and the opposite pattern being true in others (Mandarin Chinese
and Korean: Choi & Gopnick, ; Tardif, ), suggesting that
children’s processing of nouns and verbs entails diﬀerent cognitive
demands. The present study adds to this line of research by exploring the
lexical and conceptual/semantic variables contributing to object and action
naming skills in three- and ﬁve-year-old Italian children.

There is extensive evidence that the vocabulary of very young children
speaking English, German, and Italian includes mainly nouns, with verbs
present in a more restricted number (Bassano, ; Bates et al., ;
Caselli et al., ; Klassert, Gagarina, & Kauschke, ; Sheng &
McGregor, ). This phenomenon is labelled ‘noun bias’ (Bassano,
; Klassert et al., ). Gentner (, , ) was among the
ﬁrst to propose this idea, named the NATURAL PARTITIONS hypothesis, on
the basis of ﬁndings that most words in the early lexicon are nouns. The
dominant idea is that nouns learned by young children correspond to
“highly cohesive collections of percepts that are universally conceptualized
as objects” and consequently “lexicalized as nouns” in most languages.
The complementary RELATIONAL RELATIVITY hypothesis in Gentner’s
conceptualization states that in order to make the correspondence between
the linguistic verb and its meaning there is more variability in the way
relations are expressed within and across languages (Gentner &
Boroditsky, ). For example, the act of making a piece of clothing from
wool or cotton with long needles or a machine is lexicalized as a single
verb in English (to knit) and as a phrase in Italian (lavorare a maglia,
literally ‘to work at knitting’). In contrast, the objects used to knit are
lexicalized by a single noun in both languages: needles in English and ferri
in Italian.
More generally, the noun bias reﬂects the fact that nouns (i) are
conceptually simpler than verbs, and often refer to NATURAL categories; (ii)
are less dependent on context for interpretation; and (iii) mostly refer to
stable entities (‘chair’, ‘doll’) in the communicative context, as opposed to
verbs, which refer to events (‘pass’, ‘disappear’), or relations between objects
and agents (‘give’, ‘take’). For this reason, objects are believed to be easier to
identify and represent for a child than actions. A complementary and more
comprehensive view of the word learning process, the EMERGENTIST
COALITION model holds that an important factor in learning nouns and
verbs, besides the diﬃculty of mapping language to the world, is the
ability to use linguistic information, and to understand the social intent of
a speaker (Golinkoﬀ & Hirsh-Pasek, , ; Maguire, Hirsh-Pasek, &
Golinkoﬀ, ). Children predominantly use perceptual information ﬁrst
to learn words; subsequently, they can use social–linguistic cues which can
support the learning of more diﬃcult terms requiring a complex pattern of
relations between multiple entities, rather than a single, perceptually
salient object (Brandone, Pence, Golinkoﬀ, & Hirsh-Pasek, ). In this
theory, not all nouns are necessarily learned early and not all verbs are
learned late: factors like ﬁgure–ground relation, concreteness, imageability,
and the ease of being distinguished from other elements in the context
may be important predictors of learning nouns and verbs.

A diﬀerent perspective is taken by those who note that if conceptual/
semantic complexity and context dependency were the only determinants
of the noun–verb diﬀerence, the noun advantage in acquisition should be
found in both comprehension and production, while in fact it is more
marked in production (Bassano, ; Sandhofer, Smith, & Luo, ).
These authors argued that the noun advantage might be a consequence of
linguistic characteristics of nouns and verbs. There is some empirical
evidence in support of this hypothesis. Bassano (), for example, found
that in French-speaking children, the noun–verb gap in the early
development of language production was explained by grammatical aspects
of verbs and nouns. In two-year-old French-speaking children, verb
grammaticalization, or the ability to properly use the grammatical features
of verbs, assessed through use of inﬂections and auxiliaries, lagged behind
noun grammaticalization, assessed through use of the determiner.
As noted, children learning Korean and Mandarin Chinese typically show
a developmental pattern opposite to that observed for French, English, and
German, with verb naming developing earlier than noun naming (Choi &
Gopnick, ; Tardif, ), while in Cantonese children no advantage
for nouns over verbs was found (Masterson et al., ). All these data
would support the idea of an involvement of language-speciﬁc factors in
the noun–verb developmental gap. Among the language-speciﬁc
dimensions that are believed to aﬀect real-time word learning or
production are the grammatical and syntactic structures of the language.
For example, in so-called verb-friendly languages like Mandarin or
Korean, noun phrases can be dropped from the sentence. As a
consequence, nouns are less frequent un these languages than in
noun-friendly languages like English, where nouns are typically explicit
(Waxman, Fu, Arunachalam, Leddon, Geraghty, & Song, ). As
noted, variability across languages seems higher where verbs, not nouns,
are concerned. In a series of experiments with monolingual -month-old
children acquiring diﬀerent languages (i.e., English, Mandarin, and
Korean), Waxman and collaborators (Arunachalam, Leddon, Song, Lee, &
Waxman, ; Arunachalam & Waxman, ; Leddon, Arunachalam,
Waxman, Fu, Gong, & Wang, ) found that performance in verb
learning was more variable than performance in noun learning across
languages, and that it reﬂected the speciﬁc characteristics of the language
learned, in particular its syntactic structures. In languages like English,
richer linguistic (syntactic) contexts (full noun phrases) are necessary to
learn a verb in comparison to a noun (Arunachalam et al., ;
Arunachalam & Waxman, ). But in languages where noun phrases can
be dropped from sentences, like Korean, children typically need less
explicit and sparser linguistic contexts to learn a verb (Arunachalam et al.,
). At the lexical level, morphological complexity (the use of inﬂected
forms for a noun or verb to express a concept) is also important (Bates
et al., ). When diﬀerent inﬂected forms of a word exist, these may
provide important information to identify the subject argument, but they
example, D’Amico, can also compete during word retrieval. For
Devescovi, and Bates () found that ﬁve- to six-year-old Italian
children were aﬀected by gender inﬂection in object naming. Naming
agreement was greater when the target word was masculine (the default
gender in Italian) than feminine (less frequent word types). On the other
hand, in verb-friendly languages that have a reduced morphology, like
Mandarin, the lack of inﬂections may make it diﬃcult for the child to
distinguish nouns from verbs (Imai et al., ).
In the present study we investigated the contribution of lexical (word
frequency, length) and conceptual/semantic (imageability, familiarity)
factors to object and action naming in three- and ﬁve-year-old Italian
children. Italian linguistic structure is characterized by a complex
morphology: Italian verbs, in particular, have a much richer inﬂectional
morphology than English, with diﬀerent suﬃxes for tense, aspect, person,
number, gender, and mood, and nouns are inﬂected for person, number,
and gender. In Italian, a pro-drop language (Rizzi, ), noun phrases
(speciﬁcally, subject pronouns) can be dropped from the sentence when
the context allows disambiguation (Bates et al., ). Therefore, verbs
might potentially be more frequent.

Agreement marking of Italian verbs on person, gender, and number allows
for dropping the subject. As a consequence of subject-dropping, verbs are
more likely in the salient initial position. Thus, both because of the
pro-drop characteristics, and because of the verb position in sentences,
verbs should be more salient in Italian than English, and the prediction
could be made that verbs would appear before nouns in Italian children’s
development. In contrast to this prediction, studies describing the
spontaneous speech of young Italian children (Caselli et al., ; Tardif,
Shatz, & Naigles, ) showed a noun bias. This results in an apparent
contradiction; that is, Italian is more similar to Mandarin than English in
certain aspects of linguistic structure, but young children’s speech shows a
noun bias for Italian and English and a verb bias for Mandarin.
Tardif et al. () speciﬁcally explored the verb–noun diﬀerence in
Mandarin, English, and Italian adult speech directed to children and in
the children’s spontaneous speech. Tardif et al.’s study showed that nouns
were more frequent than verbs in Italian adult speech in terms of types,
and there was no diﬀerence between Italian and English for token
frequency, but verb tokens were more frequent than nouns in all three
languages. Moreover, considering the two more salient positions in the
sentence, beginning and end, verbs were more frequent at the beginning of
sentences in all three languages. In the ﬁnal position, however, nouns were
more frequent than verbs in English, while in Mandarin the probability of
a verb ending a sentence was higher than for a noun. In Italian the
diﬀerence was not signiﬁcant.
Although morphological marking appears to be more complex for verbs
than for nouns in both English and Italian, there was a signiﬁcantly
greater variation in the latter, suggesting a greater morphological
complexity for Italian verbs than nouns, as anticipated. In Mandarin the
trend was the opposite, with greater morphological variation for nouns
than for verbs. Finally, subjects were dropped in a high proportion of
Italian and Mandarin utterances, in contrast to English. In particular,
Italian allowed the omission of both nouns and pronouns, due to
important information coming from the inﬂectional morphology of verbs,
specifying person and number. Tardif et al.’s conclusion was that Italian
speech input patterns with English for some aspects of linguistic structure,
and with Mandarin for other aspects. However, Italian-speaking children
“hear an overall pattern of linguistic input that looks more like English
than like Mandarin” (Tardif et al., , p. ). This might explain why
two-year-old Italian children show a preponderance of nouns in their
vocabulary.
Given the complexity of the linguistic structure of Italian, however, this
kind of distribution might vary when children grow older and their ability
to interpret thematic and pragmatic roles in sentences, as speciﬁed by
verbs, increase. For example, subject dropping may require a larger extent
of inferential processing for the mapping between the omitted subject and
the referent, and for the identiﬁcation of (one of) the verb’s argument(s).
This capacity might require time to develop, and be fully eﬃcient only in
older children, not in two-year-olds (but see Arunachalam et al., ;
Arunachalam & Waxman, ).

Existing studies on the noun–verb diﬀerence across diﬀerent languages
investigated Italian infants in indirect studies, through parental report
(Bornstein et al., ; Caselli et al., ), while an empirical study is
missing. Thus, in the present study we investigated older children, three-
and ﬁve-year-olds, and veriﬁed whether the noun bias found in younger
children through parental report still remains in older children.

As noted, investigations through parental report ensure ecological validity,
but largely limit the comparability of ﬁndings across languages, as named
objects and actions vary across language samples, depending on the
speciﬁc characteristics of the context of the observations. To overcome
these limits, some researchers have more recently used picture naming
tasks (Bates et al., ; D’Amico et al., ; Kambanaros, Grohmann, &
Michaelides, ; Masterson et al., ). Picture naming allows for a
more controlled assessment (and comparison) of children’s naming skills, as
both the context (the task) and the stimuli to be named are the same for all
children.

Masterson et al. () tested three- and ﬁve-year-old English-speaking
children with a picture naming task, representing objects and actions,
and investigated the eﬀect of several lexical variables on both accuracy and
latencies in naming a picture. Pictures were line drawings of objects and
actions, matched for AoA (Age of Acquisition) and spoken frequency, not
for imageability, visual complexity, and length of name. AoA is considered
critical in naming tasks, since it has been demonstrated that words learned
earlier are retrieved faster (e.g., Brysbaert & Ghyselinck, ; Carroll &
White, ; Gerhand & Barry, ; Morrison & Ellis, ; Navarrete,
Scaltritti, Mulatti, & Peressotti, ; Zevin & Seidenberg, , )
and are less prone to retrieval failures (Navarrete, Pastore, Valentini, &
Peressotti, ). Imageability is related to the semantic aspects of the
concept to be named. If the gap between object and action naming is due
to semantic factors,
imageability should correlate closely with the
children’s performance in these tasks and explain a signiﬁcant part of the
object and action naming diﬀerence. Frequency and length, by contrast,
can be considered lexical variables, which aﬀect object and action naming
similarly. In their ﬁrst experiment, Masterson et al., only measured
accuracy, and they found higher accuracy for nouns than for verbs only for
three-year-old children, who were overall less accurate than ﬁve-year-olds.
The main predictors of accuracy for three-year-olds were imageability for
both actions and objects. Moreover, they found that word length and
visual complexity explained part of the variance in naming accuracy for
objects, and spoken frequency explained naming accuracy for actions. For
ﬁve-year-olds, signiﬁcant predictors were spoken frequency for actions,
imageability for objects, and word length for both objects and actions. AoA
was not included in the regression analysis, but nouns and verbs were
matched for it, while they were not for the other variables.

In a second experiment, Masterson et al. () also collected latencies for
ﬁve-year-old English-speaking children, as a more sensitive measure to
investigate the action–object diﬀerence, given that this diﬀerence did not
emerge in the error analysis. Indeed, they found a signiﬁcant advantage in
terms of naming latencies for objects compared to actions. The regression
analysis showed a pattern similar to that of Experiment . Imageability
was the strongest predictor for objects in both error and latencies analyses.
In the latter, visual complexity was also signiﬁcant. For actions, no
variable predicted latencies, while errors were predicted by frequency and
length. Overall, the study conﬁrmed that English-speaking children
acquired action names later than object names, and this trend was still
present in ﬁve-year-olds. Moreover, imageability and spoken frequency
were the more robust predictors, with the ﬁrst aﬀecting objects and the
latter only actions. In fact, the inﬂuence of spoken frequency was not
stable in the two experiments in Masterson et al., although it showed a
stronger eﬀect on actions.

Masterson et al. () also examined diﬀerent categories of errors
committed by children for the two types of stimuli. They classiﬁed each
error type according to three hyper-categories: semantic, visual, and other.
They did not ﬁnd any substantial diﬀerence between action and objects in
the three-year-olds, who tended to commit more omission errors, while
ﬁve-year-olds made more semantic errors for actions (‘weaving–knitting’)
than for objects, and more omission errors for objects than for actions.
Overall, the authors’ interpretation of the results was that the semantic
representation of objects and actions diﬀer. In particular, the greater
inﬂuence of imageability for objects than for verbs that they found in their
data would be due to the greater availability of objects in the sensory
experience of children, which in turn would lead to a more detailed
semantic representation for objects. In contrast, the verbs’ semantic and
thematic representation is quite heterogeneous, thus making it possible for
children to acquire verbs only through repeated exposures. This would
explain the signiﬁcant eﬀect of the predictor spoken frequency on verb
acquisition

This interpretation is in line with the idea that actions are conceptually
more complex, an idea shared by many researchers in the ﬁeld, as
mentioned above. As noted, this complexity may be due to diﬀerent
causes, but primarily to the fact that actions involve understanding scenes
and episodes, and are more likely to require inferential
reasoning.
Moreover, object recognition is based on the shape of the object and on a
static view (Biederman, ; Humphreys, Riddoch, & Quinlan, ),
while the interpretation of an action requires the involvement of visual
motion, even if it is represented statically (den Ouden, Fix, Parrish, &
Thompson, ).

From a developmental point of view it is important to point out that
concepts may be acquired before their corresponding names, and that their
acquisition is not necessarily all or none. Children may have acquired
partial representations of a concept, and may not be able to name it at
some point, consistent with the more marked noun advantage in
production (Bassano, ; Sandhofer et al., ). This idea is further
supported by evidence that children are extremely sensitive to cues from
social–pragmatic contexts (Arunachalam et al., ). The meaning of
words, either nouns or verbs, can be considered as given by speciﬁc
interconnections between the verbal
label and the underlying concept.
Thus, it is interesting to understand the extent to which the underlying
concept has been at least partially grasped when actions and objects are
not named correctly. We would expect that young children would not be
able to name correctly some words that are not presently in their lexical
repertoire, but may nonetheless have acquired at least a partial knowledge
of their meanings. In the light of the presumed greater semantic–
conceptual complexity of actions, we expected children’s acquisition of
action labels to lag behind that of objects.
In the present study we investigated the acquisition of actions and objects
in three- and ﬁve-year-old Italian children with a selection of pictures from
the Masterson et al.’s () corpus. Given that two-year-olds show a noun
bias, we might expect a bias in this direction to still be present in older
(three- and ﬁve-year-old) children, in particular if the noun advantage is
due to the semantic–conceptual representation. In contrast, as the
linguistic structure of the language should be completely acquired in
ﬁve-year-olds, if this is responsible for the noun bias in two-year-olds it
should have less inﬂuence on older children, and so we would expect no,
or a smaller, noun bias in the latter.
We also examined the eﬀect of some predictors investigated in several
studies that aﬀected naming performance in adults and children. In
particular, among these we included imageability, AoA, and visual
complexity of pictures, as they are highly correlated with picture naming
performance (D’Amico et al., ; Masterson et al., ; Szekely et al.,
). AoA was measured subjectively, but subjective and objective
measures correlate highly (e.g., Ferrand et al., ; Lotto, Surian, & Job,
; Morrison, Chappell, & Ellis, ). We included familiarity as a
measure of the frequency with which children experienced concepts for
actions and objects. We also included an estimate of spoken frequency,
drawn from texts written by children, as spoken frequency estimates for
children were not available for Italian. We included length in phonemes, as it
might be important for the production phase of naming.

Finally, we carried out a qualitative analysis of errors in order to see
whether a diﬀerent pattern emerged for objects and actions. In particular,
in order to see if the diﬃculty in acquiring verbs is dependent on the
complexity of their conceptual representations or on a diﬃculty in
acquiring and using the words in spoken language, we investigated if the
types of errors in object and action naming would reveal a problem at the
semantic or at the lexical level. For example, the incorrectly produced
word might be a coordinate, or superordinate, of the target. In this case,
one may plausibly conclude that the underlying semantic representation is
not correctly speciﬁed, lacking some critical attribute diﬀerentiating an
exemplar from another of the same category. On the other hand, if the
child does not come up with the target word, but with a deﬁnition of the
meaning of the word, as exempliﬁed, for example, by a circumlocution,
then it may be plausible to conclude that the semantic–conceptual
representation has been to some extent acquired, but not the corresponding verbal label.
In sum, although some aspects of the linguistic structure of Italian may
favour verbs, existing studies attested a noun bias in very young children
(e.g., Caselli et al., ; Tardif et al., ). Perhaps this bias may
change when linguistic ability is more mature: to this end, in the present
study we investigated action and object picture naming in three- and
ﬁve-year-olds. We also examined lexical and semantic variables and their
eﬀects on the noun–verb diﬀerence, measured by accuracy and latencies in
the picture naming task. Finally, we carried out a qualitative analysis of
errors in order to understand which factors in the conceptual structure of
nouns and verbs are responsible for their diﬀerence. The NATURAL
PARTITIONS and RELATIONAL RELATIVITY hypotheses predict that nouns
should be easier than verbs, but also that this diﬀerence should decrease
with age because of the increasing ability to interpret relational terms
(Gentner & Borodistsky, ). Moreover, it predicts that there should be
more variability in the verbal labels attached to actions than to objects
when the proper word has not yet been acquired. By contrast,
EMERGENTIST COALITION model states that verbs are not necessarily
acquired later than nouns due to their intrinsic nature, but rather that
whether nouns and verbs are learned depends on the diﬀerent cues that
may or may not be available for their interpretation, such as the
imageability and concreteness of the concept, and how easily the action
may be distinguishable in the event depiction (Golinkoﬀ & Hirsh-Pasek,
).

EXPERIMENT. <Middle>

M E T H O D.
Participants
Participants were  children,  of whom were aged between ; and ;,
and  were aged between ; and ;. Children were native Italian speakers
and were recruited from ﬁve preschools located in Veneto (north-west of
Italy). Children had normal vision and did not present developmental
disabilities or suspected language or learning delay.

Materials
In order to select the materials for the object and action naming tasks we
selected items from the “Object and Action Naming Battery” developed
by Druks and Masterson (). From the original  objects and 
actions, we selected those items for which the Italian translation consists of
one word (e.g., the item conductor was excluded because the Italian
translation has two words: direttore d’orchestra). We carried out pre-tests to
evaluate familiarity and AoA values for Italian words. Sixty-two adult
Italian native speakers, all university students at the University of Padova,
were recruited to provide measures of familiarity and AoA. They rated the
degree to which they had come into contact with, or thought about, each
object and action on a -point scale (, a very familiar item,  a very
unfamiliar item) and were asked to estimate the age at which they thought
they had learned each of the names of the object and action items in its
written or oral form on a -point scale (, learned at – years; , learned
at – years; , learned at – years; , learned at – years; , learned at
– years; , learned at – years; , learned at >  years). Another
pre-test was carried out on  new participants on name agreement, that
is, the proportion of participants giving the most common name to each
picture. They were presented with the  pictures of actions and the 
pictures of objects and were required to give a label to each picture,
producing, if possible, a single word. The values for word frequency were
extracted from two corpuses. One was the corpus LIP (Lessico di frequenza
dell’italiano parlato) (De Mauro, Mancini, Vedovelli, & Voghera, ),
based on a corpus of about , words. The second was based on the
Marconi, Ott, Pesenti, Ratti, and Tavella () corpus. This corpus is
based on , lemmas extracted from a corpus of one million word forms
from texts written and read by children, and provided the best estimate
available of the spoken frequency for children. The frequency values for
the selected action pictures correspond to the inﬁnitive form of the verb.

Based on the results of the pre-tests,  items (i.e., pictures) from the Druks
and Masterson () database were selected and used as experimental items,
with  object pictures and  action pictures (see ‘Appendix’). Properties of
the selected items are listed in Table  (see also Table ). Visual complexity and
Imageability values were taken from the Druks and Masterson database. Word
length in the verbs corresponds to the length of the inﬂected form, third person
singular (see below). T-tests revealed that Object and Action items did not
diﬀer in Name Agreement (t < , d = ·), Children (t < , d = –·), and
Spoken Frequency (t < , d = –·), and Length values (t < , d = ·)
(see Table ). There was a marginally signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the
Familiarity values (t() = ·, p = ·, d = ·). A signiﬁcant diﬀerence
in visual complexity (t() = ·, p < ·, d = ·), AoA (t() = ·,
p = ·, d = ·), and Imageability (t() = ·, p < ·, d = ·) was
reported in the t-tests. Action items were more visually complex,
later acquired, and less imageable than object items.

Procedure.
Children were tested individually in a quiet room at their school. Children
were seated at  cm from the computer screen on which stimuli were
displayed and were asked to name the pictures using a single word.
Presentation of the object and action pictures was blocked so that half of
the participants named ﬁrst the objects and the other half the actions.
Within each block, items were presented in random order. For actions,
children were required to name the action pictures using the third person
form of the singular form of the present (e.g., cant-a, sing-s).

In order to avoid fatigue, the  experimental stimuli were presented
in three separate sessions to three-year-old children ( action and 
object stimuli per session), and in two sessions to ﬁve-year-old children
( action and  object stimuli per session). All the sessions of each
single participant were collected on the same day. There was a short pause
after every  trials, and prior to the presentation of each block children
were informed which picture type they were going to be presented with.
The whole experimental session lasted about  minutes. All sessions were
audio-recorded. The experimenter also wrote down each inaccurate
response in a booklet for later examination. Four new items (two object
and two action pictures) were selected as training items and presented
twice before the experimental items to familiarize the children with the task.
An experimental trial consisted of the following events. A ﬁxation cross
was shown in the centre of the screen for , ms. The ﬁxation cross was
followed by a blank screen for  ms. Following the blank screen the
target picture was presented until the participant’s response, or until the
voice-key was triggered. The experimenter coded the response as correct,
wrong, or invalid trial, pressing a button on the response box. Response
latencies were measured from the onset of the picture. The next trial
began , ms after the onset of response coding by the experimenter.

The software of the experiment was E-Prime (Psychology Software Tools,
Inc., Sharpsburg, PA).

Analysis.
Responses from  participants (four from the three-year-old group) were
discarded because of high error rate (> %). In addition, a total of 
trials were discarded from the analysis due to invalid trials. The analysis
was based on a total of , trials. Two diﬀerent types of analysis were
performed. The ﬁrst analysis was based on reaction times (RTs) and
accuracy rates. Four types of responses were excluded from the RTs analysis:
(i) production of clearly erroneous response names; (ii) verbal dysﬂuencies
(stuttering, utterance repairs); (iii) extremely fast (<  ms) or long (>  s)
responses; and (iv) responses above · standard deviation from a given
participant mean in each condition (i.e., object and action pictures).
Following these criteria, RT analyses were based on , trials (·%).
Accuracy analyses were based on correct responses, that is, excluding types
(i) and (ii). Overall, children successfully named , (·%) of the trials.

R E S U L T S A N D D I S C U S S I O N
RTs and accuracy.
Separate analyses were carried out treating participants and items as random
factors, yielding F and F statistics, respectively. One within-participant
factor, Picture Type (two levels: Object and Action), and one
between-participant factor, Age (two levels: three-year-olds and
five-year-olds), and their interaction were modelled. Seven items ( object
and  action pictures) elicited incorrect responses in all participants of the
three-year-old group. In the analysis of naming latencies both the main
eﬀects of Picture Type (F(,) = ·, p < ·, η
p = ·; F(,) =
·, p < ·, η
p = ·; F
(,) = ·, p < ·, η
interaction
between these factors was not signiﬁcant (F < ; F(,) = ·, p = ·,
p = ·). Five-year-old children were faster than three-year-old children,
η
and naming latencies were shorter for object pictures than for action
pictures in both groups (see Table ).

p = ·) were

signiﬁcant. The

p = ·; F(,) = ·, p < ·, η

In the analysis of accuracy, the main eﬀects of Picture Type (F(,) =
·, p < ·, η
p = ·) and Age
(F(,) = ·, p < ·, η
p = ·)
were signiﬁcant. The interaction between these factors was also signiﬁcant
(F(,) = ·, p < ·, η
p = ·)
(see Table , showing that the advantage of objects over actions was
greater for three-year-old children).

p = ·; F(,) = ·, p < ·, η

p = ·; F(,) = ·, p < ·, η

Since Object and Action items diﬀered by AoA values, we performed the
same analysis including AoA values as a covariate variable. Results on Object
and Action parallel those just reported. In the analysis of naming latencies,
(F(,) = ·,
the main eﬀect of Picture Type was
p < ·, η
p = ·) and there was no interaction with the factor Age
(F(,) = ·, p = ·, η
p = ·). In the analysis of accuracy, the main
eﬀects of Picture Type (F(,) = ·, p < ·, η
p = ·) and the
interaction with the factor Age (F(,) = ·, p < ·, η
p = ·) were
signiﬁcant. By contrast, and reﬂecting the correlation between the variables
AoA and Age, the latter factor was marginally signiﬁcant in the analysis of
naming latencies (F(,) = ·, p = ·, η
p = ·) and not signiﬁcant in
the analysis of accuracy (F < ).

signiﬁcant

Regression analysis
First we examined the relationships among the variables using simple
correlations (calculated over items) separately for RTs and Accuracy and
for each age group. The correlations are presented in Table .

Multiple simultaneous regression analyses were carried out on RTs and
Accuracy data separately for each group (see Tables  and ). We included
as predictors all
for spoken
frequency, because its correlation with the dependent variables was lower
than for Child frequency. AoA was also excluded, because for children in
this age range the eﬀect would be trivial. Indeed, in some cases AoA
estimates exceeded the age of our younger participants. For example, in
our sample % of nouns and % of verbs had an AoA value above three
years old (for similar analysis, see Masterson et al., ). In these cases,
performance is necessarily lower, as children presumably have not yet
acquired the target word.

We assumed that imageability would be important to explain object–
action diﬀerences because concepts for objects tend to have higher
imageability (and, indeed, pictures were not matched for this variable).
Familiarity and frequency are diﬀerent measures of exposure. The former
reﬂects mainly the familiarity with the concept expressed by the word, while
the latter is an estimate of the vocabulary acquired by the children, as
frequency values were derived from texts produced or read by children.
Length in phonemes might reﬂect production processes, like planning of
articulation, perhaps more
latencies. Finally, visual
complexity reﬂects the diﬃculty in interpreting the picture, which should
be higher for pictures depicting a scene rather than a single object.

important

for

The analysis for the three-year-old children revealed that for RTs
imageability and visual complexity were signiﬁcant predictors for objects,
and no variable was signiﬁcant for actions, these data probably reﬂecting
high variability in the response latencies (see Tables  (RTs) and 
(Accuracy)). The model with the ﬁve variables accounted for % of the
variance for objects and was close to  for actions in the RTs analysis.

For accuracy, imageability and visual complexity were the signiﬁcant
predictors for objects, while for actions, besides imageability, the two
measures of exposure to the words (familiarity and frequency) and word
length were also signiﬁcant (with, respectively, % and % of variance
accounted for).
For older children, variability in latencies was predicted by imageability
and visual complexity for objects (R = ·) while no predictor was
signiﬁcant for actions. Accuracy was also predicted by imageability and
visual complexity for objects (R = ·), while for actions the strongest
predictors were familiarity and word length, but
imageability also
remained in the model (R = ·).

Overall, the regression analyses showed that imageability was the most
critical predictor, signiﬁcant in all analyses, for both younger and older
children. The more imageable an item, the more likely it was to be
produced correctly and easily. The measures of exposure were also
important. In particular, familiarity, although a subjective measure derived
by adults, was also quite noteworthy. This can be explained by the fact
that children learn the language primarily through exposure to adults’
spoken language. It is remarkable that the considered predictors explained
little, if any, variance in latencies for actions for both groups of children.
Visual complexity was a signiﬁcant predictor for objects but not for
actions. Being actions generally represented with more complex scenes, the
lack of a visual complexity eﬀect seems to suggest that performance on
actions was most likely inﬂuenced by how easily the scene was interpreted,
rather than by complexity in purely perceptual terms. Finally, word length
was a signiﬁcant predictor of accuracy only for actions, not for objects.

Q U A L I T A T I V E A N A L Y S I S O F E R R O R S
We carried out a qualitative analysis of error types based on , errors.
The errors were classiﬁed by two independent judges according to the
categories shown and deﬁned in the ‘Appendix’. The error classiﬁcation
was mostly drawn from Masterson et al.’s () own classiﬁcation,
because it was more analytic and systematic, and provided a better
description of the underlying representation of unlabelled items, compared
to other more generic classiﬁcations (e.g., Szekely et al., ). Inter-rater
agreement computed on % of the items (, errors) was %. Cases of
disagreement were discussed and solved. All errors were re-coded,
reaching % agreement. The distribution of each type of error is shown
in Figure , for three- (left) and ﬁve-year-olds (right), respectively. The
relative percentage of errors was % in three-year-old children, and %
in older children.

concept of

‘leg’ would be

About % of the errors (% for three- and % for ﬁve-year-olds)
reﬂected a lack of understanding of the picture or lack of knowledge of the
underlying concept. These ﬁgures were given by the sum of the error
categories: misinterpretation, no relation, omissions, and frank visual error
(see ‘Error classiﬁcation’ at the end of the ‘Appendix’ for deﬁnitions). In
fact, under the category ‘misinterpretation’ there were instances in which
there was some understanding of the picture. For example, many children
produced piede ‘foot’ instead of the intended target gamba ‘leg’, although
most presumably the
fairly familiar.
Misinterpretations were more frequent for actions (%) than for objects
(%; see Figure ). This may reﬂect several aspects of the task, like, for
example, that it is more diﬃcult to interpret an action because a scene is
more complex than a single object, or because it requires inferences about
the role of the actors, and the construction of a plot (Boureux, Arfé,
Pasini, Carretti, Oakhill, & Sullivan, ; Sullivan, Oakhill, Arfé, &
Boureux, ). Of the remaining errors, ·% were mixed errors, and %
reﬂected at
the concept. The latter
percentage was higher for ﬁve- (%) than for three-year-olds (%),
reﬂecting an increase in the ability to carry out the task, due to the
development
semantic
representations. Overall, the most frequent error categories in children of
both ages were circumlocutions, change of category, and
misinterpretations. These categories also showed the most marked
difference between objects and actions, in particular the first two (see
Figure ). Thus, children substituted the correct target verb more often than
target objects with a phrase, often a verbal phrase, expressing the word’s
meaning. An example is given by innaﬃa ‘to water’, for which ‘gives water
to the plants’ was produced, or ‘runs with the horse’ for cavalca ‘rides’.
These examples show that the core meaning or underlying concept was
acquired, but
the lexical word was not available. There were 
circumlocutions for objects,  of which were for the same noun, cameriere
‘waiter’. Removing that
item resulted in just  circumlocutions for
objects,  of which preserved the core meaning of the word (e.g., for
chiave ‘key’: serve per chiudere la porta ‘is used to close the door’). There
were  circumlocutions for actions, more widely distributed among
verbs. A high percentage of these circumlocutions preserved the meaning
of the action: % for three-year-old and % for ﬁve-year-old children
(see Figure ).

Change of category elicited a heterogeneous number of responses. For
some verbs, like nuota ‘swims’, galleggia ‘ﬂoats’, and sgocciola ‘spills’, the
response was an associate (acqua ‘water’) but also part of the core meaning
(‘usually people swim in the water’). In other cases the change of category
involved an object that was part of the depicted episode and/or a salient
item: auto ‘car’ for guida ‘drives’ and for ferma ‘stops’, and in still other
cases they were nominalizations or verbalizations: neve ‘snow’ for nevica ‘is
snowing’. There were  cases of category change,  made by
three-year-olds ( from objects and  from actions) and  by
ﬁve-year-olds ( and  for objects and actions, respectively). Change of
category errors for objects were mostly a predicate instead of a noun. In
general, they were predicates describing relevant actions, for example
taglia ‘cuts’ for forbici scissors’, and fa la musica ‘makes music’ or suona
‘plays’ for radio. There was just one example of a non-relevant action, the
expression fa una passeggiata ‘goes for a walk’ produced for cammello ‘camel’.
Changes of category in response to actions were more heterogeneous.
Children tended to produce a noun, and this could be one of
the
arguments of the verb, describing the action or the episode in the ﬁgure.
Examples include the following: cane ‘dog’ for abbaia ‘barks’, bottiglia
for ferma ‘stops’, as
‘bottle’
subjects, and gatto ‘cat’ produced for accarezza ‘strokes’, auto ‘car’ for
ferma ‘stops’ as other types of arguments (mostly an object phrase). The
main argument, or subject, was the most frequent response at both ages,
% and % for three- and ﬁve-year-olds, respectively, followed by %
and %,
frequent
sub-type in change of category responses was nominalization. An error was
classiﬁed as such when it consisted of a noun morphologically derived
for sanguina
from the action verb. Examples include:
‘bleeds’, pioggia ‘rain’ for piove ‘raining’, neve ‘snow’ for nevica ‘snowing’.

for non-subject arguments. Another

sangue ‘blood’

for galleggia ‘ﬂoats’, vigile

‘policeman’

respectively,

Fig. . The ﬁgure shows the number of responses that could be interpreted as reﬂecting, or

not, the core meaning of each target, within the errors classiﬁed as circumlocutions.

like toctoc

This category included % and % instances respectively for three- and
ﬁve-year-olds. Within category change there were also misinterpretations,
like pupazzo ‘puppet’ or pupazzo di neve ‘snowman’ for nevica ‘snowing’,
for bussa ‘knocks’. However,
and onomatopoeic sounds,
onomatopoeic expressions were considered circumlocutions when they
included a verb, like fa ecciù ‘makes ecciù’ for starnutisce ‘sneezing’, or fa
baubau ‘does baubau’ for abbaia ‘barks’ (see Table  for a summary). As is
apparent, this type of error is also much more frequent for actions, and
this type of response suggests that in order to name the action verb
children tended to construct a sentence phrase, activating not only the
predicate action, but also the relevant arguments. When the action verb
was not available, the activated arguments were produced instead.

As noted, overall there were more errors for actions than for objects. The
only exceptions were the two categories associate and coordinate. Associates
included, for example, the response musica ‘music’ for radio ‘radio’, bottiglia
‘bottle’ for tappo ‘cork’, caﬀè ‘coﬀee’ for cameriere ‘waiter’. Examples of
coordinates are: mela ‘apple’ for ciliegia ‘cherry’, colore ‘coloured pencil’
for matita ‘pencil’. The larger proportion of coordinate and associate
responses for objects probably reﬂects the semantic organization of nouns
compared to verbs. The former are often hierarchically organized in
well-deﬁned structures,
in contrast to the latter. Superordinate errors
included examples like animale ‘animal’ for cammello ‘camel’, uomo ‘man’
for cameriere ‘waiter’, corre ‘runs’ for pattina ‘skates’, cucina ‘cooks’ for
mescola ‘stirring’, and occurred in both object and action naming because
they were often more generic terms compared to target, not necessarily
reﬂecting a hierarchy.

To summarize, the qualitative analysis of errors showed that about % of
all errors made by children were due to a lack of knowledge of the meaning of
the words, or of the underlying concept (including the categories no relation,
omission, and visual error). Interestingly, the percentage of such errors,
compared to the combined errors of both groups of children separately for
actions and objects was % for action words and % for objects. Thus,
errors
showing that no meaning was available were more frequent
for objects than actions. Moreover, a similar proportion was observed for
children at each age (% for younger and % for older children, for
objects; % and %, respectively,
for actions). This suggests that
although action words could be conceptually more complex, at least a
partial grasp of their meaning was often acquired.
The remaining error categories revealed an at least partial understanding
of the pictures and of the underlying concept, if not of the correct target
word. This understanding was reﬂected in the attempt to interpret the
picture with a phrase or an expression that deﬁned the concept or
described the picture. In younger children these expressions included
onomatopoeic words that are often used by adults in talking to babies.

Overall, the qualitative analysis of errors is congruent with the results of the
quantitative analyses. In particular, the regression analyses showed that for
objects the most powerful predictor was imageability, suggesting that
objects’ semantic representation relies on visual–semantic properties of
objects, and their shared features with other objects, explaining the large
number of coordinate and superordinate errors. For actions, in contrast,
familiarity and frequency correlated more strongly with accuracy. This is
congruent with the ﬁnding that most errors for verbs were circumlocutions,
or attempts to give a deﬁnition of the concept, misinterpretations, and
category change, showing diﬃculties in lexical retrieval, or limited lexical
knowledge, which of course is strongly sensitive to frequency of exposure.
If a verb is encountered very frequently,
is retrieved
relatively easily, despite the potentially greater conceptual complexity.
However, imageability also explained some variance for actions, which is
quite plausible, given that some verbs refer to relatively simple and concrete
actions (lecca ‘licks’; soﬃa ‘blows’). Overall, the pattern of latencies and
errors showed a coherent picture, with the disadvantage of verbs in latencies
and number of errors explained by the type of error committed.

its verbal

label

<Conclusion>
G E N E R A L D I S C U S S I O N
To summarize the present data, both latencies and errors data showed an
advantage in naming objects aloud compared to actions, and for accuracy
this eﬀect was more marked in three- than in ﬁve-year-old children. This
noun advantage replicated that obtained in picture naming in English
(Masterson et al., ) and conﬁrms the widely held idea that actions are
more diﬃcult to name than objects (Szekely et al., ). The most
important variables aﬀecting naming latencies for actions and for objects
were also diﬀerent. In particular, when latencies were considered,
imageability and visual complexity were signiﬁcant predictors for objects
in both groups, while no variable predicted latencies for actions. The same
variables predicted accuracy for objects, while for actions frequency (for
three-year-olds), familiarity, imageability, and word length (for both age
groups) were signiﬁcant.

Through a qualitative analysis of errors we have shown that about half of
the errors were due to a not yet fully developed semantic representation of
words
conceptual

incomplete

pictures,

labelling

the

or

to

an

representation, and this pattern was more marked for action concepts.
Remarkably, despite the developmental diﬀerence noted in the quantitative
analysis, and in the number of errors made by the two age groups in
particular, the diﬀerent error types showed a very similar proportion, both
overall and separately, for objects and actions (see Figure ). This suggests
that ways of dealing with lack of knowledge or of understanding is
handled in a similar fashion by children despite the age diﬀerence,
reﬂecting a general tendency in how to organize semantic and conceptual
representations for actions and objects.

reveals a gradual

As mentioned in the ‘Introduction’, the object–action (or noun–verb)
diﬀerence has been abundantly discussed in former studies on infants,
children, and adults. What the present study adds to the discussion in the
literature is evidence that knowledge of the words labelling concepts is not
an all-or-none phenomenon, but
increase in the
conceptual knowledge underlying words and in the size of the lexicon.
The high number of circumlocutions indicates that children tended to
express concepts for which the name was not available through a phrase or
a sentence. This was especially evident for actions, and the reason may be
that actions express thematic relations among entities, and verbs are
predicates expressing relations among arguments. Therefore, when the
corresponding verbal labels have not been acquired, or are not available,
circumlocutions are used preferentially. The same reason may underlie the
relatively high proportion of category change produced as a response to
actions, as opposed to objects. Many responses to actions were names of
an object represented in the picture that was either a subject (cane ‘dog’
for abbaia ‘barks’) or an argument (gatto ‘cat’ for accarezza ‘strokes’). This
could be due either to a partial or complete failure to understand what the
action was or to the fact that the name for the action was not available.
But it could also reﬂect a tendency to focus the conceptual representation
on the described entity (i.e., the object). That is, the object, as an
argument of
the
conceptual representation of actions. Often the description of a relation
(e.g., ‘is stroking’) requires inferential processing, who is doing what to
whom, which would be easier when starting from an entity or object as
actor or experiencer. Support for this idea comes from the fact that two
error types, omissions and visual errors, were proportionally higher in
objects than in actions (see above). If responding with an object to an
action, which was much more frequent than the opposite, were due to
miscomprehension of the task or of the concept, we might also expect
omissions and visual errors to be higher in actions, which was not the case.
The increase and enrichment of the conceptual representations interact
with experiences
in speech
comprehension and their relative frequency. When words are not very

the thematic grid, could represent

the nucleus of

verbal

labels

of

the

corresponding

common they may not be available for production, but the concepts may
already be present in children’s memory, and are then expressed in various
ways. This is clearly shown by the productions that did not correspond
exactly to the target.

This pattern of data is consistent with the predictions of the NATURAL
PARTITIONS hypothesis summarized in the ‘Introduction’, in that it shows a
noun bias even in a language where verbs are salient and frequent as types
(because of the argument dropping), and that this bias tends to diminish
with age. Moreover, as predicted by the RELATIONAL RELATIVITY hypothesis,
we found more variability in the labels attached to verbs, often constituted
by whole phrases. Changes of category and circumlocutions were more
frequent in action than in object naming, conﬁrming the greater delay in the
lexical acquisition of action words (verbs) versus object words (nouns). The
prevalence of change of category errors in action naming further conﬁrms
the children’s bias toward noun production. Indeed, most change of category
errors consisted in the production of nouns instead of verbs in action
naming. However, although most nouns are overall CONCEPTUALLY simpler
than verbs, as we noted earlier, errors like circumlocutions and change of
categories often revealed a certain comprehension of the (subject–action–
object) relation underlying the action to be named.

The data are more ambiguous in relation to the EMERGENTIST COALITION
model, which predicted that nouns and verbs do not intrinsically diﬀer, but
that their acquisition depends on the degree of imageability and sensory
information present in their semantic representation and cued by the
picture. Imageability was indeed an important predictor for both actions
and objects, although more so for the latter. The cues available in normal
life,
including social ones, are much more abundant, thus the picture
naming task used in the present study was not the most eﬃcient way to
test the EMERGENTIST COALITION model.

As noted in the ‘Introduction’, our study was a replication of that
conducted by Masterson et al.
() on three- and ﬁve-year-old
English-speaking children. It is therefore important to compare the results
of the two studies. The quantitative analysis of accuracy and latencies
yielded similar results in the two studies, with an advantage for object
compared to action naming in both three- and ﬁve-year-olds (although in
ﬁve-year-olds Masterson et al., only found a signiﬁcant disadvantage for
actions in latencies). This ﬁnding conﬁrms the view that the noun bias
referred to by some authors (Bassano, ; Klassert et al., ;
Masterson et al., ) is also present in a language, Italian, which is
morphologically and syntactically diﬀerent from English.

The qualitative analysis of errors also showed similarities and diﬀerences.
In particular, Masterson et al.’s error data showed a relatively high
percentage of coordinate words as responses in both groups of children,

errors

such as

semantic

associates,

coordinates,

but only a small diﬀerence between objects and actions. In our study, the
percentage of
and
superordinates was not very high, was similar for three- and ﬁve-year-olds,
and was higher for objects. Misinterpretations didn’t show diﬀerences
either between child age groups or between picture types in Masterson
et al., while we had a lower proportion for objects. Omissions were
relatively fewer and did not show group or picture type diﬀerences in our
study, while in Masterson et al., there was a high number of omissions in
three-year-olds in both picture types and a higher number for objects than
actions
relatively few in
Masterson et al., and did not show the strong eﬀect on action naming that
our study did. Finally, circumlocutions showed a high rate for actions in
our study, and not in Masterson et al.’s. Overall, English children, in
particular young ones, preferred to omit the word when the target was not
available, while Italian children, even young ones, preferred to express the
meaning of the picture through other types of expressions, like phrases,
particularly for actions.

in ﬁve-year-olds. Category changes were

the much

It is interesting to note that these diﬀerences may reﬂect language-speciﬁc
variations between English and Italian. In the Masterson et al. () study,
 objects and  actions were used. Out of this set we were only able to
select  objects and  actions, partly because some could not be labelled
with a single word. Many concepts could only be expressed in Italian
through phrases or multiword expressions. This may reﬂect diﬀerent
characteristics in the way English and Italian label concepts, and may
explain the much higher proportion of category change and
circumlocution responses for actions in Italian compared to English. In
the ‘Introduction’ we discussed several structural and morphological
diﬀerences between English and Italian that might potentially cause
diﬀerences between nouns and verbs (e.g., the fact that Italian is a
pro-drop language, and that it is morphologically more complex). Despite
these diﬀerences, the data conﬁrm a noun bias that tends to decrease with
age in naming agreement but to remain in latencies. In conclusion, further
studies are necessary to better explore the factors responsible for lexical
and conceptual acquisition of actions and objects.
