J. Child Lang.  (), –. © Cambridge University Press 
doi:./SX

Bilingual children’s lexical strategies in a

narrative task*

POLIANA BARBOSA, ELENA NICOLADIS A N D

MARGAUX KEITH

University of Alberta, Canada

(Received  April  – Revised  October  – Accepted  April  –

First published online  May )

A B S T R A C T

We investigated how bilinguals choose words in a narrative task,
contrasting the possibilities of a developmental delay vs. compensatory
strategies. To characterize a developmental delay, we compared
younger (three to ﬁve years) and older (seven to ten years) children’s
lexicalization of target words (Study ). The younger children told
shorter stories, omitting many of the target concepts. To characterize
compensatory strategies, we compared late second language learning
adults to (seven- to ten-year-old) monolingual children (Study ). The
adults often lexicalized the target concepts even when not producing
the target words. Finally, we compared French–English bilingual
children with French and English monolinguals, all seven to ten years
old (Study ). The bilinguals produced fewer target words than the
monolinguals. However, when not producing the target words, the
bilinguals often lexicalized the concepts, sharing more in common with
the adults (Study ) in their use of compensatory strategies than with
the younger children (Study ). This interpretation was further
corroborated by comparisons across studies (Study ).

I N T R O D U C T I O N
In language development, bilinguals often lag behind monolinguals of the
same age. Bilingual children are not delayed in all aspects of language
development relative to monolingual children, but primarily those aspects
linked to frequency of exposure in a particular
such as

language,

[*] This research was supported by a grant from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council (SSHRC) to Elena Nicoladis. We thank Cindy Xing for her collaboration.
Address for correspondence: Poliana Barbosa, Department of Psychology, University of
Alberta, P- Biological Sciences Building, Edmonton AB, TG E, CANADA. tel:
+ () -; fax: + () -; e-mail: poliana@ualberta.ca



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X

B A R B O S A E T A L.

vocabulary (see review in Nicoladis, ). Bilingual children often score
below the monolingual norm or below same-age monolinguals on
vocabulary tests in at least one of their languages (Bialystok, Craik & Luk,
; Bialystok, Luk, Peets & Yang, ; Bialystok, Majumder & Martin,
; Junker & Stockman, ; Nicoladis, ; Oller, Pearson & Cobo-
Lewis, ; Uchikoshi, ; Umbel & Oller, ; Umbel, Pearson,
Fernández & Oller, ; Verhallen & Schoonen, ). Bilingual children
and adults also show greater diﬃculty in lexical access (i.e. they take
longer or make mistakes when accessing speciﬁc words in the lexicon for
production) than monolinguals (Gollan & Acenas, ; Gollan, Montoya,
Cera & Sandoval, ; Yan & Nicoladis, ). Importantly,
limited
vocabulary may lead to limitations on bilinguals’ communicative and
conceptual skills (Keith & Nicoladis, ; Zareva, ). The primary
the present study was to investigate bilingual children’s
purpose of
strategies in choosing words in the context of a narrative task to document
the strength of any relationship between linguistic (vocabulary) deﬁcits, if
they are found, and communicative and conceptual skills.

rely heavily on imagery (Mallan, )

As we will detail below, many previous studies on lexical access have relied
on experimental tasks, such as picture-naming or picture-based choice tests.
However, there is a discussion in the literature that these standard measures
should be interpreted carefully because they are extremely impacted by
diﬀerent cultures and linguistic input (de Villiers, ). Unlike these
experimental tasks, in narrative tasks there is no necessary correct word.
Narratives
and are more
cognitively complex than these common experimental tasks, given that
narratives are intrinsically dependent on the story-teller’s causal thinking
structure (Trabasso & Broek, ). The choice of a term often reﬂects the
story-teller’s conception of the story (Downing, ). Downing showed
that monolingual adults commonly used a basic kind term for most nouns
when telling a story. However, these adults deviated from basic terms
when they were trying to convey an attitude or perspective on the story.
In narratives, it is more important to construct a story grammar, i.e. the
story-teller needs to represent the narrative events and describe the story
units in a sequential order (Herman, ; Mandler, ), than to
remember a particular word. Therefore, the selection of what is important
to remember and to retell relies on the relationships between narrative
events and their representation of the story (Trabasso & Broek, ).

Although several authors have investigated the development of narratives
in children (e.g. Pearson, ; see also Verhoeven & Lundquist, ), none
of them investigated lexical choice in terms of lexicon organization and
strategies used to refer to target concepts. As far as we know, Downing
() was the only one who investigated lexical choice in narratives in
such terms, and then only in a group of monolingual adults. This dearth



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X

B I L I N G U A L L E X I C A L C H O I C E

in the literature does not permit us to make clear predictions about how
bilingual children, with greater lexical access diﬃculties, would choose
words diﬀerently from monolingual children in the context of a narrative
task. Therefore, before we address the principal question guiding this
research, we ﬁrst propose two background studies
to
characterize how younger children (Study ) and adult
late second
language (L) learners (Study ) access words in a narrative context. If
bilingual children’s lexical choices resemble those of younger children,
then they could be characterized as demonstrating developmental delay. If
their choices resemble those of the adult late L learners, then they could
be characterized as demonstrating compensatory strategies, but not general
communicative delay.

to allow us

Conceptual delay in lexical access
Some authors have proposed that lexical organization and retrieval reﬂect
lexical development, and may be a fairer semantic assessment
than
acquired vocabulary (de Villers, ; Seymour, Roeper & de Villiers,
). Previous
studies have characterized lexical access diﬀerences
between bilinguals and same-aged monolinguals as developmental delays
(e.g. Keith & Nicoladis, ). If so, bilingual children with lexical access
delay might resemble younger children in their way of choosing words to
convey a story. Study  compares three- to ﬁve-year-old and seven- to
ten-year-old monolingual children. We thought that younger children
might be more likely than older children to omit target concepts, either
because they cannot access them, or because their story grammars are still
rudimentary (Hayes & Kelly, ). If so, they might tell shorter stories
(i.e. use fewer word tokens to tell the story) and lexicalize fewer target words.
Another possible manifestation of conceptual delay could be observed in
children’s lexical organization and the non-target word choices. Previous
research has suggested that monolingual children’s mental lexicons show a
shift in relations between words around approximately seven and ten years
of age, from primarily schematic to primarily categorical relations (Brown
& Berko, ; Danovitch & Keil, ; Nelson, ; Perraudin &
Mounoud, ; Sheng, McGregor & Marian, ). Schematic relations
are connections established between words when taking into consideration
how they follow each other in a discourse or between objects and their
relations in the physical word (Perraudin & Mounoud, ). Categorical
relations refer to taxonomic relations between words or objects (Perraudin
& Mounoud, ; see also Nelson, , for a similar conceptualization
of the developmental shift in the mental lexicon). For example, if we show
children a picture with dog on it and ask them to say the ﬁrst word that
comes to mind, some may give an answer guided by the schematic relation



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X

B A R B O S A E T A L.

for

schematic

responses

schematic or categorical

like bone (e.g. dogs may be associated with the action of hiding or gnawing on
a bone). Others may give an answer showing a categorical relationship with a
word like cat, since both cat and dog are from the same taxonomic category,
animals. In the context of a narrative task, children who have not yet
undergone the schematic–categorical shift might not necessarily use words
that could be helpful to the listener’s comprehension when they do not
produce the non-target word. For example, they might produce nouns
with schematic relations to the target words (such as tail for the target cat).
Some studies of simultaneous bilingual children have shown little to no
diﬀerence from monolinguals
responses
(Namei, ; Reustle, ; Sheng et al., ), and others have found
that bilinguals produce more
than same-aged
monolinguals (Keith & Nicoladis, ; see also Verhallen & Schoonen,
). Generally these studies used picture-naming or word-association
tasks to assess these diﬀerences. For instance, one study showed that
seven- to ten-year-old simultaneous French–English bilinguals produced
more
schematically related words on a picture-naming task than
monolinguals (Keith & Nicoladis, ). The rate of schematically related
words was negatively correlated to children’s vocabulary in each of their
languages. It is possible that studies have found diﬀering results with
simultaneous bilinguals because they can vary in whether their vocabulary
that of monolinguals. Consistent with that
size diﬀers or
interpretation, Sheng et al.
found no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in
English vocabulary scores between the Mandarin–English bilingual
children and the monolingual children, and also no diﬀerences between
the groups on the rate of schematic-based choices. The link between
vocabulary size in a particular language and the schematic–categorical shift
could explain why we observe schematic choices in adult and child second
language learners. L learners have been reported to produce more
schematic responses in their L than in their L, and more than native
speakers (Norrby & Hakansson, ; Zareva, ). The same pattern of
results has been observed with sequential bilingual children (Verhallen &
Schoonen, ). The use of categorical relations increases as L learners’
proﬁciency in L increases (Zareva, ).

()

equals

In sum, some researchers have argued that, to the extent that bilingual
children show diﬀerences from same-aged monolinguals in lexical access,
they may be showing a developmental delay. In the context of a narrative
task, developmental delay in lexical access could be manifested in the form
of shorter stories, fewer instances of lexicalizing particular words, and less
frequent use of categorical
responses when the non-target word is
produced. In Study , we test whether these characteristics are, indeed,
true of younger monolingual children relative to older monolingual children.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X

B I L I N G U A L L E X I C A L C H O I C E

Compensatory strategies for lexical access diﬃculties
As noted above, recounting a narrative involves remembering and imaging
what one would like to say. Bilingual children might be at least as
advanced in the underlying cognitive abilities necessary for narration
relative to same-aged monolinguals. For instance, Pearson () showed
that, after correcting for multiple analyses, bilingual children performed as
well as monolingual children in narrative discursive elements (e.g. mention
of key content, event sequence, and reference to characters). If so, when
they could not access particular words important for narration, they might
use other means to express them. As with many everyday language tasks,
speakers could explain what they meant in multiple words (e.g. it goes
meow), coin a novel word (the meow-animal), or use categorically related
words like a superordinate noun (e.g. animal
instead of cat). Study 
compares intermediate second language learning adults’ lexical choice with
that of monolingual children in middle childhood. We expected the adults
to attempt to lexicalize important concepts in relating the narrative, as
opposed to omitting them, but not necessarily with a speciﬁc set of target
words (as would be required in a picture-naming task).

Some research has shown bilingual advantages in both imagery and creativity
over monolinguals (Chuneyeva, ; Kachru, ; see Simonton, , for
review). As noted earlier, narrative tasks rely heavily on imagery and
creativity. Bilinguals might use strategies based on imagery and creativity
to compensate for lexical access diﬃculties, thereby showing little to no
diﬀerence from monolinguals in their choice of words. However, it is worth
noticing that many of the studies showing bilingual advantages have only been
done with adults, so it is not clear that they will generalize to children.

Finally, in Study , to address the principal research question, we compare
French–English bilingual children with French and English monolingual
children from middle childhood. If bilingual children’s lexical choice can
be characterized as delayed, then they should show the same patterns of
lexicalization as the younger children in Study . Alternatively, bilingual
children’s lexical choice might more resemble that of L adults, perhaps
manifested as compensatory strategies. In Study , we make comparisons
across studies in order to further investigate bilinguals’ closeness to L
adults and to younger monolingual children.

Although the L adults in the present study have Mandarin as their ﬁrst
language (L), and not French, as the simultaneous bilinguals from Study
,
it should not matter for the variables under investigation. We are
interested in the strategies that the L adults will use to retell the narrative
in a language in which they potentially cannot access (or do not know) the
words for all the key concepts shown in the narrative; not on how the L
interferes in L performance.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X

B A R B O S A E T A L.

STUDY 

M E T H O D
Participants
The participants in this study consisted of thirty-four English monolinguals,
separated into two age groups. One group was composed of ﬁfteen children
aged between three and ﬁve years ( boys,  girls). The other group included
nineteen children between eight and ten years ( boys,  girls). Their
average age was, respectively, ; (SD = ;), and ; (SD = ;).

All the children were living in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. According to
the children’s parents, the children had no signiﬁcant or regular exposure to
more than one language. Therefore, the older children had approximately
twice the exposure to English than the younger ones.

Materials
All participants watched the same four-minute excerpt from the non-verbal
Pink Panther cartoon In the Pink of the Night. This story shows the Pink
Panther being awakened by an annoying cuckoo bird, and the Pink
Panther’s multiple attempts at trying to get rid of it. The choice of a short
cartoon excerpt was meant to not overload the younger children’s memory,
disentangling vocabulary knowledge from memory eﬀects.

Procedure
Participants were encouraged to watch the cartoon carefully, as they were
going to be asked to describe it to someone later. After viewing the
cartoon, they were asked to retell what happened in the cartoon to a
researcher.

retelling of

the cartoon was

Transcription and coding
The children’s
transcribed in normal
orthography (see supplementary online content for narrative examples,
available at < journals.cambridge.org/JCL>). The length of the stories the
children told was counted in word tokens, not counting false starts or
self-repetitions. We counted the number of word types the children used
in the retelling the whole story, as well as the number of word types
within ﬁfty word tokens, as an indicator of the children’s vocabulary size.
The length limit of ﬁfty word tokens was determined based on the
shortest narrative among all the participants across studies.

We also identiﬁed thirteen target words ( nouns and  verbs) that were
important in telling the story, and then searched the children’s stories for
if and how they had lexicalized these targets. The target words were:
(pink) panther, (cuckoo) clock, bridge, hands (of the clock), (alarm) clock,



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X

B I L I N G U A L L E X I C A L C H O I C E

wrench, cuckoos, throws (oﬀ the bridge), dives, rows, throws (into the water), goes
back (to bed), and hits. Note that the words in parentheses were considered
optional in identifying a child’s lexicalization as on target. To identify
these thirteen words, we started with twenty words generated by the
second and third authors that they thought essential to telling the story.
We then looked through the transcripts of ten English monolingual adults,
retaining the words that were used by six or more.

In analyzing the children’s results, we counted only the ﬁrst mention of
each of these concepts. For each child, we calculated the percentage of the
thirteen target words that were lexicalized (% concepts lexicalized). The
percentage of concepts lexicalized included both concepts for which the
children used the target word and concepts for which they used other
words or phrases. The percentage of concepts lexicalized was calculated as
the number of lexicalized words divided by thirteen (the total number of
opportunities to lexicalize the key concepts).

To calculate whether the children had produced the target form or not, we
used as the denominator the number of lexicalized concepts, resulting in the
percentage of target forms. So, for instance, if a child lexicalized eight of the
targets and six were in the target form, we calculated for that child six out of
eight, or % target production.

When the children did not produce the target noun, we coded for use of
either (i) nouns that had a categorical relationship with the target, or (ii)
other. Nouns that were considered to have a categorical relationship with
the target were either nouns from the same semantic category (e.g. tiger
for the target panther) or the superordinate category label (e.g. animal for
the target panther; see Perraudin & Mounoud, ). The other category
most often included nouns with a schematic relation to the target noun
(e.g. song for the target cuckoo clock). To calculate the rate of categorical
responses, the denominator was the number of lexicalized concepts minus
the number of target words. For instance, if a child lexicalized eight of the
targets, and four were categorical responses for nouns and one was the
target word, we calculated for that child four out of seven ( minus ), or
%, categorical responses.

As discussed above, Study  was designed to characterize what a
developmental delay looks like. Therefore, we compared younger and
older children’s lexical strategies; the latter with twice the time of exposure
to English than the former. If the simultaneous bilinguals from Study 
show any delay, their performance should resemble that of the younger
children.

In order to compare our participants groups we used either a t-test (or
F test in Study ) when our variables were normally distributed, or the
Wilcoxon W test (equivalent of a t-test for non-parametric data) when our
variables were not normally distributed.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X

B A R B O S A E T A L.

TA B L E . Average (SD) of word types and tokens, concepts lexicalized, target

words used, creative responses, and categorical responses for nouns

Age three–ﬁve

Age seven–ten

Adults (Study )

Word types
Word tokens
# of types in ﬁfty tokens
% concepts lexicalized
% target total
% creative responses
% categorical responses

· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (.)

· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)

· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)

R E S U L T S A N D D I S C U S S I O N: S T U D Y 
The two leftmost columns of numbers in Table  summarize the averages of
the dependent variables for the younger and older children. There was
a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the groups in terms of total word types
(t() = ·, p = ·, d = ·), word tokens (t() = ·, p = ·, d =
·), and the number of types within ﬁfty tokens (t() = ·, p = ,
d = ·). As would be expected, the older children probably have a larger
vocabulary, and therefore they used a signiﬁcantly higher number of word
types and tokens than the younger children. For similar reasons, as shown
in Table , the older children lexicalized more of the target concepts than
the younger
though this diﬀerence was only marginally
signiﬁcant (t() = ·, p = ·, d = ·).

children,

Table  also summarizes the rate of target-word production. There was a
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the percentage of target words used by the
older children when compared to the younger ones (t() = ·, p = ·).
As expected, the older children used signiﬁcantly more target words than
the younger children (d = ·).

Table  also shows the average percentage of categorical responses for
nouns produced by the children. Although the older children used more
categorical responses, the diﬀerence was not statistically signiﬁcant (W =
·, n.s.).

In a ﬁnal set of analyses we used Spearman’s correlation to investigate the
relationship between (a) the rate of categorical responses and (b) the
children’s age, word types, and types within ﬁfty tokens. We only found a
marginally signiﬁcant, and negative, correlation between types within ﬁfty
tokens and categorical responses (ρ = –·, p = ·); this was true only
for the older children. Thus, the greater the number of types within ﬁfty
tokens, the lower the rate of categorical responses produced by the children.
in comparison to older children, younger children’s
production of target words in a narrative context could be characterized as
OMISSIVE. They told shorter stories with less varied word types than older

In summary,



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X

B I L I N G U A L L E X I C A L C H O I C E

children. They also lexicalized fewer of the target concepts than older
children and produced fewer target items. When producing categorical
responses for nouns, the younger children and older children did not
diﬀer. If bilingual children show delay in lexical choice and lexicon
organization, they may also show an omissive narrative style.

STUDY 

M E T H O D
Participants
The participants in this study consisted of the same nineteen English
monolingual children ( boys,  girls), all aged between seven and ten
years, who participated in Study , and ﬁfteen Mandarin Chinese-speaking
adults who were learning English as their second language ( men, 
women), all aged between twenty-eight and thirty-nine years. The
participants’ average ages were, respectively, ; (SD = ;), and ;
(SD = ;).

The adult late L learners grew up in mainland China and they started to
speak English ﬂuently when they moved, as adults, to countries where
English was the predominant spoken language. All of the adults had
begun their intensive English-learning post-adolescence. At the time of the
study, all of the adults had spent at least one year (M = ;, SD = ;) in
an English-predominant part of the world. On the basis of listening to the
narratives, all the Chinese adults were classiﬁed as INTERMEDIATE SPEAKERS
by an experienced English as a second language teacher. There was no
signiﬁcant correlation between years of exposure to English and the
number of word types (within ﬁfty tokens) the adults used when retelling
the story. More importantly, there was no diﬀerence between the groups
on the number of word types produced within ﬁfty tokens.

Materials and procedure
We followed the same materials and procedure as in Study , with two
exceptions. First, the adult late L learners watched the Pink Panther
cartoon twice and retold the story once in Chinese and once in English
(there were no diﬀerences between the English narratives of the adults
who did the retelling ﬁrst in English versus those of the adults who did
the English retelling after they did it in Chinese). The order of the two
language sessions was counterbalanced. The two language sessions were
done on diﬀerent days, usually about a week apart, with a native speaker
experimenter. We report here only on the adults’ L English stories.

Second, in analyzing the adults’ responses, we noticed a fair number of
what we called CREATIVE responses (e.g. a little bird which makes the clock



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X

B A R B O S A E T A L.

clarity (see

supplementary online

as his home, when referring to the cuckoo clock; or bought a ﬂower and tried to
use the ﬂower to miss the bird, when referring to the Pink Panther throwing
ﬂowers on the river after thinking the bird was dead). Creative responses
were understood as the participants’ eﬀort to convey through original
expressions the target concepts that they do not have a word for, or could
not access. These expressions were functional in that they did not interfere
with narrative
content). Because
creativity can be deﬁned as original and functional ideas (Simonton, ),
we identiﬁed such responses as creative, and not circumlocution (e.g. of
non-creative circumlocution: this guy who looked, looks like tiger but except
it doesn’t look like him. I mean his colours. He doesn’t have the same colours
on his body, when referring to the Pink Panther; or and there is someone at
the door and there was something that makes noise, when referring to the
cuckoo clock). We report here the percentage of creative responses (the
number of creative responses divided by the number of
lexicalized
concepts minus the number of target words) for both the children in
Study  and the adults (see Table ).

Study  was designed to characterize what compensatory strategies
simultaneous bilinguals could use to overcome lexical access and lexical choice
diﬃculties. Therefore, we compared the lexical strategies used by L adults
with an average time of exposure similar to the younger children in Study ,
and by seven- to ten-year-old monolingual children; the latter with the same
time of exposure to English as the simultaneous bilinguals in Study .

R E S U L T S A N D D I S C U S S I O N: S T U D Y 
The two rightmost columns in Table  summarize the averages of the
dependent variables for the children and the adults. Although the children
tended to produce more word types and tokens than the adults, there was
only a marginally signiﬁcant diﬀerence between them in terms of total
(t() = ·, p = ·, d = ·), and a non-signiﬁcant
word types
diﬀerence of word tokens (t() = ·, n.s.). No diﬀerence was found for
the number of types within ﬁfty words (t() = ·, n.s.). As also shown
in Table , the adults attempted to lexicalize signiﬁcantly more of the
target concepts than the children (t() = ·, p = ·, d = ·). Even
though the adults tended to use fewer word types in telling the whole
story than the children, they nonetheless attempted to lexicalize most of
the target words.

However,

lexicalizing and producing the target words were not the
same. When controlling for the number of concepts lexicalized,
the
children used signiﬁcantly more target words than the adults (t() = ·,
p = ·, d = ·). However, the adults used marginally more categorical
responses for nouns than the children (W = ·, p = ·).



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X

B I L I N G U A L L E X I C A L C H O I C E

Regarding the participants’ creativity when referring to the target words,
the adults were more CREATIVE than the seven- to ten-year-olds (W = ·,
p = ·). This ﬁnding reinforces the idea that the adults were indeed making
an eﬀort to convey the meaning of the target concept, despite not knowing
the correct word for it or not being able to access it.

Finally, we ran a Spearman’s correlation test between the rate of
categorical responses for nouns and the participants’ age, word types, and
types within ﬁfty tokens. While, for the adults, word types and word
tokens were signiﬁcantly correlated to categorical responses (respectively
ρ = –·, p = ·, and ρ = –·, p = ·); for the children we found
only a marginally signiﬁcant correlation between types within ﬁfty tokens
and categorical responses (ρ = –·, p = ·). All correlations were
negative, i.e. the greater the number of types, tokens, and types within
ﬁfty tokens, the lower the number of categorical responses produced by
the participants.

In summary, the adult late L learners showed more compensatory
strategies than the children. Even though the adults tended to tell shorter
stories, using less varied words than the children,
they nonetheless
attempted to lexicalize most of the target concepts. The adults also showed
a greater proportion of categorical responses for nouns than the children,
and a greater use of creative responses, coining terms or explaining the
target concept’s meaning. In Study , we test whether bilingual children
also show these patterns of compensatory strategies to lexical access delay.

STUDY 

M E T H O D
Participants
The participants in this study consisted of nineteen French–English
bilinguals ( boys,  girls), fourteen French monolinguals ( boys, 
girls), and nineteen English monolinguals ( boys,  girls), all aged
between seven and ten years. The average age of the bilinguals was ;
(SD = ;). The average age of the French monolinguals was ; (SD = ;),
and of the English monolinguals, ; (SD = ;). The monolingual English
group was the same as the older children in Study  and the children in
Study . The bilinguals did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly in age from either of the
monolingual groups (Fs < ), nor did the monolinguals diﬀer in age (F < ).
Both the English monolinguals and the French–English bilinguals were
living in an English-speaking city, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. The
bilinguals were simultaneous bilinguals, with one French-speaking parent
at home and one English-speaking parent at home. The bilinguals were all
attending French schools. The French monolinguals lived in a small



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X

B A R B O S A E T A L.

TA B L E . Average (SD) of word types and tokens, concepts lexicalized, target
words used, creative responses, and categorical responses for nouns for seven- to

ten-year-old children

Monolingual
(English)

Bilingual
(English)

Bilingual
(French)

Word types
Word tokens
# of types in ﬁfty tokens
% concepts lexicalized
% target total
% creative responses
% categorical responses

· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)

· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)

· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)

Monolingual
(French)

· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)
· (·)

French-speaking city close to Montreal, Quebec, Canada. According to the
children’s parents, while the English and French monolinguals had no
signiﬁcant or regular exposure to more than one language, the bilinguals
had been hearing both languages since birth.

Materials and procedure
The same procedures adopted in Study  were used here with only
one exception, the bilinguals watched the cartoon and retold the story
twice: once in French and once in English, on diﬀerent days and with
diﬀerent native-speaker interlocutors (see supplementary online content
for narrative
sessions was
counterbalanced, and there were no diﬀerences between the English
narratives of the children who did the retelling ﬁrst in English versus
those of the children who did the English retelling after they did it in
French. There were at least two days, and usually a week, between the two
language sessions.

examples). The order of

the

language

Study  was designed to compare the lexical strategies (possibly
style) used by

COMPENSATORY strategies versus OMISSIVE narrative
simultaneous bilinguals to those used by monolinguals of the same age.

R E S U L T S A N D D I S C U S S I O N: S T U D Y 
Table  summarizes the averages of the dependent variables. In English,
there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the groups in terms of word
types (t() = ·, n.s.), word tokens (t() = ·, p = ·), and number
of types within ﬁfty words (t() = ·, n.s.). In French, the bilinguals
used a signiﬁcantly higher number of word types than the monolinguals
(t() = ·, p = ·, d = ·), and also tended to use more word tokens
(t() = ·, p = ·). However, the groups did not diﬀer in the number



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X

B I L I N G U A L L E X I C A L C H O I C E

of types within ﬁfty tokens (t() = ·, n.s.). Table  also summarizes the
percentage of our target concepts that the children lexicalized. The bilinguals
lexicalized a higher rate of concepts than the monolinguals in both languages
(t() = ·, p = ·, d = ·, and t() = ·, p = ·, d = ·, for
French and English, respectively).

Table  also summarizes the rate of target-word production. While English
monolinguals used signiﬁcantly more target words than the English
bilinguals (t() = ·, p = ·, d = ·), in French the diﬀerence was not
signiﬁcant (t() = ·, n.s.).

Regarding the average rate of categorical responses for nouns, in English,
although the bilinguals used more
than the
monolinguals, the diﬀerence was not statistically signiﬁcant (W = ·,
n.s.). In contrast, in French, monolingual children seemed to use more
categorical responses than bilinguals, but once again this diﬀerence did not
reach statistical signiﬁcance (W = ·, n.s.).

categorical

responses

As a creativity measure, we also counted the number of coinages and
explanations (see the ‘Method’ section of Study ) used by the children.
In Table  we can see that the bilingual children in English tended to use
more CREATIVE responses than the English monolingual children. Indeed,
this diﬀerence was marginally signiﬁcant (W = ·, p = ·). However,
no signiﬁcant diﬀerence was found in French (W = ·, n.s.).

We also compared the French monolingual and the English monolingual
children. While English monolingual children used signiﬁcantly more target
words than the French monolinguals (t() = ·, p = ·, d = ·), the
later used a higher proportion of creative responses than the former (t() =
·, p = ·, d = ·). The groups did not diﬀer in their number of word
types and tokens or their number of types within ﬁfty words; there were
also no signiﬁcant diﬀerences in how much they tried to lexicalize the target
concepts, or in their rate of categorical response. Therefore, we cannot
characterize either of
the monolingual groups as using an OMISSIVE
narrative style or a COMPENSATORY strategy when retelling the stories.

Finally, we correlated the coeﬃcients for the rate of categorical responses
for nouns, with children’s age, word types, and types within ﬁfty tokens. For
the English bilinguals, a signiﬁcant correlation was found between word
types and categorical responses (ρ = ·, p = ·) and between word
(ρ = ·, p = ·). For English
tokens
monolinguals we only found a marginally signiﬁcant correlation between
word types within ﬁfty tokens and categorical responses (ρ = –·,
p = ·). Finally, no signiﬁcant correlation was found for the French
monolingual and the French bilingual group.

and categorical

responses

In summary, the bilingual children’s lexical choice cognitive strategies
resembled the adult late L learners (in Study ) more closely than that of
the younger children (in Study ). The bilingual children did not omit



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X

B A R B O S A E T A L.

more target concepts than the monolingual children: instead, they tended to
tell slightly longer stories with slightly more varied words than the
monolinguals in both languages. The bilinguals also tended to lexicalize
more concepts than monolinguals in both languages. Consistent with
lexical access diﬃculties, the bilinguals tended to use fewer target nouns
than the monolinguals in English; however, this diﬀerence was not found
in French. Despite using fewer target words in English, the bilinguals
used a very high percentage of non-target nouns with categorical relations
with the targets (e.g. animal for panther) and creative responses. In many
respects, the bilingual children’s approach to having greater diﬃculty
accessing particular target words relative to the monolinguals could be
characterized as using compensatory strategies,
like the adult late L
learners in Study .

As an attempt to further investigate the closeness of bilinguals’ lexical
strategies to those of adult late L learners, Study  directly compares the
groups from the previous studies.

STUDY 

M E T H O D
Participants
The French–English bilinguals
the younger English
monolingual children in Study , and the adult late L learners from
Study  were compared in this study. See description of the participants
in the studies above.

in Study ,

Materials and procedures
See description on the studies above.

R E S U L T S A N D D I S C U S S I O N: S T U D Y 
The following analyses were made for the bilinguals’ English narrative, and
then for their French narrative. The dependent variables were always the
number of word types and tokens, the number of types within ﬁfty tokens,
the rate of
the
proportion of categorical responses for nouns, and creative responses.

lexicalized concepts,

the proportion of

target words,

Bilinguals’ English narrative
A MANOVA showed that the three groups (English bilinguals, Adult
L, and younger English monolingual children) diﬀered in their total
word tokens and types (respectively, F(,) = ·, p = ·, ηp
 = ·;
F(,) = ·, p = ·, ηp
 = ·), number of types within ﬁfty tokens



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X

B I L I N G U A L L E X I C A L C H O I C E

the rate of

(F(,) = ·, p = ·, ηp
 = ·),
lexicalized concepts
(F(,) = ·, p = ·, ηp
 = ·), and target words (F(,) = ·,
p = ·, ηp
 = ·). Further pairwise comparisons showed that in English,
the bilinguals from Study  had a greater number of total word types and
tokens than both the younger English monolingual children from Study 
and the adult late L learners from Study  (all ps < ·). Regarding the
number of types within ﬁfty tokens, the bilingual children and the adult
late L learners did not diﬀer, but both groups had a higher number of
types (within ﬁfty tokens) than the younger children (respectively, p = ·
and p = ·). The bilinguals from Study  were also shown to lexicalize
more concepts and to use more target words than the younger children
from Study  (all ps < ·); the bilinguals’ performance did not diﬀer from
that of the adult late L learners.

Compared to the younger children from Study , while the bilinguals used
more creative responses (W = , p = ·),
they did not use more
categorical responses for nouns (W = ·, n.s.). In relation to the adult
late L learners from Study , the bilinguals did not diﬀer in their use of
categorical responses for nouns (W = ·, n.s.); however, a marginal
signiﬁcant diﬀerence was found for adults using more creative responses
than the bilingual children (W = ·, p = ·).

Bilinguals’ French narrative
A MANOVA showed that the three groups (French bilinguals, Adult L,
and younger English monolingual children) diﬀered in their word tokens
and types, and types within ﬁfty tokens (respectively, F(,) = ·,
p = ·, ηp
 = ·; F(,) = ·, p = ·, ηp
 = ·; F(,) = ·,
p = ·, ηp
 = ·). The groups also signiﬁcantly diﬀered in their
proportion of lexicalized concepts (F(,) = ·, p = ·, ηp
 = ·), but
not in the proportion of target words used (F(,) = ·, n.s.). Further
pairwise comparisons showed that, in French, the bilinguals from Study 
had a greater number of word types and tokens than both the younger
English monolingual children from Study  and the adult late L learners
from Study  (all ps < ·). Regarding the number of types within ﬁfty
words, the bilingual children and the adult late L learners did not diﬀer,
but both groups had a higher number of types (within ﬁfty words) than
the younger children (respectively, p = · and p = ·). The bilinguals
from Study  were shown to lexicalize more concepts only than the
younger children from Study  (all ps < ·); the bilinguals’ performance
did not diﬀer from that of the adult late L learners.

Compared to the younger children from Study , while the bilinguals used
more creative responses (W = ·, p = ·), they did not use more
categorical responses for nouns (W = ·, n.s.). In relation to the adult



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X

B A R B O S A E T A L.

late L learners from Study , the bilinguals did not diﬀer in their use of
creative responses (W = ·, n.s.); however, a signiﬁcant diﬀerence was
found for the adults using more categorical responses for nouns than the
children (W = ·, p = ·).

Summarizing, the bilingual children from Study  used a greater number
of word types and tokens, and types within ﬁfty words, than both the
younger children from Study  and the adult late L learners from
Study . The bilinguals lexicalized more concepts,
in English and in
French, than the younger children, but not than the adults. While in
French, the bilinguals tended to use more creative responses than the
younger children,
they tended to use more categorical
responses for nouns. Finally, the bilinguals tended to use almost the same
proportion of categorical (in English) and creative responses as the adults.
Therefore, these results are further evidence that, in both French and
English, the bilinguals more closely resemble the adult late L learner
than the younger children, suggesting that they are able to compensate for
diﬃculties in accessing and choosing (target) words, retelling a narrative in
a mature, conceptually advanced way.

in English,

G E N E R A L D I S C U S S I O N
Previous research has shown that bilingual children present a smaller
vocabulary and score below the norm in at least one of their languages
when compared to monolinguals of
the same age (Bialystok, ;
Bialystok et al., ; Bialystok et al., ; Junker & Stockman, ;
Nicoladis, ; Oller et al., ; Uchikoshi, ; Umbel & Oller, ;
Umbel et al., ; Verhallen & Schoonen, ). Bilinguals also show
greater lexical access diﬃculties relative to monolinguals (Yan & Nicoladis,
).

strategies used)

Given such lexical access diﬃculties, the primary objective of the present
set of studies was to investigate how bilingual children choose words (i.e. the
lexical
in a narrative task compared to same-age
monolinguals. To characterize what a lexical choice delay might look like,
we ﬁrst compared lexical choices in narratives between younger and older
children in Study . Younger children told shorter stories and lexicalized
fewer of the target concepts than older children did. We characterized
these diﬀerences as an OMISSIVE narrative style. In Study , we compared
the lexical choices of L adults with those of monolingual children
between seven and ten years of age. The adults lexicalized most of the
target concepts, but rarely with the target words. Instead, the adults often
used nouns with a categorical relation to the target (e.g. cat for the target
panther). They also coined new words or explained what they meant more
often than the children did when they did not produce the target form.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X

B I L I N G U A L L E X I C A L C H O I C E

As for the bilingual children in Study , their performance did not
resemble the OMISSIVE narrative style observed in the younger monolingual
children in Study . The bilingual children tended to tell longer stories
with equal or more varied vocabulary (even within a set number of tokens)
than the same age monolingual children. They also tended to lexicalize
more target concepts than the monolingual children. These results are
surprising, given the common ﬁnding in the literature that bilingual
children perform more poorly on vocabulary tests in at least one of their
languages. Although vocabulary scores on standardized tests and word
types or word types within a set number of tokens in a narrative task are
not the exactly the same construct, the latter two can be considered
proxies to vocabulary. Similarly to Keith and Nicoladis (), who found
that their participants’ vocabulary scores were correlated with their rate of
schematic responses, in this study we found for some groups that the
number of word types or word types within ﬁfty tokens was correlated
with the participants’ rate of categorical responses and age.

Finally, in Study  we showed that both in French and English, the
bilingual children used more types and tokens, had a greater number of
types within ﬁfty words, a greater
rate of creative responses, and
lexicalized more target concepts than the younger children in Study
. The bilinguals also produced a higher number of types and tokens than
the adult late L learners, but did not diﬀer in their number of word
types within ﬁfty tokes and their use of categorical and creative responses.
These ﬁndings are further evidence that the performance of the bilingual
children in Study  resembles more closely that of the adult late L
learners than that of younger children.

As with previous research showing that bilinguals have a harder time with
lexical access than monolinguals (e.g. Yan & Nicoladis, ), the bilinguals
in Study  did tend to use fewer target forms than the monolinguals,
although this diﬀerence was signiﬁcant only in English. However, unlike in
Keith and Nicoladis (), where bilingual children used fewer categorical
responses for nouns than monolinguals, the bilingual children in this study
showed the opposite pattern. That is, they tended to use more categorical
responses than monolinguals (see also Namei, ; Reustle, ). One
possible reason for the opposite patterns in these studies is the motivation
and/or cognitive resources for the task. That is, if asked to name the picture
of a panther (the kind of task in Keith & Nicoladis, ), children might be
satisﬁed with responses like tail or ferocious or roar, responses that are
schematically associated with the target. In contrast, in a narrative, calling
the main character panther a tail will fundamentally disrupt the story-line,
while animal or lion would be suﬃcient to convey the thrust of the story.

Another explanation for the bilinguals’ higher performance is that the
narrative retelling task used is very likely less culture bound than the



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X

B A R B O S A E T A L.

traditional picture-based choice tasks (see de Villiers, , for a discussion).
simply word meaning, we evaluated children’s
Instead of
semantic
knowledge
through lexical organization and retrieval, oﬀering the
bilinguals an opportunity to compensate for lexical access diﬃculties.

relative

to monolingual

children’s

While bilingual

language development has often been
characterized in terms of delays
children
(Bialystok, ; Genesee & Nicoladis, ), the present results suggest
that that characterization may be restricted to only some measures of
language development. In the context of a narrative, in which there is a
strong reliance on imagery and less call for a particular correct response,
bilingual children showed use of some advantages over monolinguals (e.g.
tendency to tell longer stories with more varied vocabularies) and some
compensatory strategies (e.g. high use of nouns categorically related to the
target word and a tendency to use more creative words) to get their story
across. They seemed to have overcome their lexical access diﬃculties,
showing no lag in lexical choice when compared to monolingual of the
same age.

An important limitation of this study was its sample sizes. Future research
is needed to conﬁrm these ﬁndings and to test their generalizability to other
bilingual populations. As there are cross-cultural diﬀerences in many aspects
of narrative (see, for example, Anstatt, ; Kupersmitt & Berman, ),
the present results may not necessarily generalize to speakers of all languages.
For instance, in this study, the narrative in French, for both bilingual
and monolingual children, contained fewer target words than English
narratives, but more categorical and creative responses. Although these
diﬀerences did not always reach statistical signiﬁcance, they may reﬂect
cross-cultural diﬀerences. For instance, English narrative style could be
more factual, while the French could be more descriptive; or such
diﬀerences could be a result of the target words being based on English
monolingual adults’ retelling of the Pink Panther’s cartoon (as described in
Study ). Similarly, this could also explain the adult late L learners’
higher rates of categorical and creative responses when compared to
monolingual children (Study ).

Another limitation of the present study is that we did not have vocabulary
scores for the bilingual children. Bilingual children of age eight to ten
generally show lower vocabulary scores than monolinguals in at least one
of their languages (Oller et al., ; Umbel & Oller, ; Umbel et al.,
). We know of no reports that bilingual children can score better than
monolinguals in both their languages, as might be concluded by the
tendency of the bilingual children in Study  to use more word types in
both languages relative to monolinguals. Future studies can measure
vocabulary scores and elicit narratives from the same bilinguals to verify
how the two kinds of measures are related.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X

B I L I N G U A L L E X I C A L C H O I C E

Although we chose a short excerpt from Pink Panther cartoon, one might
think that the diﬀerences found between younger and old children in Study 
were due to memory load diﬀerences (e.g.
the number of episodes
remembered) and not to vocabulary knowledge. We do not believe this is
the case, because our analyses were focused on a few target words that
represented key characters and objects in the story, and not on minimal
details. Nevertheless, future studies could further investigate this issue by
adding memory load measures and statistically controlling for that in their
analyses.

In spite of these limitations, these studies have provided preliminary
evidence that, in a narrative context, bilingual children can compensate for
lexical access diﬃculties, resulting in lexicalization of key concepts to
communicate the story. For these children, a smaller lexicon was shown
not to be an indicator of poorer performance, even on a task that relies on
the lexicon.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS

For supplementary materials for this paper, please visit journals/cambridge.
org/JCL.

R E F E R E N C E S

Anstatt, T. (). Aspect and tense in storytelling by Russian, German and bilingual

Bialystok, E. (). Bilingualism: the good, the bad, and the indiﬀerent. Bilingualism:

children. Russian Linguistics , –.

Language and Cognition , –.

Bialystok, E., Craik, F. I. M. & Luk, G. (). Lexical access in bilinguals: eﬀects of

vocabulary size and executive control. Journal of Neurolinguistics , –.

Bialystok, E., Luk, G., Peets, K. F. & Yang, S. (). Receptive vocabulary diﬀerences in

monolingual and bilingual children. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition , –.

Bialystok, E., Majumder, S. & Martin, M. M. (). Developing phonological awareness: Is

there a bilingual advantage? Applied Psycholinguistics , –.

Brown, R. & Berko, J. (). Word association and the acquisition of grammar. Child

Development , –.

Chuneyeva, A. (). Assessing cognitive functions in Russian–English bilinguals and English
monolinguals using visual spatial tasks. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Carlos Albizu
University.

Danovich, J. H. & Keil, F. C. (). Should you ask a ﬁsherman or a biologist?

Developmental shifts in ways of clustering knowledge. Child Development , –.

de Villiers, J. (). Cultural and linguistic fairness in the assessment of semantics. Seminars

in Speech and Language , –.

Downing, P. (). Factors inﬂuencing lexical choice in narrative. In W. Chafe (ed.), The
pear stories: cognitive, cultural, and linguistic aspects of narrative production, –.
Norwood, NJ: ABLEX Publishing Company.

Genesee, F. & Nicoladis, E. (). Bilingual ﬁrst language acquisition. In E. Hoﬀ &
M. Shatz (eds), Handbook of language development, –. Malden, MA: Blackwell
Publishing.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X

B A R B O S A E T A L.

Gollan, T. H. & Acenas, L.-A. R. (). What is a TOT? Cognate and translation eﬀect on
tip-of-the-tongue states in Spanish–English and Tagalog–English bilinguals. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition , –.

Gollan, T. H., Montoya, R. I., Cera, C. & Sandoval, T. C. (). More use almost always
means a smaller frequency eﬀect: aging, bilingualism and the weaker links hypothesis.
Journal of Memory and Language , –.

Hayes, D. & Kelly, S. B. (). Sticking to syntax: the reﬂection of story grammar in
children’s and adults’ recall of radio and television shows. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly ,
–. Online: <http://digitalcommons.library.umaine.edu/psy_facpub/>.

Herman, D. (). Story logic. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Junker, D. A. & Stockman, I. J. (). Expressive vocabulary of German–English bilingual

toddlers. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology , –.

Kachru, B. B. (). The bilinguals’ creativity. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics ,

–.

Keith, M. & Nicoladis, E. (). The role of within-language vocabulary size in children’s
semantic development: evidence from bilingual children. Journal of Child Language ,
–.

Kupersmit, J. & Berman, R. A. (). Linguistic features of Spanish–Hebrew children’s
in a

(eds), Narrative development

narratives. In L. Verhoeven & S. Strömqvist
multilingual context. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.

Mallan, K. (). The road less traveled: storytelling and imaginative play. Storytelling

World , –.

Lawrence Erlbaum.

Mandler, J. M. (). Stories, scripts, and scenes: aspects of schema theory. Hillsdale, NJ:

Namei, S. (). Bilingual lexical development: a Persian–Swedish word association study.

International Journal of Applied Linguistics , –.

Nelson, K. (). The syntagmatic–paradigmatic shift revisited: a review of research and

theory. Psychological Bulletin , –.

Nicoladis, E. (). Cross-linguistic transfer in adjective–noun strings by preschool bilingual

children. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition , –.

Nicoladis, E. (). Why does bilingualism aﬀect language and cognitive development? In
J. Altarriba & R. Heredia (eds), An introduction to bilingualism: principles and practices,
–. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Norrby, C. & Hakansson, G. (). Girl—lass or curl? Word associations in second language

learners. Australian Review of Applied Linguistics, , ·–·.

Oller, D. K., Pearson, B. Z. & Cobo-Lewis, A. B. (). Proﬁle eﬀects in early bilingual

language and literacy. Applied Psycholinguistics , –.

Pearson, B. Z. (). Narrative competence among monolingual and bilingual school
children in Miami. In D. K. Oller & R. E. Eilers (eds), Language and literacy in bilingual
children, –. Bristol: Multilingual Matters.

Perraudin, S. & Mounoud, P. (). Contribution of the priming paradigm to the
from  to  years of age.

the conceptual developmental shift

understanding of
Developmental Science , –.

Reustle, C. (). The eﬀect of L on the syntagmatic–paradigmatic shift. Unpublished

master’s thesis, William Patterson University of New Jersey.

Seymour, Roeper & de Villiers (). Diagnostic Evaluation of Language Variation-Norm

Referenced. San Antonio, TX: Pearson Assessments, Inc.

Sheng, L., McGregor, K. K. & Marian, V. (). Lexical–semantic organization in bilingual
children: evidence from a repeated word associate task. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research , –.

Simonton, D. K. (). Bilingualism and creativity. In J. Atarriba & R. R. Heredia (eds),
An introduction to bilingualism: principles and process, –. Mahwah, NJ: Laurence
Erlbaum.

Trabasso, T. & van den Broek, P. (). Causal thinking and the representation of narrative

events. Journal of Memory and Language , –.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X

B I L I N G U A L L E X I C A L C H O I C E

Uchikoshi, Y. (). English vocabulary development in bilingual kindergartners: What are

the best predictors? Bilingualism: Language and Cognition , –.

Umbel, V. M. & Oller, D. K. (). Developmental changes in receptive vocabulary in

Hispanic bilingual school children. Language Learning , –.

Umbel, V. M., Pearson, B. Z., Fernández, M. C. & Oller, D. K. (). Measuring bilingual

children’s receptive vocabularies. Child Development , –.

Verhallen, M. & Schoonen, R. (). Word deﬁnitions of monolingual and bilingual

children. Applied Linguistics , –.

Verhallen, M. & Schoonen, R. (). Lexical knowledge in L and L of third and ﬁfth

graders. Applied Linguistics , –.

Verhoeven, L. & Lundquist, S. (). Narrative development in a multilingual context.

Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

Yan, S. & Nicoladis, E. (). Finding le mot juste: diﬀerences between bilingual and
monolingual children’s lexical access in comprehension and production. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition , –.

Zareva, A. (). Structure of the second language mental lexicon: How does it compare to

native speakers’ lexical organization? Second Language Research , –.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600026X


