Journal of Sociolinguistics 21/3, 2017: 320–347

Ex-centric textualities and rehearsed

narratives at a gender identity clinic in

Brazil: Challenging discursive colonization1

Rodrigo Borba

Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Transsexuality is classiﬁed as a disorder by the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, which shapes trans-speciﬁc healthcare policies
worldwide. This paper addresses the discursive effects the imposition of a
psychiatric diagnosis impinges on the daily life of Brazilian gender identity
clinics. It aims to assess the epistemological and political dynamics which
make the global circulation of this manual possible and to understand the
socialization trajectory that leads to the materialization of diagnostically
driven, rehearsed narratives in a gender clinic in the global South. I argue
that the globalization of medical epistemologies and their textualities
homogenizes transsexuality and impels transsexual individuals and their
doctors to engage in textually constrained interactional performances
which make the construction of a trusting healthcare relationship virtually
impossible. The paper, thus, discusses how a sociolinguistics from the South
may contribute to foster (trans)autonomy in healthcare settings where
epistemological imbalances produced by ex-centric, globalized textualities
constrain possibilities for agency.

Este artigo investiga os efeitos discursivos e intersubjetivos que a
patologizacß~ao da transexualidade imp~oe a vida diaria de usuarixs trans
do Processo Transexualizador brasileiro. Objetiva-se (1) avaliar as
din^amicas epistemologicas e polıticas que fazem a circulacß~ao de manuais
diagnosticos produzidos no Norte global possıvel e (2) investigar a trajetoria
de socializacß~ao que leva a materializacß~ao in situ de narrativas ensaiadas
cujo objetivo e a obtencß~ao do diagnostico de Transtorno de Identidade de
G^enero/Disforia de G^enero em um servicßo publico de transgenitalizacß~ao no
Sul global. Argumenta-se que a globalizacß~ao de certas epistemologias
medicas e seus padr~oes textuais estanques homogeneıza a transexualidade
e constrange as potencialidades interacionais entre proﬁssionais de saude e
usuarixs trans do servicßo, diﬁcultando, assim, a construcß~ao de relacß~oes de
cuidado baseadas em conﬁancßa mutua. O artigo discute como uma
sociolinguıstica do Sul, por assim dizer, pode contribuir na promocß~ao de
desequilıbrios
(trans)autonomia
epistemologicos produzidos por textualidades globalizadas e ex-c^entricas
limitam as possibilidades de ag^encia. [Brazilian Portuguese]

em contextos

onde

de

saude

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

EX-CENTRIC TEXTUALITIES

321

KEYWORDS: Discursive colonization, rehearsed narratives,
trans-speciﬁc healthcare, Brazilian Portuguese

INTRODUCTION

‘treatment’ to resolve transsexual

Until 1997, the healthcare needs of Brazilian transsexual people received little
to no attention from the public health system (Sistema Unico de Saude – SUS).
Indeed, one of their main healthcare concerns, i.e. sex reassignment surgeries,
was regarded as a crime of mutilation by the Federal Board of Medicine (FBM).
This changed, however, with the publication of FBM Resolution 1.482/97, in
which sex reassignment surgeries were allowed to be performed as an
experimental
individuals’ dissatisfaction
with their morphological sex. Since then, the regulation for Brazilian trans-
speciﬁc healthcare policies has undergone constant revision. The most recent
governmental documents regulating gender identity clinics in the country are
the Ministry of Health Decree 2.803/2013 and the FBM Resolution 1.955/
2010: the former institutionalizes the Brazilian Transsexualizing Process
(‘Processo Transexualizador’) within the SUS and allows the government to
subsidize surgeries and hormone therapies;
the latter revises previous
resolutions and more clearly deﬁnes the FBM’s viewpoints on transsexuality
and its medical management.

According to the Brazilian documents,

‘the transsexual patient has a
permanent psychological disorder and [because of
this] rejects his/her
phenotype and tends to self-mutilate and/or commit suicide’ (Brasil 2010).
Due to their pathologized status, transsexual people who wish to have their
healthcare subsidized by the State must be diagnosed as suffering from a
Gender Identity Disorder (GID) – a term coined by the American Psychiatric
Association (APA) in the fourth version of its Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM).2 Thus,
it is a psychiatric diagnosis which guides
Brazilian trans-speciﬁc healthcare policies and, as a consequence, informs the
interactions between transsexual people at gender identity clinics and their
doctors. Interestingly, though, the Brazilian documents never mention the
DSM as a diagnostic resource. However, ﬁeldwork in one of the Brazilian
gender clinics has shown that it is the APA’s diagnostic criteria which guide
doctors’ clinical gaze (Foucault 2001) when talking to a transsexual person. In
this scenario, the medical management of transsexual individuals at Brazilian
public hospitals provides an analytical avenue for the sociolinguistic critique of
a macro-sociological process the editors of this Special Issue allude to in their
introduction, namely discursive colonization. This concept refers to the ease
and rapidity with which certain authoritative Western discursive frameworks
and their respective texts circulate globally and end up imposing ex-centric
(Bhabha 1994) institutional standards of textuality by which the global South

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

322

BORBA

must comply, obliterating, thus, local culture-speciﬁc discourses, practices and
subjectivities. In this context, the ﬁrst aim of this paper is to critically assess the
epistemological dynamics which make the global circulation of the APA
manual possible.

The centrality of this diagnostic text is also relevant for our understanding of
how interactions between doctors and transsexual people unfold, and, most
signiﬁcantly, how identity (de)legitimation is interactionally negotiated in
these ex-centric, globalized terms. In fact, the necessity of a psychiatric
diagnosis within the APA’s terms imposes interactional tensions. As argued by
Teixeira (2013), for example, the GID diagnosis is the result of discursive
strategies deployed by clinic users to convince doctors they ﬁt the diagnostic
criteria. In this scenario, worried they will be denied access to the clinic
services, transsexual clients rapidly learn ‘the necessary life-history required
for successful “passing”’ (Hird 2002: 583).

Although the learning and the telling of an adequate narrative is frequently
referred to in the literature which analyses the little resonance such diagnostic
criteria have in transsexual people’s lives (Butler 2004; Bento 2006; Stone
2007 [1991]; Teixeira 2013), these analyses are largely based on second-
hand, retrospective accounts of transsexual people about their experiences
with doctors. As such,
in situ
instantiation of such ‘adequate narrative’, let alone the learning trajectory
effects.
that
to
Understanding
the
materialization of such text-based, diagnostically driven, ex-centric narrative
standards is the second aim of this paper.

content, and pragmatic

the micro-interactional

little do we know of

the interactional

processes

leads

to the narrative

shape,

that

lead

Within language and gender studies, research on interactions between
health professionals and transsexual people has been developed by Susan Speer
(Speer 2009, 2010, 2011). However, Speer’s allegiance to conversation
analysis’s (CA) understanding of context as co-text (Billig 1999), and focus on
what members explicitly orient to, impel her to take the status of transsexuality
as a mental disorder for granted. As such, her CA studies overlook the
centrality of the diagnostic manuals to the relationships within the gender
clinic she investigates. Needless to say, transsexual clients will hardly ever
admit to their doctors they are familiar with the diagnostic texts. Physicians, in
turn, will seldom tell their interlocutors they perceive the rehearsed quality of
the narratives (Maryns 2006) of
‘true’ transsexuality and grow intensely
suspicious of what the clients say. This is testimony to the fact that the
diagnostic texts may be regarded as an absent presence in these interactions;
indeed, they constitute a ‘ghost audience’ (Langellier 2001) which constrains
the social actions of both transsexual people and their doctors. In order to
understand the role of these ex-centric diagnostic criteria in the relationships
between health professionals and transsexual people, we must take into
account the dynamics between what Goffman (1959) refers to as onstage and
backstage performances. In other words, we need to compare and contrast

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

EX-CENTRIC TEXTUALITIES

323

(i.e.

their

in consultations

turn-by-turn interactional
what happens
these
development) and the interlocutors’ attitudes and opinions about
interactions which are shared outside the consultation room. The analytical
enterprise, as Fabrıcio (2013: 146) puts it,
is a task of ethnographically
tracking down the textual webs that make visible ‘how social actors experience
and reconstruct [their membership to social categories] in their everyday
discursive practices’. This kind of textual cartography involves looking into the
macro-sociological dynamics which allow certain discourses to materialize as
travelling texts (Blommaert 2005), i.e. ones invested with the power and
authority to circulate globally almost without contestation, and the effects of
these itineraries in the micro-details of people’s daily institutional lives.
Having this in mind, the discussion in this paper is grounded in 13 months
of ethnographic ﬁeldwork at the Programa de Atencß~ao Integral a Saude
Transexual
the
importation of the DSM diagnostic criteria, their standards of textuality, and
narrative resources in the lives of transsexual people and their doctors. During
ﬁeldwork, the PAIST had three main health professionals (a surgeon, a
psychologist, and a psychiatrist) and two visiting physicians who were
specializing in urological surgeries. Here, speciﬁcally, I present a case study of
one of the research participants’ ﬁrst contacts with the PAIST to highlight the
discursive processes that lead her to locally refashion her life history within the
textual modes of the DSM. As the analyses show, the necessity of such a
narrative refashioning exempliﬁes the ex-centricity of such medical texts
within the Brazilian context. This will
the
intersubjective effects of such narrative refashioning on the clinic users’
situated relationships with their doctors; and (2) reﬂect on the possibilities of a
sociolinguistics from the South, i.e. an approach to discourse and interaction
that takes discursive colonization and its local effects seriously.

the intersubjective effects of

lead me to:

(1) discuss

(PAIST).

It

investigates

TRAVELLING TEXTS AND EPISTEMOLOGICAL IMBALANCES: A CRITIQUE
FROM/ABOUT THE SOUTH

The DSM-IVR is described as a ‘helpful guide to medical practice’ which
provides ‘brevity of criteria sets, clarity of language, and explicit statements of
the constructs embodied in the diagnostic criteria’ (American Psychiatric
Association 1994: xv) and is thus regarded as a useful guide to clinical practice
among psychiatrists. However, one needs to problematize the epistemological
and political processes that transform this manual into a highly mobile text
(Blommaert 2010) which is able to shape healthcare policies around the globe.
To a great extent, but not exclusively, two interrelated socio-cultural and
discursive dynamics contribute to the global
this text and
constitute a process Briggs (2005) describes as the globalization of medical
epistemologies: (1) the medicalization of society; and (2) epistemological

itinerary of

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

324

BORBA

colonization produced by what Connell (2007) and Grosfoghel (2011) refer to
as the universalizing tendencies of ‘Western’ theories.

‘[M]edicalization describes a process by which nonmedical problems become
deﬁned and treated as medical problems, usually in terms of illness and disorders’
(Conrad 2007: 4). This is the case in transsexuality, but it is not restricted to it. A
number of human experiences have also been medicalized, such as baldness,
menstruation, hyperactivity, ageing, etc. Conrad argues that medicalization is a
form of social control: by redeﬁning such life experiences in medical terms and
imposing treatment procedures, a line between what is normal and healthy and
what is abnormal and, thus, unhealthy, is drawn. This, in turn, gives medicine
the power to prescribe which human experiences, subjectivities and bodies are
deemed appropriate. In this scenario, the DSM is both constituted by and
constitutive of such medico-social processes. On the one hand, it reﬂects these
broader social dynamics; on the other, it performatively produces (new) disorders
and foments their medical surveillance. The publication of the DSM-V in 2012
illustrates the extent to which processes of medicalization have reached, as it
considerably multiplied the number of mental disorders a psychiatrist can treat;
among them we ﬁnd, for instance, male hypoactive sexual desire disorder
(tellingly, there is no female counterpart to this).

The ﬁnancial interests of pharmaceutical industries also deserve part of the
credit for the intensiﬁcation of this process (Conrad 2007). In this context, it is
difﬁcult to determine which comes ﬁrst: the disorder or the drugs. Conrad
seems to believe that in many cases the creation of a disease follows the
production of a drug. For instance, Conrad explains that, in the 1970s, the
pharmaceutical company Upjohn discovered minoxidil was able to lower heart
rate. During clinical trials for hypertension, however, researchers accidentally
noticed male patients grew new hair on their heads;
thus new target
consumers for minoxidil were created and baldness became a medical problem.
With regards to transsexuality,
its close relation to the developments in
endocrinology in the 20th century, the growing hormone market and the
technological advances in plastic and genital reconstructive surgery make
gender transitions possible and highly proﬁtable in some countries.

The second process that contributes to the global mobility of the DSM, and,
as a consequence, to the widespread circulation of the APA’s worldviews and
epistemic investments, has to do with epistemological colonization. Central as
it is to the globalization of certain texts and their effects on institutional and
epistemological practices, the importance of epistemological colonization to the
pathologization of transsexuality is also the link between the discussion in this
paper and the main topic of this Special Issue, i.e. to reﬂect upon the global
South and its contributions to the study of discourse, gender and sexuality. In
this sense, medicalization is, to a great extent, a by-product of epistemological
colonization.

By epistemological colonization I refer to the dynamics ‘in which the North
produces theory and the South must supposedly import it and apply it’

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

EX-CENTRIC TEXTUALITIES

325

(Miskolci and Pelucio 2017: 72). Or, in the case of medicine, it refers to the fact
that ‘medical epistemologies and technologies have long been seen as produced
in Euro-America for export
to less-industrialized countries as bases for
regulating bodies and diseases’ (Briggs 2005: 279). Having in mind this
unequal geopolitics of knowledge, Miskolci (2014: 13) explains that

even in an increasingly decentred world we still witness the hegemony of
academic [and scientiﬁc] exchange in which the North produces theories and the
South is seen as a space for collecting data, making ethnographic incursions or
applying (Northern) theories to particular cases.

This dynamics constitutes what Borba et al. (2014) call North-normativity: a
politics of knowledge production and circulation that is centred in and
dominated by the Northern hemisphere. Such epistemological imbalance, in
which theories produced in the global North become highly mobile, is the
result of what Connell
(2011) describe as the
universalizing tendencies of
theories: due to their political,
scientiﬁc and linguistic power such theories are taken to be valid throughout
the globe when, in fact, they involve a theoretical leap based on European or
North American contexts. This process ends up producing the North as the
norm and the South as the exotic Other (Borba et al. 2014) only liable of being
the object of study, never its subject.

(2007) and Grosfoghel

‘Western’

In his discussion of the geopolitics of knowledge production and circulation,
Sousa Santos (1995) argues that the focus of epistemological criticism should
fall on knowledge practices and their concrete effects on other social practices.
With this in mind, he contends that we should value ‘Southern epistemologies’,
which, according to him, are guided by three main tenets: ‘learning that the
South exists, learning to go to the South, and learning from the South and with
the South’ (Sousa Santos 1995: 508). Following in Sousa Santos’ steps, more
recently there has been an attempt
to challenge such dynamics of
epistemological colonization in the work of Connell (2007), who argues for a
‘Southern theory’, and Comaroff and Comaroff (2012a, 2012b, 2012c), who
advocate for a ‘Theory from the South’. For these authors, ‘the South’ is a
metaphor that refers not only to a neat geographical region. Perhaps most
importantly, the South involves multiple conﬁgurations of discursive, material,
and historical positionalities marked by a heritage of colonization, social
immobility, subalternity, cultural and economic exploitation, Othering and, as
in the case of transsexuality in Brazil and elsewhere, imposition of ex-centric
textual standards that limit the scope of social action in institutional life and
beyond. In this sense, there is not only the geographical South as we know it, but
also the South within the North; for instance, Latin American sex workers in
Europe (Piscitelli 2012), African asylum seekers in Belgium (Maryns 2006), and
all those who, despite living in the global North, have very limited citizenship
and chances for social mobility. There is also, of course, the North within the

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

326

BORBA

South: multinational corporations in India, petrol millionaires in Nigeria, etc.
Or, as Comaroff and Comaroff explain, ‘there is much south in the north,
much north in the south, and [. . .] more of both to come’ (2012b: 20). In
other words, ‘the South cannot be deﬁned a priori in substantive terms. The
label refers to a relation, not a thing in or for itself’ (Comaroff and Comaroff
2012b: 20, original emphasis).

As the Comaroffs contend, given the current dynamics of capitalism,
globalization and modernity, the South is often the ﬁrst to feel the effects of
world-historical processes and, thus, it provides us ‘the angle of vision [. . .]
from which to estrange our world in its totality in order better to make sense of
its present and future’ (Comaroff and Comaroff 2012c, n.d., original emphasis).
It is in this sense that Moita Lopes (2006) urges sociolinguists to ‘hear the
voices from the South’. According to this author, if sociolinguistics and other
language-related ﬁelds of inquiry aim to be socially responsive and capable of
intervening in the world, they should produce politically engaged knowledge
with (not about) those who have been excluded from the beneﬁts of modernity
and have had their voices muted by the workings of the epistemological
imbalances and discursive colonization discussed earlier. In this vein, this
politically engaged knowledge would be the result of the analytical attention to
voice in the most Hymesian sense; that is, a reconstruction of silenced voices
(Hymes 1996) in a blatant political attempt to challenge the discursive
dynamics that entrap their possibilities for agency.

A sociolinguistics from the South, to paraphrase the Comaroffs (2012c), is
neither for the south nor necessarily from the south. It is about the effects of
the global circulation of certain discursive frameworks and institutional
practices on the South and, mutatis mutandis, the effects of the South on
discourse, language, institutions and on the production of knowledge within
the ﬁeld.3 Such a sociolinguistics would pay due attention to both the macro-
sociological and macro-political mechanisms that allow certain discourses to
travel globally and to their local microdiscursive effects. Discursive colonization
would be its bread and butter.

to a great extent, a result of

The case under scrutiny here is,

the
incorporation of the APA’s pathologizing epistemology onto the SUS which
provides free healthcare to the Brazilian population. It should not be implied,
though, that trans-speciﬁc healthcare in the global North is without its speciﬁc
problems. The main difference between public gender reassignment clinics in
Brazil (such as the PAIST) and in the U.S. lies in that fact that, in countries
where trans-speciﬁc healthcare is only provided by private clinics, transsexual
people have a little more room for negotiation. This is so due to a process
viviane v. (2015), a Brazilian transfeminist activist, calls the ‘privatization of
autonomy’. In other words, due to the fact that in the U.S. and elsewhere, trans
people can only undergo hormone therapy and gender reassignment surgeries
via private clinics, they seem to have more leeway to negotiate the quality of
their healthcare. Class is an important vector for agency here: precisely

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

EX-CENTRIC TEXTUALITIES

327

because of who can afford operations and hormones, in the U.S. ‘trans’ is
sometimes seen as an upper-class identity.4 However, little do we know about
what happens inside gender clinics in the global North. The few studies
available (see, for example, Speer 2009, 2010) take the status of transsexuality
as a mental disorder for granted and have little to say about the intersubjective
effects such pathologization produces within those clinics. This lack of critical
analytical attention to the dynamics of pathologization in these studies may
derive from the fact that discursive colonization of trans identities is less salient
in the clinics analysed by Speer.

The critique of these diagnostic criteria (and the processes that allow their
global circulation) is in tune with the international campaign Stop Trans
Pathologization (STP2012) which aims at releasing transsexual people’s
healthcare needs from psychiatric surveillance and towards more nuanced
understandings of gender outside medical discourses (Misse and Col-Planas
2010; Bento
the Brazilian
Transsexualizing Process emerges at the intersection of global discursive
ﬂows
local
understandings of their bodies and subjective experiences.

transsexuality and transsexual people’s

and Pelucio 2012).

that pathologize

scenario,

In this

IMPORTED TEXTUALITIES IN THE BRAZILIAN ‘TRANSSEXUALIZING
PROCESS’

and

ﬁelds

of

that

biological

in fact, argues

psychoanalytical

As Bento (2006) explains, the individuals who the APA considers to be
suffering from a gender disorder were at the epicentre of epistemological
conﬂicts between the 1950s and 1970s in the U.S.A.: different ﬁelds of
medicine tried to explain the characteristics and the origin of transsexuality
these
within their own scientiﬁc lenses. Bento,
epistemological conﬂicts have produced diverging explanations of
this
‘disorder’:
deﬁnition were
established. Despite being contradictory amongst themselves, but due to
their apparent scientiﬁc objectivity, these theories made the inclusion of
transsexuality in the APA manual possible. The history of the APA’s interest in
gender transition is a complex one which I am prevented from exploring in
detail due to space constraints. It is important to note, however, the centrality
two diverging medical explanations have in the current institutional standards
of textuality which regulate transsexual people’s and physicians’
lives in
gender
the
endocrinologist, Harry Benjamin, and those of the psychoanalyst, Robert
Stoller. Despite their differences, both shape what
the APA (and as a
consequence, the Brazilian government) understands as who counts as a ‘true
transsexual’ (Benjamin 1999 [1966]). Throughout this paper, I use the term
‘true transsexual’ between quotation marks to point to its origins in systems of
knowledge/power which produce transsexuality as a mental disorder. In this
sense, the use of the concept in this format aims to highlight its diagnostic

clinics around the globe. These

theories are

those of

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

328

BORBA

character, which is based on idealizations of what constitutes an allegedly
authentic transsexuality (see also Borba 2015, 2016a, 2016b).

In his book, The Transsexual Phenomenon (1999 [1966]), Benjamin argues
that transsexuality is a matter of biological determination. Benjamin explains
that the human sex is comprised of eight different ‘sexes’: genetic, gonadal,
germinal, endocrinological, phenotypical, psychological, legal and social. Due to
unnamed biological processes,
transsexuality is the result of a radical
dissociation of the psychological sex from the other ones. Such dissociation
produces a gender identity that is not in accordance with the more biologically
based sexes of the body. Benjamin explains, however, that this separation of the
psychological sex may have different degrees and as such there are six types of
transsexuality. Only the most intense (types V and VI) should be classiﬁed ‘true
transsexuals’ and thus should be considered for sex reassignment surgeries.

In Benjamin’s (1999 [1966]: 11) view, the ‘true transsexual’:

feel[s] that they belong to the other sex, they want to be and function as members
of the opposite sex, not only to appear as such. For them, their sex organs, the
primary (testes) as well as the secondary (penis and others) are disgusting
deformities that must be changed by the surgeon’s knife. (emphasis in original)

Viewing transsexuality in these terms, Benjamin always defended the necessity
of sex reassignment surgeries. Since psychological sex is more ingrained, one
should modify the morphology of the body, which, due to technological
advances, may be transformed. This would make more coherent individuals, as
linearity among the different sexes would be restored, and, thus, the cultural
intelligibility matrix (Butler 2003 [1990]) would be kept intact.

Benjamin’s views, however, did not go unchallenged. One of the most
important ﬁgures against sex reassignment surgeries was the psychoanalyst
Robert Stoller, to whom transsexuality was the product of dysfunctional
socialization within gender roles in the family. Stoller focussed his efforts on
analysing the socialization processes that would supposedly lead to gender
non-conforming behaviours in adulthood. To this end, the psychoanalyst
worked with young boys whose parents were concerned about
their
‘effeminacy’. In his book, The Transsexual Experience (Stoller 1982 [1975]),
he proposes that the origin of gender non-conforming behaviour in children
(which could lead to the desire to undergo sex reassignment in the future) is
the product of traumatic psychosocial dynamics imposed by the children’s
relationship with their parents, more speciﬁcally the mother.

Following Freud’s concept of castration anxiety, Stoller suggests that the
mother of a prospective transsexual person is a masculine woman whose penis
envy is so strong that she transfers her unfulﬁlled desires onto her son. This
produces family dynamics in which the mother is powerful and dominating
and the father is absent and emotionally unavailable. In this context, the father
cannot establish himself as a model and the Oedipus complex is interrupted,

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

EX-CENTRIC TEXTUALITIES

329

among other things, by the excess of physical contact between mother and
child. Stoller believed that it was possible to inculcate gender-conformity in
these children via what he termed the ‘therapeutically motivated Oedipus
complex’ (Stoller 1982 [1975]: 101) in which the (male) therapist must serve
as a ‘representative of society, health and of conformity with the external
reality’ (1982 [1975]: 80) providing the child with an ‘appropriate’ model of
masculinity. In his clinical practice, Stoller attempted to lead the child to
disidentify with his envious mother, which was supposed to turn the child’s
attention to stereotypically masculine activities, games and clothing
preferences. What
this paper is the
centrality Stoller gave to childhood activities and to socialization.

for the purposes of

is signiﬁcant

The DSM-IVR deﬁnition of GID is a Benjamin-Stoller hybrid. This diagnostic
manual establishes the set of ‘symptoms’ individuals desiring to undergo sex
reassignment surgeries must demonstrate in order to be diagnosed as ‘true
transsexuals’ in the APA’s terms. As such, the text imposes certain narrative
demands (Coupland, Garret and Williams 2005) which must be fulﬁlled if one
is to be granted institutional authorization to have one’s healthcare covered.
According to the DSM, there are four main symptoms a psychiatrist must pay
attention to in order to diagnose someone as a ‘true transsexual’ (Figure 1).
I will not delve into a detailed discussion of the diagnostic criteria at this
point but I will clarify them later on whenever relevant for understanding the
interactions under investigation in this paper. It is important to note, however,
that
the
reentextualization of Benjamin’s and Stoller’s theories in the DSM text
possible. The symptoms of GID do not merely materialize the medicalization
of transsexuality; in a broader sense, such entextualizations medicalize gender
and, more signiﬁcantly, the non-linearity between sex and gender. As such, the
DSM text is a vector of social control that attempts to maintain the current
matrix of gender intelligibility (Bento 2006). As I argue elsewhere (Borba
2015, 2016a, 2016b), by pathologizing gender transition through the
supposed neutrality and objectivity of scientiﬁc language (Martınez-Guzman
and I~nıguez-Rueda 2010), this text homogenizes transsexual experiences and,
thus, effaces
the idiosyncrasies of alternative context-speciﬁc forms of
transsexuality by producing it as a medical fact.

in this manual,

stereotypical

gender

behaviours make

For a transsexual person to have free access to gender clinic services
(hormone therapy and reassignment surgeries may all be covered by the state),
they must abide by the rules of the most recent legislation of the FBM, i.e.
Resolution 1.955/2010 which replicates the pathologization of transsexuality
promulgated by the DSM. The Resolution afﬁrms that sex reassignment
surgeries are the appropriate procedure for ‘treating’ the disorder. In other
words, by re-establishing an alleged coherence between the gender of
identiﬁcation and the sexual morphology, the disorder disappears and a
sense of linearity is reinstated. In order for surgeries to be allowed, transsexual
clients must undergo at least two years of psychiatric and psychological

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

330

BORBA

Figure 1: The four main symptoms required for diagnosis as a ‘true transsexual’
(American Psychiatric Association 1994: 537–538)

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

EX-CENTRIC TEXTUALITIES

331

assessment during which the medical team as a whole must produce a ‘medical
diagnosis of transsexualism’ (Brasil 2010). Such a diagnostic demand in Brazil,
a country where conﬁgurations of gender and sexuality do not reﬂect those of
the Anglo-Saxon world and gender transitions occur in very local shades (in
this sense, see Kulick 1998; Benedetti 2005; Pelucio 2009), constitutes one of
the local clogs in the epistemological machinery that makes the APA’s
medicalization of non-medical problems circulate globally.

the fact

This kind of discursive colonization has at least two consequences for
transsexual people and their doctors. On a macro level,
that
transsexuality is considered a mental disorder is what makes it possible for
them to have their healthcare needs subsidized by the state or health insurance
companies. On a micro level, it produces interactional tensions which hinder a
trusting healthcare relationship between doctors and their ‘patients’. Such
interactional obstacles emerge from the fact that transsexual individuals must
satisfy the medical criteria listed by the DSM, which, as anthropological
research has proved, has little resonance with their lived bodily and subjective
experiences (Bento 2006; Misse and Col-Planas 2010; Lima 2011; Bento and
Pelucio 2012; Teixeira 2013; Borba 2016a).

In this scenario, how can transsexual people convince their doctors that they
are in fact ‘true transsexuals’ in the APA’s sense? This is mostly done in narratives
in which transsexual clients of gender clinics must echo the diagnostic criteria
almost literally in order to be regarded as ‘true transsexuals’. My ﬁeldwork has
demonstrated that PAIST clients, upon being accepted to the clinic, are thrown
into a socialization trajectory (Wortham 2006) during which they are led to
narrate their experiences according to the medical staff’s expectations, having
their opportunities for voice and agency limited. In the Brazilian Transsexualizing
Process, transsexual people are but the animators of a narrative whose author
(i.e. the APA) lies far away but is, nonetheless, ever present in consultations. The
analysis below focuses on the backstage performances of a new client at PAIST in
which she is helped by more experienced clients to strategically reshape her life
history in order to ﬁt the APA’s diagnostic criteria. This will be compared to what
happens onstage (i.e. in a consultation). I argue that the pathologization of
transsexuality locks the possibilities for agency outside the consultation room
where transsexual clients help one another rehearse the necessary diagnostic
narrative. This rehearsed narrative, however, does not go unchallenged by the
doctors. Giovani, the PAIST surgeon, constantly told me that ‘there seems to be a
book they all read’ and repeat in their consultations. In what follows, I discuss the
interpersonal obstacles the globalization of this medical epistemology imposes on
doctors and their transsexual interlocutors.

LEARNING HOW TO BE A ‘TRUE TRANSSEXUAL’

The imposition of a psychiatric diagnosis makes the re-entextualization
(Silverstein and Urban 1996) of the DSM diagnostic criteria imperative for

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

332

BORBA

transsexual clients of gender clinics if they wish to have their healthcare needs
covered by the state. Re-entextualization is the discursive process whereby
semiotic resources are extracted from a context and materialized in our social
actions in another place and time. To illustrate the centrality of this discursive
dynamic in the Brazilian Transsexualizing Process, I draw on an ethnographic
episode I participated in, which involved Vitoria (a new clinic user) and Rebeca
and Gilda (more experienced clients).

On her ﬁrst day at PAIST, Vitoria met Rebeca, Gilda and me while we were
having breakfast at one of the food stands across from the hospital. She was
about 50 years old and, different from most clients of the clinic, donned very
few indexical markers of femininity on her body. Aside from her long, dark
hair, nothing else was stereotypically feminine, which created a marked
contrast between her and Rebeca and Gilda. Vitoria had been married to a
woman and had two adult daughters. Her historical body (Scollon and Scollon
2004), i.e. the embodiment of her life trajectories and individual experiences,
contrasted with the DSM criteria for GID, which performatively entextualizes
‘true transsexuals’ as engaging in stereotypically feminine behaviours since
early childhood and as asexual due to their disgust for their genitals.

Vitoria’s historical body indeed caused Rebeca and Gilda to distrust her
performance as a transsexual person. Rebeca challenged Vitoria: ‘do you know
the treatment here is for transsexuals?’ Surprised, Vitoria replied she was
aware of this: ‘that’s why I’m here. I’m trans.’ Faced with Vitoria’s distinctive
performance as a transsexual person, Gilda and Rebeca – the latter, as usual,
carried copies of the Brazilian documents on the Transsexualizing Process in
her purse – started advising Vitoria on how to behave and on what to say to
her doctor in her consultation. After Rebeca showed Vitoria the FBM’s
resolutions, Gilda warned her that if she entered the physicians’ room dressed
the way she was (i.e. wearing ‘men’s’ clothes) they would not believe she was a
‘you look too masculine!’ Worried, Vitoria asked us
transsexual woman:
whether she would be banned from the clinic due to the fact that she ‘was not
as pretty’ as her interlocutors, to which Gilda replied: ‘it’s just a matter of time.
As soon as you start taking hormones you’ll become a very pretty woman’.
Rebeca asked whether Vitoria was familiar with the DSM and advised her to
read the diagnostic criteria attentively in order not to be caught in the doctor’s
circular questions and attempts to spot incoherencies in her narrative.

In her interaction with Vitoria, Rebeca recontextualized the questions
doctors ask the clients of the clinic. According to her, they would ask Vitoria
very intrusive questions about when she started ‘feeling different’, and
explained ‘I tell them I started feeling different since I was born.’ Vitoria,
however, told us her feelings of inadequacy as a man started years after she got
married. Gilda advised her: ‘don’t say that to them’. Rebeca also told Vitoria
the physicians would ask very invasive questions about her sexual life. ‘I love
sex’, whispered Vitoria while she checked to see if the clerk at the food stand
was able to hear her. Rebeca grinned at Gilda and ﬁred off the suggestion: ‘I

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

EX-CENTRIC TEXTUALITIES

333

think you shouldn’t admit that to them.’ Rebeca continued: ‘since you don’t
take hormones yet, you must get hard-ons.’ Vitoria acquiesced:
‘I have
erections now and then, but now that I’m getting older it doesn’t happen that
frequently. I don’t really care about it.’ One more piece of advice followed: ‘I
think you shouldn’t admit that to them’, afﬁrmed Rebeca.

What we see in this part of my ﬁeld notes is the beginning of Vitoria’s
introduction to the Transsexualizing Process through Rebeca and Gilda’s
reentextualization of the interactions they had previously had with the PAIST
medical staff, which in turn intertextually link them to the diagnostic criteria
in the DSM. Their advice to Vitoria illustrates the fact that ‘social identities may
be durable projections from texts read in terms of entextualization processes’
(Silverstein and Urban 1996: 6).

On the day of our ﬁrst meeting, Vitoria could not see her doctor due to a
delay in the consultations and her need to catch a bus to the countryside
where she lived. She was able to reschedule her consultation, and two weeks
later she met Carlos, one of the visiting physicians at PAIST. Below are
excerpts from her ﬁrst consultation at the PAIST, which are presented in
Brazilian Portuguese followed by a translation into English. Transcription
conventions are adapted from Jefferson (2004) (see Borba 2015 for details).

Excerpt 1

80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102

Carlos:

Carlos:

Vitoria:

Vitoria >me diz uma coisa<
(0.3)
°e:::° como e que voc^e cheg^o a- a- a::::
<conclus~ao> que voc^e::::: >apresenta< um
transtorno de::: [>identidade de g^enero?<]
[e:: desde os sete anos] de

idade eu::: criava muito assim na hora de se
vesti, tinha umas camisetas que eu usava,
fazia feito um mai^o .hhh depois aos doze
anos de idade >eu comecei a me vesti< usava
as roupas da minha m~ae::, prima:: ne >n~ao
tinha irm~a<
(0.5)
e:::::::::::- e sempre tive uma tend^encia::
a gosta de tudo que era coisa de mulher ne,
nas brincadeiras >eu n~ao soltava pipa< n~ao
jogava [bo::la]

[c^e se] senti::a diferente dos outros

rapazes? [>dos outros garotos?<]

[ah::::: s i m, sempre] sempre eu

preferia sempre o contato com as mulhe::res,
>com as meninas< mais que dos rapazes, esse
negocio as vezes de i a clu:::be assim,

Vitoria:

Carlos:

Vitoria:

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

334

BORBA

piscina e t^e que troca de roupa na frente
dos home >eu nunca gostei disso< [eu sempre-]

[en ten di]

Carlos:

103
104
105
106
107
Carlos:
108 Vitoria:
109
110
111
112
113 Vitoria:
114
Carlos:
115 Vitoria:
116
—————————————————

=e >e e<

Carlos:

(0.5)
desde de muito novinho=
=↑e::::: desde de muito novo, de sete anos de
idade agora::::: <marcadamente> desde os doze
anos de idade,
desde os doze que voc^e:: comecß^o a usa a roupa
>que [c^e diz<]

[N ~A O] desde os sete, [de sete anos]
[desde se]te?=

Carlos: mas se usava:: escondi::do assim voc^e::[::-]

Carlos:

Carlos:

80
81
82
83
84
85 Vitoria:
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93 Vitoria:
94
95
96
97
98
99 Vitoria:
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
Carlos:
107
108 Vitoria:
109

Carlos:

Carlos:

Vitoria >tell me something<
(0.3)
°a:::° how did you come to- to- to:: the
<conclusion> that you:::: suffer from a
gender [>identity disorder<?]

[a:: since I was seven] years old
I::: got really creative like at the time of
getting dressed, I had some t-shirts I wore,
I wore them like bathing suits .hhh later at twelve
years old >I started to dress up< wearing
my mo::ther’s, my cousins’ clothes right >I had no
sisters<
(0.5)
a::::::::nd- and I always had a tendency:: to
like everything that was womanly right,
at play time >I didn’t ﬂy kites< didn’t
play [so::ccer]

[did you] fee::l different from the

other boys? [>the other kids?<]

[a::::: yes, always] I always

preferred to be always around the wo::men,
>with the girls< than to boys, this
business like going to the sports clu:::b, like
the pool and have to change clothes in front
of men >I never enjoyed that< [I always-]

[I get it]

(0.5)
since you were very young=
=ye::::s since I was very young, seven years
old, no::::w <strongly> since I was twelve

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

EX-CENTRIC TEXTUALITIES

335

Carlos:

110
111
112
113 Vitoria:
114
Carlos:
115 Vitoria:
116
Carlos:

years old,
since you were twelve you:: started wearing the clothes
>you [say<]

[N O] since I was seven, [seven years old]

=yes >yes yes<
but you wore them hi:::dden you:::[::-]

[since you were] seven?=

The mismatch between the bits of Vitoria’s life history she shared with us in
front of the hospital (i.e. offstage) and the narrative (and the identity) that is
performed to/with Carlos in the PAIST consultation room (i.e. onstage) is
apparent. These scenes illustrate phases in the circulation of the discourse that
medicalizes (and, thus, homogenizes) transsexuality and, ultimately, constrains
both physicians’ and clinic users’ actions vis-a-vis each other. Vitoria’s onstage
attempts at performing true transsexuality within the DSM modes in the
interaction with Carlos are operationalized through the transformation of the
talk she had with Rebeca and Gilda (and possibly, many other texts) into a type
of rehearsed narrative in which she adapts events in her life history to ﬁt what
she believes the doctor needs to hear in order to diagnose her. In other words,
according to Goffman (1959), when there is an identity test (especially one that
is based on ex-centric terms), there is likely to be a spectacular performance of
such an identity. In the case of transsexuality, this sort of exaggerated
performance emerges, to a great extent, from the repeated re-entextualizations
of diagnostic criteria with which clinic users become increasingly familiar as
they move through the Transsexualizing Process both outside and inside the
consultation room (Borba 2016a, 2016b).

Right after taking a general medical history in which he discovers Vitoria
has Type 1 diabetes (not shown above), Carlos turns his clinical gaze (Foucault
2001) to signs of ‘true transsexuality’ (lines 80–84). Diabetes is not clinically
relevant for the GID diagnosis, but it is important for Vitoria’s general health:
Carlos, however, is more interested in the GID than he is in something that is
in fact health-related and that deserves clinical attention. The importation of
the DSM textual standards blinds physicians from real health problems and
forces them to look only at the supposed gender disorder. The demand for a
GID diagnosis thus eclipses the fact that Vitoria has diabetes, a clinically
relevant fact, which is almost completely ignored by the physician.

Although Vitoria began to identify as a transsexual woman in adulthood,
Gilda’s advice to her (‘don’t say that to them’) metamorphoses into a narrative
in which childhood activities are explained as symptoms that aim at fulﬁlling
the doctor’s diagnostic question (‘how did you come to-
the
<conclusion> that you:::: suffer from a gender [>identity disorder<?]’). This
question echoes one of the DSM criteria, which considers that there must be
‘intense desire to participate in the stereotypical games and pastimes of the
other sex’ (American Psychiatric Association 1994: 537). Evidence for the

to::

to-

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

336

BORBA

intensity of the ‘disorder’ is frequently searched for in childhood memories. Note
that Vitoria anticipates the physician’s question and replies before he even
ﬁnishes his turn (lines 84–85). She continues her narrative by saying that from
the age of 12 her dressing in feminine clothes became more frequent. Carlos,
however, understands she started wearing her mother’s and cousins’ clothes at
that age, to which Vitoria emphatically replies (line 113) by afﬁrming she was
seven years old when she started dressing up. After all, the earlier an individual
identiﬁes as a transsexual, the truer a transsexual that person is, according to
the DSM. The diagnostic question sequence carries on as follows:

Excerpt 2

Carlos:

=entendi, e::: durante o:: s- o seu namoro
agora com seu- seu atual namorado
(0.5)
.hh e:::: com relacß~ao a::- a- a- ao namoro,
voc^e ta usando- voc^e usa o p^enis?=
=n~ao >n~ao [uso< n~ao, n~ao uso]

[voc^e n~ao faz- n~ao] usa?=

Carlos:

Carlos:

[eu] n~ao uso e::::::-

=n~ao, n~ao uso=
=ta [bom]

226
227
228
229
230
231 Vitoria:
232
Carlos:
233 Vitoria:
234
Carlos:
235 Vitoria:
((lines omitted))
245
246
247
248 Vitoria:
249
250
251
252 Vitoria:
253
Carlos:
254 Vitoria:
255
Carlos:
256 Vitoria:
257
258
259
—————————————————

entendi, voc^e::: <quando se olha> no espelho
e olha seu::- seu genital se nota alguma
coisa? c^e- >c^e ﬁca [constrangido?<]
meio desagradavel, [>situacß~ao ruim<]
[e desagradavel]

[e eu ﬁco numa] situacß~ao

(.)
e=
=voc^e acha desagradavel t^e:::- t^e o p^enis=
=e,>eu acho<=
=c^e acha=
=mas eu n~ao sei se eu fari::a a::: >cirurgia<
de <<redesignacß~ao>> sexual, isso eu ainda na˜o
me deﬁni,
°°perfeito°°

Carlos:

Carlos:

Carlos:

226
227
228
229
230
231 Vitoria:

Carlos:

I get it, a:::nd during the::: y- your relationship
now with your- your current boyfriend
(0.5)
.hh a:::: with regards to::- to- to- your relationship,
are you using- do you use your penis?=
=no >I don’t [use it<, no I don’t use it]

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

EX-CENTRIC TEXTUALITIES

337

Carlos:

232
Carlos:
233 Vitoria:
234
Carlos:
235 Vitoria:
((lines omitted))
245
246
247
248 Vitoria:
249
250
251
252 Vitoria:
253
Carlos:
254 Vitoria:
255
Carlos:
256 Vitoria:
257
258
259

Carlos:

Carlos:

[you don’t make- you don’t] use it?=

=no, I don’t use it=
=that’s [ok]

[I] don’t use it a::::::nd-

I get it, you::: <when you look> at the mirror
and see you::- your genitals do you notice anything?
you- >do you get [embarrassed?<]

that’s bit unpleasant, [>a bad situation<]

[well I ﬁnd my]self in a situation

[it is unpleasant]

(.)
yes=
=you ﬁnd it unpleasant to:::- to have a penis=
yes, >I do<=
=you do=
=but I don’t know whether I’d ha:::ve the::: >surgery<
sex <<reassignment>>, this I haven’t made up
my mind yet,
°°perfect°°

According to the DSM-IVR, a ‘true transsexual’ has a ‘persistent discomfort
with his or her sex or a sense of inappropriateness in the gender role of the sex’
(American Psychiatric Association 1994: 537). Both in the meeting we had in
front of the hospital and in her interaction with Carlos, Vitoria is exposed to the
centrality of this diagnostic criterion. In fact, during her talk with us, Vitoria
implied she was not bothered by her penis or her rare erections. Besides this,
she has two daughters, which puts her historical body in contradiction with
what
the Brazilian government, replicating the DSM, regards as ‘true
transsexuals’. She is thus in a dilemma: having had kids with her former
wife would be an indication she does not feel the discomfort the DSM
propounds to be typical of transsexual people eligible for undergoing sex
reassignment. Faced with the fact that she has two daughters, Carlos carried
on his diagnostic task and in lines 226–230 inquires whether Vitoria takes a
penetrative role in her sexual relations with her current boyfriend. If the
answer had been positive, not only would she have been disqualiﬁed as a ‘true
transsexual’, but she would also be categorized as a travesti. Space constraints
do not allow me to discuss the complex systems of gender and sexuality in
Brazil, but, to put it simply, travestis are transgender individuals who modify
their bodies to acquire feminine shapes but who generally do not wish to
undergo sex reassignment surgeries. According to anthropological research,
they identify as gay men who, due to the speciﬁc conﬁgurations of gender and
sexuality in Latin America, shape their bodies with feminine clothes and
(industrial) silicone to be more sexually attractive to ‘heterosexual’ men (see
Kulick 1998; Borba and Ostermann 2007; Pelucio 2009). The interaction

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

338

BORBA

between Carlos and Vitoria underpins how these local understandings of
gender and sexuality relate to the universalizing and simplifying effects of the
imported ex-centric diagnostic discourse. Although travestis and transsexual
people do not typically share the same subjectivity and/or bodily practices,
they do share semantic ﬁelds of
identiﬁcation and social positions of
marginality in the Brazilian culture. The lines between these two identities
are difﬁcult to draw since many transsexual people do not wish to undergo
surgeries for a multitude of reasons. This, however,
taken into
consideration at the Brazilian Transsexualizing Process since the desire to have
one’s body surgically modiﬁed is a central diagnostic criterion guiding
physicians’ gaze. As Vitoria’s case highlights, the imposition of the DSM
diagnostic manual into the Brazilian health system impels doctors to engage in
a crusade in search of ‘true transsexuals’ which ends up disregarding travestis
as individuals who also need specialized healthcare (Borba 2015, 2016b).5

is not

At line 231, Vitoria replies to Carlos’ questions negatively by reinforcing her
answer with a repetition so that no doubt about her use of her penis would
remain. Despite her emphatic negative answer, the physician asks for a
conﬁrmation of this information at line 232. In turn, Vitoria once again says
she does not use her penis (line 233). After having received three negative
answers to the same question, Carlos seems satisﬁed and closes the sequence at
line 234. If there were any doubts as to her identifying as a travesti and her
using her penis for sexual pleasure, this should have been erased by this
questioning sequence.

However, despite having conﬁrmed that she does not use her penis and
should not be considered a travesti, Carlos keeps inquiring about how Vitoria
relates to her penis (lines 245–259). In this consultation, Vitoria is at the
intersection of such discursive conﬂict. Although she had told us her penis did
not disgust her (at least not with the intensity required by the DSM), in her
interaction with the physician, she answers positively to his question at lines
245–247. Despite the discomfort she reports in the consultation room, Vitoria
has not yet decided whether she wants to undergo sex reassignment. Her
uncertainty with regards to the surgeries also raises suspicion that she is not a
‘true transsexual’, since the desire to be operated upon is a prerequisite of the
DSM classiﬁcation, regardless of the many reasons transsexual people may
have for not wanting to have their bodies surgically modiﬁed (i.e.
fear,
insecurity, age, etc.).

Carlos and Vitoria’s diagnostic interactional exchange materializes locally
the globalized narrative demands that the legal requirement of a GID diagnosis
imposes on the Brazilian Transsexualizing Process. These demands revolve
around three narrative axes:

1. childhood cross-dressing;
2. gender inadequacy; and
3. discomfort felt regarding one’s genitals.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

EX-CENTRIC TEXTUALITIES

339

In this sense, the DSM textually imposes the adequate life history of ‘true
transsexuals’ and performatively produces a mental disorder through this
entextualization. Within this textually constrained interactional scenario,
Vitoria seems to have successfully managed her performance as a ‘true
transsexual’ by refashioning some events in her life to suit the diagnostic criteria
with which she by now has become familiar. Nonetheless, her historical body
leads Carlos to glimpse at the rehearsed quality of her narrative. Right after this
diagnostic sequence, the physician left Vitoria in his room and consulted with
In^es, the PAIST psychologist. Carlos told In^es of how squarely Vitoria’s narrative
ﬁt within the diagnostic criteria: ‘what he tells me would lead me to believe he is
a real transsexual, but for me, he looks more like a rock musician than a trans.
Even his voice is masculine!’ (note the use of the masculine to refer to Vitoria,
which contrasts with how PAIST’s professionals usually refer to clients they
consider adequate trans-women). In^es, who had welcomed Vitoria upon her
arrival at the clinic, agreed with Carlos’ assessment without even having heard
her life narrative and corroborated his diagnosis: ‘it seems he has done his
homework and knows what to tell us. For me, he is a travesti’ (ﬁeld notes, 5 May
2010). In other words, this consultation materializes one of the discursive
clashes the importation of a global text brings to this local context: a ‘true
transsexual’, on the one hand, is the textual solidiﬁcation of knowledge systems
produced in the global North within an epistemological war to deﬁne the origin
and the clinical management of transsexual people; a travesti, on the other hand,
embodies Latin American discourses on gender and sexuality.

In^es’ assessment of Vitoria’s performance indirectly leads us back to the
centrality of the DSM’s performative production of ‘true transsexuals’. Vitoria’s
homework, in this sense, may easily refer to the fact that she has studied what
to tell the doctors. Indeed, when Carlos returned to his room and was about to
close the consultation, Vitoria told him she has been keeping herself informed,
as can been seen in the extract below.

Excerpt 3

Carlos:

646
647
648 Vitoria:
649
Carlos:
650 Vitoria:
651
Carlos:
652 Vitoria:
653
Carlos:
654 Vitoria:
655
Carlos:
656 Vitoria:

<<infelizmente>> infelizmente- >mas assim< e
um programa longo [n~ao] precisa pressa agora

>c^e ta entendendo?< [e:::] tudo s~ao novidades=

[uhum]

[uhum]

[e:: eu tenho=

=c^e ta vendo de coisas [que c^e nunca=

=imagin^o]
=lido mui]to tambem::: [^o:::]: >Carlos< eu=

=leio muito pela internet, [muita mate::ria]

[isso]

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

340

BORBA

Carlos:

657
658
659
660
661
662 Vitoria:
—————————————————

[n~ao precisa c^e]
t^e pressa disso n~ao voc^e:::: >assim< ﬁca
tranquilo que::: e::: a diferencßa de um m^es
pra quatro meses >de diferencßa< parece s^e::
>mas ↑c^e vai v^e< e rapido=
=e

Carlos:

646
647
648 Vitoria:
649
Carlos:
650 Vitoria:
651
Carlos:
652 Vitoria:
653
Carlos:
654 Vitoria:
655
Carlos:
656 Vitoria:
657
Carlos:
658
659
660
661
662 Vitoria:

<<unfortunately>> unfortunately- >but like< it’s
a long process, [there’s no] need to hurry now

>do you follow?< [a:::] everything is new to you=

[u h u m]

=you’re seeing things [you have never=

[uhum]

[ye::s I have=

imagined]
read a lo]t too::: [o::::]: >Carlos< I=

[right]

=read a lot on the internet, [many a:::rticles]
[no need for you]

to be in a hurry about it you::: >like< be calm tha::t
a:::: the difference from one to four months >of
difference< seems to be::
>but you’ll see it’s fast<=
=yes

While the physician explained how the Transsexualising Process works,
Vitoria told him she has been reading a lot on the Internet (lines 652–656).
This adds another vector for the circulation of the DSM epistemology within
PAIST: learning how to be a ‘true transsexual’ is not only linked to the DSM
text per se but also to the interactions among users of the clinic and their
reading about transsexuality on the Internet and other places. Narratives of
‘true transsexuality’ within this gender clinic are, thus, a work of
local
(inter)textual bricolage based on globally available discursive frameworks.

The imposition of

increasingly suspicious of

these diagnostically-driven narratives also makes
physicians
interlocutors.
According to Giovani, PAIST’s surgeon, clients of the clinic engage in what
he calls a ‘standardized discourse’. In an interview with me, he says he is
worried about the ‘lies’ transsexual people tell the physicians, which prevents
the staff from knowing the clients’ medical history with any level of certainty.
Giovani believes clinic users’ narratives are ‘quite stereotypical’ and he goes on
to answer my question about why transsexual people ‘lie’ to the medical staff:

their

transsexual

The consultations must be based on the Resolution. So if she doesn’t say the
things that are in the Resolution it’s as if- the healthcare professionals aren’t seen
as someone who wants to help, someone who makes her life easier. They are
seen as an obstacle for the transsexual to get what she wants from the system. So

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

EX-CENTRIC TEXTUALITIES

341

she comes and learns [the narrative] and even those who don’t know the
discourse, since consultations are frequent, the questions are repetitive, they
learn what has to be answered. So it’s something like this ‘when you’re having
sex, do you allow your boyfriend to touch your penis?’ She replies, ‘oh, God
forbid, never ever’, because they know that genital aversion is important to
receive the authorization for surgery. (interview with Giovani, 24 June 2010,
lines 232–253)

PAIST’s psychologist has similar concerns, as she told me in an interview
when asked about this ‘standardized discourse’: ‘they read the book and so
they lie right? because they have an ideal of women they must convey in order
to convince us [. . .] so they try to sell us preconceived ideas’ (interview with
In^es, 6 June 2010, lines 254–267). The medical staff is not only concerned
about the fact that transsexual people ‘lie’, they also know the source of the
‘lies’ and are able to perceive them in consultations. Transsexual users of the
clinic,
in turn, trapped in a discursive hurricane of whirling conﬂicting
entextualizations of transsexuality, are aware of the necessity of producing a
narrative persona that may fulﬁl the text-based diagnostically-driven narrative
demands imported by the SUS. Or, as Livia told me in an interview when asked
whether she thought transsexuality was a mental disorder: ‘since it is a disease
for them, whenever I have a consultation I arrive there crestfallen, crying and
pretending I’m autistic (laughs)’.

What I refer to as ‘rehearsed narratives’, the medical staff calls ‘lies’. But, as we
can grasp from Vitoria’s consultation with Carlos, the diagnostic interactional
exchange is shaped by transsexual people’s ‘lies’ (i.e. textually-based rehearsed
narratives) and the medical staff’s own ‘lies’ (i.e. textually-based rehearsed
diagnostic sequences). At this stage, it is paramount to mention the fact that the
PAIST’s medical staff, as opposed to the DSM, do not actually consider
transsexuality a mental disorder, as they repeatedly told me during ﬁeldwork.
According to Giovani, the pathologization of transsexuality ‘is an absurd, right?
these inconsistencies that happen but as everything else as [society evolves],
things get better. So transsexuality cannot be considered a disease in the ICD, for
instance’ (interview with Giovani, 24 June 2010). In^es, the psychologist, afﬁrms
that

my experience [with transsexuality] is not very vast. I learned about it here and the
more you work with them, the more you see it’s not a disorder. You don’t
understand very well how it works, but it is not. It’s so natural what they say and
how they say it that you must accept it, right? (interview with In^es, 14 June 2010)

However, their medical actions are constrained by the Brazilian documents
regulating the Transsexualizing Process and, as a consequence, by the
globalization of apparently objective medical epistemologies onto a context
whose views of gender and sexuality differ dramatically from those the APA’s
manual help circulate globally.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

342

BORBA

Vitoria’s case illustrates the narrative constraints imposed by the globalization
of this particular medical epistemology which impels the production of an
idealized performance of transsexuality. The importation of these medicalized
textualities to the Brazilian Transsexualizing Process obliterates local bodily and
subjective experiences of transsexuality and, thus, impedes the construction of a
trusting healthcare relationship with the clinics’ medical staff. In this context,
these pathologizing textualities limit the autonomy and agency of both
transsexual clients and their doctors, since their actions (discursive or
otherwise) must please this ghost audience. In other words, in the micro-
details of their talk, they successfully manage the textual constraints imposed by
the legislation in which transsexuality is constructed as a homogenous and
objective medical
fact. The requirement of a diagnosis within the APA’s
framework forces gender clinic clients and staff to engage in such textually-
limited identity performances in order to reentextualize transsexuality as a
mental disorder for the purposes of
the Transsexualizing Process. The
globalization of
two
consequences for the Brazilian gender clinics: because of such discursive
colonization, trans-speciﬁc healthcare policies (1) become identity-based instead
of being comprehensively health-focused and (2) are based on ex-centric
standards of textuality which eclipse local understandings of gender and
sexuality.

the APA’s medical epistemologies has at

least

FINAL REMARKS

How does the global circulation of certain discourses about transsexuality and
Vitoria’s exposure to such mobile texts point to possibilities and challenges for
a sociolinguistics from the South? How can such southern epistemology (Sousa
Santos 1995) develop its critique of the relationships between discourse
circulation, gender and sexuality? Some answers may come from the practices
of those who face such discursive colonization as the purveyor of ways of
thinking, behaving, viewing the world and relating to others, namely
transsexual people themselves. In a self-ethnography of her experiences in
the Brazilian public health system, transfeminist activist and scholar viviane v.
(2015) critically assesses the epistemological imbalances the importation of the
‘true transsexual’ model of identity imposes on the country’s trans-speciﬁc
healthcare. After facing innumerous difﬁculties to access comprehensive and
humanized healthcare in her city, v. concludes that such obstacles resulted
from the fact that her body and subjectivity as a transsexual person have been
colonized by ex-centric standards of textuality which end up producing
epistemological hierarchies and obliterating subaltern cosmologies (Grosfoghel
2011). Despite her self-determination as a trans woman, her voice is not taken
into consideration as an agent in decisions about her own health. Instead, the
healthcare decisions are made by the DSM’s ‘true transsexual’ diagnostic
model. In this context, v. (2015: 119) argues that

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

EX-CENTRIC TEXTUALITIES

343

the pathologization of certain non-conforming bodies and genders works as a
colonial device of control and normalization, which restricts their autonomy and
existential viability. This is particularly true when their speciﬁc needs are not
taken into account in public health settings which are less prone to the
privatization of one’s autonomy. (my translation)

What drives v.’s critique is the erasure of local, radically contextualized forms
of transsexuality in the Brazilian health system in favor of an imported model of
identity which has little resonance in people’s lives and subjectivities below the
equator line. This importation, as Vitoria’s case illustrates, is trans-oppressive. In
a recent article, Connell (2014: 212) asks: ‘how can the global pattern of
centrality versus dependence be contested?’ Her answer is as straightforward as it
is complex: by asserting ‘alternative knowledge systems’ (Connell 2014: 212). In
a similar vein, viviane v. (2015) explains that trans autonomy can only be
fostered if these discursive processes of colonization and the epistemological
imbalances they help get institutionalized are radically criticized on behalf of the
local voices which are systematically eclipsed by ex-centric texts. In other words,
trans autonomy (i.e. the possibility of making transsexual people’s voices heard
in institutional contexts) can only emerge if the textually-based, diagnostically-
driven narrative patterns analyzed above are replaced by the nuanced, multiple
and radically contextualized local understandings of transsexuality clients of the
clinics bring with them to the consultation room.

A sociolinguistics from the South, as the case study discussed above indicates,
would be able to do such a radical critique of the dynamics of epistemological
power that makes the circulation of certain gendered discourses possible. Its
prime interest of investigation would be discursive colonization in its own right.
Its focus on local institutional practices would provide analysts microscopic
lenses to locate the workings of global discourses in people’s minutest daily acts
and would, thus, contribute to a political and epistemological project in which
the ‘voices from the South’ (Moita Lopes 2006) help ‘decolonize power relations
in the modern world’ (Grosfoghel 2011: 26). Such sociolinguistics would
scrutinize the itineraries of global travelling texts, the capillarity of power
relations and their effects on how people think, behave, and stylize their linguistic
and gendered performances in order to fulﬁll and/or challenge ex-centric
standards of textuality. By studying how southern gendered and sexual
experiences are constrained by global discourses and how they adopt, adapt
and resist such travelling texts, a more nuanced view of the relationship between
discourse, gender and sexuality would emerge, avoiding,
the
epistemological universalizing traps of North-normativity. Contrary to what
Spivak (1994) contends, by problematizing how discursive colonization reaches
down to people’s minutest actions, a sociolinguistics from the South should
demonstrate that the subaltern can speak and must be heard.

thus,

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

344

NOTES

BORBA

1. I am grateful to the editors of this special issue for their guidance throughout the
process of publication. Thanks are also due to Branca Falabella Fabrıcio,
Elizabeth Sara Lewis, Daniel do Nascimento Silva, Ben Rampton, Guy Cook,
Roxy Harris, and two anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments on
earlier drafts of this paper. Any remaining weaknesses are, of course, my
responsibility. This research has received generous funding from the Fundacß~ao
de Aperfeicßoamento de Pessoal de Nıvel Superior (CAPES) and from the Brazil
Fellowship Scheme at the University of Birmingham, U.K. to which I am
thankful.

2. The APA frequently revises the manual. The latest version, DSM-V, was
published in 2012. However, I use the DSM-VR as a reference because it was the
version available during ﬁeldwork in 2009–2010 and, thus, it was that version
that was used as a resource for the interactional construction of the diagnosis.
3. Work on the sociolinguistics of globalization (Blommaert 2010) and on world
Englishes (Kachru, Kachru and Nelson 2006) touches on these issues. However,
what distinguishes these strands of research from a sociolinguistics from the
South, is their lack of reﬂexive critical engagement with the epistemological
place from which researchers speak.

4. Although salient in Brazil, race and class were not ethnographically relevant
during my ﬁeldwork: the study participants hardly mentioned these categories in
their daily life at the PAIST and, thus, they are not discussed here. There are, of
course, intersections that make trans identities more nuanced than I could
possibly address here: race and ethnicity, passability status, etc. mark different
social positions to trans people in the global North and shape their access to
healthcare. Compare, for example, the story of Sabrina ‘Bree’ Osbourne in the
movie Transamerica and that of Sin-Dee Rella in Tangerine. Grossly speaking, Sin-
Dee Rella, a Latina working-class dweller on the outskirts of Los Angeles,
represents what I refer to as the South within the North and has her trans
experiences colonized by authoritative medical discourses while Bree (a white,
upper-class, college-educated Jew) is more capable of negotiating her autonomy
within the medical establishment.

5. In 2013, the Ministry of Health published a resolution that allows travestis to use
the services of the Transsexualizing Process in order to receive specialized
healthcare and, especially, hormone therapy.

REFERENCES

American Psychiatric Association. 1994. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders

(4th edition). Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Association.

Benedetti, Marcos. 2005. Toda Feita: O corpo e o g^enero das travestis. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil:

Garamond.

Benjamin, Harry. 1999 [1966]. The Transsexual Phenomenon. D€usseldorf, Germany:

Symposium Publishing.

Bento, Berenice. 2006. A Reinvencß~ao do Corpo: Sexualidade e G^enero na Experi^encia Transexual.

Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Garamond.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

EX-CENTRIC TEXTUALITIES

345

Bento, Berenice and Larissa Pelucio. 2012. Despatologizacß~ao do g^enero: A politizacß~ao das

identidades abjetas. Revista de Estudos Feministas 2: 123–155.
Bhabha, Homi. 1994. The Location of Culture. London: Routledge.
Billig, Michael. 1999. Conversation Analysis and the claims of naivety. Discourse and Society

10: 572–576.

Blommaert, Jan. 2005. Discourse. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Blommaert, Jan. 2010. The Sociolinguistics of Globalization. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge

University Press.

Borba, Rodrigo. 2015. How an individual becomes a subject: Discourse, interaction and
subjectiﬁcation at a Brazilian gender identity clinic. In Working Papers in Urban Language and
Literacies (paper 163). London: King’s College London.

Borba, Rodrigo. 2016a. O (Des)aprendizado de Si: Transexualidades, Interacß~ao e Cuidado em Saude.

Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Editora FioCruz.

Borba, Rodrigo. 2016b. Receita para se tornar um ‘transexual verdadeiro’: Discurso, interacß~ao
e (des)identiﬁcacß~ao no Processo Transexualizador. Trabalhos em Linguıstica Aplicada 55: 33–
75.

Borba, Rodrigo, Elizabeth Lewis, Branca Fabrıcio and Diana Pinto. 2014. A queer postcolonial
critique of (queer) knowledge production and activism. In Elizabeth Lewis, Rodrigo Borba,
Branca Fabrıcio and Diana Pinto (eds.) Queering Paradigms: Global Dialogs on Epistemologies,
Embodiments and Activisms. Oxford, U.K.: Peter Lang. 1–10.

Borba, Rodrigo and Ana Cristina Ostermann. 2007. Do bodies matter? Travestis’ embodiment
the Brazilian Portuguese

of
identity through the manipulation of
grammatical gender system Gender and Language 1: 131–147.

(trans)gender

Brasil. 2010. Conselho Federal de Medicina. Resolucß~ao 1.955/2010. Brasılia, D.F.
Briggs, Charles. 2005. Communicability, racial discourse, and disease. Annual Review of

Anthropology 34: 269–291.

Butler, Judith. 2003 [1990]. Problemas de G^enero: Feminismo e a Subvers~ao da Identidade. Rio de

Janeiro, Brazil: Civilizacß~ao Brasileira.

Butler, Judith. 2004. Undoing Gender. New York: Routledge.
Comaroff, Jean and John Comaroff. 2012a. Theory from the South – or How Euro-America is

Evolving towards Africa. Boulder, Colorado: Paradigm.

Comaroff, Jean and John Comaroff. 2012b. Writing theory from the South: The global order

from an African perspective. World Financial Review Sept–Oct: 7–20.

Comaroff, Jean and John Comaroff. 2012c. Theory from the South: A rejoinder. Fieldsights:
Theorizing the Contemporary Cultural Anthropology Online. Available at http://www.culanth.
org/fieldsights/273-theory-from-the-south-a-rejoinder

Connell, Raewyn. 2007. Southern Theory: The Global Dynamics of Knowledge in Social Science.

Sydney, Australia: Allen and Unwin.

Connell, Raewyn. 2014. Using southern theory: Decolonizing social thought in theory,

research and application. Planning Theory 13: 210–223.

Conrad, Peter. 2007. The Medicalization of Society: On the Transformation of Human Conditions

into Treatable Disorders. Baltimore, Maryland: The John Hopkins University Press.

Coupland, Nikolas, Peter Garret and Angie Williams. 2005. Narrative demands, cultural
performance and evaluation: Teenage boys’ stories for their age-peers.
In Joanna
Thornborrow and Jennifer Coates (eds.) The Sociolinguistics of Narrative. Amsterdam, The
Netherlands: John Benjamin Publishing Co. 67–88.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

346

BORBA

Fabrıcio, Branca. 2013. A outridade lusofona em tempos de globalizacß~ao: identidade cultural
como potencial semiotico. In Moita Lopes and Luiz Paulo (eds.) Portugu^es no Seculo XXI:
Cenario Geopolıtico e Sociolinguıstico. S~ao Paulo, Brazil: Parabola. 144–168.

Foucault, Michel. 2001. O Nascimento da Clınica. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Forense Universitaria.
Goffman, Erving. 1959. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. New York: Anchor Books.
Grosfoghel, Ramon. 2011. Decolonizing post-colonial studies and paradigms of political
economy: Transmodernity, decolonial thinking, and global coloniality. Journal of Peripheral
Cultural Production of the Luso-Hispanic World 1: 1–37.

Hird, Mira. 2002. For a sociology of transsexualism. Sociology 36: 577–595.
Hymes, Dell. 1996. Ethnography, Linguistics, Narrative Inequality: Toward an Understanding of

Voice. London: Taylor and Francis.

Jefferson, Gail. 2004. Glossary of transcript symbols with an introduction. In Gene Lerner (ed.)
Conversation Analysis: Studies from the First Generation. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John
Benjamins. 13–31.

Kachru, Braj, Yamuna Kachru and Cecil Nelson (eds.). 2006. The Handbook of World Englishes.

London: Wiley.

Kulick, Don. 1998. Travesti: Sex, Gender and Culture among Brazilian Transgendered Prostitutes.

Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press.

Langellier, Kristin. 2001.

‘You’re marked’: Breast cancer,

tattoo, and the narrative
performance of
identity. In Jens Brockmeier and Donal Carbaugh (eds.) Narrative and
Identity: Studies in Autobiography, Self, and Culture. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John
Benjamins. 145–184.

Lima, Fatima. 2011. A invencß~ao do dispositivo da transexualidade: Producß~oes de verdade e

experi^encias trans. Em Pauta 9(28): 117–130.

Martınez-Guzman, Antar and Lupicınio I~nıguez-Rueda. 2010. La Fabricacion del Transtorno

de Identidad Sexual. Discurso & Sociedad 4: 30–51.

Maryns, Katrijn. 2006. The Asylum Speaker: Language in the Belgium Asylum Procedure.

Manchester, U.K.: St. Jerome Publishing.

Miskolci, Richard. 2014. Queering the (geo)politics of knowledge. In Elizabeth Lewis, Rodrigo
Borba, Branca Fabrıcio and Diana Pinto (eds.) Queering Paradigms: Global Dialogs on
Epistemologies, Embodiments and Activisms. Oxford, U.K.: Peter Lang. 13–30.

Miskolci, Richard and Larissa Pelucio. 2017. Ao Sul da teoria: Notas sobre Teoria Queer e a
geopolıtica do conhecimento. In Elizabeth Lewis, Rodrigo Borba, Branca Fabrıcio and Diana
Pinto (eds.) Queering Paradigms: Insurg^encias Queer ao Sul do Equador. Oxford, U.K.: Peter
Lang. 69–89.

Misse, Miquel and Gerard Coll-Planas (eds.). 2010. El Genero Desordenado: Crıticas en torno a la

Patologizacion de la Transexualidad. Madrid, Spain: Egales.

Moita Lopes, Luiz Paulo (ed.). 2006. Por uma Linguıstica Aplicada Indisciplinar. S~ao Paulo,

Brazil: Parabola.

Pelucio, Larissa. 2009. Abjecß~ao e Desejo: Uma Etnograﬁa Travesti sobre o Modelo Preventivo de

AIDS. S~ao Paulo, Brazil: Annablume.

Piscitelli, Adriana. 2012. Migracion, genero y sexualidad: Brasile~nas en los mercados del sexo

y del casamiento en Espa~na. Mora 18: 1–15.

Scollon, Ron and Suzy W. Scollon. 2004. Nexus Analysis: Discourse and the Emerging Internet.

New York: Taylor and Francis.

Silverstein, Michael and Greg Urban (eds.). 1996. Natural Histories of Discourse. Chicago,

Illinois: The University of Chicago Press.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

EX-CENTRIC TEXTUALITIES

347

Sousa Santos, Boaventura. 1995. Pela M~ao de Alice: O Social e o Polıtico na Pos-modernidade.

Porto, Portugal: Edicß~oes Afrontamento.

Speer, Susan. 2009. Passing as a transsexual woman in the gender identity clinic. In Margaret
Wetherell (ed.) Theorizing Identities and Social Action. Basingstoke, U.K.: Palgrave Macmillan.
116–138.

Speer, Susan. 2010. Pursuing views and testing commitments: The role of

‘worst case’
hypothetical questions in the psychiatric assessment of transsexual patients. In Alice Freed
and Susan Ehrlich (eds.) Why Do You Ask? The Function of Questions in Institutional Discourse.
New York: Oxford University Press. 133–158.

Speer, Susan. 2011. On the role of reported, third-party compliments in passing as a ‘real’
woman. In Susan Speer and Elizabeth Stokoe (eds.) Conversation and Gender. Cambridge,
U.K.: Cambridge University Press. 155–182.

Spivak, Gaytri C. 1994. Can the subaltern speak? In Patrick Williams and Laura Chrisman
(eds.) Colonial Discourse and Post-colonial Theory: A Reader. Hertfordshire, U.K.: Harvester
Wheatsheaf. 67–111.

Stoller, Robert. 1982 [1975]. A Experi^encia Transexual. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: IMAGO.
Stone, Sandy. 2007 [1991]. The empire strikes back: The posttranssexual manifesto. Last

accessed 11 August 2013 at http://sandystone.com/empire-strikes-back.pdf

Teixeira, Flavia. 2013. Dispositivos de Dor: Saberes que (con)formam as Transexualidades. S~ao

Paulo, Brazil: Annablume.

trans*

sobre saude:

v., viviane. 2015. Reﬂex~oes autoetnograﬁcas

Invisibilizacß~oes e
marginalizacß~oes cist^emicas e resist^encias a patologizacß~ao e normatizacß~ao das diversidades
de g^enero. In Adriana Geisler (ed.) Protagonismo Trans*: Polıtica, Direito e Saude na perspectiva
da integralidade. Niteroi, Brazil: Alternativa. 107–133.

Wortham, Stanton. 2006. Learning Identity: The Joint Emergence of Social Identiﬁcation and

Academic Learning. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Address correspondence to:

Rodrigo Borba
Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Applied Linguistics
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro
Av. Horacio Macedo, 2151
Rio de Janeiro 21941-901
Brazil

rodrigoborba@letras.ufrj.br

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd


