Journal of Sociolinguistics 21/3, 2017: 442–464

Querying heteronormativity among

transnational Pasiﬁka teenagers

in New Zealand: An Oceanic approach

to language and masculinity1

Brian W. King

City University of Hong Kong

This study aims to contribute to emerging dialogues on language, sexuality
and gender, focusing on the performance and subversion of gender and
sexual normativities in a New Zealand sexuality education classroom. In
terms of theory, the aim is to focus on New Zealand’s outlying, unsettled
‘global Southern’ status. It also aims to heuristically separate New Zealand
from the global North to explore local relationships between sexuality and
gender that might otherwise be imperceptible in the glare of globalisation.
In two critical
incidents, transnational Pasiﬁka boys use language to
perform what appears to be sexual ﬂuidity and sexual objectiﬁcation of the
self. A transformation occurs in which a local version of hegemonic
masculinity is countered, and the analytical purchase of the concept of
heteronormativity becomes questionable in this context. Existing Southern
theories from Oceania provide a possible pathway to better understanding
the sociolinguistics of gender and sexuality in New Zealand and in the
world at large.

KEYWORDS: Gender, global South, heteronormativity, New Zealand,
Oceania, sexuality education

INTRODUCTION

This study has both theoretical and investigative aims, with the theme of this
Special
Issue providing an impetus to pause and rethink its potential
contribution to knowledge. In terms of theory, the aim is to contribute to
dialogue about research in the global South, encompassing research on
gender, sexuality and language and to do so while focussing on New Zealand’s
idiosyncratic, unsettled ‘global Southern’
(i.e. New Zealand as
potentially representing both ‘the North in the South’ and ‘the South in the
North’).
this study queries masculinity

investigative aims,

status

In terms of

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

QUERYING HETERONORMATIVITY

443

performance in a classroom-based community of practice and its relationship
with sexuality, colonial hegemony and heteronormativity. Crucially for this
Special Issue, Hokowhitu (2008) has pointed out in the context of New
Zealand that gendered and sexual identity practices in the Paciﬁc region might
remain incomprehensible to Northern epistemologies of gender theory. In the
present study, by primarily focusing on liminal moments instigated by young
men who are New Zealand born Cook Island, Niuean and Samoan
transnationals, I explore this possibility.

the Paciﬁc Islands (or Oceania)

Empirically, the study aims to heuristically separate New Zealand from the
global North as a provisional strategy for making processes of gender and
sexuality visible that might otherwise be difﬁcult to perceive in the shadow of
globalisation and Northern theoretical hegemony. A corollary of this aim is to
address issues of knowledge and power between New Zealand and less
controversially ‘Southern’ scholarship in what is often referred to as ‘the
Paciﬁc’ (Jolly 2008a). Therefore, following other scholars in the region, for
example research in Hawaiʻi (Chen 2014) and Vanuatu and the Cook Islands
(Jolly 2008b), I align here with Hauʻofa (2008) in using the term ‘Oceanic’ to
stress the connections and similarities between various experiences in different
parts of
instead of essentialising their
differences. The term Oceanic also captures the phenomenon of
‘world
enlargement’ (Hauʻofa 1993: 6). This term of Hauʻofa’s refers to a tendency for
Paciﬁc Island peoples to outline their worlds based on the lines of exchange
drawn between members of their extended families who live around the Paciﬁc
Rim. Besnier, researching in Tonga, has called these dispersed, kinship-based
communities ‘transnational enclaves’, which he describes as being loosely
organised networks that span continents and national borders (1997: 19).
This notion of world enlargement is a Paciﬁc perspective of globalisation in
which Paciﬁc peoples occupy a world larger than the geographic spaces and
the international boundaries within which they dwell (Wendt Samu 2010). By
incorporating Oceanic theories of
interconnectedness and this Oceanic
expanded view of the world, I can focus on how observed practices might
challenge Northern-inspired theorisations. Focusing on linguistic and
discursive practices, the ultimate goal is not to essentialise observed patterns
as post-colonial or Southern but rather to examine how local sociolinguistic
systems in New Zealand and broader Oceania might articulate with or
problematise Northern systems related to sex, gender, and sexuality. This is not
an attempt to eclipse indigenous scholarship or conﬂate it with non-indigenous
theory from New Zealand (i.e. in its role as ‘the North in the South’). Neither is
it an attempt to ‘hybridise’ indigenous critique with Northern theories and
thereby hold my own critique up as superior to both (as cautioned against by
Tuck and Yang 2012: 16). Rather, it is an attempt to add a speciﬁc vantage
point in a process for what Raewyn Connell (2014a: 539) has called ‘mutual
learning and interactive thinking about theoretical questions’ and ‘creat[ing]
spaces of theoretical discussion with many more voices and wider and deeper

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

444

KING

agendas’. It is in this sense, here outlined, that I position this paper as an
engagement in South-South dialogue, not to ‘indigenise’ non-indigenous New
Zealand perspectives but instead in order to ultimately ‘talk back’ to Northern
theory with an alternate voice.

SOUTHERN THEORY

Connell (2007) has emphasised the need for South-South dialogue as an
essential part of a critical project aiming to integrate knowledge systems from
the periphery in order to resist a hegemonic relationship in which general
theories are formed in the global North and the global South is mainly a locale
to test those theories and gather data. It is germane to consider how research
on language and masculinity in New Zealand might appropriate the theories of
the North whilst at
the same time extending them in a symmetrical
relationship (Rosa 2014). Speciﬁcally, as Jolly (2008b: 6) suggests, I engage
with Northern models of gender and sexuality while ‘bringing a particularly
Oceanic inﬂection to the dialogue.’

In effect, New Zealand is continually peripheral

In the introduction, I suggested that New Zealand’s status as part of the
global South is unsettled and controversial. Some scholars (e.g. Deumert and
Lexander 2013) have questioned Australia’s inclusion in the global South
presumably because Australia is a wealthy and powerful nation with academic
traditions ﬁrmly grounded in (and contributing to) theory from the North.
However, in no way can New Zealand be considered a duplicate of its powerful
neighbour
to the west, despite continued membership in the British
Commonwealth (indeed many incontrovertibly Southern nations remain
members of that organisation, such as Seychelles, Papua New Guinea and
Samoa).
to Australia’s
antipodean ‘core’ and so any argument that New Zealand enjoys Australia’s
level of inﬂuence is a difﬁcult one to sustain. Certainly, the Maori people of New
Zealand, like the aboriginal people of Australia, are members of the global
South ‘norm’ by most measures (as opposed to outliers). Yet the Maori people
have their own distinctive, and problematic, relationship with the nation state
of New Zealand and its research (Tuhiwai Smith 2012). In an effect referred to
as ‘internal colonialism’ their situation is one in which they are outnumbered
by the descendants of colonial settlers who have no North to return to; thus it
can be argued that global North and colony have become coextensive (Weaver
2005). This indigenous sense of ongoing colonisation must not be collapsed
into the South perhaps simply to end up perpetuating a problem outlined by
Tuhiwai Smith (2012) in which the privileges of non-indigenous academics
are upheld by leaving out the concerns and ways of knowing of indigenous
peoples. It is for these reasons that I question the fruitfulness and the ethics of
conﬂating the ‘global South’ with indigeneity.

The Maori have been included at least symbolically in New Zealand from its
ﬁrst moments of independence, the Treaty of Waitangi between Maori and the

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

QUERYING HETERONORMATIVITY

445

Crown in 1840 promising the Maori status as British subjects, which was
unusual practice in the empire at the time (Orange 2013). Lieutenant
Governor William Hobson proclaimed ‘He iwi kotahi tatou, we are now one
people’ thereby instigating a relationship between Maori and Pakeha2 that is
distinctive from the relationship between Maori and other peoples in New
Zealand (MacLean 1999). The Maori people have since resisted the
assimilationism inherent in Hobson’s phrasing, but a focus on ‘two peoples
in one country’ remains (Hill 2010: 294).

The distinctiveness and importance of indigenous perspectives under the
Treaty of Waitangi, however, still allows space for the idea that the Tauiwi
peoples (i.e. ‘non-Maori’ of all races) of New Zealand have their own experiences
of living and researching in a periphery. To include Tauiwi researchers in a
democratisation of the research imagination is not necessarily to argue for what
Tuck and Yang (2012: 21) have called ‘settler moves to innocence – diversions,
distractions, which relieve the settler of feelings of guilt or responsibility, and
conceal the need to give up land or power or privilege’. Rather, the goal is to
remain cognizant of this mentioned need, continuing to pay close attention to
indigenous critiques while trying to make a concerted contribution to the
destabilisation of the current geopolitics of knowledge (instead of remaining
tacitly complicit with them). Thus, Manathunga (2011: 7) has called for
scholars to make use of ‘the unresolved post-colonial tensions evident in our
societies in Australia and Aotearoa New Zealand to . . . create new spaces for
Southern, Eastern and indigenous knowledges and methodologies’. It is in this
spirit of inclusion that I proceed with positioning New Zealand as part of the
global South and frame this study as being in dialogue with ideas arising from
‘Oceanic’ scholarship while also keeping in mind that these same Southern ideas
are in dialogue with the Northern-based theories that partly enable my analysis.
I propose that it is more useful to at least sometimes view New Zealand as
Southern in tension with various indigenous Oceanic academic perspectives
(e.g. Maori, Cook Island, Hawaiian, and Samoan) as points of view in a South-
South dialogue.
this need not be an inward-looking
epistemology of New Zealand as indigenously Southern; that is, it is not an
attempt to re-theorise New Zealand as somehow unique or ahistorical and
thereby to separate it from the inequalities of the neo-colonial world of today nor
to isolate it from indigenous critique. On the contrary, this in-between status
that I propose is a way of exploiting the tension between New Zealand’s situated
status as both marginally Northern and problematically Southern. As a Tauiwi
scholar myself, this positioning of New Zealand as simultaneously North-in-
South and South-in-North, and thus positioned at the margins of a space of
shared theoretical discussion with indigenous perspectives, represents an
uncertain site of vulnerability, but it is one that I embrace. I do so in
alignment with Milani (2014) who has asserted that by positioning ourselves, as
researchers, at
the margins, we can enable reﬂection concerning our
contributions to knowledge.

I maintain that

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

446

KING

As preparation for the coming analysis, the next sections outline brieﬂy the
history of Oceanic peoples in New Zealand, the role of ethnicity in schools, and
the particularities of masculinity in New Zealand’s socio-historical context.

BACKGROUND: PASIFIKA PEOPLES IN NEW ZEALAND
Tangata Whenua, or the indigenous ‘people of the land’ – the Maori people –
comprise about 15 percent of the population, and Tangata Pasiﬁka, or Paciﬁc
Islanders – the people of Oceania – comprise about 7.5 percent. Both of these
categories represent ‘umbrella’ terms that tend to invite deconstruction and
contestation (Hill 2010). Subsumed by the label Maori, for example, are the
various distinctive iwi (extended kinship groups) that serve as the primary
means of self-identiﬁcation for indigenous people in New Zealand (Hill 2010).
Similarly, the term Pasiﬁka subsumes people from diverse nations that are
distinctive although very much linked by the Paciﬁc Ocean throughout their
history (Hauʻofa 1993). The Cook Islands were annexed by New Zealand in
1901 and existed as a dependency of New Zealand until 1965. Niue and
Tokelau followed a similar course, though Tokelau remains a dependency
today. Samoa was administered as a United Nations trusteeship ﬁrst by Britain
(1914–1946) and then New Zealand until 1962. In the mid-1960s, the bulk of
the populations of the Cook Islands, Niue, and Tokelau migrated to New
Zealand, already equipped with citizenship under ‘free association’, and
Samoans began to migrate under a quota system that has been at times only
loosely enforced (Smith 2012).

Since the beginning of this period of free association and somewhat open
immigration quotas, the inﬂuence of Pasiﬁka communities in New Zealand has
steadily grown. This change was primarily a result of their efforts to achieve
economic progress and social inclusion in the aforementioned ‘one country
two peoples’ model that had been negotiated in relation to the Treaty of
Waitangi
the New Zealand-born
population, identiﬁcation with their parents’ homeland has widely varying
salience, but due to the highly mobile and transnational nature of their kinship
communities many have ongoing contact with extended family from their
parents’ homeland and prioritise travel to those locales themselves where
possible (Anae 2002).

in its modern reincarnation. Amongst

This widely varying identiﬁcation with Oceanic ethnic identities is evident
among the participants in the current study to some extent, but it has been
challenging to discern their ethnic self-identiﬁcations because of an overall
reticence in the classroom about ethnic practices. Such reticence serves as a
demonstration of a colonial hegemony in New Zealand that enforces alignment
with a levelling of ethnic differences (Shields, Bishop and Mazawi 2005). There
are certain domains in mainstream New Zealand schools (like Matangi College,
the pseudonymous label for the location of this research) in which ethnicity is
celebrated, such as cultural groups and their shows. However, as valuable as

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

QUERYING HETERONORMATIVITY

447

these activities are in terms of improved school experience and attendance for
Maori and Pasiﬁka students (Whitinui 2008), in many mainstream schools
these moments are mostly restricted to the practice room or the auditorium
and do not necessarily translate into the presence of ethnic practices or
positions in the classroom unless robustly supported across the curriculum
(Savage et al. 2011). Admittedly, my ﬁeld work observations were restricted to
the school grounds and to this speciﬁc classroom, limiting my ability to conﬁrm
the pervasiveness of this observed classroom reticence of Pasiﬁka students
(indeed everyone) about ethnicity.

MASCULINITIES IN NEW ZEALAND

As part of the broader study of
language use in a sexuality education
classroom, gender was of great relevance, and here masculinity will be the
focus. In the colonial history of New Zealand, hegemonic masculinity has been
and largely continues to be one that comprises a Pakeha version that
emphasises violence, stoicism, heterosexuality, and a rugged sports-oriented
masculine world (Hokowhitu 2004; Phillips 1987). As Hokowhitu (2004)
argues, in a normative sense Maori men have largely aligned to this version
since colonisation, as evidenced by the spectacle of the Maori sportsman,
to varying degrees. Referring to this
although of course embodying it
phenomenon as Maori men’s
‘consumption of Pakeha masculinity’,
Hokowhitu points out that in the face of the possible extinction of their
people, many Maori men ‘were forced to assume those masculine qualities that
would abet their integration into the dominant Pakeha culture’ (Hokowhitu
2004: 269). This was a process of appropriation whereby Maori men gained a
certain masculine legitimacy via terms approved by Pakeha masculinity; as
Malcolm MacLean (1999: 23) has expressed it, ‘Maori men can never be
admitted to this legitimate masculine world on terms other than those
determined by its cultural mores. They can be admitted as rugby players and as
soldiers.’ It is important to note that there is evidence of other masculinities
that proliferated in Maori culture historically, for example nineteenth century
photos of Maori men that show them demonstrating mutual physical affection
by lazing on each other in open displays of caring (Hokowhitu 2004).
However,
since colonisation such versions of masculinity have been
subordinated by a patriarchal masculinity that is primarily an historical,
colonial construct (Hokowhitu 2008). My intention here is not to deny or
obfuscate the pre-colonial history of the Maori warrior,
for example, and
attempt to replace it with some kind of monolithic, essentialised and softer
version; rather, the point is to emphasise that for Maori men (and indeed
Pakeha men), a narrower ﬁeld of masculinities eventuated from the hegemonic
processes of colonisation.

In contrast with the colonial New Zealand, rugged, masculine norm, modern
Pasiﬁka men in other Paciﬁc Island locales have been observed performing

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

448

KING

In Hawaiʻi, Tengan (2002) has

masculinities more in line with the nineteenth century Maori photos described
above.
contrasted Hawaiian men’s
masculinities (a softer, sexualised version associated with Hula) with the
Maori sportsman, and indeed warrior, which is usually associated with the
Haka, or war challenge, made famous globally by the All Blacks rugby team.
He suggests that the Maori version is seen by his Hawaiian men informants to
represent an ideal masculine image to strive for (although this stance is
contested by many Kanaka Maoli women, as he outlines). Again, the point
here is not to suggest that men from other Pasiﬁka societies never embody and/
or perform masculinities that include the sportsman spectacle; obviously they
sometimes do so, just as there are Maori men who embody and/or perform
subordinated masculinities within the New Zealand context. In fact, there are
numerous rugby stars who hail from Pasiﬁka communities. Rather, the point is
that a different array of masculinities has been more readily accessible to them.
For instance, Tengan is careful to observe that Hawaiian men have historically
found other ways to subvert the perceived emasculation of the colonised in
Hawaiʻi. An example of this subversion is highlighted in the work of Walker
(2005, 2008) in which Waikıkı surfers are seen to use sexual/romantic allure
to bolster anti-colonial agency. Sexual prowess in Hawaiʻi represents a
different masculinity from that of Maori-Pakeha masculinity, and it is therefore
important to the current study, for the Cook Island, Niuean, and Samoan boys
are seen to ignore the local normative version at key moments. Of relevance
here is the work of Alexeyeff in the Cook Islands (2008), which has revealed
that local and Western concepts of sexuality and gender are markedly different
and come together with friction. Sexuality is not central to masculinity in the
Cook Islands, and indeed Oceania more broadly. Therefore, for example, men
who prefer to have sex with akavaʻine (i.e. cross-dressing ‘men’ who tend to
exclusively desire straight men) are not considered to be gay (Alexeyeff 2009).
These men’s social identity is based on public behaviour, and private sexual
activity (opposite sex or same sex) does not factor in the equation because it
must be concealed both from public display and public declaration. If they act
like straight men in public life, then that is what they are considered to be and
a blind eye is turned to any ‘contradictory’ sex habits. The akavaʻine, too, are
deﬁned by their gendered roles in the community (i.e. they are girls, as they
claim) rather than being deﬁned by who they privately prefer as sexual
partners.

Because of the transnational kinship networks between the Cook Islands and
New Zealand and North America, these contrasts with Western concepts of
gay and transgender are quite salient to people in these communities, and the
contrasts are humorously played with (Jolly 2008b). This tendency to combine
local and global in relation to sexuality and gender is similarly the norm
amongst Samoan New Zealander men (Park et al. 2002). The participants in
the current study also step outside of a New Zealand colonial framing of gender
and sexuality in a playful manner, making these Southern theorisations highly

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

QUERYING HETERONORMATIVITY

449

instructive for the analysis. The following section outlines the approach taken
during analysis and further sets the context by introducing the participants.

DATA AND PARTICIPANTS

Social context in sociolinguistics is crucial for understanding and explaining
language use, for it inﬂuences the choices that we make between linguistic
resources. Culturally based practices form an important part of an array of
components that comprise context,
including also gender and sexuality.
Culture inﬂuences interaction at a macro level via norms and values while at a
micro level analysis can focus on the linguistic ways in which speakers align
themselves and others with certain aspects of identity such as masculinity (or
do not). These alignments emerge during interaction and are dynamically
negotiated (Marra, King and Holmes 2014). During the analysis in this study, I
focus on how masculinity emerges locally through interaction and how it is
contested or not. Speaker choices have many potential meanings, including
acting as indices of gender as part of self-positioning and the ascribed
positioning of others. Gender is most often not directly indexed by linguistic
acts. Rather, language ﬁrst of all performs speciﬁc functions in interaction
while indirectly indexing gendered social
identities through ideological
associations in which language is linked semiotically to certain social
meanings (Ochs 1992). My approach to analysis aligns with this idea that
identities may be indirectly indexed, incorporating the notion that this can be
achieved through various acts such as:

refer to self or other);

identities);

(cid:129) overt labelling (i.e. using social categories such as lesbian or straight to
(cid:129) implicature (i.e. inferences and presuppositions that provide links to social
(cid:129) stance-taking (i.e. linguistic marking of a speaker’s orientation to ongoing
(cid:129) styling (i.e. the use of a speciﬁc repertoire such as hip-hop talk or even a

talk via evaluation and affect);

speciﬁc language or dialect);

all of which provide semiotic links to social identities (Bucholtz and Hall 2005).
Talk about sexualised male bodies in the classroom under investigation acts as
this type of index, with gendered meanings dependent on how the interlocutors
speak about body parts and postures, relating them to gender and sexuality in
multiple ways, as outlined here.

This research took place in a New Zealand secondary school that appears
here under the pseudonym ‘Matangi College’, an urban school on the North
Island. The ethnographic portion of the research took place between February
and August 2009, with the audio recordings concentrated in the ﬁnal month
of that period. The participants also appear under pseudonyms (Table 1) and

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

450

KING

Table 1: Information about participants

Name

Sex

Ethnic identiﬁcations (in sequence, as stated by participant)

Cook Islander
unveriﬁed (but listed as ‘Maori and European’ in school documents)

F
F
M Niuean and European

Ata
Aroha
Ben
Caleb M Maori, Samoan, and Australian European
Codey M Samoan
Isaac M Maori
Jay
Josh
Lito
Luana
Olivia
Rawiri M Cook Islander

M Cook Islander
M Cook Islander
F
F
F

Samoan
Fijian and Cook Islander
unveriﬁed (but listed as ‘European’ in school documents)

are all age ﬁfteen to sixteen (see also King 2010, 2014a, 2014b). All were born
in New Zealand or came as infants.

The two other important participants in this lesson are their teacher, Mr J,
and myself; two adults whose inﬂuence on the students’ experience was
extensive, as one might expect, and our roles have been outlined in King
(2014a).3 Mr J (a pseudonym) is originally from Australia and had previously
taught Physical Education and Health in Australia and England. At the time of
data collection for this study, he had been living and teaching in New Zealand
for about six years. I am originally from Canada, but my mother was born and
raised in New Zealand as a member of the European/Pakeha majority. In terms
of ethnicity, I self-identify in the New Zealand context as European but not
Pakeha, as I was not born and raised in New Zealand. This birthplace
distinction is contested (see endnote 2), but one to which I align so as to
emphasise my own migrant history. I came to this research as a former teacher
of the New Zealand secondary school system. After arriving from Canada, I
worked as a secondary school teacher from 1996 to 2000, ﬁrst in a small town
on the North Island and then in an urban school (not Matangi College). In
both of those schools there were large numbers of students who identiﬁed in
some way as Maori and Pasiﬁka (including Cook Island, Fijian, Niuean,
Samoan, Tokelauan, and Tongan) and about half who identiﬁed as European/
Pakeha. Although nine years had passed since my time as a teacher in the
area, my former time there proved to be valuable in permitting me to relate to
the students regardless of their ethnicities.

CLASSROOM PRACTICE AND SITUATED IDENTITIES

In previous analyses of sexuality education classroom discourse I have chosen
not to emphasise the ‘institutionality’ of classroom dialogue (e.g. King 2014b),

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

QUERYING HETERONORMATIVITY

451

arguing that student experiences in the classroom very much interpenetrate
with their experiences elsewhere in the world. Thus, to draw a clear line at the
classroom door could serve primarily to reify roles which might perhaps be
having questionable or minimal effect on the ongoing gendering and
sexualisation of discourse in a particular community of practice. That is,
simply because participants are speaking as students and teachers at certain
times does not mean that they will have a different linguistic and discursive
‘toolbox’ to draw from during performances of gender and sexuality. Then
again, it must be acknowledged that such effects could indeed be signiﬁcant at
certain times. Students are at least sometimes ‘doing being teachers [and
students]’ (McHoul and Rapley 2002: 75) in a local enactment of institutional
roles that have origins predating the formation of this community of practice.
This sense of doing, a practice-based view of roles and identities, captures
what is meant by performance in this study. I use the term in the sense that
Coupland (2007) has called ‘mundane performance’ in contrast with the ‘high
performance’ (e.g. shows and pre-rehearsed speeches). In mundane social
identity performances, gender and other identities are ‘done’ again and again
in everyday interaction by way of various stylised acts that reiterate past,
successful gender performances around us (Butler 1999). I align with Marra
and Angouri (2011) in their stance that the taking up and performance of
‘roles’ is linked with group belonging and ‘identities’, and so an approach that
integrates these two ideas is most productive in institutional contexts.
Performances do not suggest fabrication, which supposes a core self to be
lied about; rather, many of our stylistic acts are aimed more at our hopes
concerning future selves than our current concepts of what we are (Eckert and
McConnell-Ginet 2013). It is through these stylistic acts that we might become
what we hope to be, and these acts may be conscious or unconscious to a
varying degree.

The participants are part of a classroom-based community of practice,
deﬁned as a group who have together developed shared, localised practices
while jointly negotiating a response to the conditions in which they ﬁnd
themselves (Eckert and McConnell-Ginet 1999; Holmes and Meyerhoff 1999;
Wenger 1998). In other words, they have come together in the institutional
setting of a school and through sustained interaction have worked out shared
ways of doing and saying things. This is a community of practice whose shared
repertoire is grounded in a joint enterprise of two parts – participating in and
shaping a unit of study in sexuality education while concurrently participating
in social research. I have elsewhere argued, on the basis of ethnographic
observation and discourse analysis,
that highly localised practices were
emergent over several months and clearly resulted in the formation of a
community of practice (King 2014a).

However, to say that they have come together to form a community of
practice does not mean that no one was acquainted beforehand. On the
contrary, these students had been, and in many cases continued to be, joint

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

452

KING

members of other communities of practice both within the school and in the
wider community and even transnationally between New Zealand and other
places in Oceania (e.g. Cook Islands and Samoa). In fact, some of them have
known each other since kindergarten while still others are members of the
same extended family. When these other networks become relevant, they will
be explained as part of the analysis.

Ethnographic observations revealed that the Samoan and Cook Island
students who participated in the discussions analysed here are indeed
transnationals. In one representative example, just after the two-week term
break I observed Lito chatting with Codey and Luana about her recent trip to ‘Sa’
(i.e. Samoa) and, in a separate conversation, Jay comparing notes with Ata and
other Cook Island students about their anticipated trips to ‘Raro’ (i.e. Rarotonga,
the largest and most populous of the Cook Islands) in the upcoming school
holiday break. In both examples, there was a tacit assumption that all present
would be making a trip like this sooner or later. They are members of Cook Island
and/or Samoan ‘transnational enclaves’ (Besnier 1997: 19), travelling there,
hosted by family and often reciprocally hosting family members in New Zealand.
As mentioned in the previous section, during classroom conversations of
gender and sexuality (recorded or not) students rarely spoke about lesson
topics in direct relation to their self-identiﬁed and often transnational
ethnicities (i.e. rarely saying ‘As a Samoan’ or ‘In Samoa’). One isolated
exception was Lito who once brought up the topic of fa’afaﬁne in Samoa (i.e.
boys who present as non-masculine, self-identify as girls, and may later eschew
masculine adult roles – Schoeffel 2014; Tcherkezoff 2014) as an example of a
gender identity that did not conform to New Zealand norms of binary gender
and sexuality. Mr J encouraged her to say more about it, but she fell silent and
did not mention it again. Nonetheless, I will argue that certain responses
during class activities are difﬁcult to explain unless Oceanic epistemologies are
employed, and this serves as an indirect clue to the perhaps ‘covert’ relevance
of ethnicity in the interaction.

MASCULINITIES AND HETERONORMATIVITY IN CONVERSATION

The data for this study have been selected from a lesson that took place near
the beginning of a six-week sexuality unit. The focus of this lesson produced
opportunities to observe the students talking about sexual minorities because
homoerotic advertising images were included in an activity centred on gender
in the media. The task that stimulated the conversations to be analysed was
drawn from Tasker (2000), a resource that formed the foundation of the
teacher’s sexuality unit. The speciﬁc data extracts analysed here were selected
because they are representative of patterns observed in the broader linguistic
ethnographic study.

As identiﬁed in Holmes and King (2017), there was an ongoing pattern in the
class in which alignments to performance expectations for the roles of teacher and

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

QUERYING HETERONORMATIVITY

453

student incorporated an alignment to non-heteronormative and non-heterosexist
talk. Unfortunately, space restrictions do not allow for those conversations to be
analysed here, but sufﬁce to say that Mr J persistently drew attention to ways of
saying and doing that presumed everyone is heterosexual in order to be critical of
that type of discourse. The students did their best to attend to such transgressions,
expressing in class activities that their aim was to be inclusive of sexual minorities
in every way possible even if they did not always succeed. However, as the
following analysis reveals, at this early stage of the sexuality unit (i.e. week three
of an eight-week unit), practices did not always fully align with those intentions.
Extract 1, below, is a small-group discussion by a group of girls (Ata, Luana
and Lito) during an activity in which small groups are asked to analyse print
media advertisements, answering questions about how the images represent
men and women. The group is discussing the advertisements they have been
given by the teacher, and in Extract 2 (further below) they present their ideas
during a subsequent whole-class discussion. The image is a black and white
photo of ﬁve men wearing nothing but tight, white brief-style underpants.
They are leaning on one another in ways that are suggestive of intimacy. The
caption reads ‘Versace Intensive’.4 After spending a few minutes looking at the
images and responding with their ﬁrst impressions, the small group begins to
have a discussion. For transcription conventions, see the Appendix.

Extract 1

1

2

3

Luana:

Lito:

Luana:

4 Ata:

5
Lito:
6 Ata:

Luana:

7
8 Ata:
9
10
11

Luana:
Lito:
Luana:

12 Ata:

13

Lito:

((looking at picture))
HA↑ (laughs)
if it was just one guy it’d be good but
//((inaudible))//
//
//o::::KAY
they’re all leaning on each other and like
(3) LOOK AT THAT though hehe
((pointing at crotch))
it’s YUH:::uh::::ck
(10) okay
((reading)) what was your FIRST thought
(2) oh (.) my (.) FUCKING gosh (nervous laugh)
(7) ha HA (laughs)
((to Lito)) what did YOU say
(4) (laughing and talking) it’s not NOR ↑ mal hehe
like they’re not hot
AT all (2) AT all (.) to US
(3) THAT’S just WRONG
(4) anyway WHO’S it AIMED at (2) you think GUYS ↑
oh why do you say (.) how do you say
why do you say THAT

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

KING

454

14 Ata:

15
16

Luana:
Lito:

17 Ata:

18

Luana:

well who ELSE would it be for
(1) they’re all like wearing (.) white=
=yeah that’s like the product they’re SELLing
yeah they’re not wearing anything else
((reading)) WHAT’S the MESSage
(5) it makes your thing (.) big ↑
(laughter)
((reading caption)) inTENsive
(2) time to get real↑ or something:::
grow up↑ (.) be a MAN or something
but they don’t look like real manly
they look GAY
little GIRLS (1) with BALLS

In turn 5, Lito gives the ﬁrst reaction to the photo, with a long, emphatic,
drawn-out exclamation of ‘yuck’. In the subsequent turn, after a ten second
pause, Ata reorients to the question paper in front of them, reading aloud ‘What
was your FIRST thought’. Luana and Lito then begin to discuss their shock, with
Luana adding an interjection of ‘FUCKING’ for emphasis (turn 7). Then Lito in
turn 10 states that the picture is ‘not normal’. In this discussion, words like
‘normal’ and interjections such as ‘yuck’ begin to generate an oppositional
stance in relation to the image. This stance indirectly indexes (Ochs 1992) a
hegemonic ideal of how masculine men are supposed to appear and act in the
New Zealand context. The section closes with a heteronormative statement by
Luana (turn 18) in which she repeatedly questions the manliness of the models
(‘they don’t look like real manly’), comparing them to little girls with atrophic
male anatomy (i.e. ‘little GIRLS with BALLS’) and with the presupposition that
this is typical for gay men (i.e. ‘they look GAY’). In this way, they index a close
connection between gender and sexuality that in turn indexes the New Zealand
hegemonic norm. Even though the class has agreed that heterosexist talk is out
of place in this sexuality education classroom, during this exchange between
friends at an early stage in the sexuality unit, there is evidence of an alignment
with a dominant notion of masculinity in New Zealand and a tendency (for girls
in particular) to police masculinity to ﬁt that dominant notion. This policing is
related to participation in the local heterosexual market (more on this below).
In Extract 2, below, we see the group’s presentation of this advertisement
during whole class discussion. Luana holds up the advert for the class to see,
but her attempt to align with Mr J’s guidance of the lesson is immediately
overwhelmed by spontaneous talk from the rest of the class.

Extract 2
Italicised, underlined, non-indented sections comprise a small group conversation
taking place at the same time as the whole class discussion, which appears in normal
non-underlined type, fully indented. For other transcription conventions, see the
Appendix.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

QUERYING HETERONORMATIVITY

455

1
2
3
4
5

Codey:
Aroha:
Codey:
Caleb:
Ata:

is that (.) WHA::T what IS that
verSACe
i can’t SEE it
MISter //put it on the THING//
//one two three four ﬁve//
ﬁve men

Jay:

6 Olivia: ((into mic)) Jay’s um going over to look at the men in underwear↑
7
8 Aroha: Jay and Codey going over to look at the sexy men 
9 Olivia: in their underwear↑ touching each other↑
10

AWWWW WRONG

((pointing at the men in the picture)) me::: Josh Codey Rawiri

Jay:

Caleb

Codey:
Josh:

we’re just CURious (laughing)
i’m the one with the ((inaudible))
what is it about

11
12
13 Hannah:
14 Aroha: ((into mic)) and they are making it so //that it is THEM// having an orgy
15
16

Caleb:
Codey:

29 Aroha: //they’re like touching// each other↑
30 Mr J:

now
can i just point something out↑

31 Codey: that’s //a STIFFER i bet//

There is a brief,

rapid cacophony of outbursts

from turns 6–27.6
Interjections of disgust appear (e.g. ‘ewwww’ in turns 21 and 25) and use of
lexical items such as ‘fags’ that, combined with a prolonged vowel and a rising
then falling tone, point to a stance that is negatively judgmental of ‘gayness’
(e.g. Lito in turn 20: ‘they LOOK like fa::::gs
’). These features are juxtaposed
with the paradoxical and interesting subject positions taken up by Josh, Jay,
and Codey. There are negative responses from their classmates and even these
boys initially react negatively – Jay in turn 7: ‘AWWWW WRONG ’ and

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

17 Aroha:
18
Codey:
19 Aroha:
20

Lito:

21 Aroha:
22
Codey:
23 Aroha:

24 Kate:
25
Codey:
26 Aroha:
27
28 Mr J:

Jay:

(laughing)

//you’re the one with the BIG balls//
aw FUCK5 their BALLS are NEXT to each other
they’re gonna rub aGAINST each other (laughing)
are those white things men’s undies
yeah
like WHOA
they LOOK like fa::::gs
aw there it goes
ewww hooo hoohoohoohoo
(laughing) they’re buggers man
they’re GAY
they HAVE to be gay
look at that guy’s hand
ewwwww (laughing)
especially the two like closest together
look at that one going like THAT ((limp-wristed hand gesture))
okay everyone quiet please
you’re //all calling out//

456

KING

Codey turn 22:
‘they’re buggers man’ (buggers being a pejorative term
historically used in a pan-British-Empire context to refer to men who have
anal sex with other men). Although all of these affective responses index
gender and sexuality positionings that are hegemonic in the colonial New
Zealand context, Jay in turn 10 suddenly positions himself and some of his
friends in the room as substitutions for the men in the photo. This move is
aligned to by Josh in turn 12. The apparent incongruity of these two
reactions is observed by Olivia and Aroha, who lean close to their group’s
desk microphone in turns 6, 8, 9, and 14 and provide a running
commentary in which they highlight the potential homoeroticism of this
positioning. Aroha emphasises the eroticism of the advert by using the term
‘sexy’ (turn 8) and Olivia then deploys a high rising tone in turn 9 on
‘underwear’ and ‘touching each other’, creating the implicature that Jay is
engaging in a performance of same-sex desire or perhaps gay identity.
Signiﬁcantly, despite the amount of negativity towards the embodiment of
the models being expressed in this discussion, Jay’s discursive placement of
himself and his friends in that same image is subsequently neither withdrawn
nor disavowed. Rather, that positioning is permitted to stand.

Thus,

in the public forum of the whole-class discussion, performances
initially align to heteronormalisation as speakers ‘Other’ homosexuality and
construct themselves as valid members of the localised heterosexual market
and also police the behaviour of others (Eckert 2006; see also Cameron 1997).
As a concept, the heterosexual market uses economic metaphors to refer to a
collaboration amongst children and teenagers in a move towards the
predominantly heterosexual social order of adolescence (Eckert 2006, 2011).
The market metaphor is appropriate because the making and unmaking of
pairings between boys and girls is the beginning of seeing their cohort as
structured around social value, and that social value is based on heterosexual
attractiveness (Eckert 2011). The heterosexual market is relevant for the
current study because the Pasiﬁka boys’ contributions appear to sit outside of
those relations, at least sometimes, despite a clear stance by the girls in which
they seem to police masculinity as part of this heterosexual social order. What
gets overlooked is the alternate reading of the image by Jay and the other Cook
Island and Samoan boys. It is a reading in which a very different relationship is
suggested between masculinity and sexuality, and as ﬂeeting as that position
appears to be in terms of talking time, it is an excellent example of an ongoing
trend in this community of practice. As will be seen in Extract 3 below, it was
common for Pasiﬁka young men in this community of practice to behave in
ways that both problematised hegemonic masculinity and at times aligned
with it, something that the Pakeha and Maori boys in the class (and the girls
for that matter) were not observed to do. Because there is a limited amount of
recorded data that demonstrates this problematisation, it would perhaps be
unwise to make too many assumptions about gender ﬂuidity and its
relationship to ethnicity in this context. It must also be acknowledged that,

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

QUERYING HETERONORMATIVITY

457

in the data presented in this article, it is mainly Pasiﬁka girls who participate in
talk that aligns very closely to that hegemonic version. However, in the larger
ethnographic ﬁeld study there were numerous other interactions, many that
took place while audio recorders were switched off,
in which the gender
balance was more even in this regard. Therefore, although the girls’ role in this
case is signiﬁcant, once again caution is required in order to avoid attaching
undue signiﬁcance to these girls’ performances of heteronormative policing.
Further research can hopefully shed light on this apparent gender ﬂuidity of
transnational Pasiﬁka boys in New Zealand, and the apparent lack of
it
amongst Pakeha and Maori boys, to explore whether these observed practices
extend beyond this community of practice or whether there might be
alternative explanations for them.

The activity that Extract 3 has been taken from was recorded a couple of
weeks later and comprises an activity in which students had to ask one
another questions that have stereotypically been asked only of sexual
minorities. The purpose is to turn heteronormativity on its head and
provoke reﬂection about heterosexuality (Tasker 2000). Heteronormativity
as a concept refers to how sexuality has become entangled with binary gender,
reproducing a narrow version of heterosexuality as normative and rendering
its entanglements invisible as part of that normalisation process (Milani 2017;
Motschenbacher 2011). This entanglement of heterosexuality and binary
gender has been referred to by Butler (1993) as the ‘heterosexual matrix’. In a
variation of what is often referred to in New Zealand classrooms as the
‘carousel’ discussion method, half of the students remained stationary at desks
(and beside an audio recorder – there were eight recorders in the room) while
the other half rotated tables after every second question. They went through
the questions in sequence and did their best to answer them in interview style.
In Extract 3, Codey puts a question to Ben.

Extract 3: Codey, Ben and Isaac – I’m still a growing man

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

8
9
10

Codey:
Isaac:
Codey:

Codey: when did you deCIDE //that you were either straight gay//
Isaac:
Ben:
Codey:
Ben:
Codey:
Ben:

//on the day i was BORN niggah↑ (short laugh)//=
=or heterosexual
so now (.) what is your answer
well:::
(laughs)
i wouldn’t have a clue
i’m still a growing man↑
//so:://
//HA HA//
(laughing)
((calling out to room)) he //could be// GAY guys

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

458

KING

11

Ben:

12
13
14
15

Codey:
Ben:
Codey:
Ben:

i don-
i i don’t know↑
(laughs)
i i’m st- i’m still //experiencing// changes man↑
//true haha//
farg jeez
but i’m pretty sure i’m heterosexual man

laugh. The others fail

to respond to this apparent

Codey reads the question aloud in turn one, and in turn two, Isaac overlaps
the question with ‘on the day i was BORN niggah↑’ and following up with a
short
joke, but via
implicature Isaac’s stance seems to be that one does not choose, rather one is
born with a sexual orientation. This stance indexes hegemonic masculinity by
way of compulsory heterosexuality. As a participant who identiﬁes as Maori, in
this performance Isaac aligns with the New Zealand version of normative
masculinity. That version does not allow for ﬂuidity of desire, but it is
interesting to note that it is Ben, a Niuean identiﬁed participant, who chooses
to ignore that local norm. Ben responds in turn 7, stating that he is still a
‘growing man’, and so he has no idea how to answer the question. He implies
that he does not yet have a ‘ﬁxed’ or salient sexual orientation because he is
too young and so cannot be sure about his desires. One interpretation is that in
this way he indexes an Oceanic version of masculinity in which sexuality is not
at the core of gender identity (see ‘Masculinities in New Zealand’ section). To
achieve these effects, Ben is prepared to engage in a performance in which he
places himself in an ambiguous sexual subject position from the point of view
of the gay/straight binary that is so central to a New Zealand (indeed Western)
conception of gender identity and the heterosexual market in New Zealand.
There is evidence of a greater ﬂuidity here, which is much more the model of
Oceanic masculinities (Jolly 2008b). This interpretation is conﬁrmed by Codey,
who in turn 10 points out, to all who will listen, that Ben’s response opens up
the possibility that he could be gay. Thus, we see that in the context of this
New Zealand classroom, Ben and Codey, as transnational Pasiﬁka young men,
are navigating the localised norms of New Zealand, but Ben introduces a more
Oceanic inﬂection to the dialogue (i.e. by dislocating sexuality from identity).
This moment of contestation, as with the previously analysed interaction in
response to the homoerotic image, is a reminder that Oceanic perspectives on
gender and sexuality rarely mimic Western or cosmopolitan modes of gender
and sexuality (Jolly 2008b). Instead, as Alexeyeff points out in relation to the
Cook Islands, for example (2008: 144), ‘Cook Islands “locality” is moulded by
the interplay between competing perspectives; Western and local are co-
present in a zone of contestation, and Cook Islanders struggle over their
meaning.’ Neither the non-normative positioning nor Codey’s announcement
appears to worry Ben, and his undeterred bearing maintains the resigniﬁcation
of young men’s masculinity which began in turn 7. Because it places in doubt

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

QUERYING HETERONORMATIVITY

459

the centrality of sexuality to gender identity, his performance thus also raises
questions about
the concept of
heteronormativity, a theme that I will explore in the next section.

the universal analytical purchase of

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

to

perceived

be non-hegemonically masculine

To summarise, there was a periodic tendency for Pasiﬁka young men in this
community of practice to position themselves in ways that I, as a participant
observer,
and non-
heteronormative in the New Zealand context. One possible interpretation is
that they demonstrate a version of close male friendship in which physical
intimacy does not disrupt masculinity and heterosexuality; evidence of what
Jackson (1997) has framed in the context of Thailand as an understanding of
the relationship between gender and sexuality in which the two are not
necessarily connected in ways expected in purely Western contexts. The young
men in this sexuality education classroom assert a sense of aroha (i.e. love) for
one another by inserting physical
intimacy into masculinity, perhaps
disrupting a Northern construction of Oceanic physicality.

Yet the other participants do indeed heteronormatively position these models
(judged to be rather effete looking) as gay (Aroha, turn 23, Excerpt 2 ‘they
HAVE to be gay’). Thus, another possible interpretation of the boys’ narcissistic
self-positioning is that it is a kind of masculinity performance in which they
display conﬁdence in their own sexual attractiveness despite such stances. In
this sense,
it could be a move that positions them favourably in the
heterosexual market and thus their peer group, and perhaps this is why it is
permitted to stand in the interactions of this particular heterosexual market.
Therefore, it is reminiscent of the Waikıkı surfers in Walker’s studies (2005,
2008 – see ‘Masculinities in New Zealand’, above). Oceanic theory about
masculinities and the subversion of positioning of Pasiﬁka men sheds light on a
possible peer group motivation for what at ﬁrst seems non-heteronormative
and may be so, but mainly in a colonial New Zealand version of hegemonic
masculinity, which gets disrupted here. Perhaps gender and sexuality are
being ‘domesticated’ (Jolly 2008b: 14) as New Zealand hegemonic masculinity
is juxtaposed with an Oceanic epistemology.

The self-identiﬁed Cook Island, Samoan and Niuean young men featured
during this analysis manage to draw upon dominant gender constructs for a
contradictory and ultimately perhaps subversive purpose. This interpretation
aligns with what Tengan has observed with Hawaiian masculinity in
comparison with Maori masculinity; that is, how indigenous men in Oceania
engage both in hegemonic and marginalised gender practices that defy simple
categorisation as either Western or Oceanic (Tengan 2002). They occupy
certain subject positions that are non-heteronormative according to Northern
epistemologies. The liminal
simultaneously homophobic,
homophilic, and even homoerotic performance causes a transformation in

status of

this

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

460

KING

which a heteronormative display by New Zealand’s standards (i.e. the initial
responses of the Pasiﬁka girls and subsequently their classmates) transforms
into a non-hegemonic performance. These young men can occupy a liminal
space in terms of gender and sexuality in ways that are more problematic for
Pakeha and especially Maori men in this community of practice. It is difﬁcult to
be certain that these Pasiﬁka boys’ conception of masculinity and sexuality,
which this analysis suggests could be markedly different from the New Zealand
norm (cf. Alexeyeff 2008 and her research in the Cook Islands), arises from
trans-Oceanic background and knowledge. However, the approach taken in
this study allows for the possibility that it might indeed. Thus, it pays to ask the
question, creating a South-South dialogue of New Zealand and other forms of
Oceanic localness but also a South-North dialogue around globalisation.

The apparent disconnectedness between sexuality and gender that these boys
arguably exemplify at key moments raises questions about the meaning of
‘heteronormative’ in an Oceanic context. If further research supports the idea
that sexuality has little normative relation to masculinity amongst transnational
Pasiﬁka boys (i.e. it is not a regulatory structure for processes of gendering) then
perhaps, in the balance, the concept of heteronormativity is not a theoretical
affordance in that given context. As Boellstorff points out in the context of
Indonesia, relationships of genders to normativity are complex, and certain queer
theoretical constructs can lose analytical purchase when removed from their
Western epistemological context (Boellstorff 2007). Further research that draws
on local Oceanic theorising about gender normativity and its particular
relationship to sexuality, beyond heteronormativity, is overdue. The current
study is a modest ﬁrst step towards that end.

As Connell (2014b) has emphasised, in order to understand masculinity
performances and construction in colonial (and neo-colonial) societies, a
Northern-centric theoretical approach is not adequate; rather, we must
instead rely on the intellectual production of the South itself. This study has
taken a step towards extending the theories of the North concerning the role of
linguistic resources in gender and sexuality performances in Oceania and New
Zealand. Hopefully others working in the global South, ideally Pasiﬁka scholars,
will add their ﬁndings to these and further enable the circulation of new theories
in the ‘communication circuits’ of the global periphery (Connell, quoted in
Epstein and Morrell 2012: 472). I, for one, look forward to these conversations.

NOTES

1. I would like to thank Janet Holmes for her support and supervision during this
project as well as Meredith Marra for mentorship and advice. In addition, I want
to thank Martha Pennington, Shirley Lim, and Ana Cristina Ostermann for
valuable comments on various iterations of the analysis (although I take full
responsibility for the version presented here). Finally, I extend my heartfelt

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

QUERYING HETERONORMATIVITY

461

thanks to the students and teacher who participated in this study and to the
reviewers and editors.

2. Pakeha is a term of disputed etymology that came to mean ‘of European descent’
and later to mean white, native-born in some formulations (see M. King 1999).
However, this is a disputed formulation because of its tendency to ‘nativise’ the
descendants of settlers, permitting them to keep the status quo in terms of power
and privilege (Tuck and Yang 2012).

3. Human ethics approval for this research was granted by the Victoria University

of Wellington Human Ethics Committee.

4. Unfortunately, permission to reprint the photo was not granted.
5. The use of words such as ‘fuck’ and ‘fags’ in this section appears to go unnoticed
by Mr J, but he was focused on using the students’ reactions as a teachable
moment. Subsequently Mr J expressed his disappointment to the students about
the use of institutionally inappropriate and heterosexist talk.

6. This discussion was recounted by Olivia to a guest speaker in a later lesson (in a

conversation analysed in King 2010).

REFERENCES

Alexeyeff, Kalissa. 2008. Globalizing drag in the Cook Islands: Friction, repulsion, and

abjection. The Contemporary Paciﬁc 20: 143–161.

Alexeyeff, Kalissa. 2009. Dancing sexuality in the Cook Islands. In Hasting Donnan and Fiona
McGowan (eds.) Transgressive Sex: Subversion and Control in Erotic Encounters. New York:
Berghaghn. 113–130.

Anae, Melani. 2002. Papalagi redeﬁned: Towards a New Zealand-born Samoan identity. In
Paul Spickard (ed.) Paciﬁc Diaspora: Island Peoples in the United States and across the Paciﬁc.
Honolulu, Hawaiʻi: University of Hawaiʻi Press. 150–169.

Besnier, Niko. 1997. Sluts and superwomen: The politics of gender liminality in urban Tonga.

Ethnos 62: 5–31.

Boellstorff, Tom. 2007. A Coincidence of Desires: Anthropology, Queer Studies, Indonesia. Durham,

North Carolina/London: Duke University Press.

Bucholtz, Mary and Kira Hall. 2005. Identity and interaction: A sociocultural linguistic

approach. Discourse Studies 7: 585–614.

Butler, Judith. 1993. Bodies that Matter: On the Discursive Limits of ‘Sex’. New York: Routledge.
Identity. London:
Butler,

Judith. 1999. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of

Routledge.

Cameron, Deborah. 1997. Performing gender identity: Young men’s talk and the construction
of heterosexual masculinity. In Sally Johnson and Ulrika Meinhoff (eds.) Language and
Masculinity. Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell. 47–64.

Chen, Chiung Hwang. 2014. Prioritizing hyper-masculinity in the Paciﬁc region. Culture,

Society & Masculinities 6: 69–90.

Connell, Raewyn. 2007. Southern Theory: The Global Dynamics of Knowledge in the Social

Sciences. Cambridge, U.K.: Polity Press.

Connell, Raewyn. 2014a. Rethinking gender from the south. Feminist Studies 40: 518–539.
Connell, Raewyn. 2014b. Margin becoming centre: For a world-centred rethinking of

masculinities. NORMA: International Journal for Masculinity Studies 9: 217–231.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

462

KING

Coupland, Nikolas. 2007. Style: Language Variation and Identity. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge

University Press.

Deumert, Ana and Kristin Vold Lexander. 2013. Texting Africa: Writing as performance.

Journal of Sociolinguistics 17: 522–546.

Eckert, Penelope. 2006. Vowels and nail polish. In Deborah Cameron and Don Kulick (eds.)

The Language and Sexuality Reader. London: Routledge. 189–195.

Eckert, Penelope. 2011. Language and power in the preadolescent heterosexual market.

American Speech 86: 85–97.

Eckert, Penelope and Sally McConnell-Ginet. 1999. New generalizations and explanations in

language and gender research. Language in Society 28: 185–201.

Eckert, Penelope and Sally McConnell-Ginet. 2013. Language and Gender (2nd edition).

Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Epstein, Debbie and Robert Morrell. 2012. Approaching southern theory: Explorations of

gender in South African education. Gender and Education 24: 469–482.

Hauʻofa, Epeli. 1993. Our sea of islands. In Eric Waddell and Vijay Naidu (eds.) A New Oceania:

Rediscovering Our Sea of Islands. Suva, Fiji: University of the South Paciﬁc. 2–16.

Hauʻofa, Epeli. 2008. We Are the Ocean: Selected Works. Honolulu, Hawaiʻi: University of

Hawaiʻi Press.

Hill, Richard S. 2010. Fitting multiculturalism into biculturalism: Maori–Pasiﬁka relations in

New Zealand from the 1960s. Ethnohistory 57: 291–319.

Hokowhitu, Brendan. 2004. Tackling Maori masculinity: A colonial genealogy of savagery

and sport. The Contemporary Paciﬁc 16: 259–284.

Hokowhitu, Brendan. 2008. The death of Koro Paka: ‘Traditional’ Maori patriarchy. The

Contemporary Paciﬁc 20: 115–141.

Holmes, Janet and Brian W. King. 2017. Gender and sociopragmatics. In Anne Baron, Gu Yueguo

and Gerard Steen (eds.) Routledge Handbook of Pragmatics. London: Routledge. 121–138.

Holmes, Janet and Miriam Meyerhoff. 1999. The community of practice: Theories and

methodologies in language and gender research. Language in Society 28: 173–183.

Jackson, Peter A. 1997. Kathoey><gay><man>: The historical emergence of gay male
identity in Thailand. In Lenore Manderson and Margaret Jolly (eds.) Sites of Desire,
Economies, of Pleasure: Sexualities in Asia and the Paciﬁc. Chicago, Illinois: University of
Chicago Press. 166–192.

Jolly, Margaret. 2008a. The South in southern theory: Antipodean reﬂections on the Paciﬁc.

Australian Humanities Review 44: 75–99.

Jolly, Margaret. 2008b. Moving masculinities: Memories and bodies across Oceania. The

Contemporary Paciﬁc 20: 1–24.

King, Brian W. 2010. ‘All us girls were like euuh!’: Conversational work of ‘be like’ in New

Zealand adolescent talk. New Zealand English Journal 24: 15–32.

King, Brian W. 2014a. Tracing the emergence of a community of practice: Beyond

presupposition in sociolinguistic research. Language in Society 43: 61–81.

King, Brian W. 2014b. Inverting virginity, abstinence, and conquest: Sexual agency and

subjectivity in classroom conversation. Sexualities 17: 310–328.

King, Michael. 1999. Being Pakeha Now: Reﬂections and Recollections of a White Native.

Auckland, New Zealand: Penguin.

MacLean, Malcolm. 1999. Of warriors and blokes: The problem of Maori rugby for Pakeha
masculinity. In Timothy J.L. Chandler and John Nauright (eds.) Making the Rugby World:
Race, Gender, Commerce. London: Routledge. 1–26.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

QUERYING HETERONORMATIVITY

463

Manathunga, Catherine. 2011.

supervision: Post-colonial
explorations and reﬂections on Southern positionings. New Zealand Annual Review of
Education 20: 5–23.

Intercultural postgraduate

Marra, Meredith and Jo Angouri. 2011. Investigating the negotiation of identity: A view from
the ﬁeld of workplace discourse. In Jo Angouri and Meredith Marra (eds.) Constructing
Identities at Work. Basingstoke, U.K.: Palgrave MacMillan. 1–14.

Marra, Meredith, Brian W. King and Janet Holmes. 2014. Trivial, mundane or revealing? Food

as a lens on ethnic norms in workplace talk. Language & Communication 34: 46–55.

McHoul, Alec and Mark Rapley. 2002. ‘Should we make a start then?’: A strange case of
(delayed) client-initiated psychological assessment. Research on Language and Social
Interaction 35: 73–91.

Milani, Tommaso M. 2014. Marginally speaking. Multilingual Margins 1: 9–20.
Milani, Tommaso M. 2017. Language and sexuality. In Ofelia Garcıa, Nelson Flores and
Massimiliano Spotti (eds.) The Oxford Handbook of Language and Society. New York: Oxford
University Press. 403–422.

Motschenbacher, Heiko. 2011. Taking queer linguistics further: Sociolinguistics and critical
heteronormativity research. International Journal of the Sociology of Language 212: 149–179.
Ochs, Elinor. 1992. Indexing gender. In Alessandro Duranti and Charles Goodwin (eds.)
Rethinking Context: Language as an Interactive Phenomenon. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press. 335–338.

Orange, Claudia. 2013. The Treaty of Waitangi. Wellington, New Zealand: Bridget Williams

Books.

Park, Julie, Tamasailau Suaalii-Sauni, Melani Anae, Leti Lima, Nite Fuamatu and Kirk Mariner.
2002. Late twentieth-century Auckland perspective on Samoan masculinities. In Heather
Worth, Anna Paris and Louisa Allen (eds.) The Life of Brian: Masculinities, Sexualities and Health
in New Zealand. Dunedin, New Zealand: University of Otago Press. 43–55.

Phillips, Jock. 1987. A Man’s Country? The Image of the Pakeha Male – A History. New York:

Penguin Books.

Rosa, Marcelo C. 2014. Theories of the South: Limits and perspectives of an emergent

movement in social sciences. Current Sociology Review 62: 851–867.

Savage, Catherine, Rawiri Hindle, Luanna H. Meyer, Anne Hynds, Wally Penetito and Christine
E. Sleeter. 2011. Culturally responsive pedagogies in the classroom: Indigenous student
experiences across the curriculum. Asia-Paciﬁc Journal of Teacher Education 39: 183–198.

Schoeffel, Penelope. 2014. Representing faʻafaﬁne: Sex, socialization, and gender identity in
Samoa. In Niko Besnier and Kalissa Alexeyeff (eds.) Gender on the Edge: Transgender, Gay, and
Other Paciﬁc Islanders. Honolulu, Hawaiʻi: University of Hawaiʻi Press. 73–90.

Shields, Carolyn M., Russell Bishop and Andre Elias Mazawi. 2005. Pathologizing Practices: The

Impact of Deﬁcit Thinking on Education. New York: Peter Lang.

Smith, Philippa Mein. 2012. A Concise History of New Zealand (2nd edition). Cambridge, U.K.:

Cambridge University Press.

Tasker, Gillian (ed.). 2000. Social and Ethical Issues in Sexuality Education: A Resource for Health
Education Teachers of Year 12 and 13 Students. Christchurch, New Zealand: Christchurch
College of Education.

Tcherkezoff, Serge. 2014. Transgender in Samoa: The cultural production of gender
inequality. In Niko Besnier and Kalissa Alexeyeff (eds.) Gender on the Edge: Transgender,
Gay, and Other Paciﬁc Islanders. Honolulu, Hawaiʻi: University of Hawaiʻi Press. 115–134.
Tengan, Ty Kawika. 2002. (En)gendering colonialism: Masculinities in Hawaiʻi and Aotearoa.

Cultural Values 6: 239–256.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

464

KING

Tuck, Eve and K. Wayne Yang. 2012. Decolonization is not a metaphor. Decolonization:

Indigineity, Education & Society 1: 1–40.

Tuhiwai Smith, Linda. 2012. Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous Peoples (2nd

edition). London: Zed Books.

Walker, Isaiah Helekunihi. 2005. Terrorism or native protest? The Hui ‘O He’e Nalu and

Hawaiian resistance to colonialism. Paciﬁc Historical Review 74: 575–601.

Walker, Isaiah Helekunihi. 2008. Hui Nalu, beachboys, and the surﬁng boarder-lands of

Hawaiʻi. Contemporary Paciﬁc 20: 89–114.

Weaver, Jace. 2005. Indigenousness and indigeneity. In Henry Schwarz and Sangeeta Ray

(eds.) A Companion to Postcolonial Studies. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell. 221–235.

Wendt Samu, Tanya. 2010. Paciﬁc education: An Oceanic perspective. MAI Review 1: 1–14.
Wenger, Etienne. 1998. Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning and Identity. Cambridge,

U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Whitinui, Paul. 2008. Kapa Haka counts: Improving participation levels of Maori students in

mainstream secondary schools. MAI Review 3: 1–14.

APPENDIX

Transcription conventions:

Slashes indicate overlapping speech.

//
word- A hyphen indicates abruptly cut-off speech.
(1)
(.)
::

Numbers in parentheses indicate elapsed time of silence in seconds.
A dot in parentheses indicates a tiny gap, less than 1 second.
Colons indicate prolongation of the immediately prior sound. The length of

the row of colons indicates the length of the prolongation.

WORD Capitals indicate especially emphasised sounds compared to surrounding

( )
(( ))

↑

talk (including ‘I’).
Single parentheses contain prosodic contributions – e.g. (laughter).
Double parentheses contain author’s descriptions rather than

transcriptions.

Indicates rising intonation in the preceding syllable.
Indicates falling and then rising intonation in the preceding syllable.
Indicates rising and then falling intonation in the preceding syllable.

Address correspondence to:

Brian W. King
Department of English
City University of Hong Kong
83 Tat Chee Avenue
Kowloon
Hong Kong

bwking@cityu.edu.hk

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd


