Journal of Sociolinguistics 21/4, 2017: 521–546

Conceptualising the vertical landscape: The
case of the International Finance Centre in

the world’s most vertical city1

Phoenix W. Y. Lama
and David Graddolb
a.The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong

b.The English Company, Great Britain

This article introduces the crucial yet much overlooked dimension of
verticality to landscape-related research through a case study of one of the
most iconic skyscrapers in Hong Kong, the world’s most vertical city. A
tripartite analytic model is proposed to examine the dialogical interaction
between the discursive and material landscapes in a vertical layout, while
at the same time to explore the intricate interrelations among social actors,
practices, functions of space, levels of access and forms and functions of
semiotic resources, all within one single site of varying levels of verticality.
In the process, the study reveals the vertical space as a highly stratiﬁed and
hierarchical system, and underlines the value of taking a functional
approach to verticality in order to deepen our understanding of its indexical
social meaning and its role as an active agent both in reﬂecting and
shaping social stratiﬁcation in today’s globalised and consumerist world.
本文探討景觀研究中,一項重要而常被忽略之元素 — 垂直性。在世界最
垂直的城市 — 香港,我們透過一案例,分析香港其一最具標誌性的高樓大
廈,從而提出一個三部份的縱向分析模型,以檢視話語景觀與物料景觀,在
一個垂直的空間中的交流及相互作用。與此同時,我們探究在此一垂直的
空間中,社會行動者、社會行為、空間功能與使用權限,及話語資源的形態
及作用,其錯綜複雜的相互關係。在此過程中,本研究揭示垂直空間的高度
分層性及階級性,並突出在全球化及消費主義下,我們如何透過以功能為重
的研究方法,更深入了解垂直性的指引社會含意,及其於反映及同時塑造社
會分層化的重要角色。[Chinese]

KEYWORDS: Geo-semiotics, Hong Kong, linguistic landscape, semiotic
landscape, vertical landscape, vertical semiotics

INTRODUCTION

In his bestseller The World is Flat, Friedman (2007) portrays a world in which
technological changes have ‘ﬂattened the playing ﬁeld’ by equalising
opportunities among individuals. Long before this metaphor of ﬂatness was

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

522

LAM AND GRADDOL

made popular in the understanding of globalisation, what might be referred to
as a ‘ﬂat earth’ approach has dominated the discourse of academic disciplines
on spatial geographies as in geopolitics, urban design and critical urban
research. It is therefore unsurprising that this discursive ﬂattening is also found
in other academic domains where landscape is a prime concern, as in research
on linguistic landscapes, and more generally, on semiotic landscapes.

The persistent neglect of the vertical landscape in ‘an overly ﬂat discourse’
(Graham and Hewitt 2012: 72) as seen in these disciplines, however, is at odds
with the human spatial experience, which is essentially three-dimensional and
volumetric. Furthermore, such neglect overlooks the fact
that high-rise
architecture has become an iconic and ubiquitous feature in contemporary
cityscapes in an increasingly urbanised world. Of course, tall buildings are
nothing new. By the late nineteenth century, multi-storey structures were
already in place, at least since the Home Insurance Building in Chicago – often
regarded as the world’s ﬁrst modern skyscraper – was completed in 1885.
However,
it was not until the last decade or so, when computing power
brought about major technological advances in architecture and engineering,
that the construction of supertall buildings of theoretically unlimited heights
became possible (Al-Kodmany 2011). While it remains to be seen whether
supertall buildings will become the future architectural norm, it is generally
expected that skyscrapers will continue to grow in number, scale and height. A
call for the study and theorisation of verticality in landscape-related research is
therefore not only essential but pressing.

In this regard, nowhere in the world is a more ﬁtting research site for
understanding the vertical landscape than Hong Kong. Situated at the south-
eastern tip of China, Hong Kong is characterised by a unique landscape
combining hilly terrain with a deep harbour. Of the 1105 square km of total
land area (Hong Kong Lands Department 2014), approximately 45 percent
possesses an elevation of at least 100 metres above sea level.2 The bulk of this
rugged landscape is thus composed of steep slopes, rendering it relatively
unsuitable for development. Only about a quarter of the land is currently
developed for residential, commercial, industrial and other urban uses. The
remaining three quarters is mainly composed of woodland, grassland and
wetland which are scattered across the territory (Hong Kong Planning
Department 2014). With a population of over seven million people (Hong
Kong Census and Statistics Department 2014), Hong Kong is the eighth most
densely populated urban area in the world (Demographia 2015: 108). High-
rise and high-density buildings are therefore a direct response to the large
population in a small city of distinct topography. This is unlike in Dubai, for
instance, where the aim of vertical expansion is not to address land-shortage
problems but to showcase the city’s wealth and to mark its global position (Al-
Kodmany 2011).

Hong Kong is unique in terms of both its scale and pattern of verticality.
Among the Paciﬁc Rim regions, Hong Kong was the ﬁrst to begin the

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

CONCEPTUALISING THE VERTICAL LANDSCAPE

523

development of tall buildings in the 1970s. In less than half a century, Hong
Kong has become the city with the highest number of skyscrapers in the world,
surpassing New York and Dubai (The Skyscraper Center 2015). Almost 90
percent of the city’s population live in high-rise buildings (Wang and Lau
2013). Compared with New York and Chicago which are both archetypal
vertical cities with skyscrapers highly concentrated at the core, Hong Kong is
exceptional in the sense that verticality is not only found at the centre but also
across the whole city (Chau 2011). Hong Kong, on several counts, can hence
be regarded as the world’s most vertical city, making it an ideal location for
researching the vertical dimension of linguistic landscapes.

RESEARCHING THE DISCURSIVE AND MATERIAL LANDSCAPES

Landscape-related research in linguistics and semiotics primarily concerns the
ways in which the physical landscape is deﬁned and communicated discursively
in space through the use of language and other semiotic resources. Such
research has long been strongly oriented to the study of public spaces in urban
contexts. This is evident, for example, in the ﬁrst deﬁnition of the term linguistic
landscape by Landry and Bourhis (1997: 25), which focused on such urban
signage as ‘advertising billboards’ and ‘commercial shop signs’. Similarly,
when conceptualising the notion semiotic landscape, Jaworski and Thurlow
(2010: 2) emphasised how language, as one of
the available semiotic
interacts with such urban modalities as ‘architecture and the
resources,
built environment’, in deﬁning a place. Given the overwhelming majority of
research in linguistic and semiotic landscapes in urban areas, it has been
suggested that cityscape might be a better word for the subject under
investigation (see, for example, Gorter 2006; Spolsky 2009).

Despite this strong orientation to the study of the urban linguistic and
semiotic landscapes, there has been a curious absence of scholarly attention to
verticality. Previous studies thus far have mainly dealt with signs at street
level, overlooking the relationship between signs and skyscrapers or
underground railways, structures which increasingly characterise cities and
urban life. Studies of the linguistic and semiotic landscapes of Hong Kong are
no exception. Largely conceptualising the city as a horizontal surface, these
studies have explored the interrelationship between particular regional areas of
Hong Kong and patterns of signage, while addressing such issues as
multilingualism, language proﬁciency and post-colonialism.

In this former colony of Britain, Chinese and English remain the ofﬁcial
languages after its handover to China in 1997. The language policy of the
Hong Kong government is to promote ‘biliteracy and trilingualism’ amongst
the population. Cantonese is the mother tongue or usual language of an
overwhelming majority (88–90%) of
the predominantly ethnic Chinese
population, while Mandarin has recently overtaken English as the second
most commonly spoken language (48% vs. 46%) (Hong Kong Census and

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

524

LAM AND GRADDOL

Statistics Department 2011, 2016). A recent linguistic survey showed an
increasing trilingualism amongst younger speakers in the city (Bacon-Shone,
Bolton and Luke 2015). In addition, census data shows that Hong Kong is
home to twenty-four minority languages, each spoken by at
least one
thousand residents. These include Filipino, Indonesian, and other Asian
languages (Hong Kong Census and Statistics Department 2016). The extent of
multilingualism in the horizontal landscape of the city is hence a common
research theme.

In a study of signs on residential buildings in Hong Kong, for example,
Jaworski and Yeung (2010) showed the differences in semiotic choices as
displayed in property-name signs among three broad geographical areas of
varying degrees of afﬂuence. In the working-class neighbourhood, there were
more monolingual Chinese signs when compared with the more afﬂuent areas,
and signs were more functional in nature. By contrast, signs from the most
privileged neighbourhood were more likely to be monolingual in English and
were more decorative in nature,
invoking a sense of grandeur. Similar
differences were also found in Finzel (2012), who studied the linkage between
the language choice of shop signs and the language proﬁciency of shopkeepers
in two geographical areas of Hong Kong. It was found that shops in the old
working-class district had more monolingual Chinese signs and had staff who
spoke little English. In the middle-class district, more monolingual English
signs were found and the employees were able to converse in English at the
shops. These ﬁndings indicate that the horizontal linguistic landscape of Hong
Kong, speciﬁcally, the language choice on signs, is sensitive to the socio-
economic background of the local residents.

Focusing more on the postcolonial inﬂuence from mainland China on the
linguistic landscape of the city after the change of sovereignty, Lai (2013)
examined signage at four geographical sites in Hong Kong with differing
proximity to the border with mainland China. It was found that the closer the
site was to the border, the more frequent was the use of simpliﬁed Chinese on
signs. As simpliﬁed Chinese is the form of written Chinese used in mainland
China but not in Hong Kong, its presence on signs nearer the border may
signal the impact of
‘mainlandisation’. The linguistic divide at this intra-
national border is also the topic of interest in Danielewicz-Betz and Graddol
(2014) and Graddol and Danielewicz-Betz (2015), who found that Hong Kong
and Shenzhen, its closest neighbour across the border, were distinct in their
language landscapes in terms of romanisation, lexical choice and preference for
the exonormative variety of English. Traditional Chinese, simpliﬁed Chinese
and English can thus each be seen to have a distinct visual identity in the city.
Following Scollon and Scollon (2003: xii), we consider emplacement, i.e. ‘the
physical location of language in the world’, to be central to the understanding
of any sign. We further argue that the meaning of a sign is dependent not only
upon where it is placed horizontally but also, equally importantly, where it is
placed vertically. The inclusion of this missing z-coordinate on the map of

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

CONCEPTUALISING THE VERTICAL LANDSCAPE

525

landscape research thus presents a crucial yet long overdue perspective,
allowing the landscape to be seen in full in three-dimensional space.

and urban studies

can inform a more

It is with this focus that we now turn to studies of the material landscape to
see how insights into verticality from such disciplines as architecture,
geography
comprehensive
understanding of
the discursive landscape. Partly overlapping with the
discursive landscape, the material landscape mainly concerns the ways in
which the physical landscape is deﬁned and communicated materially in space
through the use of architectural and other physical forms. Two material design
features peculiar to the vertical landscape of Hong Kong are of particular
relevance here: the multiple intensive land use (MILU) model and the podium
form.

In response to the continuous arrival of immigrants from mainland China
since the early 1960s and the economic boom in the 70s and 80s, the
government in Hong Kong introduced a Buildings Ordinance in 1970 to
permit the design and construction of tall buildings for mixed use. This urban
development policy resulted in low-rise shop-houses giving way to high-rise
buildings, which forever changed the skyline of Hong Kong. Over the years,
new building regulations have been enforced not only to increase the overall
ﬂoor-to-area ratio of such mixed-use buildings but also the non-domestic
proportion, allowing developers to enlarge the retail ﬂoor area at the lower end
of a building for higher rental returns. Since then, Hong Kong has seen the
proliferation of increasingly multi-functional high-density skyscrapers, with an
oversized podium as a characteristic, if not deﬁning, feature.

In these so-called composite developments, ofﬁces or residential apartments
are housed together with facilities for other uses within one single tower block.
The most common uses identiﬁed in representative MILU projects in the city
are residential, commercial, recreational, community facilities and transport
facilities (Lau, Giridharan and Ganesan 2005). A mixed-use tower in Hong
Kong is thus in essence a microcosm of the city, a synthesis of public and
private spaces for different social practices performed by a range of social actors
in one vertical structure. In this respect, the now ubiquitous podium form in
these MILU projects has been hailed as a form of public space with social
signiﬁcance (Shelton, Karakiewicz and Kvan 2011). Elevated above the
ground, the podium is a horizontal transfer structure at the base of a
skyscraper, whose orientation and width differ from that of the skyscraper’s
tower (Skyscraper Dictionary 2013–2014). As a raised platform often
encompassing several ﬂoors to support the weight of the tower above, the
podium regularly serves the important function of demarcating public and
private spaces. Under the roof of the podium, commercial and transport
facilities such as car parks, transport interchanges and shopping arcades are
commonly found. Above the deck rise the stacks of commercial or residential
towers. In the case of the latter, the podium terrace is reserved for recreational
and communal facilities including landscaped gardens, playgrounds and sports

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

526

LAM AND GRADDOL

amenities, all of which are often used exclusively by the gated communities of
residents living in the towers sitting atop the podium.

These two interrelated design features characterising much of the vertical
dimension of the contemporary material landscape of Hong Kong have profound
implications for its discursive landscape. In the discussion which follows, we
explore the means and forms in which the vertical landscape can be visually
deﬁned and communicated by focusing on one of the most recent and
representative composite urban projects at the business and ﬁnance hub of
Hong Kong, namely the megastructure of the International Finance Centre.
Through this case study, we illustrate the dialogical interaction between the
discursive and material landscapes in a vertical layout. In the process, we
address the more critical issues surrounding social actors, practices, types of
space and levels of access in order to reveal how the vertical landscape reﬂects
and at the same time shapes the changing socio-economic and ideological fabric
of the city in the rising tide of globalisation, consumerism and mainlandisation.

THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CENTRE (IFC)

Located at the heart of Central, the central business district of the city on
reclaimed land, the International Finance Centre (IFC, branded in lower case as
‘ifc’) is one of the largest MILU projects in Hong Kong. As part of the Airport
Core Programme, the ifc project was initiated in the early 1990s to connect the
Hong Kong International Airport, which is situated on an outlying island, to
the ﬁnancial core of Hong Kong via an express train (Figure 1).

Jointly developed by a consortium of property developers and ﬁnanciers, the
ifc complex is a commercial, retail and hotel development sited on the
waterfront. The major components of the complex were completed in three
phases from 1998 to 2005: two ofﬁce towers, a shopping mall, and a hotel.
With a total gross ﬂoor area of 4,700,000 square feet on a total site area of
430,000 square feet, this megastructure is claimed to offer ‘a truly inspiring
working, shopping and living experience’
(International Finance Centre
Management Co. Ltd 2015: ‘About us’).

The 39-storey Tower 1 (known as One ifc) and the 88-storey Tower 2
(known as Two ifc) provide high-quality ofﬁce space to accommodate up to
20,000 ofﬁce workers. The major tenants of the ofﬁce towers include some of
the world’s leading banks and international ﬁnancial institutions. These two
skyscrapers are linked by the ifc mall, which occupies a four-level podium, with
more than 200 stores featuring mid-range to high-end international brands.
Also connected to the podium is a 5-star hotel. With 399 guest rooms and 519
serviced apartments, the luxury hotel offers top-of-the-range accommodation
options for both short and long-term stays.

On the ﬁrst ﬂoor of the podium, access on foot to a number of neighbouring
commercial buildings and public facilities, including a post ofﬁce and ferry
piers, is provided by a network of covered elevated walkways and footbridges.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

CONCEPTUALISING THE VERTICAL LANDSCAPE

527

Figure 1: Map showing the location of the ifc in Hong Kong

On top of the podium sits a roof garden, open to the public, with bars and views
over the harbour. Below the podium lies the ground ﬂoor and a six-level
basement. One part of the basement houses the car parks of the two ofﬁce
towers, offering 1,800 parking bays. Another part of the basement is Hong
Kong Station, which belongs to the only railway and metro company of the
city. The station occupies the ground ﬂoor and four stories underground. In the
basement, its facilities include a metro station, an airport express station, a
station car park with 277 parking bays, and a number of shops and
restaurants. On the ground ﬂoor, the station provides facilities for in-town
check-in for ﬂights. Outside the station, a public transport interchange, a taxi
stand, and two designated pick-up/drop-off areas for vehicles are located at
various points on the ground ﬂoor of the complex. Figure 2 presents a full view
of the ifc complex.3

A PROPOSED ANALYTIC MODEL OF VERTICALITY FOR THE STUDY OF
THE IFC COMPLEX

Our interest in exploring the vertical semiotics of the ifc complex was
motivated by years of experience interacting with the site personally as
residents of the city. Following the informal observations that we made
individually over the years, we embarked on a nine-month study (July 2015 –
March 2016) which included six intensive site visits with numerous minor
calls to collect data, observe patterns, and record any notable changes or

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

528

LAM AND GRADDOL

Figure 2:
[Colour ﬁgure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

ifc by the waterfront (GoogleEarth, DigitalGlobe, TerraMetrics 2016)

trends. The site visits
involved note-taking, photographic and video
documentation, and unstructured interviews with social actors using the
site. Based on our study of the data collected in the ﬁeldwork, we propose an
analytic model of verticality, illustrated by the ifc complex and organised at
three levels of abstraction as stated below (see Figure 3, from left to right):

(cid:129) the actual architectural structure, which includes seven infrastructural
(cid:129) the physical vertical layout, which consists of four levels of verticality from
(cid:129) the functional vertical

layout, which distinguishes the main activities

components within the ifc complex;

the basement to the tower;

carried out within the spaces.

Our analytic model theorises vertical space as a highly stratiﬁed and
hierarchical system, in which the access of social actors to different vertical
levels is unequal and power-invested. As such, the degree of vertical mobility of
social actors within a site indexes their (lack of) right to access and use space, as
well as physical and semiotic resources, for particular social practices. While the
tripartite model presented is based on the study of the ifc complex,
its
conceptualisation from the local, micro material plane on the left to the
global, macro physical and functional planes on the right allows one to move
from token instantiation to type generalisation. The model can thus be used to

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

CONCEPTUALISING THE VERTICAL LANDSCAPE

529

Figure 3: Analytic model of verticality for studying the ifc complex [Colour ﬁgure
can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

account for structures and sites of varying degrees of complexity where the
vertical landscape is a subject of interest. A bungalow, for example, typically
occupies only the ground level as a private living space. A traditional shop-house
found in many parts of Southern China and Southeast Asia uses the ground as a
public space for commercial purposes and the two to four upper ﬂoors at the
tower level for private residential functions. In big cities in Japan, underground
shopping streets form an extensive network at the basement level, allowing
commercial activities to be conducted in a weatherproof environment while
facilitating commutes on foot at the same time. These different architectural,
physical and functional vertical conﬁgurations all have important implications
for the forms and functions of resources used in the linguistic and semiotic
landscapes. Our function-oriented approach thus highlights the need to
conceptualise verticality as physical functional segments, rather than simply
in raw vertical distance, to better understand how space turns into place, and the
role of the discursive and material landscapes in such transformation.

In the following analysis, we explore the relationship between the experience
of verticality and the distribution of social actors and social practices involved.
We relate this, in turn, to the form and function of the semiotic resources and
material facilities employed, as well as the degree of access to the space. Our
analysis does not seek to provide an exhaustive inventory of all the signs found

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

530

LAM AND GRADDOL

at the site, as any such attempt to completely exhaust a place in constant
interaction with social actors in motion is futile if not impossible, particularly
when the arbitrary nature of sign counting (Spolsky 2009) and the mobility
and capriciousness of signs (Sebba 2010) are taken into account. Instead, we
limit our focus mainly to the key patterns of signs erected by the most powerful
stakeholder(s)
in the space concerned, often its owner or management
company. Given the focus of the present study on the theorisation of spatial
verticality, using a more qualitative approach, supplemented by quantitative
ﬁndings of more clearly deﬁnable signs, is considered more appropriate. We
take space, rather than sign, as the main analytic unit, and organise our
analysis into four sub-sections according to the physical vertical layout as
presented in Figure 3. To illustrate, we use signs representative of the semiotic
patterns discussed to highlight
the architectural
structure, vertical physical level and functional space concerned.

the characteristics of

EXPLORING THE VERTICALITY OF THE IFC COMPLEX

The basement levels

The six-level basement consists of two infrastructural components: the car
parks and Hong Kong Station, which are both owned and managed by the
railway company. It is predominantly a commuting space for private car
owners and railway users to travel to and from other locations, resulting in
massive trafﬁc ﬂow of both vehicles and passengers. As such, signs providing
information are prevalent at the basement levels, mainly for giving directions
to a number of internal and external sites. Figure 4 shows a typical informing
sign in this commuting space, representing hundreds of other signs showing
similar semiotic patterns.

Representing the voice and corporate identity of the railway company, such
informing signs with a standardised visual design are not only found in this

Figure 4: Hanging sign at Hong Kong Station [Colour ﬁgure can be viewed at
wileyonlinelibrary.com]

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

CONCEPTUALISING THE VERTICAL LANDSCAPE

531

station but also horizontally across all metro stations in the city. Instantly
recognisable as property of the metro operator, these signs are characterised by
the consistent use of a combination of semiotic resources maximising
readability to highlight the ideational meaning (cf. Jaworski and Yeung
2010), i.e. the propositional content of the message. Upper case in coloured
boxes highlights the type of information displayed (EXIT), and distinguishes the
sign from other similar signs specifying the same type of information inside the
station (EXIT E). Large and clear white fonts are shown against a highly
contrastive black background on a durable but economical plastic surface to
display textual information indicating, in both Chinese (國際金融中心一期)
and English (One ifc), the major site(s) nearest the exit concerned. Thick white
arrows point at speciﬁc directions to index places exophorically (Scollon and
Scollon 2003). Together, these semiotic choices of colour, formatting, size and
width serve to enhance legibility, allowing commuters to locate sites of interest
and exits easily and quickly by referring to the set of signs with the same visual
and textual styles within the station.

Such design features of a large number of informing signs, combined with
numerous access facilities in the material landscape such as lifts, escalators
and automatic doors, reﬂect that the basement is mainly a commuting space
allowing a very high level of public access and movement, but not for
prolonged stay. In addition, while the signs are bilingual, the relative size
and placement of Chinese and English on the signs suggest a stronger
emphasis on the former language, with the use of the traditional Chinese
script at the top in a bigger font, and English at the bottom in a smaller
font. This language arrangement may serve the pragmatic purpose of
facilitating quick reference for most commuters in a predominantly ethnic
Chinese population.

While the basement is primarily a commuting space, the concourse areas
within the station are ﬁlled with small shops, offering commuters the
opportunities to buy or eat quickly without the need to leave the commuting
space. The signs associated with these shops, together with the hundreds of
advertising posters lining the station walls, are primarily promotional or
commercial. Like the informing signs, such shop signs give precedence to
Chinese by positioning the Chinese shop name before or on top of its English
equivalent
in Chinese
characters and English letters sometimes mean that one language may
occupy more space for the same name even if a similar font size is adopted for
both languages. These promotional signs will be compared with those in the ifc
mall in the ensuing discussion of the podium levels.

though the orthographic differences

(Figure 5),

The ground level

The ground ﬂoor of the ifc complex houses a public transport interchange for
buses and minibuses, a taxi stand, and two designated pick-up/drop-off areas

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

532

LAM AND GRADDOL

Figure 5: Outlet of a pharmacy chain within the basement station area [Colour
ﬁgure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

for vehicles. It also provides entrances to the car parks and Hong Kong Station,
with in-town check-in facilities for air passengers. Similar to the basement, the
ground is principally a commuting space. It is, however, more geared towards
public and private vehicles than individual commuters. Of the four vertical
levels at the ifc site, the ground is the one with the smallest area of enclosed
space. The public transport interchange,
is covered but not
enclosed. The taxi stand and the pick-up/drop-off areas are largely unsheltered.
This level is therefore the most susceptible to weather conditions such as
extreme temperatures, rain and typhoons. Here, an average commuter’s
experience is likely to be even more transient than in the basement.

for example,

While traditionally the street level is a pedestrian realm, this is not the case for
the ifc complex. In the material landscape, pedestrian access to other streets,
through pavements and pedestrian crossings, is limited, leaving the ground
almost exclusively for vehicular use (cf. Xue, Zhai and Roberts 2010). In the
discursive landscape, signs here are mostly informing but the density of signs
giving directions to various places for pedestrians is much lower than that found
in the basement. Instead, there are road signs for drivers and bus route signs for
commuters, in addition to the mobile advertising signage on public vehicles in
motion (cf. Sebba 2010). As the ground level is ofﬁcially designated as a trafﬁc
interchange, a number of operators and service providers are responsible for

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

CONCEPTUALISING THE VERTICAL LANDSCAPE

533

signage, leading to less standardised forms. Figure 6 shows a corner of the public
transport interchange which illustrates this heterogeneity.

Three signs from three different sources are juxtaposed in Figure 6, from left
to right: the ifc mall, the hotel and a minibus company. These signs show
different design features such as font size and style, colour, material texture
and language preference. The leftmost two will be discussed later in relation to
other vertical levels. Of particular interest here is the minibus sign on the right
which shows details of three minibus routes to some of the most expensive
residential areas in the city. In large contrastive dark fonts on an orange
inexpensive plastic surface, the sign emphasises Chinese more than English in
both size and position. As the afﬂuent residents in such upscale areas are not
likely passengers on these minibuses, one might speculate that this choice is
pragmatically motivated by the linguistic background of
local workers
commuting there, including security guards, cleaners and handymen. This
preference, however, may also be attributed to the usual language of the sign
producer, i.e. the local minibus company, rather than the sign recipients.

Figure 6: Heterogeneity in the public transport interchange (lower part of the ﬁgure
shows close-up shots of the two left-hand signs) [Colour ﬁgure can be viewed at
wileyonlinelibrary.com]

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

534

LAM AND GRADDOL

Apart from local workers, our ﬁeldwork shows that another major group
which routinely travels on these minibus routes comprises domestic helpers,
who are mostly from Indonesia or the Philippines. As the two largest non-
Chinese ethnic groups in Hong Kong, each constituting 1.9 percent of the
population (Hong Kong Census and Statistics Department 2011), Indonesians
and Filipinos are mostly employed as domestic helpers in the city, often
receiving only the statutory minimum wage. Despite the fact that the usual
language of many Filipinos in Hong Kong is English and most foreign domestic
helpers are unable to read Chinese, their communicative needs do not seem to
be prioritised by the minibus sign here, or by the many Chinese-oriented public
transport signs placed in this interchange. English seems marginalised here,
perhaps because of the lower economic status of one key group of readers of the
sign. This is in contrast to the emphasis on English at the podium levels, which
is to be discussed in the ensuing sub-section.

The podium levels

(Scollon and Scollon 2003),

The four-level podium is comprised mainly of the ifc shopping mall, which is
linked to the lower levels of the hotel and serviced apartments. It is a shopping
and dining space, offering a high-end consumer experience to shoppers and
diners. In this respect, the tenants of the mall can be considered among the
most powerful stakeholders of this space. In the podium, signs serving
promotional, or commercial
functions are
ubiquitous. Unlike the informing signs in the commuting space below which
commonly make use of strategies such as arrows to index directions in the
locality through situated semiotics (Scollon and Scollon 2003), almost all shop
signs in the ifc mall are essentially decontextualised, showing the same brand
names, logos and associated design features regardless of the geographical
location of the shops around the world. Individually, this enhances brand
recognisability and establishes a consistent corporate identity worldwide for
each retailer. Collectively, this creates a horizontal homogenised commercial
discursive landscape in shopping malls all over the globe (cf. Kelly-Holmes
2010). Signs at the podium levels highlight the interpersonal, rather than
ideational, meaning of communication (cf.
Jaworski and Yeung 2010),
emphasising the affective aura of the message. This is the case not only for
the promotional shop signs representing global corporates, but also for the less
common informing signs in the podium erected by the local ifc management
company. While smaller in number, such informing signs in the discursive
landscape serve a crucial role in encouraging public access, movement, and
hence footfall, to the mall, by giving directions to both internal and external
sites. Together with such facilities as lifts, escalators, covered pedestrian
walkways and sheltered footbridges in the material landscape, they maximise
both horizontal connection externally with neighbouring buildings and
infrastructures, and vertical connection internally with other levels to the

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

CONCEPTUALISING THE VERTICAL LANDSCAPE

535

shopping mall. Compare the hanging sign in Figure 7 with the one serving
similar informing functions in Figure 4 and note how readability gives way to
style in this shopping and dining space.

On the hanging sign in Figure 7, small black fonts, with unconventional
capitalisation, and thin arrows are engraved on a sleek silvery metallic plate to
create a contemporary stylish look. These design features are consistently
employed on all signs put up by the ifc mall management, including the one on
the ground ﬂoor in Figure 6, to portray and reﬂect the luxurious image of this
shopping and dining space. The English top–Chinese bottom (Figure 6, bottom
left) or English ﬁrst–Chinese next (Figure 7) order on all these signs reﬂects a
greater emphasis on English, which is consistent with the stronger presence of
English on shop signs here, when compared with those in the shops and
restaurants in the basement metro station. Indeed, monolingual non-Chinese
shop signs, mostly in English and other Western European languages using the
Roman alphabet such as French and Italian, are the norm rather than the
exception in the shopping mall, not only for the global brands but also the local
retailers
in language
preference on shop signs at these two vertical levels.

(Figure 8). Table 1 shows

this marked contrast

As a high-end shopping arcade repeatedly achieving record-high rental rates
in the central business district, the ifc mall is ﬁlled with jewellers, watch
retailers, luxury fashion and cosmetics brands, with a total sales ﬁgure of over
US$1.2 billion in a year (South China Morning Post 2013). It can be assumed
that the prominence given to English and other European languages on
signage appeals to the target customers of the ifc mall, who belong to the high-
income middle class or above. In contrast, the tenant mix of the metro
shopping area downstairs consists mostly of fast-food restaurants, convenience
stores and bakeries, which involve small transactions. Chinese thus appears to
be more preferred in the station frequented by the less afﬂuent commuters. The
two languages, therefore, seem hierarchically structured, with English having
a higher market value than Chinese at the podium. It should, however, be
noted that this language preference does not only serve the pragmatic purpose

Figure 7: Hanging sign at
wileyonlinelibrary.com]

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

the ifc mall

[Colour ﬁgure can be viewed at

536

LAM AND GRADDOL

Figure 8: Outlet operated by the same pharmacy chain as in Figure 5 in the ifc mall
[Colour ﬁgure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

Table 1: Language on shop signs on the shopfront*

ifc mall (podium)

Metro shops (basement)

Total number of shop signs
Signs with Chinese characters

208

9 (4.3%)

71

39 (54.9%)

*The shop signs refer to the most noticeable sign denoting the brand on each shopfront, the
majority of which are located at the top. Counts are based on our site visit in January 2016.

of better communicating with expatriate customers who only speak English or
other Western European languages.
Indeed, mainland Chinese tourists
generate 30 percent of sales in the mall (Gu 2013). English thus also has a
symbolic value here – as a marker of prestige, quality and sophistication, in
addition to its connotation of
‘a global commercial culture’ worldwide
(Blommaert and Maly 2014: 202).

The tower levels

The architectural
structural components concerned here are the two
residential towers of the hotel and serviced apartments, which constitute
mainly the living space, and the two commercial towers of One ifc and Two ifc,

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

CONCEPTUALISING THE VERTICAL LANDSCAPE

537

which constitute mainly the working space. At the tower levels, public access
is considerably much more restricted than the ﬂoors below, though the means
of access control varies in relation to the type of space involved.

At the 5-star hotel and serviced apartments, access by guests from the
podium entrance to the guest rooms on the 9th to 45th ﬂoors is subtly
facilitated and achieved discursively through the use of informing signs, and
materially through the use of key-cards in the lifts, without the presence of
physical barriers or manned gates. Figure 9 shows an informing sign placed
beside a lift, which illustrates the pattern of signs erected by the hotel
management.

Similar in design to the informing signs at the ifc mall, the signs at the hotel
also highlight the interpersonal dimension of communication: small white
fonts are engraved on a dark metallic plate to create a luxurious yet non-
intrusive ambience. The difference is that many informing signs at this luxury
accommodation are in English only, and more conventional capitalisation is
used. Again, English seems to play a more symbolic than pragmatic role here,
as most of the guests are actually mainland Chinese (Leaders Magazine 2015).
Further, the English-only signs here may serve a gatekeeping function by
keeping out social actors whose linguistic competence is incompatible with the
space. By contrast, the informing sign indicating the staff entrance of the hotel
on the ground ﬂoor is bilingual with Chinese at the top (Figure 6, bottom
right) and emphasises ideational meaning through its more basic overall
design. This is a case where the deployment of semiotic resources by the same
authority varies vertically depending on readership, with the ground-ﬂoor staff
entrance contrasting with the podium guest entrance.

For the ofﬁce towers, access of the white-collar workers to One ifc and Two
ifc is facilitated and achieved rather differently from that in the living space.
For authorised entry, multiple access points are provided at the basement,
ground and podium levels via lifts to the ofﬁce towers, making it possible to
bypass the intermediate levels to access the towers directly from the basement.
At the same time, regulatory signs erected by the management companies of
the ofﬁce towers abound at the boundaries, not only to speciﬁcally prohibit
unauthorised parties from trespassing and loitering, but also to strictly forbid
photography and ﬁlming. Indeed, the difﬁculties we have experienced as
researchers in studying the tower level are testimony to its scrutinised nature,
and more importantly, the exclusivity of access to these higher levels at the
site. Our repeated attempts to access the ofﬁce towers for research purposes
were denied. On many occasions, we were questioned and prohibited from
taking photographs or videos from outside the gated areas of the ofﬁce towers
by security guards. Even our endeavours to approach an automatic teller
machine and company directories placed outside the gated areas during the
non-ofﬁce hours were met with surveillance and refusal. It was only when our
role as social actors changed to potential property buyers that we were able to
have a glimpse of an apartment showroom inside an ofﬁce tower, accessible

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

538

LAM AND GRADDOL

Figure 9: Sign on the wall beside a lift at the hotel [Colour ﬁgure can be viewed at
wileyonlinelibrary.com]

only by a lift servicing a restricted number of levels, while being fully escorted
by the property agent at all times. Figure 10 shows an entrance to the One ifc
ofﬁce tower.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

CONCEPTUALISING THE VERTICAL LANDSCAPE

539

The sign placed by the entrance in Figure 10 is representative of signs at the
entrances to the ofﬁce towers in terms of language preference. English is the
slightly more prominent language, through its consistent placement on top of
or before Chinese. The stronger role of English on signs in the two ofﬁce towers
can also be seen in the company directories, as the company names are
arranged alphabetically in English and all company names are shown in
English but not always in Chinese. Table 2 summarises the language choice of
company names on the directories of the ofﬁce towers.

While English may be favoured on the company directories symbolically for
its high economic value and pragmatically for
the highly-educated
international ofﬁce workers, an increasing number of tenants of the ofﬁce
towers are in fact ﬁnancial institutions from mainland China. Indeed, mainland

Figure 10: Entrance to One ifc [Colour ﬁgure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.
com]

Table 2: Language of company names on the directories of One ifc and Two ifc

One ifc

Two ifc

Total number of company names (all in English)
Company names in Chinese

54

105

20 (37.0%)

63 (60.0%)

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

540

LAM AND GRADDOL

corporates accounted for one-ﬁfth of the Grade A ofﬁce ﬂoor space leased in the
central business district where the ifc is located (Jones Lang LaSalle 2016).
Accordingly, the ofﬁce towers see the rising presence of Mandarin-speaking
ﬁnancial professionals, as ‘Mandarin is fast becoming the de facto language in
Hong Kong’s ﬁnancial services industry’ and native mandarin-speaking
mainlanders are recruited at
the expense of Cantonese-speaking locals
(Mortlock 2016). Despite the growth in mainland Chinese tenants and
employees at the ofﬁce towers, traditional Chinese rather than simpliﬁed
Chinese is still used on all the main signs erected by the tower management.

In relation to the texture of signs, the working space makes use of noticeably
less expensive material for its signs (Figure 10) when compared with the living
space. Through their simpler design, the signs at the working space pay more
attention to the ideational meaning of the message, i.e. to prohibit certain
behaviours and to maintain a high level of security for the tenants, most of
which are major global ﬁnancial institutions. Apart from the use of regulatory
signs in the discursive landscape to control access, a number of facilities in the
material landscape are also employed. These include CCTV cameras, physical
barriers and manned gates allowing access only through smart cards,
registration desks for visitors, dedicated lifts for different ﬂoor zones for
limited access and for creating additional gateways, as well as a facial
recognition system for access and lift operating control in non-ofﬁce hours
(Wong and Lam 2005). Vertical segregation demarcating the working space
from the rest is thus explicit and highly visible both discursively and materially.
This is in marked contrast to what is observed earlier in the living space, where
access is controlled also through signs and facilities, albeit via subtler means.
In both cases, careful arrangements are made to ensure that the working and
living spaces, which are the most difﬁcult to access practically owing to their
distance to the ground, are conveniently linked to the lower ﬂoors but remain
insulated and undisturbed by the public access downstairs.

DISCUSSION

As a prime example of MILU projects in Hong Kong, the ifc complex illustrates
the interaction between the discursive and material
landscapes, and the
intricate interrelations among social actors, practices, types of space, levels of
access and forms and functions of semiotic resources, all within one single site
of varying levels of verticality. The site thus reveals a highly stratiﬁed and
hierarchical vertical system, and the realisation of such stratiﬁcation is
linguistic, cultural and social-economical.

Linguistically, stronger emphasis on Chinese is found on the signs at the
basement and ground levels, while English is more prominent at the podium
and tower levels. This, however, does not map simplistically onto a Chinese-
English cultural dichotomy in relation to the social actors interacting with the
spaces. Instead, we observe the use of the Chinese-oriented lower levels by

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

CONCEPTUALISING THE VERTICAL LANDSCAPE

541

Filipino and Indonesian domestic helpers among others, while the English-
oriented higher levels are increasingly occupied by well-to-do mainland
Chinese. As such,
the linguistic and cultural stratiﬁcation are in close
connection with the socio-economic stratiﬁcation, reﬂecting a society full of
inequalities,
inﬂuenced by the major driving forces of globalisation,
consumerism and the more local process of mainlandisation. The lower
levels are for commuting mainly by the less afﬂuent communities. By contrast,
the higher levels are elite spaces for shopping,
living or working for the
wealthier communities. The semiotic choices including language, therefore,
appear to be motivated pragmatically downstairs and emblematically upstairs. At
the lower levels where trafﬁc and movement of a large number of social actors
is involved, Chinese is prioritised pragmatically as the usual language of most
of the population. As the more efﬁcient language here to locate and to inform
(cf. Cook 2015), its practical value is higher. Signs at these levels are more
rudimentary in design, highlighting the ideational meanings and reﬂecting the
socio-economic background of their recipients, who are more likely to be from
the middle class or below. At the higher levels where an image of prestige,
quality and luxury is the prime concern, English is prioritised emblematically
as the global lingua franca symbolising consumerism and internationalisation.
As the more appealing language to promote and attract, its market value is
higher here. Signs at these levels are more elaborate in design, focusing more
on the interpersonal meanings and reﬂecting the income level of
their
recipients, who are more likely to be from the most privileged social class of the
city and beyond. It is thus evident that language use is hierarchical in the
vertical model. However, such hierarchical ordering is not absolute but is
sensitive to the social function and value of the language in that particular
vertical space, in close relation to the cultural and socio-economic background
of the social actors interacting with the space.

An important implication arising from such multi-layer stratiﬁcation is the
simultaneous social segregation realised vertically at the site through the
different degrees of mobility and access of social actors. Only the most
privileged and powerful groups, mostly highly-educated and/or high-income
ﬁnancial professionals and hotel residents, are able to move freely across all
vertical levels of the site to access and consume the associated physical and
semiotic resources and to beneﬁt from the full functionality of the spaces. They
are at the top of the social hierarchy pyramid, smallest in number but enjoying
the highest level of mobility, access, privacy and security, while gazing down
and surveying the general population from height. The majority, including us
as researchers, are excluded from the gated communities of the towers and can
only raise our gaze to conjecture the inaccessible heights of the powerful.

Of course, height has long been a symbol of power and status in many
cultures, as realised metaphysically in the idea of a three-layered universe
consisting of the heavens, earth, and the underworld. Gods inhabit the
heavens and the mountain tops, to which ordinary mortals must raise their

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

542

LAM AND GRADDOL

gaze. Similarly, imposing structures such as the Acropolis, the Great Pyramid
of Giza or the great medieval cathedrals of Europe have all symbolised power
through height materially. However, the association between height and
prestige, almost always taken for granted as universal (see,
for example,
Graham 2016), is indexical rather than iconic and must be understood in
relation to the segmented nature of verticality, the function of the space
involved, as well as the geographical location, i.e. the horizontal dimension, of
the space. In many European cities, it is the low-rise detached dwellings in
afﬂuent suburbs that are considered more prestigious, while the high-rise
tower blocks in less privileged neighbourhoods are often used as council
housing. Similarly, in an ancient colosseum or a modern theatre, it is the seats
in the front rows closest to the stage that are for the most important people or
the costliest, whereas the higher levels further away from the stage provide
seats to social groups of lower status or which are cheaper in price. In the case
of the ifc complex, upper ﬂoors in the ofﬁce towers generally command higher
rents because of better views. In the podium shopping mall, however, it is the
lower ﬂoors, or the ﬂoors closest to the ground, which are with most footfall
and hence most expensive to rent. In other words, the indexical value of
elevation is relative to each volumetric space rather than absolute. Height has
no iconic universal meaning in itself. This demonstrates the polycentric nature
of space (Blommaert 2007) and again highlights the value of taking a
functional approach to verticality in the analytic model.

A further point which needs to be considered in relation to the social
segregation discussed above is the omnipresence of movement and ﬂow, and
the multiple and changing roles of social actors. While spaces are stratiﬁed,
they are also interconnected, not only vertically but also horizontally. As noted
earlier in the podium level analysis, horizontal external connection of the
shopping mall with neighbouring buildings and infrastructures is achieved and
maximised through informing signs and covered walkways and footbridges,
which offer shelter from heat and storm. These resources in the discursive and
material landscapes together aim to attract commuters, pedestrians, ofﬁce-
workers and hotel guests to the weatherproof mall and to transform them into
potential consumers. Moving from one space to another thus often involves
role-changing. Importantly, social actors interact with the discursive and
material landscapes in such spaces at different times of the day, week or year
and/or in different languages with different goals and intentions, making the
spaces active, dormant or hectic. Some such encounters, as in the working and
living spaces, are more permanent, while some others, as in the commuting
and shopping and dining spaces, are more transient. A commuter travelling at
rush hour in the basement on typical weekdays, for instance, may be an
employee working at an investment bank in the ofﬁce tower upstairs during
working hours, and occasionally go to a bar in the podium as a consumer after
work. One’s linguistic repertoire and communicative strategies thus need to
adapt to interact with the corresponding space. As such, the resources used in

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

CONCEPTUALISING THE VERTICAL LANDSCAPE

543

landscapes at different vertical

the discursive and material
levels, signs
included, not only vary in terms of their key target recipients but also their
regular peak times of use in a day, week and/or year. While beyond the scope
of the present study, this is an area which merits further research, calling for a
much ﬁner, richer and more socially-oriented approach than any quantitative
studies of signs would allow.

CONCLUSIONS

research,

dimension in landscape-related

Rather than living in an idealised ﬂat world where an equal playing ﬁeld is
created for every individual, we increasingly and perhaps regrettably ﬁnd
ourselves in a world that is vertically stratiﬁed as a result of urbanisation. In
the present case, such stratiﬁcation is realised linguistically, culturally and
social-economically. Through a case study of the vertical semiotics of an
iconic skyscraper, this article has demonstrated how verticality, as a much
ignored
can enrich our
understanding of the intricate interplay between the discursive and material
landscapes, while addressing such key issues surrounding social actors,
practices, levels of access and functions of space in the process. Offering a
novel and crucial dimension for landscape-related research in the increasingly
vertical contemporary society, our analytic model has shown the power of
incorporating the notion of vertical
landscape into the current research
paradigm, not simply as a contextual background but as ‘an agentive force in
sociolinguistic processes’ (Blommaert 2007). Placing verticality at the centre
stage but also exploring its relationship with horizontality, our study
underlines
in
dissecting and segmenting vertical space functionally in relation to social
actors, practices and access,
instead of simply measuring and examining
height in metres or ﬂoors. It also suggests the potential of applying the model
to the study of other sites with different conﬁgurations of verticality, allowing
comparison and generalisation to be made at the material, physical and
functional
in order to identify key patterns of association between
different physical vertical levels and their major functions, and the ways in
which the material and discursive landscapes constitute and are constituted
by the space concerned. This opens up a new research agenda, providing a
three-dimensional perspective which may lead to a redeﬁnition of the very
notion of landscape in sociolinguistic research.

the explanatory value of

the tripartite analytic model

levels,

NOTES

1. We thank the editors and reviewers for their insightful comments and
suggestions. The corresponding author of this paper is a member of the
English Department’s Research Centre for Professional Communication in

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

544

LAM AND GRADDOL

English (RCPCE), the mission of which is to pursue applied research and
consultancy so as to deepen the understanding of professional communication
and to better serve the communicative needs of professional communities. The
work described in this paper is intended to fulﬁll part of this mission.

2. More accurately, elevations in Hong Kong are measured in terms of ‘metres above
Principal Datum’ (mPD), which is a point 1.230 metres below the average sea level
(Hong Kong Civil Engineering and Development Department 2012).

3. An interactive map indicating the location of the ifc and its connectivity with the

surrounding area is available here: http://ifc.com.hk/en/mall/location/

REFERENCES

Al-Kodmany, Kheir. 2011. Tall buildings, design, and technology: Visions for the twenty-ﬁrst

century city. Journal of Urban Technology 18: 115–140.

Bacon-Shone, John, Kingsley Bolton and K. K. Luke. 2015. Language Use, Proﬁciency and
Attitudes in Hong Kong. Hong Kong: The University of Hong Kong. Last accessed 27 March
2017 at http://www.ssrc.hku.hk/files/language_2/HK_lg_survey_Final.pdf
Blommaert, Jan. 2007. Sociolinguistic scales. Intercultural Pragmatics 4: 1–19.
Blommaert, Jan and Ico Maly. 2014. Ethnographic linguistic landscape analysis and social
change: A case study. In Tilburg Papers in Culture Studies No. 100. Tilburg, The Netherlands:
Babylon. 1–27.

Chau, Hing-wah. 2011. Vertical and volumetric urbanism: Hong Kong – a conversation with

A/Prof. Barrie Shelton. HKIA Journal 60: 96–99.

Cook, Vivian. 2015. Meaning and material in the language of the street. Social Semiotics 25:

81–109.

Danielewicz-Betz, Anna and David Graddol. 2014. Varieties of English in the urban landscapes

of Hong Kong and Shenzhen. English Today 30: 22–32.

Demographia. 2015. Demographia world urban areas 2015. Last accessed 26 August 2016 at

http://www.urbangateway.org/document/demographia-world-urban-areas-2015

Finzel, Magdalena A. 2012. English in the linguistic landscape of Hong Kong: A case study of
shop signs and linguistic competence. Unpublished MA thesis. Potsdam University,
Potsdam, Germany.

Friedman, Thomas L. 2007. The World is Flat (3rd edition). New York: Picador.
Gorter, Durk. 2006. Introduction: The study of the linguistic landscape as a new approach to

multilingualism. International Journal of Multilingualism 3: 1–6.

Graddol, David and Anna Danielewicz-Betz. 2015. Borderland English: Signs of transition

across the expiring China-Hong Kong border. Asian Englishes 17: 3–28.

Graham, Stephen. 2016. Vertical: The City from Satellites to Bunkers. London/New York: Verso

Books.

Graham, Stephen and Lucy Hewitt. 2012. Getting off the ground: On the politics of urban

verticality. Progress in Human Geography 37: 72–92.

Gu, Wei. 2013. Behind the scenes at Hong Kong’s IFC Shopping Mall. The Wall Street Journal
September 24. Last accessed 27 March 2017 at http://blogs.wsj.com/scene/2013/09/24/
curating-a-hong-kong-temple-ok-shopping-mall-of-luxury/

Hong Kong Census and Statistics Department. 2011. 2011 Population Census: Summary
Results. Last accessed 27 March 2017 at http://www.census2011.gov.hk/pdf/summary-re
sults.pdf

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

CONCEPTUALISING THE VERTICAL LANDSCAPE

545

Hong Kong Census and Statistics Department. 2014. Hong Kong Statistics. Last accessed 26

August 2016 at http://www.censtatd.gov.hk/hkstat/sub/bbs.jsp

Hong Kong Census and Statistics Department. 2016. Thematic Household Survey Report No. 59.
Last accessed 27 March 2017 at http://www.statistics.gov.hk/pub/B11302592016XXXX
B0100.pdf

Hong Kong Civil Engineering and Development Department. 2012. Hong Kong slope safety:
Natural terrain in Hong Kong. Last accessed 27 March 2017 at http://hkss.cedd.gov.hk/
hkss/eng/natural_terrain.aspx

Hong Kong Lands Department. 2014. Total land and sea area of Hong Kong. Last accessed 26

August 2016 at http://www.landsd.gov.hk/mapping/en/publications/total.htm

Hong Kong Planning Department. 2014. Land utilization in Hong Kong. Last accessed 27

March 2017 at http://www.pland.gov.hk/pland_en/info_serv/statistic/landu.html

International Finance Centre Management Co. Ltd. 2015. About us. Last accessed 27 March

2017 at http://www.ifc.com.hk/en/about-us/

Jaworski, Adam and Crispin Thurlow. 2010. Introducing semiotic landscapes. In Adam

Jaworski and Crispin Thurlow (eds.) Semiotic Landscapes. London: Continuum. 1–40.

Jaworski, Adam and Simone Yeung. 2010. Life in the Garden of Eden: The naming and
imagery of residential Hong Kong. In Elana Shohamy, Eliezer Ben-Rafael and Monica Barni
(eds.) Linguistic Landscape in the City. Bristol, U.K./Buffalo, New York/Toronto, Canada:
Multilingual Matters. 153–181.

Jones Lang LaSalle. 2016. Central: Gateway to Hong Kong. Last accessed 27 March 2017 at

https://www.jllproperty.com.hk/office-leasing/news/central-gateway-to-hong-kong

Kelly-Holmes, Helen. 2010. Languages and global marketing. In Nikolas Coupland (ed.) The

Handbook of Language and Globalization. Oxford, U.K.: Wiley-Blackwell. 475–492.

Lai, Mee Ling. 2013. The linguistic landscape of Hong Kong after the change of sovereignty.

International Journal of Multilingualism 10: 251–272.

Landry, Rodrigue and Richard Y. Bourhis. 1997. Linguistic landscape and ethnolinguistic

vitality: An empirical study. Journal of Language and Social Psychology 16: 23–49.

Lau, Stephen, Renganathan Giridharan and Sankar Ganesan. 2005. Multiple and intensive

land use: Case studies in Hong Kong. Habitat International 29: 527–546.

Leaders Magazine. 2015. Hospitality: Service in capital letters. Last accessed 27 March 2017 at

http://www.leadersmag.com/issues/2015.1_Jan/Hospitality/LEADERS-Christoph-Schmid
inger-Four-Seasons-Hotel-Hong-Kong.html

Mortlock, Simon. 2016. Hong Kong ﬁnance jobs where you must speak Mandarin.
eFinancialCareers March 14. Last accessed 27 March 2017 at http://news.efinancialcaree
rs.com/hk-en/204045/asian-banking-jobs-where-you-must-speak-mandarin/

Scollon, Ron and Suzie Wong Scollon. 2003. Discourses in Place: Language in the Material

World. London/New York: Routledge.

Sebba, Mark. 2010. Discourses in transit. In Adam Jaworski and Crispin Thurlow (eds.)

Semiotic Landscapes: Language, Image and Space. London: Continuum. 59–77.

Shelton, Barrie, Justya Karakiewicz and Thomas Kvan. 2011. The Making of Hong Kong: From

Vertical to Volumetric. London/New York: Routledge.

Skyscraper Dictionary. 2013–2014. Podium. Last accessed 27 March 2017 at http://skyscrape

rdictionary.com/?project=podium

South China Morning Post. 2013, July 11. Luxury label agrees to hair-raising record IFC rent.
Last accessed 27 March 2017 at http://www.scmp.com/business/companies/article/
1279772/luxury-label-hair-raising-ifc-rent

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

546

LAM AND GRADDOL

Spolsky, Bernard. 2009. Prolegomena to a sociolinguistic theory of public signage. In Elane
Shohamy and Durk Gorter (eds.) Linguistic Landscape: Expanding the Scenery. New York:
Routledge. 25–39.

The Skyscraper Center. 2015. City lists. Last accessed 27 March 2017 at http://skyscraperce

nter.com/cities

Wang, Jun and Stephen Siu Yu Lau. 2013. Hierarchical production of privacy: Gating in

compact living in Hong Kong. Current Urban Studies 1: 11–18.

Wong, Evia and Bonnie Lam. 2005. Anatomy of a sustainable building in Hong Kong. The

Constructor (The Autumn Issue): 7–12.

Xue, Charlie, Hailin Zhai and Joshua Roberts. 2010. An urban island ﬂoating on the MTR
station: A case study of the West Kowloon development in Hong Kong. Urban Design
International 15: 191–207.

Address correspondence to:

Phoenix Lam
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University – Department of English
FG332 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hung Hom, Kowloon
Hong Kong

phoenix.wy.lam@polyu.edu.hk

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd


