Journal of Sociolinguistics 21/3, 2017: 420–441

Homonationalist discourse as a politics of

pragmatic resistance in Singapore’s Pink Dot

movement: Towards a southern praxis

Michelle M. Lazar

National University of Singapore

Pink Dot SG is a non-proﬁt social movement
launched by LGBTQ
Singaporeans to rally support for Singapore’s LGBTQ community. Every
year, since its inception in 2009, it organises a free-to-all public event,
which attracts increasingly larger crowds. In this article, I undertake a
critical multimodal analysis of one of its ofﬁcial promotional videos, in
order to show how a discourse of homonormative nationalism, or
homonationalism,
is constructed within it. Although from a radical
queer perspective especially of the North, homonationalism is construed
as problematic in that it leaves heteronormativity unchallenged and
appears to be depoliticised, in the case of the Pink Dot movement, I argue,
the discourse works tactically as a form of ‘doing’ a politics of pragmatic
resistance within an illiberal sociopolitical context. Therefore, although it
appears assimilationist and complicit with wider heteronormative and state
structures,
from the perspective of a southern praxis it can be re-
conceptualised as a contextualised form of resistance that demonstrates the
resilience, creativity and agency of a queer subaltern constituency in
Singapore.

KEYWORDS: Homonormativity, homonationalism, southern praxis,
pragmatic
analysis,
Singapore, Pink Dot

critical multimodal

resistance,

discourse

INTRODUCTION: SITUATING THE STUDY

This article examines the nexus of non-normative gender/sexual and national
identities within Singapore’s contemporary LGBTQ movement. Drawing upon
Puar’s concept of ‘homonormative nationalism’ or ‘homonationalism’ (Puar
2007), I view it speciﬁcally as a form of discourse, and extend it, particularly, as
a discursive strategy employed by a queer subaltern constituency in ‘doing’ a
politics of pragmatic resistance in an illiberal city-state. My focus is the Pink
Dot movement in Singapore (or ‘Pink Dot SG’, a name which aligns sexual/
gender non-normativity with the nation), launched in 2009, which organises

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HOMONATIONALISM AS A POLITICS OF RESISTANCE

421

a large-scale, free-to-all public rally, themed ‘Freedom to Love’. This is held
annually in Hong Lim Park, the only public space in Singapore which allows
the gathering of a mass assembly without an ofﬁcial license. In this article, I
explore the ‘impossible presence’ (Chan 2012) of a visibly optic queer event in
a city-state that continues to criminalise gay sex and maintains a resolutely
heteronormative public sphere. My point of focus is on the promotional online
videos produced annually, which have been pivotal to the success of the Pink
Dot movement (Philips 2013). A close multimodal analysis of one of the videos,
titled ‘For Family. For Friends. For Love’, is analysed in order to explicate the
discourse of homonationalism at work.

justice and emancipation,

The analysis is situated within the dual perspectives of critical discourse
studies (CDS) and ‘southern theory’ or, as I shall term it, ‘southern praxis’.
While it is assumed that sociolinguists are familiar with CDS, and so it requires
less explanation, a southern praxis perspective will be outlined in greater
detail. CDS, motivated by goals of social
is a
perspective interested in the discursive dimensions of social issues that sustain
asymmetrical power relations, which privilege certain groups in a society
whilst disadvantaging and marginalising others; the latter of which entails
closure of life possibilities for disenfranchised subjects. The term ‘critical’ is
understood, broadly, to encompass the complex dynamics of power relations at
work in any situation, in any given sociopolitical-historical moment. While
CDS has an established tradition of investigating various forms of hegemonic
power structures, research on resistance as discursively articulated by
historically marginalised groups
largely underdeveloped. The
potential exists, nonetheless; note,
for example, Wodak and Meyer’s
statement: ‘CDA [or CDS] researchers are interested in the way discourse (re)
produces social domination, that is the power abuse of one group over others,
and how dominated groups may discursively resist such abuse’ (Wodak and
Meyer 2009: 9, emphasis mine). CDS, therefore, has the capacity to engage
more fully with various aspects and interrelations of power, from the points of
view of institutional structures as well as of marginalised individuals and
communities that engage dominant structures in agentive ways (see also Lazar
2014). In this study, power relations are viewed both in terms of state and
heteronormative hegemonies, and especially, in terms of discursive resistance
exercised by a marginalised LGBTQ community.

remains

‘Southern theory’ (e.g. Comaroff and Comaroff 2012; Connell 2007) or
‘southern praxis’, as I call it, refers to a mode of intervention that seeks to
unsettle the hegemony of Northern-centricity in governing the geopolitics of
knowledge globally, in favour of interconnected and multiple sites from which
theory and practice get constituted. From a critical perspective, I argue that this
is not solely about the development of intellectual projects, but has important
implications for political organising and lived experiences as well. The
imbrication of theory and practice/action, as praxis, is absolutely essential
for a critical enterprise.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

422

LAZAR

Aligned with Mohanty (2003), I use the ‘North’/‘South’ terminology to
generally ‘distinguish between afﬂuent, privileged nations and communities and
economically and politically marginalised nations and communities’ (2003:
226). While these terms loosely distinguish the northern and southern
hemispheres, afﬂuence and marginality of course do not line up within this
geographical frame in any stable way. As the Comaroffs (2012: 7) put it, there
are enclaves of ‘the south in the north and the north in the south’. The
terminology, therefore, is necessarily imprecise, slippery and porous, and for this
reason, I ﬁnd Mohanty’s formulation of ‘nations and communities’ extremely
useful. Having said this, the North/South terminology serves a political,
explanatory function that draws attention to the experiences of colonisation,
historically as well as discursively, and the structured imbalances of power and
inﬂuence across geoscapes. The notion of the ‘South’ or periphery, moreover,
importantly functions as an analytical category to denote a politicised
positionality in regard to theory and practice. The periphery as an ‘ex-centric
location’ (Bhabha 1994) has been conceptualised as offering an ‘angle of vision’
or a ‘special vantage point’, arising from an acute awareness of borders and
boundaries, which are exclusionary and enabling in providing pathways to
navigate between the borders (Comaroff and Comaroff 2012; hooks 1984;
Mohanty 2003).

their own socio-historical

What might constitute a southern praxis? Here, I outline three points
pertinent to the present study. Firstly, a southern praxis involves de-centring
Northern-centric prerogatives in theorising which, arising from an inadequate
recognition of
speciﬁcities, are presented as
universally agenda-setting. As a form of discursive colonisation, a Northern-
centric lens, through which the rest of the world is read, profoundly excludes
the experiences and social thought of the periphery, views the South merely as
a source of ‘unprocessed data’ in need of Northern theoretical illumination,
and ‘others’ the South as exotically different or playing catch-up with the
North as the normative point of reference (Comaroff and Comaroff 2012;
Connell 2007; Mohanty 2003; Spivak 2000). For example,
in sexuality
research, a Northern-centric ‘rights’ discourse has been assumed to be
universally applicable, and globalisation is seen as the unilineal spread of
Northern models of homosexuality (Altman 1997; Warner 1993).
In
assuming a global gay identity, Altman (1997: 417), for instance, argues for
the ‘emergence of a Western style politicised homosexuality in Asia’ and places
Asian gays in a place of deferred arrival in a normatively woven Northern
narrative of gay liberation.

Secondly, decolonisation of knowledge goes beyond demystifying Northern
privilege to contributing positively towards a globally inclusive theory-making
and practice. Resisting erasure and ‘othering’ of the South means viewing the
South as legitimate producers of theory in their own right about the social
world they inhabit, and re-writing ideas of Northern experts from their situated
insights (Comaroff and Comaroff 2012; Connell 2007). The Comaroffs (2012)

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HOMONATIONALISM AS A POLITICS OF RESISTANCE

423

rightly advocate a move from ‘grand theory’ towards ‘grounded theory’, the
latter of which involves a historically contextualised knowledge production
based on a lived praxis. Fundamentally, then, a southern praxis eschews
‘monopolies of
(Das 1995), such that all knowledge production,
regardless from the North or the South, must necessarily be self-reﬂexive and
acknowledge its social, economic, political, historical, and geographical
groundedness.

truth’

Thirdly, a southern praxis adopts the view of theory and practice as a
transnationally shared process achieved through dialogue and mutual
learning. As Connell notes (2007), engagement, critique, respect and
recognition form the bases of mutual
learning, whereby the North too
must learn as actively as the South. Mutual learning can be in the form of
developing an interconnected set of intellectual projects that emerge from
varied social starting points as well as forging transnational alliances for
political organising (Connell 2007; Mohanty 2003). A critical southern
praxis strives to move from a politics of
identity towards building a
transnational politics of solidarity. Writing about homosexuality in Brazil,
Parker (1999: 231) outlines a politics of solidarity as that which is ‘capable of
hearing not only our own pain and suffering, but also the pain and suffering
of others, subject to the multiple forms of oppression, exploitation, and
injustice that have been produced by the contemporary world system’. This is
needed for political organising in both the North and the South.

To be sure, CDS and a southern praxis are consonant perspectives. Both are
modes of critical
intervention into hegemonic discourses of power and
privilege, and are aligned with excluded, marginalised communities. Both
also believe that knowledge production is not an apolitical activity, but is
invested in relations of power and ideology. However, while CDS with its well-
developed linguistic and semiotic frameworks offers a sharp analytical
instrument for discursive critique of knowledge practices of various kinds,
CDS scholarship itself, built upon and propagating Northern hegemonic
epistemologies, can also learn from a southern praxis.

The critical analysis of the Pink Dot video, from a southern/CDS perspective,
builds upon two sets of conceptual ideas, which shall be explained below. The
ﬁrst is ‘pragmatism’, through which the sociopolitical contexts of Singapore
and Singapore’s LGBTQ movement can be historically understood. Resistance
in pragmatic terms, or ‘pragmatic resistance’ (Yue 2012),
is introduced,
against which the emergence of the Pink Dot movement and its tactical
approach are set out. The second set of ideas is ‘homonormativity’ (Duggan
2003) and ‘homonationalism’ (Puar 2007), and how these are differently, and
strategically, implicated in the Pink Dot SG movement. In the light of these
conceptual discussions, the critical analysis of the Pink Dot video in terms of
the discourse of homonationalism as a politics of pragmatic resistance is then
undertaken. In concluding, I return to some observations about ‘doing’ queer
politics from a southern praxis perspective.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

424

LAZAR

THE POLITICS OF PRAGMATIC NECESSITY

The concept of pragmatism is central to understanding the production of the
LGBTQ culture and activism in Singapore, both from the point of view of state
governance and in terms of a tactical response formulated by a marginalised
queer constituency. As a mode of governance, the ideology of pragmatism was
developed as an ‘instrumental rationality’ (Chua 1995: 59) by the ruling PAP
government (the People’s Action Party) for postcolonial nation-building since
the 1960s. Based on a survivalist ethos,
justiﬁed overt government
intervention in all areas of social life, rationalised as ‘natural’, ‘necessary’
and ‘realistic’ solutions to challenges of nation-building (Chua 1995).
Underlying state pragmatism was a clear economic imperative. Economic
growth was seen as the best guarantor of social and political stability necessary
for national survival, and material improvements were regarded as the most
tangible index of ‘taking care of the collective good’ (Chua 1995).

it

rather

In practice, the policies rationalised on pragmatic grounds often proved to be
undemocratic and unapologetically anti-liberal. Also,
than ‘in
principle’, the exercise of pragmatism has been ‘contextual’ and ‘ad hoc’,
which could suddenly alter the trajectory of previously established policies by
the introduction of radically newer ones, and could prove inconsistent and
contradictory to existing policies. The PAP government, however, while
maintaining the formal features of a democratic electoral politics, has promised
that in the ﬁnal analysis its policies would lead to the establishment of a stable
communitarian democracy. Hence, pragmatism as an operative logic has
achieved popular legitimacy among Singaporeans, and is constitutive of the
ideological consensus between the government and the people.

Referring to the contradictions as ambivalences between non-liberalism and
neoliberalism, and rationalism and irrationalism, Yue (2012: 1) describes the
PAP’s practice as an ‘illiberal pragmatism’, which is central to understanding the
governance of homosexuality and the production of an LGBTQ culture in
Singapore. For example, even though gay sex is criminalised through the
maintenance of Section 377A (‘Outrage of Decency’) of the penal code, same-sex
cohabitation is permitted through a recent change in property law, arising from an
over-supply of public housing, which makes it possible for same-sex couples to co-
purchase government-subsidised ﬂats. Thus, although a hegemonic discourse of
heteronormative home ownership continues to prevail, the new government
policy has unwittingly made possible non-heteronormative domesticity. In
another example, motivated by the government’s desires for Singapore to
become a global city in transnational capitalist networks, queer involvement in
creative industries, for instance, is accepted, turning arts and culture into
commodities which add value to the country’s economy (Chan 2012; Yue 2012).
LGBTQ communities in Singapore, therefore, have circumnavigated around
the ambivalences of an illiberal pragmatic governance, in order to survive and
thrive. The same applies to the LGBTQ movement in Singapore, necessitating

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HOMONATIONALISM AS A POLITICS OF RESISTANCE

425

queer activists to negotiate the legal restrictions and stigmatisation of non-
normative sexualities and gender through a tactical response of pragmatic
resistance. Pragmatic resistance refers to a sustained collective strategy which
seeks to advance the LGBTQ movement, while ensuring that it survives the
scrutiny and potential retaliation of the government (Chua 2014). Although
queer activists in Singapore, like their counterparts elsewhere on the globe,
want to be allowed to live full self-determined lives, their approach reﬂects a
highly contextual and reﬂexive response of ‘toe[ing] the line, while pushing
boundaries’ (Chua 2014: 20). The approach has been highly adept at reading
signals and shifts in the sociopolitical environment in order to seize as well as
create opportunities to progress (pushing boundaries), while not jeopardising
the survival of the movement (toeing the line). Such acts as organising street
protests or belligerently demanding rights could be seen to pose a threat to
existing power structures, and are avoided. Tactics, too, are continuously
adapted, escalated or scaled down, based on earlier lessons learnt (Chua 2014).

Pink Dot SG and pragmatic resistance

Here, I outline speciﬁcally the emergence of the Pink Dot movement as a mode
of pragmatic resistance, demonstrating its tactical manoeuvring around the
illiberal pragmatism of governance. In her book, Mobilizing Gay Singapore,
Lynette Chua (2014) outlines several
factors which shaped the tactical
direction taken with the Pink Dot initiative, as a historic moment in the LGBTQ
movement of Singapore.

One important factor was the unsuccessful outcome of a parliamentary
petition advanced by Singaporean gay activists to decriminalise gay sex in 2007.
Under Section 377A of the penal code, sexual intimacy between gay men, even
when consensual, is punishable by a two-year jail term. Expressed through the
language of rights, the gay activists who had spearheaded the petition had no
expectation that the law would be repealed, but wanted to force political
attention to be paid to it. As a result, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong made an
assurance that Section 377A would not be enforced against gays in consensual,
private situations. However, the law was retained symbolically, sending a clear
message that LGBTQ interests were not to be prioritised above those of the
heteronormative mainstream which, it was argued, had yet to accept non-
normative sexualities. The unsuccessful result of the petition conﬁrmed local
queer activists’ expectation that a Northern-style liberal rights discourse was not
an effective instrument for social change in Singapore. It became clear, too, that
legal restrictions against gay men would not be removed unless mainstream
values shifted in favour of doing so. This meant that garnering a visible support
base of straight allies and demonstrating alignment with mainstream goals of
social cohesion and harmony were imperative.

Secondly, in the wake of the petition to repeal Section 377A, there emerged
a vocal countermovement led by a conservative Christian minority group. This

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

426

LAZAR

required the LGBTQ constituency to respond cautiously and non-
confrontationally, so as not to be seen as causing social disharmony, thus
underscoring the importance of achieving a wider support base.

Thirdly, an economically-motivated trend towards social liberalisation led to
the government relaxing its licensing rules for public speech and assembly in
Hong Lim Park, the site of Singapore’s ‘Speaker’s Corner’, in 2008. As long as
organisers of events pre-registered with the police, and did not broach
politically sensitive topics on race and religion, they were no longer required to
obtain a license to hold public gatherings at the site. The new exemption rule
gave queer activists an opportunity for collective mobilisation in the Park,
leading to the inception of Pink Dot SG in 2009.

After much deliberation among queer activists, the decision was made not to
hold a Northern-style protest or gay pride parade that could be seen as
politically confrontational and off-putting to the masses. Instead, the concept of
organising a free-to-all carnival-like rally, aimed at social cohesion and
mobilising mass support, was birthed. Under the banner ‘Freedom to Love’, the
event aimed to ‘raise awareness and foster deeper understanding of the basic
human need to love and be loved, regardless of one’s sexual orientation or
gender identity’ (Pink Dot SG 2013). The idea was for anyone to simply show
up at a designated time in the park attired in pink,
for a picnic, some
entertainment and speeches by LGBTQ ambassadors. The highlight of the
event was the formation of a giant human Pink Dot, to be photographed
aerially from a nearby hotel for a visual record of collective solidarity.

At the ﬁrst Pink Dot SG rally in 2009, 2,500 people – queer, and straight
allies – showed up. Since 2009, Pink Dot SG has been an annual event,
attracting increasingly larger crowds. In 2015, the estimated turnout was 28,000
people (The Straits Times, 14 June 2015). In the run-up to the Pink Dot SG rallies,
the organisers produce a promotional video, different each year, which they
circulate widely online. In what follows, the 2014 ofﬁcial video will be analysed to
show the emergent tactical discourse as a form of pragmatic resistance.

THE DISCOURSE OF HOMONATIONALISM AS PRAGMATIC RESISTANCE

Evident
in the Pink Dot SG videos is a discourse of homonormative
nationalism. The terms ‘homonormativity’ and ‘homonationalism’ were
coined by Duggan (2003) and Puar (2007), respectively, in regard to the
U.S. context. I brieﬂy outline these concepts, and then explain how they are
put to work differently in the context of Pink Dot SG.

Duggan (2003: 50) deﬁnes homonormativity as:

a politics that does not contest dominant heteronormative assumptions and
institutions, but upholds and sustains them, while promising the possibility of a
demobilized gay constituency and a privatized gay culture anchored in
domesticity and consumption.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HOMONATIONALISM AS A POLITICS OF RESISTANCE

427

According to Duggan, homonormativity signals a new neoliberal sexual
politics that is consonant with broader neoliberal ‘equality politics’ in the
U.S.A. since the mid-1990s, as manifested in the rhetoric of U.S. politicians,
corporations and the media. She is critical of U.S. gay civil rights groups that
have adopted this neoliberal rhetoric, thus moving away from a broad-based
progressive queer politics. Homonormativity, she argues, leads to a shrinking
of the gay public sphere and a ‘stripped-down equality’ (Duggan 2003: xx),
seen merely in terms of access to institutions of domestic privacy, the ‘free
market’, and patriotism.

complicit with the

Although homonormativity is

reproduction of
heteronormativity, and appears depoliticised, when viewed through the lens
of pragmatic resistance, the case of Pink Dot SG, I suggest, can be read as a form
of tactical politics within illiberal state structures. Instead of shrinking the queer
public sphere, leveraging on a discourse of homonormativity, in fact, offers the
Pink Dot movement an opportunity to expand, strategically, the queer public
sphere. This applies beyond the conspicuous staging of the rally for one day, to
a wider reach through its videos and other content posted on its website and
other media platforms.

Puar (2007, 2013) links the concept of homonormativity explicitly to a
national scale, in theorising practices of U.S. sexual exceptionalism, and terms
this phenomenon ‘national homonormativity’ or ‘homonationalism’. She
shows the collusion between homosexuality and nationalism in U.S. national
rhetorics of patriotic inclusion against orientalist
Islamic
terrorists. The strategic appropriation of non-normative sexualities for U.S.
nationalist agendas is explained in the following terms:

invocations of

For contemporary US nationalism and patriotism, the production of gay and
queer bodies is crucial to the deployment of nationalism, in so far as these
perverse bodies reiterate heterosexuality as the norm but also because certain
domesticated homosexual bodies provide ammunition to reinforce nationalistic
projects. (Puar 2007: 39)

Homonationalism is viewed as an inevitable facet of modernity, and is
characterised by a number of features. For example, the relationship between
non-normative sexualities and the nation is seen to be convivial rather than
antagonistic. Homonationalism is also primarily exclusionary in that
it
privileges queer white bodies, and denies homonational subjectivity to
undesirable ‘others’ based on such criteria as race, ethnicity, religion and
age. Furthermore, as argued by Puar, homonationalism is neither an identity
nor a political position.

In the case of Singapore, in so far as ofﬁcial discourses on the ‘global city’
appropriate non-normative sexualities and genders to create the city-state as
cosmopolitan,
it can be said that
homonationalism, as a feature of modernity, does get enacted tacitly and

tolerant and open (Obendorf 2012),

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

428

LAZAR

grudgingly. However, unlike Puar, my interest in homonationalism here is
from the perspective of a queer subaltern practice, rather than from a position
institutional state power. Speciﬁcally, my uptake on the concept of
of
together
homonationalism is
yokes
homonormativity and nationalism as a political discursive
strategy.
Furthermore, unlike Puar’s thesis that U.S. homonationalism is contingent
upon the exclusion of racial and religious others,
the performance of
homonationalism by Pink Dot SG is consciously inclusive of all Singaporeans.

LGBTQ movement

how an

Homonationalism and Singapore’s shared values

The homonational discourse in Pink Dot SG resonates closely with Singapore’s
nationalist values as articulated in a White Paper tabled in Parliament in 1991
and accepted the following year. Former Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong had
proposed developing a national ideology, called ‘Shared Values’, which aimed

to evolve and anchor a Singaporean identity, incorporating the relevant parts of
our varied cultural heritages, and the attitudes and values which have helped us
to survive and succeed as a nation. (Shared Values 1991: 1)

The motivation for the Shared Values came from concerns regarding shifts
among Singaporeans from communitarian to individualistic values. Presented
from a binaristic Asian-Western frame, Goh cautioned that

Traditional Asian ideas of morality, duty and society which have sustained and
guided us in the past are giving way to a more Westernised, individualistic, and
self-centred outlook on life.1 (Shared Values 1991: 1)

Individualism was seen to produce a sense of

‘hypersubjectivity’ at the
expense of commonality with others, implying an unwillingness to make self-
sacriﬁces for the social good (Chua 1995). Moreover, according to Goh, a
communitarian ethos had contributed to the success of East Asian capitalist
nations’ economic competitiveness in relation to the industrial West since the
1960s. It was feared that a decline in Asian communitarian values would have
repercussions on Singapore’s continued economic competitiveness globally.

The government, thus, proposed ﬁve values constitutive of Singapore’s

national ideology:

1. Nation before community and society above self.
2. Family as a basic unit of society.
3. Community support and regard for the individual.
4. Consensus, not conﬂict.
5. Racial and religious harmony.

Even though the White Paper lacked legal status, as an ofﬁcially promoted
and politically sanctioned document that was accepted by Parliament, the
Shared Values bear institutional and ideological gravitas, and have since

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HOMONATIONALISM AS A POLITICS OF RESISTANCE

429

represented rational grounds for action by the government and the citizenry.
In fact, all ﬁve values, in some form, are resonant in the homonationalist
discourse of the Pink Dot videos, regardless of whether Pink Dot SG is orienting
to the Shared Values in any conscious way.

HOMONATIONALIST DISCOURSE IN THE 2014 PINK DOT VIDEO

Here, a multimodal analysis of Pink Dot’s ofﬁcial 2014 promotional video, titled
‘For Family. For Friends. For Love’ (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3iGKe
IbxDoQ) is provided. The video presents a montage depicting Singaporeans of
various sexualities, genders, ethnicities and ages speaking directly to the camera;
sexuality is indexed through verbal or visual cues, while gender, ethnicity and
age are represented visually in a self-evident way. Addressing the audience
directly, through the camera, accords subject status to all speakers in terms of
presence and voice. The close or medium shot images chosen to represent these
speaking subjects allow personal or social
identiﬁcation to be established,
metaphorically, between the addressers and the audience, regardless of the
diversity of the addressers. Interspersed with these ‘speaking’ images are other
shots of the same individuals photographed holding either a ‘pinkie’ cushion
(Pink Dot’s mascot) or a circular pink cut-out with handwritten apothegms.
Notwithstanding individual differences, therefore, they constitute a collective
community, indexed through association with LGBTQ-friendly symbols and
paraphernalia. The language used in the video is English, which is an ofﬁcial
national language and lingua franca in multicultural Singapore, and this, too,
serves to bind the represented diversity. The analysis aims to show how the ﬁve
Shared Values are intertextually resonant in the video and are constitutive of the
discourse of homonationalism. (The excerpts below are numbered to reﬂect the
sequence in which the utterances appear in the video transcript. Underline
denotes speaker’s emphasis; square brackets enclose inaudible words, pauses or
extralinguistic information.)

Nation before community, society above self

The ﬁrst Shared Value calls for national unity and interests to be prioritised
above the rights and prerogatives of any individual or subgroup within
Singapore society. In the video, Pink Dot celebrations patriotically call into
presence Singapore’s national identity, for example:

(11)
(12)
(13)

I remember the year we had the helicopter with a Singapore ﬂag ﬂying past.
It was like a happy National Day.
I literally had tears in my eyes.

Each of these utterances is visually seen as spoken by different women: a
middle-aged Chinese woman, a young Malay woman, and an elderly Chinese
woman, respectively. Collectively, they reanimate by recalling a past Pink Dot
rally, replete with national symbolism.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

430

LAZAR

Firstly, as the speaker in (11) reminisces, the video cuts to actual footage,
shot from a distant aerial perspective, of a human Pink Dot formation at an
earlier rally, seen as a mass of shimmering pink. The concept of the ‘Pink Dot’
is itself overdetermined with nationalistic meanings. The term ‘Pink Dot’
alludes to a disparaging remark made by former Indonesian President Habibie
in 1998 to refer to Singapore’s small geographical size, barely represented on
the world map as a little ‘red dot’. The ‘red dot’ was reclaimed positively by
Singapore’s political leaders in the same year, and has since become a symbol
of national pride. In choosing the name ‘Pink Dot’, therefore, the organisers
can be said to be proudly aligning the movement with the nation, through a
creative twist in hue. In fact, although pink is a recognised colour of non-
normative sexualities globally (Altman 2001), here it is given an added local/
national signiﬁcance, for pink is a blend of Singapore’s national ﬂag colours of
red and white. The mixing of colours, symbolic of diversity, has become a
fundamental expression of Singapore’s national identity. Pink, notably, is also
the colour of the national identiﬁcation cards issued to Singaporean citizens; in
the context of Pink Dot, the colour symbolises the inclusiveness of all
Singaporeans, regardless of sexual orientation. The formation of the human
is highly signiﬁcant as a visual symbol of Singaporeans2
Pink Dot, then,
uniting as a singular body politic (pun intended), regardless of sexuality and
gender. More than a symbol, in fact, the national body politic is performed
literally and physically through the ‘collectivisation’ (van Leeuwen 2008),
corporeally, of diverse bodies.

Secondly, the national ﬂag is overtly referenced in the video. As the speaker
in (11) continues with the utterance ‘the helicopter with a Singapore ﬂag
ﬂying past’, the video at this point cuts to more sky-view footage showing the
national ﬂag being airlifted. The text-image congruence reinforces the
ideological signiﬁcance of the ﬂag as a supreme national symbol. The visual
display – and the act of watching – the national ﬂag from an extreme low angle
is a powerful invocation of patriotism. The original performance of nationalism
at the earlier rally and the intertextual re-enactment of that moment in the
2014 video construe a two-way relationship between sexuality and
nationalism. On the one hand, the Pink Dot celebration is aligned with and
subordinated to national values. On the other hand,
in the nationalistic
performance, no Singaporean – regardless of sexuality/gender – gets excluded.
Queer subjects may occupy a peripheral social position, but in terms of
national identity, they are also very much part of the centre.

Thirdly, the performance of nationalism is underscored through the analogy
made in (12) of Singapore’s National Day, an annual national celebration to
mark Singapore’s independence as a nation-state in 1965. During the
commemoration, the national ﬂag is patriotically raised, accompanied by the
singing of the national anthem. By likening the experience at the Pink Dot rally
to a ‘happy National Day’, a convergence of the two kinds of celebration is
achieved, and the Pink Dot event, arguably, gets elevated to a national

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HOMONATIONALISM AS A POLITICS OF RESISTANCE

431

celebration. In this regard, the invocation of, and alignment with, the nation
allows the powerful emotional affect expressed in (13) to be understood as a
moment of intense nationalistic pride at Pink Dot.

Although the video shows Pink Dot SG as patriotic and respectful of the
nation, it also weaves in elements that push the heteronormative boundaries of
a conservative Singapore society:

I think I want to live in a society that’s fair.

(31)
(32) So that our LGBT families and friends can consider coming back home.
(33)

I want my cousin to feel like this is a different place than the one she left.

fairness, understood speciﬁcally,

The ‘I want’ (main) clauses express future-oriented aspirations of what is
yet to be. Clause (31), in particular, implies that Singapore society presently
is far from ‘fair’;
from dependent clause
(32), as the social exclusion of LGBTQ members of society. Redressing the
social exclusion is discursively attempted through use of the inclusive ﬁrst
person plural pronoun and referents indicative of close relationships (‘our
families and friends’) in (32) and through personal kinship reference (‘my
cousin’) in (33). The expressions denoting movement ‘can consider coming
back home’ and ‘a place . . . she left’ are suggestive of a society’s progress
report. That Singaporeans have not felt at home in their own country and
have had to depart is a national indictment against social inclusiveness. Yet,
change and progress are implied as possible as well, with references to
homecoming and ‘a different place’, thus making national pride achievable
after all.

Family as the basic unit of society

The second Shared Value emphasises the importance of family ties: ‘It is the
group within which human beings most naturally express their love for
parents, spouse and children, and ﬁnd happiness and fulﬁlment’ (Shared
Values 1991: 3). This universalistic formulation,
is perfectly
consonant with Pink Dot’s broadly construed slogan,
‘Freedom to Love’,
referring not only to the love between non-normative persons but including a
spectrum of other loving relationships among friends and within largely
heterosexual families.

in fact,

The video surfaces two ways in which the idea of the family is accorded
importance. On the one hand, the Pink Dot rally is framed as a family-centred
event, stressing familial bonds.

(14)
(15)

(16)
(17)

I went to Pink Dot with my uncle and aunty.
I went down with my sister as well as my mom. When they are there, it
afﬁrms their acceptance of me.
I want my sons who are both gay to be happy and to live fulﬁlled lives.
I want my mom to accept me as a transgender.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

432

LAZAR

Expressed from the perspectives of straight parents (16) as well as non-
normative children (15 and 17), they all speak a common message of
acceptance. From the point of view of queer offspring, the desire for family
approval and support
items
‘acceptance’/ ‘to accept’. Here, family relationships are emphasised over an
autonomous individual subjectivity. The image that accompanies (15), in fact,
shows the speaker photographed in a part-whole ‘analytical’ relationship
(Kress and van Leeuwen 1996) with his parents and sister at a Pink Dot rally,
which emphasises his familial identities as a son and brother, rather than as a
gay subject.

is conveyed explicitly through the lexical

From the perspective of straight family members, acceptance is either
verbalised (see 16), or implied by the act of attending Pink Dot events together
as a family (14 and 15). At the same time, non-acceptance by families is also
painfully portrayed. Whereas in (15) and (16), the mothers are supportive of
their gay sons, the mother in (17) has yet to accept her transgender son.

these

In all

scenarios, heteronormativity is uncontested; however,
heteronormative family members are called upon to embrace non-normative
members as part of being ‘family’. Pink Dot’s slogan, ‘Freedom to Love’, in this
regard, is a call for straight parents, children, siblings, and other kin to accept a
family structure that is sexually diverse.

On the other hand, the depiction of the family-oriented queer subject is

pushed further in the video, by extending family formation to include them:

I want to ﬁnd love.

(23)
(24) Someone who is always there for me during my good times and in my bad

times.

(25) To be able to bring my own [er] boyfriend or partner home.
(26) We’ve been together for six years.
(27) Ten years.
(28) We’ve been together for seventeen years. I wish one day we can move in

and stay together.

In the above segment, only queer subjects are featured. (23) to (25)
constitute three parts of an extended clause structure, with each subsequent
part adding to the previous. The propositional content involves a narrative
script of seeking love (23), establishing a stable, committed relationship (note,
the formulaic expression ‘good times and in . . . bad times’ that resonates with
traditional heterosexual wedding vows) (24), and including one’s signiﬁcant
other in the wider kinship circle (25). Verbally,
the script suggests a
prerogative that is familiar to straight Singaporeans. Yet, the speakers in this
case are all manifestly non-normative sexual subjects indexed, semiotically,
through pink attire (23), tomboyish appearance (24), or through a male
speaker’s lexical reference to ‘my boyfriend’ (25). By attributing each part of
the clause to a different queer speaking subject, family formation is implied as

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HOMONATIONALISM AS A POLITICS OF RESISTANCE

433

a universal desire shared by non-normative and normative sexual subjects
alike.

In (26) to (28), same-sex couples (a lesbian couple (26) and two gay
couples (27 and 28)) are featured, claiming stable, long-term relationships,
ranging between six to seventeen years. Each pair is visually framed as a
‘couple’
through their close physical proximity and through mutual
engagement of some sort – looking at each other (27) or depicted in a
shared activity (26) and (28). The public declarations about their years
together highlight the monogamous nature of their relationships, disrupting
stereotypes of gay promiscuity. Such a representation counters
the
government’s expressed fears of
‘alternative
lifestyles’ which would ‘weaken the family unit’, thus recommending that
‘Singapore should not follow these untested fashions uncritically’ (Shared
Values 1991: 3). The video representation not only directly challenges such a
view, but normalises non-normative sexual relationships. The lesbian couple
(26) is visually featured holding a toddler, without verbally calling attention
to the infant in any way, thus implicitly normalising sexually diverse family
structures.

‘permissive social mores’ of

In sum, this segment of the video shows queer people presented just like

straight people, with a natural desire to love and be loved like anyone else.

Community support and regard for the individual

The White Paper on Shared Values explains that although the government
recognises that individuals have rights which should be respected, each
society must determine the balance between the individual and the
community. Unlike Western societies which emphasise individual rights,
Asian societies favour communitarianism, where individuals can rely on the
care and support of one another as a way to strengthen social cohesion
(Shared Values 1991).

The theme of relying on wider group support is pronounced in the video,
which relates also to the theme of consensus-building (discussed in the next
section). On the one hand, the value of community support is represented
as LGBTQ persons ﬁnding validation by participating in the Pink Dot rallies
over the years. In the following, four individuals (two of whom appear to be
transgender) recall past rallies each has attended. Their attendance signiﬁes
their
through their
participation, each of
in turn, contributes towards forming that
community.

identiﬁcation with the Pink Dot

them,

community;

(7) My ﬁrst time, I think it was in 2009.
(8)
(9)

I attended the one last year, 2013.
I attended the last three years.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

434

LAZAR

On the other hand, community support is represented also from the point of

view of straight allies:

(38) This year, I really want to go to show my support to my friend who I

haven’t been supporting all this while.

(39) Even if you don’t have a relative who is LGBT, just go and support [them].

Here, the call for support is extended beyond the family to friends and the
general public; that is, everyone. The speakers’ personal support for queer
individuals or the community is symbolised by their wearing pink and by
attending a Pink Dot rally (note the verb ‘to go’). One’s physical presence at
the rally becomes both a symbolic and an actual gesture of solidarity. These
utterances also signal the importance of recruiting new participants to the
rally, thus growing the community support base.

Regard for the individual, which forms part of the third Shared Value,

underscores the utterances below:

(18)
(19)
(20)

[I want] to be included and not just be cast out.
I would like people to stop judging and stop asking why – why we are gay.
If I could, I want bullying to stop cos I went through it. It’s hurtful and
leaves a scar.

(21) And you lose your self-conﬁdence and your self-esteem and your self-worth

very quickly if you’re being bullied, or you’re being called names.
If everyone can be more tolerant, then [.] less of us [.] will be hurt.

(22)

Queer subjects are represented as speaking up on their own terms from
personal experiences of being socially excluded (18), judged (19), bullied and
called names (20, 21). Similar to the liberation of women’s oppression under
patriarchy, it can be seen as a process of making the ‘personal political’ i.e.,
drawing attention to the social nature of prejudice and discrimination in order to
redress them. However, here, it is a consciousness-raising or education of the
public, and is balanced discursively through an assertiveness that is not
confrontational. The
their personal
standpoints in terms of what they want (18) and what they want stopped (19)
and (20). Yet, social criticism against the straight mainstream is mitigated in a
number of ways. Firstly, through passivisation and agent-deletion, the focus is
deﬂected away from the discriminatory majority (see 18 and 21). Secondly,
where agents are intact, vague and indeﬁnite referents are chosen (‘people’ (19),
‘everyone’ (22)). Thirdly, the use of the conditional moderates the tone (see 20
and 22), which reﬂects poignantly the social reality of asymmetrical power
relations at work where desired changes are contingent upon the collective good
will of the majority.

subaltern subjects make

explicit

Finally, community support and regard for the individual are forged through

straight allies’ advocacy of the marginalised LGBTQ community.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HOMONATIONALISM AS A POLITICS OF RESISTANCE

435

(34) This is a group that’s still receiving a lot of rejection by a majority of our

people.

(35) But there will be people like us, families like us, who believe that they

deserve to be loved just like anyone else.

(36) All of us should really love them, appreciate them. This is who they are and

what they are.

Interestingly, the use of the ‘us’ and ‘them’ pronouns can be read as socially
divisive from the point of view of the Shared Values. Yet, by drawing attention
to the division, the speakers from their position as the straight majority,
collectively confront the prevailing attitudes of the conservative mainstream
(34), and advocate a change of mindset (36). The ‘us/them’ discursive
strategy, moreover, clariﬁes the position of straight allies, in that they are not
part of the subaltern but speak up in solidarity with them, alongside the
subalterns who are capable of speaking for themselves (as seen above). Neither
is the straight ‘in-group’ conservatively homogenous. Implied in the word
‘majority’ (34) is the fact that there exists also a straight minority which is
progressive. This is especially evident in (35) where self-referencing of ‘people
like us, families like us’ suggests that a different (sub)group of ‘us’ belongs
within the larger straight mainstream. These straight allies potentially
destabilise the ‘us/them’ dichotomy, as they advocate a shared humanism
(‘they deserve to be loved just like anyone else’).

Consensus, not conﬂict

The fourth Shared Value dictates that social
issues ought to be resolved
through consensus instead of contention. Consensus does not mean achieving
unanimous support, but gaining majority support by bringing as many people
on board an issue as possible (Shared Values 1991). Rather than use the Pink
Dot video as a platform to explicitly lobby for legal rights, for instance, which
would lay claim to a partisan agenda,
the video positions the LGBTQ
community as already having achieved a measure of social recognition and
acceptance by the wider mainstream.

(2)

It’s great that Singapore has communities now that support the freedom to
love.

(3) The attitude is deﬁnitely changing.
(4) People dare to show and they have the courage to love.
(5) Slowly but surely more and more people are more accepting.

Reference to a present time frame allows for staking claim to a growing
support for the LGBTQ community; note the temporal adjunct ‘now’ (2), and
the present progressive tense ‘is . . . changing’ (3) and ‘are accepting’ (5). The
adverbials ‘deﬁnitely’ and ‘slowly but surely’ indicate the certainty of this
attitudinal shift. This is reinforced by ‘more’ in (5), which both quantiﬁes (in

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

436

LAZAR

the nominal group – ‘more and more people’) and intensiﬁes (in the verbal
group – ‘more accepting’) the increasing acceptance of the LGBTQ community.
This social acceptance is rendered intelligible through a universal language of
love. The clauses ‘communities now that support the freedom to love’ (2) and
‘they have the courage to love’ (4) ‘speak’ directly to Pink Dot’s slogan which
advocates an inclusive and expansive love. While (2) refers to support for queer
people’s right to love, given the co-textual context, (4) gives credit to straight
allies who stand up against the tide of conservatives to extend their love, in
solidarity, to non-normative Singaporeans.

The ﬁnal segment of the video ends signiﬁcantly on a note of consensus-
building. The utterances below are spoken by diverse subjects, some of whose
non-normative sexual and gender identities are made visually explicit (for
example, a man in drag (40) and a lesbian couple with a baby (41)), and some
whose identities are not visually explicit. The diversity is indicative of a general
consensus among queer and straight people alike.

(40)

I believe that when we come together it’s powerful. I believe the 21,000
people last year was extremely powerful.
It’s really great to see how Pink Dot has come and gone so far.
I’ve seen it grow bigger and bigger. And hotter and sweatier. [smiles]

(41)
(42)
(43) We could not have imagined 20,000 people gathering and supporting us.
(44) Yes, completely inspiring to be part of that. When I saw everyone putting

(45)

(46)

their lights to the sky.
I really felt the whole park and the thousands of people there bonding and
coming together.
I wish my mom would come with me to Pink Dot for just one time cos I-I
honestly believe that it might change her mind.

Here, participation at Pink Dot rallies is proof of a growing consensus among
the mainstream. The following expressions constitute a semantic ﬁeld,
representing a united and solidary front:
‘when we come together’ (40);
‘people gathering and supporting us’ (43); ‘everyone putting their lights to the
sky’ (44); and ‘thousands of people . . . bonding and coming together’ (45).
Accompanying (43) to (45) are various footages from past rallies, ranging from
a close-shot of an elderly female participant in the Pink Dot crowd (43), to a
distant aerial shot of the crowds as tiny dots of sparkling pink (44 and 45), to a
long shot revealing a cross-section of a crowd (44). The support achieved is
perceived as incremental and rising, as personally witnessed by Pink Dot
participants
(21,000; 20,000)
reinforces, objectively,
the sizeable support and represents strength in
numbers. From the point of view of queer subjects, the show of support is
strongly afﬁrming (note the intensiﬁers ‘extremely powerful’
(40) and
‘completely inspiring’ (44)). Yet, at the same time, there is a sobering
reminder that consensus-building must be an ongoing struggle. A daughter
longing for her mother’s support in (46) indicates that it is individuals’

(see 41and 42). The numerical count

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HOMONATIONALISM AS A POLITICS OF RESISTANCE

437

presence at the rally that contributes to the growing critical mass. This is
represented, intersemiotically, where the individuated reference to ‘my mom’ is
juxtaposed with an aerial shot of the dotted masses.

Racial and religious harmony

The promotion of racial and religious harmony in Singapore is essentially
about majority and minority populations living together peaceably, in spite of
differences. The government maintains an ofﬁcial ‘CMIO’ (‘Chinese’, ‘Malay’,
‘Indian’, ‘Others’) categorisation to distinguish the various ethnic communities
in Singapore, with the Chinese comprising the sizeable majority (74.3%), and
the Malays (13.3%), Indians (9.15%) and Others (3.2%) constituting the
ethnic minorities (Singapore Department of Statistics 2016).
is a
category which includes Eurasians of Asian-Western heritage. Even though no
exact correspondence between ethnicity and religion exists in Singapore, most
Malays are Muslims, but not vice versa. Muslims comprise 14.3 percent of the
local population, after a fairly sizeable Buddhist (33.9%) and Christian (18.1%)
population (Population SG 2016). Harmony-in-diversity is enshrined in the
Shared Values as fundamental to the collective well-being of the nation.

‘Others’

Throughout the video, Singapore’s ethnic diversity, in particular, is amply
represented in the queer and straight subjects featured, with multi-ethnic
harmony implicitly indexed through the juxtapositioning of shots in which
persons of different ethnicities are shown. See, for example, (11) – (13) and
(38) – (39) above. It should be noted, however, that ethnicity in the video is
represented as self-evident, and not indexed overtly through semiotic markers
like ethnic attire or cultural symbols. Analytically, then,
identiﬁcation of
individuals for ethnicity is made exogenously based on the ofﬁcial CMIO
classiﬁcation, and not through expressed self-identiﬁcation of the persons
involved. Discursively, this serves, at the same time, to emphasise and de-
emphasise ethnic identities in the video. On the one hand,
it achieves a
symbolic performance of multi-ethnic nationalism by the producers of the
video. Yet, on the other hand, it serves to ‘de-race’ gender and sexuality in the
national context, presenting the concerns and support for LGBTQ people as
universally shared, rather than as community-speciﬁc.

The value of harmony-in-diversity as a cornerstone of Singapore’s multi-
identity is explicitly foregrounded

ethnic (and multi-religious) national
through the text-image relations in two instances of the video below:

(1) Living in Singapore, I think we got everything: different cultures, different

beliefs, different races, different kind of people.

(6) We should embrace and celebrate our differences.

The repeated verbal mention of ‘difference’ in (1) cuts to several juxtaposed
shots in which persons who could be said to be of Malay and Chinese

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

438

LAZAR

ethnicities are represented. The video, in fact, opens signiﬁcantly with a young
Malay-Muslim woman, attired in a black hijab (an outward marker of Muslim
religious identity), speaking the words ‘Living in Singapore, I think we got
everything’. Spoken by an ethnic/religious minority member, the statement is
a powerful testament to the harmonious multi-ethnic/religious diversity of the
nation. Similarly, (6) is spoken by a young woman who appears to be of
Eurasian descent, belonging to an even smaller ethnic community in
Singapore. The Eurasian identity of mixed Asian-Caucasian heritage itself
represents the embodiment of the harmonious blend of different ethnicities.

fabric is achieved in a few ways. Firstly,

The overt enactment of harmony-in-diversity, I suggest,

is strategically
harnessed as a platform for extending the ambit to include the LGBTQ
community. The weaving of gender/sexual non-normativity into the multi-
ethnic social
through an
overdetermination of the colour pink which, as noted, signiﬁes queer or queer-
friendly identities. In (1) and (6), the persons are mostly attired in pink, wearing
pink hats, glitzy pink glasses, and holding a pinkie or a pink cut-out – each of
these functioning as Attributes, indexing the Carrier’s identiﬁcation with the
LGBTQ community. Secondly, as the Malay-Muslim woman (1) speaks the words
‘different cultures’, the image shown is of a Chinese woman holding a pink cut-
out on which are the handwritten statements ‘I want to stop talking about “gay
rights”. It’s not “gay rights”. It’s human rights.’ This is the only time ‘rights’ is
mentioned in the video. The text-image correspondence, with the words
‘different cultures’ spoken by a Malay individual and the visually represented
handwritten statement about rights held up by a Chinese person, achieves an
the LGBTQ community within the fabric of
assimilated presence for
multiculturalism. Finally,
in (6), through the modality of obligation, the
Eurasian subject calls for a commitment to celebrate ‘our differences’ – which is
deliberately double-voiced, in referring to ethnic/religious differences and, in the
co-textual context of the video, gender/sexual differences also. It carries a certain
poignancy that a member of an ethnic minority which has been socio-
historically named ‘Others’ should raise the banner for inclusion of gender/
sexual minorities in Singapore.

In sum, riding on multi-ethnicity and multiculturalism, non-normative gender/
sexualities get quietly imbricated into the overarching,
familiar nationalist
discourse of harmony-in-diversity. Arguably, this achieves a naturalisation of all
kinds of difference as constitutive of Singapore’s national identity.

CONCLUSION: REMARKS FROM THE PERSPECTIVE OF A SOUTHERN
PRAXIS

I aimed to show the construction of a homonationalist discourse in a Pink Dot
promotional video, which resonated closely with Singapore’s Asian-centric Shared
Values. From the point of view of a queer radical critique, the assimilationist
discourse of homonationalism found in Pink Dot SG would justiﬁably raise critical

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HOMONATIONALISM AS A POLITICS OF RESISTANCE

439

illiberal

concerns regarding complicity and a seeming lack of agency. However, viewed as
a tactical discourse of pragmatic resistance,
the Pink Dot discourse of
homonationalism, as I have argued, demonstrates the resilience, creativity and
agency of a marginalised community in the face of
institutional
apparatuses. Instead of being openly contestative, Pink Dot’s resistance, shaped
by a pragmatic necessity, followed a pathway centred on nationalism, social
harmony, normative
family-orientedness, consensus-building and forging
alliances with the heterosexual mainstream. Viewed no less as a tactical politics
of resistance in the case of Pink Dot SG, I disagree, therefore, with Duggan’s
theoretical position that homonormativity necessarily ‘seriously disables political
analysis and activism’ (2003: xx). As demonstrated, the resistive politics analysed
in this study pragmatically toed the line, while pushing boundaries. In other
words, while strategically passing as normative, on the one hand,
it
simultaneously opened up a space for non-normative presence and recognition,
on the other. For example, as shown in the Pink Dot discourse, while the
movement is aligned with and leverages on the uniting force of nationalism, it also
challenges Singaporean society to be open and inclusive of all citizens. Likewise,
while upholding heteronormative family structures, the discourse, at the same
time, pushes for the acceptance of non-normative family formations.

political

organising

and

Herein lies an implication for the adoption of a southern praxis perspective. If
read through a Northern-centric lens, the argument regarding the political
import of homonormativity and homonationalism presented in the study could
be interpreted as peculiar, anomalous, and as ‘other’. However,
from the
perspective of southern praxis, the strategic practice shown in this study,
contingent upon the socio-historical speciﬁcities of its context, paves the way
for entry into a theoretically engaged dialogue and reﬁnement of concepts
developed in the North. As earlier described, this entails unsettling monopolies
of truth-making, and allowing other narratives to come forth and to relate
different narratives to each other in a globally inclusive way (Connell 2007).
Extending from this study is another implication of southern praxis,
concerning
The
conceptualisation of the Pink Dot movement, supported by the discourse in
the videos, offers a different pathway to organise an LGBTQ social movement and
mobilise communal support. The concept of Pink Dot SG, in fact, has been
borrowed and adapted for political organising in a variety of geographical
locations across the world, such as Hong Kong, the U.S.A. (in New York City and
Salt Lake City), and Canada (in Montreal). In terms of global transnational ﬂows,
this disrupts Northern-centric narratives that assume a unilineal ﬂow of
knowledges and practices from the North, as the pivotal centre, and adapted
(‘glocalised’) in the rest of the world (cf. Altman 1997). Neither does this example
reify a simple North/South binary, whereby ideas either ﬂow from the North to
the South or in the reverse direction. Rather, the transnational ﬂows in this case
are multi-directional, and suggest interconnectivity of multiple sites in relation
to the North and within the Asian South. Pertinently, too, contra a Northern-

transnational

alliances.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

440

LAZAR

centric assumption that focuses on rights as necessarily driving the discourse
and political organising of LGBTQ communities globally, ‘Asian values’, as a set
of ideas circulating widely within the Asian South, have strategically shaped the
Pink Dot SG discourse and mode of political organising, and have been indirectly
imported globally. To conclude then, what and how any activism ends up
looking in any place cannot be determined a priori nor assumed to be a foregone
conclusion, but is always contingent. And that applies to communities in the
North as it does in the South.

NOTES

1. It should be noted that such an iteration is not unproblematic, and that the
conjured image of ‘Asia’ and its communalist values are appropriated for state
ambitions. (Thanks to Phoebe Pua for highlighting this point.)

2. Although foreigners could join the rallies (until 2017), only Singaporean citizens
and Permanent Residents are permitted to participate in the Pink Dot formation.

REFERENCES

Altman, Dennis. 1997. Global gaze/global gays. GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies 3:

417–436.

Altman, Dennis. 2001. Global Sex. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press.
Bhabha, Homi. 1994. The Location of Culture. London: Routledge.
Chan, Kenneth. 2012. Impossible presence: Toward a queer Singapore cinema. In Audrey Yue
and Jun Zubillaga-Pow (eds.) Queer Singapore: Illiberal Citizenship and Mediated Culture. Hong
Kong: Hong Kong University Press. 161–174.

Chua, Beng-Huat. 1995. Communitarian Ideology and Democracy in Singapore. London:

Routledge.

Chua, Lynette J. 2014. Mobilizing Gay Singapore: Rights and Resistance in an Authoritarian State.

Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Temple University Press.

Comaroff, Jean and John L. Comaroff. 2012. Theory from the South: Or How Euro-America is

Evolving toward Africa. Boulder, Colorado: Paradigm Publishers.

Connell, Raewyn. 2007. Southern Theory: The Global Dynamics of Knowledge in Social Sciences.

Cambridge, U.K.: Polity Press.

Das, Veena. 1995. Critical Events: An Anthropological Perspective on Contemporary India. New

Delhi, India: Oxford University Press.

Duggan, Lisa. 2003. The Twilight of Equality?: Neoliberalism, Cultural Politics, and the Attack on

Democracy. Boston, Massachusetts: Beacon Press.

hooks, bell. 1984. Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center. Boston, Massachusetts: South End

Press.

Kress, Gunther and Theo van Leeuwen. 1996. Reading Images: The Grammar of Visual Design.

London: Routledge.

Lazar, Michelle M. 2014. Feminist critical discourse analysis: Relevance for current gender
and language research. In Susan Ehrlich, Miriam Meyerhoff and Janet Holmes (eds.) The

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HOMONATIONALISM AS A POLITICS OF RESISTANCE

441

Handbook of Language, Gender and Sexuality (2nd edition). Oxford, U.K.: Wiley-Blackwell.
180–200.

Mohanty, Chandra Talpade. 2003. Feminism without Borders: Decolonising Theory, Practicing

Solidarity. Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press.

Obendorf, Simon. 2012. Both contagion and cure: Queer politics in the global city-state. In
Audrey Yue and Jun Zubillaga-Pow (eds.) Queer Singapore: Illiberal Citizenship and Mediated
Culture. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press. 97–116.

Parker, Richard. 1999. Beneath the Equator: Cultures of Desire, Male Homosexuality and

Emerging Gay Communities. New York: Routledge.

Phillips, Robert. 2013. ‘We aren’t that different’: Globe-hopping and queer rights in Singapore.

Journal of Language and Sexuality 2: 122–144.

Pink Dot SG. 2013. Last accessed 10 January 2017 at https://pinkdot.sg/2013/06/support-

for-the-freedom-to-love-blazes-forth/

Puar, Jasbir. 2007. Terrorist Assemblages: Homonationalism in Queer Times. Durham, North

Carolina: Duke University Press.

Puar, Jasbir. 2013. Rethinking homonationalism. International Journal of Middle East Studies 45: 2.
Shared, Values. 1991. White Paper (Cmd 1 of 1991) Presented to Parliament by Command of the

President of the Republic of Singapore. Singapore: Singapore Government.

Singapore Department of Statistics. 2016. Singapore in Figures. Last accessed at https://www.

singstat.gov.sg/docs/default-source/default-document-library/publications/publications_a
nd_papers/reference/sif2016.pdf

Population SG. 2016. Population trends. Last accessed at http://www.population.sg/

population-trends/demographics

Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. 2000. Subaltern studies: Deconstructing historiography. In
Anthony Elliott (ed.) The Blackwell Reader in Contemporary Social Theory. London: Blackwell.
244–256.

van Leeuwen, Theo. 2008. Discourse and Practice: New Tools for Critical Discourse Analysis. New

York: Oxford University Press.

Warner, Michael (ed.). 1993. Fear of a Queer Planet. Minneapolis, Minnesota: University of

Minnesota Press.

Wodak, Ruth and Miriam Meyer (eds.). 2009. Methods of Critical Discourse Analysis. London: Sage.
Yue, Audrey. 2012. Queer Singapore: A critical
introduction. In Audrey Yue and Jun
Zubillaga-Pow (eds.) Queer Singapore: Illiberal Citizenship and Mediated Culture. Hong Kong:
Hong Kong University Press. 1–28.

Address correspondence to:

Michelle M. Lazar
Department of English Language and Literature
National University of Singapore
Block AS5
7 Arts Link
Singapore 117570
Singapore

ellmml@nus.edu.sg

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd


