1. INTRODUCTION.

This article seeks to put a spotlight on the roles of the body and materiality in
language and gender socialization, a process that sociolinguists and linguistic
anthropologists have traditionally argued takes place largely through language
in interaction. In keeping with this article’s appearance in the themed series,
‘Interaction: Talk and Beyond,’ we present an analytic innovation: the use of
psychophysiological measures that represent the interaction between the
physical and psychological aspects of brain and behavior.
The fields of sociolinguistics, linguistic anthropology, and visual
anthropology have a longstanding interest in the role of the body in
interaction. Discourse and conversation analysis have long been concerned
with the fine-grained texture of interaction itself (Gumperz 1982; Erickson
1985; Tannen1984) and the delicate choreographing of physical components
of the body with aspects of language such as intonation (Mendoza-Denton and
Jannedy 2011). However, we know relatively little in sociolinguistics about the
psychophysiological facets of interaction. Lab-bound research such as that
with Event-Related Potentials (ERPs, small voltage events that occur in the
brain in response to specific stimuli and are measured with an
electroencephalograph) has long been taking place in psychology and
psycholinguistics. Sociolinguistics has only recently explored ERPs and eye
tracking techniques to understand how socio-indexical information influences
phoneme recognition as well as sentence and text comprehension (Beddor
et al. 2013; D’Onofrio 2015; Pickering et al. 2004); while other areas of
linguistics are using MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) and ultrasound to
understand, for example, articulation and its relation to phonological structure
(Mielke, Baker and Archangeli 2010).
Sympathetic nervous system responses such as increasing heart rate,
temperature, blood pressure, and electrodermal activity (EDA) are not
currently exploited for what they might tell us in sociolinguistics, linguistic
anthropology or conversation analysis, and we believe this lacuna arises in part
because of the perceived divide between field research and lab research that
predominates in these disciplines, with most field sociolinguists considering
psychophysiological measurement protocols to be too cumbersome and
inhibitory of the naturalistic situations preferred for fieldwork and
interviewing. Here, we must recognize some exceptions in the reading and ESL
ﬁelds which take advantage of the relative immobility of reading tasks to
measure, for instance, the greater EDA response to ﬁrst vs. second-language
swearing and reprimands (Harris 2004).

There is no a priori reason for our discussion of the relation between
language and the body to stop at the surface of the skin, especially given the
current availability (indeed, ubiquity) of unobtrusive, portable devices. As part
of audience design, speakers have been shown to deploy ﬁne linguistic and
gestural features to carefully ﬁt their language to speciﬁc interlocutors (Bell
1984), and they have also been shown to orient to such displays across
multiple interactions (Kendon 1985). In neighboring ﬁelds such as speech and
hearing science, unconscious processes such as breathing have been shown to
be tied to interactional events in laboratory situations (Hixon and Hoit 2005).
Within sociolinguistics, we are aware of the ways in which techniques of the
body (Mauss 1973) participate in meaning making along with language,
primarily through studies of gesture (Goodwin 2000; Voigt et al. 2016; inter
alia), and through analyses of the body interacting with objects (Shankar and
Cavanaugh 2012; Mondada 2016). Little attention has been paid as of yet to
processes (such as those of the autonomic nervous system) which are largely
outside of conscious regulation.

In contrast to sociolinguistics, the ﬁeld of videogame Human Computer
Interaction (HCI) has a rich history of exploiting psychophysiological
measurements to:

1. analyze and improve user experience (Ballard and Wiest 1996; Ravaja

et al. 2008);

2. operationalize the development of biofeedback videogames that rely on

interactivity between users and their own biological output; and
3. evaluate and implement design choices (Kivikangas et al. 2011).
With regard to product evaluation, the insights resulting from studies of users’
physiological reactions can be employed by videogame developers seeking to
quantify aspects of subjective dimensions such as fun, challenge, enjoyment,
and boredom (Mandryk, Inkpen and Calvert 2006). Video game user
experience data can additionally elucidate not only individual responses, but
also co-participants’ reactions to each other. Despite difficulties in
interpretation (i.e. do increased heart rate, breathing or sweating have
positive or negative valence?), gaming researchers and engineers assert that
psychophysiological measurement provides an ‘objective, continuous, realtime,
non-invasive, precise, and sensitive way to assess the game experience’
(Kivikangas et al. 2011: 181).
Meanwhile in the field of quantitative sociolinguistics, the real-time tracking
of linguistic consequences of discrete interactional events has enjoyed a surge
of interest, particularly in so-called third-wave variationist studies (Eckert
2012). Such studies often benefit from an ethnographic perspective (Podesva
2006; Mendoza-Denton 2008; see also Schilling-Estes 2004), providing rich
context that aids in the interpretation of the effects of linguistic variables as
they unfold in conversation. But quantitative sociolinguists are not the only
ones who have examined interaction as it unfolds: in sociology, anthropology,
language and communication departments, conversation and discourse
analysts have a long history of being centrally concerned with the mutually
constitutive nature of talk and action. As Devyani Sharma observes,
‘interaction is at once fundamentally linguistic and inescapably
interdisciplinary [. . .] it creates momentary alliances of bodies, strategies,
geographies, and various other signals and positionings’ (2016: 335).
Some of the questions we seek to investigate in this paper include:
• How does materiality of the environment, and especially culturally
sedimented features of material objects, serve to structure the interactions
of speakers in the world?
• How does gender ideology as materialized in objects affect interaction?
• How are these effects reflected not only at the interactional level but also
in physiology?
Answers to these questions can help us to better understand the building blocks
not only in talk and at the interactional level, but of gendered marginalization,
building on analyses of face-to-face interactional literature such as Goodwin
(2006). The technographic ‘human x machine/tool interaction’ (Ferrin and
Kontopodis 2017: 42) case study we present focuses on an interaction with a
technological tool: the Wii-mote, a motion-sensing wireless joystick/remote
controller that can simulate the speed and intensity of player movements. Such
a technological artifact is not inherently weighted as masculinist, but becomes
intensely so in the nexus within which the affordances of the game hardware
and the interactions it propitiates – using the Wii-mote as a stand in for a
phallus – serve to discourage and exclude the female player. In our case, the
result is gendered marginalization that takes place within the context of play,
joking and laughter. Thus, we can see how interactions during leisure
activities surrounded by positive affect for some of the male players might
simultaneously function to marginalize the female player. And yet, such a use
of the Wii-mote as a substitute penis is widespread. Not only is Wii-mote the
controller for one of the best-selling consoles of all time, but it has spawned a
string of other games that exploit masturbation mimesis: Wario Land: Shake It;
We Dare (a critically underwhelming [Gibson 2011] banned-in-the-U.K.
swinger-avatar game that somehow achieved a 12+ age rating). Even the
current and much-hyped portable console Nintendo Switch has built-in games
that earn ‘sexually suggestive’ ratings from review sites (IGN.com 2017).
2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND.
In this section, we briefly summarize four relevant strands of literature needed
in order to make sense of the data we will present. The literature on gaming
environments for women and girls gives us a glimpse of settings encountered
by female gamers. The second section examines some of the conversation
analytic claims about laughter (one of the main features we examine in the
interactions we collected), and ﬁnally we discuss psychophysiology and
electrodermal activity.

2.1 Gaming and gender.
In her anthropological account as a participant observer in the World of
Warcraft MMORPG (Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Game), Bonnie
Nardi (2010) provides an analysis of the gendered dynamics of video games, as
well as a sobering review of the literature on women and video games. She
notes that many games include elements that are unappealing to women, such
as ‘kombat lingerie [. . .] hypersexualized female body types . . .’ (2010: 166)
and even off-putting scenarios where players must ‘run around ﬁnding gear to
cover their nakedness’ (2010: 166) or operate in environments of ‘surly
masculinity’ like the brothels in the game Neverwinter Nights (Mortensen and
Corneliussen 2005, as cited in Nardi 2010: 165). To further her analysis,
Nardi relies on the use of the ‘boys’ tree house’ metaphor originally employed
by Williams et al. (2006), referring to a space that is assumed to be a boys-only
safe space, where girls are by deﬁnition excluded, and which in some sense
describes areas of gamer culture as a whole.
Much of our inspiration in thinking about gender is consonant with thinkers
such as Michel Foucault and Judith Butler. For our purposes, Butler (1988)
contributes the notion of performativity, a stance in which gender is not ﬁxed,
given or stable, but rather is continuously achieved through performance and
repetition. A related notion was advanced by Gail Jefferson (2004) who
considered gender not as a given entity belonging to an individual, but rather
as a career, a cumulative trajectory through which individuals play out all
their interactions. We follow Wysocki and Lauteria (2015) in understanding
the videogame industry as analyzable through Foucault’s regimes of biopolitics
and anatomo-politics (Foucault 2010 [1978]). Anatomo-politics in this case
can be used to consider how the prevalence of sexist language, imagery, and
object reference in video games (for examples, see dorkly.com 2017) has
resulted in a disciplining of the body, as well as an interpellation, a hailing
(Althusser 1971) of women in video games as always/already constituted in
degrading ways (Dietz 1998; Fron et al. 2007).

To give a brief illustration, a recent Python developer conference was
plagued by scandal when two male developers were ﬁred for openly making
jokes about ‘forking’ and ‘big dongles’ within earshot of a female developer
who chose to speak up and posted their picture online (‘forking’ refers
ambiguously to both a sexual act and to the development of a new program
from open source software, while a ‘dongle’ can be either a hardware
connector or a slang word for penis). The male developers denied interpellating
the woman, claimed that they only meant ‘forking’ and ‘dongles’ in the
technical sense, and apologized. As most gender-related matters in the world of
gaming though, the controversy was far from over: the firings were followed by
vengeance from Anonymous resulting in multiple DDoS (Distributed Denial of
Service – an evil-minded attempt to make a server unavailable) attacks on the
server hosting the woman’s blog (Brodkin 2013).
Yes, by now the terms ‘forking’ and ‘dongle’ have technical meanings.
Inescapable, however, is the sexist background from which these terms spring,
and the double-entendre that the terms create and which can be covered up in
plausible deniability. The terms and the objects to which they refer are always
already entangled with the history of their social naming.
Elsewhere (Mendoza-Denton 2016) we discuss the enregisterment of this
gaming interpretation, and its circulation through social media. The
phenomenon of enregisterment, the emergence of recurrent patterns across
registers, would be an example of an ideology in the making, an interpretant
taking flight through post-mass-media networks. And yet it is the
entanglement between the game designers of Mario Party 8 (mostly male),
the iconic function of the Wii-mote, and its use in a (purportedly family-rated)
videogame that constitutes an in-group joke, a type of Easter Egg (a secret
subroutine found in a video game that, if found, is meant to reward ingenuity
on the part of the player), sent across time and space from the male designers of
the game to the male players at the other end.
What is the point of the minigame under study then? The object of the
minigame ‘Shake it Up’ within Mario Party 8 is to shake the can (the Wii-mote)
as hard as possible, at which point ‘soda’ appears to spurt out from the can.
The person with the highest soda stream is declared the winner. All of this
action is mimed by the Mario character in the game, and the mimetic
masturbation this directive produced in the interaction we recorded drew peals
of laughter from the men involved in the game. The patterning of language,
laughter and action proved revealing for what it shows about gender relations
in the game, and we will see how the emotional and interactional commitment
signaled by this joke in the ‘boys’ tree house’ is embodied in participants’
electrodermal responses.
2.2 Laughter in conversation.
From its earliest writings, the field of conversation analysis has investigated the
micro-coordination of interactional patterns of laughter in conversation. Like
all other types of interaction, laughter exhibits ‘order at all points’ (Sacks 1984:
22). Contrary to popular perceptions of laughter as interrupting normal speech
or bursting through in a disorderly way, conversational data supports the idea
that, even in what may seem like the abandon of merriment, speakers place
laughter precisely (Jefferson 1979; Glenn 1995). The occurrence of laughter is
projected by both speakers and hearers, and governed by principles more
broadly applicable to conversation, such as preference for positive assessments
and agreement, commonly exhibited through sharing and joining of laughter
(Kangasharju 1996; Gordon 2003). Laughter can be thought of as an
invitation for joint attention which can be accepted or declined (Jefferson
1979). Laughing together (or not) is then a joint accomplishment,
systematically produced and socially organized (Jefferson, Sacks and Schegloff
1987: 152), whether laughter is accompanying talk about troubles – in which
case laughter-joining is dispreferred (Jefferson 1984) – or whether the laughter
invites the positive evaluation of a nominated laughable (Glenn 1995).
The gendered pattern of laughter-joining has also aroused the curiosity of
researchers. How, muses Gail Jefferson (2004: 117), is it possible tomake sense of
generalizations such as ‘in male-female interaction, if the male laughed, the
female would join in, and if the female laughed, the male would not join’? The
cases she presents in that analysis are further abstracted as instances of ‘laughreceptiveness’
and ‘laugh-resistance,’ and it is precisely that receptiveness and
resistance that varies by the type of joke and the gendered career of the recipient.
2.3 Physiology and electrodermal activity.
Physiological reactivity is constantly being regulated by our bodies through
our autonomic nervous system. The system has two components: the
parasympathetic and sympathetic. The parasympathetic nervous system
serves to calm down the body while the sympathetic nervous system
stimulates physiological responses. As individuals engage and interact with
their environment, the sympathetic nervous system causes their bodies to
react, elevating heart rates, quickening breath or increasing sweat production
(Sapolsky 2004; Dawson, Schell and Filion 2007). Importantly, the same
physiological reactivity also occurs due to psychological factors (Coenen,
Coorevits and Lievens 2015; M€uller and Fritz 2015). That is, even in the
absence of physical activity, cognitive processes can result in physiological
reactions just as movement does.
The physiological response we have chosen to examine is called electrodermal
activity (EDA) and is the regulation of skin conductance through sweat levels in
sweat gland pores. Increased moisture in sweat ducts lowers resistance for
electric currents, increasing the amount of electricity that can flow through the
skin (Dawson, Schell and Filion 2007; Fowles 2008). EDA is measured in
microsiemens (ls), which is a standardmeasurement of electrical conductance. A
rise in EDA levels is also controlled by the sympathetic nervous system. While
EDA does react to physical stimuli – i.e. doing exercise – it is sensitive enough to
document reactivity due to psychological stimuli as well. These include positive
and negative emotions, engagement, and intense focus (Dawson, Schell and
Filion 2007; Coenen, Coorevits and Lievens 2015; M€uller and Fritz 2015). While
EDA on its own cannot inform researchers of the reason or valence for the
response – observations or interviews are needed for that – it indicates time
periods when there were sustained high or low levels of reactivity. We are
hypothesizing that the commitment to the joke in the video game – the emotional
investment – will be reflected in the body and recordable in the form of the
impedance and conductance that make up EDA.
EDA can be examined in two main ways: tonic levels and phasic responses.
Tonic levels refer to the long-term trends in EDA over a longer period of time
(Fowles 2008; Empatica 2016). According to Benedek and Kaernbach (2010),
the slowly varying tonic activity can be contrasted to the rapid spikes of phasic
activity that can be attributed to sudomotor nerve responses within a 1–3
second window following the stimulus, depending on individual reactivity. A
phasic response would be expected to return to its tonic baseline, and can be
succeeded by other fast-varying phasic responses.
For example, a phasic response is what one would see in a traditional lab
setting where an at-rest participant is exposed to a loud audio stimulus. Within
one to three seconds following the stimulus the EDA data would show a
discrete spike indicating reactivity to that specific stimulus.
What makes EDA a useful physiological measure for research looking at
multimodal interactions is the new wearable technology that allows
physiological data to be collected in ecologically plausible situations. To
measure EDA, we used the Empatica E4 wristband (Empatica 2016) which
allows participants to move around freely without being hindered by wired
technology, facilitating the capture of real-time streaming EDA data, which
can then be usefully combined with observations, video, and comments
collected in interviews and debriefings.
Only recently has EDA begun to be used in conjunction with ongoing
qualitative research in naturalistic environments. Eisenhauer (2016) indicates
the potential for EDA and ethnographic data to inform each other. She
compiles data into graphic representations called CSP (Context, Subjectivity,
Physiology) timelines. These are images that superimpose ongoing activities
and individual subjective commentary on the EDA data (Eisenhauer 2016). As
part of this process, EDA can be used as a participatory visual research tool
that can be used to probe participants’ perspectives. Researchers can review
EDA outputs with participants, allowing them to generate their subjective
interpretation of moments of heightened physiological activity. Eisenhauer
found that having children and youth view their own EDA output in
conjunction with video footage of their participation in activities made for a
powerful visualization. She found that youth were prompted to engage in more
in-depth descriptions of what they understood to have been happening and
how they felt about the activities. It also led to conclusions regarding their
participation that ran counter to what may have been concluded based on
observations or lengthier interview commentary alone. Although these
methods have been longstanding in sociolinguistics (Gumperz [1982] and
Tannen [1984] both showed participants videotapes of their interactions),
Eisenhauer is the first to pioneer them with EDA outputs.
<Middle>
3. METHODS.
The larger dataset for this study was collected over the course of a year, and over
the span of five gaming sessions. The first three sessions were conducted from
November 2015 to January 2016, and were composed of two unacquainted
friendship dyads (four participants in total) playing at any given time. The last two
sessions were conducted from October to November 2016, and were composed
solely of dyads. For the purposes of this article, we focus on the third session,which
took place in January 2016. The sessions were conducted with the initial
expectation that they would last one to one and half hours, but during sessions 3,
4, and 5, all participants wished to continue past the expected timeframe.
We attempted to control for gender in the interactions, and invited two male
friendship dyads to the session under discussion. As often happens in the
course of research, one of our participants, Joey, did something unexpected:
instead of bringing the male friend that he had said he would bring, he brought
a woman named Ruth. We recorded the interaction anyway, and what was at
first an accident of data collection has become the focus of our research: an
interaction skewed numerically by gender (three male subjects and one female
subject joined by two male researchers), and, as it turns out, technologically
and culturally gender-skewed as well. The larger interaction under analysis
took place over the course of four and half hours, over three rounds of
gameplay separated by two intermission periods. We focus on rounds one and
two, lasting around three hours total, and played on Mario Party 8 (Hudson
Soft 2007), which, as mentioned above, is a party (co-present multiplayer)
game on the Nintendo Wii console that emphasizes group-oriented, motioncontrolled
gameplay. The close interaction analysis of turn-by-turn play and
laughter takes place over a segment approximately two minutes in length.
Both friendship dyads were aware that they were going to play with strangers,
but they were not introduced until the time of the session. Each individual player
was close friends with one other player (the one in their dyad) and one of the two
researchers present, but initial strangers to the other two game participants and
the other researcher. Two of the co-authors of this study,Wilson and Flores, both
male, recruited the subjects, ran the study and were present in the room without
participating directly in gameplay. The composition of the players was 75 percent
male, and 25 percent female (three men and one woman). During the session,
one participant from each friendship group was asked to wear an Empatica E4
wristband device (we were limited in how many devices we could use by their
cost, around US$3,000 at the time of purchase, though we expect they have
come down in price). Although the only woman present was not wearing an
Empatica E4 wristband, she later agreed to meet with a female member of the
research team (not initially present at the recording session) to recall and reflect
on her experiences from playing while looking at the video data that we had
compiled from the session. The insights gained from the post-game interview will
round out the presentation of our conversational data.
3.1 Equipment.
The Empatica E4 wristband is a wireless, real-time monitor that measures a
wide range of physiological signals. In addition to the EDA sensor, it has a skin
temperature monitor and a photoplethysmograph (PPG) that measures Blood
Volume Pulse (BVP), from which heart rate, heart rate variability, and other
cardiovascular measures are derived. The E4 also has an Event Mark Button
that allows users to intentionally ‘tag events and correlate them with
physiological signals’ (Empatica 2016), and an application feature that
provides a live-streaming feed for researchers to monitor activity in real-time
and for up-to-date measurements that are synchronized to a secured, online
database.
3.2 Data setting.
Data collection took place in a ‘game room’ located within a redesigned faculty
office on the UCLA Campus. This was to closely simulate an environment of
familiarity and comfort (as opposed to a more impersonal laboratory setting)
while effectively eliminating the chance of passing visitors. Our redesign
consisted of separating one side of the office (used for its intended academic
purposes) from the game room section by high drapes, while furniture was
rearranged to evoke a cozy college dorm room (comfy couch, large TV screen,
pizza provided) in order for participants to experience minimal distraction
during gameplay. Participants sat on a couch on one side of the wall facing a
series of 32” flat-screen televisions, accompanied by an atomic clock and a
wide-angle lens camera (Figure 1).
The ‘front’ camera was designed to capture and record the movements of
the participants during gameplay, while a ‘back’ camera, placed behind the
players facing the television, would simultaneously capture all gameplay
footage. As per the findings of Mendoza-Denton et al. (2009), we did not place
posters on the wall that might exhibit gender prejudice and thus affect our
interactions.
3.3 The participants.
Participants were recruited according to the following criteria:
1. They were native English speakers, friends, and willing to come together
as a friendship-pair.
2. They had some prior experience in playing, understanding basic game
controls and game mechanics. It was not necessary for them to have
previously played any of the games presented in the study.
3. They were interested in playing in a study environment. This included
having two researchers in the room during the session.
4. The pairs were amenable to playing with a pair of strangers for the
duration of the session.
Participants consented to the use of their undoctored video footage, but agreed
to the modification of their names. Participants were not compensated save for
food and drinks provided during the study to further simulate dorm-room play.
Before the session began, players were asked a series of background
questions, including their history of videogame playing; their relationship to
communities oriented around playing videogames – online or offline gaming
forums; frequency of play, and history of playing with their accompanying
friend. At the end of the session, players were asked some basic questions
about their overall impressions of the gaming sessions, any particular
moments that they felt emotionally responsive to, and how this may have
been influenced by the presence of other participants. During the session,
players were encouraged to stop at any point if they wished to ask any
questions or to address any concerns that they may have experienced while
participating.
A brief description of each participant is necessary to provide context.
1. Ruth (Group 1), 20, is a Latina student at UCLA, from South Central Los
Angeles; she is the only female participant present during the gaming
session. She considers herself a casual gamer during school, but plays
more frequently when on break. She has limited experience with Mario
Party, and has traditionally disliked first-person shooter games. She is
not involved in online gaming communities beyond looking up general
information.
2. Joey (Group 1) is a 20-year-old African-American male, from Inglewood,
California, who is a student at UCLA. He considers himself a semi-avid
player; although his playtime also varies depending on school. He prefers
to play local games with friends, but occasionally plays online against
strangers. He is familiar with the Mario Party franchise, and not involved
in online communities beyond looking up general information.
3. Bob (Group 2) is a 23-year-old Egyptian-American male, from California,
living locally. He considers himself an avid player, familiar with both the
Mario Party and Call of Duty franchise. He participates in online
videogame communities through social media. Although he plays with
strangers regularly online, he prefers to play with close friends.
4. Ross (Group 2) is a 30-year-old Native-American male from California,
living locally. Like his friend Bob, Ross considers himself an avid player,
familiar with the Mario Party franchise. He also participates in online
communities, but tends to play games with close friends only.
After the groups were introduced to one another and were asked the initial
interview questions, participants began the first round on Mario Party. Round
1 was a standard, two-versus-two game on medium difficulty. The teams were
Ruth and Joey on team 1, and Bob and Ross on team 2. Without instruction
from the research team, the participants sat next to each other for the first
round, with Ross on the far left, Bob at the center left, Joey at center right, and
Ruth on the far right (Figure 2).
After the first intermission period, the teams were switched, and round 2
began. In this round we asked that Ruth pair up with Bob, and that Joey pair
up with Ross. As we will see in the discussion of the EDA later in the paper, the
separation of Ruth from her friend Joey had consequences for Joey’s
physiology. But first let us analyze an approximately one-minute interaction
where speakers ‘shake it up.’
4. TRIANGULATING OUR DATA
In order to make our argument, we will be presenting three different kinds of
related data in this section:
1. conversation analytic data;
2. post-game debriefing interview data; and
3. electrodermal activity (EDA) data.
The conversation analytic transcription and video data come from the section in
which much of the initial Shake it Up gameplay occurred. We selected these
segments for their remarkable display of the theoretical ‘boys’ tree house’
arrangement described in the literature. We selected those incidents before
identifying the EDA data following those segments for further analysis. The
electrodermal activity data comes from portions immediately following that
brief first game-play and following the reshuffling of the seating of the subjects
(recall that although EDA has a relatively fine granularity, it is still not exactly
time-aligned to the stimuli: it has a latency response of 1–3 seconds, variable in
time and magnitude for each speaker, so as far as possible we try to compare
speakers to themselves). The post-game debriefing interview occurred two
weeks after the event, and only one speaker (Ruth) was available for that.
4.1 Analyzing laughter.
Our first data set involves analyzing interaction among the participants
playing the Mario Party 8 game ‘Shake it Up’. We produced a conversation
analytic transcript of the event, along with the short periods leading up to it
and following it, and we analyzed it for interactional clues that might allow us
to understand Ruth’s participation in this sexualized interaction. Our analysis
will be focused on laughter, utilizing transcription conventions as per Jefferson
(1984; see the Appendix). Consider the following excerpt, from the first time
the participants play the mini-game:
Excerpt 1: Shake it Up
Players are playing Mario Party 8. The randomized mini-game lands on ‘Shake
It Up.’ See the bottom of Figure 3 for an image of what participants see on-screen.
The players in this excerpt respond to game selection and discuss the game controls.
1. Joey: ↑O:::H I li[ke this::]
2. Ruth: [°Shake it uh:hp°]
3. Joey: = oh yah you’d jus[ (.) da shake th- jus (.) shake]=
4. Ruth: >°[Shake it uhp shake it uhp↑]°< ((continued
melodic intonation))
5. Ruth: >which one?< ((Mario mimes up and down motion within game))
6. Joey: = (0.5) >as fast as-< jus- shake da-
7. Ruth: you gotta jerk it? ((to Joey with smiling voice))
8. Joey: yeah:: (.) I- I mean (.) tsh [ha-] ha ((smiling voice))
9. Ross: [if] you want to SAY it [like THATL*+H
GO aheadL-L%]
10. Ruth: I- I didn’t mean it like that ((serious voice))
11. Ruth: You’re the one who took into connotation
12. Joey: WELL HACTUA.HHHLLY [↑I said shake]
13. Ross: [°<Yeah> I am°]
14. Bob: I me::.hhhan-uh (.) there’s a bunch of [[.hhhdifferent wa]]ys:
[you’d could]: have. . . .hhh
15. Joey: [[inaudible laughter?, mouth in shirt]]
16. Bob: [[inaudible laughter? cough?, covering mouth]]
In this excerpt, Joey and Ruth, who are best friends and sitting next to each
other, assess the possibility that they will be playing this potentially
embarrassing game together. When Joey’s speech starts to slow down and
he exhibits pausing hesitation in line 3, Ruth invites Joey to laugh with her,
teasing him by pretending not to know the game, and in the end making overt
the sexual connotation by saying ‘You gotta jerk it?’ with a smiling voice in
line 7. The sequence plays out with both of these speakers looking at the screen
but aligning their bodies toward each other. By line 8, Joey has accepted both
the collaborative completion of the joke and the invitation to laugh. At this
point Ross, who is sitting at the furthest end of the couch, invites himself into
the joke by saying sarcastically to Ruth: ‘If you want to say it like that, go
ahead.’ The intonation in this utterance is salient, and we’ve transcribed it in
the ToBI system as a L*+H contour that Pierrehumbert and Hirschberg (1990)
have analyzed as indicating a lack of commitment to a scale, while Calhoun
and Schweitzer (2012) have analyzed it as a downplayer when a speaker offers
a controversial opinion, all of which fits with our interpretation of Ross inviting
himself into Ruth and Joey’s joke. Ruth, however, rejects Ross’s joking
intervention with a serious voice in lines 10–11, firmly declining to laugh. Joey
tries in line 12 to repair the face-threat to Ross implied by Ruth’s dispreferred
decline of his volunteered alignment, while Ross responds curtly to Ruth in line
13. After the attempted joke short circuits, both Joey and Bob cover their faces,
possibly laughing or coughing (Figure 3). We understand this temporary
stepping away from the interaction as significant in that it gives speakers a
chance to restart what may have been an unsuccessful bid for mutual
alignment. After this point, the game begins and the participants play. We pick
the transcript back up after the game has declared Bob the winner.
Note that in the lower half, Mario is holding a Wii-mote, shaking it up and
down.
Excerpt 2: After the minigame is finished, and Bob has won . . .
109. Ross: [TH .hhh ERE was] no way anyone was gonna beat =
110. Ruth: [What?]
111. Ross: =him in that [[game (.) OK?]] hhh .hhh=
112. Ruth: [[what? ((slight smiling towards Ross, then
shaking her head side-to-side while mouthing words)) ]]
113. Ross: = for L[IFE] ha ha ha
114. Ruth: [°my god°] ((mouthing out words))
115. Bob: [HE HA HA] ha ha .hhh .hhh hu.ugh ((covers mouth
with shirt to cough))
116. Joey: (inaudible) ((smiles while looking down))
117. Bob: .hhh .hhh .hhh HA .hhh guh- hu ((coughing))
118. Cory: (inaudible laughter) ((researcher: laughter))
119. Wesley: dhe [ha aha ha ha ha ha ha [[eha]= ((researcher: laughter))
120. Ross: = ((response to Cory, pointing at him and laughing))
121. Bob: [ha ha [[ha ha]] ha hah ha .hhh] ((laughter responding to
Ross and Cory, then Bob turns refocuses attention to the game.))
122. Ruth: [[(inaudible)]] ((mouthing words))
123. Ross: [.hhh]
124. Joey: [It] said we need fifty?
From lines 109–124, after Bob’s win, there would appear to be generalized
laughter all around, with even the male researchers joining in the merriment.
Looking more closely though, and as annotated in parentheses, we can see that
despite Ross’ proffered jokes (110, 111) invitations to laugh (115, 117, 119,
121), and opportunities to jointly assess volunteered laughables (113), Ruth
has repeatedly declined to join laughter (lines 114, 122). Ruth looks straight
ahead at the screen. All the while, Bob’s laughter spawns a coughing fit, Ross
laughs so hard he begins to cry, and that friendship pair pull researchers Cory
and Wesley into the sequence by physically pointing at them. Between lines
112 and 121, their loud laughing is co-produced and jointly patterned, while
Joey and Ruth vaguely smile but appear to decline to join in. Consider Figure 4,
where Joey looks down/straight ahead and Ruth mouths inaudible words. It is
of course a possibility that they were not declining to join, but their attention
was captured by something else. However, there is nothing of consequence
playing on the screen. We propose that the seating arrangement here is
consequential: Joey mirrors the hidden-mouth gesture earlier, with Bob to his
right, when everyone was ‘game’ and playing along with the joke. Now that the
joke has gone too far for his best friend, Joey resists the joke, declines potential
laughter invites, and mirrors Ruth’s gesture and affect. The sequence ends with
Joey nominating a new topic and the group moves on for the moment.
4.2 Ruth’s post-game interview.
The second type of data we now present consists of excerpts from a post-game
debriefing. After reviewing the data, we specifically wanted to get participant
opinions about the game ‘Shake it Up,’ and the sexual joking in the
interaction. Only Ruth was interviewed because the male participants were
unavailable. Here are some excerpts from her interview, which took place
approximately two weeks after the initial interaction. The interview was
conducted by Scarlett Eisenhauer, a female graduate student who is one of
the co-authors of this study. Scarlett was not present at the initial interaction
but had been briefed by the research team. Ruth viewed the video clip and
made the following remarks:
Um, I thought what was really, really, funny was that immediately, as soon as
we saw the motions, uh, that were on the screen there was a sexual connotation
to it. And so, uh, I think it’s just funny, like, masturbation is supposed to be
funny. Or it’s perceived as funny. So I felt like- I felt like I was less in on the joke
than the three of them, because I noticed that the two on the other side were
talking about- competing between each other like ‘oh’ um, like ‘you should- you
should be really good at this game’ or whatever. So maybe as a fe- as a girl without
a penis maybe I just didn’t get it as much. But I was still competitive in the end.
In discussing the interaction, we see that Ruth felt that, as a woman, she was
less ‘in on the joke’ than the other participants. Her pointing specifically to the
phallic nature of the joke is the key to our interpretation of this excerpt as
being conditioned by the gendered nature of the game. At an earlier point in
the interview, she talks gamely about enjoying competitiveness (unexpected,
she says, because she’s a girl) and wanting to display it, but in this portion of it
she explicitly disavows competitiveness in the arena of sexual banter and
innuendo. She continues:
I felt a little uncomfortable and I tried to play it off as ignoring the sexual
connotation too, ‘cause I kept- I kept repeating ‘oh it’s like a soda can,’ because I
kinda wanted the joke to be over at that point. Because I just- I don’t feel
comfortable. I mean, masturbation is normal and that’s fine, but I just- I don’t
like the idea of like someone else um, talking badly about another person’s like
sexual- sexuality or like how much- their sexual role I guess. [. . .] I feel like it
makes it worse that like the Wii-mote is kind of like a phallic symbol or at leastso.
[. . .] that’s why I felt like I didn’t want to participate with the other two,
because I felt like some of their language, like, I just wasn’t invested in it. Like, I
know all the guys would laugh at certain jokes and I wouldn’t, because it was
kind of- not that I was left out- but it’s just that I kind of- I don’t like the idea of
sexualizing things as a joke.
In this portion of the interview Ruth draws an explicit link between the phallic
shape of the technological object (the Wii-mote controller) and how that shape
allows it to lend itself to sexualized types of interactions. This interplay between
technology, embodiment, and interaction, is an instantiation of the concept of
entanglement. Hodder (2012) identifies the following sets of relationships:
• things depending on humans (T-H: Wii-mote depends on designers);
• humans depending on things (H-T: players depend on Wii-mote);
• things depending on other things (T-T: Wii-mote depends on larger game
architectures); and
• humans depending on other humans (H-H: players interacting with one
another, and in a physically and temporally remote way with hardware
and software designers).
While all of these take place synchronically in the one interaction we have
analyzed, an accretion of these interactions might give rise to a diachronic
pattern of gendered marginalization in games like ‘Shake it Up.’ Regarding
possible age effects, and keeping in mind that Ross is ten years older than her
and Joey, Ruth did not mention age in her comments about the other players
during her interview. While she was not specifically asked about this, she also
did not mention it as an issue when describing and discussing the other
players.
4.3 Electrodermal activity data.
The third type of data we show is the EDA data for two of the male participants,
Bob and Joey. We aim to show a contrast in EDA between the time that Joey
was sitting next to Ruth and the period that saw Joey was sitting between the
two other men.
Figure 5, where the x-axis displays time and the y-axis displays the measure
of conductance in microsiemens (lS), shows the full EDA output for the entire
sequence where participants were playing ‘Shake it Up.’ The solid line tracks
Bob’s EDA levels, while the dotted line tracks Joey’s EDA levels. It must be
noted here that different people can have both different baseline levels and
different magnitudes of EDA reactions. For this reason, we interpret an
individual’s EDA relative to their own output. What is their tonic trend-line?
And how much reactivity do they exhibit for a given stimulus? Do they return
to the tonic baseline quickly? Recall that focal EDA data comes from the devices
on Bob and Joey. From the data output in Figure 5 we can infer that Bob (solid
line) is much more reactive than Joey (represented by the dotted line).
In Figure 5, we aim to give the reader an overall view of the output from the
EDA devices. The devices are aligned to the video, so the 18:34 visible in the
nuclear clock on the table in Figure 4 corresponds above to the time that is
labeled ‘Game Play’. However, recall that EDA reactivity measurements are not
instantaneous, but occur between 1 and 3 seconds following the stimulus, and
both the magnitude of the speaker’s wave and their time lag relative to the
stimulus is dependent on the individual’s level of reactivity (Stern, Ray and
Quigley 2001). For that reason, we don’t compare absolute numbers or
averages for this data output, but rather look at overall trends, and in this case
the best comparisons are within a single individual. We focus here on Joey,
Ruth’s friend. Let’s zoom into a segment immediately after gameplay. We call
this portion of gameplay the ‘Friend Zone’ because at that point in the
transcript Ross remarks that they have left the friend zone, a designation for a
situation where one party has an unreciprocated sexual interest in another.
Ross says they have left the friend zone, meaning they are now intimate,
because the game put them in a situation where they feel like they have
masturbated together.
Figure 6 shows that right after the conclusion of game play, Bob has not
only general elevation and but also some continuing phasic responses, since
he’s been joking and laughing. At the same time, Joey has very little response
and his EDA actually shows some decline. Note here that the right y-axis is
scaled for Joey and the left y-axis is scaled for Bob since they have different
levels of reactivity.
In our video (not shown here for reasons of space), Joey has visibly turned
toward Ruth. During the interview, Ruth talks about how she disengages with
the joke and mentions that she is talking to Joey directly rather than engaging
with the other two male players. Effectively, she has provided an alternate
focus of attention for Joey, and this pulls him out of the male-only gaming
space of the ‘boys’ treehouse.’
Figure 7 comes from the second time the randomized mini-game lands on
Shake It Up, almost an hour later. Once again, Joey’s microsiemens scale is on
the right and Bob’s scale is on the left. By this time, the players have changed
seats, and Joey is sitting in between the two other men and Ruth is sitting in
the same place.
The second time they play Shake it Up, the sexualized comments and jokes
re-emerge in full force: ‘My form is perfect!’ exclaims Bob, and this time all
three male participants laugh. In this case both Bob and Joey show phasic
responses, as above. While Joey is still not as reactive as Bob, his EDA line is no
longer flat. Now sitting in the middle of the boys’ treehouse, Joey is
interactionally positioned to participate more fully in their jokes, while Ruth
completely loses interest. While we do not have Ruth’s EDA data, we do have
her post-game interview. Ruth later commented:
And so, I was definitely feeling the adrenalin when we were playing the game
again and like, I wanted to win, and so I knew he [Joey] was good at the game.
And I was like ‘oh you’re good at this game, we got this.’ But the joke- I felt like
the joke was ok and then I think I started quitting down [. . .] because you know I
think it’s harmless when he references to masturbation, that’s ok. I just think I
don’t like the idea of like using it as a kind of derogatory- using it in a derogatory
form. . .nah. I think I was just completely disinterested at that point, I wanted to
focus on the game. [Int: You were over it?] Yeah I was just over that joke. I mean
it’s fine, everyone can engage in what they want, I won’t say anything.
The game session still went on for a couple of hours after this. Participants
had pizza, and moved on to another videogame. Weeks later, both Ross and
Bob were still joking with the male researchers about the great time they
had ‘shaking the can,’ wondering if they could come back and play again.
<Conclusion>
5. DISCUSSION.
We understand the present study as tapping into unexplored facets of the
study of multimodality. We have tracked the engagement and arrangement of
bodies in gesture, laughter, speech and physiology. We are also attempting to
understand how a normatively male-oriented joke is both contingent on
locally-produced sense-making and entangled with material objects. The joke
is transmitted from the designers through the realm of objects interacting
with the body, and those in-game objects in turn constrain bodies to fit into
ideological frames. According to Haddington, Mondada and Nevile (2013:
45),
In [virtual worlds] mobile actions are organized, coordinated and controlled by
immobile participants who sit in front of computer screens and identify partially
or totally with the movements of their avatars, in and even out of the game.
We observed that both in and out of the game, the Wii-mote’s Mario-avatar
actions translated into Ruth taking real-life offence, as evidenced in her
interview, and into the other players joking that their real selves had moved
past the ‘Friend Zone’ by virtue of their actions as instructed within the game.
According to Mondada, participants orient toward ‘“normative mobile orders”,
where in the lived course of instructed actions the participants claim and
disclaim, attribute and refuse the responsibility for game configurations that
are morally assessed as blamable, [. . .] complainable [. . .] or dangerous and
risky . . .’ (2013: 336).
Much current research now addresses social dominance in video games
(Gonzalez-Gonzalez 2011; Gray 2012; O’Leary 2012; Fox and Tang 2014). We
hold that locally produced assessments and invitations such as laughter, by
virtue of the way they are linguistically and physiologically responded to by
participants, highlight asymmetries in gender, power, and alignment.
6. CONCLUSIONS.
We hope to continue this line of research in several different directions. First,
we are interested in seeing how all-female groups with female research
assistants might react to the videogame in question. Do mixed-gender groups
with these kinds of sexually ambiguous gameplay play out differently with
women? Would female groups playing this game even find it funny?
Preliminary research suggests they don’t. Under what circumstances would
women develop these kinds of in-group jokes that would result in reciprocal
coordination of laughter and physiology?
We also would like to further explore context in gameplay, and for example,
EDA reactivity and activation differences in a speaker playing against the
computer, and against co-located and remote co-participants (for example, in
online gaming or MMORPGs, which are famously plagued by sexism, possibly
due to the anonymity of participation; Lea and Spears 1991).
At this point readers may be asking themselves, what does EDA offer to the
field of sociolinguistics? How does EDA differ from plainly observable behavior
as is reflected in videorecordings of action, or in transcriptions of talk? In this
study we have shown that physiological processes below the level of
consciousness can shed light on interactional events. We suggest that being
in close proximity to someone who is suffering through a sexist interaction is
enough to affect psychophysiological processes, a sort of ‘second-hand sexism’
if you will. Even though Joey didn’t say anything overtly oppositional to Bob or
Ross at the time of the onanistic sequence, he was still internally affected by the
experiences of his female friend. In other words, sexism and exclusion are felt
not only by the target, but also physiologically by aligned bystanders/
overhearers, a reflection of the sort of processes that Bell (1984) identified as
overhearer effects. We might call this ‘second-hand sexism,’ along the analogy
of ‘second-hand smoke,’ in that it is sexism that has a deleterious effect on the
bystander. It cannot be ruled out that our observation of Joey’s lack of
alignment in laughter and gesture is essentially a case showing the operation
of mirror neurons (Ramachandran and Altschuler 2009), except for the fact
that in the case of psychophysiology, subjective reports of emotions through
interviews and questionnaires have been widely normed and are also known to
correlate psychophysiological measures to stress-related health states and
outcomes vicariously (Drachen et al. 2010; Ruiz-Robledillo and Moya-Albiol
2015). In this way, we wish to suggest that the vicarious experience of
discrimination and sexism may have long-term outcomes. Prior research
suggests that we may be able to combine psychophysiological measures with
our analyses of the chronic stressors around sexism and racism. Both
divergence as shown here and entrainment (see, for instance, Hirschberg
2011) stand to be productively studied with the multifaceted methodology
offered here.
Finally, we recognize that video gameplay has the potential to provide a rich
source of relatively controlled data so that we may understand how EDA
measurement might apply to a naturalistic situation before taking such
measurements out into the field. Playing video console games in our contrived
game room affords a familiar replica of a naturally occurring environment for
this type of interaction: players can hear and see each other well, have assured
co-presence and mutual orientation, as well as a lack of competing demands,
extraneous movements and outside stimuli. We suggest that new, portable and
noninvasive technologies for measuring breathing, heart rate, and EDA are
ready to be taken into sociolinguistic situations beyond the confines of our labs
and set-up living rooms and game rooms. We hope this exploratory, proof-ofconcept
study provides some first steps and lays the groundwork for future
research in psychophysiology and sociolinguistics.