Applied Psycholinguistics 38 (2017), 1019–1043
doi:10.1017/S0142716417000029

Morphological awareness: Construct
and predictive validity in Arabic

SANA TIBI
Florida State University

JOHN R. KIRBY
Queen’s University

Received: April 4, 2016

Accepted for publication: December 11, 2016

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Sana Tibi, School of Communication Science and Disorders, Florida State University,
201 West Bloxham Street, Tallahassee, FL 32306-1200. E-mail: stibi@fsu.edu

ABSTRACT
The purposes of this study were to examine the dimensions underlying morphological awareness (MA)
in Arabic (construct validity) and to determine how well MA predicted reading (predictive validity). Ten
MA tasks varying in key dimensions (oral vs. written, single word vs. sentence contexts, and standard
vs. local dialect) and two reading tasks (real word and pseudoword reading) were administered to
102 Arabic-speaking Grade 3 children in Abu-Dhabi. Factor analysis of the MA tasks yielded one
predominant factor, supporting the construct validity of MA in Arabic. Closer inspection revealed that
this factor had two subcomponents, oral and written. Hierarchical regression analyses, controlling for
age and gender, indicated that both the one- and the two-factor solutions accounted for 48% of the
variance in word reading, and 40% of the variance in pseudoword reading, supporting the predictive
validity of MA. Implications for future research, assessment, and instruction are discussed.

Recent research on reading in English provides mounting evidence for the role
of morphology in a variety of literacy skills. Morphology refers to the aspect of
language that deals with “word-formation processes, including inﬂections, deriva-
tions, and compounds” (Nagy, Carlisle, & Goodwin, 2014, p. 4). Morphology
provides meaningful cues for the reader and the speller, because it allows learners
to analyze unknown words into their constituent morphemes and synthesize the
morphemes into complex words. Whereas some morphological processing oper-
ates automatically without conscious awareness (e.g., Deacon, Parrila, & Kirby,
2008), the conscious metalinguistic sensitivity to morphological structure and the
ability to manipulate morphemes have been referred to as morphological aware-
ness (MA; Carlisle, 1995).

The role of MA in word reading and reading comprehension has been well
established in English monolinguals, above and beyond the effects of phonologi-
cal awareness, vocabulary, and verbal and nonverbal intelligence (Carlisle, 1995;
Kieffer, & Lesaux, 2012; Kirby et al., 2012; Nagy, Beringer, & Abbott, 2006). MA
has been linked to a variety of literacy skills, including reading accuracy, reading

© Cambridge University Press 2017 0142-7164/17

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

1020

ﬂuency, reading comprehension (Roman, Kirby, Parrila, Wade-Woolley, & Dea-
con, 2009), spelling (Carlisle, 1987; Deacon, Kirby, & Casselman-Bell, 2009;
Nunes & Bryant, 2006; Nunes, Bryant, & Olsson, 2003), and vocabulary (Bow-
ers & Kirby, 2010; Carlisle & Fleming, 2003; Nagy & Anderson, 1984). Meta-
analyses show that morphological instruction leads to signiﬁcant gains in vocab-
ulary and reading (Bowers, Kirby, & Deacon, 2010; Goodwin & Ahn, 2013).
Morphological problem solving has been linked to children’s ability to deci-
pher previously untaught complex words (Anglin, 1993; Bowers & Kirby, 2010;
Carlisle, 2007; Carlisle & Fleming, 2003; Wysocki & Jenkins, 1987). All of these
ﬁndings underscore the role of morphology in literacy outcomes.

In contrast, MA and reading by Arabic-speaking children is underresearched
(Abu-Rabia, 2007, Abu-Rabia & Shalhoub-Awwad, 2004; Saiegh-Haddad, 2013;
Saiegh-Haddad & Geva, 2008; Shalhoub-Awwad & Leiken, 2016; Taha & Saiegh-
Haddad, 2016, 2017). The available studies on processes of reading Arabic have
included relatively small samples (sometimes not from a monolingual Arabic pop-
ulation), used a limited number of morphological tasks, or dealt exclusively with
adults in priming experiments. The paucity of research on MA in Arabic reading
is conspicuous, particularly because morphology is a salient feature of the Arabic
lexical structure. The majority of Arabic words are at least bimorphemic because
surface forms are derived by applying two abstract morphemic units (roots and
word patterns; Eviatar & Ibrahim, 2012). Furthermore, Arabic morphology and
orthography have a number of features that distinguish them from more com-
monly studied languages and orthographies such as English. For example, as
Boudelaa (2015) said, “The historically predominant analysis of Arabic morphol-
ogy is stated in root-and pattern terms, where surface word forms are constructed
by interleaving bound morphemes one within the other” (p. 2). After describing
the nature of morphological processing and morphological awareness, and re-
viewing evidence (in English) on the dimensionality of morphological awareness,
we will return to a more detailed analysis of Arabic language, orthography, and
morphology.

MORPHOLOGICAL PROCESSING AND MORPHOLOGICAL
AWARENESS

It is important to note that there is a difference between MA and morphological
processing. The classical example of the “Wug test” devised by Berko (1958)
has provided evidence that children as young as 4 years old have and can use
knowledge about English morphological rules. Children’s overgeneralization of
the –ed sufﬁx to irregular past tenses such
buyed is another example
of their unconscious knowledge of their morphology system (Nagy et al., 2014;
Owens, 2001). These are examples of tacit morphological processing. At the
more explicit level, MA requires conscious working out of the morphological pro-
cesses needed, that is, awareness. There seems to be a ﬁne line between MA and
morphological processing, and sometimes it is not easy to differentiate between
implicit and explicit MA tasks. For example, selecting which of two sentences has
correct morphology could be done by judging which sounds better, without any di-
rect or explicit application of morphological knowledge. Other tasks, for instance,

goed or

∗

∗

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

1021

constructing a word that has particular morphological characteristics, require more
explicit morphological knowledge (Deacon et al., 2008). Bowers et al. (2010) and
Nagy et al. (2014) have pointed out that this is a complex issue because existing
measures of MA draw on both implicit and explicit processes. Deacon et al. (2008)
argued that morphological tasks vary with respect to modality, content, and pro-
cess, and proposed a taxonomy to delineate the types of MA tasks. For example, a
morphology task may use oral or written stimuli and oral or written responses. The
content of a morphology task could include inﬂectional or derivational morphol-
ogy. Furthermore, morphology tasks may ask participants to produce a response
or judge the correctness of a particular response. Other factors contributing to
this complexity include developmental issues; for example, younger children who
are still in the process of reading acquisition may perform differently than older
children who read more ﬂuently and have gained more vocabulary. Another factor
could be individual differences between children depending on the type of educa-
tion they receive and their abilities, including intellectual abilities. Task demands
vary also and may tap other factor such as memory or syntax. Finally, differences
across languages/orthographies and the way the type of morphology (linear vs.
nonlinear or root based vs. stem based) would play a role in the processes needed
to process words.

THE DIMENSIONALITY OF MORPHOLOGICAL AWARENESS

While numerous studies have examined the role of MA in the development of
reading in English and other alphabetic orthographies, only a few studies have
investigated the dimensionality of MA in English-speaking children (Muse, 2005)
or adults (Tighe & Schatschneider, 2015). Although a wide range of MA mea-
sures has been used across studies (Apel, Diehm, & Apel, 2013), only few studies
(Muse, 2005; Spencer et al., 2015; Tighe & Schatschneider, 2015) have examined
the number of dimensions underlying multiple MA measures. Muse (2005) ad-
ministered nine MA measures to a sample of fourth graders and found that MA
emerged as a single latent construct, having considered a number of possible dis-
tinctions underlying the morphological structure: oral–written, implicit–explicit,
multiple-choice versus production, inﬂection versus derivational, different levels
of word complexity, and whether contextual clues were included or excluded.
Tighe and Schatschneider (2015) gave seven measures of MA and two vocab-
ulary measures to a group of adult students, ﬁnding that MA divided into two
dimensions, one for real words and one for pseudowords, each separate from vo-
cabulary. Furthermore, Spencer et al. (2015) reported on the unidimensionality of
morphological awareness in two studies using a number of different morpholog-
ical awareness tasks and an expanded set of vocabulary measures examining the
breadth and depth of vocabulary knowledge. They emphasized that morphological
awareness is an integral part of vocabulary knowledge and may even be considered
a facet of an individual’s depth of vocabulary knowledge. Spencer et al. (2015)
supported a unidimensional model that encompassed morphological awareness
and vocabulary knowledge.

The variety of MA measures used in the literature spans many differences in
task requirements, as described in the above studies and in the taxonomy proposed

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

1022

by Deacon et al. (2008). Although there are linguistic differences between Arabic
and English, it is important to note that the current study is partially framed in
terms of the English literature on morphological awareness only because that is
the greatest amount of literature available. Hence, the multidimensionality of MA
as a construct needs to be explored further, and in languages other than English.
No study has investigated the construct of MA and examined its relationship
to reading among native Arabic-speaking children using multiple measures with
distinct task requirements.

ARABIC LANGUAGE AND ORTHOGRAPHY

Arabic is a Semitic language. Its orthography has 28 letters that are primarily
consonantal, is written from right to left, and uses superscripted diacritics to
mark its three short vowels (Saiegh-Haddad & Henkin-Roitfarb, 2014). When
Arabic orthography employs the diacritics, it is considered to be a shallow (i.e.,
transparent) orthography. However, when Arabic words and texts appear without
superscripted vowels (diacritics), it is considered to be a deep (i.e., opaque) or-
thography. Abu-Rabia (2001) demonstrated that vowelized words and text were
read more accurately than nonvowelized words and text by skilled Arabic read-
ers. However, Shalhoub-Awwad and Leikin (2016) showed that morphological
knowledge conveyed by the consistency in the word patterns compensated for the
missing vowels. In explaining how readers of Semitic languages such as Arabic
and Hebrew read when short vowels are omitted, Hansen (2014) argued “The fact
that short vowels are normally omitted in Semitic writing makes decoding more
reliant on other kinds of information than phonology. . . . , decoding is predomi-
nantly orthographic, and the vast number of homographs makes the reader heavily
dependent on context in the quest for the meaning of words” (p. 71).

A description of the Arabic language would be incomplete without a men-
tion of diglossia. The term diglossia describes two linguistically related varieties
of a language: the standard and the spoken (Ferguson, 1959). Literary or Stan-
dard Arabic is used in writing and in formal communication, whereas spoken
Arabic, a linguistically related form usually referred to as colloquial Arabic, is
used in daily conversation. Although each country in the Arab world has its
own distinguishing dialects, they all share the same standard language, which
is the only form that appears in conventional writing. All literate Arab per-
sons are taught this standard form in formal schooling and are expected to read
and write using this written standard form regardless of their spoken dialects
(Tibi & McLeod, 2014).

The difference between the standard form and the dialect has been referred as
“linguistic distance” by Saiegh-Haddad (2003), and the differences exist at the
phonological, morphological, syntactic, and lexical levels. In a series of studies,
Saiegh-Haddad (2003, 2004, 2005) tested the impact of the phonological distance
on phonological awareness and word decoding, and showed that the difﬁculty
children have with Standard Arabic phonemes appears to be related to the quality
of phonological representations in long-term memory. In a recent study, Saiegh-
Haddad and Schiff (2016) showed that this affects reading in both vowelized and
unvowelized Arabic across the school grades (Grades 2–10). If we acknowledge

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

1023

that “reading is jointly deﬁned by a language and by the writing system that encodes
the language” (Perfetti, 2003, p. 4), then Arabic reading acquisition in the context
of diglossia deserves to be investigated further. In spite of considerable overlap
between spoken Arabic and Standard Arabic, diglossia is evident in all aspects
of the language: phonology, morphology, syntax, and vocabulary. For example,
morphology in spoken Arabic has fewer inﬂections than Standard Arabic (for a
review, see Saiegh-Haddad & Henkin-Roitfarb, 2014).

ARABIC MORPHOLOGY

The cross-linguistic differences between Arabic and more commonly studied lan-
guages like English extend to its morphology. Arabic morphology is in sharp
contrast with Indo-European morphology in its linguistic structure and functions
(Boudelaa, 2014; Boudelaa, Pulverm¨uller, Hauk, Shtyrov, & Marslen-Wilson,
2010; Frost, 2012; Saiegh-Haddad, 2013; Saiegh-Haddad & Henkin-Roitfarb,
2014). Two main systems make up Arabic morphology: inﬂectional and deriva-
tional. Inﬂectional morphology provides information about the grammatical func-
tions of a word such as gender, number (singular, dual, and plural), person, case,
mood, and tense (see Saiegh-Haddad & Henkin-Roitfarb, 2014). In this inﬂec-
tional system, preﬁxes, sufﬁxes, or both are added to real words in a linear fashion
/kitaab/ “one book” /kitaabaan/ “two books.” In Arabic derivational morphology,
words are formed by combining two bound morphemes (root and word pattern).
The root is only consonantal and carries the general meaning of the lexeme,
whereas the word pattern is mainly vocalic and provides phonological and mor-
phosyntactic information (Holes, 2004). Derivations are formed by interleaving
the consonants of the root with different word patterns. The different word patterns
are classiﬁed into nominal word patterns and verbal words patterns that represent
different grammatical categories such as agentive, passive adjective, passive verb,
and active participle (for more examples, see Saiegh-Haddad & Henkin-Roitfarb,
2014). To illustrate, the root /k t b/ with its general semantic ﬁeld “anything related
to writing” when afﬁxed on different word patterns (with each dash representing
the position of a root consonant), such as (-a-a-a), (-a:-i-), (-u-i-a), or (ma- - a-),
yields the following distinct but semantically related words with different syn-
tactic functions: /kataba/ meaning “to write,” /ka:tib/ (“writer”), /kutiba/ (“was
written”), and /maktab/ (“ofﬁce” or “desk”). The root’s three consonants /k t b/
remain in the same order in all of the derivatives. Preserving the sequence of these
consonants has a morphological function (lexical access) and provides the general
semantic ﬁeld, in this case “anything related to writing.” Conversely, changing the
order of the consonants changes the semantic ﬁeld. For example, the word /kabata/
yields a different word meaning, “to suppress.” In some cases, such a change may
yield a pseudoword (e.g.,

takaba).

∗

In contrast, when the same word pattern combines with different roots, the
result is different words with similar syntactic functions, but completely different
meanings. For example, the pattern (-a-a-a) has the grammatical function of the
verb “to do.” When afﬁxed to different roots such as /d r s/, /k t b/, or /r s m/,
the result is /darasa/, /kataba/, or /rasama/, meaning “to study,” “to write,” and
“to draw,” respectively. It has been reported that there are 5,336 roots and 2,324

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

1024

word patterns in Standard Arabic (Boudelaa & Marslen-Wilson, 2010). The root-
word pattern structure causes almost all Arabic words (with the exception of few
function words) to be at least bimorphemic. Some roots are highly productive
allowing for many words to be derived from them.

In addition to the inﬂectional and derivational systems of Arabic morphology,
there is another group of morphemes referred to as clitics, which Saiegh-Haddad
and Henkin-Roitfarb (2014) described as “grammatically independent, but phono-
logically dependent on another word or phrase. . . . Clitics may attach to the
word . . . and can co-occur within the same word, resulting in one-word phrases
and clauses” (p. 14). For example, the one-word clause /bimadrasatihi/ “in his
school” includes the preﬁx /bi/ “in,” /madrasat/ “school,” and “hi/ referring to the
sufﬁx that means “his.”

The complexity of Arabic morphology being both linear and nonlinear requires
the Arabic reader to process its morphology by means of composition and de-
composition processes to attain comprehension (Boudelaa, 2014; Boudelaa et al.,
2010). In the composition process, the Arabic learner applies different patterns to
the root in order to derive different words. In the decomposition process, the learner
extracts the root from the polymorphemic word to derive the meaning. Both pro-
cesses are important and natural for the advanced learner. Frost, Kugler, Deutsch,
and Forster (2005) found that morphological priming was far more robust than
orthographic priming in Hebrew and Arabic. Boudelaa (2015) provided evidence
from two cross-modal priming experiments that Arabic learners rely mainly on
the root in accessing meaning. He found that the consonants that belong to the root
were more effective primes than the vowels of the word patterns. Boudelaa con-
cluded that the roots and word patterns in Arabic have distinct representational and
processing properties. Similarly, Ussishkin, Dawson, Wedel, and Schluter (2015)
found that the consonantal root facilitated priming in spoken-word recognition in
Maltese, another Semitic language.

The predominance of the root-word pattern morphological structure in Arabic
words has been shown to play a key role in reading accuracy and comprehension
among normal and dyslexic Arabic readers across different age groups (Abu-
Rabia, 2007; Abu-Rabia, Share, & Mansour, 2003; Abu-Rabia & Taha, 2004) and
in spelling (Saiegh-Haddad, 2013). Abu-Rabia (2007) compared typically devel-
oping and dyslexic Palestinian students in Grades 3, 6, 9, and 12 and found that,
within groups and across grade levels, performance on an orthographic morphol-
ogy task was a robust, and often the sole, predictor of word recognition accuracy
and reading comprehension in vowelized texts. In a previous study, Abu-Rabia
et al. (2003) compared reading-disabled and normal readers of the same chrono-
logical age (9.5–10.5 years), and younger normal readers (7.5–8.5 years) at the
same reading level as the reading disabled children. They found that the reading-
disabled children performed poorly on the morphological measures, and their
overall performance was signiﬁcantly poorer than that of the other groups. After
phonological awareness, morphology was the strongest predictor. Saiegh-Haddad
(2013) found that Grade 1 Arabic-speaking students made use of morphology
while doing a spelling task. For example, spelling accuracy with the letter <t>
increased when the <t> was part of the root as opposed to part of the word pattern
(e.g., present tense preﬁx).

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

THE CURRENT STUDY

1025

Considering the relative lack of research on Arabic MA and reading, especially
among children, the importance of morphology in the Arabic lexical structure,
and the speciﬁc linguistic nature of Arabic (e.g., differences between spoken and
Standard Arabic, and differences between the root and word patterns), we set out
to investigate the dimensionality of Arabic MA and its role in reading Arabic with
native Arabic-speaking Grade 3 children. Examining morphological awareness in
Arabic may reveal new insight because of its varied types of morphology (linear
and nonlinear), and because its words are formed mostly through derivational
processes. Furthermore, the diglossic situation of Arabic makes it different from
other languages investigated so far. It is also important to note that the available
studies on Arabic processes of reading have included a relatively small sample
(sometimes not from an Arabic population), examined older students only, used
a limited number of morphological tasks, or dealt with adults only in priming
experiments. None of the Arabic studies has examined the performance of typical
Arabic-speaking children living in an Arabic country on a wide range of mea-
sures capturing all domains of morphology in addition to reading measures. More
important, none of the available studies on Arabic morphology has attempted to
examine the underlying nature of morphological knowledge in Arabic. Our reasons
for studying Arabic are, ﬁrst, to extend the MA literature, and second, to capitalize
on key features of Arabic concerning morphology and its potential relationship
to reading. The mounting evidence on the strong relationship between morpho-
logical awareness and reading motivated us to explore this relationship in Arabic,
particularly because Arabic combines linear and nonlinear morphology and plays
a central role in forming its words. Therefore, the present study investigates the
following research questions:

1. What dimensions underlie morphological awareness in Arabic?
2. Does morphological awareness predict the reading ability of Arabic-speaking

children, and if so, how well?

To answer the ﬁrst question, we developed 10 MA tasks in Arabic covering a
wide range of dimensions (Deacon et al., 2008), and examined their dimension-
ality through exploratory factor analysis. An exploratory analysis was conducted
because there were many plausible alternative structures and little guidance was
provided by prior research regarding constructs and construct validity. We used
Deacon et al.’s taxonomy to construct a set of 10 MA tests that varied in several
dimensions. In designing the tasks, we took into consideration the morphological
structure of Arabic (e.g., root vs. word pattern), and inﬂectional versus derivational
processes. We included a variety of different consonantal roots and different word
patterns covering a wide range of grammatical functions and different inﬂectional
and derivational processes in each measure. Because Arabic is diglossic in nature,
it was possible to assess children on an oral task in their own dialect. Including
an oral task may shed light on the nature of dimensionality in Arabic MA. For
example, are there two dimensions, dialect versus standard? The same applies
to including both written and oral tasks in the sense that oral versus written di-
mensions could emerge. To answer the second research question, we developed

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

1026

two reading tests (words and pseudowords), and due to the central function of
morphology in forming Arabic words, we investigated the relationship between
MA and reading (predictive validity).

METHOD

Participants
Participants were 102 Arabic-speaking children (51 girls; mean age = 104 months,
SD = 5.7 months) recruited from three public schools in the Emirate of Abu Dhabi
in the United Arab Emirates (UAE). All children in Grade 3 in the participating
schools were invited to participate. Only the children with parental consent and
child assent were tested; the participation rate was 60%. All children were assessed
informally for any signs of developmental impairment by the ﬁrst author. All
children with any sign of hearing or cognitive impairment were excluded from
participation in this study. All participants were native Arabic-speaking Emirati
children with both parents being native speakers of Arabic, and were tested at the
end of Grade 3. All children were learning Standard Arabic as a core subject in
their curriculum. In addition, the children were studying English, mathematics,
and science in English. Although these children had started studying English in
Grade 1, their knowledge of English was at best rudimentary. Possible reasons
for this are that their exposure to English is limited to the class periods, many of
the teachers who teach these subjects are not native English speakers, and lack
of access to peers who are native or near native English speakers (only Emirati
children attend government schools in UAE). The only mode of communication in
the children’s homes is also Arabic. Therefore, considering the factors proposed
by Paradis, Genesee, and Crago (2011; i.e., the majority language, ethnolinguistic
community, and time of exposure), we see the sample as primarily Arabic speaking.

Procedure

Children completed a series of tasks administered individually by the ﬁrst author
(who is a native speaker of Arabic) in a quiet room in their school. Task admin-
istration for each child was broken up into two sessions, 30 min each. The ﬁrst
session included the word reading test and the six oral MA tests. The second
session included the pseudoword reading test and the four written MA tests. In the
written tests, children were instructed to carefully read the sentences presented
in print and were given a pencil to use for writing or circling the correct choice.
All tests were preceded by practice items (four for MA tests and three for reading
measures) to ensure that children understood the task; during the practice items,
corrective feedback was given if needed. All instructions were given in the Emirati
dialect, though the content of most tests was in Standard Arabic. All assessments
and contacts with the children were exclusively in Arabic.

Measures

We developed 10 MA tasks covering the dimensions addressed in the Deacon
et al. (2008) taxonomy and other relevant factors (see Table 1). Four of the tasks

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

1027

Table 1. Morphological awareness tasks, examples, and description in terms of Deacon
et al. (2008) taxonomy, and number of items

Test Name

Picture choice

Sentence

selection

Sentence

completion

Morphological

relation
judgment

Word analogy-
administered
in standard
and local
Arabic

Morphological
composition

Sentence
analogy

Deacon et al. (2008)

Taxonomy

Example

C or D E or I O or W Items

C, D

C, D

C

I

I

I

O

20

W

20

W

20

C, D

I

O

20

C, D

E

O

20
each

C

E

W

20

C, D

E

O

20

Children are shown 4 pictures to

choose one from representing the
target word said by the
experimenter (e.g., bread, baker,
beads, tailor).

Children are asked to select the
morphologically appropriate
word from a choice of four
alternatives (e.g., I live in this/F,
this/M, these two, these/pl) house.

Children are asked to complete
each sentence with the correct
form from the given word (root)
(e.g., “to clean”. The teacher said:
we have to keep the ____ of the
school. The target response is
“cleanliness,” which is a derived
noun from the given root.

The child needs to judge by saying

Yes or No if pairs of words are
related or not in meaning (e.g.,
hunt and hunter (Yes); clap and
cage (No).

The child needs to produce a word
to complete an analogy (e.g., she
student: plural female students
(regular):: he student: plural male
students (irregular).
Children are presented in print with
words followed by a + sign and a
sufﬁx and are asked to write the
correct word with the inﬂection
attached to it (e.g., kitaab+aan=
kitaabaan).

Children are provided in print with
a pair of sentences (a:b) and then
with a sentence (c) and the child
is expected to produce/compose a
sentence analogous to the given
sentence and the pair (e.g., Tom
helps Mary: Tom helped Mary::
Tom sees Mary: ____).

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

Table 1 (cont.)

1028

Test Name

Word analysis

Morphological

decomposition

Deacon et al. (2008)

Taxonomy

Example

C or D E or I O or W Items

D

E

O

20

D

E

W

20

Children will be asked questions
such as: Is there a little word in
“danced” that means something
like “danced”? Children will be
given partial marks depending on
how many morphemes they can
decompose/extract. This test in
Arabic will include what is known
as one-word sentences (one word
containing a verb, subject, &
object).

Children will be provided in writing

with a sufﬁxed word and a
sentence that has a blank. The
child is expected to complete the
sentence with the correct form of
the provided word. This is done by
decomposing the target word (the
child is given the word “farmer”
and asked to complete the
sentence with the correct word by
decomposing it: “The plowed
ﬁelds are on the ”. (farm).

Note: C, Composition; D, decomposition; E, explicit; I, implicit; O, oral; W, written; F,
feminine; M, masculine; pl, plural.

were presented in vowelized print and required the participants to read and write or
circle the correct answer. The other 6 MA tasks were presented orally and required
the child to either provide an oral answer or to say Yes or No. Nine out of the 10
MA tests were in Standard Arabic, whereas the 1 MA test was in the local Emirati
dialect. The termination rule for each MA task was 4 consecutive errors, for word
reading 10 consecutive errors, and for pseudoword reading 4 consecutive errors.
To address as many types of morphological process as possible, we included items
within each test that varied in the degrees of transparency/opacity of phonology,
orthography, and semantics. Furthermore, all measures involved both inﬂections
and derivations, though these were not included as separate scales. We also in-
cluded both linear and nonlinear morphology items. We explicitly included two
variations of the word analogy task, one in Standard Arabic and one in the local
dialect to examine the diglossia issue. In all multiple-choice tasks, the position of
correct answers was varied randomly. All tasks are listed in Table 1, with examples
and descriptions in terms of the Deacon et al. (2008) taxonomy.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

Written tasks.

1029

WORD SELECTION. This task was based on Singson, Mahony, and Mann (2000)
and Tyler and Nagy (1989, 1990). Participants were presented with 20 written
vowelized incomplete sentences and asked to complete each sentence by circling
the appropriate word from four alternatives. The four word choices for each
item contained the target word plus distractors that were morphologically related,
orthographically similar, or phonologically similar to the target, but incorrect. A
typical item was “In the summer, the weather is usually ________.” The four
choices were Ha:r, Hur, Hari:r, Hararah, meaning hot, free, silk, and heat. The
participant’s score was the number of items correct.

In this task (based on Carlisle, 2000) the par-
SENTENCE COMPLETION.
ticipants were presented with 20 written sentences each preceded by a clue
word, and they were asked to write the correct form of the word to com-
plete each sentence. Half of the target words required application of inﬂec-
tional morphology, the other half derivational morphology. An example of this
task was “/kitaab/ (book): I have two __________.” The correct answer would
be /kitaabaan/ (two books). The participant’s score was the number of items
correct.

In this task based on Carlisle (2000),
MORPHOLOGICAL DECOMPOSITION.
the participants were shown 20 incomplete sentences, each preceded by a
clue word, and asked to complete each sentence in writing with a word related to
the clue word. Half of the items required inﬂectional morphology processes, and
the other half derivational morphology processes. The correct responses varied in
the type of morphological operations required (e.g., verb to noun; noun to verb;
plural to singular; dual to singular; adjective to noun; and so on). An example of
this task was “/ʔmTarat/ (rained): The rain /maTar/ falls in the winter season.” The
score was the number of items answered correctly.

MORPHOLOGICAL COMPOSITION. This measure (based on Carlisle, 1988)
had two parts. In the ﬁrst 13 items, participants were presented with written words
plus preﬁxes and/or sufﬁxes, and asked to write them as complete words (all of
these were to be composed in a linear fashion). For example, children were shown
“t + ʔistaqbala + hum,” for which the correct response is “tastaqbiluhum” (she
received them). Another example that required more change at the phonological
and orthographic levels was “/j/+ / ʕa:da/” (correct answer “/yaʕu:du/|” (to return).
The other 7 items on this test targeted the broken plural (irregular inﬂection).
Broken plural in Arabic, unlike regular plural, follow different nonlinear process
of morphological derivation (see Saiegh-Haddad, Levin, Hende, & Ziv 2011). The
7 broken plural items were administered by presenting children with a picture of
one object (e.g., rabbit) /ʔarnab/, then a picture of ﬁve rabbits, and asking the child
to say the name of the plural form which is /ʔara:nib/. The rationale for this was
the nonlinear quality represented in the broken plural. Participants’ scores were
the number of correct responses.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

Oral tasks.

1030

In this task based on Carlisle and
MORPHOLOGICAL RELATION JUDGMENT.
Nomanbhoy (1993) and Derwing (1976), the participants were presented orally
with 20 pairs of words and asked if the two words in each pair were morphologi-
cally related (shared the same meaning). Half of the items were morphologically
related pairs and half were phonologically related foils. For example, “/mi”za:n/
and /zama:n/” (scale, time) were not related, whereas “/muTa:laʕa/ and /Ta:laʕa/”
(reading, read) were related. The participant’s score was the number of items
correct.

In this task (based on Kirby et al., 2012; Nunes,
STANDARD WORD ANALOGY.
Bryant, & Bindman, 1997), children were asked to supply words that completed
morphological analogies. They were told a pair of words that had a morphological
relationship, and then asked to apply that same relationship to a third word. For
example, if the tester said /kataba (he wrote): katabu:/ (they wrote), and then
/laʕiba/ (he played), the child was supposed to say /laʕibu:/ (they played). To
reduce the likelihood of participants responding according to phonological cues
and replicating a phonological pattern (see Kirby et al., 2012, for a discussion of
this issue), some items included irregular formation processes or a phonological
shift. There were 20 items, half of which required linear operations while the
remainder were nonlinear, and the participant’s score was the number of items
correct.

LOCAL WORD ANALOGY. This test followed the same format as Standard word
analogy except that this test included different words and all items were presented
in the spoken Emirati dialect. The two tests were constructed to be as equivalent
as possible in terms of linear and nonlinear operations and other morphological
processes. The participants were required to respond orally in the local dialect
to complete each analogy. For example, if the tester said /ﬁnja:n/ (cup):/fana:ji:n/
(cups) :: /rajja:l/ (man), the correct answer would be /rajaji:l/ (men). Some items
required more phonological shifts than others. There were 20 items (a balanced
number of linear and nonlinear operations), and the participant’s score was the
number of items correct.

In this task based on Nunes et al. (1997), the participants
SENTENCE ANALOGY.
were presented orally with two sentences in Standard Arabic in which the ﬁrst
sentence had been transformed into the second one by a morphological change.
They were then asked to apply the same transformation to a third sentence. To
reduce the likelihood of participants responding according to phonological cues,
some items included irregular formation processes or a phonological shift. For
example, /ha:ð:hi d͡ʒari:da/ (this is a newspaper) :/ha:ði hi d͡ʒara:ʔid/ these are
newspapers:: /ha:ða qalam/ (this is a pencil), the correct answer would be “/ha:ð:hi
ʔaqla:m/ these are pencils.” The transformation in this example requires irregular
plural formation in which there is a phonological change between the ﬁrst plural
/d͡ʒara:ʔid/ and the second plural /ʔaqla:m/. The participant’s score was the number
of correct answers. There were 20 items.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

1031

WORD ANALYSIS. This 20-item task (based on Carlisle & Fleming 2003; Rubin,
1988) asked the participants to generate as many smaller words as possible from
given complex words. Participants were asked cue questions, such as “Is there a
smaller word in the given word that means something like the given word?” For ex-
ample, the word /mudarrisu:n/ (teachers) contains /mudarris/(teacher), /darrasa/(to
teach), /darasa/(to study), and /dars/(lesson). Each of these words is derived by
means of a different word pattern calling for different vocalic/phonological form.
Children were given corrective feedback on practice items, to ensure that they
understood they needed to strip the word into its smallest constituting word or
root in some cases. Responses were scored zero when the child was not able to
provide any smaller and related word from the given multimorphemic words, 1
point when the child provided a smaller word that was not the smallest possible
word, and 2 points when the child was able to provide the smallest word or root
from the target word. There were 20 items, so the maximum score for this test was
40.

In this task based on Casalis and Louis-Alexandre (2000),
PICTURE CHOICE.
the participants were shown 20 sets of four pictures, and asked to choose the picture
that correctly represented the target word spoken by the experimenter. In designing
this task, the four pictures selected for each individual item included ones which
(a) corresponded to the target word; (b) represented a word morphologically re-
lated to the target word, but was semantically wrong; (c) was phonologically and
semantically similar to the target word, but was incorrect morphologically; and
(d) was phonologically and orthographically similar to the target but was incorrect
semantically and morphologically. The pictured words assessed children’s knowl-
edge of a variety of inﬂectional and derivational morphemes. For example, when
the target spoken word was “/tuffa:Hataan/ (two apples), the child was shown
pictures of (a) /tuffa:Hataan/ (two apples); (b) /mawzata:n/ (two bananas); (c)
/tuffa:Ha/ (one apple); and (d) /mufta:H/ (key). The participant’s score was the
number of correct answers.

Reading measures. Two reading tests were constructed, one with real words and
one with pseudowords. The real words were selected based on the frequency count
from two sources each representing a different corpus. One source was the lexical
database of Modern Standard Arabic known as Aralex (Boudelaa & Marslen-
Wilson, 2010). Aralex consists of 40 million word tokens primarily drawn from
Arabic newspapers available online, and includes information about orthographic
forms, vowelized stems, unvowelized stems, roots, and word patterns. Aralex also
provides statistical information about words and morphemes. The second source
was a corpus of 147,527 word tokens compiled from Arabic textbooks used in
primary schools (Grades 1–6) from two different Arab countries (Libya and UAE)
by Belkhouche, Harmain, Al Najjar, Taha, and Tibi (2010). Words chosen for the
reading test ranged in frequency from most frequent as in the preposition /ﬁ:/ (in)
with a frequency of 32,189 in Aralex (and 4,100 in the textbook corpus) to the
lowest frequency of .13 in Aralex (and 1 in textbook corpus) as in the one-word
phrase /lijabi:ʕha:/ (to sell it).

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness
Table 2. Summary of descriptive statistics on all tasks (untransformed data; N = 102)

1032

Measure

Min.

Max.

Mean

SD

Split-Half
Reliability

Word selection
Sentence completion
Morphological decomposition
Morphological composition
Morphological relation judgment
Standard word analogy
Local word analogy
Sentence analogy
Word analysis
Picture choice
Word reading
Pseudoword reading

5
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
13
2
0

20
20
20
20
20
18
19
18
37
20
78
20

17.01
15.32
16.26
14.08
18.19
10.57
13.37
12.63
30.53
18.97
59.54
15.76

2.87
4.06
3.62
5.22
1.93
4.48
4.34
4.21
5.92
1.13
19.497
4.412

0.78
0.91
0.87
0.92
0.67
0.88
0.86
0.86
0.82
0.62
0.98
0.85

All real words were vowelized, and represented different parts of speech, with
nouns comprising the largest percentage, followed by verbs, adjectives, and par-
ticles. Words varied in number of syllables, ranging from monosyllabic to ﬁve-
syllable words. There were 80 words in the word reading measure. Each word was
vowelized and appeared in 26-point Times New Roman font. Words were arranged
in order of decreasing frequency. Participants were instructed to read each word
out loud with its complete vowelization. The score for the reading measures was
1 point for each word read accurately. The termination rule was 10 consecutive
errors.

The pseudoword reading test was developed based on the Arabic structure of
words. For example, the pseudowords included phonemes (consonants and vowels)
and syllabic structures that are similar to real words. Pseudowords varied in number
of syllables, and in orthographic, morphological, and phonological structure. The
set of pseudowords included all Arabic letters and captured a variety of different
word patterns. The test consisted of 20 vowelized pseudowords, arranged in order
of expected difﬁculty as judged by two Arabic language inspectors and the ﬁrst
author. Children were asked to read all pseudowords with their vowelizations.
One point was given to every pseudoword word read accurately. The termination
rule was four consecutive errors. The ﬁrst author scored both word reading and
pseudoword reading tests. Each test began with the more frequent word patterns,
and with the words that are most frequent or (in the case of the pseudowords) were
judged to be easiest (by the ﬁrst author and two Arabic language experts).

RESULTS

Descriptive statistics and split-half reliability estimates for all variables are dis-
played in Table 2. The word reading, pseudoword reading, and 9 out of 10 MA test
distributions showed negative skewness. The exception to the skewness among the

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

1033

10 MA tests was the Standard word analogy. All skewness problems were solved
by square root, logarithmic, or inverse transformations, except for the sentence
completion test, which after a logarithmic transformation required further win-
sorizing (following the guidelines of Tabachnick & Fidell, 2007).

Correlations between measures are reported in Table 3. Correlations between
MA tests ranged from .12 to .63 and most were signiﬁcant; the exception was
morphological relation judgment (an oral test) that was not strongly correlated
with some of the other measures, namely the three measures that required students
to read and write. The two MA tests that varied in the language variety (Standard
and local word analogy) were signiﬁcantly correlated (r = .63, p < .01). The
two reading measures were correlated signiﬁcantly (r = .78, p < .01). All of
the MA tests correlated signiﬁcantly with both reading tests (range = .22–.60,
p < .05).

The dimensionality of the 10 MA tasks was examined using principal axis
factor analysis with direct oblimin rotation when appropriate. The ﬁrst eigen-
value was substantial (4.06), much larger than the second (1.06) and subsequent
eigenvalues. Although the scree plot clearly showed one factor, we decided to
explore one- and two-factor solutions because the second eigenvalue was greater
than 1.0.

Both the one- and two-factor solutions are shown in Table 4. The single factor
has substantial loadings for all tests, although the loadings of morphological
relation judgment and word analysis were lower than the others. This factor,
termed MA, accounted for 40.1% of the variance. In the two-factor solution, all
oral MA tests loaded on the ﬁrst factor (hence, we labeled it oral MA); however,
the loading for word analysis was not high. All tests requiring reading or writing
loaded on the second factor, which we labeled written MA. Only one test (word
selection) had split loadings; this test required students to read a sentence and
make a choice of three options by placing a circle around it, rather than writing
a word. The two-factor solution accounted for 51.3% of the variance. Regression
factor scores were generated from the one-factor and the two-factor solutions.
Correlations between the factor scores and all of the other variables can be seen
in Table 3. Each factor score correlated signiﬁcantly with each MA test, and with
both reading variables.

Finally, hierarchical regression analyses were conducted to investigate the extent
to which the MA factors predicted reading after controlling for age and gender.
Two regression analyses were conducted from each factor solution, one for real
words and one for pseudowords (see Table 5). In each model, gender and age were
entered in the ﬁrst step and the MA factor score(s) in the second step. Gender
and age accounted for about 4% to 7% of the variance in the outcomes, mostly
due to gender (higher performance by girls). For real-word reading, the single
MA factor accounted for a further 44% of the variance (Model 2A in Table 5).
When the two MA factors of the two-factor solution were used, the amount of
variance accounted for stayed essentially the same (Model 2B in Table 5); the beta
coefﬁcients indicate that written MA (β = 0.41) was more powerful than oral MA
(β = 0.29), though each was signiﬁcant (p < .01). For pseudoword reading, both
the single and the dual MA factors contributed an additional 33% of the variance
(Models 2A and 2B in Table 5); in the analysis with two factors, written MA

Table 3. Correlations between transformed variables

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

1. Word selection
2. Sentence completion
3. Morphological
decomposition
4. Morphological

composition

5. Morphological

relation judgment

—
.39** —

.34** .53** —

.42** .55** .43** —

.28** .17

.18

.13 —

6. Standard word analogy .44** .47** .41** .43** .30** —
7. Local word analogy
8. Sentence analogy
9. Word analysis
10. Picture choice
11. Word reading
12. Pseudoword reading
13. MA single factor
14. Oral MA (two factor

.36** .42** .43** .38** .27** .63** —
.32** .42** .32** .31** .21*
.27** .29** .24*
.21*
.29** .35** .24*
.26** .24*
.50** .54** .44** .47** .35** .57** .45** .29** .28** .35** —
.37** .45** .37** .39** .22*
.63** .76** .67** .68** .39** .79** .72** .66** .40** .51** .68** .61** —

.46** .45** —
.22*
.13
.29** .23*

.57** .48** .27** .26** .33** .78** —

.24* —
.41** .27** —

.19

.61** .57** .53** .50** .57** .82** .73** .70** .42** .56** .63** .57** .94** —

solution)

15. Written MA (two

factor solution)

Note: MA, Morphological awareness.
*p < .05. **p < .01.

.57** .87** .71** .78** .23*

.68** .63** .55** .33** .42** .65** .57** .95** .79** —

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness
Table 4. Summary of principal axis factor analysis (N = 102)

1035

Test

Word selection
Sentence completion
Morphological decomposition
Morphological composition
Morphological relation judgment
Standard word analogy
Local word analogy
Sentence analogy
Word analysis
Picture choice

Factor Loading

One Factor
Solution

Two Factor Solution

Oral MA

Written MA

.586
.701
.621
.631
.361
.733
.664
.610
.367
.473

.341
.018
.107
−.005
.584
.522
.453
.485
.286
.407

.308
.769
.578
.708
−.153
.298
.288
.201
.126
.127

Note: Direct oblimin rotation used in two-factor solution. Loadings > .300 are in bold.

Table 5. Summary of hierarchical regression analyses predicting real word reading and
pseudoword reading

Outcome Variable

Real Word Reading

Pseudoword Reading

Model

Test

β

R2

Total R2

β

R2

Total R2

1

Gender (M =
0.206*
1, F = 2)
Age (months) −0.027
2A Gender (M =
0.147*
1, F = 2)
Age (months)
MA (single
factor score)
Gender (M =
1, F = 2)
Age (months)
Oral MA (two

0.154*

2B

.045

.045

0.045
0.667*** .436*** .480***

.066*

0.239*
−0.070
0.187*
−0.008
0.586*** .335*** .402***

.066*

0.191*
−0.007
0.297*

0.047
0.293**

factor
solution)
Written MA
(two factor
solution)

Note: M, Male; F, female; MA, morphological awareness.
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.

0.414**

.439*** .484***

0.321*

.335*** .401***

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

1036
(β = 0.32) was only slightly more powerful than oral MA (β = 0.30), but again
each was signiﬁcant (p < .05).

DISCUSSION

The goals of the current study were to explore the dimensionality of MA and
establish its relationship with reading in Arabic. The results indicated that MA is
predominantly one dimensional, though when forced, this factor splits into oral
and written MA factors. It should be noted that the two-factor solution is not clean
in that one oral measure (word analysis) did not load highly on the oral factor
and another measure (word selection) loaded on both factors. Whether seen as
one factor or two, these results support the construct validity of MA in Arabic.
Whether used as a single predictor or as two, MA accounted for a substantial and
equivalent amount of variance in reading, establishing its predictive validity in
Arabic.

Dimensionality

In recent years many researchers have used many different measures of MA.
Deacon et al. (2008) pointed out that these measures can be classiﬁed in terms
of modality, content, and process. Although there is some work in English ex-
ploring how many dimensions underlie such measures (Muse, 2005; Spencer et
al., 2015; Tighe & Schatschneider, 2015), this is the ﬁrst study to do so in Ara-
bic. The measures administered in the current study covered a wide variety of
MA task features: spoken dialect/Standard Arabic, inﬂectional/derivational, im-
plicit/explicit, word/sentence level, composition/decomposition, oral/written, and
judgment/constructed response (see Table 1). In contrast to previous studies, this
set of measures provides a broad coverage of the MA domain in Arabic. The
characteristics of Arabic (diglossia, phonological transparency, and linear and
nonlinear morphological structure) made many possible dimensions feasible.

Our results demonstrate either a single MA dimension representing all 10 mea-
sures or two dimensions representing the oral and written tests separately. The sin-
gle factor suggests that MA knowledge in Arabic is essentially one dimensional,
in spite of the diversity of measures used and the complexity of the processes in-
volved in Arabic. This conclusion is helpful for researchers and practitioners alike
because it implies that relatively few measures could be used to assess the MA
construct. However, we also investigated the two-factor solution as an alternative
model, which resulted in distinct oral and written factors. Almost all MA tasks
that were administered orally and required an oral response loaded on the oral
MA factor, the exception being that word analysis did not load highly. Conversely,
all of the tasks that were presented in writing and required a written response
loaded on the written MA factor, except for word selection, which had loadings on
both factors. Psychometrically, the one-factor solution is cleaner and has a simpler
structure.

The two-factor structure does not challenge the underlying cognitive nature of
MA, and may be attributed to the developmental stage of the Grade 3 participants
in this study. Although many of the children had acquired the basic foundational

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

1037

skills of reading and writing, some children were still in the process of learning to
read, spell, and write. This may have been inﬂuenced by the differences between
written and spoken Arabic, so that oral knowledge could not be used as a reliable
support when dealing with print, and by differences in reading instruction. Hence,
some children with adequate oral MA knowledge may have performed poorly on
written tasks, giving rise to the second factor. We would expect the oral–written
separation to disappear with increased age and reading ability. Oral measures may
be more appropriate for younger children, but given the consistent orthographic
representations of morphemes in Arabic, written measures should be introduced as
soon as instruction makes it possible. Once reading competence is well established,
the single MA factor should emerge: this should be tested in longitudinal studies.

MA and reading

The second aim of the current study was to investigate the predictive validity of
MA in Arabic by examining its relationship with reading. Previous research in
English and other languages has found substantial relationships between reading
and MA (Carlisle, 1995; Kirby et al., 2012; Mahony, Singson, & Mann, 2000;
Nagy et al. 2006). We found that both the one-factor MA and the two-factor MA
(oral and written) predicted a substantial proportion of real-word and pseudoword
reading, thus supporting the predictive validity of MA. With regard to real words,
our ﬁndings are consistent with those of Abu-Rabia (2007), who found that MA
predicted real-word reading accuracy in normal and dyslexic Arabic readers in
Grades 3, 6, 9, and 12.

As for pseudoword reading, our ﬁnding is consistent with that of Deacon and
Kirby (2004), who found that MA made a signiﬁcant contribution to pseudoword
reading, after controlling measures of prior reading ability, verbal and nonverbal
intelligence, and phonological awareness. Deacon and Kirby were initially sur-
prised that pseudoword reading would be predicted, because pseudowords should
not be meaningful and thus should not have morphological structures. However,
some of the pseudowords on the test they used appeared to have morphological
structures (e.g., gaked). Kirby et al. (2012) argued that morphology could be used
to rule out certain pronunciations by identifying either the presence or the absence
of morphological boundaries. In the present study, the result was less surpris-
ing because the pseudowords had been constructed in a way similar to real-word
structures in Arabic. Furthermore, pseudoword reading was highly correlated with
real-word reading (r = .78, p < .01), so the prediction could be due to this degree
of covariance. Future research could explore this relationship further by including
pseudoword measures with different degrees of (pseudo) morphological structure
and observing the relationship with MA.

Limitations, future directions, and implications

Several limitations of this study should be mentioned, each of which should be
addressed in future studies. First, although a wide range of measures was em-
ployed, other measures of MA need to be studied; these could include priming and
response time measures. Word and pseudoword reading accuracy were addressed

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

1038

here, but word-reading ﬂuency, spelling, and reading comprehension need to be
examined. Including other measures varying in other features may affect the fac-
tor structure that emerges; for example, if we had included separate inﬂection and
derivation measures (rather than embedding both in each test as we did), those
tests could have deﬁned separate factors. Second, the study took place within one
Arabic country; given the diversity of spoken Arabic, other national settings and
educational systems need to be studied. Third, to fully assess the effect of MA
on reading, further control variables need to be included in the predictive mod-
els, such as intelligence, executive functions, vocabulary, phonological awareness,
and orthographic knowledge. Furthermore, only experimental studies, in which
MA was taught, could establish a causal relation. Fourth, future studies should
investigate the developmental course of the MA factors.

More generally, it would be important to investigate the sources of morpho-
logical awareness before it is taught deliberately in school (if it is taught). Two
obvious candidates are the home language environment and genetic factors. Hart
and Risley (1995), for example, observed large individual differences in vocabulary
development related to amount of language exposure. Morphological awareness
is intertwined with vocabulary (Spencer et al., 2015), so it will be important to
determine their developmental relationships. Samuelsson et al. (2005) found that
vocabulary and morphology demonstrated stronger shared-environment inﬂuences
and weaker genetic inﬂuences than other language skills, including general verbal
ability and phonological awareness. Results such as those of the present study show
that largely untaught morphological awareness predicts reading ability, and other
studies (e.g., Bowers et al., 2010; Goodwin & Ahn, 2013) show that morphological
awareness can be taught with positive effects on reading. It remains to be clariﬁed
to what extent the preschool factors (home environment and genetics) interact
with deliberate instruction, but Lyster, Lerv¨ag, and Hulme (2016) have shown that
preschool morphological instruction leads to long-term gains in reading.

The present results provide a framework for researchers interested in pursuing
studies in the morphological processes of the Arabic language on Arabic-speaking
children in Arabic countries. Given the relatively strong relationship between MA
and word reading, measures of MA should be included in predictive studies so that
a more complete picture of linguistic strengths and weaknesses can be obtained.
By including other predictors, the unique effects of MA will be shown. Building
on the current ﬁndings will help us also deepen our understanding of morphology’s
effects and help us reﬁne the tools further for different age groups.

For educators, two applications arise. First, assessment of morphological aware-
ness should be included in any language or early reading assessment. Teachers
and speech-language pathologists need to give this area more attention in their
assessments (American Speech-Language–Hearing Association, 2010; Gabig &
Zaretsky, 2013). We are not aware of any formal evidence about the assessment of
morphological awareness by teachers and speech-language pathologists in Arabic,
but our discussions with these professionals suggest that little is currently being
done. Second, another application would be in instruction. The strong association
between MA and reading suggests that it may be a useful target for instruction;
this would be supported by instructional studies in other languages (for reviews,
see Bowers et al., 2010; Carlisle, 2010; and Goodwin & Ahn, 2013). Instruction

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

1039

programs explicitly targeting MA in Arabic are sorely needed. Considering the
important role morphology has in Arabic word construction and the present re-
sults, it seems very likely that enhanced morphological knowledge would exert a
powerful positive inﬂuence on literacy achievement in Arabic. One impediment
for both researchers and educators is the lack of standardized measures of reading
and reading-related processes in Arabic, even though all Arab countries share the
same standard form of the language. The development of such tools should be
seen as a priority for policymakers in the Arab world.

This study offers a basis for further research on the morphological and other
cognitive processes involved in Arabic reading of Arabic-speaking subjects re-
siding in an Arabic country. The construct and predictive validity demonstrated
in the current study should spark more research in the ﬁeld of Arabic reading
and morphological processing. This research is needed to improve the literacy
skills of many children in many countries. The distinctive features of the Arabic
language and orthography also offer opportunities to researchers to broaden their
understanding of language and literacy in a global context.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank the Abu Dhabi Education Council for allowing access to the schools
to conduct this study. We also thank the children who participated in the study and their
parents.

REFERENCES
Abu-Rabia, S. (2001). The role of vowels in reading Semitic scripts: Data from Arabic and Hebrew.

Reading and Writing, 14, 39–59. doi:10.1023/A:1008147606320

Abu-Rabia, S. (2007). The role of morphology and short vowelization in reading Arabic among
normal and dyslexic readers in Grades 3, 6, 9, and 12. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research,
36, 89–106. doi:10.1007/s10936-006-9035-6

Abu-Rabia, S., & Shalhoub-Awwad, J. (2004). Morphological structures in visual word recognition:
The case of Arabic. Journal of Research in Reading, 27, 321–336. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9817.
2004.00235.x

Abu-Rabia, S., Share, D., & Mansour, M. S. (2003). Word recognition and basic cognitive processes
among reading disabled and normal readers in Arabic. Reading and Writing, 16, 423–442.
doi:10.1023/A:1024237415143

Abu-Rabia, S., & Taha, H. (2004). Reading and spelling error analysis of native Arabic dyslexic

readers. Reading and Writing, 17, 651–690. doi:10.1007/s11145-004-2657-x

American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) (2010). Roles and responsibilities of
SLPs in schools [Professional Issues Statement]. Retrieved September 19, 2016, from
http://www.asha.org/policy

Anglin, J. M. (1993). Vocabulary development: A morphological analysis. Monographs of the Society

for Research in Child Development, 58, 1–165. doi:10.2307/1166112

Apel, K., Diehm, E., & Apel, L. (2013). Using multiple measures of morphological awareness to
assess its relation to reading. Topics in Language Disorders, 33, 42–56. doi:10.1097/TLD.
0b013e318280f57b

Belkhouche, B., Harmain, H., Al Najjar, L., Taha, H., & Tibi, S. (2010). Analysis of primary school
Arabic language textbooks. Paper presented at the 10th Arab Conference on Information Tech-
nology Retrieved from http://acit2k.org/ACIT/index.php/proceedings/acit-2010-proceedings

Berko, J. (1958). The child’s learning of English morphology. Word, 14, 150–177.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

1040

Boudelaa, S. (2014). Is the Arabic mental lexicon morpheme-based or stem based? Implications for
spoken and written word recognition. In E. Saiegh-Haddad & M. Joshi (Eds.), Handbook of
Arabic literacy: Insights and perspectives. Amsterdam: Springer.

Boudelaa, S. (2015). The differential time course for consonant and vowel processing in Arabic:
Implications for language learning and rehabilitation. Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 1557. doi:10.
3389/fpsyg.2014.01557

Boudelaa, S., & Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (2010). Aralex: A lexical database for Modern Standard

Arabic. Behavior Research Methods, 42, 481–487. doi:10.3758/BRM.42.2.481

Boudelaa, S., Pulverm¨uller, F., Hauk, O., Shtyrov, Y., & Marslen-Wilson, W. (2010). Arabic morphol-
ogy in the neural language system. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22, 998–1010. doi:10.
1162/jocn.2009.21273

Bowers, P. N., & Kirby, J. R. (2010). Effects of morphological instruction on vocabulary acquisition.

Reading and Writing, 23, 515–537. doi:10.1007/s11145-009-9172-z

Bowers, P. N., Kirby, J. R., & Deacon, S. H. (2010). The effects of morphological instruction on literacy
skills: A systematic review of the literature. Review of Educational Research, 80, 144–179.
doi:10.3102/0034654309359353

Carlisle, J. F. (1987). The use of morphological knowledge in spelling derived forms by learning-

disabled and normal students. Annals of Dyslexia, 37, 90–108. doi:10.1007/BF02648061

Carlisle, J. F. (1988). Knowledge of derivational morphology and spelling ability in fourth, sixth and

eighth grades. Applied Psycholinguistics, 9, 247–266. doi:10.1017/S0142716400007839

Carlisle, J. F. (1995). Morphological awareness and early reading achievement. In L. B. Feldman (Ed.),

Morphological aspects of language processing (pp. 189–209). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Carlisle, J. F. (2000). Awareness of the structure and meaning of morphologically complex words:

Impact on reading. Reading and Writing, 12, 169–190. doi:10.1023/A:1008131926604

Carlisle, J. F. (2007). Fostering morphological processing, vocabulary development, and reading com-
prehension. In R. K. Wagner, A. E. Muse, & K. R. Tannenbaum (Eds.), Vocabulary acquisition:
Implications for reading comprehension (pp. 78–103). New York: Guilford Press.

Carlisle, J. F. (2010). Effects of instruction in morphological awareness on literacy achievement: An

integrative review. Reading Research Quarterly, 45, 464–487. doi:10.1598/RRQ.45.4.5

Carlisle, J. F., & Fleming, J. (2003). Lexical processing of morphologically complex words in the ele-
mentary years. Scientiﬁc Studies of Reading, 7, 239–274. doi:10.1207/S1532799XSSR0703 3
Carlisle, J. F., & Nomanbhoy, D. (1993). Phonological and morphological awareness in ﬁrst graders.

Applied Psycholinguistics, 14, 177–195. doi:10.1017/S0142716400009541

Casalis, S., & Louis-Alexander, M. F. (2000). Morphological analysis, phonological analysis and
learning to read French: A longitudinal study. Reading and Writing, 12, 303–335. doi:10.1023/
A:1008177205648

Deacon, H. S., & Kirby, J. R. (2004). Morphological awareness: Just “more phonological?” The roles of
morphological and phonological awareness in reading development. Applied Psycholinguistics,
25, 223–238. doi:10.1017/S0142716404001110

Deacon, H. S., Kirby, J. R., & Casselman-Bell, M. (2009). How robust is the contribution of mor-
phological awareness to general spelling outcomes? Reading Psychology, 30, 301–318. doi:10.
1080/02702710802412057

Deacon, S. H., Parrila, R., & Kirby, J. R. (2008). A review of the evidence on morphological processing
in dyslexics and poor readers: A strength or weakness? In G. Reid, A. Fawcett, F. Manis, &
L. Siegel (Eds.), The Sage handbook of dyslexia (pp. 212–237). London: Sage.

Derwing, B. L. (1976). Morpheme recognition and the learning of rules in children of differing language

backgrounds. Canadian Journal of Linguistics, 21, 38–66.

Eviatar, Z., & Ibrahim, R. (2012). Multilingualism among Israeli Arabs and the neuropsychology of
reading in different languages. In M. Leikin, M. Schwartz, & Y. Tobin (Eds.), Current issues
in bilingualism: Cognitive and socio-linguistic perspectives (pp. 57–74). New York: Springer
Science + Business Media.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

1041

Ferguson, C. A. (1959). Diglossia. Word, 14, 47–56.
Frost, R. (2012). Towards a universal model of reading. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 35, 263–279.

doi:10.1017/S0140525X11001841

Frost, R., Kugler, T., Deutsch, A., & Forster, K. I. (2005). Orthographic structure versus morphological
structure: Principles of lexical organization in a given language. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31, 1293–1326. doi:10.1037/0278-7393.31.6.
1293

Gabig, C., & Zaretsky, E. (2013). Promoting morphological awareness in children with language needs:
Do the common core standards pave the way? Topics in Language Disorders, 33, 7–26. doi:10.
1097/TLD.0b013e318280f592

Goodwin, A. P., & Ahn, S. (2013). A meta-analysis of morphological interventions in English: Effects
on literacy outcomes for school-age children. Scientiﬁc Studies of Reading, 17, 257–285. doi:10.
1080/10888438.2012.689791

Hansen, G. F. (2014). Word recognition in Arabic: Approaching a language-speciﬁc reading model. In
E. Saiegh-Haddad & M. Joshi (Eds.), Handbook of Arabic literacy: Insights and perspectives.
Amsterdam: Springer.

Hart, B., & Risley, T. (1995). Meaningful differences in the everyday experience of young American

children. Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes.

Holes, C. (2004). Modern Arabic: Structures, functions and varieties (rev. ed.). London: Longman.
Kieffer, M. J., & Lesaux, N. K. (2012). Development of morphological awareness and vocabulary
knowledge in Spanish-speaking language minority learners: A parallel process latent growth
curve model. Applied Psycholinguistics, 33, 23–54. doi:10.1017/S0142716411000099

Kirby, J. R., Deacon, S. H., Bowers, P. N., Izenberg, L., Wade-Woolley, L., & Parrila, R. (2012).
Children’s morphological awareness and reading ability. Reading and Writing, 25, 389–410.
doi:10.1007/s11145-010-9276-5

Lyster, S.-A. H., Lerv¨ag, A. O., & Hulme, C. (2016). Preschool morphological training produces long-
term improvements in reading comprehension. Reading and Writing, 29, 1269–1288. doi:10.
1007/s11145-016-9636-x

Mahony, D., Singson, M., & Mann, V. (2000). Reading ability and sensitivity to morphological

relations. Reading and Writing, 12, 191–218.

Muse, A. E. (2005). The nature of morphological knowledge (Unpublished doctoral dissertation,

Florida State University, Tallahassee).

Nagy, W. E., & Anderson, R. (1984). How many words in printed school English? Reading Research

Quarterly, 19, 304–330. doi:10.2307/747823

Nagy, W. E., Berninger, V. W., & Abbott, R. D. (2006). Contributions of morphology beyond phonology
to literacy outcomes of upper elementary and middle-school students. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 98, 134–147. doi:10.1037/0022-0663.98.1.134

Nagy, W. E., Carlisle, J., & Goodwin, A. (2014). Morphological knowledge and literacy acquisition.

Journal of Learning Disabilities, 47, 3–12. doi:10.1177/0022219413509967

Nunes, T., & Bryant, P. (2006). Improving literacy by teaching morphemes. New York: Routledge.
Nunes, T., Bryant, P., & Bindman, M. (1997). Spelling and grammar: The necsed move. In C. A. Per-
fetti, L. Rieben, & M. Fayol (Eds.), Learning to spell: Research, theory, and practice across
languages (pp. 3–20). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Nunes, T., Bryant, P., & Olsson, J. (2003). Learning morphological and phonological spelling
rules: An intervention study. Scientiﬁc Studies of Reading, 7, 289–307. doi:10.1207/
S1532799XSSR0703 6

Owens, R. E. (2001). Language development: An introduction (5th ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Paradis, J., Genesee, F., & Crago, M. B. (2011). Dual language development and disorders. Baltimore,

MD: Paul H. Brookes.

Perfetti, C. A. (2003). The universal grammar of reading. Scientiﬁc Studies of Reading, 7, 3–24. doi:10.

1207/S1532799XSSR070102

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

1042

Roman, A. A., Kirby, J. R., Parrila, R. K., Wade-Woolley, L., & Deacon, S. H. (2009). Toward a
comprehensive view of the skills involved in word reading in Grades 4, 6, and 8. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 102, 96–113. doi:10.1016/j.jecp.2008.01.004

Rubin, H. (1988). Morphological knowledge and early writing ability. Language & Speech, 31, 337–

355. doi:10.1177/002383098803100403

Saiegh-Haddad, E. (2003). Linguistic distance and initial reading acquisition: The case of Arabic

diglossia. Applied Psycholinguistics, 24, 431–451. doi:0.1017.S0142716403000225

Saiegh-Haddad, E. (2004). The impact of phonemic and lexical distance on the phonological analysis
of words and pseudowords in a diglossic context. Applied Psycholinguistics, 25, 495–512.
doi:10.1017.S0142716404001249

Saiegh-Haddad, E. (2005). Correlates of reading ﬂuency in Arabic: Diglossic and orthographic factors.

Reading and Writing, 18, 559–582. doi:10.1007/s11145-005-3180-4

Saiegh-Haddad, E. (2013). A tale of the letter T: Morphological processing in early Arabic spelling.

Writing Systems Research, 5, 169–188. doi:10.1080/17586801.2013.857586

Saiegh-Haddad, E., & Geva, E. (2008). Morphological awareness, phonological awareness, and reading
in English-Arabic bilingual children. Reading and Writing, 21, 481–504. doi:10.1007/s11145-
007-9074-x

Saiegh-Haddad, E., & Henkin-Roitfarb, R. (2014). The structure of Arabic language and orthography.
In E. Saiegh-Haddad & M. Joshi (Eds.), Handbook of Arabic literacy: Insights and perspectives.
Amsterdam: Springer.

Saiegh-Haddad, E., Levin, I., Hende, N., & Ziv, M. (2011). The linguistic afﬁliation constraint and

phoneme recognition in diglossic Arabic. Journal of Child Language, 38, 297–315.

Saiegh-Haddad, E., & Schiff, R. (2016). The impact of diglossia on voweled and unvoweled word
reading in Arabic: A developmental study from childhood to adolescence. Scientiﬁc Studies of
Reading, 20, 311–324. doi.org/10.1080/10888438.2016.1180526

Samuelsson, S., Byrne, B., Quain, P., Wadsworth, S., Corley, R., DeFries, J. C., . . . Olson, R. (2005).
Environmental and genetic inﬂuences on prereading skills in Australia, Scandinavia, and the
United States. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97, 705–722. doi:10.1037/0022-0663.97.4.
705

Shalhoub-Awwad, Y., & Leikin, M. (2016). The lexical status of the root in processing morphologically

complex words in Arabic. Scientiﬁc Studies of Reading, 20, 296–310.

Singson, M., Mahony, D., & Mann, V. (2000). The relation between reading ability and morphological
skills: Evidence from derivation sufﬁxes. Reading and Writing, 12, 219–252. doi:10.1023/A:
1008196330239

Spencer, M., Muse, A., Wagner, R. K., Foorman, B., Petscher, Y., Schatschneider, C., . . . Bishop, M.,
D. (2015). Examining the underlying dimensions of morphological awareness and vocabulary
knowledge. Reading and Writing, 28, 959–988. doi:10.1007/s11145-015-9557-0

Tabachnick, B. G., & Fidell, L. S. (2007). Using multivariate statistics (5th ed.). Boston: Allyn &

Bacon.

Taha, H., & Saiegh-Haddad, E. (2016). The role of phonological versus morphological skills in the
development of Arabic spelling: An intervention study. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research,
45, 507–535.

Taha, H., & Saiegh-Haddad, E. (2017). Morphology and spelling in Arabic: Development and interface.

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 46, 27–38. doi:10.1007/s10936-016-9425

Tibi, S., & McLeod, L. (2014). The development of young children’s Arabic language and literacy
in the United Arab Emirates. In E. Saiegh-Haddad & M. Joshi (Eds.), Handbook of Arabic
literacy: Insights and perspectives. Amsterdam: Springer.

Tighe, E. L., & Schatschneider, C. (2015). Exploring the dimensionality of morphological awareness
and its relations to vocabulary knowledge in adult basic education. Reading Research Quarterly,
50, 293–311. doi:10.1002/rrq.102

Tyler, A., & Nagy, W. E. (1989). The acquisition of English derivational morphology. Journal of

Memory and Language, 28, 649–667. doi:10.1016/0749-596X(89)90002-8

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Tibi & Kirby: Morphological awareness

1043

Tyler, A., & Nagy, W. E. (1990). Use of derivational morphology during reading. Cognition, 36, 17–34.

doi:10.1016/0010-0277(90)90052-L

Ussishkin, A., Dawson, C. R., Wedel, A., & Schluter, K. (2015). Auditory masked priming in Maltese
spoken word recognition. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 30, 1097–1115. doi:10.
1080/23273798.2015.1005635

Wysocki, K., & Jenkins, J. R. (1987). Deriving word meanings through morphological generalization.

Reading Research Quarterly, 22, 66–81. doi:10.2307/747721


