Journal of Sociolinguistics 21/3, 2017: 348–370

‘No mam. You are heterosexual’:

Whose language? Whose sexuality?1

Ana Cristina Ostermann

Universidade do Vale do Rio dos Sinos, Brazil

the survey)

categorizations

talking about

that demonstrate

takers (who conduct

This study analyzes phone calls to a Brazilian governmental health helpline. By
means of Conversation Analysis and categorization analysis, it investigates a
demographic survey at the end of the calls, used to collect information about
the caller, including the caller’s sexual orientation. What was originally a wh-
question (‘What is your sexual orientation?’) is most frequently transformed by
call
into a polar question (‘Are you
heterosexual?’), a format that triggers complex interactional trajectories and
activates
‘in-action’ heteronormative
understandings about gender and sexuality. The analysis reveals the helpline
callers’ unfamiliarity with what academics and activists have mostly
considered everyday and perhaps universal terminology, and thus calls for
more bottom-up and ecologically valid ways of
sexual
orientations. This investigation also contributes to questioning the traditional
dichotomy of the micro and macro perspectives, demonstrating how situated
interactions respond to a wider sociocultural repertoire which makes what is
local simultaneously translocal.
Este artigo analisa ligacß~oes para uma central telef^onica governamental de
informacß~oes sobre saude. Por meio da Analise da Conversa e da Analise de
Categorizacß~oes de Pertencßa, investiga uma enquete demograﬁca realizada ao
ﬁnal das ligacß~oes, utilizada para coletar informacß~oes sobre usuarias dessa
central, incluindo sua orientacß~ao sexual. O que era previsto originalmente como
uma pergunta de formato aberto (‘Qual a sua orientacß~ao sexual?’) e
transformado, pelos atendentes da central, em uma pergunta polar – de sim
ou n~ao – (‘Voc^e e heterossexual?’), ‘em acß~ao’ gerando trajetorias interacionais
complexas e categorizacß~oes heteronormativas ‘em acß~ao’ sobre g^enero e
sexualidade. A analise aponta a n~ao familiaridade das usuarias dessa central
com termos que acad^emicas/os e ativistas considerariam de uso cotidiano e
mesmo universais, e sugere que termos mais locais e ecologicamente validos
sejam usados para tratar de orientacß~ao sexual nesses contextos. A investigacß~ao
tambem contribui para questionar a tradicional dicotomia do micro e macro, ao
demonstrar como interacß~oes situadas respondem a repertorios socioculturais
mais amplos que fazem que o local seja simultaneamente translocal. [Portuguese]

KEYWORDS: Gender, language and sexuality, Conversation Analysis,
Brazilian
helpline,
heteronormativity,
Membership Categorization Analysis

Portuguese,

survey,

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

WHOSE LANGUAGE? WHOSE SEXUALITY?

349

INTRODUCTION

Issues of how to analyze gender and sexual identities in interaction have been
largely already discussed, in particular in the ﬁeld of Conversation Analysis
(CA) (Schegloff 1997, 1998; Wetherell 1998; Kitzinger 2000; Speer and
Stokoe 2011). Some of the criticism addressed by conversation analysts is that
much of the research on the relationships between language, gender, and
sexuality lies in understanding speakers and talk as predetermined by abstract
discourses ‘from above’ or ‘beyond’ talk (Speer and Stokoe 2011: 7).

Schegloff (1997) claims that gender has to be demonstrably relevant to the
participants – instead of being (a priori and exogenously) imposed by analysts –
in order to be used as an analytical social category in social interaction. The
author notes, for instance, that

it is not enough to justify referring to someone as a ‘woman’ just because she is,
in fact, a woman – because she is, by the same token, a Californian, Jewish, a
mediator, a former weaver, my wife, and many other things. (Schegloff 1997:
165)

CA methodological criteria on what counts as analytical categories, and its
issues2 – such as power,
reluctance to bring wider (or macro) social
heteronormativity, and oppression – aprioristically into the analysis, have
not gone without criticism (e.g. Wetherell 1998). In response to the criticism of
CA’s conceptualization of what actually is relevant to the participants or what
constitutes participants’ orientation to gender (e.g. Wetherell 1998; Ehrlich
2002), a number of
the
conversational analytical
lenses might be at grasping gender and sexual
identities in action (e.g. Ehrlich 2002; Kitzinger 2005, 2007; Speer and Stokoe
2011; Ostermann and Kitzinger 2012). As Weatherall (2002: 768) points out,

scholars have demonstrated how powerful

[b]eing limited, as an analyst,
the
participants is not to say that gender is not omni-relevant. What it does mean
is that it is incumbent on the researcher to show how and that gender as omni-
relevant is produced and oriented to.

to the overtly displayed concerns of

Moreover, once analysts have demonstrated and described the speciﬁc and
practical ways of how gender is actualized in interaction, this might also allow
them to show how such practices could possibly be changed (Ostermann and
Kitzinger 2012).

Aligned with the perspective taken by other studies interested in unveiling
how participants orient to gender and sexuality in talk and how larger social
constructs come into being in social interaction, the current study also takes
up Garﬁnkel’s ethnomethodological claim (1967) that it is part of the analysts’
task to actually show how interactants’ production of their everyday activities
is informed by certain categorizations and how the interactants demonstrate
their oriention to them (Stokoe 2000, 2006; Stokoe and Smithson 2001;

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

350

OSTERMANN

interactants

are

Stokoe and Weatherall 2002; Speer and Stokoe 2011). In other words, the
analysis and discussion presented in this paper assume an understanding
that
and
continuously
demonstrating their understanding of
the world around
them and what is happening here and now. Thus, a close analysis of
naturally occurring interactions is taken here as central to explaining the
methods and everyday practices that participants use in order to produce
such worlds (Garﬁnkel 1967; Speer and Stokoe 2011).

attributing meaning
interactions,

to

Such perspective also reﬂects how this paper connects with the special theme
of this issue. The perspective assumed here is not one of North and South, West
and non-West, developed and developing (or even underdeveloped), First and
Third World, center and periphery, or the macro and micro. Instead,
it
assumes a tentatively less dichotomous perspective that proposes to simply
shift our point of departure by ﬁrst looking at the ‘margins’ (Milani 2014), and
only then investigating how the margins – perhaps unavoidably – relate (or
not) to what has been taken to be the ‘metropole’.

What I propose, in fact, is not new: to (ﬁrstly) look at and (only later)
theorize from language where language is actually used; to look at and theorize
from the actual sites where people are interacting in the world to carry out
their everyday affairs,
investigating how they orient (or not) to certain
categories and how they make sense of the world while doing so.3 In this sense,
Conversation Analysis and categorization analysis serve as empowering
analytical
to investigate participants’ own understandings and
categorizations of gender and sexuality.

lenses

In order to frame the analysis of this paper within the larger theme of the
Special Issue, I take here Comaroff and Comaroff’s invitation (2012a: 1),
originally formulated as ‘What if we posit that, in the present moment, it is the
global south that affords privileged insight into the workings of the world at
large?’ (emphasis added), and modify it slightly so as to propose that ‘What if
we posit that [. . .] it is the micro level of everyday interactions that affords
privileged insight into the workings of the world at large’?

the study looks at how ‘heteronormativity’

This work, thus, investigates the micro level of talk-in-interaction itself in the
production and naturalization of understandings of gender and sexuality. By
analyzing language as it is used by people when conducting their everyday
affairs,
(Warner 1991) or
‘compulsory heterosexuality’ (Rich 1980; Butler 1990) are actualized in
naturalistic data, and how intersubjectivity (understood here as
the
participants’ mutual understandings),
in particular when at stake, might
reveal ‘heteronormativity in action’, to borrow Kitzinger’s (2005) words. By
relying on such an analytical perspective, the paper also aims to call into
question the traditional dichotomy of the micro and macro perspectives,
demonstrating how the interactional moment, as a condensed historicity of
participants’ own understandings and categorizations of gender and sexuality,

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

WHOSE LANGUAGE? WHOSE SEXUALITY?

351

seems to respond to a wider sociocultural repertoire which makes what is local
simultaneously translocal.

SITUATING THE SETTING, DATA, AND METHODS

Helplines, the interactional context of interest here, are dedicated telephone-
based services (delivered by both the private and public sector) that provide
some type of assistance, guidance and/or simply information on a range of
topics or concerns, such as legal, medical, emotional, among others (Baker,
Emmison and Firth 2005). An example of a helpline would be a phone number
made
customers with
available
troubleshooting.

company

to help

software

by

a

Within the context of helplines, it is by means of talk-in-interaction that
callers and call takers conduct their main business, i.e. to request for and
receive some type of help – whose nature, of course, can vary. In addition, it is
by means of talk-in-interaction that speciﬁc meanings are negotiated, and the
participants’ reasoning, assumptions and beliefs are rendered visible.

The wider study from which this investigation derives comprises 308 audio
interactions
recorded and fully transcribed, naturally occurring phone-call
directed to a Brazilian governmental health helpline, Centro de Informacß~oes
sobre Saude (also referred to here as CIS).4 That is a toll free number, created by
the Brazilian Ministry of Health to provide citizens with health information and
referrals. Most users of the helpline are working-class citizens with low
educational background whose access to health information (including
internet access) is limited.

The interactions analyzed for the larger investigation from which this study
derives, and whose main purpose was to investigate morality in action in
interactions in women’s public health services in Brazil, were limited to those
initiated by a citizen, and then only those in which the caller selected ‘women’s
health’ in the initial menu, and further selected one of the following topics in
the
or
contraception.

submenu: HIV/AIDS,

transmitted

diseases,

sexually

cancer

As is the case for most telephone services in Brazil nowadays, all CIS calls are
automatically recorded by the management for quality control, with callers
being informed of the recording at the start of every call by means of an
automated message. It is important to register, however, that all calls are
anonymous. At no instance in the interactions are callers asked to reveal their
names. Thus,
in order to ensure the highest possible ethical care while
simultaneously abiding by the institutional demand to not interfere with their
current practices at the time, written permission for participation in the study
was requested only from the call takers.5 Those who chose not to take part in
the study had their wish respected and, thus, the institutional recordings of
their calls were not analyzed. In addition, any mention of proper names that

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

352

OSTERMANN

might indicate who the participants are, including names of cities, streets, and
institutions, were replaced by ﬁctitious ones.

The analysis presented here focusses on the ﬁnal phase of the phone calls;
more speciﬁcally,
the analysis is circumscribed to the phase when the
institutional representative (call taker or CT) applies a survey that requests
demographic information from the caller (C). This survey was introduced in
2010 by the Ministry of Health as part of the service provided by the
the calls was
helpline, CIS. The introduction of surveys at
motivated by the government’s initiative to gather statistics about
the
helpline callers in order to propose actions more closely tailored to their
proﬁles, including the need to serve LGBTT users more adequately in the
public health system.

the end of

Out of the corpus of 308 recorded phone calls analyzed in the larger
study, only 31 contained the recording of
survey
comprised 20 questions, ordered in a pre-arranged way. Among the
information requested about the caller were age, gender, sexual orientation,
and educational level.

the survey. That

Despite some initial neglect of the survey recordings in the phone calls, a
closer look at the data revealed that speakers interactionally demonstrated
problems when dealing with one speciﬁc question: the one about the caller’s
sexual orientation.
the sequence
surrounding such a question that this paper investigates.

the interactional

trajectory of

It

is

Following the tradition of other conversation analytical studies (Kitzinger
2000; Paoletti 2002; Speer 2005; Wilkinson and Kitzinger 2014; Lindstr€om,
N€aslund and Rubertsson 2015), in order to carry out such investigation, I
combine Conversation Analysis (CA) (Sacks, Schegloff and Jefferson 1974) with
categorization analysis (Sacks 1992). Moreover, at some points in the analysis I
also rely on some ethnographic notes about the call center and its workings.

SEXUAL ORIENTATION AS INTERACTIONALLY DELICATE

The sequence involving the actions of requesting and providing information
about the caller’s sexual orientation reveals itself as interactionally ‘delicate’
(Silverman and Per€akyl€a 1990; Per€akyl€a 1995) by the participants’
orientation to it. The ﬁrst evidence for such a claim is that such a question
is deliberately moved by the CTs from its middle position in the survey list – i.e.
allocated by the Ministry of Health as the 10th out of 20 questions – to be
asked as the very last, as Figure 1 below illustrates.

This change, as reported by the call takers in informal conversations with
me, is a way to maximize the information obtained by means of the survey,
since a number of callers hang up after being asked about their sexuality.
Thus, according to the call takers, by requesting that information as the last
question in the survey, if the call is abruptly terminated, the responses to the
rest of the survey could still have been obtained.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

WHOSE LANGUAGE? WHOSE SEXUALITY?

353

Figure 1: Survey applied at the end of the calls to CIS and the repositioning of the
question about sexual orientation

Secondly, as an attempt to deal with the complexity of the question about
‘sexual orientation’, call takers make use of alternative ways of designing the
format of the request. The original structure of the question posed by the
Ministry of Health – an open Wh-question (What is your sexual orientation?) – is
actually informally modiﬁed and produced in three other
formats, as
represented in Figure 2:

1. polar (yes/no) questions (Heritage and Raymond 2012);
2. alternative questions (Bolinger 1978); or
3.

in-progress ‘list construction’ (Jefferson 1991).

Call takers reported doing this in order to facilitate the interaction. According
to them, responding ‘yes’ or ‘no’ (to a yes-no question) – instead of having to
produce an answer to an open question – should make it ‘easier’ or simpler for
the callers to respond.

Because the polar yes-no question was by far the most frequent format used by
the call takers (28 out of the 31 occurrences), it is on sequences involving that
speciﬁc format that this paper concentrates. The single occurrence of the in-
progress list construction and its interactional consequences are discussed
elsewhere (Ostermann in preparation).What follows are some examples of how

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

354

OSTERMANN

Figure 2: Call takers’ changes in the design of the question, in which A stands for
heterosexual and B, homosexual (N=number of call takers using the design)

the survey open question about sexual orientation is actualized in interactions
in its different formats.6

Polar (yes/no) questions:
(1) Call taker: voc^e e heterossexua:l?

(2) Call taker:

are you heterose:xual?
.h e com relacß~ao a sua opcß~a- a sua orientacß~ao sexual voc^e e
heterossexu↑a:l
.h and in relation to your sexual opt- to your sexual orientation
are you heterosexu↑a:l

Alternative questions:
(3) Call taker: e: orientacß~ao sexual voc^e se considera .h heterossexual ou

homossexual
uh: sexual orientation do you consider yourself .h heterosexual
or homosexual

In-progress list construction:
(4) Call taker: e: orientacß~ao sexual voc^e se considera .h heterossexua::l,

homossexua::l,
uh: sexual orientation do you consider yourself .h heterose::xual,
homose::xual,

Such deliberate transformation,

in particular, the most frequently used
format in the data set (i.e. yes-no questions), besides creating a number of
interactional problems for the participants in terms of intersubjectivity, as

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

WHOSE LANGUAGE? WHOSE SEXUALITY?

355

discussed elsewhere (Ostermann in preparation), also reveals the workings of
heteronormativity (or of ‘heteronormativity in action’; Kitzinger 2005), as
explored in this paper.

Finally, the interactional delicacy surrounding the sequence that involves
the request and provision of information about the callers’ sexual orientation
becomes noticeable also through ‘perturbations’ (Silverman and Per€akyl€a
1990) in the participants’ talk – i.e. disturbances in their speech, such as
pauses, hesitations, repairs and laughter.

A NEUTRAL QUESTION? A PRESUPPOSED HETEROSEXUAL WORLD

Interactional studies of naturally occurring ordinary and institutional interactions
have demonstrated that questions may perform a number of different actions
besides that of requesting information (Freed and Ehrlich 2010; Hayano 2013).
Other actions performed by questions might include inviting, challenging,
requesting accounts and initiating repair, among others (Hayano 2013).
However, questions do even more. They also communicate the questioner’s
beliefs, reasoning and expectations; questions presuppose (Heritage 2010).

the two formats – call

When deliberately transforming an originally open question about sexuality
(‘What is your sexual orientation?’) into a yes/no interrogative (‘Are you
heterosexual?’) or an alternative question (‘Are you heterosexual or
homosexual?’) – or any combinations of
takers
communicate some of their beliefs and assumptions about the callers and the
world. The major format used by the call takers (Y-N questions) reveals itself as
problematic for being shaped in a non-neutral
format and creating
presuppositions about the caller. The alternative question-format (‘Are you
heterosexual or homosexual?’), used alone on only two occasions, creates a
binary world of sexual orientation, thus limiting the choices one might have. An
answer that does not conform to any of the choices offered in the ﬁrst-pair part of
the adjacency pair will tend to demand more interactional work from the
participants and be ‘dispreferred’ (Lee 2013; Pomerantz and Heritage 2013).

Another presupposition operates in polar (yes/no) interrogatives (Heritage
2010; Raymond 2010; Ostermann and Jaeger 2012). As Heritage (2010: 51)
explains, ‘the conversation analytic term preference is used to describe the bias or
tilt of questions that are designed for, favor, or suggest an expectation of an answer
of a particular type.’ In that sense, the grammatical design of the interrogative ‘Are
you heterosexual?’ favors a ‘yes’ answer (see also Raymond 2010).

By transforming an originally open question (‘What

is your sexual
orientation?’) into a yes-preferred question (‘Are you heterosexual?’ or the
alternative ‘Are you heterosexual or not?’), the call taker communicates
preference of some kind: a yes agreement. Beyond that, she/he also selects a
speciﬁcsexual orientation (or aspeciﬁccategory) asadefault, ‘morefavorable’one,
thus revealing ‘heteronormativity’ (Warner 1991) – most commonly discussed as
a macro level concept – in operation at the micro level of everyday interactions.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

356

OSTERMANN

The data show that when the caller responds afﬁrmatively to the ﬁrst
production of a yes-preferred question, her answer is not problematized and the
interaction evolves to its closing, as shown in Extract 1.

Extract 1 [Disk040909ReginaAIDS]
234
235

Call taker:

Caller:

Call taker:

hhh a::h a senhora se considera heterossexual
hhh u::h do you consider yourself heterosexual
↑s:i:::m:
↑y:e:::s:
oquei senhora (.) muito obrigado por colabo↑ra (.) o
ministerio da saude agradece a sua ligacß~ao ligue sempre que
for necessa:rio .hh tenha um ↑bom ↓di:a
okay mam (.) thank you very much for colla↑borating (.) the
ministry of health thanks you for your call call whenever
necessary .hh have a ↑great ↓da:y

236
237

238
239
240
241
242
243

244
245

Call taker:

bom dia
have a good day

After receiving a type-conforming as well as a preference-conforming
answer by the caller (i.e. ‘yes’), the call taker immediately moves to the closing
of the interaction (lines 238–240 / 241–243). Notice that this is so despite the
markedness with which such a yes-preferred answer is produced in Excerpt 1
(lines 236 / 237) – a one syllable agreement marked not only with stretched
sounds but also with a rising intonation (↑y:e:::s:).

Conversely, in all but six cases in which the caller provides a no as a response, her
answer is met with some type of ‘problematization’ by the CT. Repair sequences are
initiated, and, as a consequence, the sequence gets extended over a number of
turns in talk until its closing. However, another fact calls attention to the data set
being analyzed. Despite the preferred yes-answer in the design of the question, and
taking into consideration that we live in a world largely deﬁned as heterosexual
(Warner 1991),
it might be somewhat intriguing that out of 28 survey
respondents replying to Y-N questions, only six categorized themselves as being
heterosexual. It is to those interactions that the next section in this paper turns.

CO-CONSTRUCTING A HETEROSEXUAL WORLD

The sequence involving the request and provision of information about the
caller’s sexual orientation in which the caller answers negatively to being
heterosexual, in addition to revealing large confusion about what heterosexual
means, opens up trajectories of interaction that activate categorizations and
make accessible demonstrably naturalized understandings about gender and
sexuality. This section of the analysis, thus, investigates such interactional
trajectories and, in doing so, reveals the operation of heteronormativity and
compulsory heterosexuality (Rich 1980) at the very micro, social level of

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

WHOSE LANGUAGE? WHOSE SEXUALITY?

357

human interaction. The excerpts described below were selected on the basis of
the recurrence of the phenomenon they represent in the larger corpus.

Extract 2 [DISK080909HelenaCAN]
260 Call taker:
261
262
263
264

ce::rto (.) .h e: po- en↓t~ao senhora- (.) a senhora se considera
heteressexu↑al
oka::y (.) .h ah: you so- ↓okay mam- (.) do you consider yourself
heterosexu↑al
(1.4)
n~a:o
no:
(0.6)

265 Caller:
266
267
268 Call taker: heterossexual senhora e a pessoa que tem aﬁnidade pelo sexo
269
270
271
272

o↑posto >ou seja a mulher ter aﬁnidade por um homem<
heterosexual mam is a person who has afﬁnity with the
opposite ↑sex. >in other words< the woman who has afﬁnity
with a ↑man.
a: ent~ao sim (hh) eu n~ao entendi muito bem
oh: then yes (hh) I hadn’t understood it very well
(.)
oque:i senhora ent~ao o ministerio da saude agra↑dece a sua
ligacß~ao ligue sempre que for necessario, e tenha um ↑bom dia.
oka:y mam then the ministry of health thanks for your call. call
whenever necessary, and have a ↑good day.

273 Caller:
274
275

276 Call taker:
277
278
279

In Extract 2, after receiving a no (lines 265 / 266) to her yes-preferred question
(260–261 / 262–263) – which is delivered with a number of perturbations
(stretches, hesitations, inbreaths) – in her next turn, the CT problematizes such
an answer. Such problematization is done by means of a repair initiation
(Schegloff 1992), which consists of an unrequested explanation of what
heterosexual means – ‘a person who has afﬁnity with the opposite ↑sex’ (lines
268–269 / 270–272). Such explanation is further modiﬁed by the CT to be
more recipient-designed,
i.e. by replacing ‘a person’ with ‘a woman’ and
‘opposite sex’ with ‘a man’. In other words, the call taker designs her further
explanation of ‘heterosexual’ to be a type of relationship that is (potentially)
more adjusted to that speciﬁc caller – an adult female.

two assumptions at

The repair initiation implemented by the CT in lines 268–269 and 270–272
the caller is
reveals at
heterosexual and (2) that by answering negatively (i.e.
that she is not
heterosexual) the caller either (2a) has not understood the CT’s question or
(2b) does not understand what heterosexual means. As revealed in the caller’s
next turn (lines 273 / 274), marked with a change of state token (‘oh:’) and
the delivered ‘online’ realization of how her sexual orientation is named (‘then

this point: (1) that

least

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

358

OSTERMANN

yes (hh) I hadn’t understood it very well’, in lines 273 / 274), assumptions (1)
and (2b) are interactionally revealed to be actually the case.

Another – and perhaps even stronger – instance of presupposed
heterosexuality, as well as of misunderstanding what heterosexual means,
takes place in Extract 3.

Call taker:

Extract 3 [DISK110909MaribelCAN]
338
339
340
341

oque:i. (.) e a senhora e heterossexua:l ou seja a senhora tem
atracß~ao pelo sexo o↑po:sto, a senhora tem a[tracß~ao]=
oka:y. (.) and are you heterose:xual that is are you attracted
to the opposite ↑sex, are you a[ttracted]=

Caller:

Call taker:

Caller:

Call taker:

Caller:

Call taker:

Caller:

Call taker:

Caller:

Call taker:

Caller:

342
343

344
345
346

347
348
349

350
351
352

353
354
355

356
357
358
359
360

361
362

363
364
365

366
367

368
369

370
371

[n~a:o]
[no:]

=por ho:mens?
=to me:n?
(1.4)
n~ao
no
(1.1)
n~a:o?
no:?
(.)
n~ao.
no.
(.)
a senhora tem atracß~ao por homens e n~ao por mulheres ou a
senhora tem atracß~ao por °mu↓lhe:res°
are you attracted to men and not to women or are you
attracted to °wo:↓men°
(0.8)
n~a:o tambem n~ao.
no: not that either.
.h a senhora tem atracß~ao por ↑ho:mens
.h are you attracted to ↑me:n
(.)
so por meu marido ↓mesmo
only to my husband ↓really
correto. que e ho:mem. (.) ce:r[to]
okay. who is a ma:n. (.) ri:[ght]
[ah~a]
[yeah]

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

WHOSE LANGUAGE? WHOSE SEXUALITY?

359

Call taker:

Caller:

Call taker:

372
373
374

375
376

377
378
379
380
381
382

ent~ao a senhora e heterossexua:l
so you are heterose:xual
(.)
[ah~a]
[aham]
[oque:i] obriga:do por colaborar e o ministerio da saude
agradece a sua ligacß~ao ligue sempre que necessario e tenha
um bom di:a
[oka:y] thank you for your collaboration and the ministry of
health thanks for your call. call whenever necessary and
have a goo:d day

The question about the caller’s sexual orientation in Extract 3 is designed
in a slightly different way from the one in Extract 2. The yes-preferred
question (‘and are you heterose:xual’, in lines 338 / 340) is immediately
revised into a format that supposedly explains what heterosexual means
(‘that is are you attracted to the opposite ↑sex’, in lines 338–339 / 340–341)
and again into another question that further elaborates the explanation (‘are
you a[ttracted] to me:n?’,
lines 339 and 344 / 341 and 345). However,
before the third question reaches a possible transition point,
the caller
provides, in overlap with the CT, a negation (‘[no:]’, lines 342 / 343), which
is repeated in lines 347 and 348 – possibly to resolve possible problems of
hearing caused by the earlier overlap.

Interestingly, at this point the CT challenges (Levinson 2013) the caller’s
negative answer, by repeating the caller’s ‘no’ with rising intonation (‘no:?’,
lines 350 / 351), to which the caller answers once again with a negation (lines
353 / 354). Demonstrating that she is not yet satisﬁed with the caller’s third
in lines 356–357 and 358–359, the CT further elaborates her
negation,
question in an alternative format that could be represented as: Are you A and
not B, or are you B?. At this point, the caller simply negates all the possibilities
presented so far. However, once again evidencing what seems to be a pursuit of
a ‘yes-I-am-heterosexual’ answer, the CT presents the question in yet another
format (‘.h are you attracted to ↑me:n’, lines 363 / 364). At this point we have
access to yet another disclosure of misunderstanding when the caller replies
that she is attracted only to her husband.

Thus, what we see happening in this interaction, just as in the previous one,
is an assumption by the CT that the caller: (1) is heterosexual and that (2) she
does not reply afﬁrmatively because she does not understand the word
heterosexual nor any of the explanations provided by the CT – assumptions
that are again revealed to be congruent.

Interestingly, however, and differently from Extract 2, in Excerpt 3 we also
have access to an understanding and belief of the caller herself which might
represent female sexuality at a more general level: that her sexual desire is not

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

360

OSTERMANN

directed towards all or any men, but only to her husband. In terms of
categorizations, the caller makes reference to a relational pair of husband-wife
in which the wife has limited rights to sexual attraction – only to her husband
– which, in its turn, also points to a certain understanding of female sexuality:
that of ﬁdelity or even of chastity.

Extract 4, below, reveals another made-explicit categorization by the caller

about female sexuality.

Extract 4 [DISK080909IsisCONTRA]
257 Call taker: ↑oquei e voc^e e heterossexua:l?
258
259

↑okay and are you hereterosexua:l?
(0.9)

260 Caller:
261
262

263 Call taker:
264
265
266
267

268 Caller:
269

270 Call taker:
271
272

273 Call taker:
274
275
276

277 Caller:
278

como assi:m?
what do you mea:n?
(.)
se voc^e tem prefer^encia por ho:mens ou se voc^e tem prefer^encia
por mulhe:res
if you have preference for me::n, or if you have preference
for wo::men
(2.6)
prefer^e:ncia?
pre:ference?
prefer^encia sexu↑a:l senho:ra
sexu↑a:l preference (.) mam.
(2.2)
sua prefer^encia sexual e por ↑HOmem (0.7) ou e por
mu[lher]
your sexual preference is for ↑MEN (0.7) or is it for
wo[men]

[eu s^o] mulher ne tem que ser homem (.)°(hh)°
[I’m] a woman of course. it has to be for men (.) °(hh)°

279 Call taker:
280
281
282
283
284

oque:i obrigada por colabora (.) o ministerio da saude agradece a
ligacß~ao (.) ligue sempre que for necessario e tenha um bom- uma
boa ↑tarde
oka:y. thank you for your collaboration (.) the ministry of health
thanks for your call (.) call whenever necessary and have a good
mor- after↑noon

This interaction shows in so many words the caller’s problem with
understanding the CT’s question – or more speciﬁcally, with what
heterosexual means – as she explicitly initiates repair of the trouble source
question with another question, in ‘what do you mea:n?’ (lines 260 and 261).
After taking more turns to repair that understanding and others (i.e. about

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

WHOSE LANGUAGE? WHOSE SEXUALITY?

361

what the CT means by preference), in lines 275 and 276 the CT and caller
ﬁnally seem to reach shared understanding with regards to the information
being requested. This moment
comes, however, with a meaningful
categorization by the caller: that because of being a woman, her sexual
preference has to be for men. Another interesting point here is the design of her
answer – a response that does more than the simple provision of the
information requested (for a discussion on answers that resist questions and on
answers that do other (or more) than answering, see Stivers and Hayashi
2010; Walker, Drew and Local 2011; Couper-Kuhlen 2014). The caller uses
the discourse marker ne (roughly translated as ‘of course’ here) in the second
position to the question, showing thus the ‘obviousness’ of what has been
asked, in ‘[I’m] a woman of course. it has to be for men (.) °(hh)°’.

On what concerns how the answer is produced, it happens both (1) in
overlap with the previous question and (2) with an account (i.e. that she is a
woman) which is positioned before the actual provision of the requested
information (i.e. that she is attracted to men). Such features in the design of
her answer point to the relevance of the categorization in process taking place
here: that of compulsory heterosexuality, of biological sex determining her
sexual desire for males (Rich 1980; Butler 1990).

Possibly, it is Extract 5, below, that most emblematically represents all of the
complexities involved in the sequences of the helpline survey question about
the caller’s sexual orientation.

Extract 5 [Disk160909AfonsoAIDS]
138 Call taker:
139
140

a senhora e heterossexu↑al
are you heterosexu↑al
(2.7)

141 Caller:
142

143 Call taker:
144

145 Caller:
146

147 Call taker:
148

149 Caller:
150

151 Call taker:
152

oi?
what?
a senhora e ↑heterossexual ou ↓n~ao
are you ↑heterosexual or ↓not
↓n~a:o n~ao.
↓n:o no.
a senhora ↑sabe o que e heterossexu↑a:l
do you ↑know what heterosexual means?
↓sei sim.
↓I do. yes.
a senhora e: ↑le:sbica:
are you:: a les↑bian

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

362

OSTERMANN

n~ao.
no.

157 Caller:
158

159 Call taker:
160
161

153 Caller:
154
155 Call taker: n~a::o?
no::?
156
n~ao.
no.
a senhora enquadra a sua orientacß~ao sexual co:mo en↓t~ao
how would you categorize your sexual orientation ↓then
(.)
ah eu s^o totalmente femi↓ni:na n~ao so::u ↑nem le:sbica n~ao
sou nada disso
oh I’m totally femi↓ni:ne. I’m no::t ↑neither lesbia:n nor
anything of that kind
en↓t~ao a sen[hora compreen]de=
↓so you [understand]=

162 Caller:
163
164
165

166 Call taker:
167

[gracßas a ↓deus(h)]
168 Caller:
[thanks ↓god(h)]
169
170 Call taker: =o que e [heterossexual e]
171

=what [heterosexual means]

172 Caller:
173
174 Call taker: e a pessoa que sente atracß~ao sexual pelo sexo ↑o↓po:sto
175

[EU SEI o que que] e i:sso eu ↓sei
[I DO know what what] that is: I ↓do

176 Caller:
177

178 Call taker:
179
180

181 Call taker:
182

183 Caller:
184
185

186 Call taker:
187

188 Caller:
189
190 Call taker:

it’s a person who feels attracted to the ↑opposite ↓sex
↑eu ↓se:i
↑I ↓kno:w
en↓t~a:o
↓so:
(1.2)
a senhora deseja n~ao respond^e: essa per↑gunta:
do you prefer not to answer this ques↑tion
↑n~a::o ↓n~a::o eu n~ao ↓sou eu n~ao sou heterossexual ↓n~ao
↑no:: ↓no:: I don’t ↓I’m not heterosexual ↓no
(0.9)
a senhora en↑tende o que e heterossexu↓al
do you understand what heterosexual ↑means
eu en↓te::ndo eu entendo. meu primo ele e heterossexu↓al
I un↓dersta:nd it I understand it. my cousin he is heterosexu↓al
↓n~ao senhora heterossexual e a pessoa que sente atracß~ao pelo

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

WHOSE LANGUAGE? WHOSE SEXUALITY?

363

191
192
193

194 Caller:
195

196 Call taker:
197

198 Caller:
199

sexo oposto
↓no mam. heterosexual is the person who is attracted to the
opposite sex
↑a::h ent~ao eu s^o heterossexu↓al (h)(h)(h)((riso))
↑o::h then I am heterosexu↓al (h)(h)(h)((laughs))
↓a::h entendi senhora muito obrigado [pela re]sposta
↓o::h I understand mam thank you [for your] answer

[ta bom]
[okay]

This interaction presents again a series of repair sequences. After producing
a yes-preferred question (‘are you heterosexu↑al’, lines 138 / 139), the CT’s
question is met with a long temporal gap (2.7 seconds) before the caller
initiates repair (lines 141 / 142). In lines 143 and 144, the CT offers a modiﬁed
version of a yes-preferred question, revising it into an even more strongly-yes-
preferring format (‘are you ↑heterosexual or ↓not’). The double negative
particle used by the caller shows her orientation to the second version of the
question as a Y/N question indeed (and not an alternative one). In addition to
conveying assurance, the double negative might also point out that that course
of action has persisted beyond what is necessary (Stivers 2004). One could
potentially claim, however, that it is this marked answer (double negative) – in
addition to the CT’s previous experience with callers’ misunderstanding of the
term ‘heterosexual’ and his assumption of an unlikely ‘queer planet’ (Warner
1991) – that prompts the CT to challenge the caller’s knowledge of the
meaning of ‘heterosexual’ (‘do you ↑know what heterosexual means?’, lines
147 / 148). The caller, however, responds afﬁrmatively, reiterating, thus, the
validity of her very ﬁrst answer (i.e. that she is not heterosexual).

Upon returning to the task of ﬁlling in a slot in the survey about the caller’s
sexual orientation, the CT reformulates his question so as to ask whether the
caller is a lesbian (lines 151 / 152), to which she replies with a negative
without any delay (lines 153 / 154). At this point, being confronted with
negative answers to both being heterosexual and a lesbian, the CT produces a
somewhat conclusive (see the use of
‘then’) open-format question (wh-
question): ‘how would you categorize your sexual orientation ↓then’ (lines 159
/ 160). The caller shows resistance to categorizing her sexual orientation in
any of the terms proposed so far. She starts her turn by ﬁrst claiming that she is
‘totally feminine’, followed by a negation of the categories proposed so far: that
she is not a lesbian ‘nor anything of that kind’ (lines 162–163 / 164–165).
The interaction reveals some important categorization processes at work. By
characterizing herself with the attribute of being ‘totally feminine’ and
establishing such attribute in a relation of opposition to ‘being a lesbian’ or
‘anything of that kind’, the caller evokes an understanding of some type of
(naturalized) linearity between gender practices and sexual orientation (i.e.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

364

OSTERMANN

that being ‘feminine’ corresponds to not being a lesbian). In addition, the caller
characterizes being a lesbian as an undesirable sexual orientation when she
places it as part of a larger collection that comprises ‘anything of that kind’,
followed by a response cry (‘[thanks ↓god(h)’], in lines 168 / 169), conveying
relief and a positive assessment of not being a member of such a (undesirable)
collection (of ‘lesbians’ and ‘anything of that kind’).

Sequentially speaking, such categorization processes seem to support the
inference the CT seems to make – that the caller does not understand what
heterosexual means. In lines 166 / 167 and 170 / 171, once again the CT looks
for conﬁrmation of the caller’s understanding of the category ‘heterosexual’. He
does so by means of a ‘formulation’ (Heritage and Watson 1980), starting with
the conclusive ‘so’ (in ‘so you understand what heterosexual means’), which is
once again conﬁrmed by the caller (lines 172 / 173). Important as well here is
that one could possibly speculate that, by drawing an inference from the caller’s
latest contribution (lines 162–163 / 164–165), the CT shows that he aligns
himself with the caller’s orientation to the fact that being ‘totally feminine’
cannot be an attribute of a lesbian.

repairing what he infers

The CT’s offer of an explanation of what heterosexual means (lines 174 / 175)
to be a
further evidences his pursuit of
misunderstanding. Upon the caller’s conﬁrmation of her knowledge of the
meaning of heterosexual, the CT takes a new turn, however, which is not to
accept the answers provided by the caller (i.e. that she is heterosexual and that
she knows what heterosexual means). Instead, he offers her the option of not
answering the question about sexual orientation (lines 181 / 182). Interestingly,
however, the caller vehemently rejects such an offer by producing a triple
negative to the offer (‘↑no:: ↓no:: I don’t’) (see Stivers 2004) and rejecting twice
that she is heterosexual (‘↓I’m not heterosexual ↓no’, lines 183 / 184), thus
pointing out the unsuitability of such an offer.

For the third time in this sequence, the CT looks for conﬁrmation of the
caller’s understanding of the term heterosexual (lines 186 / 187). It is at this
point that we see a dramatic change in the course of action. Right after
(re)conﬁrming her understanding, the caller provides what should work as
some type of evidence that she knows what ‘heterosexual’ means: she informs
the call taker that she has a heterosexual cousin.

As is well known in the literature, facts have to be ‘tellable’ to be worth
reporting (Shuman 1986; Georgakopoulou 2007). By reporting that she has a
cousin who is heterosexual, besides attempting to show evidence of her
knowledge, the caller also seems to orient herself to the ‘tellable’ principle – and
so does the call taker. It is precisely that mutual orientation that provides the
evidence the CT needs to conﬁrm the inference he was making before; i.e. that
the caller did not know the word heterosexual. In other words, by drawing on
the common sense belief of compulsory heterosexuality and, thus, that someone
being heterosexual is not frequently a ‘reportable’ event, the CT is able to draw
an important inference here. The CT produces an other-initiated-other repair,

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

WHOSE LANGUAGE? WHOSE SEXUALITY?

365

starting his turn with a negation token (‘no’) and going on to produce the same
explanation he has made twice before, but that now corrects the caller’s
understanding (‘↓no mam. heterosexual is the person who is attracted to the
opposite sex’, in lines 190–191 / 192–193), which is accepted by the caller. In
lines 194 and 195, the caller shows realization of what her sexual orientation is
named in a turn that starts off with a token that signals a ‘change of state’ (Heritage
1998) (‘↑o::h’ in English; originally produced as ↑a::h in Brazilian Portuguese). In
other words, the caller expresses having moved from one understanding into a new
one (‘↑o::h then I am heterosexu↓al (h)(h)(h)((laughs))’).

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUDING REMARKS

The interactions analyzed in this study reveal a number of facts concerning
language and its relation to gender and sexuality identities. The paper
discusses how heteronormativity emerges in interactions as a very palpable
concept both in how the questions are asked and how they are answered.

The most frequently used format to request the caller’s sexual orientation, the
polar question ‘Are you heterosexual?’, is revealed as highly problematic, both in
interactional terms as well as in the selection it makes of a range of sexual
orientation possibilities in order to serve the ‘optimization principle’ (Heritage
2010). As argued, questions do more than asking; they communicate the
questioner’s beliefs, reasoning and expectations; they presuppose. The format of
a yes-preferred question communicates preference of some kind: a yes
agreement. Moreover, the selection of a speciﬁc sexual orientation as a default,
a ‘more favorable’ one, reveals how heteronormativity – most commonly
discussed as a macro-level concept – operates at the very micro level of everyday
interactions. In other words, such selection is not neutral and works towards
(re)constructing (and actively pursuing) the normalization of an understanding
that we live on a heterosexual ‘planet’ (Warner 1991).

Nevertheless, a yet larger and more encompassing problem about questions on
sexual orientation arises, and that refers to the fact that any question format
about sexual orientation that asks what the interlocutor is (including an open
wh-question, which actually does not happen in this data set) reveals an
understanding of sexual orientation as a static one; a category a person is or
belongs to, thus not envisaging any possibility for a more queered and ﬂuid
understanding of sexuality and sexual desire.

The analysis of

the data unveils

even more about naturalized
understandings of gender and sexuality. The misunderstanding of the term
‘heterosexual’ discloses in very concrete ways important heteronormative
categorizations to studies of gender and sexuality. This is the case, for instance,
when callers (as well as CTs) exhibit their understanding of some type of
linearity between sex, gender and sexuality. Thus, a woman who is supposedly
‘totally feminine’ cannot be a lesbian, a caller who has a husband who is ‘very
macho’ (as it happened in another interaction not presented here), and a

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

366

OSTERMANN

woman who is biologically female can only be attracted to men (e.g. ‘[I’m] a
woman right. it has to be for men (.) °(hh)°’). In addition, female sexual desire
is related to attributes of ﬁdelity or even chastity, as revealed by the caller who
claims to be attracted only to her husband.

The recurrent problems of intersubjectivity around the word heterosexual
also concretely point out the existence of a default category – what I will call
here a default ‘h-sexual’ orientation. That default category would be the one
that does not circulate in discourse – which in this case is the word
heterosexual itself. That would be the category one does not talk about. It
simply is. And it so much is that callers reveal not knowing what that word
actually means. They simply know it is an h-sexual word. The interactions
show, however, that when an h-sexual word is indeed produced in discourse,
when it becomes ‘tellable’ or ‘reportable’ (e.g. ‘my cousin is heterosexual’), it
must mean the ‘other’ category; the category one is not (e.g. ‘I’m not a lesbian
or anything of that kind’) nor wants to be (e.g. ‘thanks god’). Because it is
taken as a default sexual orientation, and perhaps because it is not an
ecological term used by members of that community (i.e. members might use
words that are more colloquial such as straight to refer to heterosexuals), the
word heterosexual does not circulate in discourse. Consequently, it ends up
being understood as the h-sexual word refering to the ‘reportable’ sexual
orientations; i.e. the ‘other’ one or ones.

(2010) when discussing female sexuality in South Africa:

Such ﬁndings pose some important considerations for the discussion of the
theme of this Special Issue, and for what one can learn from the global South
(Comaroff and Comaroff 2012a, 2012b) or, in this case, from the ‘margins’
(Milani 2014). In particular, they bring to light an important topic raised by
Gunkel
the
‘invention’ of western sexual identity terms or what Connell (2007: 218)
claims to be the research terminology getting ‘exported from the metropole to
the periphery’. The analysis highlights the fact that the long-term and always
enlarging academic theorizations and political activism about
language,
gender and sexuality do not seem to have yet reached an important slice of the
population: the less economically and educationally privileged groups at the
margins – here, the users of this government toll free number, who rely on a
helpline for health information exactly because they cannot access it
elsewhere.

The callers to this helpline (who are the respondents of the survey) disclose
not being familiar with what academics and activists have taken as everyday,
basic or, perhaps, ‘universal’ terms. In fact, users of the toll free number also
demonstrate not to be able to distinguish how sexual orientations in general
are named. However, that obviously does not mean that a diversity of sexual
practices and orientations are not part of their everyday lives. Upon being faced
illiteracy’, call takers (those who conduct the
with a situation of
survey) end up playing another role in these interactions:
the role of
‘educating’ callers, even though in very crude, heteronormative, and, just as

‘sexual

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

WHOSE LANGUAGE? WHOSE SEXUALITY?

367

important, colonizing ways, about how the callers’ should name their own
sexual identities (e.g. ‘then you are heterosexual, mam’).

Similarly to what is described by Gunkel (2010) in relation to sexuality in South
Africa, it seems that words and concepts about sexuality in the Brazilian context
are not simply equivalent to mere universalized translations of sexual orientations,
which explains the title of this paper, ‘Whose language? Whose sexualities?’7 What
this analysis reveals, thus, also calls for the need for the deconstruction of
supposedly universal terms; it calls for a more bottom-up, locally emerged and
ecologically valid description of sexual orientations – ways that are locally used
and understood. It requires a language that actually comes from the ‘margins’
(Milani 2014), from where it is actually spoken. Thus, if a ‘theory from the South’ is
not, as Comaroff and Comaroff (2012a) contend, any grand theory, but more of a
grounded theory based on encounters with human practices, then investigations
of local understandings of sexuality should also – and ﬁrstly – be done in encounters
‘with grounded human practices’ (Comaroff and Comaroff 2012b: para. 2) and ‘in
places where we have not classically thought to look’ (2012b: para. 2), like
everyday interactions, where the actual discursive practices and displays of
understandings of human sexuality take place.

NOTES

1. I would like to thank Michelle Lazar, Tommaso Milani, Bonnie McElhinny, Allan
Bell and the anonymous reviewers for comments and reactions to this paper in
whole or in part. I alone remain entirely responsible for its contents.

2. See Stokoe, Hepburn and Antaki (2012) and Ostermann and Kitzinger (2012).
3. In fact, what could be considered simply a methodological constraint here (i.e.
CA approach to theorization), was, in fact, what yielded me the possibility of
relating the analytical ﬁndings to the major theme of this Special Issue.

4. For the purposes of preserving the anonymity of the participants involved in the

project, the name of the helpline has also been replaced with a ﬁctitious one.

5. The research project has been submitted to and reviewed by the Universidade do
in turn, has issued the approval

Vale dos Sinos (UNISINOS) IRB, which,
certiﬁcate ‘Resolucß~ao 045/2005’.

6. Transcription conventions follow Jefferson (1884). Bold indicates speech that is

discussed in the article.

7. The title was also inspired by Mey (1995), Schegloff (1997) and Billig (1999).

REFERENCES

Baker, Carolyn, Michael Emmison and Alan Firth (eds.). 2005. Calling for Help: Language and

Social Interaction on Telephone Helplines. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: John Benjamins.

Billig, Michael. 1999. Whose terms? Whose ordinariness? Rhetoric and ideology in

Conversation Analysis. Discourse & Society 10: 543–558.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

368

OSTERMANN

Bolinger, Dwight. 1978. Yes-no questions are not alternative questions. In Henry Hiz (ed.)

Question. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Reidel Publishing Company. 87–105.

Butler, Judith. 1990. Performative acts and gender constitution: An essay in Phenomenology
and Feminist Theory. In Sue-Ellen Case (ed.) Performing Feminisms: Feminist Critical Theory
and Theatre. Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press. 270–282.

Comaroff, Jean and John Comaroff. 2012a. Theory from the South: Or, How Euro-America is

Evolving toward Africa. Boulder, Colorado: Paradigm Publishers.

Comaroff, Jean and John Comaroff. 2012b. Theory from the south: A rejoinder. Fieldsights –
Theorizing the Contemporary, Cultural Anthropology Online, 24 February. Paper originally
presented at American Anthropology Association Annual Meeting, Montreal, November 2011.
Connell, Raewyn. 2007. Southern Theory: Social Science and the Global Dynamics of Knowledge.

Cambridge, U.K.: Polity Press.

Couper-Kuhlen, Elizabeth. 2014. What does grammar tell us about action? Pragmatics 24:

623–647.

Ehrlich, Susan. 2002. Legal

institutions, nonspeaking recipiency and participants’

orientations. Discourse & Society 13: 731–747.

Freed, Alice and Susan Ehrlich. 2010. The function of questions in institutional discourse: An
introduction. In Alice Freed and Susan Ehrlich (eds.) Why Do You Ask? The Function of
Questions in Institutional Discourse. New York: Oxford University Press. 3–19.

Garﬁnkel, Harold. 1967. Studies in Ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice

Hall.

Georgakopoulou, Alexandra. 2007. Small Stories, Interaction, and Identities. Amsterdam, The

Netherlands: John Benjamins Publishing.

Gunkel, Henriette. 2010. The Cultural Politics of Female Sexuality in South Africa. New York:

Routledge.

Hayano, Kaoru. 2013. Questions design in conversation. In Jack Sidnell and Tanya Stivers
(eds.) The Handbook of Conversation Analysis. Malden, Massachusetts: Wiley-Blackwell. 395–
414.

Heritage, John. 1998. Oh-prefaced responses to inquiry. Language in Society 27: 291–334.
Heritage, John. 2010. Questioning in medicine. In Alice Freed and Susan Ehrlich (eds.) Why
Do You Ask? The Function of Questions in Institutional Discourse. New York: Oxford University
Press. 42–68.

Heritage, John and Geoffrey Raymond. 2012. Navigating epistemic landscapes: Acquiescence,
agency and resistance in responses to polar questions. In Jan P. de Ruiter (ed.) Questions:
Formal, Functional and Interactional Perspectives. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University
Press. 179–192.

Heritage, John and Rod Watson. 1980. Aspects of the properties of formulations. Semiotica 30:

245–262.

Jefferson, Gail. 1984. Transcript notation. In J. Maxwell Atkinson and John Heritage (eds.)
Structures of Social Action: Studies in Conversation Analysis. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press. ix–xvi.

Jefferson, Gail. 1991. List construction as a task and resource. In George Psathas (ed.)

Interactional Competence. New York: Irvington Publishers. 63–92.

Kitzinger, Celia. 2000. Doing feminist Conversation Analysis. Feminism & Psychology 10: 163–

193.

Kitzinger, Celia. 2005. Heteronormativity in action: Reproducing the heterosexual nuclear

family in ‘after hours’ medical calls. Social Problems 52: 477–498.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

WHOSE LANGUAGE? WHOSE SEXUALITY?

369

Kitzinger, Celia. 2007. Feminist conversation analysis: Research by students at the University

of York, UK. Feminism & Psychology 17: 133–148.

Lee, Seung-Hee. 2013. Response design. In Jack Sidnell and Tanya Stivers (eds.) The Handbook

of Conversation Analysis. Malden, Massachusetts: Wiley-Blackwell. 415–432.

Levinson, Stephen. 2013. Action formation and ascription. In Jack Sidnell and Tanya Stivers
(eds.) The Handbook of Conversation Analysis. Malden, Massachusetts: Wiley-Blackwell. 103–
130.

Lindstr€om, Ann, Shirley N€aslund and Christine Rubertsson. 2015. The interactional

organisation of sex assignment after childbirth. Gender and Language 9: 189–222.

Mey, Jacob L. 1995. Whose Language? A Study of Linguistic Pragmatics. Amsterdam, The

Netherlands: John Benjamins.

Milani, Tommaso. 2014. Marginally speaking. Multilingual Margins 1: 9–20.
Ostermann, Ana Cristina. In preparation. Intersubjectivity in action (and at stake) in survey

question-answer sequences about sexual orientation.

Ostermann, Ana Cristina and Aline Jaeger. 2012. G^enero e identidade no consultorio
ginecologico: Pressupostos identitarios jamais questionados. In Ana Cristina Ostermann
and Stela Meneghel (eds.) Humanizacß~ao. G^enero. Poder: contribuicß~oes dos estudos de fala-em-
interacß~ao para a atencß~ao a saude. Rio de Janeiro and Campinas, Brazil: Editora Fiocruz e
Editora Mercado de Letras. 119–132.

Ostermann, Ana Cristina and Celia Kitzinger. 2012. Feminist conversation analysis and

applied conversation analysis. Calidoscopio 10: 239–244.

Paoletti, Isabella. 2002. Caring for older people: A gendered practice. Discourse & Society 13:

805–817.

Per€akyl€a, Anssi. 1995. AIDS Counseling:

Institutional

Interaction and Clinical Practice.

Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Pomerantz, Anita and John Heritage. 2013. Preference. In Jack Sidnell and Tanya Stivers
(eds.) The Handbook of Conversation Analysis. Malden, Massachusetts: Wiley-Blackwell. 210–
228.

Raymond, Geoffrey. 2010. Grammar and social relations: Alternative forms of yes/no-type
initiating actions in health visitor interactions. In Alice Freed and Susan Ehrlich (eds.) Why
do You Ask? The Function of Questions in Institutional Discourse. New York: Oxford University
Press. 87–107.

Rich, Adrienne. 1980. Compulsory heterosexuality and lesbian existence. Signs: Journal of

Women in Culture and Society 5: 631–660.

Sacks, Harvey. 1992. Lectures on Conversation (Vols. 1 and 2, Gail Jefferson, ed.). Oxford, U.K.:

Blackwell.

Sacks, Harvey, Emmanuel A. Schegloff and Gail Jefferson. 1974. A simplest systematics for the

organisation of turn-taking for conversation. Language 50: 696–735.

Schegloff, Emmanuel A. 1992. Repair after next turn: The last structurally provided defense of

intersubjectivity in conversation. American Journal of Sociology 97: 1295–1345.

Schegloff, Emmanuel A. 1997. Whose text? Whose context? Discourse & Society 8: 165–187.
Schegloff, Emmanuel A. 1998. A reply to Wetherell. Discourse & Society 9: 413–416.
Shuman, Amy. 1986. Storytelling Rights: The Uses of Oral and Written Texts by Urban

Adolescents. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Silverman, David and Anssi Per€akyl€a. 1990. AIDS counselling: The interactional organisation

of talk about ‘delicate’ issues. Sociology of Health & Illness 12: 293–318.

Speer, Susan A. 2005. Gender Talk: Feminism, Discourse and Conversation Analysis. London:

Routledge.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

370

OSTERMANN

Speer, Susan A. and Elizabeth H. Stokoe. 2011. Conversation and Gender. Cambridge, U.K.:

Cambridge University Press.

Stivers, Tanya. 2004. ‘No no no’ and other types of multiple sayings in social interaction.

Health Communication 30: 260–293.

Stivers, Tanya and Makoto Hayashi. 2010. Transformative answers: One way to resist a

question’s constraints. Language and Society 39: 1–25.

Stokoe, Elizabeth H. 2000. Towards a conversation analytic approach to gender and discourse.

Feminism & Psychology 10: 552–563.

Stokoe, Elizabeth H. 2006. On ethnomethodology, feminism, and the analysis of categorial

reference to gender in talk-in-interaction. Sociological Review 53: 467–494.

Stokoe, Elizabeth, Alexa Hepburn and Charles Antaki. 2012. Beware the ‘Loughborough
School’ of social psychology? Interaction and the politics of intervention. British Journal of
Social Psychology 51: 486–496.

Stokoe, Elizabeth H. and Janet Smithson. 2001. Making gender relevant: Conversation

analysis and gender categories in interaction. Discourse & Society 12: 217–244.

Stokoe, Elizabeth H. and Ann Weatherall. 2002. Gender, language, conversation analysis and

feminism. Discourse & Society 13: 707–713.

Walker, Tracy, Paul Drew and John Local. 2011. Responding indirectly. Journal of Pragmatics

43: 2434–2451.

Warner, Michael. 1991. Introduction: Fear of a queer planet. Social Text 29: 3–17.
Weatherall, Ann. 2002. Towards understanding gender and talk-in-interaction. Discourse &

Society 13: 767–781.

Wetherell, Margaret. 1998. Positioning and interpretative repertoires: Conversation analysis

and post-structuralism in dialogue. Discourse & Society 9: 387–412.

Wilkinson, Sue and Celia Kitzinger. 2014. Conversation analysis in gender and language
studies. In Susan Ehrlich, Miriam Meyerhoff and Janet Holmes (eds.) The Handbook of
Language and Gender (2nd edition). Malden, Massachusetts: Wiley-Blackwell. 141–160.

Address correspondence to:

Ana Cristina Ostermann
Programa de Pos-Graduacß~ao em Linguıstica Aplicada
Avenida Unisinos, 950
S~ao Leopoldo, RS, 93022-970
Brazil

ana.cristina.ostermann@gmail.com

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd


