J. Child Lang.  (), –. © Cambridge University Press 
doi:./S

Pragmatic inferences in context: learning to interpret

contrastive prosody*

CHIGUSA KURUMADA
University of Rochester, USA

A N D

EVE V. CLARK

Stanford University, USA

(Received  November  – Revised  August  – Accepted  April  –

First published online  May )

A B S T R A C T

Can preschoolers make pragmatic inferences based on the intonation of
an utterance? Previous work has found that young children appear to
ignore intonational meanings and come to understand contrastive
intonation contours only after age six. We show that four-year-olds
succeed in interpreting an English utterance, such as “It LOOKS like
a zebra”, to derive a conversational implicature, namely [but it isn’t
one], as long as they can access a semantically stronger alternative, in
this case “It’s a zebra”. We propose that children arrive at the
implicature by comparing such contextually provided alternatives.
Contextually leveraged inferences generalize across
speakers and
contexts, and thus drive the acquisition of intonational meanings. Our
ﬁndings show that four-year-olds and adults are able to bootstrap
their interpretation of the contrast-marking intonation by taking into
account alternative utterances produced in the same context.

[*] Thanks to Sarah Bibyk, T. Florian Jaeger, Michael K. Tanenhaus, the HLP and
Kurumada-Tanenhaus Labs for helpful feedback and advice; to Olga Nikolayeva, the
Bing Nursery School at Stanford University,
the Rochester Baby Lab, and the
Children’s School at University of Rochester Medical Center for help in subject
testing. This research was funded by a Stanford Graduate Fellowship and a JSPS Post
Doctoral Research Fellowship awarded to CK, and by an award from the National
Institutes of Health (NIH R #HD) to Michael K. Tanenhaus (University of
Rochester). Address for correspondence: Chigusa Kurumada, Department of Brain and
Cognitive Sciences,  Meliora Hall, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY -
. e-mail: ckuruma@ur.rochester.edu



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

P R A G M A T I C I N F E R E N C E S I N C O N T E X T

I N T R O D U C T I O N
Children’s interpretation of contrast-marking prosody
Although many aspects of language have been mastered by the age of ﬁve or
six, other aspects, such as pragmatic understanding of the meaning of
intonational contours, have longer developmental
trajectories. Many
researchers have argued that young children do not rely on intonation in
inferring the speaker’s pragmatic intention, aﬀect, or emotional state (e.g.
Aguert, Laval, Le Bigot & Bernicot, ; Capelli, Nakagawa & Madden,
; Cruttenden, ; Cutler & Swinney, ; Hornby & Hass, ;
Morton & Trehub, ; Quam & Swingley, ; Solan, ; Van Der
Meulen, Janssen & Den Os, ; Wells, Peppe & Goulandris, ;
Winner & Leekam, ). Moreover, the ability to interpret an intonation
contour that signals contrast is said to develop late, after age six, and
slowly (Ito, Bibyk, Wagner & Speer, ; Ito, Jincho, Minai, Yamane &
Mazuka, ; Speer & Ito, ). For example, Cruttenden () tested
British English-speaking ten-year-olds and adults to determine whether
they could reliably identify the referents of utterances such as those in (a)
and (b), given a choice of three pictured referents []–[].

()

a. It’s a very nice garden.
[fall–rise]
b. It’s a very nice garden.

[fall]

Pictures

[]
[]
[]

a nice garden but a house falling down
a garden and a house, both very nice
a garden overgrown but a very nice house

(a) has the fall–rise pitch accent on the word garden, which results in a
slight rise at the ﬁnal position of the sentence. This is typically associated
with reservation (Cruttenden’s [] term) or contrast in meaning. This
reservation is expected to match the picture in [], in which the nice
garden is contrasted with the not-nice house. (b), however, does not
convey such a contrast and, hence, could describe [] or []. Cruttenden
found that % of the adult listeners chose picture [] for (a) but that
only % of the ten-year-olds did so; % of them chose [] instead. The
majority in both groups consistently selected [] when they heard (b).
These
that
comprehension of the contrast-marking function of an intonation contour
has yet to be acquired by ten-year-olds (see also Cutler & Swinney, ;
Speer & Ito, ).

and those of other

results

studies

strongly suggest



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

K U R U M A D A A N D C L A R K

Children’s diﬃculty in understanding intonation contours cannot be
attributed solely to a limited ability to PERCEIVE pitch contours. Much
younger children are acutely sensitive to prosodic information in the input
(e.g. Fernald ; Morgan & Demuth, ; Sakkalou & Gattis, ).
In addition, in a few limited domains, children under six years of age do
show some understanding of pragmatic functions marked by intonation
contour (e.g. Armstrong, ; Grassmann & Tomasello, , ;
Sekerina & Trueswell, ), and they PRODUCE distinct contours that
depend on the pragmatic function of their utterance (Cutler & Swinney,
; Hornby & Hass; ; Ito, ; Thorson & Morgan, ; Wells
et al., ; Wieman, ). At the same time, young children appear to
be insensitive to intonational meanings in situations in which adult
listeners derive speciﬁc pragmatic inferences eﬀortlessly. This raises the
question: What causes these young children diﬃculty?

consider

example

()

again. Adult-like

(a) or (b). Second,

To investigate the development of the ability to interpret intonational
meanings,
interpretation of
intonational meanings involves the following three steps (Pierrehumbert &
Hirschberg, ). First, listeners need to identify a particular utterance as
a variant of
they need to remember that an
intonation contour such as (a) is typically associated with the speaker’s
highlighting a contextual contrast. Third, they reason about why the
speaker used a particular intonation in context in arriving at a speciﬁc
interpretation of the target utterance (e.g. [It’s a very nice garden, but the
house is not as nice]). In particular, this process requires listeners to derive
a contextually plausible alternative expression (namely, what the speaker
could have said, e.g. (a) vs. (b)) and make inferences about why the
speaker chose a particular expression (Grice, ).

These three steps are not necessarily acquired in order, and their
developmental trajectories are most likely intertwined. Nonetheless, the
separation of intonation interpretation into these three steps is useful, as
each one taps a diﬀerent aspect of children’s linguistic knowledge. The
ﬁrst step depends on representations of meaningful intonational contours
in English, as well as cognitive and attentional resources, to process a
sequence of speech as it unfolds (Ito et al., ; Speer & Ito, ). The
second includes knowledge speciﬁc to English intonational contours, as
languages diﬀer in how much of the speaker’s pragmatic intention is
conveyed prosodically and how this is accomplished (see Büring &
Gutiérrez-Bravo, ; Ladd, ; Jun, , ; Vallduví, ). The
third step requires the ability to make use of contextual information to
derive
argued that
preschoolers lag behind adults in using contextual information to constrain
possible interpretations of an utterance (Snedeker & Trueswell, ).
Indeed, children’s intonational interpretations could diﬀer from those of

implicature. Researchers have

conversational

a



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

P R A G M A T I C I N F E R E N C E S I N C O N T E X T

adults in any one of these steps and so result in diﬃculty in arriving at the
intonational meaning intended.

Two important questions here are: Which step constitutes an obstacle? and
How do children achieve adult-like interpretations? To answer these questions,
we ﬁrst need to take a brief look at another domain of development with a
similarly late, and protracted, development in children: scalar implicature.
Preschoolers typically fail to derive scalar implicatures based on quantiﬁers
(e.g. none, some, and all) or logical words such as and vs. or (e.g. Chierchia,
Crain, Guasti, Gualmini & Meroni, ; Musolino, ; Musolino &
Lidz, ; Noveck, ; Papafragou, ; Papafragou & Musolino,
; Papafragou & Tantalou, ). Their diﬃculty could be due to the
level of
lexical
knowledge (including knowledge about relevant scales), or pragmatic
ability in deriving the appropriate implicatures.

their general processing capacity,

language-speciﬁc

One method for sorting out these components is to provide extra
scaﬀolding for one component and to determine whether this improves
children’s performance. Recent studies have shown that, with such an
approach, the diﬃculty that children have with scalar implicature often lies
in identifying a relevant scale. In fact, preschoolers can manage pragmatic
inferences when they are shown visually represented ad-hoc scales (Stiller,
Goodman & Frank, ), familiar scales such as numbers, or even
explicit descriptions. So, when shown a picture of three animals sleeping,
four-year-olds correctly reject Only the cat and the cow are sleeping (Barner,
Brooks & Bale, ). The availability of contrasting prenominal adjectives
also helps children to make contrastive inferences (Horowitz & Frank,
, ). Together, these results support the hypothesis that children’s
diﬃculty with scalar implicature lies in their limited ability to call to mind
relevant alternatives in response to words such as some, rather than in their
cognitive ability to compute contextually enriched pragmatic meanings.

If we apply the same logic to the interpretation of intonational contours,
we can test whether preschoolers understand a contrastive intonation
contour better, as in (a), when there is a linguistic alternative available
in the same context. In other words, the non-adult-like performance
observed in earlier research may stem from children’s diﬃculty in arriving
at relevant alternatives based on an intonational cue alone. We deﬁne
an alternative as an expression that
lexically, syntactically, or
prosodically diﬀerent from a target utterance, and (b) is strongly linked to
one of the possible meanings that the speaker could have expressed in that
context. If a likely alternative expression is explicit in context, preschoolers
may be able to bootstrap their inference by reasoning about why the
speaker used one particular expression and not another. This type of
reasoning follows from adherence to the principle of contrast (Clark,
), known for its facilitative roles in the early stages of children’s word

is (a)



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

K U R U M A D A A N D C L A R K

learning. The current study was designed to test this prediction in the
domain of intonational meanings.

We also test an extended version of this prediction. We asked: If the
availability of alternatives facilitates children’s contextual inferences, does
successful comprehension contribute to the LEARNING of an intonational
meaning? By learning, we mean acquisition of the ability to identify an
intended meaning based on a particular prosodic contour, even in the
absence of an explicit alternative. Contextually derived meanings may be
short-lived or strongly tied to a particular setting, and thus unlikely to
generalize across speakers and contexts (e.g. Carey, ; Goodman,
McDonough & Brown, ; Horst & Samuelson, ; Mervis &
Bertrand, ; Wilkinson & Mazzitelli, ). Alternatively, young
children could learn to associate a particular intonation contour with some
pragmatic meaning through contextually supported inferences.

In what follows, we present ﬁndings from three studies of four-year-olds.
We show that
these children succeed in the appropriate pragmatic
interpretation of contrast-marking intonation contours when they can
leverage their interpretations against alternatives in context. We also show,
in a two-day-long study, that contextually leveraged inferences generalize
across speakers and contexts, potentially contributing to longer-term
acquisition of intonational meanings.

like a zebra).

A case in point: “It looks like an X”
The current study focuses on the construction It looks like an X (e.g. It
looks
(We use italics for example words or sentences
abstracted away from acoustic detail, e.g. It is raining outside can be said as
“It’s RAINING outside!”, “It IS raining outside!”, and other variations.
We use double-quotation marks for quoted speech, with phonetic and
prosodic speciﬁcation; capital letters for prosodic emphasis; and square
brackets [ ] for intended interpretations.) Depending on the listener’s
construal of the intonation contour, this construction can convey either an
aﬃrmative ‘hint’ (e.g. [(It looks like a zebra) and I think it is one]) or,
with a diﬀerent contour, a negative ‘warning’ (e.g. [(It looks like a zebra)
but
(Kurumada, Brown & Tanenhaus, ,
submitted; Kurumada, Brown, Bibyk, Pontillo & Tanenhaus, ). Both
interpretations are attested in spontaneous conversations between adults
and children.

it actually isn’t one])

Hansen and Markman (), in their analysis of language uses pertinent
to the appearance/reality distinction, found examples of look(s) like in 
recording sessions from eight children between ; and ; and their
parents (in , turns). Of these,  instances (%, virtually all from
adults) were used to indicate the identity of the object (e.g. Child: What’s



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

P R A G M A T I C I N F E R E N C E S I N C O N T E X T

that? – Adult: It looks like a bottle opener); and  (%, again, adult uses
mainly) were used to refer to the similarity in appearance of the referents
mentioned (e.g. Adult: Yeah, that rock looks like a beehive). By four years
of age, then, children clearly have been exposed to instances of the It looks
like an X construction, with an aﬃrmative (It is an X) and comparative
interpretations in context, usually oﬀered in response to children’s What’s
that questions. Nevertheless, Hansen and Markman’s study did not
examine the prosodic features of utterances, and thus does not provide any
the child’s inappropriate
information on how often adults contradict
reference by means of “It LOOKS like X (but it isn’t one).”

Other researchers have documented adult speakers’ uses of looks like as
well as is like to convey one of two diﬀerent speaker intentions marked by
diﬀerences in prosodic contour (Clark & Wong, ). In () below, the
adult speaker (Karen) uses They look like cows to me as a hint to categorize
the referents as cows. In (), however, Adam’s mother uses It’s like to give
feedback on an erroneous word–object mapping, with an alert or warning.
Clark and Wong suggested that the lengthened vowel (here transcribed as
‘li::ke’) emphasizes this function of the utterance by highlighting the
reading [It is like a rope but it’s actually not a rope].
() Abe (;·; Kuczaj :, from Clark and Wong (),

Karen is an adult)

ABE:
KAREN:
ABE:
KAREN:

What’s those?
What do they look like?
I don’t know.
They look like cows to me, don’t they look like cows
to you?

() Adam (;.l; Brown/Adam :, from Clark and Wong ()

ADAM:
MOTHER:

What kind o(f) rope is dat?
It’s not a rope.
It’s li::ke a rope.
It’s a cord.

Figure  provides intonational contours that a native speaker of American
English uses when asked to express these two meanings. In THE NOUN-FOCUS
PROSODY (on the left), the sentence bears a canonical accent placement, with
sentential stress on the last constituent (i.e. X in It looks like an X), and the
overall pitch contour ends with a low–falling boundary tone. We follow the
ToBI convention, in which L and H to represent a low tone and a high tone
respectively, and % indicates an utterance-ﬁnal boundary tone (Beckman &
Ayers, ; Beckman, Hirschberg & Shattuck-Hufnagel, ; Silverman
et al., ). An asterisk (*) means that the tone is aligned with a pitch



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

K U R U M A D A A N D C L A R K

Fig. . Waveforms (top) and pitch contours (bottom) of the utterance “It looks like a
zebra”. The aﬃrmative interpretation It is a zebra is typically conveyed by the contour on
the left, and the negative one, It is not a zebra, by the contour on the right.

accent. The noun-focus prosody is therefore annotated as a contour with an
H* on the ﬁnal noun followed by a falling boundary tone L-L%. This
pattern typically evokes the aﬃrmative interpretation (i.e. [It looks like an
X and it is one]) usually produced by adults to provide a hint as to the
identity of the referent. In THE VERB-FOCUS PROSODY (on the right), the
vowel in the verb looks is lengthened and emphasized with a contrastive
accent (L + H*), and the sentence typically ends with a rising, L-H%,
boundary tone. This pattern biases individuals’ interpretation toward the
negative interpretation (i.e. [It looks like an X but it is not one]). This
provides a warning. Studies with adult speakers of English corroborate
this distinction between hint and warning (Kurumada et al., ,
submitted; Kurumada et al., ). Although adult judgments are not
always categorical and can be modulated by contextual factors, such as the
preceding utterance,
and
distributional information about the speaker’s prosodic production, they
reliably interpret these contours as [It is an X] (hint) and [It is not an X]
(warning) (see Kurumada et al., ).

an expected level of

speaker

expertise,

With this construction, we ask whether four-year-olds can make a
contrastive inference based on prosodic information. To call to mind that
“it LOOKS like an X . . . ” (verb-focus prosody) means [It is not an X],
one needs to make inferences based on two prosodic representations: a
fall–rise pitch accent (L + H*) and a rising boundary tone (L-H%). The L
+ H* accent on the verb evokes a set of alternatives, in this case, any
alternative predicates, including the semantically stronger It is an X. The
utterance-ﬁnal boundary tone signals that the propositional content is
incomplete, which invites an additional inference from the listener (e.g.
[. . . but it is actually something else]). This is similar to the inference



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

P R A G M A T I C I N F E R E N C E S I N C O N T E X T

expected in (a), “It’s a very nice garden . . .” [but the house is not nice]
(Cruttenden, ).

In Experiments –, we test whether four-year-olds can, in fact, engage in
such an inference if they have access to an alternative expression (e.g. “It is
an X” vs. “It LOOKS like an X . . .”). In an everyday conversational context,
as in () and () above, adult speakers tend to provide alternative expressions
through rephrasing (e.g. “It’s not a rope”; “It’s like a rope”; “It’s a cord”).
We predict that young children will succeed in making a contrastive
inference from “It LOOKS like an X” if they receive such information in
context. We then ask whether such contextually supported inferences can
be extended to understanding the same intonation contour when an
alternative structure is not present. We end with a discussion of the role of
such contextual inferences in intonational development.

EXPERIMENT 

M E T H O D
Participants
We recruited and tested twelve children who were acquiring English as
their ﬁrst language (ﬁve girls, seven boys; mean age ;, age range ;–;)
at a nursery school in Stanford, California. We also collected data from
twenty-four adults on-line, using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk service
(https://www.mturk.com/mturk/). Adult participants were
self-
identiﬁed as native speakers of American English who currently resided in
the United States. Data from three adult participants were excluded
because their participation time was two standard deviations below the
mean. Adults were paid $ to participate in this task.

all

Stimuli
First, we embedded sixteen high-frequency animal names in the sentence
frame It looks like an X (e.g. It looks like a zebra). All the items were
recorded twice by a female native speaker of American English: once with
noun-focus prosody (e.g. “It
looks like a ZEBRA!”) and once with
verb-focus prosody (e.g. “It LOOKS like a zebra . . .”). We created two
experimental lists and counterbalanced the stimuli across these two lists:
items pronounced with noun-focus prosody in List one had verb-focus
prosody in List two, and vice versa. The mean duration (in milliseconds)
and fundamental frequency of the words used (i.e. it, looks, like, a, noun)
are summarized in Table  and Figure .

We chose sixteen animal pictures to visually represent the animal terms.
We then chose sixteen more animal pictures to form pairs whereby the
animals resembled each other perceptually (e.g. a zebra and an okapi;



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

K U R U M A D A A N D C L A R K

TA B L E . Mean fundamental frequency values and mean word duration in

Sally’s utterances used in Experiments –

Mean fundamental frequency (Hz) [standard deviation]

It

looks

like

a

noun

Noun-Focus · [·]
Verb-Focus

· [·]

· [·]

· [·] · [·] · [·] · [·] · [·]

· [·]

· [·]

Mean word duration (milliseconds) [standard deviation]

It

looks

like

a

noun

Noun-Focus · [·] · [·] · [·] · [·]
Verb-Focus

· [·] · [·] · [·]

· [·]
· [·] · [·]

Fig. . Mean fundamental frequency (Hz) and mean word duration (in milliseconds) in the

female puppet’s (Sally) utterances.

Figure ). In each pair, the target named in the input sentence (e.g. It looks
like a zebra) was the more frequent of the two and was expected to be more
familiar to the children who were being tested. Hereafter, the target named
in a sentence (e.g. a zebra) is referred to as the animal MENTIONED, and the



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

P R A G M A T I C I N F E R E N C E S I N C O N T E X T

paired animal (e.g. an okapi) is the UNMENTIONED animal. The animals in
each pair served as target referents for one or the other of the two prosodic
contours used in the task (e.g. a zebra as the target referent for “It looks
like a ZEBRA” [and it is one] and an okapi for “It LOOKS like a zebra
. . .” [but it’s not one]).

Why did we use this asymmetry in the familiarity of the two items in each
pair? For our study, we needed to ensure that, for each pair, children were
more familiar with the animal mentioned than with the unmentioned
animal. If the children were equally familiar with both animals, e.g. horse
and zebra, no adult speaker would say, “It LOOKS like a zebra . . .” to
refer to a horse; instead, the speaker would simply say, “It’s a horse”. In
other words, for the verb-focus prosody to be used felicitously, one animal
has to be unfamiliar and less likely to be referred to by name. To make
sure that preschoolers registered this asymmetry, we did two surveys. The
ﬁrst one was an informal interview, for which we showed all the depictions
of animals to eight children and had them name them one by one. Most
could name all the mentioned animals (e.g. horse, zebra, elephant) or else
recognized the names once the adult interviewer mentioned them (e.g.
beetle, tadpole). At the same time, none of the children could correctly
name all
tapir, bison). These
children did not participate in the actual experiment. We also showed all
of the stimuli to the teachers at the nursery school to conﬁrm that the
unmentioned animals were, indeed, less familiar to the children tested.

the unmentioned animals (e.g. okapi,

In the second survey, we checked that preschoolers could correctly
associate a given mentioned name (e.g. zebra) to a target picture when
presented with the two options of zebra and okapi. We did this to reject
the possibility that children would accept both pictures (a zebra and an
okapi) as equally good referents for the word used in an instruction (e.g. It
looks like a zebra). We showed our picture pairs to ﬁve four-year-olds, who
did not participate in the experiments, and asked them to point to the
picture that matched best with the name of the animal. They answered
correctly, e.g. choosing a zebra over an okapi almost all the time (%).
This suggests that four-year-olds indeed recognized one picture in each
pair as a better referential ﬁt for the noun mentioned. This licensed adult
uses of “it LOOKS like an X . . .” in referring to the unfamiliar item in
each pair.

The task
The experiment took place in a quiet room with a low table and child-sized
chairs. The experimenter sat across from the child and placed experimental
equipment (a puppet, a box, and a ﬁle binder displaying all the two choice
options) on the table. Participants
in a two-alternative

took part



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

K U R U M A D A A N D C L A R K

forced-choice task with an experimenter who was a native speaker of
American English. The task comprised sixteen trials (two practice trials
and fourteen critical trials) and lasted approximately  minutes.

The child participant was ﬁrst introduced to the puppet named Sally. A
mini portable speaker was attached to the puppet as a means to play the
audio stimuli, and the experimenter who manipulated the puppet
controlled the audio stimuli with a small mp player. Children ﬁrst took
part in a picture-naming task, for which they labeled eight animals, one by
one
later used as
‘mentioned’ animals in the immediately following block of the guessing
game (Guessing-game Phase ). Then the child and the puppet repeated
the procedure with eight more critical
items. Children were randomly
assigned to one of two item lists with diﬀerent presentation orders of the
animal pairs.

(Picture-naming Task ). These

animals were

shown two pictures – the target and a distractor

In the guessing game, children were ﬁrst presented with a box and told
that it contained pictures of many diﬀerent animals. In each trial, the child
was
(e.g. a zebra
[mentioned] versus an okapi [unmentioned]), as shown in Figure . The
pictures were presented in a red frame (left) and a blue frame (right), and
the location of
the mentioned and the unmentioned pictures was
counterbalanced across items. The puppet was allowed to peek inside the
box and to give the child a clue in the form of “It looks like an X” vs. “It
LOOKS like an X . . .”. The experimenter controlled the puppet’s
movements so that there was no other extralinguistic cue (such as the
puppet’s gesture or gaze direction) for the child. Following the puppet’s
utterance, the child was asked to point to the picture of whichever animal
was hidden inside the box. When the child’s point was ambiguous, the
experimenter followed up and asked, “Is it the one in the red box or the
blue box?” until the child provided a clear verbal or non-verbal response.
After the child’s response, the experimenter took a picture card from the
box, showed it to the child, and said, “Oh, it was this one!” This served as
feedback about which animal the puppet-speaker had intended to identify.
All sessions were recorded on a camcorder for later review and coding.
Two coders annotated the children’s responses. All of
the responses
were made either non-verbally or verbally (i.e. choosing the red or the
blue box). When a child changed his or her mind, we always noted that
the one that he or she chose last was the chosen animal. There was no
disagreement between coders on coding decisions.

To equate children’s initial experience with the task, we gave all of them an
identical set of example items. The ﬁrst practice trial used pictures of a horse
and a donkey as choice options, and the children heard an utterance with
noun-focus prosody (“It looks like a horse”). The second practice trial
used pictures of a butterﬂy and a moth, and they heard an utterance with



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

P R A G M A T I C I N F E R E N C E S I N C O N T E X T

Fig. . Examples of two choice options: a mentioned animal (zebra) on the left and the

unmentioned animal (okapi) on the right.

verb-focus prosody (“It LOOKS like a butterﬂy . . .”). Children’s responses
for these practice trials were analyzed separately.

To collect data from twenty-four adult speakers, we conducted the same
experiment as an Internet-based survey through Amazon Mechanical
Turk. We used the web-based platform for the adult data as a means to
collect the data eﬃciently and economically. To ensure that they had
access to audio clips, prior to the experiment, we asked all of
the
participants to play a demo sound clip and to type in a word that they
heard. We presented the task as “a language experiment targeted for
preschoolers”, and we described, with written texts and pictures, how the
guessing game was conducted with children. The participants were
instructed to listen to each sentence only once and to answer two-
alternative forced-choice questions by clicking on a picture of the intended
referent.

As in the live experiment with child participants, all of the adult
participants were exposed to the same two example items (i.e. “It looks
like a HORSE” and “It LOOKS like a butterﬂy . . . ”) and then received
the fourteen critical items in a pseudo-randomized order. They received
feedback after each trial. The adult task was set up so that sound clips
were auto-played at the start of each trial, and participants could replay
the sound as many times as they needed. Only two participants used this
replay function, twice each. They could not proceed to the next trial
without choosing at least one item. As in the child version of the task,
they could change their mind and reselect an animal in each trial. They
could, however, not go back to previous trials once they had proceeded to
the next trial.

We decided a priori to remove datapoints from any participant who
showed no variability in responses (i.e. always choosing a mentioned or an
unmentioned animal). No participants, however, followed that strategy in
the current dataset.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

K U R U M A D A A N D C L A R K

R E S U L T S A N D D I S C U S S I O N
The children’s and adults’ responses are presented in Figure . As shown in
Panels (a) and (c), children and adults provided similar responses to the ﬁrst
two practice trials: in response to the noun-focus contour (i.e. “It looks like a
HORSE”), the animals mentioned were chosen about % of the time. In
response to the verb-focus prosody (i.e. “It LOOKS like a butterﬂy . . .”),
however, they chose the two pictures (i.e. a butterﬂy and a moth) at an
approximately equal
rate. In addition, adults and children diﬀered
signiﬁcantly in how they incorporated the feedback given after these ﬁrst
two trials. As can be seen in Panel (d), adults quickly associated the
prosodic contours with the intended interpretations and proceeded to
provide near-categorical
trials.
Children’s responses, however, remained at chance level for both prosodic
contours. On average, they chose a mentioned animal (a zebra when the
input was It looks like a ZEBRA) % of the time for the noun-focus
prosody and % of the time for the verb-focus prosody.

fourteen critical

responses

the

for

learning an abstract

Do the current results simply reﬂect the fact that adults are better than
form–meaning pairing quickly? The
children at
strongest version of this view would predict that adults should quickly
learn any prosody–meaning mapping. Experimental evidence shows,
however, that adults are NOT willing to learn a new pairing if the relation
between the contours and the meanings are unexpected or unpredictable
compared to what they are familiar with. Heeren, Bibyk, Gunlogson, and
Tanenhaus (), for instance, demonstrated that adult listeners could
not easily learn to remap rising/falling utterance-ﬁnal boundary tones and
assertion vs. question interpretations, even with constant feedback. This
suggests that, while cognitive ﬂexibility and better understanding of the
task probably facilitated the form–meaning mappings in adults, the results
must also reﬂect existing prosodic knowledge.

et al.

The adults’ response patterns were compared with those in a previously
published study that used a very similar set of visual and audio stimuli.
Kurumada
() conducted a laboratory-based eye-tracking
experiment using the current construction “it looks like an X!” and “it
LOOKS like an X . . .” while, unlike the current study, providing no
feedback after each trial. They found that adult participants selected the
mentioned animal on % of critical trials with noun-focus prosody, but
only % of trials with verb-focus prosody. Adult participants in the
current experiment selected the mentioned animal on % of the two
practice trials and on % of the fourteen critical trials with noun-focus
prosody, and on % of the practice trials and % of the critical trials with
verb-focus prosody (Figure ). Taken together, these results support the
clearly
view that

listeners derive

feedback helps

constant

adult



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

P R A G M A T I C I N F E R E N C E S I N C O N T E X T

Fig. . Proportion of the ‘it is an X’ interpretation (choice of a mentioned animal) in the
responses from four-year-olds (top) and adults (bottom). Left-hand panels summarize
responses to the two practice trials, and right-hand panels summarize responses to the
fourteen critical items. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean.

distinguished interpretations based on noun-focus versus verb-focus
intonation contours. Children, however, do not seem to use the feedback
as eﬀectively as adults do.

We conducted a mixed-eﬀects regression analysis with the response data
for critical trials produced by the four-year-olds (Gelman & Hill, ).
The model included the input prosody (i.e. noun-focus vs. verb-focus),
item order, the children’s gender and age in months as ﬁxed eﬀects, and
both children and items as random eﬀects. The main eﬀect of the input
prosody was not signiﬁcant (p > ·), and there were no signiﬁcant eﬀects of
gender or age for the children. The model also suggested that there was no
eﬀect of order for trials. Thus, despite the feedback provided after each
trial, the children did not learn the contour contrast within the task itself.

Next, to take a closer look at individual children, we plotted response
patterns for the fourteen critical items for each child (Figure ). There was
a lot of variability in their responses, and almost all of their responses
deviated from the pattern observed in adults. Some children, such as
E_F, E_G, E_H, and E_J (where E stands for Experiment ),
categorically
or
unmentioned (e.g. okapi), regardless of the prosodic input. Other children
showed less variability, but their responses did not distinguish signiﬁcantly

animal mentioned (e.g.

zebra)

chose

either

the



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

K U R U M A D A A N D C L A R K

Fig. . Proportion of the ‘it is an X’ interpretation (choice of a mentioned animal) in the
responses from the twelve individual children. Error bar represents the standard error of
the mean.

between noun-focus and verb-focus prosody. These results lend support to
earlier observations that four-year-olds are not sensitive to contrastive
prosodic contours in the absence of other contextual information.

The results of Experiment  suggest that adults and four-year-olds diﬀer
in how they integrate feedback and determine the relevant associations
between the prosodic input
(i.e. noun-focus vs. verb-focus) and the
interpretation intended (i.e. [It is an X] vs. [It is not an X]). In the
next experiment, we sought to determine whether the presence of an
alternative expression would facilitate four-year-olds’ identiﬁcation of these
associations. The contrastive inference based on verb-focus prosody
requires reasoning that the verb phrase “it LOOKS like an X” should be
chosen over other expressions, such as “It is an X”, when the target is NOT
an X. Based on earlier ﬁndings (Barner et al., ; Horowitz & Frank,
, ), we expected that explicit mention of an alternative would
help children derive the contrastive inference signaled by the prosody. If
this prediction is supported, we can argue that four-year-olds have the
basic ability to attend to intonational contours and compute the pragmatic
interpretation that is intended by the speaker. Children’s insensitivity to



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

P R A G M A T I C I N F E R E N C E S I N C O N T E X T

intonational meanings, attested in Experiment , can then be attributed to a
still underdeveloped ability to identify linguistic alternatives that could
constrain their interpretation of a particular intonation contour. When the
alternatives are made explicit, children may be able to make use of the
intonation contour to derive a contrastive interpretation when given verb-
focus prosody.

EXPERIMENT 

M E T H O D
Participants
We recruited and tested twenty-four children who were acquiring English as
their ﬁrst language (fourteen girls, ten boys; mean age ;, age range :–;)
at the same nursery school as used in Experiment . They were randomly
assigned to one of two conditions (Forms-only and Combined) described
below. We also collected data from forty adults on-line, using Amazon
Mechanical Turk. Data from three adult participants were excluded based
on the same criterion as in Experiment .

Stimuli
The visual stimuli and experimental settings were identical to those in
Experiment . The audio stimuli were changed as follows:
in the
CONSTRUCTION-ONLY CONDITION, the puppet said “It’s an X” when the
target animal was indeed an X (e.g. “It is a ZEBRA” when the target
picture depicted a zebra), and “It looks like an X,” again, with a focus on
the ﬁnal noun, as a warning, when the picture was not an X (e.g. “It looks
like a ZEBRA” when the target picture depicted an okapi).

In the COMBINED CONDITION, the puppet used “It’s an X” with the
noun-focus prosody (i.e. a nuclear accent on X with a rising boundary
tone), to convey the [It is an X] interpretation, and verb-focus prosody
(e.g. “It LOOKS like an X . . .”) for the [It is not an X] interpretation.
The pattern of clues to meaning by condition is summarized in Table .
We used a between-subjects design, with each child participating in just
one condition.

The Combined condition was designed to determine whether children
could associate verb-focus prosody and the meaning of [but it is not one].
The association should be more accessible to children in the Combined
condition than in Experiment  because the linguistic signals are
distinguished by both prosody and syntactic construction. The statement
type It is an X is unambiguously associated with the intention to assert
that [It is an X]. Casillas and Amaral () showed that four-year-olds
could infer core vs. peripheral category membership of objects based on a



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

K U R U M A D A A N D C L A R K

. The

between-subject manipulation

of
TA B L E
Experiments  and . White cells identify sentence patterns
used for identifying a target as the animal mentioned.
Shaded cells identify sentence patterns used for identifying
the hidden animal as not being the mentioned animal.

contrast in linguistic construction (e.g. “it’s a butterﬂy” vs. “It’s sort of a
butterﬂy”). If the contrast in construction (i.e. “It’s a ZEBRA” vs. “It
looks like a ZEBRA”) is suﬃcient for a contrastive inference, and children
show no awareness with contrastive prosody,
in the
Construction-only and Combined conditions should be identical. In other
words, a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the results of the Construction-only
and the Combined conditions would support the view that the children
can make use of prosodic information on top of syntactic information to
make the relevant pragmatic inferences.

results

the

R E S U L T S A N D D I S C U S S I O N
Figure  provides a summary of children’s responses to the ﬁrst two practice
trials. Across all conditions, children ﬁrst received the input type associated
with the [It is an X] interpretation (i.e. “It’s an X” in both the Form-only
and Combined conditions). They then received the input type associated
with the [It is not an X] interpretation (i.e. “It looks like an X” in the
Construction-Only condition and “It LOOKS like an X . . .” in the
Combined condition).

All responses in the fourteen trials from children and adults are
summarized in Figure . In Experiment  (henceforth, the Prosody-only
condition), children’s responses to verb-focus did not diﬀer from chance.
With the same acoustic input as in Experiment , however, children in the
Combined condition successfully interpreted verb-focus prosody (“It
LOOKS like an X . . .”), treating it as [It is not an X] % of the time.
This strongly suggests that the presence of the syntactic form “It’s an X”



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

P R A G M A T I C I N F E R E N C E S I N C O N T E X T

Fig. . Proportion of the ‘it is an X’ interpretation (choice of a mentioned animal) in the

two practice trials, given ﬁrst, in Experiments  and .

facilitated children’s integration of the feedback that they received during the
ﬁrst two practice trials. In the Construction-only condition, children also
showed sensitivity to the contrast in syntactic form between the two
sentence types. They chose the mentioned animal % of the time when
they heard, “It’s an X”, but only % of the time when they heard, “It
looks like an X”, also with noun-focus prosody. That their response to the
latter was at chance suggests that the structural contrast alone was not
like an X” with the
suﬃcient
interpretation [It is not an X]. Notice, however, that the adults in the
Construction-only condition also chose a mentioned animal about % of
the time when they heard “it looks like an X”. This may reﬂect an overall
bias for the noun-focus prosody to be associated with an [It is an X]
interpretation (Kurumada et al., ; Kurumada, Brown & Tanenhaus,
unpublished observations). Alternatively, this result could arise from the
conﬂicting cues of contrasting predicates (“is” vs. “looks like”), along with
prosodic focus always on “X” (e.g. zebra).

for children to associate “it

looks

to adult-like performance on the fourteen critical

These results suggest that the presence of the alternative expression “It is
an X” facilitated children’s integration of contextual feedback, which led, in
turn,
items in the
Combined condition. The diﬀerence between the Construction-only and
Combined conditions excludes the possibility that children’s improved
performance was simply due to the formal contrast between “It is an X”
and “It looks like an X”. Four-year-olds are able to make the intended
inference from the verb-focus prosody when the input expression is
explicitly contrasted with a semantically stronger alternative expression.

Do such contextually supported inferences have an eﬀect on the long-term
in the

learning of prosodic interpretations? Carey and Bartlett (),



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

K U R U M A D A A N D C L A R K

Fig. . Proportion of the ‘it is an X’ interpretation (choice of a mentioned animal) in
Experiments  and : (a) in children’s responses for target items, (b) in the adult control
study. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean.

domain of word learning, proposed that the process of learning a new word
could be separated into two phases. The ﬁrst phase is FAST-MAPPING, by
which the child associates a newly encountered word with a contextually
constrained word meaning. The second phase is EXTENDED-MAPPING, by
which a newly learned referent–label mapping is maintained over several
successive uses. In this second phase, some meaning for the word is
abstracted from properties of particular referents and becomes stored as
part of a new lexical entry. In prosodic learning as well, children need to
extract properties of prosodic contours that can be generalized across
speakers and contexts.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

P R A G M A T I C I N F E R E N C E S I N C O N T E X T

In Experiment , we conducted a two-day-long study in which we exposed
children to the Combined condition and then to a Prosody-only condition. If
the children have learned the mapping between verb-focus prosody and the
[It is not an X] interpretation, then this should improve their performance in
the Prosody-only condition.

EXPERIMENT 

The goal of Experiment  was to determine whether experience with the
contextual inferences in the Combined condition would lead to a more
adult-like interpretation of the verb-focus prosody in the absence of any
formally contrasting alternative. We conducted a two-day experiment in
which children were ﬁrst
tested on the Combined condition with
contrasting syntax and prosody and then on the Prosody-only condition
(as in Experiment ) with the two sessions run one day apart. We
addressed two questions here:
the contextually supported
interpretation of contrastive intonation contour generalize to a situation
where there is no such support? and (b) If so, does the eﬀect also
generalize to a new speaker?

(a) Does

M E T H O D
Participants
We recruited and tested twenty-four children who were acquiring English as
their ﬁrst language (ten girls, fourteen boys; mean age ; age range ;–
;) at a nursery school in Rochester, New York, and in the Baby Lab at
the University of Rochester.

Stimuli
The animal pictures used in this experiment were identical to those in
Experiments  and . In this experiment, we introduced a male puppet
(Dave) in addition to the female puppet (Sally) from Experiments  and
. A male speaker of American English recorded the stimuli for the Dave
puppet. Mean pitch values and segment durations of Dave’s utterances are
provided in Table  and Figure . We created two between-subject
conditions. In the same-speaker condition, children heard Sally on both
days. In the diﬀerent-speaker condition, children heard Dave in the
Combined condition on Day  and Sally in the Prosody-only condition on
Day  (Table ). The audio stimuli for Sally’s speech were identical to
those in the Prosody-only and Combined conditions from Experiments 
and .

The goal of this experiment was to determine whether the advantage
observed in the Combined condition could be maintained and transferred



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

K U R U M A D A A N D C L A R K

TA B L E . Mean fundamental frequency values and mean word duration in
Dave’s (male puppet) utterances used in the diﬀerent speaker condition in
Experiments 

Mean fundamental frequency (Hz) [standard deviation]

It

looks

like

a

noun

Noun-Focus · [·] · [·]
Verb-Focus

· [·] · [·]
· [·] · [·] · [·] · [·] · [·]

· [·]

Mean word duration (milliseconds) [standard deviation]

It

looks

like

a

noun

Noun-Focus
Verb-Focus

· [·] · [·] · [·]
· [·] · [·] · [·] · [·]

· [·] · [·]
· [·]

Fig. . Mean fundamental frequency (Hz) and mean word duration (in milliseconds) in the

male puppet’s (Dave) utterances.

to the Prosody-only condition, which had yielded a null result in Experiment
. We introduced the diﬀerent-speaker condition in this experiment for two
reasons. First, we wanted to determine whether the contextually supported
prosodic interpretation generalized to a new speaker. Using a speaker of



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

P R A G M A T I C I N F E R E N C E S I N C O N T E X T

TA B L E . Items used in Experiment . White cells identify sentence
patterns used for identifying a target as the animal mentioned. Shaded
cells identify sentence patterns used for identifying the hidden animal
as not being the mentioned animal.

the opposite sex with a diﬀerent voice quality oﬀers one test of this. As can be
seen in Tables  and  and Figures  and , the male and the female speakers’
utterances had diﬀerent prosodic proﬁles, which made it possible for us to
test whether children were simply tracking the mapping between acoustic
patterns of speech and diﬀerent interpretations or whether they were
learning more abstract templates of prosodic contours applicable across
speakers and speech conditions.

intonational

Second, we introduced the condition to tease apart

two possible
mechanisms of
learning. One possibility is that children
simply memorize the observed association between the verb-focus prosody
“It LOOKS like an X” and the feedback [It is not an X] on Day . They
then use it to distinguish the noun-focus and the verb-focus prosody in
the Prosody-only condition on Day . If memorization were used, children
in the same- and the diﬀerent-speaker conditions should behave similarly
on Day . Indeed, the beneﬁt of the Combined condition might be greater
in the same-speaker condition, as the children would hear exactly the same
voice across two days.

Alternatively, we would see a diﬀerent result if children’s learning involves
additional assumptions beyond memorized mappings between prosodic
contours and their interpretations. If children are learning the mapping of



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

K U R U M A D A A N D C L A R K

sensitivity to referential precedents

which linguistic expression the speaker could use to convey a particular
meaning, interacting with the same speaker over two days might, in fact,
cause confusion. Children might ﬁnd it odd for the speaker to use “It’s an
X” to convey the [It is an X] interpretation on Day  and then switch to
“It looks like an X” to express the same interpretation on Day . Previous
studies of children’s
show that
preschoolers expect a speaker to adhere to referential pacts. They are
surprised when a given speaker switches referential expressions without
any clear contextual
they accepted a new
expression for a previously mentioned object when a novel speaker
produced it
(Graham, Sedivy & Khu, ; Matthews, Lieven &
Tomasello, ). This led us to predict that, if children learn to process
intonational meanings through reasoning along the lines of “What would
the speaker say if she meant X?”, those in the diﬀerent-speaker condition
should perform better on Day . The encounter with a new speaker
justiﬁes the introduction of a new expression, “It
looks like an X”
(noun-focus prosody), for the interpretation that was previously expressed
by “It’s an X.”

justiﬁcation. Nevertheless,

We altered the order of the items from Day  to Day . In addition,
the input prosody was ﬂipped for two-thirds of the items to exclude the
possibility that children could simply answer questions by memorizing the
target animals from Day .

The task
The task was identical to those in Experiments  and .

R E S U L T S A N D D I S C U S S I O N
The children’s responses in the example trials were similar to what we
observed in Experiment . Only responses from the fourteen critical trials
were included in the following analysis. Children in both conditions reliably
distinguished the two prosodic contours on Day , and thus replicated the
results of the Combined condition in Experiment  (see Figure ). This
replication highlights the robustness of the eﬀect of the Combined condition
because Experiment  was conducted in a diﬀerent geographical location
(Experiment : Stanford, California; Experiment : Rochester, New York)
and included a new speaker as well as the original speaker.

On Day , in the Prosody-only condition, children diﬀered in their
performance, depending on whether they heard the same speaker as on
Day  or a diﬀerent speaker from that of Day  (see Figure ). With the
same speaker (right-hand-side of Panel a, Figure ), children’s responses
for both the noun-focus and verb-focus versions were equally biased
toward the “It is not an X” interpretation. With a diﬀerent speaker



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

P R A G M A T I C I N F E R E N C E S I N C O N T E X T

Fig. . Proportion of the ‘it is an X’ interpretation (choice of a mentioned animal) in

Experiment . Error bars represent the standard error of the mean.

(right-hand-side of Panel b, Figure ), however, children successfully
assigned diﬀerent responses to the noun-focus and verb-focus versions.
This diﬀerence, though, was a little smaller than the diﬀerence the same
children assigned on Day  (compare the left- and right-hand-sides of
Panel b, Figure ).

We constructed a mixed model to ﬁt the data collected on Day . The ﬁrst
model included the prosodic input (i.e. noun-focus vs. verb-focus), the
condition (e.g. same- or diﬀerent-speaker), item order, children’s gender
and age as ﬁxed eﬀects, and children and items as random eﬀects. Item
order, gender, and age were dropped in subsequent models due to lack of
signiﬁcance in model comparisons. The ﬁnal model revealed signiﬁcant
eﬀects of prosodic input (β = ·, p < ·), condition (β = ·, p < ·), and
a marginal interaction between them (β = ·, p < ·). The interaction
term suggests that children derived diﬀerent interpretations, depending on
the two kinds of the prosodic input, and did so more in the diﬀerent
speaker condition. Children in the same-speaker condition, in contrast,
were likely to interpret both types of input, “It looks like an X” and “It
LOOKS like an X”, as [It is an X].

Thus, in the diﬀerent-speaker condition, prior exposure to the Combined
condition supported a successful distinction between the two prosodic
contours in the Prosody-only condition. The size of the distinction, however,
varied across individuals. Figure  provides a summary of the responses from
each child in Experiment . Four of the twelve children (E_A, B, C, D)



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

K U R U M A D A A N D C L A R K

Fig. . Proportion of the ‘it is an X’ interpretation (choice of a mentioned animal) in the
responses from the twelve individual children in the diﬀerent-speaker condition. Error bars
represent the standard error of the mean.

two of

the four

(E_B and E_C)

judgment patterns on Day .
showed categorical or near-categorical
Interestingly,
showed signiﬁcant
improvement from Day  to Day  in their interpretation of verb-focus
prosody. Responses from four children (E_E, F, G, H) showed the expected
numerical trend but contained much more variability. Responses from the
remainder of the children (E_I, J, K, L) were biased toward the [It is not an
X] interpretation, just as were those in the same-speaker condition. In short,
there appear to be signiﬁcant individual diﬀerences in how exposure on Day 
was generalized to Day . Further, some children showed similar response
patterns to those we found in the same-speaker condition.

G E N E R A L D I S C U S S I O N
Studies of children’s acquisition of intonational meanings have long posed a
puzzle in that preschoolers appear unable to interpret contrastive prosody
despite their general sensitivity to prosodic features of speech. We
hypothesized that young children’s diﬃculty may stem in part from their
weaker expectations about possible alternative expressions with which to
contrast whatever the speaker has explicitly mentioned. We examined
like an X
four-year-olds’
intonation contours: one with canonical
produced with two diﬀerent
accent placement that indicated the speaker’s intention to provide a hint
(e.g. “It looks like a ZEBRA” [and I think it is one]; noun-focus prosody)

the construction It

interpretations of

looks



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

P R A G M A T I C I N F E R E N C E S I N C O N T E X T

and the other with a contrastive pitch accent on the verb that provides a
warning (e.g. “It LOOKS like a zebra . . .” [but it isn’t one]; verb-focus
prosody). Our main objective was to determine whether the presence of a
semantically strong alternative, namely “It is an X”, would facilitate
contrastive inferences.

The three experiments reported here yielded support for the facilitative
role of contextual alternatives. In the absence of “It’s an X” (Experiment ),
four-year-olds’ performance in the current
task replicated previous
ﬁndings in that they appeared insensitive to contrast-marking intonation
contour. Despite their receiving feedback in each trial, some children
consistently chose either the mentioned or the unmentioned animals,
regardless of the prosodic input. Others gave more variable responses, but
none consistently showed the adult-like responses of associating “It looks
like an X” with [It’s an X”] and “It LOOKS like an X” with [It is not an X].
In Experiment , we demonstrated that four-year-olds could successfully
associate verb-focus contour with the [It is not an X] interpretation when it
contrasted with the same speaker’s use of the form “It is an X” (that is, in the
Combined condition). In the Construction-only condition, the children
responded diﬀerentially to the forms of “It’s an X” and “It looks like an
X” (where the latter also had noun-focus prosody), but the diﬀerence was
smaller than in the Combined condition. The diﬀerence between these two
conditions suggests that
the noun-focus and
verb-focus prosody diﬀerently. Taken together, the results support our
proposal that children are able to derive contrastive inferences based on
verb-focus prosody when the speaker’s intended contrast is made explicit
with alternative expressions.

they do,

in fact,

treat

These results provide insight into how young children may discover
intonational meanings in the input. As is seen in word-learning (e.g. Carey
& Bartlett, ; Clark, ; Markman & Wachtel, ),
scalar
implicature (Barner et al., ; Stiller et al., ), and contrasting
adjectives (Horowitz & Frank, , ), children appear to be able to
leverage their knowledge about an unfamiliar intonation contour with
contextually provided contrast. That
intonational
contours conditionally, depending on alternative expressions used by the
same speaker to convey interpretations warranted by the context. Such
contextual bootstrapping may allow young learners to associate a particular
intonation contour and a contextually supported interpretation. Further,
the results from the diﬀerent-speaker condition support the idea that the
contextually facilitated intonation interpretations can be retained and
generalized across speakers, leading to LEARNING of intonational meanings.
It is also important to note that a presence of an alternative expression may
have contributed to better comprehension of alternative intonational
meanings by aiding memory for intonational contours. In the Combined

they interpret

is,



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

K U R U M A D A A N D C L A R K

condition, verb-focus prosody (“It LOOKS like an X . . .”) diﬀered from its
contextual alternative (“It’s an X”) in two ways: syntactic structure and
prosodic contour. This may have made it easier for children to notice that
the speaker was, in fact, using two distinct linguistic structures, helping
them to integrate the feedback from the experimenter and to better
remember the mapping between the structures and the meanings that they
conveyed. In the Prosody-only condition (i.e. “It looks like an X” vs. “It
LOOKS like an X . . .”) and the Construction-only condition (i.e. “It is an
X” vs. “It looks like an X”), in contrast, the contrasts in the linguistic
information that the children heard were more subtle, possibly making it
more diﬃcult for them to remember how the two linguistic forms mapped
onto the speaker’s intentions.

We cannot, however, straightforwardly attribute the results of Experiment
 to improvements in memory alone. In the same-speaker condition,
memorized representations of the verb-focus prosody “It LOOKS like an
X” could have helped children better distinguish it from noun-focus
prosody. Instead, what we found was a strong tendency in children in this
condition to generalize the knowledge along the dimension of
the
construction. Their responses were strongly biased toward [It is not an X]
regardless of the prosodic input. As seen in Figure , there were a few
children in the diﬀerent-speaker condition who showed the
same
preference. In both cases, this was likely due to perseveration on the
construction–interpretation mapping heard on Day . There, the structural
like an X) distinguished the two
contrast
interpretations. If they carried this assumption over from Day , they
should interpret both noun-focus and verb-focus prosody on Day  as [It
is not an X] because they both have the construction It looks like an X.

(It’s an X vs. It

looks

The diﬀerent degree of perseveration between the two conditions, we
believe, supports the idea that children’s intonational interpretations occur
as part of a more general pragmatic inferential process similar to their
referential comprehension. They construct a speaker-speciﬁc expectation –
a pact – as to how a particular interpretation has been encoded (Graham
et al., ; Matthews et al., ). They then use any formal (lexical,
prosodic, and syntactic) deviation from an expected expression as a signal
of diﬀerences in interpretations. In this process, they appear to rely more
on lexically or structurally encoded contrast than on intonational contrast,
presumably because structural contrasts are registered categorically, and
hence more reliably mapped onto distinct interpretations, compared to
highly variable prosodic information. In the diﬀerent-speaker condition,
most of the children seemed to successfully block generalization of the
pact with the previous speaker, picking up on the diﬀerences between the
noun-focus and the verb-focus prosody produced by the new speaker as
meaningful contrasts.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

P R A G M A T I C I N F E R E N C E S I N C O N T E X T

Our results thus highlight the importance of assessing children’s prosodic
interpretations within discourse, in which they can make use of all available
alternative form–meaning mappings produced in the same context. Previous
studies have examined how children interpret ‘intonational’ minimal pairs
(such as (a) and (b)) to determine whether they could derive diﬀerent
meanings. Such an approach, however, tends to overlook other types of
alternative expressions that could help bootstrap children’s understanding
of a target utterance. The current results suggest that both children and
adults constantly rely on contextual alternatives and feedback to ﬁne-tune
their expectations about the semantic, syntactic, and prosodic devices that
the speaker uses to express a particular meaning. In turn, those contextual
inferences, over time, guide their learning of intonational meanings.

children’s

interpretation of

We leave for future studies the question of whether exposure to the
Combined condition could facilitate
a
construction other than it LOOKS like an X. For this, one could
substitute a diﬀerent verb (e.g. “it SOUNDS like a ﬁre engine . . .”) or use
unrelated sentences produced with the same intonation contour (e.g. “It’s
a very nice GARDEN . . .” as in Cruttenden (), or “She HAD a bell
. . . [but she no longer has one]” as in Dennison () and Dennison and
Schafer
research should consider whether
form-based inferences also facilitate comprehension of a wider range of
prosodic
accented vs. unaccented referential
expressions to signal given vs. new discourse status; see Arnold, ).
Such integrative approaches will advance our understanding of the process
of prosodic development in relation to children’s lexical, syntactic, and
pragmatic abilities.

representations

(e.g.

()).

Indeed,

future

R E F E R E N C E S

Aguert, M., Laval, V., Le Bigot, L. & Bernicot, J. (). Understanding expressive speech
acts: the role of prosody and situational context in French-speaking - to -year-olds.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research , –.

Armstrong, M. E. (). Child comprehension of intonationally-encoded disbelief. In
W. Orman & M. J. Valleau (eds), Proceedings of the th Annual Boston University
Conference on Language Development, –. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.

Arnold, J. (). THE BACON not the bacon: how children and adults understand accented

and unaccented noun phrases. Cognition , –.

Barner, D., Brooks, N. & Bale, A. (). Accessing the unsaid: the role of scalar alternatives

in children’s pragmatic inference. Cognition , –.

Beckman, M. E. & Ayers, G. E. (). Guidelines for ToBI labelling, version .. Manuscript
and accompanying speech materials, Ohio State University. Online: <http://www.ling.
ohio-state.edu/research/phonetics/E_ToBI/>.

Beckman, M. E., Hirschberg, J. & Shattuck-Hufnagel, S. (). The original ToBI system
and the evolution of the ToBI framework. In S.-A. Jun (ed.), Prosodic typology: the
phonology of intonation and phrasing, –. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Büring, D. & Gutiérrez-Bravo, R. (). Focus-related constituent order variation without
the NSR: a prosody-based crosslinguistic analysis. In J. McCloskey (ed.), SASC :



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

K U R U M A D A A N D C L A R K

Syntax and Semantics at Santa Cruz (pp. –). Santa Cruz, CA: Linguistics Research
Center, University of California, Santa Cruz.

Capelli, C. A., Nakagawa, N. & Madden, C. M. (). How children understand sarcasm:

the role of context and intonation. Child Development , –.

Carey, S. (). The child as word learner. In M. Halle, J. Bresnan & G. A. Miller (eds),

Linguistic theory and psychological reality, –. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Carey, S. & Bartlett, E. (). Acquiring a single new word. Papers and Reports on Child

Language Development , –.

Casillas, M. & Amaral, P. (). Learning cues to category membership: patterns in
children’s acquisition of hedges. In C. Cathcart, I.-H. Chen, G. Finley, S. Kang, C.
S. Sandy & E. Stickles (Eds.), Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society th
Annual Meeting (), –. Available from Linguistic Society of America, eLanguage
platform.
<http://journals.linguisticsociety.org/proceedings/index.php/BLS/
article/view/>.

Online:

Chierchia, G., Crain, S., Guasti, M. T., Gualmini, A. & Meroni, L. (). The acquisition
of disjunction: evidence for a grammatical view of scalar implicatures. In A. H.-J. Do,
L. Dominguez. & A. Johansen (eds), Proceedings of the th Annual Boston University
Conference on Language Development, –. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.

Clark, E. V. (). On the pragmatics of contrast. Journal of Child Language , –.
Clark, E. V. & Wong, A. (). Pragmatic directions about language use: words and word

meanings. Language in Society , –.

Cruttenden, A. (). Intonation comprehension in ten-year-olds. Journal of Child Language

Cutler, A. & Swinney, D. A. (). Prosody and the development of comprehension. Journal

, –.

of Child Language , –.

Dennison, H. Y. (). Processing implied meaning through contrastive prosody. Unpublished

PhD dissertation, Department of Linguistics, University of Hawaii, Manoa.

Dennison, H. Y. & Schafer, A. J. (). Online construction of implicature through
contrastive prosody. Proceedings of Speech Prosody . Online: <http://speech
prosody.illinois.edu/papers/.pdf>.

Fernald, A. (). Four-month-old infants prefer to listen to motherese. Infant Behavior and

Development , –.

Gelman, A. & Hill, J. (). Data analysis using regression and multilevel/hierarchical models.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Goodman, J. C., McDonough, L. & Brown, N. B. (). The role of semantic context and

memory in the acquisition of novel nouns. Child Development , –.

Graham, S. A., Sedivy, J. & Khu, M. (). That’s not what you said earlier: preschoolers

expect partners to be referentially consistent. Journal of Child Language , –.

Grassmann, S. & Tomasello, M. (). Two-year-olds use primary sentence accent to learn

new words. Journal of Child Language , –.

Grassmann, S. & Tomasello, M. (). Prosodic stress on a word directs -month-olds’

attention to a contextually new referent. Journal of Pragmatics , –.

Grice, P. (). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. Morgan (eds), Syntax and semantics,

vol., –. New York: Academic Press.

Hansen, M. B. & Markman, E. M. (). Appearance questions can be misleading:
a discourse-based account of the appearance–reality problem. Cognitive Psychology ,
–.

Heeren, W. F., Bibyk, S. A., Gunlogson, C. & Tanenhaus, M. K. (). Asking or telling:
real-time processing of prosodically distinguished questions and statements. Language and
Speech (), –.

Hornby, P. A. & Hass, W. A. (). Use of contrastive stress by preschool children. Journal

of Speech and Hearing Research (), –.

Horowitz, A. & Frank, M. C. (). Learning from speaker word choice by assuming
adjectives are informative. In N. Miyake, D. Peebles & R. P. Cooper (eds), Proceedings of



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

P R A G M A T I C I N F E R E N C E S I N C O N T E X T

the th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, –. Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.

Horowitz, A. & Frank, M. C. (). Preschoolers infer contrast from adjectives if they can
access lexical alternatives. In P. Bello, M. Guarini, M. McShane & B. Scassellati (eds),
Proceedings of the th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, –.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.

Horst, J. S. & Samuelson, L. (). Fast mapping but poor retention in -month-old

infants. Infancy , –.

Ito, K. (). Children’s pragmatic use of prosodic prominence. In D. Matthews (ed.),
Pragmatic development in ﬁrst language acquisition, –. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Ito, K., Bibyk, S. A., Wagner, L. & Speer, S. R. (). Interpretation of contrastive pitch
accent in six- to eleven-year-old English-speaking children (and adults). Journal of Child
Language , –.

Ito, K., Jincho, N., Minai, U., Yamane, N. & Mazuka, R. (). Intonation facilitates
contrast resolution: evidence from Japanese adults and -year-olds. Journal of Memory
and Language , –.

Jun, S.-A. (). Prosodic typology: the phonology of intonation and phrasing. Oxford: Oxford

University Press.

Jun, S.-A. () Prosodic typology II: the phonology of intonation and phrasing. Oxford:

Oxford University Press.

Kurumada, C., Brown, M., Bibyk, S., Pontillo, D. & Tanenhaus, M. K. (). Is it or isn’t
it: listeners make rapid use of prosody to infer speaker meanings. Cognition , –.
Kurumada, C., Brown, M. & Tanenhaus, M. K. (). Pragmatic interpretation of
contrastive prosody: it looks like speech adaptation. In N. Miyake, D. Peebles & R.
P. Cooper (eds), Proceedings of the th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, –. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.

Ladd, D. R. (). Intonational phonology, nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Markman, E. M. & Wachtel, G. F. (). Children’s use of mutual exclusivity to constrain

the meanings of words. Cognitive Psychology , –.

Matthews, D., Lieven, E. & Tomasello, M. (). What’s in a manner of speaking?
Children’s sensitivity to partner-speciﬁc referential precedents. Developmental Psychology
, –.

Mervis, C. B. & Bertrand, J. (). Acquisition of the novel name/nameless category (NC)

principle. Child Development , –.

Morgan, J. & Demuth, K. (). Signal to syntax: bootstrapping from speech to grammar in

early acquisition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Morton, J. B. & Trehub, S. E. (). Children’s understanding of emotion in speech. Child

Musolino, J. (). On the semantics of the subset principle. Language Learning and

Development , –.

Development , –.

Linguistics , –.

Musolino, J. & Lidz, J. (). Why children aren’t universally successful with quantiﬁcation.

Noveck, I. (). When children are more logical than adults. Cognition , –.
Papafragou, A. (). From scalar semantics to implicature: children’s interpretation of

aspectuals. Journal of Child Language , –.

Papafragou, A. & Musolino, J. (). Scalar implicatures: experiments at the semantics–

pragmatics interface. Cognition,  –.

Papafragou, A. & Tantalou, N. (). Children’s computation of implicatures. Language

Acquisition , –.

Pierrehumbert, J. & Hirschberg, J. (). The meaning of intonational contours in the
interpretation of discourse. In P. R. Cohen, J. Morgan & M. E. Pollack (eds), Intentions
in communication, –. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Quam, C. & Swingley, D. (). Development in children’s interpretation of pitch cues to

emotions. Child Development , –.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246

K U R U M A D A A N D C L A R K

Sakkalou, E. & Gattis, M. L. (). Infants infer intentions from prosody. Cognitive

Development , –.

Sekerina, I. A. & Trueswell, J. C. (). Interactive processing of contrastive expressions by

Russian children. First Language , –.

Silverman, K., Beckman, M., Pitrelli, J., Ostendorf, M., Wightman, C., Price, P.,
Pierrehumbert, J., and Hirschberg, J. (). TOBI: a Standard for labeling English
prosody. Proceedings of the  International Conference on Spoken Language Processing,
Vol. , –. Banﬀ, Canada.

Snedeker, J. & Trueswell, J. C. (). The developing constraints on parsing decisions: the
role of lexical-biases and referential scenes in child and adult sentence processing. Cognitive
Psychology , –.

Solan, L. (). Contrastive stress and children’s interpretation of pronouns. Journal of

Speech and Hearing Research , –.

Speer, S. R. & Ito, K. (). Prosody in ﬁrst language acquisition: acquiring intonation as a
tool to organize information in conversation. Language and Linguistics Compass , –.
Stiller, A., Goodman, N. D. & Frank, M. C. (). Ad-hoc implicature in preschool

children. Language, Learning, and Development , –.

Thorson, J. C. & Morgan, J. L. (). Acoustic correlates of information structure in child
and adult speech. In E. Grillo & K. Jepson (eds), Proceedings of the th Annual Boston
University Conference on Language Development, –. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.

Vallduví, E. (). The informational component. New York: Garland Press.
Van Der Meulen, S., Janssen, P. & Den Os, E. (). Prosodic abilities in children with

speciﬁc language impairment. Journal of Communication Disorders (), –.

Wells, B., Peppe, S. & Goulandris, N. (). Intonation development from ﬁve to thirteen.

Journal of Child Language , –.

Wieman, L. A. (). Stress patterns of early child language. Journal of Child Language ,

–.

Wilkinson, K. M. & Mazzitelli, K. (). The eﬀect of ‘missing’ information on children’s

retention of fast-mapped labels. Journal of Child Language , –.

Winner, E. & Leekam, S. (). Distinguishing irony from deception: understanding the
speaker’s second-order intention. British Journal of Developmental Psychology (), –.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:30, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000246


