Resolving linguistic ambiguities can reveal tendencies in the use of provided in-
formation, or biases toward one of the possible interpretations, that can be easily
overlooked otherwise. In this paper we use temporarily ambiguous sentences to
examine whether gender markings may function as cues moderating the assign-
ment of thematic roles in complex relative clause constructions. The processing
of sentence (1) may appear as difﬁcult as that of sentence (2), as they both contain
object-extracted relative clauses (ORC). Sentences (3) and (4) contain subject-
extracted relative clauses (SRC), and therefore (3) may seem equally difﬁcult to
comprehend as (4).

(1) The beautician, whom both designers recognized, is experienced.
(2) The artist, whom both designers recognized, is experienced.
(3) The beautician, who recognized both designers, is experienced.
(4) The artist, who recognized both designers, is experienced.
However, there is evidence that certain features shared by nouns or noun phrases
(e.g., animacy) facilitate the assignment of speciﬁc thematic roles, such as when
agent roles are assigned more easily to animate and patient roles to inanimate
nouns (e.g., Bornkessel-Schlesewsky & Schlesewsky, 2009; MacDonald, 1994;
Trueswell, Tanenhaus, & Kello, 1993). While claims about animate nouns as bet-
ter agents (Gennari & MacDonald, 2008) and inanimate nouns as poorer agents
(Clifton et al., 2003; Just & Carpenter, 1992) have already been supported by em-
pirical evidence, the claim about gender cues as predictors of good or poor agents
has not yet been demonstrated experimentally. At the same time, similarly to ani-
macy when described as a “supralinguistic” concept (Yamamoto, 1991) affecting
linguistic phenomena (e.g., word order), gender can be regarded as a fundamental
semantic dimension expressed on biological and social levels (Ridgeway, 2001)
with various linguistic representations (e.g., grammatical1 [der Musiker/die Musik-
erin “the musicianmasculine/feminine” in German], natural [woman/man], deﬁnitional
[mother/father], and stereotypical [nurse/surgeon] gender). Based on psycholin-
guistic and sociocognitive research on gender that will be discussed in more detail
below, this study attempts to clarify whether gender, along with animacy, may affect
the identiﬁcation of thematic roles. Previous research has reported gender-related
observations, such as case syncretism of feminines in German (Krifka, 2009) and
the strong link between agency and masculinity (Koenig, Mitchell, Eagly, & Ris-
tikari, 2011), suggesting that entities possessing female characteristics may be less
agentive and therefore more likely to serve as thematic patients. If this is the case,
then stereotypically female beautician may be perceived as a better patient com-
pared to neutral artist (i.e., receiving an action) in the ORC sentences, making the
comprehension of (1) easier than (2). Similarly, neutral artist may be perceived as
a better agent compared to stereotypically female beautician (i.e., producing an
action) in the SRC sentences, making (4) easier than (3). The experiments reported
in the present paper use relative clause structures in German as a tool to address
this issue.

THEMATIC STRUCTURE AND PROMINENCE HIERARCHIES.
A number of studies invoked thematic structure to explain biases that inﬂuence the
interpretation of complex linguistic constructions, such as relative clauses (e.g.,
Boland, Tanenhaus, Garnsey, & Carlson, 1995; Pickering & Traxler, 1998; Pick-
ering, Traxler, & Crocker, 2000; Traxler, Morris, & Seely, 2002). Evaluating the
role of various factors in the comprehension of relative clauses, previous research
has repeatedly shown that ORCs are more difﬁcult to process than SRCs (Gordon,
Hendrick, & Johnson, 2001; Staub, 2010; Traxler, Williams, Blozis, & Morris,
2005). However, Mak, Vonk, and Schriefers (2002, 2006) and Traxler et al. (2002)
demonstrated that ORCs with inanimate heads, such as The movie that the director
watched received the prize, were almost as easy to comprehend as SRCs of the
type The director that watched the movie received a prize. Thus, the feature of
animacy has been shown to modulate the difﬁculty in the interpretation of relative
clauses, showing that linguistic characteristics are a signiﬁcant factor modulating
the likelihood of the assignment of an agent role to one of the two nouns in a
sentence.
The expectations readers have about entities possessing certain characteristics
to occupy syntactically prominent positions in a sentence can be seen within the
framework of the thematic hierarchy hypothesis (e.g., Grimshaw, 1990; Jackend-
off, 1987). This hypothesis lists the ordering of thematic roles by prominence, with
the agent role ranking the highest on the hierarchy of semantic features. At the same
time, prominence can be assessed along several dimensions other than thematic
agency, such as animacy, deﬁniteness, or person, with animate entities ranking over
inanimate, deﬁnite over indeﬁnite, and ﬁrst and second person over third (Lamers
& de Swart, 2012). The tripartite animacy hierarchy proposed by Croft (1990) of-
fers a similar ordering by person (ﬁrst and second over third), NP-type (pronouns
over common nouns), and animacy itself (human over nonhuman, animate over
inanimate). The deﬁnition of the agentive case, given by Fillmore as “the typically
animate perceived instigator of the action identiﬁed by the verb” (1968, p. 24),
indicates the relatedness of the two concepts: agency and animacy. In line with
this deﬁnition, Yamamoto (1991) suggests that agency presupposes animacy, con-
sidering that previous research had named such conceptual properties of agency as
intentionality (Davidson, 1971), dynamicity, and control (Dik, 1989). These prop-
erties are not purely linguistic, which contributes to Yamamoto’s understanding
of animacy as an “extra-” or “supralinguistic” concept, which nevertheless relates
to such linguistic phenomena as case marking, word order, subject selection, and
gender.

Even though the interaction of different prominence dimensions remains a sub-
ject of debate (e.g., Klein, Guntsetseg, & von Heusinger, 2012; Primus, 2012),
the principle of harmonic alignment suggests that hierarchies within separate
dimensions map onto one another, so that the hierarchy within the dimension
of animacy, for instance, correlates with that of thematic roles (Lamers, 2012).
The processing is facilitated when rankings on different hierarchies point to the
same argument in a sentence as being more prominent (Bornkessel-Schlesewsky
& Schlesewsky, 2008). As a result of such alignment, animacy information
can be used in the assignment of thematic roles during language comprehen-
sion. Thus, readers seem to have expectations about high-ranked animate en-
tities to produce actions represented by the verb (i.e., serve as agents that are
high ranked on a thematic role hierarchy), while low-ranked inanimate enti-
ties are expected to rather receive those actions (i.e., serve as patients that
are low ranked on a thematic role hierarchy). This tendency can be regarded
as a bias moderating difﬁculties in the interpretation of syntactically complex
sentences.

GENDER PROCESSING AND AGENCY.
The present investigation extends the current knowledge about biases in linguistic
structures by examining the role of grammatical and stereotypical gender in the
resolution of relative clauses. In the literature on reference resolution, the integra-
tion of grammatical and stereotypical gender cues is widely discussed in terms
of mismatch effects that are reﬂected in longer processing times when stereotyp-
ically male (e.g., electrician) or female (e.g., beautician) role nouns corefer with
mismatching information, such as gender sufﬁxes, gender-speciﬁc pronouns, or
noun phrases (e.g., Cacciari, Corradini, Padovani, & Carreiras, 2011; Esaulova,
Reali, & von Stockhausen, 2014; Irmen, 2007; Kreiner, Sturt, & Garrod, 2008;
Reali, Esaulova, & von Stockhausen, in press). Grammatical and stereotypical
gender cues have been shown to affect readers’ interpretation of role nouns in
highly automatized ways and to strongly inﬂuence the comprehension of sen-
tences (e.g., Banaji & Hardin, 1996; Cacciari & Padovani, 2007; Carreiras, Garn-
ham, Oakhill, & Cain, 1996; Esaulova et al., 2014; Irmen, Holt, & Weisbrod,
2010).

In the literature mentioned above, the effects of both grammatical features and
stereotype-based connotations of roles and contexts are analyzed. On the one hand,
this research clearly points at the fact that both gender representations affect ref-
erence resolution, and on the other hand, it relates the linguistic and the social
psychological understanding of the term gender on a conceptual level. This is
in line with social cognition research (e.g., Stahlberg, Braun, Irmen, & Sczesny,
2007), which indicates the association between conceptual and formal gender rep-
resentations, where the former are expressed through gender stereotypes and the
latter through grammatical features, such as gender sufﬁxes. However, neither
research on thematic structures (e.g., Clifton et al., 2003; Trueswell & Tanen-
haus, 1994) nor research on gender processing (e.g., Cacciari & Padovani, 2007;
Carreiras et al., 1996; Esaulova et al., 2014; Irmen, 2007) and social cognition
(Stahlberg et al., 2007) have ever supposed the link between gender and agency or
considered gender a relevant factor in the assignment of thematic roles. At the same
time, some approaches in historical linguistics indicate such a link arguing that
an initial two-way distinction in gender in Germanic languages may have been
based on animacy, agentivity, or the capability of subject marking (Kürschner
& Nübling, 2011; Meier-Brügger, 2002). Bringing the research from these dif-
ferent areas together, we supposed that gender characteristics of nouns should
be examined as constituting another dimension along which the prominence of
thematic role nouns can be assessed. This perspective draws largely on McRae,
Hare, Elman, and Ferretti’s (2005) account of thematic roles, which views them
as concepts formed through everyday experience rather than simply lexical infor-
mation. This account, in turn, is based on the situation model theories (Sanford
& Garrod, 1981), which emphasize the role of long-term memory in the repre-
sentation of a linguistically described event. Following Yamamoto, we suggest
that, similar to agency, gender presupposes animacy, most certainly in those cases
when it points at the sex of the referent. The evidence of animacy-based role
assignments (Wang, Schlesewsky, Philipp, & Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, 2012) en-
courages the assumption that gender cues may inﬂuence readers’ implicit beliefs
about good or poor agents in a similar way. This should be reﬂected through
readers’ expectations about nouns of certain gender to produce or receive actions
represented by the verb in a sentence. In social psychology, male roles are as-
sociated with higher status and power and are described as more agentive and
less communal than female ones (e.g., Koenig et al., 2011). Agency and com-
munion are fundamental dimensions of social categorization (e.g., Fiske, Cuddy,
& Glick, 2007), in which the former comprises such characteristics as assertion,
competence, and independence, while the latter is associated with cooperation,
warmth, and empathy. An extensive body of research in this ﬁeld indicates a
possible association between agency and gender representations.
<Middle>
HYPOTHESES.
In this study we examine gender represented through grammatical and conceptual
characteristics, since research on language-based representation of women and
men points at the commonalities in their processing. If gender constitutes an im-
portant factor in the assessment of agency, as we would like to argue, we should
be able to observe its inﬂuences on agency when it is expressed through both
gender-marking sufﬁxes and through gender stereotypes, such as in typically male
(/neutral)/female occupational role nouns. The hypotheses below specify this gen-
eral proposition by making speciﬁc predictions about each of these two types of
gender representations. These predictions are tested in experimental designs that
manipulate the morphological marking of gender in role nouns and the stereotyp-
ical gender of role nouns independently in order to provide converging evidence
about the relationship between gender processing and the identiﬁcation of thematic
roles.

The phenomenon of differential object marking described in functional/typo-
logical literature (e.g., Aissen, 2003; Stiebels, 2000) offers a theoretical frame for
considering grammatical gender in relation to agency. Differential object mark-
ing deﬁnes the likelihood of an object to be overtly case-marked as a function of
prominence ranking. Thus, Aissen (2003) describes preferred case marking pat-
terns relating them to prominence hierarchies and shows that aligned AGENT >
PATIENT and ANIMATE > INANIMATE hierarchies lead to unmarked animate agents and
inanimate patients, whereas the violation of this alignment leads to the overt case
marking of entities. Krifka (2009) further considers the phenomenon of differential
object marking in relation to the gender and case system in Germanic languages
in order to explain syncretism of nominatives and accusatives observed for fem-
inines in German. In German, the case marking of singular masculine determin-
ers is expressed overtly for nominative and accusative (derNominative; denAccusative),
while feminine determiners lack any morphological distinction in these cases
(dieNominative/Accusative). Similar syncretism for the neuter has been explained by
the fact that the distinction between nominative and accusative is functionally im-
portant for animates, as neuter is, originally, a class of inanimates. Since there
is no reason why the masculine and the feminine should be unequal in terms
of animacy, Krifka (2009) evaluates alternative explanations (e.g., Becker, 1994;
Bittner, 2003) suggesting that this asymmetry may result from the evolution of
language within the speech community where feminine NPs occur less frequently
in the agent role than masculine ones. According to the concept of harmonic align-
ment, the hierarchy of thematic roles corresponds to the underlying mapping of
prominence hierarchies, which would indicate that masculine entities should be
more prominent, since they are more likely to align with agent roles than feminine
entities. This prediction is expressed in Hypothesis 1, which concerns grammatical
gender: if grammatical gender constitutes a prominence dimension and feminine
is ranked lower on the hierarchy than masculine, then readers should have ex-
pectations about grammatically feminine role nouns to rather function as patients
than agents (to receive rather than produce actions) compared to masculine role
nouns, which would be reﬂected in longer processing times for feminine agents
than masculine ones.

Social cognition research indicates theoretical grounds to relate agency and
stereotypical gender. If the association between agency and masculinity (e.g.,
Koenig et al., 2011) described above can be carried over to linguistic terms, then
stereotypically male (/neutral) nouns should be good agents and poor patients
compared to stereotypically female nouns. Hypothesis 2 is based on these con-
siderations and regards stereotypical gender: if stereotypical gender constitutes a
prominence dimension and female entities are ranked lower on the hierarchy than
neutral, then readers should have expectations about stereotypically female role
nouns to function as patients rather than agents compared to neutral role nouns,
which would become evident through longer processing times for female agents
than neutral ones.

In terms of eye-tracking measures, both hypotheses translate into the prediction
that longer ﬁxation times and more regressions should occur in sentences where
feminine or female role nouns are agents and shorter ﬁxations and fewer regressions
in sentences where masculine or neutral role nouns are agents.

OVERVIEW OF THE PRESENT RESEARCH.
The inﬂuence of thematic role characteristics on the production and comprehension
of particular syntactic structures (e.g., SRCs and ORCs) does not seem to be
restricted to a particular language (e.g., English, see McDonald, Bock, & Kelly,
1993; Spanish, see Prat-Sala, 1997; German, see Van Nice & Dietrich, 2003).
The standard ﬁnding that ORCs are interpreted with greater difﬁculty than SRCs
mentioned above also extends to the case of German (e.g., Friederici, Steinhauer,
Mecklinger, & Meyer, 1998).

Since German is one of the languages in which the verb often appears in
clause-ﬁnal position, the integration of information to predict the temporarily
unavailable or ambiguous input must be critical to efﬁciently interpret the sen-
tence. Previous studies have shown that both syntactic and semantic informa-
tion is used to predict the subsequent input (e.g., Kamide, Altmann, & Haywood,
2003). According to McRae et al.’s (2005) account on thematic roles, concep-
tual/world knowledge information from thematic role characteristics is computed
and used immediately in online language processing. Our research question con-
sisted of clarifying whether gender cues are relevant indicators of prominence
in readers’ expectations about thematic agents and patients, which contribute
to the rapid integration of information in a sentence. In German, certain com-
binations of gender and number in nouns of the main and the relative clause
make it possible to construct sentences where ORCs and SRCs can only be
identiﬁed as such by the form of the auxiliary verb at the end of the relative
Such temporary ambiguity in the thematic structure allowed us to vary grammatical
and stereotypical gender of role nouns in German sentences containing ORCs and
SRCs to test whether gender information is used in the assignment of thematic agent
and patient roles. Previous research has shown that the analysis of subject–object
ambiguity is inﬂuenced by the relative ranking of the arguments on prominence
hierarchies (Haupt, 2008). If gender information constitutes a relevant dimension
that contributes to the prominence of thematic roles in a sentence, then it should
be reﬂected in the processing of syntactically ambiguous structures, such as in the
German sentences containing SRCs and ORCs mentioned above.

In both experiments reported in this paper, we examined the empirical validity
of our theoretical assumptions about gender as a dimension of prominence. The
hypotheses were tested in two experiments designed using temporarily ambiguous
sentences containing SRC and ORC structures, as provided in Examples (5) and
(6). The identiﬁcation of role nouns as agents and patients in these sentences
was not possible until the auxiliary verb of relative clauses had been reached.
Experiment 1 examined the effects of grammatical gender by varying grammatical
cues (masculine and feminine) in role nouns that were neutral with regard to
stereotypical gender. Experiment 2 extended the focus to stereotypical gender
inﬂuences and included the variation of grammatical (masculine and feminine)
and stereotypical (neutral and female) gender cues of involved role nouns.2

EXPERIMENT 1.
In Experiment 1, we investigated to what extent grammatical gender functions as a
cue to agency and affects the resolution of temporarily ambiguous relative clauses.

Method.
Participants. Thirty-two students at the University of Duisburg-Essen (15 male,
17 female, mean age 26.3 years, SD = 4.7) were paid to participate. All of them
were native speakers of German who did not report to be highly proﬁcient in other
languages and had normal or corrected to normal vision.
Materials.
EXPERIMENTAL STIMULI. Twenty-four experimental sentences consisted of
a main and a relative clause connected by the relative pronoun die
“who/whomfeminine sg/masculine or feminine plural” that can be interpreted either as fem-
inine singular or as masculine or feminine plural. Main clauses contained plu-
ral forms of 24 role nouns (RN1), which varied in grammatical gender (fem-
inine and masculine, feminine marked by the feminine plural sufﬁx –innen3)
but were neutral with regard to stereotypical gender (e.g., Student-en/-innen
“studentsNeutral+masculine/feminine”). Relative clauses contained singular forms of 24
role nouns (RN2), all of which were grammatically feminine and neutral with re-
gard to stereotypical gender (according to the previously published norms4). The
verb in the relative clause was an action verb and necessarily involved two argu-
ments, while the verb of the main clause was a state verb (see Appendix A for
experimental stimuli with masculine RN1). Both main and relative clauses of each
sentence were presented simultaneously in one line. In sentences with SRCs, such
as (7), RN1 served as agents and RN2 served as patients. According to Hypothe-
sis 1, masculine RN1 agents were expected to facilitate comprehension compared
to feminine ones. In sentences with ORCs, such as (8), RN2 served as agents
and RN1 served as patients. Therefore feminine RN1 patients were expected to
facilitate comprehension compared to masculine ones.

(7) Die

Student-en/-innen,
students:M/F

die
who:NOM the:ACC;F;SG

die

the:NOM;PL
Fahrradfahrerin übersehen
cyclist:F
“The students, who overlooked the cyclist, are hurt.”

haben,
have:AUX;3PL

overlooked:PTCP

sind verletzt
are

hurt

(8) Die

Student-en/-innen,
students:M/F

die
whom:ACC

die
the:NOM;F

sind verletzt

overlooked:PTCP

the:NOM;PL
hat,
Fahrradfahrerin übersehen
has:AUX;3SG are
cyclist:F
“The students, whom the cyclist overlooked, are hurt.”
All of the sentences had the following ﬁxed structure: determiner + RN1 +
relative pronoun + determiner + RN2 + action verb + auxiliary verb + main
clause verb + adjective. The identiﬁcation of a relative clause as subject-extracted
(die = “who”) or object-extracted (die = “whom”) was not possible until its last
word (the auxiliary verb hat “has” or haben “have”) had been reached.
VERB AND ADJECTIVE PRETESTS. To exclude potential confounding effects
resulting from the context, a series of pretests was conducted to ensure that verbs
and adjectives used in experimental items did not contain any gender informa-
tion. The verb pretest consisted of 24 transitive verbs requiring a two-argument
structure (e.g., erkennen “to recognize”), while 16 verbs reﬂecting stereotypically
female and male characteristics (8 verbs like kochen “to cook” and 8 verbs like
boxen “to box”), as well as 8 verbs allowing a different number of arguments (e.g.,
versprechen “to promise”), served as pretest ﬁllers. The adjective pretest consisted
of 82 items that were structurally similar to the main clause in the experimental
items, except that role nouns were replaced with X (e.g., X ist aufmerksam “X is
thoughtful”). Adjectives that reﬂected stereotypically male and stereotypically fe-
male characteristics (22 adjectives like wetteifernd “competitive” and 21 adjectives
like liebevoll “affectionate”) were used as pretest ﬁllers. A total of 37 participants
were asked to rate pretest items (i.e., verbs and adjectives) for gender stereotyp-
icality on a scale from 1 (stereotypically male) to 7 (stereotypically female). All
verbs and adjectives around the scale midpoint, that is, with ratings from 3.5 to
4.5, were considered neutral with regard to gender stereotypicality and used in the
study. In addition, the selected RN pairs were controlled for hierarchical relations,
so that RNs that differed in status (e.g., professor/student) were not used in the
same sentence.

FILLERS. To prevent participants from developing reading strategies based on the
gender characteristics of role nouns and on temporarily ambiguous relative clause
structures of experimental items, 24 ﬁller items were constructed. Filler sentences
consisted of a main clause and a relative clause connected by the relative pronoun
die, which was followed by an unambiguous nominative or accusative masculine
determiner der/den (each occurring in 50% of all ﬁllers). All ﬁllers had a ﬁxed
structure that imitated the experimental sentences. Plural forms of 24 neutral role
nouns served as RN1 in main clauses; they were either grammatically masculine
or nominalized participles, which do not express grammatical gender. The singular
forms for another 24 neutral role nouns served as RN2 in relative clauses.

Design. The experimental design included two factors: grammatical gender of
RN1 (masculine vs. feminine; within subjects and within items), and type of rel-
ative clause (SRC vs. ORC; within subjects and within items). Four randomized
lists presented each item in one of the four conditions: masculine RN1 + SRC;
masculine RN1+ ORC; feminine RN1+ SRC; and feminine RN1+ ORC. Across
lists, each item occurred equally often in each condition. Participants were pre-
sented with one of the lists (24 experimental items); that is, they received 6 items in
each of the four conditions and encountered each item only once. A quarter of the
sentences (including ﬁllers) were followed by a yes/no comprehension question
to ensure that participants read materials carefully enough and understood their
content.

Procedure. Eye movements were recorded using an Eyelink 1000 eye-tracker
with a sampling rate of 1000 Hz and angular resolution of 10–30 min of arc (about
0.15° to 0.5°). Participants were seated 70 cm from the computer screen, at which
distance three characters subtended 1° of visual arc. All sentences in the experiment
were presented in 22-point Lucida Console font and displayed on a single line.
Viewing was binocular, but only the dominant eye was recorded. A chin rest was
used to minimize head movements.

Participants were tested individually. Before the experiment began, they were
instructed to read for comprehension in their normal reading speed, pressing corre-
sponding buttons on a response pad to move on to the next sentence, and to answer
questions. Then a calibration procedure with a 9-point grid was performed. Each
trial started with the presentation of a ﬁxation point located at the beginning of
the sentence to be triggered. Whenever the experimenter judged ﬁxation on the
point as inaccurate, recalibration was carried out. The ﬁrst four sentences with two
questions served as practice trials. The eye-tracking session lasted approximately
20 min.

Results.
Data analysis. For the analysis of the eye movement data, the experimental sen-
tences were divided into the following regions (marked with angle brackets in
the example below and in italics in the following text): Die Student-en/-innen,
<die die> <Fahrradfahrerin> <übersehen> <hat/haben,> <sind verletzt>
“The studentsNeutral+masculine/feminine, whom the cyclistNeutral+feminine has overlooked
/ who have overlooked the cyclistNeutral+feminine, are hurt.” We refer to the analyzed
regions of the relative clause as relative pronoun (the relative pronoun with the
following determiner), RN2, action verb, and auxiliary verb.5

For each region, ﬁve reading time measures were computed: ﬁrst ﬁxation dura-
tion (the duration of the very ﬁrst eye ﬁxation on a region entered from the left),
ﬁrst-pass reading time (the sum of ﬁxation times from ﬁrst entering a region from
the left until leaving it either to the right or to the left), regression path (the sum
of ﬁxation times from ﬁrst entering a region from the left until leaving it to the
right, including the time spent regressing to the left of the region), total ﬁxation
time (the sum of all ﬁxation times on a region), and regressions into a region
(the number of times the region was entered from the right; see Staub & Rayner,
2007).

The initial stages of data analysis consisted of merging ﬁxations shorter than
70 ms with neighboring ﬁxations within one character and removing ﬁxations
below 70 ms and above 600 ms (2.13% of the data), for previous research on
reading had shown that such ﬁxations are not representative of normal acquisition
of information (Breen & Clifton, 2011; Rayner, Sereno, Morris, Schmauder, &
Clifton, 1989). Trials that exceeded the reading time range of the total reading time
mean plus 3 SD were considered outliers (1.30% of all trials) and were excluded
from the analyses.6 The data were subjected to repeated measures analyses of
variance (ANOVAs) with the RN1 grammatical gender (masculine vs. feminine)
and the relative clause type (SRC vs. ORC) treated as within-subjects and within-
items factors. Computations based on the data averaged across participants and
across items are referred to as F1 and F2 analyses, respectively. The analyses
were based on residual ﬁxation times after region-length correction (Trueswell,
Tanenhaus, & Garnsey, 1994).7 Table 1 provides means and standard deviations of
residual ﬁxation times for all measures and regions and probabilities of regressions,
and Table 2 presents the results of ANOVAs.

Pairwise contrast analyses were performed based on F1 only in cases when
patterns of mean differences were similar and signiﬁcant in either both F1 and
F2, or in one (p ≤ .05) and marginally signiﬁcant (p ≤ .1) in the other analysis.
Corresponding t test results are reported and interpreted below region by region
(left to right), starting from measures reﬂecting earlier processing to those reﬂecting
later processing.8 Note that it is the interaction term between the RN1 grammatical
gender and the relative clause type that is of critical interest to our Hypothesis 1.
First ﬁxation durations. The ANOVA revealed a main effect of the RN1 grammat-
ical gender on the RN2 region with shorter ﬁxations after masculine than feminine
RN1, Mmasc = −11.40; Mfem = −1.66, t (31) = −2.05, SEM = 4.76, p = .049,
r = .35.

Regression path. A main effect of grammatical gender emerged on the action
verb with shorter ﬁxations after masculine than feminine RN1, Mmasc = −475.30;
Mfem = −416.95, t (31) = −2.15, SEM = 27.18, p = .040, r = .36. The ANOVA
also revealed an interaction between the RN1 grammatical gender and the relative
clause type on the auxiliary verb. A t test showed shorter ﬁxations of the auxiliary
verb in SRCs after masculine compared to feminine RN1 agents, MmascSRC =
−198.99; MfemSRC = −104.80, t (31) = −3.00, SEM = 31.45, p = .005, r = .47
(see Figure 1).

Total ﬁxation time. A main effect of grammatical gender occurred on the RN2
showing shorter ﬁxations after masculine than feminine RN1, Mmasc = 22.23;
Mfem = 104.34, t (31) = −2.22, SEM = 36.96, p = .034, r = .37.

Regression into a region. A main effect of grammatical gender showed a tendency
for fewer regressions into the RN2 after masculine than feminine RN1, Mmasc =
0.60; Mfem = 0.72, t (31) = −1.88, SEM = 0.06, p = .070, r = .32.
Response accuracy. The average accuracy in answering comprehension ques-
tions during the experiment was 81.25%.
Discussion.
As expected, the grammatical gender of RN1 affected the resolution of tem-
porarily ambiguous relative clauses in Experiment 1, which was represented by
the interaction between the grammatical gender and the relative clause type. In
SRCs, feminine RN1 agents caused more difﬁculties in processing than mas-
culine. This ﬁnding suggests that grammatical gender may function as a cue to
agency in that masculine role nouns are more expected to serve as agents in rela-
tive clauses than feminine role nouns. However, the extent to which this result can
be generalized remains limited at this point since no such pattern was observed
in ORCs and, despite a reliable effect in regression path residuals, the effect in
SRCs did not reach signiﬁcance across measures. One plausible reason for why
the pattern observed in SRCs was absent in ORCs may be the greater difﬁculty
of ORCs compared to SRCs requiring higher processing costs that could have
washed out rather subtle effects of gender. In addition, it should be noted that
the agent role is more central for comprehension than the patient role (e.g., Cohn
& Paczynski, 2013), which could be another explanation of the effect of gram-
matical gender, which was observed for agents (in SRCs) and not for patients
(in ORCs). These possibilities will be considered in more detail in the General
Discussion.

As to the main effect of grammatical gender, most of the examined measures
reliably showed that feminine RN1 caused more difﬁculties in processing com-
pared to masculine RN1. Since agents are more likely to precede patients (e.g.,
Bornkessel, Zysset, Friederici, Von Cramon, & Schlesewsky, 2005), this may indi-
cate a general tendency in readers to expect masculine rather than feminine agents
to be mentioned in a sentence ﬁrst.
EXPERIMENT 2.
In Experiment 2 we extended the research question to the stereotypical gender
of role nouns. Based on our previous reasoning, not only grammatical but also
stereotypical gender of role nouns should contribute to thematic role assignment
as gender typicality has repeatedly been shown to prompt the representation of
gender congruent referents. Theoretically this can be explained by the situation
model approach (Sanford & Garrod, 1981, 1998), which claims that updating the
representation of an event that is being described from long-term memory is a
constant process running in parallel to the unfolding of linguistic input. Stereo-
typical gender information represented linguistically through role nouns likely
affects the upgrading process, in which it is mapped onto the world knowledge
about typical gender roles. Research on gender processing has shown that both
stereotypical and grammatical gender information is relevant for the interpreta-
tion of sentences, which manifests itself through mismatch effects when gender
cues are incongruent (e.g., Carreiras et al., 1996; Esaulova et al., 2014). Fur-
thermore, gender effects are even stronger when gender cues are made more
salient such as through gender markings and/or through varying both grammatical
and stereotypical gender (e.g., Irmen, 2007). Making gender information more
salient through the use of grammatical and stereotypical gender in Experiment 2
should result in both functioning as cues to agency, as predicted in Hypotheses
1 and 2.

Therefore, in Experiment 2 we examined to which extent both grammatical
gender and stereotypical gender function as cues to agency and affect the reso-
lution of temporarily ambiguous relative clauses. For this purpose, we varied the
stereotypical gender of RN1 and the grammatical gender of RN2.

Method.
Participants. Forty students at the University of Duisburg–Essen (15 male, 25
female, mean age = 25.2 years, SD = 3.6) were paid to participate. All of them
were native speakers of German who did not report to be highly proﬁcient in other
languages and had normal or corrected to normal vision.

Materials and procedure. The preparation of materials and procedural details in
Experiment 2 were similar to those of Experiment 1; details in which they differed
are described below.

EXPERIMENTAL STIMULI. Twenty-four experimental sentences consisted of
a main and a relative clause connected by the relative pronoun die
“who/whomfeminine sg/masculine or feminine plural.” Main clauses contained singular forms
of 12 stereotypically female and 12 neutral role nouns (RN1), all grammatically
feminine (see Examples (9)–(12)). Relative clauses contained the plural forms of
24 neutral role nouns (RN2) that varied in grammatical gender (feminine and mas-
culine, feminine marked by the feminine plural sufﬁx –innen; see Appendix A for
experimental stimuli with grammatically masculine RN2).
In sentences with SRCs, such as (9) and (10), RN1 served as agents and RN2
served as patients. In sentences with ORCs, such as (11) and (12), RN2 served as
agents and RN1 served as patients. Hypothesis 1 concerned stereotypically neutral
RN2 and predicted grammatically feminine patients and grammatically masculine
agents to facilitate comprehension compared to masculine patients and feminine
agents. Hypothesis 2 concerned RN1 (which grammatical gender was held con-
stant) and predicted longer processing of stereotypically female than neutral agents
and after neutral than stereotypically female patients.
All of the sentences had the following ﬁxed structure: determiner + RN1 +
relative pronoun + quantiﬁer9 + RN2 + action verb + auxiliary verb + main
clause verb + adjective. As in Experiment 1, the identiﬁcation of a relative clause
as subject-extracted (die = “who”) or object-extracted (die = “whom”) was not
possible until the last word of the relative clause had been reached.

FILLERS. Fillers consisted of a main clause and an unambiguous relative clause
connected by relative pronouns der/den “who/whommasculine” (each occurring in
50% of all ﬁllers). The singular forms of 24 slightly male (rating score: 2.5 to 3.4
on a 7-point scale from 1 = stereotypically male to 7 = stereotypically female) and
grammatically masculine role nouns served as RN1 in main clauses. The plural
forms of 12 nominalized participles and 12 neutral role nouns (6 grammatically
feminine and 6 grammatically masculine) appeared as RN2 in relative clauses.

Design. The experimental design included the following three factors: RN1
stereotypical gender (neutral vs. female; within-subjects and between-items), RN2
grammatical gender (masculine vs. feminine; within-subjects and within-items),
and relative clause type (SRC vs. ORC; within subjects and within items). Four
randomized lists presented each item in one of the 8 conditions that consisted of
either stereotypically female or neutral RN1 and one of the four combinations:
masculine RN2 in SRC; masculine RN2 in ORC; feminine RN2 in SRC; and fem-
inine RN2 in ORC. Each participant was presented with one list (consisting of 24
experimental items and 24 ﬁllers), where a quarter of the sentences were followed
by a yes/no question to ensure an adequate reading comprehension.

Results.
Data analysis. Details of data analysis and reporting of results were similar to
those in Experiment 1; differences are described below. Experimental sentences
of Experiment 2 were divided into similar regions as in Experiment 1 (marked
with angle brackets in the example below and in italics in the following text): Die
Flugbegleiterin, <die viele> <Tourist-en/-innen> <beobachtet> <hat/haben,>
<ist aufmerksam.> “The ﬂight attendantFemale+feminine, who has observed many
touristsNeutral+ masculine /feminine / whom many touristsNeutral+ masculine/feminine have ob-
served, is attentive.” We refer to the analyzed regions of the relative clause as
relative pronoun (the relative pronoun with the following quantiﬁer), RN2, action
verb, auxiliary verb, and to the last two words of the main clause as spillover.

Initial stages of data analysis consisted in merging ﬁxations shorter than 70 ms
with neighboring ﬁxations within one character and removing ﬁxations below
70 ms and above 600 ms (1.98% of the data). Trials that exceeded the total read-
ing time mean plus 3 SD were considered outliers (1.25% of all trials) and were
excluded from the analyses (see Note 5). The data were subjected to repeated-
measures ANOVA with RN1 stereotypical gender (neutral vs. female) treated
as a within-subjects and between-items factor and with RN2 grammatical gen-
der (masculine vs. feminine) and relative clause type (SRC vs. ORC) treated as
within-subjects and within-items factors. Means and standard deviations of resid-
ual ﬁxation times for all measures and regions and probabilities of regressions are
given in Table 3, and the results of the ANOVAs are shown in Table 4.

Note again that it is the interaction term between the RN2 grammatical gender
and the relative clause type that is of critical interest to our Hypothesis 2, while
the interaction term between the RN1 stereotypical gender and the relative clause
type is critical for Hypothesis 2.

First ﬁxation durations.10 The ANOVA revealed an interaction on the action verb
between the RN1 stereotypical gender and the relative clause type. It showed
shorter ﬁxations in ORCs preceded by stereotypically female compared to neutral
RN1 patients, MFemaleORC = 14.83, MNeutralORC = 32.63, t (38) = 2.44, SEM =
7.31, p = .020, r = .37.

First-pass reading time. A main effect of the RN1 stereotypical gender occurred
on the RN2 with the consistent pattern of shorter ﬁxations after stereotypically
female than neutral RN1 in the ﬁrst pass, MFemale = −151.60, MNeutral = −28.78,
t (38) = 10.46, SEM = 11.75, p < .001, r = .86. A main effect of the RN2
grammatical gender also observed on the RN2 showed shorter ﬁxations on feminine
compared to masculine RN2, Mmasc = −24.11, Mfem = −156.28, t (38) = 6.71,
SEM = 19.70, p < .001, r = .74.

Regression path. As before, the main effects of the RN1 stereotypical gender
on the RN2 resulted in shorter ﬁxations after stereotypically female compared to
neutral RN1, MFemale = −357.32, MNeutral = −236.09, t (38) = −4.52, SEM =
26.81, p < .001, r = .59. A main effect of the RN2 grammatical gender was also
observed on the RN2, with shorter ﬁxations on feminine than masculine RN2,
Mmasc = −243.94, Mfem = −349.47, t (38) = 3.75, SEM = 28.17, p = .001,
r = .52.
An interaction between the RN1 stereotypical gender and the relative clause
type on the action verb showed shorter ﬁxations after female compared to neutral
RN1 patients, MNeutralORC = −236.28, MFemaleORC = −310.74, t (38) = 2.77,
SEM = 26.85, p = .009, r = .41.
A main effect of RN2 grammatical gender occurred again on the spillover re-
gion, with shorter ﬁxations after masculine than feminine RN2, Mmasc = 1136.40,
Mfem = 1426.97, t (38) = −2.80, SEM = 103.82, p = .008, r = .41. An interac-
tion between the RN2 grammatical gender and the relative clause type occurred
on the spillover, with shorter ﬁxations after masculine than feminine RN2 agents,
MmascORC = 1169.30, MfemORC = 1691.81, t (38) = −3.62, SEM = 144.29, p =
.001, r = .51.

Total ﬁxation time. Consistent with earlier occurrences, the main effect of the
RN1 stereotypical gender on the RN2 showed shorter ﬁxations after stereotypically
female than neutral RN1, MFemale =−61.33, MNeutral = 78.36, t (38)= 5.75, SEM=
24.30, p < .001, r = .68. The main effect of the RN2 grammatical gender also
occurred on the RN2 with shorter ﬁxations on masculine compared to feminine
RN2, Mmasc = −40.91, Mfem = 57.94, t (38) = −2.64, SEM = 37.43, p = .012,
r = .39.
The ANOVA revealed an interaction between the RN1 stereotypical gender and
the relative clause type on the action verb region. In SRCs, there were shorter
ﬁxations after neutral than stereotypically female RN1 agents, MNeutralSRC =
−52.13, MFemaleSRC = 2.15, t (39) = −2.16, SEM = 25.18, p = .037, r = .33.
In ORCs, there were shorter ﬁxations after female than neutral RN1 patients,
MNeutralORC = 56.50, MFemaleORC = −52.80, t (38) = 3.37, SEM = 32.40, p = .002,
r = .48.
The ANOVA revealed another interaction between the RN2 grammatical gender
and the relative clause type showing the same pattern of shorter ﬁxations after
masculine than feminine RN2 agents in ORCs on the action verb, MmascORC =
−53.56, MfemORC = 57.25, t (38) = −3.32, SEM = 33.34, p = .002, r = .47; and
on the auxiliary verb, MmascORC = −61.15, MfemORC = −3.16, t (38) = −2.58,
SEM = 22.49, p = .014, r = .39.

Regressions into regions. The ANOVA revealed a three-way interaction on the
relative pronoun between the RN1 stereotypical gender, the grammatical gender
of RN2, and the relative clause type. Follow-up comparisons showed fewer re-
gressions into the region after typically female RN1 followed by masculine than
feminine RN2 agents in sentences with ORCs, MFemale/mascORC = 0.63,
MFemale/femORC = 1.02, t (39) = −3.14, SEM = 0.12, p = .003, r = .45.
A main effect of the RN2 grammatical gender occurred on the action verb
resulting in fewer regressions after masculine than feminine RN2, Mmasc = 0.33,
Mfem = 0.42, t (38) = −2.58, SEM = 0.03, p = .014, r = .39.
An interaction between the RN1 stereotypical gender and the relative clause
type showed fewer regressions into the action verb in SRCs after neutral than typ-
ically female RN1 agents, MNeutralSRC = 0.27, MFemaleSRC = 0.44, t (39) = −3.66,
SEM = 0.05, p = .001, r = .51. An interaction between the RN2 grammatical
gender and the relative clause type also emerged in regressions into the action verb
region and showed fewer regressions into the region in ORCs after masculine com-
pared to feminine RN2 agents, MmascORC = 0.31, MfemORC = 0.50, t (38) = −4.30,
SEM = 0.04, p < .001, r = .57 (see Figure 2).
Response accuracy. The average accuracy in answering the comprehension ques-
tions during the experiment was 82.85%.

Discussion.
Several interactions between gender cues and the relative clause type revealed the
relevance of gender information in the assignment of agent and patient roles to role
nouns when resolving temporarily ambiguous SRCs and ORCs. The interaction
between the RN1 stereotypical gender and the relative clause type showed more
difﬁculties after stereotypically female RN1 agents compared to neutral ones in
the processing of SRCs. Similarly, it also showed more difﬁculties after neutral
RN1 patients than stereotypically female ones in the processing of ORCs. These
ﬁndings indicate that stereotypical gender information functions as a cue to agency
in that it reﬂects readers’ expectations about neutral role nouns to serve as agents
and stereotypically female role nouns as patients. Stereotypical gender affects the
processing of thematic roles starting at the earliest stage of the ﬁrst ﬁxations and is
followed by grammatical gender inﬂuences later on. The interaction between the
RN2 grammatical gender and the relative clause type consistently showed more
difﬁculties after feminine RN2 agents than masculine ones in the processing of
ORCs. These ﬁndings suggest that grammatical gender information also functions
as a cue to agency and reﬂects the readers’ expectations about masculine rather
than feminine role nouns to serve as agents.

Furthermore, the results revealed characteristic patterns in the processing of
gender cues in Experiment 2. The processing of grammatical gender differed from
earlier to later stages. During earlier stages (regression path on the RN2), feminine
RN2 were processed faster than masculine ones, while later stages showed more
difﬁculties in the processing of feminine than masculine RN2. This may be due to
the fact that having seen a feminine sufﬁx in RN1 made it easier for participants to
recognize it when encountered again in RN2. Since word recognition only takes
place at a relatively early stage, the pattern change observed in later measures is
likely to reﬂect later processing, such as the integration of lexical information with
semantic knowledge (e.g., Esaulova et al., 2014; Garrod & Terras, 2000). As to
the main effect of stereotypical gender, female RN1 required less processing time
than neutral RN1. Keeping in mind that the RN1 grammatical gender was always
feminine, this may reﬂect the congruency between stereotypical and grammatical
gender cues, which might be higher in the case of female than neutral RN1.
<Conclusion>
GENERAL DISCUSSION.
Taken together, the results of both experiments provide consistent evidence that
conﬁrms our hypotheses concerning the relationship between gender markings and
the readers’ expectations about thematic roles in temporarily ambiguous relative
clauses. More speciﬁcally, the results show that our predictions hold for both types
of gender representations (i.e., morphological markings and stereotypical gender
of role nouns), thus providing converging evidence about the relationship between
the processing of gender and thematic roles. The results of both Experiments 1 and 2
partially support Hypothesis 1 about grammatical gender inﬂuences demonstrating
that grammatically masculine rather than feminine role nouns are expected to
refer to agents, while the processing of patient roles does not seem to be affected
directly by grammatical gender cues (see discussion below). Experiment 2 conﬁrms
Hypothesis 2 about stereotypical gender inﬂuences showing that stereotypically
female rather than neutral role nouns are expected to serve as patients, while neutral
rather than female role nouns are expected to serve as agents. These results are
interesting in different ways.

These ﬁndings indicate that gender, along with animacy and deﬁniteness (Sil-
verstein, 1976), can be regarded as another relevant dimension in the assessment
of prominence of arguments in a sentence. Like other dimensions of prominence,
gender cues can be ordered in terms of a hierarchy (Lamers, 2012), with mas-
culine/neutral entities ranking higher than feminine/female ones. Following the
principle of harmonic alignment, grammatically masculine references to persons
are expected to serve as more thematically prominent roles (i.e., agents) in (tem-
porarily) ambiguous sentences than grammatically feminine ones. In terms of
stereotypical gender, stereotypically female references seem to be associated with
less prominent thematic roles (i.e., patients) and neutral ones with more prominent
roles (i.e., agents). These ﬁndings can be related to research demonstrating inﬂu-
ences of other prominence hierarchies on reading (e.g., animacy, Mak et al., 2006;
deﬁniteness/speciﬁcity, Kretzschmar, Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, Staub, Roehm, &
Schlesewsky, 2012) and research on ambiguity resolution (e.g., Gennari & Mac-
Donald, 2008; Reali & Christiansen, 2007). This research is relevant from a theo-
retical perspective, because it provides support for constraint-based accounts that
view comprehension difﬁculties as a function of probabilistic constraints provided
by certain types of linguistic information. A number of ﬁndings demonstrate that
noun animacy, voice (active vs. passive), the use of highly frequent pronominal
subjects, and certain kinds of verbs are constraints modulating the comprehension
difﬁculty of relative clauses (e.g., Bornkessel-Schlesewsky & Schlesewsky, 2008,
2009; Primus, 2011, 2012). The results of our study suggest that grammatical and
stereotypical gender can also be considered as such constraints affecting readers’
expectations that role nouns will function as agents or patients.

It is worth noting that stereotypical gender appears to affect the comprehension
of thematic roles at the very early stages, which adds to the body of literature
reporting the immediate effects of role typicality in sentence processing (e.g., Car-
reiras et al., 1996; Irmen, 2007; Irmen & Schumann, 2011). At the same time,
stereotypical gender inﬂuences occurred earlier than grammatical gender ones,
which is in contrast to some previous ﬁndings (e.g., Esaulova et al., 2014). While
all of these studies used references in sentences, Esaulova et al. (2014) argue that
the recruitment of stereotypical gender for the anaphor resolution and its timing
may depend on the exact materials, resulting in earlier effects for noun phrase than
pronominal anaphors, for instance. Moreover, grammatical gender inﬂuences in
previous research mostly referred to gender agreement required by the anaphor
resolution. However, in the current study grammatical gender was irrelevant for
the crucial number agreement in the relative clause and yet inﬂuenced its process-
ing, even though it did so during later stages compared to stereotypical gender.
This suggests that readers may rely more readily on the semantic information
available through stereotypical gender to identify thematic roles than grammatical
gender cues, which are not directly required for the interpretation of the sentence.
It is interesting that the inﬂuence of gender information on sentence processing
is more apparent in Experiment 2 compared to Experiment 1, because the inter-
action effects between gender cues and relative clause types are only documented
in sentences with SRCs but not ORCs in Experiment 1. There is some evidence
that singular personal references facilitate comprehension compared to plural ones
(e.g., Müsseler, Hielscher, & Rickheit, 1995). This facilitation may have reduced
differences between masculine and feminine RN2 in Experiment 1 but not Exper-
iment 2 due to the differences in the design. In contrast, situation model theories
propose that people use both linguistic cues and background knowledge, mapping
one onto another, when comprehending a text (Sanford & Garrod, 1998; Zwaan
& Radvansky, 1998). In particular, Sanford and Garrod (1981) suggest that repre-
sentations of situations stored in long-term memory (background knowledge) are
activated as soon as there is enough information provided through linguistic input.
Applying this perspective on the present study, gender information (grammatical
and stereotypical) represented linguistically may have activated corresponding rep-
resentations of situations from long-term memory. However, since stereotypical
gender information was only varied in Experiment 2, the linguistic input con-
taining gender information was reduced in Experiment 1. Thus, in Experiment 1,
compared to Experiment 2, the provided linguistic gender information was not
sufﬁcient for ascribing agency in ORCs but only affected the resolution of SRCs.
An alternative interpretation of this difference between Experiments 1 and 2
supposes that the relevance of gender information for comprehension appears to
be modulated by its salience in the sentence. Earlier research has shown that a
person’s sex is often made salient (marked or noted) especially when her or his role
is inconsistent with the stereotypical one, thus indirectly reinforcing stereotypes
(Romaine, 2001; Stahlberg et al., 2007). The salience of gender cues in Experiment
2 could have made readers more attentive to contrasts in gender information (i.e.,
masculine vs. feminine, neutral vs. female), and therefore gender appeared more
relevant for the resolution of relative clauses than in Experiment 1. Our results
demonstrate that the number of gender cues present in a sentence and their variety
(grammatical only vs. both grammatical and stereotypical) increase the effect of
gender biases during comprehension.

It must be noted that although grammatical gender effects appear in SRCs in
Experiment 1 and in ORCs in Experiment 2, they concern agent and not patient
thematic roles in both types of temporarily ambiguous sentences. One may argue
that the effects of prominence may have disappeared in ORCs in Experiment 1 and
SRCs in Experiment 2 because feminine plural forms may be less frequent and thus
more difﬁcult per se than their masculine counterparts. However, masculine RNs
should then be easier than feminine across all relative clauses in both experiments,
thereby ruling out all prominence effects, which is not the case. The observed
asymmetry should not be surprising considering the central role of the agent role
for comprehension and its prominence compared to other thematic roles (e.g., Cohn
& Paczynski, 2013). A closer look at the results reveals that the effects observed
for agents always occurred when patients were feminine, while the design of both
experiments allowed for both masculine and feminine patients. This indicates that
speciﬁc agent–patient combinations were particularly prone to the effect, namely,
masculine rather than feminine role nouns were expected to be agents when patients
were feminine and not masculine.

As an alternative or complementary explanation to the one based on gender
roles, research on the role of working memory in the interpretation of complex
sentences demonstrated that two NPs of a different type are processed faster than
two similar NPs due to the similarity-based interference (Gordon et al., 2001).
One important question that the similarity-based interference model leaves open
concerns critical dimensions that deﬁne similarity. If we consider gender such
a dimension, similarity-based interference could account for longer processing
times that we observed for grammatically feminine compared to masculine agents
when patients were also grammatically feminine. However, role nouns that we have
studied had a number of commonalities (e.g., animacy and person) and differences
(e.g., number and stereotypical gender), and it cannot be determined based on our
experiments which of these dimensions constitute possible sources of interference.
Furthermore, this approach does not hold for the observed stereotypical gender
effects, where neutral RN1 were found to take shorter in agent and longer in
patient roles than female RN1 while RN2 were always neutral.

Even though the similarity-based interference approach cannot be applied to all
of our results, it points at the possible interaction between the two NPs mentioned
in a sentence. This interaction may be important in predicting the thematic role
of NPs, which is highly relevant for our study. Kamide et al. (2003) argue that
the goodness of ﬁt between a NP and a thematic role may depend on the other
arguments in addition to the constraints afforded by the verb. In their eye-tracking
experiments using a “visual-world” paradigm, on hearing the girl will ride or
the man will ride participants looked more often at a picture of a carousel or a
motorbike, respectively. Since the verb (ride) afforded the same constraints for
both agents (the girl and the man), the most likely NP to be selected as a patient
varied as a function of the agent. As opposed to our study, the interpretation of NP
agents in Kamide et al.’s experiments was unambiguous and allowed the prediction
of another argument as a patient. Whichever thematic role possibly predicted the
other could not be determined in our study, since both thematic roles remained
ambiguous until the auxiliary verb. Nevertheless, the observed effects suggest an
interaction in which feminine patients were more likely to enter into a dependency
with grammatically masculine rather than feminine agents.

Our ﬁndings suggest that in order to better understand cognitive mechanisms
underlying gender processing, it is crucial to consider not only gender represen-
tations on the word level (i.e., conceptual through gender stereotypes or formal
through morphological markings) but also the way they appear within larger lin-
guistic units (e.g., as thematic roles). The observation that the processing of gender
information goes beyond the interpretation of individual words and also guides in-
ferences about thematic roles reveals implicit gender inﬂuences that can be viewed
as linguistic biases. The research on linguistic biases shows that it is not only the
type of information (e.g., gender) but also the very way the information is con-
veyed (e.g., via thematic roles) that may implicitly signal it as either expected (i.e.,
conforming to stereotypes or typical representations of a described event) or unex-
pected. Based on the linguistic category model by Semin and Fiedler (1988), who
distinguished different levels of abstraction that may be used to describe the same
behavior, research on the linguistic intergroup bias (Maass, Salvi, Arcuri, & Semin,
1989) and the expectancy bias (Wigboldus, Semin, & Spears, 2000) demonstrated
that expected behaviors were encoded at higher levels of abstraction (using ad-
jectives that are detached from speciﬁc behaviors, e.g., emotional and aggressive)
compared to unexpected information, which was encoded at a more concrete level
(e.g., via descriptive action verbs that referred to a speciﬁc observable event, e.g.,
cry and hit). Similarly, the negation bias implies that the use of negations (e.g., not
stupid, rather than smart) is more likely in stereotype-inconsistent compared to
stereotype-consistent descriptions (Beukeboom, Finkenauer, & Wigboldus, 2010;
de Villiers & Flusberg, 1975). In this context, the gender bias revealed in our study
can be deﬁned as the tendency to assign thematic agent roles to masculine/neutral
rather than feminine/female role nouns.

Finally, these ﬁndings demonstrate that the assignment of thematic roles is asso-
ciated with gender cues in the context of reading comprehension in a similar way
as the concept of agency/communion is associated with gender differences as de-
scribed in social psychology (e.g., Koenig et al., 2011). While in social psychology
masculinity and femininity are considered attributes of agency and communion,
respectively, linguistic cues marking grammatical and stereotypical gender reveal
the readers’ tendencies to assign agent roles to masculine/neutral rather than fem-
inine/female role nouns and patient roles to female rather than neutral role nouns.
This ﬁnding is again consistent with constraint-based accounts that view thematic
roles as concepts based on world knowledge from everyday experiences rather
than syntactic slots void of conceptual content (McRae et al., 2005). Even though
grammatical gender may correspond to the biological sex of the referent in case
of role nouns used in the present studies11 while stereotypical gender refers to
the probability of the distribution of men and women in given occupations, both
gender cues inﬂuence the assignment of thematic agents/patients during reading.

Conclusions.
Our study extends the existing knowledge on gender processing relating it, on
the one hand, to research on thematic roles (e.g., McRae et al., 2005; Primus,
2006) and, on the other hand, to research on linguistic biases (e.g., Maass et al.,
1989; Wigboldus et al., 2000). The interpretation of masculine/neutral rather than
feminine/female role nouns as instigators of an action is the ﬁrst evidence of a
subtle gender bias surfacing in temporarily ambiguous relative clause construc-
tions through gender-based role assignments. The results of both eye-tracking
experiments encourage one to consider interactions between gender and agency
in a broader context, which relates linguistic and social psychological aspects of
both concepts. We propose that gender be considered another dimension that can
be used when the prominence of thematic roles is assessed to determine their
hierarchy. Constraint-based models (e.g., MacDonald, Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg,
1994) can be applied to account for the readers’ expectation about agents and
patients associated with speciﬁc gender cues. Implications of grammatical and
stereotypical gender processing described in the framework of situation model
theories (e.g., Sanford & Garrod, 1981) can, for example, be relevant in the con-
text of guidelines for gender-fair language that are widely discussed today. Since
the relevance of prominence dimensions differs across languages (Aissen, 2003),
further directions of the current research aim at establishing the extent of gender-
based role assignment across languages.
