J. Child Lang.  (), –. © Cambridge University Press 
doi:./S

Prosodic diﬀerences between declaratives and

interrogatives in infant-directed speech*

SUSAN GEFFEN

Department of Psychology, University of Southern California

A N D

TOBEN H. MINTZ

Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, and Department

of Linguistics, University of Southern California

(Received  April  – Revised  April  – Accepted  June  –

First published online  July )

A B S T R A C T

In many languages, declaratives and interrogatives diﬀer in word order
properties, and in syntactic organization more broadly. Thus, in order
to learn the distinct syntactic properties of the two sentence types,
learners must ﬁrst be able to distinguish them using non-syntactic
information. Prosodic information is often assumed to be a useful
basis for this type of discrimination, although no systematic studies of
the prosodic cues available to infants have been reported. Analysis of
maternal
speech in three Standard American English-speaking
mother–infant dyads found that polar interrogatives diﬀered from
declaratives on the patterning of pitch and duration on the ﬁnal two
syllables, but wh-questions did not. Thus, while prosody is unlikely
to aid discrimination of declaratives
infant-
directed speech provides prosodic information that infants could use
to distinguish declaratives and polar interrogatives. We discuss how
learners could leverage this information to identify all question forms,
in the context of syntax acquisition.

from wh-questions,

[*] We would like to thank the members of the USC Language Development Lab for their
help with this research as well as the families that participated in this study. This
material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under
Grant No. BCS- awarded to T. Mintz and S. Geﬀen. Any opinions, ﬁndings,
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the National Science Foundation. Address
for correspondence: Susan Geﬀen, PhD, Department of Psychology, University of
Calgary, Calgary, AB TN N, Canada. e-mail: susan.geﬀen@ucalgary.ca



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

P R O S O D I C D I F F E R E N C E S B E T W E E N S E N T E N C E T Y P E S

language users. In English and many other

I N T R O D U C T I O N
Distinguishing between declaratives and interrogatives is an important
ability for
languages,
interrogatives generally involve syntactic structures and word order
patterns that are diﬀerent from declaratives. For example, in English the
canonical ordering in simple transitive declarative sentences is subject–
verb–object (Slobin & Bever, ), as in Anna likes chocolate. However,
this ordering is disrupted in the associated polar interrogative, which
inverts the subject and auxiliary verb, and inserts an utterance-initial do,
since no auxiliary is present. Thus, Anna likes chocolate becomes Does
Anna like chocolate? Moreover, in so-called wh-questions, a grammatical
phrase that normally occurs in the declarative form is absent, and its
content is queried by a wh-word – e.g. who, what, where, how, etc. – that
occurs at the beginning of the sentence (Whatt does Anna like ti?). (The t
stands for ‘trace’, and represents the structural location of the constituent
that is related to the wh-word that shares its index – in this case, the direct
object of like.) Similar kinds of word order variations occur in many other
(primarily Indo-European)
(e.g. Dryer, ; König &
Siemund, ).

languages

In many prominent theories of syntax acquisition, children learn basic
word order (i.e. the relative placement of subject nouns, object nouns, and
verbs) and morphosyntax by bootstrapping oﬀ of declarative sentences
(typically transitive declaratives) and typical
linkages between syntactic
positions in simple declarative sentences and elements of the scenes they
describe (Fisher, Hall, Rakowitz & Gleitman, ; Pinker, ). Thus,
given the diﬀerences in word order and morphosyntactic patterning of
declaratives and interrogatives, distinguishing the two sentence types is
crucial for correctly learning the syntax of both types of utterances.
Learning mechanisms that analyzed declaratives and interrogatives as the
same type would result in cascading errors in syntax acquisition, since
fundamental misanalysis early on would result in incorrect representations
in learning as
subsequent utterances are processed (Pinker, ).
Since interrogatives constitute close to half of the utterances in young
children’s input, in roughly equal proportions of polar interrogatives and
wh-questions (% and %, respectively; Newport, ), understanding
when and how learners start to diﬀerentiate interrogatives and declaratives
is important for understanding grammatical acquisition more broadly.

One way of distinguishing declaratives and interrogatives would simply be
to use the word order properties just described as a basis for segregating
sentence types. Indeed, -month-olds appear to be able to use word
order information in just this way (Geﬀen & Mintz, ). However, there
is reason to doubt that infants could use distributional information of this



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

G E F F E N A N D M I N T Z

type as the INITIAL source of information for discriminating sentences. To see
why, consider the kind of information infants would have to rely on if they
did not already know the distributional properties of declarative syntax. The
distributional information involves a small set of highly frequent closed-class
words (auxiliary verbs and wh-words) occurring in sentence-initial position.
While infants could classify sentences as interrogatives based on this
property, it is hard to see how infants could discover this property a
priori. For one thing, if such a segregation is based on words rather than
categories – i.e. who, what, which, does, etc., rather than wh-word, AUX –
then it is not clear how to avoid segregating other sentences that are
syntactically similar but diﬀer in their initial words. For example, such a
procedure would create distinctions between utterances that start with
determiners and those that start with pronouns, despite their shared
underlying structure (e.g. sentences like The boy saw the girl vs. You saw
the girl). This problem might be avoided with knowledge of the syntactic
categories (e.g. wh-operator, AUX, NP), but it is not clear that infants
have the requisite category knowledge at a point in acquisition where
making sentence-type discrimination would be important. Furthermore,
even if infants did have that category knowledge, it is not clear how they
would know to use those category distinctions – i.e. wh-word and AUX vs.
everything else – and not other distinctions as a basis for segregating
declaratives
to distinguish
declaratives from interrogatives might be a prerequisite for successfully
learning at least some of those categories in the ﬁrst place, as well as their
correlation with sentence type. Thus, another source of information is
likely to be necessary to make initial sentence-type distinctions. There is
reason to believe that sentence-level prosody provides just such an
information source.

Indeed, being able

and interrogatives.

Prosody as a cue to sentence type
Prosody consists of pitch, duration, and intensity. Here we outline the
potential role of these components in cueing sentence type.

for

cue

Pitch. In many languages, the ﬁnal pitch contour is an important
perceptual
sentence-type discrimination (American English:
Săfárŏvá & Swerts, ; Castilian Spanish: Face, ; French: Vion &
Colas, ). In adult-directed speech, polar interrogatives typically end
with a ﬁnal rise in pitch, while declaratives end with ﬁnal ﬂat or falling
intonation (Bartels, ; Hedberg, Sosa & Fadden, ; Ladd, ),
although there are some exceptions (e.g. Belfast English: Jarman &
Cruttenden, ; Chickasaw: Gordon, ). The same is true of
declarative questions, which diﬀer from declarative statements only in
prosody (e.g. Anna likes chocolate?). If speech to infants is similarly



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

P R O S O D I C D I F F E R E N C E S B E T W E E N S E N T E N C E T Y P E S

organized, prosody could provide a robust tool for initially distinguishing
sentence types. Perceptual studies have demonstrated that, while the exact
cues adults use to distinguish between declaratives and interrogatives may
vary by language, most languages rely on some form of pitch cue (e.g.
Gussenhoven & Chen, ). For example, although Russian has
wh-words, sentences often do not include lexical or syntactic/grammatical
indicators of sentence type (Makarova, ). Russian has relatively free
word order and no auxiliary verbs (Rojina, ), so listeners rely on pitch
peak alignment rather than lexical cues to perceive distinctions between
declaratives and polar interrogatives (Makarova, ; Svetozarova, ).
Declaratives and exclamations have earlier accent pitch peaks (here deﬁned
as THE F MAXIMUM ALONG THE SEGMENTAL STRING OF A THREE-SYLLABLE
WORD; Makarova, ) than interrogatives (this is also seen in Dutch: van
Heuven & Haan, ). There is also an eﬀect of pitch peak height, where
interrogatives have higher pitch peaks than declaratives (Makarova, ).
In languages like English and French, which do use lexical markings (e.g.
auxiliary verbs) to distinguish sentence types, adults primarily rely on
fundamental frequency for perceiving distinctions between sentence types
(English: Cruttenden, ; Lieberman, ; French: Vion & Colas, ).
In many languages, the ﬁnal pitch contour is a critical (if not the
important) region for discriminating between interrogatives and
most
declaratives. A gating study with French noun phrases
found that
listeners’ accuracy in making a sentence-type judgment improved nearly
% (% to %) when ﬁnal pitch information was introduced at the end
of an utterance. In the absence of this ﬁnal prosodic information, subjects
defaulted to a declarative judgment (Vion & Colas, ). Various dialects
of English also rely on ﬁnal pitch contours as an important perceptual
cue for
sentence-type discrimination (British English [e.g. London,
Cambridge]: Grabe, ; although see Jarman & Cruttenden, ). For
example, Săfárŏvá and Swerts ()
found that American English
speakers were more likely to identify utterances as declarative questions if
the utterances ended with a ﬁnal rise.

Duration. Duration is a secondary prosodic correlate of sentence type in
other Germanic languages (e.g. Dutch, Orkney English: van Heuven &
van Zanten, ) in which pitch is the primary prosodic cue. For
instance, in Dutch, interrogatives typically have a faster speech rate than
declaratives, although this diﬀerence is more apparent
in declarative
questions than polar interrogatives. In addition, perceptual studies have
demonstrated that -month-olds can use syllable duration diﬀerences to
detect syntactic boundaries, but only in conjunction with other converging
cues such as pitch changes (e.g. Hirsh-Pasek, Kemler Nelson, Jusczyk,
Cassidy, Druss & Kennedy, ; Jusczyk, Hirsh-Pasek, Kemler Nelson,
Kennedy, Woodward & Piwoz, ). Thus, to the degree that duration



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

G E F F E N A N D M I N T Z

covaries with pitch in relation to sentence type, infants could potentially use
duration in combination with pitch to discriminate declaratives and
interrogatives.

Intensity. Intensity correlates with the other dimensions of prosody,
especially pitch, and infants appear to be sensitive to this correlation
(Fernald, ). For example, in English, stressed syllables are marked by
higher pitch and intensity compared to non-stressed syllables (Hay &
Saﬀran, ). Thus, as with duration,
intensity
correlates with other prosodic cues that diﬀerentiate declaratives from
interrogatives, intensity could contribute to sentence-type discrimination.

to the extent

that

interrogatives

(i.e. yes/no questions),

Summary of prosodic cues with respect to sentence type. To summarize the
research we have just discussed, in English and many other languages,
declaratives and interrogatives give rise to diﬀerent prosodic patterns,
particularly in the ﬁnal pitch contour. Moreover, adult listeners rely on
prosodic information to make sentence-type distinctions in perception.
However, with respect to English, the distinguishing prosodic diﬀerence
between declaratives and interrogatives seems to hold only with respect to
and not wh-questions.
polar
Wh-questions usually have a falling or level pitch, and thus have ﬁnal
contours similar to declaratives (Hedberg et al., ; Ladd, ;
Ladefoged & Johnson, ), at
in adult-directed speech. One
important question we address in this paper is whether similar prosodic
patterns across sentence types are evident in infant-directed speech, and
how infants might use prosody to discriminate sentence types. Establishing
the prosodic characteristics of wh-questions, polar interrogatives, and
declaratives is critical for understanding how prosody could be used by
infants to classify utterances in syntactically meaningful ways. However,
before discussing our analyses, we brieﬂy discuss prior research on infants’
sensitivity to prosody.

least

Infants’ sensitivity to prosody
There is some evidence that young infants might start out using prosody as a
perceptual cue to sentence-type distinctions. Frota, Butler, and Vigário
() tested infants learning European Portuguese, a language which
distinguishes between sentence types using ONLY prosodic information,
and found that infants as young as ﬁve to six months can distinguish
between declaratives and polar
interrogatives. Soderstrom, Ko, and
Nevzorova () tested English-learning infants between ;· and ;
years of age and found that they could distinguish declarative statements
from declarative questions, which only diﬀer in their prosodic contours,
suggesting some ability on the part of infants to discriminate sentence
types based on prosody. However, the wide age range of the subjects



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

P R O S O D I C D I F F E R E N C E S B E T W E E N S E N T E N C E T Y P E S

(between ;· and ;) makes it diﬃcult to determine when this ability
begins. Moreover, speakers may modify prosody more sharply to mark
declarative questions as questions, compared to more typical interrogative
types (e.g. polar interrogatives).

classes of

While it remains unclear when English-learning infants begin to use
prosodic information to distinguish between sentence types, there is a
wealth of evidence demonstrating infants’ general sensitivity to prosodic
information from an early age. Infants can use prosody to make
distinctions between broad rhythmic
(Mehler,
Jusczyk, Lambertz, Halsted, Bertoncini & Amiel-Tison, ; Moon,
Cooper & Fifer, ; Nazzi, Bertoncini & Mehler, ; see Nespor,
Shukla & Mehler, , for an overview of rhythmic classiﬁcation). In
addition,
infants can use their sensitivity to prosodic cues to identify
syntactic unit boundaries including clauses (e.g. Hirsh-Pasek et al., ;
Kemler Nelson, Hirsh-Pasek, Jusczyk, and Cassidy, ) and phrases
(Gerken, Jusczyk & Mandel, ; Jusczyk et al., ). Thus, there is
ample evidence that infants are sensitive to prosody, suggesting that they
could, in principle, use prosodic information to make initial sentence-type
distinctions.

languages

O U T L I N E O F T H E S T U D Y
The goal of the present study was to evaluate the prosodic properties of
declaratives and interrogatives in infant-directed speech in American
English, with the aim of understanding whether prosodic information
would be useful, in principle, for the initial discrimination of sentence
types by infants. There has not, to our knowledge, been any thorough
analysis of
infant-directed speech that establishes the availability of
prosodic cues to sentence type. As we indicated earlier, such information
could play an important role in early syntactic acquisition.

Recall

that,

in adult-directed speech, polar interrogatives and wh-
questions have diﬀerent prosodic properties (Hedberg et al., ), with
wh-questions patterning similarly to declaratives (Ladd, ). Therefore,
a particular question we address is whether the two question types have
similar prosodic properties in infant-directed speech, as well as how they
diﬀer from declaratives. To address this question, we examined typical
prosodic contours in the speech of three mothers to their preverbal infants.
We
of declaratives, polar
interrogatives, and wh-questions to determine whether there is a common
set of prosodic features that distinguish declaratives and either type of
interrogative. Based on the ﬁndings with adult-directed speech, we
hypothesized that prosodic
information would distinguish between
declaratives and polar interrogatives, but that prosody would not be a

characteristics

evaluated

prosodic

the



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

G E F F E N A N D M I N T Z

viable source of information for distinguishing between declaratives and
wh-questions.

and polar

In Analysis , we describe the prosodic measures we examined across
sentence types, and present results organized as contrasting pairs of
sentence types (declaratives vs. polar interrogatives, declaratives vs. wh-
interrogatives vs. wh-questions). Broadly, we
questions,
measured the distribution of pitch (F), duration, and intensity over the
ﬁnal two syllables of declaratives, wh-questions, and polar interrogatives,
in speech addressed to infants, and we present two sets of analyses based
on these measurements. To preview our results, we do indeed ﬁnd that
prosodic measures diﬀer between declaratives and polar interrogatives, but
not wh-questions. In Analysis , we present a linear classiﬁcation model
that, when trained on the prosodic characteristics of a subset of
declaratives and polar interrogatives, can classify untrained utterances at
above-chance levels. Finally, we examine the implications of our results
for infants’ sentence-type discrimination ability.

ANALYSIS : PROSODIC DIFFERENCES BETWEEN

DECLARATIVES AND INTERROGATIVES

M E T H O D S
Input corpora
We evaluated input to three English-learning children from the Brent corpus
(Brent & Siskind, , ﬁles s, s, and v) from the CHILDES database
(MacWhinney, ) for the analysis procedure. We selected the Brent
corpus because it contains speech to preverbal infants, and provides the
largest number of audio-recordings of Standard American English-
speaking mother–child dyads of any corpora in the database. We only
analyzed utterances of the mother directed towards her preverbal infant,
taken from two to three consecutive sessions spanning a – week period
depending on the subject. Infants ages ranged from ;· to ;·.
Recordings were made in the subjects’ homes. Mothers were ﬁtted with a
small waist pack and a lapel microphone located just below their mouths,
and instructed to go about their daily routines while home alone with the
child (Brent & Siskind, ).

Selection of utterances
We analyzed approximately thirty utterances per sentence type (declarative,
wh-question, and polar interrogative) for each speaker, for a total of roughly
ninety utterances per speaker. Sentences had to meet several criteria for
inclusion. We based our initial selection criteria on structural properties.
Polar interrogatives were characterized by subject and auxiliary inversion,



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

P R O S O D I C D I F F E R E N C E S B E T W E E N S E N T E N C E T Y P E S

possibly in combination with do-support. Wh-questions were characterized
by the typical auxiliary inversion structure of polar interrogatives with a
wh-word such as who, what, where, or how in the utterance-initial position.
Declaratives followed the canonical transitive word order. There were
several exceptions to these criteria. We allowed three declarative sentence
fragments – grammatical phrases that were not complete sentences, e.g.
some more carrot). We referred to the context and punctuation coded in the
transcript
these were indeed declaratives. We also
included one polar interrogative fragment: Are you?

to determine that

Our analysis primarily focused on the initial instance of a given utterance.
(Approximately % of utterances ( out of ) occurred two or more
times in a single session, with the majority of repetitions being questions
( repeated utterances were wh-questions,  were polar interrogatives).
Of
those thirty-ﬁve utterances, we analyzed repetitions of nineteen
utterances. The remaining sixteen utterances contained repetitions with
background vocalizations
impossible to
that made them diﬃcult or
analyze. Results did not change with the addition of
the duplicate
utterances.) We narrowed our
selection further by listening to the
accompanying waveform. Utterances were eliminated if they included
vocalization or background noise, making analysis diﬃcult or impossible:
For example,
laughing, crying, blowing raspberries. We eliminated
unintelligible sentences because we used the mother’s pronunciation to
help deﬁne syllable boundaries. We analyzed a total of  sentences (See
Table ).

Location of analyses within sentences
Separate analyses of each acoustic measure are detailed below. We analyzed
the penultimate and ﬁnal syllables (following the precedent of Fisher &
Tokura, ) given that, in many languages, the ﬁnal pitch contour is a
critical (if not the most important) region in the utterance where prosodic
diﬀerences between interrogatives and declaratives occur. We reasoned that
the ﬁnal two syllables were likely to contain most of the variability in ﬁnal
pitch contour. For each utterance, coders marked the boundaries for the
penultimate and ﬁnal syllables for analysis by hand. Boundaries were
marked by one or two coders, then veriﬁed by the ﬁrst author. Coders
initially marked syllable boundaries by examining the spectrogram and
listening to the corresponding waveform. Coders also used regions of
silence to mark the end boundary of the ﬁnal syllable. Disagreements were
resolved by having all the coders listen to the sentences, followed by a
group discussion, and if there was still a disagreement, the ﬁrst author
decided on the
occurred in
approximately % of sentences, and were generally oﬀ by only a few

appropriate marking.

(Discrepancies



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

G E F F E N A N D M I N T Z

TA B L E . Frequency of utterance types

Utterance types

Examples

Frequency (%)a

A. Speaker  (s)

Declarative
Wh-question
Polar question

Total

B. Speaker  (s)

Declarative
Wh-question
Polar interrogative

Total

C. Speaker  (v)

Declarative
Wh-question
Polar interrogative

Total

Total utterances. . ..

That’s your mouth. I’m gonna get it.
Where did he go? How big is he?
Are you gonna crawl? Is that your spoon?

Now you closed it. I’ll bet you can.
What did you think? Who is that?
Can you ﬁnd it? Is that Piglet?

You can look at it. They’re getting squished.
How do you get down? Where did it go?
Do you see the kitty? Can you get that?

 (·)
 (·)
 (·)
 (·)

 (·)
 (·)
 (·)
 (·)

 (·)
 (·)
 (·)
 (·)


a Frequency (%) for each sentence type is the percentage of utterances for a given speaker (e.g.
declaratives account for ·% of the total utterances for Speaker ). The % total is the
percentage out of the total number of utterances analyzed (e.g. Speaker ’s utterances
account for ·% of the total utterances in the corpus analysis).

milliseconds.) Coders labeled each section with a rough English transcription
of the syllable. This was a necessary step for information extraction using the
ProsodyPro Praat script (Xu, ), which carried out batch extraction of
MeanF, MaxF, MinF, duration, and intensity from each labeled
interval within all  ﬁles (using the default settings, F range: –
Hz; F sample rate:  Hz; Npoints per interval: ).

Pitch variables
To assess the availability of pitch as a cue to sentence type in infant-directed
speech, we measured average pitch (MeanF) as well as lowest and highest
pitch (MinF and MaxF, respectively).

For MeanF and MaxF, we were interested primarily in the change of
these values across the ﬁnal two syllables (see ‘Methods’ section). MeanF
provides a simple, coarse measure that can be used to identify the general
degree of sentence-ﬁnal pitch rise or fall. MaxF, while clearly related to
MeanF, provides speciﬁc information about pitch peak. Recall that some
languages, including Russian (Makarova, ; Svetozarova, ), and
Hungarian (Gósy & Terken, ), rely on pitch peak alignment rather
than lexical cues to mark distinctions between declaratives and polar
interrogatives. Declaratives and exclamations have earlier peaks than
interrogatives. There is also an eﬀect of pitch peak height, where
interrogatives have higher pitch peaks than declaratives. Even languages



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

P R O S O D I C D I F F E R E N C E S B E T W E E N S E N T E N C E T Y P E S

like English, which do use lexical markings (e.g. auxiliary verbs) to
distinguish sentence types, demonstrate diﬀerences in pitch peak location
between sentence types. For example, English wh-questions show an
earlier pitch rise and ﬁnal F decline (Best, Levitt & McRoberts, ).
Thus, the location and degree of MaxF could be a useful cue for
distinguishing between sentence types.

We used MinF primarily as a way of calculating the derived measure of
pitch excursion across the ﬁnal two syllables that is based on the most
extreme values (see ‘Methods’ section) rather than on averages.

Since infant-directed speech is characterized by exaggerated prosodic
contours,
including higher mean pitch and expanded pitch excursion
(Fernald & Kuhl, ), it is an open question which properties of pitch
contours that distinguish between sentence types in adult-directed speech
are maintained in speech to infants.

if

For analyzing PITCH EXCURSION, we identiﬁed the lowest F and highest F
when considering the penultimate and ﬁnal syllables together. We then
subtracted whichever extreme value was in the penultimate syllable from
the extreme value that was in the ﬁnal syllable. Thus, positive pitch
excursions indicated rising pitch, and negative pitch excursions indicated
the lowest pitch was · Hz in the
falling pitch. For example,
penultimate syllable and the highest F was · Hz in the ﬁnal syllable,
the pitch excursion would be a pitch rise of · Hz (·–·). When
both extreme values came from the same syllable, we subtracted the
extreme that came ﬁrst from the extreme that came last, resulting in the
same correspondence of the sign of the excursion with excursion direction.
MinF and MaxF were not available for twenty-one sentences (
declaratives,  polar interrogative, and  wh-questions)
(%) due to
incomplete pitch information extracted by the Praat script (Xu, ), so
they were excluded from the pitch excursion analysis.

Duration and intensity
Duration and average intensity were extracted from the marked syllables in
Praat using the ProsodyPro Praat script (Xu, ) (see section, ‘Location
of analyses within sentences’, above).

R E S U L T S
Summaries of all direct measurements are given in Table . Summaries of
the derived measures are given in Table .

Results are presented as contrasting pairs of sentence types: declaratives
versus polar interrogatives, declaratives versus wh-questions, and polar
interrogatives versus wh-questions by measure. With the exception of the
pitch excursion analysis, which only focused on diﬀerences between



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

G E F F E N A N D M I N T Z

TA B L E . Mean and standard deviation by position in utterance

Sentence type

Penultimate

Final

MEANF (Hz)
Declaratives (n = )
Polar interrogatives (n = )
Wh-questions (n = )
MAXF (Hz)
Declaratives (n = )
Polar interrogatives (n = )
Wh-questions (n = )
DURATION (ms)
Declaratives (n = )
Polar interrogatives (n = )
Wh-questions (n = )
INTENSITY (dB)
Declaratives (n = )
Polar interrogatives (n = )
Wh-questions (n = )

· (·)
· (·)
· (·)

· (·)
· (·)
· (·)

· (·)
· (·)
· (·)

· (·)
· (·)
· (·)

· (·)
· (·)
· (·)

· (·)
· (·)
· (·)

· (·)
· (·)
· (·)

· (·)
· (·)
· (·)

sentence types, not syllable positions, data were subjected to a mixed  × 
ANOVA with Sentence Type as a ﬁxed eﬀect and Syllable Position
(penultimate or ﬁnal) as a repeated measure. (Adding Speaker as an
additional variable did not change the pattern of results.) We were
primarily interested in an interaction of Syllable Position with Sentence
Type.

MeanF
Analyses revealed a signiﬁcant main eﬀect of Sentence Type and a signiﬁcant
Sentence Type by Syllable Position interaction for declaratives compared to
polar interrogatives and for polar interrogatives compared to wh-questions.
In contrast, analyses revealed a main eﬀect of Syllable Position only for
declaratives compared to wh-questions (see Tables – for details of the
ANOVAs). Polar interrogatives had signiﬁcantly higher mean pitch (M =
·, SD = ·) for the ﬁnal syllable compared to declaratives (M =
·, SD = ·; t() = ·, p < ·) and wh-questions (M = ·,
SD = ·;
consistent with the
signiﬁcant interaction, there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between sentence
types in the penultimate syllable. In contrast, there were no signiﬁcant
diﬀerences in MeanF values for the penultimate or the ﬁnal syllable in
wh-questions compared to declaratives (ps > ·). There was a fall in mean
pitch from the penultimate to the ﬁnal syllable in declaratives (M = –·
Hz, SD = · Hz) and wh-questions (M = –· Hz, SD = · Hz),
while polar interrogatives showed a rise in mean pitch (M = · Hz,

p < ·). However,

t() = ·,



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

P R O S O D I C D I F F E R E N C E S B E T W E E N S E N T E N C E T Y P E S

TA B L E . Mean diﬀerence scores (standard error) and pitch excursion

(standard error)

Sentence type

Final–Penultimate

Highest pitch–Lowest pitch

MEANF (Hz)
Declaratives (n = )
Polar interrogatives (n = )
Wh-questions (n = )
DURATION (ms)
Declaratives (n = )
Polar interrogatives (n = )
Wh-questions (n = )
PITCH EXCURSION (Hz)
Declaratives (n = )
Polar interrogatives (n = )
Wh-questions (n = )

−· (·)
· (·)
−· (·)

· (·)
· (·)
· (·)

−· (·)
· (·)
−· (·)

TA B L E . Statistical comparisons for declaratives vs. polar interrogatives

Measure

Main eﬀect of
sentence type

Mean F F(,) = ·***,

Max F

partial η = ·
F(,) = ·***,
partial η = ·
Duration F(,) = ·

Intensity F(,) = ·†,
partial η = ·

Main eﬀect of
syllable position

F(,) = ·

F(,) = ·*,
partial η = ·
F(,) = ·***,
partial η = ·
F(,) = ·†,
partial η = ·

Sentence type × Syllable
position interaction

F(,) = ·***,
partial η = ·
F(,) = ·***,
partial η = ·
F(,) = ·

F(,) = ·†,
partial η = ·

NOTES: † p < ·; * p < ·; ** p < ·; *** p < ·. Statistically signiﬁcant statistics are in bold.

TA B L E . Statistical comparisons for declaratives vs. wh-questions

Measure

Main eﬀect of
sentence type

Mean F F(,) < ·

F(,) = ·
Max F
Duration F(,) = ·

Intensity F(,) = ·†,
partial η = ·

Main eﬀect of
syllable position

Sentence type × Syllable
position interaction

F(,) = ·†, partial
η = ·
F(,) = ·
F(,) = ·***,
partial η = ·
F(,) = ·

F(,) = ·

F(,) = ·
F(,) = ·

F(,) = ·

NOTES: † p < ·; * p < ·; ** p < ·; *** p < ·. Statistically signiﬁcant statistics are in bold.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

G E F F E N A N D M I N T Z

TA B L E . Statistical comparisons for polar interrogatives vs. wh-questions

Measure

Main eﬀect of
sentence type

Mean F F(,) = ·*,
partial η = ·
F(,) = ·†,
partial η = ·
Duration F(,) = ·

Max F

Intensity F(,) = ·***,

partial η = ·

Main eﬀect of
syllable position

F(,) = ·

F(,) = · ***,
partial η = ·
F(,) = ·***,
partial η = ·
F(,) = ·

Sentence type × Syllable
position interaction

F(,) = ·***,
partial η = ·
F(,) = ·***,
partial η = ·
F(,) = ·

F(,) = ·*,
partial η = ·

NOTES: † p < ·; * p < ·; ** p < ·; *** p < ·. Statistically signiﬁcant statistics are in bold.

interrogatives

is

SD = · Hz). In adult-directed speech, one of the primary distinctions
between declaratives and polar
the ﬁnal prosodic
contour – i.e. interrogatives have a ﬁnal rise and declaratives have a ﬁnal
fall. Wh-questions also typically end with ﬁnal falling or ﬂat intonation
(Bartels, ; Hedberg et al., ). Larger diﬀerences in mean pitch
between penultimate and ﬁnal syllables could make it easier for infants to
acoustically distinguish between sentence
are
consistent with adult-directed speech and demonstrate that MeanF can be
useful
from declaratives and
wh-questions, but not declaratives from wh-questions.

for distinguishing polar

types. These

results

interrogatives

interrogatives

MaxF
Analyses revealed a signiﬁcant main eﬀect of Sentence Type, a signiﬁcant
main eﬀect of Syllable Position, and a signiﬁcant Sentence Type by
Syllable Position interaction for polar
compared to
declaratives and wh-questions. However, there were no main eﬀects or
interactions for declaratives compared to wh-questions (see Tables – for
details of the ANOVAs). Declaratives showed a decline in MaxF from
the penultimate syllable (M = ·, SD = ·) to the ﬁnal syllable (M
= ·, SD = ·), consistent with the prosodic contour of declaratives
in adult-directed speech. Polar interrogatives demonstrated a rise from the
penultimate syllable (M = ·, SD = ·) to the ﬁnal syllable (M =
·, SD = ·), consistent with the ﬁnal rise pitch contour in
adult-directed speech. Wh-questions did not appreciably diﬀer in MaxF
between the penultimate syllable (M = ·, SD = ·) and the ﬁnal
syllable (M = ·, SD = ·), consistent with the prosodic contour of
wh-questions in adult-directed speech. This demonstrates that MaxF
provides information infants could use to distinguish polar interrogatives
from declaratives and wh-questions, but not declaratives from wh-questions.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

P R O S O D I C D I F F E R E N C E S B E T W E E N S E N T E N C E T Y P E S

Pitch excursion
Independent samples t-tests revealed a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in pitch
excursion between polar interrogatives and declaratives (t() = ·,
p < ·) and wh-questions (t() = ·, p < ·). However, there was no
signiﬁcant diﬀerence
and
wh-questions (t() = ·, p = ·). Polar interrogatives had an average
pitch excursion of · Hz (SD = · Hz), declaratives had an average
pitch excursion of –· Hz (SD = · Hz), and wh-questions had an
average pitch excursion of –· Hz (SD = · Hz) across the ﬁnal
two syllables. The positive excursion for polar interrogatives indicates a
pitch rise, whereas the negative excursion for declaratives indicates a pitch
fall.

in pitch excursion between declaratives

a non-signiﬁcant

although this diﬀerence was

Duration
Analyses revealed a signiﬁcant main eﬀect of Syllable Position for all three
comparisons. There was also a non-signiﬁcant trend for Sentence Type for
declaratives compared to polar interrogatives (p = ·) (see Tables – for
details of the ANOVAs). The penultimate syllables did not appreciably
diﬀer in duration for polar interrogatives (M = · ms, SD = · ms)
compared to declaratives (M = · ms, SD = · ms; t() = ·,
p = ·) or wh-questions (M = · ms, SD = · ms; t() = ·,
p = ·). Final syllable durations in declaratives (M = ·, SD =
·) tended to be longer than in polar interrogatives (M = ·,
SD = ·),
trend
(t(·) = ·, p = ·). This diﬀerence could be due to the fact that
the last word was one syllable in most declaratives but two syllables in at
least half
the polar interrogatives. These results are consistent with
adult-directed speech, where declaratives and polar interrogatives also
diﬀer in overall duration, with polar interrogatives typically a little shorter
than declaratives. This has been shown in a variety of languages (e.g.
Manado Malay, Orkney English, and Dutch: van Heuven & van Zanten,
). Final syllable durations in wh-questions (M = ·, SD = ·)
also tended to be longer than in polar interrogatives (M = ·, SD =
·), although this diﬀerence was not signiﬁcant (t(·) = ·,
p = ·). In contrast, ﬁnal syllables (M = · ms, SD = · ms) were
signiﬁcantly longer than penultimate syllables (M = · ms, SD = ·
ms) in both declaratives and polar interrogatives, although this durational
pattern did not signiﬁcantly diﬀer across sentence types. These results
suggest that duration would not be useful for distinguishing declaratives
and wh-questions. However, larger diﬀerences in duration, particularly in
the ﬁnal syllable, could make it easier for infants to acoustically distinguish
between sentence types. All three sentence types had positive diﬀerence



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

G E F F E N A N D M I N T Z

scores (see Table ), indicating that the ﬁnal syllable was longer for all three
sentence types, although the diﬀerence scores were not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
between sentence types. These results suggest that duration would not be
useful for distinguishing declaratives and wh-questions.

interrogatives

compared to declaratives

Intensity
Analyses revealed a signiﬁcant main eﬀect of Sentence Type for all three
comparisons. There was a signiﬁcant Sentence Type by Syllable Position
interaction for polar
and
wh-questions. There was also a signiﬁcant main eﬀect of Syllable Position
for polar interrogatives compared to declaratives and a non-signiﬁcant
trend toward a main eﬀect of Syllable Position for polar interrogatives
compared to wh-questions (see Tables – for details of the ANOVAs).
Polar interrogatives had slightly higher intensity than declaratives and
wh-questions, across positions. Intensity was signiﬁcantly higher for polar
interrogatives (M = ·, SD = ·) than for declaratives (M = ·, SD
= ·; t(·) = ·, p = ·) and wh-questions (M = ·, SD =
·; t(·) = ·, p < ·) in the ﬁnal syllable, and also in the
(M = ·, SD = ·)
penultimate
compared to wh-questions (M = ·, SD = ·; t(·) = ·, p
< ·), as well as a non-signiﬁcant
trend towards a diﬀerence from
(M = ·, SD = ·;
t(·) = ·,
declaratives
In
addition, declaratives had higher intensity than wh-questions in the ﬁnal
and the penultimate syllable: declaratives (Final: M = ·, SD = ·;
Penultimate: M = ·, SD = ·); wh-questions (Final: M = ·, SD =
·; Penultimate: M = ·, SD = ·). Polar
show
corresponding rises in intensity and pitch consistent with ﬁndings on the
correlation between intensity and other prosodic measures (Fernald, ).
Therefore, intensity appears to be a reliable cue for making sentence-type
distinctions in conjunction with other prosodic cues.

interrogatives

syllable

for polar

interrogatives

p = ·).

Summary
Similar to adult-directed speech, in infant-directed speech polar interrogatives
diﬀered from declaratives and wh-questions in pitch on the ﬁnal two
syllables, and showed a non-signiﬁcant trend towards a diﬀerence in
duration. Polar interrogatives were characterized by higher mean and max
pitch, and higher intensity on the ﬁnal syllable. In contrast, declaratives
and wh-questions tended to demonstrate longer duration on the ﬁnal
syllable, although this diﬀerence was not statistically signiﬁcant. In
addition, the only prosodic cue that distinguished between declaratives and
wh-questions was intensity, with wh-questions displaying a slightly lower
intensity than declaratives. Polar interrogatives do not signiﬁcantly diﬀer



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

P R O S O D I C D I F F E R E N C E S B E T W E E N S E N T E N C E T Y P E S

from declaratives or wh-questions in the penultimate syllable, and both
declaratives and wh-questions had signiﬁcantly longer ﬁnal
syllables
compared to penultimate syllables. These results suggest that prosodic
diﬀerences between polar
and
wh-questions are controlled largely by the ﬁnal syllable and its relation to
the penultimate syllable. This suggests that there is insuﬃcient prosodic
information to distinguish between declaratives and wh-questions in
infant-directed speech. However, sentence-ﬁnal prosody does provide
information that distinguishes polar interrogatives from declaratives and
wh-questions in infant-directed speech, a point we return to below.

and both declaratives

interrogatives

D I S C U S S I O N
This analysis revealed signiﬁcant diﬀerences between declaratives and polar
interrogatives for MeanF, MaxF, pitch excursion, and intensity, and a
non-signiﬁcant trend between sentence types for diﬀerences in duration.
Conversely, the only signiﬁcant diﬀerence between declaratives and wh-
questions was intensity. However, intensity patterned diﬀerently in polar
interrogatives and wh-questions
in comparison to declaratives, with
declaratives and polar interrogatives showing similar intensity proﬁles.
Collectively, these results demonstrate that prosodic information is in
principle
and polar
interrogatives. While intensity could be a basis for also discriminating wh-
questions and declaratives, it is not obvious how intensity would be used
more broadly to distinguish declaratives from interrogatives since it
patterns diﬀerently across wh-questions and polar interrogatives.

to distinguish between declaratives

available

The situation we have just described highlights the challenges in
developing a comprehensive account of how infants could use prosody to
make useful sentence-type discriminations. Although Analysis  shows
that a variety of prosodic cues provide information that infants could use
to distinguish between declaratives and polar interrogatives,
it remains
unclear how useful these combinations of cues are for actually categorizing
individual utterances. We address this question in Analysis .

ANALYSIS : SENTENCE CLASSIFICATION FROM

PROSODIC INFORMATION

Analysis  revealed that there are diﬀerent prosodic patterns between
declaratives and polar interrogatives when considering groups of sentences,
but the analyses were not designed to address to what degree any of the
cues individually, or in combination, are useful for categorizing individual
in Analysis  we used a simple linear
sentences. To investigate this,
discrimination model, using half
the sentences as a training set and



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

G E F F E N A N D M I N T Z

evaluating categorization success with the other half. To reduce the
dimensionality of the data, we ﬁrst carried out a Principal Components
Analysis
is a fairly simple
classiﬁcation technique that provides a ﬁrst attempt to assess how well
these acoustic measures classify actual sentences into declaratives and
interrogatives.

(PCA) on the acoustic measures. This

it can play an important

P C A A N A L Y S I S A N D R E S U L T S
We used PCA to standardize and assess thirteen variables which comprise
acoustic properties of declaratives and interrogatives: Penultimate Syllable
MinF, Final Syllable MinF, Penultimate Syllable MaxF, Final
Syllable MaxF, Penultimate Syllable MeanF, Final Syllable MeanF,
Penultimate Syllable Duration, Final Syllable Duration, Penultimate
Syllable Intensity, Final Syllable Intensity, Overall Minimum Pitch
(across penultimate and ﬁnal syllables), Overall Maximum Pitch (across
penultimate and ﬁnal syllables), and Mean F Diﬀerence Score (Final
syllable MeanF – Penultimate syllable MeanF). PCA is a procedure
analogous to factor analysis with orthogonal rotation; however, devoid of
theory, PCA seeks to create latent scores that maximize the variance
explained between the variables. Since PCA creates uncorrelated
(orthogonal) scores,
role in reducing the
dimensionality of many correlated variables that if modeled individually
would suﬀer from multicollinearity. In this analysis, we used PCA so as to
incorporate elements of all
logistic
regression model without concern for the multicollinearity of these related
variables. The number of component scores was selected based on the
scree plot of
considered,
comprising approximately % of the variance in the variables. Variable
loadings on each component were examined to determine the make-up of
each score. Component  was primarily a function of Final Syllable
Duration. Component  was a moderate loading on all the variables
excluding Mean F Diﬀerence Score, Penultimate Syllable Duration,
Penultimate and Final Syllable Intensity. Component  was predominantly
composed of Diﬀerence Score, and had moderate loadings on all variables
excluding Overall Minimum Pitch, Overall Maximum Pitch, Final Syllable
MinF, Final Syllable Duration, Penultimate and Final Syllable Intensity.
Component  was primarily a function of Penultimate Syllable Duration
and had moderate loadings on Mean F Diﬀerence Score and Penultimate
MinF. See Table  for the four composite scores used in Analysis  (and
see Table A in the ‘Appendix’ for the complete table of loadings).

eigenvalues. Four

the variables

into the eventual

the

components were

Before presenting the linear classiﬁer results that use the principal
components (PCs), we ﬁrst present results that verify that these principal



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

P R O S O D I C D I F F E R E N C E S B E T W E E N S E N T E N C E T Y P E S

TA B L E . Loadings of individual factors for composites – for principal

components analysis

Min
Max
Diﬀerence score
PUMinf
FNMinf
PUMaxf
FNMaxf
PUDuration
FNDuration
PUPitchmean
FNPitchmean
PUIntensity
FNIntensity

Comp. 

·
·
·
·
·
·
·
−·
·
·
·
·
·

Comp. 
−·
−·
−·
−·
−·
−·
−·
·
·
−·
−·
−·
−·

Comp. 
−·
·
·
−·
·
−·
·
−·
−·
−·
·
−·
·

Comp. 
−·
·
·
−·
·
−·
·
·
·
−·
·
·
·

components do indeed correlate with sentence type. We conducted two
separate linear regressions using the R ‘glm’ function with the binomial
link function. In all analyses the ﬁrst independent variables were the ﬁrst
four PCs, and the dependent variable was a binary contrast of
two
sentence types. The analyses varied in terms of which two sentence types
we
interrogative, or declarative vs.
wh-question.

analyzed: declarative vs. polar

With the dependent variable

contrasting declaratives with polar
interrogatives (with declaratives as the reference level), PCs  and 
(Z = –·, p < ·, and
contributed signiﬁcantly to the model ﬁt
Z = –·, p = ·, respectively) whereas PCs  and  did not (Z = –·,
p = ·, and Z = ·, p = ·, respectively). Thus, the PCs that loaded
primarily on duration measures did not contribute signiﬁcantly to the
model ﬁt. Nevertheless, in the classiﬁcation analysis we include all four
PCs, since they represent the most signiﬁcant dimensions of correlated
variability across the utterances.

With the dependent variable contrasting declaratives with wh-questions
(with declaratives as the reference level), none of the PCs were predictive
(for PCs –: Zs = –·, –·, –·, and –·, respectively; all ps
n.s.). This
involving the
individual measures in Analysis .

surprising given the results

result

is not

Potential confounds with measured variables
Because prosody is controlled by a variety of linguistic domains and levels –
e.g. lexical, phonological, syntactic, pragmatic – we wanted to rule out some
potential confounds that could be related to our prosodic measures (and the



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

G E F F E N A N D M I N T Z

PC variables we derived from them) as well as sentence type. Following the
recommendation of an anonymous reviewer, we further coded each utterance
for the number of syllables in the ﬁnal word of the utterance, as well as the
location of the nuclear pitch accent. Both variables can aﬀect utterance-ﬁnal
prosodic features, and both could reasonably be assumed to vary with
sentence type. The existence of such a confound would not necessarily
aﬀect conclusions about the availability of the prosodic cues for sentence-
type discrimination, but
theoretical
interpretation regarding what properties of utterances infants attend to and
use in early language acquisition.

the broader

it might

aﬀect

Number of syllables in ﬁnal word
We added an additional variable to each utterance representing the number
of syllables in the ﬁnal word. In our sample, utterance-ﬁnal words had one,
two, or three syllables. The results are summarized in Table .

Pearson’s chi-squared tests revealed a non-signiﬁcant but marginal
diﬀerence in the pattern of number of syllables comparing declaratives
and polar interrogatives (χ() = ·, p = ·), no diﬀerence between
declaratives and wh-questions (χ() = ·, p = .), and a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence between wh-questions and polar interrogatives (χ() = ·,
p = ·). Thus, the number of syllables in the utterance-ﬁnal word does
seem to correspond to sentence type to some degree, and could contribute
to the correlation of our PCs with sentence type.

Location of nuclear pitch accent
We calculated nuclear pitch accent in each utterance in our sample by ﬁrst
locating the highest pitch peak, and coding location as penultimate
syllable, ﬁnal syllable, or elsewhere (since we had only marked the location
of the ﬁnal two syllables in Analysis ). The results are summarized in
Table .

Pearson’s chi-squared tests revealed a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the pattern
of highest pitch placement comparing declaratives and polar interrogatives
(χ() = ·, p < ·), no diﬀerence between declaratives and wh-
questions (χ() = ·, p = ·), and a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between wh-
questions and polar interrogatives (χ() = ·, p < ·). Thus, the
location of highest pitch, considering the whole utterance, is signiﬁcantly
correlated with sentence type.

Relationship of PCs to sentence type, controlling for confounds
Our analysis of the number of syllables in the utterance-ﬁnal word and the
placement of highest pitch peak showed that both variables correlated with



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

P R O S O D I C D I F F E R E N C E S B E T W E E N S E N T E N C E T Y P E S

TA B L E . Counts of sentences with one, two, or three syllables in the

utterance-ﬁnal word, organized by sentence type and number of syllables

Utterance type

Declarative
Polar interr.
Wh-question

One





Number of syllables

Two





Three





sentence type. Moreover, those variables patterned similarly with our
measures in Analysis  and the results of our linear regression with PCs:
they diﬀered when contrasting declaratives and polar interrogatives as well
as wh-questions and polar
interrogatives, but not wh-questions and
declaratives. Therefore,
it is possible that these two simple variables
(together or independently) are responsible for the relationship between
sentence type and the prosodic measures (and composites) we reported so
far. If so, that could impact empirical and theoretical investigations with
respect to prosody and sentence type in early language acquisition.

We tested this in the following way. First, we conducted a logistic
regression, as described in the previous section, but with number of
syllables in the ﬁnal word (NumSyll) and the placement of highest pitch
peak (PitchPeak), as coded above, as predictors. We only analyzed a model
with the dependent variable coding for declarative vs. polar interrogative,
as this is the contrast that all our prior analyses indicated would be the
most promising for distinguishing declaratives and interrogatives. Next,
we added the ﬁrst four PCs to the model, as a group, to see if the
composite variables improved model ﬁt. Finally, we removed NumSyll
and PitchPeak from the model,
they made a signiﬁcant
independent contribution to the ﬁt of the larger model.

to see if

in the model

Both number of syllables in the utterance-ﬁnal word and highest pitch
peak location indeed accounted for variance in sentence type when they
(NumSyll: Z = ·, p = ·;
were the only variables
PitchPeak: Z = ·, p < ·). However, adding the ﬁrst
four PCs
signiﬁcantly improved model ﬁt (χ() = ·, p < ·). When the PCs
were entered, NumSyll and PitchPeak no longer signiﬁcantly predicted
sentence type (Z = ·, p = ·; Z = ·, p = ·, respectively). Finally,
removing NumSyll
full model did not
signiﬁcantly decrease model ﬁt (χ() = ·, p = ·). Thus, these two
variables do not appear to account
for any independent variance in
sentence type, whereas the PC variables do. Thus, in the linear classiﬁer
we now present, we consider only the composite PC variables.

and PitchPeak from the



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

G E F F E N A N D M I N T Z

TA B L E . Counts of sentences with highest pitch peak in penultimate syllable,
ﬁnal syllable, or elsewhere, organized by sentence type and highest pitch peak
location

Utterance type

Penultimate

Sentence
Polar interr.
Wh-quest.





Pitch peak location

Final





Elsewhere





S E N T E N C E T Y P E P R E D I C T I O N U S I N G P R I N C I P A L C O M P O N E N T S
We used the ﬁrst four principal components that we calculated in the
previous section to predict sentence type in a logistic regression model,
within a testing database that was a subset of our total data sample. We
used half the declaratives (N = ) and half the polar interrogatives (N =
), selected randomly from all three speakers, to set the coeﬃcients.
The coeﬃcients from this model were then applied to the remainder of the
dataset, with the predicted probabilities of sentence type compared to the
observed classiﬁcation. For Declaratives versus Polar
Interrogatives
discrimination, this model showed predictive accuracy for approximately
·% of
the errors, approximately % were
incorrectly classifying polar interrogatives as statements. Table  shows
the regression coeﬃcients
the
declarative vs. polar interrogative discrimination, the component that most
strongly predicts a question is Component . Recall that Component 
loads heavily on the pitch diﬀerence across syllables, as well as other pitch
measures, but it also loads negatively on ﬁnal syllable duration. Thus, in
accord with what we would expect from the results of Analysis , pitch
appears to be the primary determinant of discriminability, but shorter
ﬁnal syllables also predict polar interrogatives. However,
it should be
noted that the values of coeﬃcients, and thus their respective inﬂuences on
utterance categorization, do not diﬀer substantially.

the two logistic regressions. For

the observations. Of

for

Without a speciﬁc theory about how the utterances would be used for
further grammatical learning and how robust those learning procedures
would be to error in sentence-type discrimination, it is diﬃcult to assess
the adequacy of % categorization accuracy. Using more components
could add to predictive accuracy, although there are additional problems of
overﬁtting as well as multicollinearity when using the raw variables
themselves. The main contribution of
is as a
benchmark for the kind of information sentence-ﬁnal prosody provides.

this analysis,

then,

For Declaratives (N = ) versus Wh-questions (N = ) discrimination,
this model showed predictive accuracy for approximately % of the



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

P R O S O D I C D I F F E R E N C E S B E T W E E N S E N T E N C E T Y P E S

TA B L E  . Regression coeﬃcients for the logistic regressions on principal

components in Analysis . Coeﬃcients are in logit units (log odds).

Discrimination

Component  Component  Component  Component 

Declaratives vs. polar
interrogatives
Declaratives vs. wh-
questions

−·
−·

−·
−·

·

·

·
−·

observations. Thus, this model
is basically at chance for categorizing
declaratives and wh-questions. These results are not surprising given our
analysis of
the independent variables in Analysis , and the logistic
regression we reported in the previous section.

These analyses show that a simple linear classiﬁer could use prosodic
information that is realized on the last two syllables to discriminate the
majority of polar interrogatives and declaratives, at least to some degree. It
should be noted that we tested a supervised classiﬁcation model that was
trained on labeled sentences in order to set the coeﬃcient weights to optimize
the categorization results. Thus, we do not propose this as a model of sentence
discrimination. Indeed, if a learner knew the sentence type of a number of
sentences a priori, we suspect that distributional information would be a
much more robust cue to sentence type than prosodic information. Rather, in
this analysis we show how well a simple linear classiﬁer could perform when
considering the kind of prosodic information we targeted.

from polar

interrogatives

G E N E R A L D I S C U S S I O N
The results of this corpus study demonstrate that there is suﬃcient prosodic
information to distinguish declaratives
in
infant-directed speech at above-chance levels, but not from wh-questions.
Four of the ﬁve prosodic measures and derivatives – MeanF, MaxF,
pitch excursion, and intensity – signiﬁcantly diﬀered between declaratives
and polar interrogatives, while the durational diﬀerence between the two
sentence types was a statistical trend. In contrast, intensity was the only
cue that distinguished between declaratives and wh-questions, with
wh-questions demonstrating lower
intensity than declaratives, which
demonstrated lower intensity than polar interrogatives. This provides
preliminary evidence that infant-directed speech contours follow the same
patterns as adult-directed speech contours (Hedberg et al., ; Ladd,
). Speciﬁcally, declaratives and wh-questions end with a ﬂat or falling
pitch, and polar interrogatives end with a ﬁnal rise. This suggests that
while parents may exaggerate typical speech contours in daily speech to
infants, they do not change the shape of the contour. However, further



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

G E F F E N A N D M I N T Z

research is needed to determine whether infants are using these prosodic cues
and, if so, their relative value for sentence-type discrimination.

The logistic regression model also suggests a multi-cue approach to
classifying sentence types. The regression model was intended to narrow
down and evaluate what variables these components had in common, to
determine which acoustic variables are best at classifying sentence types.
However, no single cue turned out
to be exclusive for classiﬁcation
purposes. Component  was predominated by Final Syllable Duration.
Component  was primarily a function of Penultimate Syllable Duration
and had moderate loadings on two additional variables. Component  was
predominantly composed of the Pitch Diﬀerence Score, but had moderate
loadings of six additional variables. Component  had moderate loadings
of all but four variables. There was no overlap between the predominant
variables in Components , , and , and little overlap in moderate
loadings of variables either.

These results suggest that sentence-type classiﬁcation would be most robust
when considering a combination of prosodic cues. Further research is needed
to determine how well the model performs relative to human ability.
Combined with the corpus analysis, these results suggest that infants may
rely on multiple prosodic cues to distinguish between sentence types.

Preliminary work evaluating infants’ ability to make sentence-type
distinctions based on prosody alone failed to ﬁnd evidence that -month-
olds use this information to distinguish between declaratives and polar
interrogatives (Geﬀen, ). This is not to say that infants CANNOT use
prosody in this way, at this age, but rather that they did not use prosody
in that experiment. A potential confound in the study was the greater
acoustic variability in declarative stimuli compared to interrogatives, for
both familiarization and test items. Further research is needed to address
this confound and to further address the question of when infants begin
using prosodic information to make sentence-type distinctions.

One factor that showed more variability in declaratives than polar
interrogatives was MaxF. While there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between
polar interrogatives and declaratives, there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in
MaxF between the FINAL syllable of wh-questions and declaratives.
However, the MaxF is not limited to the end of an utterance. In
languages like Russian, which have relatively free word order and no
auxiliary verbs (Rojina, ), pitch peak is an important perceptual cue
for distinguishing between declaratives and polar interrogatives (Makarova,
; Svetozarova, ). Thus, the location of the pitch peak may be
another cue infants could use to make sentence-type distinctions. Perhaps
a more ﬁne-grained analysis of pitch peak location than we performed in
Analysis  would reveal more robust independent eﬀects in English. This
may be particularly
for distinguishing between polar

important



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

P R O S O D I C D I F F E R E N C E S B E T W E E N S E N T E N C E T Y P E S

and wh-questions, given that wh-questions

interrogatives
are more
prosodically similar to declaratives than polar interrogatives (Bartels, ;
Hedberg et al., ; Ladd, ). Perhaps wh-questions carry their
emphasis, and thus their pitch peak, on the wh-word. For example,
infant-directed wh-questions in English show an earlier pitch peak and
ﬁnal F decline (Best et al., ). It would be fruitful in further research
to investigate the informativeness of pitch peak location in greater detail.

interrogatives provides valuable

Although sentence-ﬁnal prosody is insuﬃcient to distinguish between
declaratives and wh-questions, the ability to distinguish between declaratives
and polar
information for making
distinctions between other types of interrogatives. As previously discussed,
polar interrogatives and wh-questions occur in roughly equal proportions in
infant-directed speech (% and %, respectively; Newport, ), so polar
interrogatives are a signiﬁcant part of
the
characteristic inversion of auxiliaries and subjects in polar interrogatives also
occurs in wh-questions, after the wh-word (e.g. What did you have for
lunch?). Infants could use prosodic information to diﬀerentiate polar
interrogatives from declaratives, which would then allow them to notice the
characteristic subject–auxiliary inversion pattern. They could then detect the
same patterns in wh-questions and use the distributional similarity as a basis
for distinguishing wh-questions
treating
wh-questions and polar interrogatives as similar. In this way, the learned
associations between word order
in polar
interrogatives may allow infants to generalize to wh-questions, given their
prosodic similarity to declaratives (Bartels, ; Hedberg et al., ).

and prosodic patterns

learners’

input. Moreover,

from declaratives,

and for

As we mentioned earlier, recent work suggests that infants can use
distributional cues to discriminate declaratives and polar interrogatives in
the absence of prosodic information by age ; (Geﬀen & Mintz, ). It
remains to be seen whether infants can make similar distinctions between
declaratives and wh-questions at the same age.

C O N C L U S I O N
In summary, the current experiment provides evidence that there is suﬃcient
prosodic information to distinguish declaratives from polar interrogatives
with above-chance accuracy. Making this distinction could then, perhaps,
provide a foundation for distinguishing wh-questions from declaratives on
distributional grounds, as we have found that those sentence types are
prosodically similar in infant-directed speech, as they are in adult-directed
speech. While infants can make use of prosody to discriminate sentence
types in some languages (e.g. Frota et al., ), it currently remains
unclear when English-learning infants can do the same (see our discussion
in the ‘Introduction’ regarding Soderstrom et al., ). This ability could



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

G E F F E N A N D M I N T Z

provide an important foundation for acquiring syntactic knowledge. Future
research is needed to further evaluate the degree to which prosody is
suﬃcient for distinguishing between declaratives and interrogatives in the
absence of lexical/semantic information. Finally, by mapping the genesis
and development of
in typically
developing children, these future studies could lead to the development of
a method for assessing individual diﬀerences in early language perception
for individuals at risk for language impairments.

sentence discrimination abilities

R E F E R E N C E S

Bartels, C. (). The intonation of English statements and questions: a compositional

interpretation. New York / London: Garland Publishing Inc.

Best, C., Levitt, A. & McRoberts, G. (). Examination of language-speciﬁc inﬂuences in
infants’ discrimination of prosodic categories. In Proceedings of the th International
Congress of Phonetic Sciences (Vol. , –). Aix-en-Provence: Universite de Provence
Service des Publications.

Brent, M. & Siskind, J. (). The role of exposure to isolated words in early vocabulary

development. Cognition , –.

Cruttenden, A. (). Intonation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dryer, M. S. (). Polar questions. In M. S. Dryer & M. Haspelmath (eds), The world atlas
of language structures online (chapter ). Munich: Max Plank Digital Library. Online:
<http://wals.info/chapter/> (last accessed  November ).

Face, T. (). The role of intonation cues in the perception of declaratives and absolute

interrogatives in Castilian Spanish. Estudios de fonética experimental , –.

Fernald, A. (). The perceptual and aﬀective salience of mothers’ speech to infants. In
L. Feagans, C. Garvey & R. Golinkoﬀ (eds), The origins and growth of communication, –
. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Fernald, A. & Kuhl, P. (). Acoustic determinants of infant preference for motherese

speech. Infant Behavior and Development , –.

Fisher, C., Hall, D., Rakowitz, S. & Gleitman, L. (). When it is better to receive than to

give: syntactic and conceptual constraints on vocabulary growth. Lingua , –.

Fisher, C. & Tokura, H. (). Acoustic cues to grammatical structure in infant directed

speech: cross linguistic evidence. Child Development , –.

Frota, S., Butler, J. & Vigário, M. (). Infants’ perception of intonation: Is it a statement

or a question? Infancy , –.

Geﬀen, S. (). When and how infants discriminate between declaratives and interrogatives.

Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Southern California.

Geﬀen, S. & Mintz, T. (). Can you believe it? -month-olds use word order to
interrogatives. Language Learning and

distinguish between declaratives and polar
Development , –.

Gerken, L., Jusczyk, P. & Mandel, D. (). When prosody fails to cue syntactic structure:

-month-olds’ sensitivity to phonological versus syntactic phrases. Cognition , –.

Gordon, M. (). The intonational structure of Chickasaw. In J. J. Ohala, Y. Hasegawa, M.
Ohala, D. Granville, and A. C. Bailey (Eds.), Proceedings of the th International Congress
of Phonetic Sciences  (pp. –). Berkeley: University of California.

Gósy, M. & Terken, J. (). Question marking in Hungarian: timing and height of pitch

peaks. Journal of Phonetics , –.

Grabe, E. . Intonational variation in urban dialects of English spoken in the British Isles.
In P. Gilles & J. Peters (eds), Regional variation in intonation –. Tubingen: Niemeyer.
Gussenhoven, C. & Chen, A. (). Universal and language-speciﬁc eﬀects in the perception of
question intonation. In B. Yuan, T. Huang, & X. Tang (Eds.), th International Conference on



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

P R O S O D I C D I F F E R E N C E S B E T W E E N S E N T E N C E T Y P E S

Spoken Language Processing  Vol.  (pp. –). Beijing: China Military Friendship
Publish.

Hay, J. & Saﬀran, J. (). Rhythmic grouping biases constrain infant statistical learning.

Infancy , –.

Hedberg, N., Sosa, J. & Fadden, L. (). Meanings and conﬁgurations of questions in

English. In Proceedings of Speech Prosody , Nara, Japan –.

Hirsh-Pasek, K., Kemler Nelson, D., Jusczyk, P., Cassidy, K., Druss, B. & Kennedy, L.

(). Clauses are perceptual units for young infants. Cognition , –.

Jarman, E. & Cruttenden, A. (). Belfast intonation and the myth of the fall. Journal of the

International Phonetic Association , –.

Jusczyk, P., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Kemler Nelson, D., Kennedy, L., Woodward, A. & Piwoz, J.
(). Perception of acoustic correlates of major phrasal units by young infants. Cognitive
Psychology , –.

Kemler Nelson, D., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Jusczyk, P. & Cassidy, K. (). How the prosodic

cues in motherese might assist language learning. Journal of Child Language , –.

König, E. & Siemund, P. (). Speech act distinctions in grammar. In T. Shopen (ed.), Language

typology and syntactic description –. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ladd, D. (). Intonational phonology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ladefoged, P. & Johnson, K. (). A course in phonetics, th ed. Boston, MA: Cengage.
Lieberman, P. (). Intonation, perception, and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
MacWhinney, B. (). The CHILDES Project: tools for analyzing talk, rd ed. Mahwah,

NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Makarova, V. (). The eﬀect of pitch peak alignment on sentence type identiﬁcation in

Russian. Language and Speech , –.

Mehler, J., Jusczyk, P., Lambertz, G., Halsted, N., Bertoncini, J. & Amiel-Tison, C. ().

A precursor of language acquisition in young infants. Cognition , –.

Moon, C., Cooper, R. & Fifer, W. (). Two-day-olds prefer their native language. Infant

Behavior and Development,  –.

Nazzi, T., Bertoncini, J. & Mehler, J. (). Language discrimination by newborns: toward

an understanding of the role of rhythm. Journal of Experimental Psychology , –.

Nespor, M., Shukla, M. & Mehler, J. (). Stress-timed vs. syllable-timed languages. In
M. van Oostendorp, C. J. Ewan, E. Hume & K. Rice (eds), The Blackwell companion to
phonology, Vol. , –. Malden, MA / Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

Newport, E. (). Motherese: the speech of mothers to young children. In N. J. Castellan,
D. B. Pisoni & G. R. Potts (eds), Cognitive theory, Vol. , Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.

Pinker, S. (). Language learnability and language development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard

University Press.

Rojina, N. (). The acquisition of wh- questions in Russian. Nordlyd , –.
Săfárŏvá, M. & Swerts, M. (). On recognition of declarative questions in English. In

Proceedings of Speech Prosody , Nara, Japan.

Slobin, D. & Bever, T. (). Children use canonical sentence schemas: a crosslinguistic

study of word order and inﬂections. Cognition , –.

Soderstrom, M., Ko, E. & Nevzorova, U. (). It’s a question? Infants attend diﬀerently to

polar questions and declaratives. Infant Behavior and Development , –.

Svetozarova, N. (). Intonation in Russian. In D. Hirst & A. Di Cristo (eds), Intonation

systems: a survey of  languages. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

van Heuven, V. & Haan, J. (). Temporal distribution of interrogativity markers in Dutch:
a perceptual study. In C. Gussenhoven & N. Warner (eds), Papers in laboratory phonology ,
–. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

van Heuven, V. & van Zanten, E. (). Speech rate as a secondary prosodic characteristic of

polarity questions in three languages. Speech Communication , –.

Vion, M. & Colas, A. (). Pitch cues for the recognition of yes – no questions in French.

Journal of Psycholinguistic Research , –.

Xu, Y. (). ProsodyPro.praat. Online: <http://www.phon.ucl.ac.uk/home/yi/ProsodyPro/>.



Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14:39:28, subject to the
Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000349

 

C
a
m
b
r
i
d
g
e
C
o
r
e
 
t
e
r
m
s
 
o
f
 
u
s
e

,
 

a
v
a

i
l

l

 

a
b
e
a
t
 
h
t
t
p
s
:
/
/

.

w
w
w
.
c
a
m
b
r
i
d
g
e
o
r
g
/
c
o
r
e
/
t
e
r
m
s
.
 

h
t
t
p
s
:
/
/
d
o

i
.

.

o
r
g
/
1
0
1
0
1
7
/
S
0
3
0
5
0
0
0
9
1
6
0
0
0
3
4
9

l

D
o
w
n
o
a
d
e
d
 
f
r
o
m
h
t
t
p
s
:
/
/

 

w
w
w
.
c
a
m
b
r
i
d
g
e
o
r
g
/
c
o
r
e

.

.
 

U
n
i
v
e
r
s
i
t
a
e
t
s
b
b

i

l
i

 

o
t
h
e
k
K
a
i
s
e
r
s
l
a
u
t
e
r
n

,
 

 

 

o
n
2
2
D
e
c
 
2
0
1
8
a
t
 
1
4
3
9
2
8

:

:

 

j

,
 
s
u
b
e
c
t
 
t
o
 
t
h
e

Appendix

TA B L E A . Full loadings of individual factors for principal components analysis

Comp.  Comp.  Comp.  Comp.  Comp.  Comp.  Comp.  Comp.  Comp.  Comp.  Comp.  Comp.  Comp. 





Min
Max
Diﬀerence score
PUMinf
FNMinf
PUMaxf
FNMaxf
PUDuration
FNDuration
PUPitchmean
FNPitchmean
PUIntensity
FNIntensity

·
·
·
·
·
·
·
−·
·
·
·
·
·

−·
−·
−·
−·
−·
−·
−·
·
·
−·
−·
−·
−·

−·
·
·
−·
·
−·
·
−·
−·
−·
·
−·
·

−·
·
·
−·
·
−·
·
·
·
−·
·
·
·

−·
·
−·
−·
−·
·
·
−·
−·
·
·
·
·

−·
·
·
·
−·
·
·
−·
·
−·
−·
−·
−·

·
−·
−·
·
−·
·
·
·
−·
−·
·
·
·

−·
·
−·
−·
·
·
−·
−·
·
−·
·
−·
·

·
·
−·
−·
−·
−·
−·
·
−·
−·
·
−·
−·

·
·
·
·
−·
·
−·
−·
·
·
·
−·
−·

·
−·
·
−·
−·
·
·
−·
−·
·
−·
·
·

−·
·
·
−·
·
−·
−·
·
−·
−·
−·
·
·

·
·
·
·
−·
·
·
·
·
·
−·
−·
·

G
E
F
F
E
N

A
N
D

M

I
N
T
Z


