Journal of Sociolinguistics 21/4, 2017: 497–520

He’s more katakana than kanji: Indexing
identity and self-presentation through script

selection in Japanese manga (comics)

Wesley C. Robertson
Monash University, Australia

This paper examines the role of script selection in indexing identities and
styles of self-presentation within a Japanese manga (comic). By cataloguing
where the kanji, hiragana, and katakana scripts are used to represent ﬁrst
person pronouns, I establish the contexts where each script/pronoun
combination serves as a locally normative representation. These norms are
compared against non-normative representations to gain insight into the
local meanings associated with the various scripts. Analysis of the variant
forms is combined with an interview with the manga’s author. Ultimately,
the results reveal that the contribution of script to the meaning of a
Japanese text goes beyond any single marked selection, and involves
interactions between both locally normative patterns of script use and
meaningful local violations of these norms. Selections of script are seen to
convey nuances in how meaning is constructed in the text, as well as
reﬂecting wider ideologies about language use in Japan.
本研究では日本の漫画を一作品取り上げ、文字表記方法によって登場人
物のアイデンティティや表現スタイルがどのように構築されるかを考察
する。登場人物の一人称代名詞が日本語の最も一般的な表記文字(漢
字、ひらがな、カタカナ)のうちどの文字で著されているかを調査し、
それぞれの表記がどのような文脈で用いられているかを分析すること
により、文字表記の選択をもたらす、あるいは影響する動機を明らか
にしようとする。この結果により日本語の文字表記の選択はテキスト
の意味において複雑で、且つ相互的な影響力を持つことが分かる。文
字表記による意味は、ある一場面でどの文字が使われているかという
個別の選択によって決まるものではなく、作品全体の中で見られる一
貫したパターン(また、そのパターンからの例外的な逸脱)との関係で
構築されるのである。これまでの先行研究では社会言語学的な見方で
日本語の文字表記バリエーションについて多くは論じられていないが、
本論文では、日本語の文字表記の選択は意味作成やニュアンスにおいて
重要であり、また、日本でダイアローグ作成に影響する言語思想(イデ
オロギー)を観察するためのツールであることを明確化する。[Japanese]

KEYWORDS: Indexicality, Japanese, Japanese writing, script, language
ideology, comics

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

498

INTRODUCTION

ROBERTSON

In English,

in many languages.

Compared to avenues for linguistic variation like accent, spelling, or word
choice, the indexical potential of script has only recently become a topic of
empirical inquiry. This is not necessarily surprising, as script selection is rare or
even non-existent
for example, distinct
populations with contrasting pronunciations, spelling standards, and/or
vocabulary preferences are still united in their use of the Roman script.
However, a growing body of research has evidenced many cases where
selection from competing scripts can become a target of metalinguistic
discussion and socially meaningful use (Sebba 2009, 2012). In actions like the
development of the Deseret alphabet by Mormons in America, the rejection of
imposed scripts and/or celebration of native scripts by writers of Korean or
Cherokee, and even in the adoption of the German-associated Blackletter by
English-speaking heavy metal bands to index militarism or machismo, we see
clear examples of script acting as a marker of distinct social groups and/or
ideologically associated traits (Bender 2008; Brown and Yeon 2015; Harkness
2015; Spitzm€uller 2012, 2015; Thompson 1982).

The indexical potential of script selection is particularly interesting when
discussing written Japanese. In most writing systems, script selection is
somewhat analogous to dialect, as distinct communities utilize distinct
methods of producing the same language (Unseth 2005). For instance,
many languages spoken in India are written in multiple scripts, but an author
generally uses a single script exclusively when writing a text (Choksi 2014).
The contemporary Japanese writing system departs from this script/dialect
analogy, as it instead necessitates the combined use of multiple scripts within a
sentence. In particular, three scripts known as kanji, hiragana, and katakana
are found within almost any contemporary text not written for children.
Although the use of the three scripts generally follows codiﬁed standards,
almost any element of the Japanese language can be (and, indeed, has been)
written in each script (Konno 2015). Consequently, the Japanese writing
system allows for variation in script use on a ‘scale which is inconceivable in
the case of more familiar [to Western readers] writing systems’ (Backhouse
1984: 220). This provides potential for meaningful and systematic variations
in ‘saying the same thing’ (Silverstein 1985: 222) which is difﬁcult, if not
impossible, to observe in other languages.

My goal in this study is to further our understanding of how variant uses of
kanji, hiragana, and katakana can be part of the creation of a ‘total linguistic
fact’ (Silverstein 1985: 220). That is, an unpredictable,
layered, context-
dependent, and ideologically mediated linguistic unit that is co-constructed by
the denotational (i.e. conventional or dictionary-literal) and indexical meaning(s)
of
I
investigate variation in the script(s) which represent ﬁrst person pronouns
throughout the dialogue of adult characters in the Japanese manga (‘comic’)

(Blommaert 2016; Wortham 2010). To do so,

linguistic signs

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HE’S MORE KATAKANA THAN KANJI

499

Usagi Doroppu (‘Bunny Drop’). More speciﬁcally, I identify and compare consistent
links between script/pronoun combinations and deﬁnable speaker identities and
styles of self-presentation to shed light on how each script’s indexical ﬁeld
inﬂuences if, when, and where the author represents a pronoun in hiragana,
katakana, or kanji. Analysis of the script selection is supplemented by a
stimulated recall interview conducted with the manga’s author.

Ultimately, the representation of pronouns in Usagi Doroppu is found to
involve both contrasting norms that separate major character identities and
temporary variants which index locally non-normative styles of
self
presentation. The speciﬁcs of each norm’s design and use also shows that
script selection can serve as a location for observing the inﬂuence of linguistic
ideologies on how dialogue is constructed in Japanese. However, before
discussing the data or ﬁndings in further detail, it is necessary to ﬁrst explain
the particulars of script and script selection in Japanese writing. The following
section will provide this summary, and in doing so establish why investigation
of Japanese script selection is still necessary despite prior discussion of the topic.

SCRIPT AND SCRIPT SELECTION IN CONTEMPORARY JAPANESE
WRITING

As mentioned,
the three primary scripts used in contemporary written
Japanese are known as kanji, hiragana, and katakana. Of the three scripts,
kanji is by far the oldest and most complex. Contemporary written Japanese
uses thousands of distinct kanji, with each morphosyllabic character usually
representing sound and meaning simultaneously (Matsunaga 1996). As an
example, in the construction これは紙です (kore wa kami desu, ‘this is paper’)
the kanji 紙 both represents the morae kami and means ‘paper’; the kanji both
signiﬁes sound and distinguishes the morae from other homographs. In
contemporary Japan, kanji are primarily used to represent nouns of Japanese
or Chinese origin, and the non-inﬂectional stems of most verbs and adjectives
(Seeley 2000).

Hiragana and katakana are instead phonetic scripts developed in Japan.
Both consist of corresponding sets of 46 characters which represent individual
morae in Japanese phonology. In contrast to kanji, individual hiragana and
katakana therefore do not possess clear meaning outside of the context of a
language act. For instance, three options for writing the morae kami are the
previously mentioned kanji 紙, the hiragana かみ, and the katakana カミ.
While the kanji representation is almost certain to mean ‘paper’, the other
options could represent the words ‘paper’, ‘hair’, ‘god’, or a number of other
homographs which would require distinct kanji (髪 and 神 for ‘hair’ and ‘god’,
respectively). Currently, the major role of hiragana is to represent grammatical
particles and the inﬂectional elements of a sentence, while katakana most commonly
represents loanwords from languages other than Chinese (Konno 2014a). Both

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

500

ROBERTSON

scripts are also used to represent onomatopoeia, and to replace kanji
considered difﬁcult to read or write.

While the use of multiple scripts in Japanese is therefore far from chaotic, the
major applications of each script are actually better described as conventions
rather than rules (Konno 2014a). Some conventions, like the use of hiragana
for particles and inﬂection, are quite rigid. However, there is not necessarily a
deﬁnitive or ‘best’ representation for many individual words, and variant
selections are often better described as ‘uncommon’ than ‘wrong’ (Konno
2014b). Consequently, authors are allowed some individuality in their script
use, and orthographic variation stands as ‘a major characteristic of the
Japanese writing system’ (Joyce, Hodoscek and Nishina 2012: 269) even
within standard writing. In more creative or ﬂexible styles/mediums of writing
(e.g. manga, advertising, online communication), script variation can be even
further pronounced, as the fact that any script can technically represent almost
any word opens the door for a wide variety of creative play (Gottlieb 2010;
Robertson 2015). Table 1 shows three examples.

Speaking broadly, researchers have established two major motives for the
selection of unconventional or uncommon script variants in Japanese. The ﬁrst
is a desire or need for legibility-related changes. For instance, authors may use
an otherwise unusual representation to draw attention to a word, avoid kanji
with unpleasant meanings, adjust their text composition in consideration of
the literacy level of
readers, or clarify word boundaries when
orthographic norms would cause one script to dominate a sentence (Akizuki
2005; Gottlieb 2005). These recognized sources of script variation are not the
focus of the current study, but must be considered as potential explanations for
any interesting script use found in written Japanese.

their

The second major reason for script selection, and the one of interest to this
study,
is that authors sometimes vary their script use in relation to the
meaning of a word or sentence. That is, authors select ‘a particular script type
for the “feeling” it evokes’ (Kess and Miyamoto 1999: 108), with each ‘feeling’
arising from links1 between a script, its historical or contemporary uses or
users, and culturally associated traits. For example, the kanji script was once
mostly restricted to the domain of educated, upper-class males. Even today, it is
still seen as a symbol of maturity and erudition. Consequently, its marked use

Table 1: Three words written in the three major Japanese scripts

Japanese word (English translation)

Script

kaki (‘oyster’)

megane (‘glasses’)

biiru (‘beer’)

Kanji
Hiragana
Katakana

牡蠣
かき
カキ

眼鏡

めがね
メガネ

麦酒

びいる
ビール

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HE’S MORE KATAKANA THAN KANJI

501

is frequently argued to make writing have an old-fashioned, masculine, formal,
or scholarly feel (Brown 1985; Tsuboi 2003). Hiragana-heavy texts are instead
viewed as feminine, cute, gentle, or childish (Akizuki 2005; Miyake 2007), as
hiragana was historically the primary script used by women writers, and is
currently the ﬁrst script learned by Japanese children (Hirose 2007; Yoda
2000). Finally, the nonstandard use of katakana is said to be able to evoke a
foreign or modern feel due to the script’s major role of representing loan words
(Tomoda 2009; Tranter 2008). While it should be recognized that many
descriptions of each script come from the assertions of individuals rather than
empirical analysis, a sizeable body of psycholinguistic research has evidenced
that the listed impressions (insho), feelings (kimochi), effects (koka), or images
(imeji) of each script – to borrow the terms used across the cited works – exist in
the minds of native speakers and can inﬂuence their script use under
experimental conditions (Hirose 2007; Iwahara, Hatta and Maehara 2003;
Ukita et al. 1996).

However, the widespread recognition of the idea that native speakers of
Japanese view each script differently belies a lack of systematic and context-
sensitive empirical investigation into how and why these images manifest in
variant uses of kanji, hiragana, and katakana in natural (i.e. not produced for
the purpose of research) texts. Most studies which touch on the topic are more
broadly interested in identifying differences in script use between writers/
genres via script proportion analysis. Generally speaking, these studies contain
clear uses of script which cannot be attributed to legibility-related concerns,
but their analysis of how the selection of a particular script creates meaning is
constrained by a few reoccurring limitations.

The most common limitation in prior research is a nearly exclusive interest
in nonstandard uses of katakana. The focus on katakana is understandable.
Purposeful selection of hiragana and kanji can be hard to identify because the
scripts possess some overlapping roles (Usami 2004). Furthermore,
the
(perceived) increase in katakana/loan words in Japanese writing has long
been a subject of debate and controversy in Japan (Tomoda 2009; Twine
1991). Still, the lack of attention to variant use of all three scripts prevents us
from fully accessing if and how multiple representations contrast and interact
to index meaning across a text or texts (Masuji 2011).

The second major limitation is that analysis of what individual selections of
script are intended to convey is rarely based on systematic trends evidenced
within texts written by a single author. Instead, potential uses of script for
effect are taken from works written by multiple authors with potentially
clashing script preferences, and/or presented out of context in tables or as
individual words. This forces the motives for any particular selection to be
analyzed through attending to a researcher’s individual conception of a script’s
indexical ﬁeld, the types of words being represented in a nonstandard manner,
or demographic differences between authors/audiences (e.g. Joyce, Hodoscek
and Nishina 2012; Rowe 1981; Satake 1989). While often persuasive, these

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

502

ROBERTSON

explanations are not rooted in clear divides between the local contexts where a
single author uses different scripts to represent the same item(s). Consequently,
the explanations may inadvertently overlook nuances of what caused the
selection, similar to how traditional descriptions of venues for variation
originating in Japanese speech (e.g. the use of honoriﬁc variants (keigo),
‘women’s language’ (onna kotoba), or pronoun selection) have been found to
inexactly describe the diversity of reasons why individuals use or avoid certain
lexical variants and/or grammatical
(Agha 1998; Cook 2011;
Moskowitz 2014, 2015). Finally, since previous studies almost always
identiﬁed marked script use by referencing published guidelines for script use
in standard Japanese (Masuji 2011),
locally
normative language use has been treated as marked (Davila 2012), or that
meaningful locally nonstandard variants have been overlooked due to chance
alignment with standard language use (Bucholtz and Hall 2005).

there is a possibility that

forms

I do not

In making these pointed critiques,

intend to dismiss the
contributions of prior research to the ﬁeld. The limitations discussed so far
are often due to script use for effect being only an ancillary element of studies
with other primary interests, and this study would be impossible without the
fundamental ﬁnding that some script variation must be attributed to
associations authors hold with kanji, hiragana, and katakana. Rather, the
intent of my critique is to establish why the role of script selection in indexing
meaning in Japanese writing needs further study despite the basic concept
seeing decades of recognition. While there is no doubt
that hiragana,
katakana, and kanji can function as indexes, there is much that remains
unknown about the speciﬁcs of how and why (i.e. for what purposes) this
occurs, with systematic and context-sensitive analysis necessary to further our
understanding of the phenomenon.

DATA SOURCE AND METHODOLOGY

The primary data for this study comes from the dialogue throughout the nine
primary volumes of the manga series Usagi Doroppu (‘Bunny Drop’) (Unita
2006, 2007a, 2007b, 2008, 2009a, 2009b, 2010a, 2010b, 2011). The
manga medium was selected as a data source for two primary reasons. The ﬁrst
is the popularity of manga in Japan. Although manga are described as
Japanese comics, it is important to establish that they are a ‘critical part of the
[Japanese] culture industry’ (Prough 2010: 56). Yearly sales of manga are
over three times larger than those of comics in America and Canada combined
(Oricon 2012; Virtue 2015), and the medium reaches such a high level of
mainstream acceptance that even ofﬁcial government communications,
corporate histories, classical works of literature, and educational texts can be
found in manga form (Kinsella 1996; Schwartz and Rubinstein-Avila 2006).
This substantial popularity of manga makes them a linguistically inﬂuential
medium, with many noted trends in both speech and writing thought to have

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HE’S MORE KATAKANA THAN KANJI

503

been spread or popularized by the language used by protagonists of popular
titles (Nakamura 2007; Ueno 2006; Unser-Schutz 2010, 2013). Consequently,
manga serve as a valuable site for examining contemporary stereotypes and
ideologies regarding language users and language use in Japanese (Kinsui
2003).

Secondly, the comic medium has a well-recognized history of conveying
information through the graphic manipulation of text (McCloud 1993).
Comics are distinct from most other writing which contains dialogue in that an
author generally does not explicitly describe paralinguistic elements of an
utterance. That is, there is no clear place in a speech bubble for written
descriptions of a character’s speech (e.g. ‘he whispered in a thick French
accent’). Instead, authors tend to rely on the representation of words to express
information about a character or speech act (McCloud 2006; Wolk 2007). This
established reliance on graphic manipulation of text to create meaning
provides the potential for comics/manga to be a particularly fertile location for
observing the use of script as an index.

The manga used for analysis here, Usagi Doroppu, is a slice-of-life manga
written and illustrated by the Japanese manga-ka Yumi Unita between 2005
and 2011. The manga was ﬁrst serialized in FEEL YOUNG, a manga magazine
with an annual run of around 80,000 copies (Japanese Magazine Publishers
Association 2014). Generally, the comics within FEEL YOUNG fall within the
Ladies’ Comics (redısu komikkusu) genre, which is aimed primarily at female
readers between 15 and 45 years of age (Ito 2005). However, although Usagi
Doroppu contains tropes of this genre, being drawn in a realistic style and
involving some discussion of relationships, it is atypical in not focusing on
female protagonists or romance (Ueno 2006). Rather, the protagonist of the
ﬁrst four volumes is a Japanese businessman named Daikichi who learns how
to be a single father after adopting a six-year-old girl named Rin. Each of these
four initial volumes consists of about six months of time, with Rin in her ﬁrst
year of elementary school at the end of the fourth volume. In the ﬁfth volume
the story enters its second major act, and jumps forward ten years. Rin is now
in high school, and Daikichi and Rin serve as co-protagonists. As the story
continues more romance-related elements appear, but the major plotline of the
latter volumes centers around Rin deciding to ﬁnd her biological mother. The
complete story is currently available in Japanese and English as nine individual
volumes, and a tenth bonus volume (called a bangaihen) was released in 2011.
Usagi Doroppu was selected over other potential manga series due to: (1) its
popularity, having spawned an animated series and a feature ﬁlm; and (2) its
creation by a single author/artist. The manga’s mainstream nature raises
conﬁdence that the language/script use within is aimed at a fairly general
readership. Sole authorship ensures that there is no risk of script variation
resulting from contrasting preferences. While Japanese publishers can have
internal guidelines for script use, the author conﬁrmed in the interview that

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

504

ROBERTSON

she had complete control over how she represented her characters’ dialogue
(Yumi Unita, personal communication, 3 March 2015).

The data used in this study were collected by transcribing the entirety of the
dialogue from Usagi Doroppu, and coding each utterance by volume, speaker,
and page number using NVivo software (a data analysis program that allows
the cataloging and coding of text and multimedia). Every lexeme in the
dialogue was then also coded in relation to the script it was written in (e.g.
hiragana, katakana, or kanji). This created a searchable corpus which could
show how many times each word in the manga appeared in which script(s),
and within which speech bubble(s)/conversation(s) each individual script/
lexeme combination occurred. This paper analyzes a subset of the data from
this corpus, looking at variation in the representation of pronouns spoken by
adults and teenagers in the manga. The dialogue of child characters is ignored
here because script use for children’s speech is distinct from the norms for
script use in the manga currently under study and in Japanese more generally.
Children’s dialogue is therefore better analyzed separately from teenage and
adult usages, and in a holistic way, as any single selection of script for a child’s
dialogue is potentially part of a larger construct for the representation of
children’s speech in writing.

Analysis began by using the coded dialogue to catalogue where (i.e. in what
dialogue) each script/pronoun combination occurred in the manga. This
catalogue was used to look for distinct contexts where speciﬁc combinations of
a script and a pronoun served as a local norm in the manga. Here ‘contexts’ is
deﬁned broadly to include who is speaking, who is involved in the
conversation, and the contents of/motive for the speech act. The deﬁnition
of a ‘local norm’ is based on a slight modiﬁcation to that used by Ukita et al.
(1996): any script that the author used to represent a word over 70 percent of
the time in a deﬁnable context is considered to be the local norm for that
context. That is, rather than use a general conception of the orthographic
norms of standard Japanese (raised earlier as problematic), quantitative
cataloguing of
the script use within the manga itself created localized
deﬁnitions of what is normative and marked throughout both the text and
the dialogue of individual speakers/speaker groups. The study then compared
the context
in which each identiﬁed script/pronoun combination norm
occurred against the others to identify the speciﬁcs of what made each
context distinct. Similarly, noted types of deviations from each identiﬁed norm
(e.g. locally marked uses of katakana for a pronoun in a context where the
manga otherwise uses kanji) were examined to see whether they could be
similarly attributed to consistent contextual
triggers. Ultimately, both
examinations helped establish if and how speciﬁc character types and styles
of self-presentation inﬂuenced the use of kanji, hiragana, and katakana for
pronouns across the text. This analysis was complemented by a stimulated-
recall interview on script and script use conducted with the manga’s author,
Yumi Unita, via email in March 2015. The interview was used to access the

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HE’S MORE KATAKANA THAN KANJI

505

author’s general impressions of each script, receive further information for the
motives for interesting orthographic trends noted in initial analysis, and
inquire about locally variant script use which could not be attributed to a
deﬁnable context or trend.

DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS

Japanese pronouns and their use in Usagi Doroppu

Before examining the script use for ﬁrst person pronouns in Usagi Doroppu, it is
necessary to brieﬂy discuss pronoun use in both the manga and Japan. First
person pronouns have long been recognized as a location where Japanese
language users select from variants to adopt stances or index their identity,
with each individual pronoun connected to different social voices or styles of
self-presentation (Ono and Thompson 2003). Within Usagi Doroppu, the four
pronouns that appear are watashi, ore, boku, and atashi. According to Ide
(1979), these pronouns are broadly differentiated as follows:

more common and less formal in women’s speech;

• watashi is the politest of the four, and although used by both genders is
• boku and ore are male-exclusive, with boku more polite than ore; and
• atashi is a casual (compared to watashi) pronoun used only by women.
Recent studies have shown that pronoun use in Japan does not always ﬁt
within Ide’s descriptions, and can index more than gender or a particular level
of politeness (Maree 2003; Miyazaki 2002; Moskowitz 2014). However, the
use of pronouns in Usagi Doroppu agrees with Ide’s stereotypical descriptions,
Japanese popular media often divides characters
reﬂecting ﬁndings that
through more conventional or ‘normative’
language use than is seen in
natural conversation (Kinsui 2003, 2010; Nakamura 2013, 2014).

their

For example, the stereotypically masculine pronouns ore and boku account
for all but one of the 541 pronouns used by males in Usagi Doroppu. Teen males
prefer the ‘rougher’ ore, using it 109 times, and avoid the ‘politer’ boku, using it
only twice. Adult males instead have individual preferences for boku or ore,
with their selection depending on the character’s general personality or the
contextual politeness of
speech register. To explain ‘contextual
politeness’, consider the manga’s protagonist Daikichi. Daikichi prefers a
rough, slang-heavy speech style which uses ore; the pronoun accounts for 352
of the 382 pronouns that appear in his speech. However, Daikichi switches to
boku 29 times, and each use occurs in politer dialogue with either superiors at
work or people he’s just met. Daikichi’s dialogue also contains the sole use of
watashi by a male speaker, which he uses when calling Rin’s biological mother,
Masako, for the ﬁrst time. In this conversation, Daikichi (who Masako does not
yet know exists) utilizes a number of indexes of formal, other-directed deference
which never appear in his speech elsewhere. A clear example is a reference to

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

506

ROBERTSON

Table 2: Contexts in which each pronoun found in Usagi Doroppu is used

Pronoun

Male speech

Female speech

watashi

Limited to hyper-polite speech

Norm for polite speakers/speech

boku

ore

Norm for polite speakers/speech

Not observed

Norm for all teens, and rough or
casual adult speakers and speech

Not observed

atashi

Not observed

Norm for all teens besides Rin,
and rough or casual adult
speakers and speech

his adopted daughter as kaga rin-san (‘Ms. Rin Kaga’). Daikichi simply calls her
rin (‘Rin’) in all other conversations. In sum, the locally marked use of the
stereotypically hyper-polite male watashi appears as part of a locally irregular
adoption of a formal stance towards his interlocutor, which is in alignment
with Ide’s descriptions. Female characters’ pronoun use is
similarly
stereotypical, as women only use the ‘feminine’ pronouns watashi and atashi.
All teenage girls besides Rin use the more casual atashi exclusively. Rin instead
always uses watashi, with her status as the most mature and studious of her
peers reﬂected in her preference of the more polite pronoun. Like the boku/ore
divide in the speech of adult men, adult women whose speech regularly
contains indexes of formality use watashi, while women who frequently use
slang or casual speech registers prefer atashi. Table 2 summarizes the contexts
in which each pronoun is used in Usagi Doroppu.

In short, the author’s pronoun use varies consistently in relation to the
gender of a character and/or the speech register they use in a given context,
and this variation occurs in a fairly conventional manner. However, as will be
shown in the analysis of the author’s script use, attending only to pronoun-
based variation overlooks the totality of means through which pronouns index
socially meaningful identities and stances across the text.

Script use for men’s pronouns

Beginning with male dialogue in Usagi Doroppu, there is a steady divide
between the script normatively used to represent the pronouns of teenagers
and adults. As can be seen in Figure 1, 110 of the 111 pronouns (99.1%) used
by teenage males are written in katakana. In contrast, 414 of the 430 ﬁrst
person pronouns (96.3%) used by adult males are written in kanji. Putting
aside the exceptions for now, initial examination of the data indicates that the
use of kanji or katakana for boku and ore is in some way related to a character’s
age. If a character is in high school, kanji will almost always be treated as
inappropriate for their pronouns, while katakana is generally avoided for
writing the pronouns used by adult males.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HE’S MORE KATAKANA THAN KANJI

507

1

110

15

1

414

Katakana
Kanji

Katakana
Kanji
Hiragana

(a) Script used for FPPs of teen males

(b) Script used for FPPs of adult males

Figure 1: The representation of ﬁrst person pronouns (FPPs) in male dialogue in
Usagi Doroppu

Due to this divide in script use, male characters in Usagi Doroppu can be
differentiated both lexically (i.e. through pronouns) and orthographically (i.e.
through script), with each individual contrast indicating different information
about what divides a speaker from another. For example, Daikichi and his father
respectively prefer the pronouns ore and boku. This contrast in their pronoun
preference reﬂects a contrast in their general demeanor: Daikichi has a short
temper, while his father is the only member of their family who is never seen
yelling or raising their voice. However, as both speakers are adults, kanji is used
for all of their pronouns. This means that the characters’ pronouns are lexically
incongruous (ore vs. boku) but orthographically alike (kanji (俺) vs. kanji (僕)).
In contrast, both Daikichi and a teenage male named Koki prefer the pronoun
ore, but Koki’s pronouns are always written in katakana. The normative
pronouns of Daikichi and Koki are consequently lexically identical (ore vs. ore)
(俺) vs. katakana (オレ)). Between
and orthographically distinct
Daikichi’s father and Koki we then see two levels of distance, as the
characters are distinguished through both lexical
(boku vs. ore) and
orthographic (kanji
these
combine to reﬂect differences in both demeanor/politeness (pronouns) and
something relating to age (script). The identities of
the male speakers
simultaneously inﬂuence the selection of variants through two channels,
with four distinct script/pronoun combination norms indexing four distinct
categories of (male) speakers.

(僕) vs. katakana (オレ)) divides. Together,

(kanji

However, while age can predict whether a male character’s pronouns will be
represented by katakana or kanji over 96 percent of the time (524/541), the
idea that
is directly indexing a speaker’s age may be an
oversimpliﬁcation. When asked how she chose whether to use kanji or
katakana for male pronouns, the author wrote that:

script

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

508

ROBERTSON

It’s always a bit arbitrary but I do divide the use [of script]. The image of 俺 [ore
in kanji] ? (if compared to the katakana) a little old fashioned, Japanese, visually
hard impression. The image ofオレ [ore in katakana] (if compared to the kanji)
? naughty, young, a bit show-offy, visually sharp. But these images are just my
personal feelings, and not a strict thing.2 (Yumi Unita, personal communication,
3 March 2015)

Based upon the author’s comments, the kanji/katakana divide between
adult and teen pronouns does not appear to be consciously planned. Rather,
selection is inﬂuenced more subconsciously by ‘images’ the author holds
regarding each script. This would imply that the prominence of kanji in adult
males’ speech is not a consequence of age, but rather of the author treating
adults as having a lower normative occurrence of behavioral traits she treats
as best indexed by katakana, and vice versa. Indeed, examination of the locally
marked departures from the adult/teen kanji/katakana divides supports this
interpretation. Across the manga, locally nonstandard pronoun representation
in male speech (i.e. the use of katakana for adult male pronouns and use of
kanji for teen male pronouns) is not random, but consistently occurs when a
character behaves incongruously with the images the author feels are indexed
by the locally standard script for their age group.

For example, in Excerpt 1 we see the use of a kanji-represented boku (boxed
in the excerpt) in the dialogue of a teenager named Yasuhara. This excerpt
occurs when Yasuhara meets Rin for the ﬁrst time and makes a semi-formal
request. It is one of only two times teenage males use boku in the manga, and
the only time any teenage male’s pronoun is written in kanji.

Excerpt 1: Usagi Doroppu, Vol. 6, p. 135

Yasuhara: じゃ、ごめんね。(cid:3707)、今日はさすがに部活に顔出さないと. . .
すいませんこんなカンジで. . . あとよろしくお願いします。

ja gomen ne. boku , kyo wa sasuga ni bukatsu ni kao dasanai to. . .
suimasen konna kanji de. . . ato yoroshiku onegaishimasu.

Ah, sorry. I should show my face at the club activities today. . .
sorry to leave now but. . . please take care of things from here.

In all later stories, where Yasuhara is closer with Rin, he instead uses the
teenage male standard of a katakana-represented ore (オレ). Furthermore, the
dual conversion in Excerpt 1 is not repeated during the second use of boku by a
teenager, which occurs when an embarrassed Koki is making obviously false
excuses to Rin about why his bag smells of perfume. Koki’s adoption of a
‘childish’ stance towards Rin in this scene is contrastively accompanied by
maintenance of the local katakana standard (i.e. ボク), with no polite stance-
taking occurring in the dialogue/scene.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HE’S MORE KATAKANA THAN KANJI

509

Still, since Yasuhara is a minor character with limited dialogue, the single
in his speech risks being dismissed as chance or a mistake.
use of kanji
However, every violation of the manga’s kanji norm for pronouns in adult
male speech similarly occurs when a character acts in a locally non-normative
(here, immature, showy, impolite, etc.) manner. For example, three of the 15
adult-male pronouns written in katakana occur in the dialogue of a character
named Tama during his ﬁrst appearance in the manga. In this story Tama is
yelling angrily at Daikichi, and uses a katakana-represented ore (オレ) three
times. In all later dialogue Tama is instead calm and friendly, and his dialogue
only contains uses of boku written in kanji (僕), moving to the more polite
variant in both channels.

Similarly, three uses of katakana for boku (ボク) occur in the speech of an
unnamed male model during his initial meeting with Daikichi at Rin’s school. In
this chapter, the model has a spirited conversation with Daikichi about past work
posing in his underwear for Daikichi’s company. The model’s speech contains
polite elements, explaining the use of boku, but is highly performative and
energetic compared to the other 30-something fathers. For instance, in Excerpt 2
the model is blushing and clasping his face with both hands while laughing. His
dialogue is highly animated, and although polite overall contains multiple
exclamation points and irregular spellings (underlined in Excerpt 2) often
intended to make writing appear cute (Miyake 2007). The model’s performance
in this dialogue (and the chapter) is silly and ﬂamboyant, matching the ‘show-
offy’ (chara chara) feel the author attributes to katakana. Additionally, the sole
use of hiragana for a male pronoun also occurs in the model’s dialogue during
this conversation, further indicating that something speciﬁc to this character is
causing irregular pronoun representations. Based on previous descriptions of
hiragana, the childish elements of the scripts’ indexical ﬁeld may be relevant
here. That said, as the hiragana boku (ぼく) is a single handwritten exception,
rather than part of any clear trend, a deﬁnitive reason for the selection is not
possible to obtain using the methods of analysis employed by this study.

Excerpt 2: Usagi Doroppu, Vol. 4, p. 78

Model: あああ!! それ多分

です!! はずかしっ。御社にかなりお世話に

なっておりますぅー。肌着も海パンもNGナシでなんでも
着てました!!

aaa!! sore tabun boku desu!! hazukashi. onsha ni kanari osewa ni natte
orimasu-, hadagi mo kaipan mo enujı nashi de nandemo kitemashita!!
Ahh!! That was probably me !! So embarrassing! I’m very indebted to
your company. Underwear, swim trunks, I wore whatever I was
asked!!

In contrast, during his second (and ﬁnal) appearance the model is more
subdued. In this later chapter he joins other adults at a park, and participates

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

510

ROBERTSON

in a dialogue about the difﬁculties of being a single parent. In this more
restrained environment, wherein children and parents of both genders are
present and the model is enacting his identity as a parent rather than a model/
new friend, the model’s dialogue is written using standard spelling and
grammar, and his two uses of boku are all written in kanji (僕).

in the bathroom of a restaurant. Like with Tama,

Finally, the remaining nine uses of katakana for adult-male pronouns come
from the dialogue of two workers at Daikichi’s company. One is unnamed, and
uses a katakana-represented ore (オレ) twice while smoking and complaining
about Daikichi
the
character’s speech and behavior in the scene where a katakana-represented ore
occurs is casual, angry, and vulgar (he refers to Daikichi as kachinige kitane,
roughly ‘a scumbag who runs off with the winnings’). However,
further
particulars of the character’s identity are difﬁcult to describe as he only appears
in two panels. On the other hand, the last seven uses of katakana are spread
across the dialogue of an unnamed subordinate of Daikichi’s who appears in
multiple volumes. The author uses a katakana-represented ore (オレ) for all
but one of the eight pronouns in this character’s dialogue. The subordinate is
therefore depicted as preferring the same pronoun as Daikichi (ore) but the
pronoun is normatively represented with a different script. Like with Daikichi
and Koki,
the script divide again mirrors differences between the two
characters. While both are ore-normative, employ rougher speech styles, and
are prone to outbursts, Daikichi is the protagonist, a college-educated bilingual,
wears a tie, and works as a manager. The subordinate is instead bearded, has
pierced ears, wears a beanie and wallet chain to work, and frequently references
his own poor academic achievement. Speaking broadly, the subordinate’s dress,
behavior, and appearance are slightly ‘punk’ and do not match those of
stereotypical white-collar males in Japan or the manga (Dasgupta 2013). These
departures from the manga’s depiction of normative masculine adulthood are
echoed in the subordinate’s status as the only adult male using a clear katakana
norm for his pronouns, with the character orthographically distanced from both
other adult males and kanji’s indexical ﬁeld.

Due to the high consistency of katakana usage for the subordinate’s
pronouns, the one scene where his selected pronoun is written in kanji is
particularly conspicuous. The kanji-represented pronoun appears when the
subordinate meets Rin (i.e. his boss’s daughter) for the ﬁrst time. In Excerpt 3,
the subordinate can be seen initially greeting Rin with his normative
katakana-represented ore (オレ, boxed in Excerpt 3). He then explicitly
corrects himself, and switches to the more polite boku (underlined in Excerpt 3)
to position himself as showing respect. This change is not merely limited to
pronoun selection though, as boku is written in kanji (僕) rather than katakana
(ボク). Consequently, we again see a character’s locally nonstandard self-
presentation accompanied by locally nonstandard lexical and orthographic
variants. In this speciﬁc case, the adoption of a polite stance requires distance
from both ore-linked identities and katakana-linked identities in the manga

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HE’S MORE KATAKANA THAN KANJI

511

(including the normative identity of the character himself), with the changes to
both channels necessary to bring the subordinate’s pronouns into temporary
orthographic alignment with the norm the manga establishes for more
‘mature’ adult males.

Excerpt 3: Usagi Doroppu, Vol. 7, p. 58

Subordinate: エーット、

. . . いや僕たち会社で河地さんにお世話

になってて. . .

etto, ore . . . iya boku tachi kaisha de kawachi san ni osewa ni
natte te. . .

Umm, ore , no, boku tachi3 all work under Mr. Kawachi and. . .

Script use for women’s pronouns

In addition to the adult male/teen male divide, a second major orthographic
contrast in the manga exists between the pronouns used by male and female
speakers. All but ﬁve of the 321 pronouns used by female characters are
written in hiragana. The more casual pronoun atashi is written in hiragana (あ
たし) all 89 times it appears. The politer watashi is written in hiragana (わた
し) in 227 of its 232 appearances, with the remaining ﬁve uses in kanji (私).
No pronouns used by women are written in katakana. As a result, for all but
six of the 862 pronouns in the manga (99.3%), we can identify if the speaker of
any excerpt is male or female by checking whether any pronouns are written
in hiragana.

Certainly, the divide between the script use for male and female pronouns
relates in some part to word choice. Atashi is exclusive to female dialogue in the
manga, which makes how the author would represent a hypothetical male use of
atashi (e.g. by a non-heteronormative speaker) unknown. The pronoun also has
no commonplace kanji representation in Japanese, and the manga’s preference
for hiragana aligns with the conventions of standard written Japanese. The
manga’s standard representation for the polite watashi in male dialogue is also
somewhat unclear, as males only use watashi once. However, Daikichi’s singular
use of watashi is represented by kanji (私), and kanji is conventionally used to
represent watashi in standard written Japanese. Additionally, the author referred
to kanji as ‘hard’ and ‘masculine’ in the interview, and stated that she ‘thinks’
this would cause her to use kanji to write watashi in male dialogue (Yumi Unita,
personal communication, 3 March 2015).4 While the author’s reply indicates
that she does not recall Daikichi’s use of watashi, it shows that the use of hiragana
for the pronoun is not due to a manga-wide norm. Rather, the script use for
watashi is conditional on an almost biological sense of a speaker’s sex, as even
uses of watashi by retired, decorous, and/or highly educated female characters
are normatively written in hiragana.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

512

ROBERTSON

Furthermore,

the absence of katakana-represented female pronouns is
important, as it indicates that the author treats the script as inappropriate for
female pronouns regardless of a speaker’s speech, dress, or relationship to
ideologies deﬁning ‘feminine’ behavior. That is, the author does not use katakana
representations of female pronouns even when a speaker’s dialogue or behavior
contains the triggers seen to bring about locally marked katakana-representations
of pronouns in kanji-normative male characters’ dialogue. For instance, in the
manga a female teenager named Akari hangs out in a bar, is verbally and
physically abusive to her partners, bullies and harasses Rin for years, and fakes a
pregnancy to extort money from Koki. Despite being very much ‘young’,
‘naughty’, and ‘a bit show-offy’, to borrow the author’s terms, Akari’s uses of
atashi are always written in hiragana (あたし) rather than katakana (アタシ).
The author therefore appears to either: (1) treat a katakana-represented atashi as
outside her conception of acceptable script use (despite its appearance in other
manga, Robertson 2015); or (2) treat katakana-represented pronouns as indexing
identities which either involve a masculine element or are incongruous with all
types of female identity and self-presentation that appear in the manga.

Lastly, out of the ﬁve cases where watashi appears in kanji (私) in female
dialogue, four were included in the stimulated recall section of the interview
because they did not appear within any deﬁnable context(s). The author referred
to all four uses as ‘probably something like a typing error’,5 and wrote that she
‘fundamentally intended to use わたし [watashi in hiragana]’6 for female speakers
(Yumi Unita, personal communication, 3 March 2015). The ﬁfth kanji
representation of a female-used watashi may therefore also result from mistaken
input, but
it reﬂects the simultaneous lexical and
orthographic changes to pronouns seen earlier in the dialogue of male speakers.
The locally nonstandard representation of watashi appears in the ﬁrst statement
made by a minor female character named Ota. In the semi-formal context of a
work meeting, Ota uses a kanji-represented watashi (boxed in Excerpt 4) once
while asking Daikichi a question during his speech to newly hired employees.

is interesting in that

Excerpt 4: Usagi Doroppu, Vol. 3, p. 83

Ota:

は営業職で採用されたんですけどーー

watashi wa eigyoshoku de saiyo saretan desu kedo――.
I was hired for a sales position, but――

After the meeting, the character defaults to a more casual speech style which
only uses the less formal pronoun atashi. Furthermore, in contrast to her initial
work-related question, the content of Ota’s dialogue in these later scenes
primarily consists of attempts to ﬂirt with male employees. The differences in
both Ota’s selection of a pronoun and its orthographic representation between
Excerpt 4 and Excerpts 5 and 6 therefore directly mirror the switches noticed in
the dialogue of Yasuhara and Daikichi’s subordinate. That
is, during

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HE’S MORE KATAKANA THAN KANJI

513

irregularly formal self-presentation, a normatively casual speaker’s dialogue
contains a pronoun which is locally nonstandard in terms of both its lexical
and orthographic representations, with the locally irregular stance inﬂuencing
two distinct channels.

Excerpt 5: Usagi Doroppu, Vol. 3, p. 92

Ota:

もこーゆートコで働きたいなァ. . . それにひとりぐらい女

の子がいた 方が楽しいじゃないですかー

atashi mo koyu took de hatarakitai na. . . sore ni hitori gurai onna no ko
ga ita ho ga tanoshi janai desuka

I would like to work in this kind of place too. . . wouldn’t it be more
fun to have a girl around?

Excerpt 6: Usagi Doroppu, Vol. 3, p. 96

Ota:

とかどーです?
atashi toka do desu?

How about a girl like me ?

DISCUSSION

Throughout the manga, we see that the author’s selection of pronouns and
script varies consistently in relation to both distinct character identities and
stances the characters adopt in particular scenes. By interacting with an item
subject to linguistic ideologies or metalinguistic discussion in and of itself, the
author’s script selection shows inﬂuence from more than just a single element
of any script’s indexical ﬁeld. Rather, (the author’s conception of) the indexical
ﬁelds of orthographic and lexical variants function in a symbiotic relationship.
The result is an effect unique to the particular combination, which is lost if
only one channel is examined.

Consequently, within the manga the traditional watashi/boku/ore and
watashi/atashi contrasts exist in a more of a matrix-like system, wherein
norms and movements can occur in lexical and/or orthographic directions
(Table 3). For instance, a katakana-represented boku (ボク) is rougher than a
kanji-represented boku (僕), but still indexes a type of self-presentation which is
more mature, calm, or polite than a katakana-representation of the rougher
pronoun ore (オレ). Selection between a katakana-represented boku (ボク) and
a kanji-represented boku (僕) can then clarify which boku-associated identity
(e.g. semi-polite but childish or show-offy vs. semi-polite and more ‘adult’) a
character adopts. Hiragana instead represents a norm for all female speakers,
with hiragana-represented male pronouns exceedingly rare.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

514

ROBERTSON

Table 3: Comparison of observed and potential script/pronoun combinations in
Usagi Doroppu

Pronoun

watashi

ore

boku

atashi

Kanji

私
Marks super-polite/
formal speech by
both genders

俺
Norm for informal
speech by rougher
adult males

僕
Norm for politer
adult males, can
mark polite male
speech

Script

Katakana

ワタシ
Unobserved

オレ
Norm for most teen
males, and angry/
very casual adults/
adult speech

ボク
Used by males acting
ﬂamboyant, showy,
or silly

アタシ
Unobserved

Hiragana

わたし
Norm for speech by
polite or studious
females, esp. adults

おれ
Unobserved

ぼく
Can appear when a
(adult) male is very
excited, more data
needed

あたし
Norm for women
with rougher
speech/behavior,
especially teens

Furthermore, the ﬁndings make it clear that the importance of any selection
of script cannot be understood by analyzing individual examples. No selection
survives out of context, as the ultimate effect the index creates is interactive
and partially bound to the situated use of the variable (Eckert 2008). For
instance,
that a temporary use of katakana in adult-male dialogue is
meaningful
in Usagi Doroppu, and that it indexes what can be broadly
deﬁned as immature or impolite masculinity rather than other images
associated with marked katakana use like foreignness, coldness, or eroticism
(Robertson 2015), is dependent upon the author establishing local, contrasting
norms for script use between teen males, adult males, and females. If any of the
three norms were absent, the effect created by the use of katakana in adult-
male dialogue might change or even disappear. Likewise, the importance of
Daikichi’s subordinate’s use of katakana-ore (オレ) as a norm is partially
meaningful in its relation to the kanji norm adopted by all other adult males,
with the subordinate’s speech, like his behavior, in constant interaction with
the local ‘adult male’ standard it contrasts with and violates. Excerpt-level
analysis of any use of script discussed here would sever the text-internal
contrasts which guide the activation of speciﬁc elements of its indexical ﬁeld,

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HE’S MORE KATAKANA THAN KANJI

515

and prevent understanding of the particular motive(s) behind the selection.
Indeed, in Usagi Doroppu the question of which script is standard for each
pronoun in the manga as a whole is more or less irrelevant. Each extant
representation is regular within some contexts and marked in others.

Finally, the data shows that script selection in Japanese has the same
potential to reﬂect higher-order linguistic ideologies as more studied avenues for
language variation. While connections between men and kanji or women and
hiragana are observable in historical orthographic practices, with women being
once socially discouraged from using/learning the kanji script, national (e.g. at
least ofﬁcially non-gendered) guidelines for script use have been mainstream
since the early 1900s at the latest (Gottlieb 2005; Seeley 2000; Yoda 2000).
Similarly, in contrast to the manga’s standards, teenage males are by no means
the primary users of katakana, and decreases in kanji recognition over the last
few decades mean that the actual writing of an older female is likely to include
more kanji than writing by twenty-something males (Yoshimura 1985). The
idea that hiragana is more appropriate to female speakers, or that kanji indexes
masculinity, is more the result of contemporary metalinguistic dialogues and
ideologies about script, language use, and language users in Japan than a
reﬂection of extant orthographic practices. The author’s selections of script are
inﬂuenced by and participating in the transmission of ideologies or ‘cultural
messages’ (Agha 2003: 246), as the script use in Usagi Doroppu reﬂects and
afﬁrms the long-running belief in Japan that there are (or should be) inherent
differences in male and female language use (Inoue 2004; Nakamura 2007,
2014). While script cannot be ‘heard’, it is nevertheless separates how the
speech of the two groups is represented on the page.

CONCLUSION

In looking at the representations of pronouns throughout Usagi Doroppu, it is
clear that script selection can be a very important and nuanced element of how
meaning is created in written Japanese. While the use of pronouns to index
character types in Japanese (manga) is well established, within Usagi Doroppu
the normative script used to write pronouns stands as another linguistic area
inﬂuenced by contrasts between the contextual self-presentation and/or gender
of speakers. The concurrent use of multiple scripts particular to Japanese also
allows variant script use to occur from scene to scene or even sentence to
sentence, and thereby mark changes in the stances adopted by individual
speakers from panel to panel. Furthermore, while some observed selections of
script relate to once extant ﬁrst-order connections between a script and a
primary body of users, the ideologies about script and language that inﬂuence
the author possess substantial distance from the realities of script use in
contemporary Japan. As a result, the use of script for pronouns in the manga
does not merely reﬂect actual dialect-like divides in linguistic practice. Rather,
like spelling changes or word choice, Japanese script selection stands as a

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

516

ROBERTSON

major avenue for indexing a variety of identities, registers, and methods of self-
presentation, and observing how contemporary ideologies about language use
and language users can affect the representation of language. Ultimately, this
study shows clearly that ignoring variant uses of kanji, hiragana, and
katakana throughout a text risks overlooking a potentially major element of
the message(s) the writing contains or is intended to convey. Selections of
script are seen to convey nuances in how meaning is constructed in the text,
and serve as a potential location for revealing overarching ideologies about
language use in Japan.

NOTES

1. These links are ﬁrst- and higher-order indexical connections in all but name, but

I avoid the use of the term ‘index’ here as it is not used in the cited studies.

2. Original Japanese: いつも、なんとなくですが使い分けています。「俺」のイ
メージ?(カタカナと比べてどちらかというと)少し古風日本的視覚的に硬い
印象。「オレ」のイメージ?(漢字と比べてどちらかというと)やんちゃ若さ
少しちゃらちゃらしている視覚的にとがっている。これらはあくまでわた
し個人の感じ方で、厳密なものでもありませんが。。。

3. The sufﬁx -tachi is attached to ﬁrst person pronouns to create the plural.
4. Original Japanese: 基本的には、硬い印象にしたい場合は「私」にすると思い
ます。あとは、公の場では男性も「私(わたし・わたくし)」と言いますが、
そういう場合は漢字かなあと。漢字には男性的な印象もあるような気がし
ます。
(‘Fundamentally, I think I use kanji for watashi when I want to create a hard
impression. Furthermore, in public situations men also say watashi or watakushi,
and in these cases I think I might use kanji. I feel like kanji also have a masculine
impression’).

5. Original Japanese:これは誤植のようなものかもしれません。
6. Original Japanese: 基本的に「わたし」にしていたつもりでした.

REFERENCES

Agha, Asif. 1998. Stereotypes and registers of honoriﬁc language. Language in Society 27: 151–

193.

Agha, Asif. 2003. The social life of cultural value. Language & Communication 23: 231–273.
Akizuki, Kotaro. 2005. Arienai Nihongo. Tokyo, Japan: Chikuma Shobo.
Backhouse, A.E. 1984. Aspects of the graphological structure of Japanese. Visible Language 18:

219–228.

Bender, Margaret. 2008. Indexicality, voice, and context in the distribution of Cherokee

scripts. International Journal of the Sociology of Language 192: 91–103.

Blommaert, Jan. 2016. Meaning as a nonlinear effect: The birth of cool. AILA Review 28: 7–

27.

Brown, Lucien and Jaehoon Yeon. 2015. The Handbook of Korean Linguistics. Chichester, U.K.:

John Wiley & Sons.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HE’S MORE KATAKANA THAN KANJI

517

Brown, R. A. 1985. Orthography in contemporary Japan: Reality and illusion. Unpublished PhD

thesis. Austin, Texas: The University of Texas at Austin.

Bucholtz, Mary and Kira Hall. 2005. Language and identity. In Alessandro Duranti (ed.) A

Companion to Linguistic Anthropology. Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell. 369–395.

Choksi, Nishaant. 2014. Scripting the border: Script practices and territorial imagination
among Santali speakers in eastern India. International Journal of the Sociology of Language
227: 47–63.

Cook, Haruko Minegishi. 2011. Are honoriﬁcs polite? Uses of referent honoriﬁcs in a Japanese

committee meeting. Journal of Pragmatics 43: 3655–3672.

Dasgupta, Romit. 2013. Re-reading the Salaryman in Japan: Crafting Masculinities. New York:

Routledge.

Davila, Bethany. 2012. Indexicality and ‘standard’ edited American English: Examining the
identity. Written

link between conceptions of standardness and perceived authorial
Communication 29: 180–207.

Eckert, Penelope. 2008. Variation and the indexical ﬁeld. Journal of Sociolinguistics 12: 453–

476.

Gottlieb, Nanette. 2005. Language and Society in Japan. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University

Press.

Gottlieb, Nanette. 2010. Playing with language in E-Japan: Old win in new bottles. Japanese

Studies 30: 393–407.

Harkness, Nicholas. 2015. Linguistic emblems of South Korean society. In Lucien Brown and
Jaehoon Yeon (eds.) The Handbook of Korean Linguistics. Chichester, U.K.: John Wiley & Sons.
492–508.

Hirose, Takehiko. 2007. Nihongo Hyoki no Shinrigaku: Tango Ninchi ni Okeru Hyoki to Hindo.

Tokyo, Japan: Kitaoji Shobo.

Ide, Sashiko. 1979. Onna no Kotoba Otoko no Kotoba. Japan: Ueno Insatsujo.
Inoue, Miyako. 2004. Gender,

language, and modernity: Toward an effective history of
‘Japanese women’s language’. In Shigeko Okamoto and Janet Shibamoto-Smith (eds.)
Japanese Language, Gender, and Ideology: Cultural Models and Real People. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford
University Press. 57–75.

Ito, Kinko. 2005. A history of manga in the context of Japanese culture and society. The

Journal of Popular Culture 38: 456–475.

Iwahara, Akihiko, Takeshi Hatta and Aiko Maehara. 2003. Effects of a sense of compatibility

between type of script and word in written Japanese. Reading and Writing 16: 377–397.

Japanese Magazine Publishers Association. 2014. JMPA Insatsu busu kohyo. Last accessed 5

August 2014 at http://www.j-magazine.or.jp/magadata/?module=list&action=list

Joyce, Terry, Bor Hodoscek and Kikuko Nishina. 2012. Orthographic representation and
variation within the Japanese writing system: Some corpus-based observations. Written
Language & Literacy 15: 254–278.

Kess, Joseph and Tadao Miyamoto. 1999. The Japanese Mental Lexicon: Psycholinguistic Studies

of Kana and Kanji Processing. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: John Benjamins.

Kinsella, Sharon. 1996. Change in the social status, form and content of adult manga, 1986–

1996. Japan Forum 8: 103–112.

Kinsui, Satoshi. 2003. Vacharu Nihongo: Yakuwarigo no Nazo. Tokyo, Japan: Iwanami.
Kinsui, Satoshi. 2010. ‘Otoko kotoba’ no rekishi: ‘Ore’ ‘boku’ o chushin ni. In Momoko

Nakamura (ed.) Jenda de Manabu Gengogaku. Kyoto, Japan: Sekai Shisosha. 35–49.

Konno, Shinji. 2014a. Kanazukai no Rekishi. Tokyo, Japan: Chuokoron.
Konno, Shinji. 2014b. Nihongo no hyoki no tayosei. AJALT 37: 23–27.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

518

ROBERTSON

Konno, Shinji. 2015. Nihongo no Rekishi. Tokyo, Japan: Kawade.
Maree, Claire. 2003. Ore wa ore dakara [‘because I’m me’]: A study of gender and language in
the documentary Shinjuku Boys. Intersections: Gender, History and Culture in the Asian
Context 9. Last accessed September 2016 at http://intersections.anu.edu.au/issue9/maree.
html

Masuji, Hitomi. 2011. Gendai nihongo ni okeru mojishu no sentaku. Unpublished PhD

dissertation. Tokyo, Japan: Waseda University.

Matsunaga, Sachiko. 1996. The linguistic nature of kanji reexamined: Do kanji represent only

meanings? The Journal of the Association of Teachers of Japanese 30: 1–22.

McCloud, Scott. 1993. Understanding Comics: The Invisible Art. New York: HarperCollins.
McCloud, Scott. 2006. Making Comics. New York: HarperCollins.
Miyake, Kazuko. 2007. How young Japanese express their emotions visually in mobile phone

messages: A sociolinguistic analysis. Japanese Studies 27: 53–72.

Miyazaki, Ayumi. 2002. Relational shift: Japanese girls’ nontraditional ﬁrst person pronouns.
In Sarah Benor, Mary Rose, Devyani Sharma, Julie Sweetland and Qing Zhang (eds.)
Gendered Practices in Language. Stanford, California: CSLI Publications. 355–374.

Moskowitz, Nona. 2014. Gender, maturity, and ‘going out into the world’: Self-referent term

choice at Ogasawara Middle School. U.S.-Japan Women’s Journal 47: 73–99.

Moskowitz, Nona. 2015. Ordering a disordered world through language: Metapragmatic
dissonance and the ‘misreading’ of an indexical relationship. Signs and Society 3: 331–361.
Nakamura, Momoko. 2007. ‘Sei’ to Nihongo: Kotoba ga Tsukuru Onna to Otoko. Tokyo, Japan:

Nihon Hosou Shuppan Kyokai.

Nakamura, Momoko. 2013. Honyaku ga Tsukuru Nihongo: Heroin wa ‘Onna Kotoba’ wo

Hanashitsuzukeru. Tokyo, Japan: Hakutakusha.

Nakamura, Momoko. 2014. Gender, Language and Ideology: A Genealogy of Japanese Women’s

Language. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: John Benjamins.

Ono, Tsuyoshi and Sandra A. Thompson. 2003. Japanese (w)atashi/ore/boku ‘I’: They’re not

just pronouns. Cognitive Linguistics 14: 321–347.

Oricon. 2012. 2011nen Shoseki Shibai. Last accessed March 2015 at http://www.oricon.co.

jp/news/2006093/full/

Prough, Jennifer. 2010. Marketing Japan: Manga as Japan’s new ambassador. ASIANetwork

Exchange 12: 54–68.

Robertson, Wesley. 2015. Orthography,

foreigners, and ﬂuency: Indexicality and script

selection in Japanese manga. Japanese Studies 35: 205–222.

Rowe, Harold Myer. 1981. Variations in Japanese newspaper spelling. In Harold Bolitho and
Alan Rix (eds.) A Northern Prospect: Australian Papers on Japan. Canberra, Australia:
Australian National University Press. 107–122.

Satake, Hideo. 1989. Wakamono no bunsho to katanana koka. Nihongogaku 8: 60–67.
Schwartz, Adam and Elaine Rubinstein-Avila. 2006. Understanding the manga hype:
Uncovering the multimodality of comic book literacies. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy
50: 40–49.

Sebba, Mark. 2009. Sociolinguistic approaches to writing systems research. Writing Systems

Research 1: 35–49.

Sebba, Mark. 2012. Orthography as social action: Scripts, spelling, identity and power. In
Mark Sebba, Alexandra Jaffe, Jannis Androutsopoulos and Sally Johnson (eds.) Orthography
as Social Action: Scripts, Spelling, Identity and Power. Berlin, Germany: Walter de Gruyter.
1–20.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

HE’S MORE KATAKANA THAN KANJI

519

Seeley, Christopher. 2000. A History of Writing in Japan. Honolulu, Hawai’i: University of

Hawai’i Press.

Silverstein, Michael. 1985. Language and the culture of gender: At the intersection of
structure, usage, and ideology. In Elizabeth Mertz and Richard J. Parmentier (eds.) Semiotic
Mediation: Sociocultural and Psychological Perspectives. Orlando, Florida: Academic Press.
219–257.

Spitzm€uller, J€urgen. 2012. Floating ideologies: Metamorphoses of graphic ‘Germanness’. In
Mark Sebba, Alexandra Jaffe, Jannis Androutsopoulos and Sally Johnson (eds.) Orthography
as Social Action: Scripts, Spelling, Identity and Power. Berlin, Germany: Walter de Gruyter.
255–288.

Spitzm€uller, J€urgen. 2015. Graphic variation and graphic ideologies: A metapragmatic

approach. Social Semiotics 25: 126–141.

Thompson, Roger. 1982. Language planning in frontier America: The case of the Deseret

Alphabet. Language Problems and Language Planning 6: 45–62.

Tomoda, Takako. 2009. The Foreign Word Tsunami: Perceptions, Politics and Policies on
Loanwords (Gairaigo) in Contemporary Japan. Saarbr€ucken, Germany: VDM Verlag Dr.
M€uller.

Tranter, Nicolas. 2008. Nonconventional script choice in Japan. International Journal of the

Sociology of Language 192: 133–51.

Tsuboi, Miki. 2003. Otokode/onnade: Seisa ni yoru hyoki yoshiki no bunrui. Tsukuba Nihongo

Kenkyu 8: 1–21.

Twine, Nanette. 1991. Language and the Modern State. London: Routledge.
Ueno, Junko. 2006. Shojo and adult women: A linguistic analysis of gender identity in manga

(Japanese comics). Women & Language 29: 16–25.

Ukita, Jun, Ichiro Sugishima, Naohiro Minagawa, Michio Inoue and Kan Kashu. 1996.
Nihongo no Hyoki Keitai ni Kansuru Shinrigakuteki Kenkyu. Tokyo, Japan: Nihon Shinrigakkai
Monogurafu Iinkai.

Unita, Yumi. 2006. Usagi Doroppu 1. Tokyo, Japan: Shodensha.
Unita, Yumi. 2007a. Usagi Doroppu 2. Tokyo, Japan: Shodensha.
Unita, Yumi. 2007b. Usagi Doroppu 3. Tokyo, Japan: Shodensha.
Unita, Yumi. 2008. Usagi Doroppu 4. Tokyo, Japan: Shodensha.
Unita, Yumi. 2009a. Usagi Doroppu 5. Tokyo, Japan: Shodensha.
Unita, Yumi. 2009b. Usagi Doroppu 6. Tokyo, Japan: Shodensha.
Unita, Yumi. 2010a. Usagi Doroppu 7. Tokyo, Japan: Shodensha.
Unita, Yumi. 2010b. Usagi Doroppu 8. Tokyo, Japan: Shodensha.
Unita, Yumi. 2011. Usagi Doroppu 9. Tokyo, Japan: Shodensha.
Unser-Schutz, Giancarla. 2010. Exploring the role of language in manga: Text types, their

usages, and their distributions. International Journal of Comic Art 12: 25–43.

Unser-Schutz, Giancarla. 2013. The role of language in manga: From the point of view of structure,
vocabulary, and characters. Unpublished PhD dissertation. Tokyo, Japan: Hitotsubashi
University.

Unseth, Peter. 2005. Sociolinguistic parallels between choosing scripts and languages. Written

Language & Literacy 8: 19–42.

Usami, Hiroshi. 2004. Kotoboa no ‘tadashisa’ to wa nanika. In Kokuritsu Kokugo Kenkyujo
(ed.) Shin Kotoba Shirızu 17: Kotoba no ‘Tadashisa’ towa Nanika. Tokyo, Japan: Kokuritsu
Insatsukyoku. 28–36.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

520

ROBERTSON

Virtue, Graeme. 2015. Marvel and DC comics dominate sales helped along by big-screen boost.
The Guardian January 15. Last accessed March 2015 at http://www.theguardian.com/b
ooks/2015/jan/14/marvel-dc-spiderman-guardians-of-the-galazy

Wolk, Douglas. 2007. Reading Comics: How Graphic Novels Work and What They Mean.

Cambridge, Massachusetts: DeCapo Press.

Wortham, Stanton. 2010. Linguistic anthropology of education. In Marilyn Martin-Jones,
Nancy Hornberger and de Mejia Anne-Marie (eds.) Encyclopedia of Language and Education
Volume 3. New York: Springer. 93–103.

Yoda, Tomiko. 2000. Literary history against the national

frame, or gender and the

emergence of Heian kana writing. Positions 8: 465–497.

Yoshimura, Yumiko. 1985. Gohyoki ishiki no heni. Gengogaku Ronso 4: 82–93.

Address correspondence to:

Wesley C. Robertson
Monash University – Arts
Wellington Rd & Blackburn Rd
Clayton
Melbourne, Victoria 3800
Australia

wesleycrobertson@gmail.com

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd


