INTRODUCTION.
Increasingly, there are calls – in contexts of the global, geopolitical South
especially – for decoloniality, and there is a respectable and growing body of
literature in disciplines such as history, sociology, literature, philosophy and
linguistics that are taking the ‘decolonial turn’ (Maldonado-Torres 2011).
Quijano (2000) introduced the notion of decoloniality to emphasize the need to
move away from ‘continuing’ coloniality – what Mignolo (1995) refers to as
‘the darker side of modernity’, distinguishing four axes relevant to the
enduring colonial matrix of power:
• economic (appropriating land, and control of the economy);
• political (maintaining authority);
• civic life (where gender and sexuality are controlled with Western
heteropatriarchal discursive practices); and
• epistemological (pertaining to subjectivity, identity, control, distortion and
erasure of knowledge).
In Maldonado-Torres’ (2011: 2) words,
Coloniality . . . refers to long-standing patterns of power that emerged as a result
of colonialism, but that define culture, labor, intersubjective relations and
knowledge production well beyond the strict limits of colonial administrations.
Thus, coloniality survives colonialism.
Decoloniality, then, is a political and epistemic (and spiritual) project to delink
from modern colonial designs (Mignolo 2011). It is the
dismantling of relations of power and conceptions of knowledge that foment the
reproduction of racial, gender and geo-political hierarchies that came into being
or found new and more powerful forms of expression in the modern/colonial
world. (Maldonado-Torres 2011: 117)
The decolonial turn has many roots and offshoots: ‘heightened perception of
the linkages between colonialism, racism and other forms of dehumanization
in the twentieth century, the formation of ethnic movements of empowerment
and feminisms of colour, and the appearance of queer decolonial theorizing’
(Maldonado-Torres 2011: 2). The many manifestations of decoloniality share a
perception of coloniality as a continuing concern in the contemporary world.
An important dimension of enduring coloniality is the ‘knowledge’ we have of
our embodied, gendered, racialized and sexualized selves, and the praxes/
practices through which these selves can be inserted into the everyday.
Concepts of gender and race that evolved out of imperial coloniality remain
tightly imbricated in contemporary forms of coloniality/modernity. The ‘voices’
with which we speak ourselves and the scripts that we follow in these respects
remain those of colonial discourse. Conceptualizations of gender that articulate
with race are reproduced through specific global sociopolitical forms of political
organization, as well as circulated across the globe in Western
heteropatriarchal discourses of entertainment and thought. Mohanty (2003:
514) notes how modern-day manifestations of coloniality ‘global capitalism
and neoliberal policies writes its script especially in the bodies and lives of
women and girls from the third world’. In the postapartheid context of South
Africa, the intersectionalities of race, gender and economic disparities underlie
widespread practices of patriarchy, rape and sexual discrimination.
However, despite the intimacy and carnality of the coloniality nexus of sex,
gender and race, Arboleda-Rıos (2014) notes that ‘the ways in which lesbian,
homosexual, bisexual, transgender and/or queer subjects confront interlocking
systems of oppression have been consistently disregarded’ by the decoloniality
collective. Furthermore, the connections between enduring racialization and
the production of race and sexuality remain in need of explication. Mbembe
(2017: 55) makes the point that ‘our critique of modernity will remain
incomplete if we fail to grasp that the coming of modernity coincided with the
appearance of the principle of race’. He goes on to say that ‘[i]n order to
reproduce itself, the principle of race depends on an assemblage of practices
whose immediate and direct target is the body of the Other and whose scope is
life in general’ (2017: 56) – including, importantly, sexuality.
In her much-cited, seminal work on decolonial feminism, Lugones (2010)
explicates the mutual co-constitution of gender and race in practices of slavery
and colonization. And Sally Kitch (2009: 169) notes how ‘sexual difference
and the gender binary became basic tenets of the ideology of racial hierarchy
and white supremacy during processes of nation formation in the West’.
Gunkel (2010: 11) explains that, through hypersexualizing the (black) Other,
‘colonialism constituted race as a sexualised category, and sexuality a
racialized category. However, it was not only heterosexuality that was
racially constructed, but also divergent sexualities’.
Drag and decoloniality.
One area in which these complex interactions are literally on show and open to
reflection is the drag performance. Drag shows are arguably a form of
decolonial aesthetic or decolonial aestheSis (Mignolo and Vasquez 2013), a
dimension of decoloniality that seeks to replace the coloniality of traditional
aesthetics with alternative ways of sensing and perceiving. They are typical
instances of performances that seek to parody and disrupt colonialities of gender
or sexuality, by showing that they are in no way ‘natural’ or stable, as we are
led to believe. Although much has been written on drag queens, less is known
about how drag kings go about the task of disrupting sexuality and gender. A
drag king is most often (but not always) a woman who dresses up in costume
that is recognizably masculine, and who performs theatrically in that costume
(Halberstam 1997, 1998, 2001). Mu~noz (1999: 99) remarks on how queer
performances allow performers and their audiences (through disidentification)
to resist ‘the interpellating call of ideology that fixes a subject within the state
power apparatus’. Halberstam (1998) argues that the subversive power of the
drag performance lies in the fact that drag parades discontinuities between
gender and sex or appearance and reality, but doesn’t allow these
discontinuities to be read as dysfunction (as they would be in ordinary
circumstances). Instead, these inconsistencies become a site of gender
creativity (cf. Butler 1996), and there is thus a strong claim here to be
disrupting normativities of masculinity through holding them up for laughter.
However, genres (including performance genres) are sites of social (re)
production – of people, persona, place and registers – as much as they invite
social change. They are therefore also a potential carrier of global-colonial
structurations (global circulation). Shome (2000: 367) has argued that
‘cultural products such as texts, . . . legitimize and reproduce – the genre allows
gender and race to shift location, and to appear anew’ thereby reproducing
patterns in ‘the everyday organization of social and cultural relations [which]
function to confer benefits and systemic advantage to whites’ (cf. Williams and
Stroud 2014). The question then becomes in what ways, and to what extent,
do performance genres such as drag king further a decolonial critique of the
colonialities of the body; that is, gender, sexuality and race and their
embodiment? In what sense can they be seen as articulations of a decolonial
aesthetics? Do drag shows break ‘silences, disrup[ting] dominant narratives
and create a transformative consciousness’, as Cervantes and Salda~na claim to
be the case for hip hop and nueva cancion (2015: 84). Do they provide a
means to ‘delink from coloniality and exercise a “decolonial imaginary”’ (Perez
1999: 5)?
In this paper, we approach these questions with a close analysis of four
excerpts from two performances by a troupe of drag kings called Bros B4 Ho’s
(sic)2 who promote themselves as ‘South Africa’s first ever Drag King troupe’.3
In interviews the motivation behind their performances is presented as clearly
political in nature (OUT Africa Magazine 2012) and, on the group’s Facebook
page, the kings explain that they ‘use satire, irony, and parody . . . to subvert
cultural hegemony and conventions and empower them[selves]’. It’s clear
that, to them, resisting and disrupting hegemony is a big part of their project.
On the basis of our analysis of the drag king troupe, we argue that
deconstructions of gendered relationships, or the remapping of sexualities
across gender categories, or the erasure of simple gender binaries oftentimes
implicate the continued production and circulation of racial and sexual
hierarchy. In fact, we make a stronger claim: that the continued circulation of
stereotypes of race and sexuality are the very means whereby
heteronormativity is deconstructed in these performances. In other words,
not performing blackness is a prerequisite for the performativity of masculinity.
At the same time, we show that there are moments of genre rupture in the
drag king performance that destabilize the simple reproduction of colonialities
of race and sexuality.
In making this argument, we take an approach to language and social life
inspired by the work of Frantz Fanon, a post-colonial philosopher and writer
born in French-colonized Martinique, who shaped the way we think about
colonialism and anti-black racism today. His most well-known works were
published in the 1950s and 1960s, largely in response to his experiences of
racism when studying in France, as well as his involvement in the Algerian
National Liberation Front fighting against French colonization. In the very first
line in the very first chapter of Black Skin, White Masks he notes the
‘fundamental importance’ of language, considering it ‘essential for providing
us with one element in understanding the black man’s dimension of being-forothers’
(2008: 1). In particular, we use a Fanonian perspective on body,
violence and language to frame our discussion of performance, genre and
subjectification in the next section. Following this, we present the drag troupe
together with a brief review of some key literature on drag. This will provide
the foundation for a study of two performances in Cape Town. We conclude the
paper with a discussion on the implications of drag for decoloniality (informed
through a Fanonian stance), and the possible contribution a Fanonian
approach can make to sociolinguistics more generally.
<Middle>
A FANONIAN LENS ON SOCIOLINGUISTICS.
Although little used by linguists (but cf. Burnett and Milani in press), a
Fanonian approach to language opens up some enticing possibilities for
thinking about the role of language in the global circulation of enduring
racialization and its semiotics. Central concepts in Fanon’s thought pertain to
the body, violence and language, and, even though Fanon wrote almost 70
years ago, his accounts of the existential formation of race retain a troubling
currency in contemporary society.
The central problematic of Fanon’s oeuvre is the fact of blackness as a White
semiotic construction, one that depends on, and is continually reinforced by,
(failed) encounters with whiteness. Blackness is forged on the anvil of
structural whiteness in a violence of language, and ‘woven out of a thousand
details, anecdotes and stories’ (Fanon 1967: 111). Race, in Mbembe’s (2017)
words, is an assemblage, cobbled together in the intersubjective, social world of
culture, history, language and economics – a world symbolically and
semiotically constituted by humans. It is this world of representation and
interaction that determines the forms in which blackness may emerge. Fanon
calls the process of fabricating blackness sociogeny, whereby the symbolic and
semiotic is made materiality and flesh.
The most famous example of sociogeny is Fanon’s telling of how he is
interpellated, while walking the streets of Paris, by a young (white) Parisian
boy who shouts: ‘Look, a negro!’ This hailing, which Fanon at first found
amusing, alerted him to how his body – his general corporeal schema – had in
that moment been overtaken by a racial epidermal schema:
. . . my body was given back to me sprawled out, distorted, recolored, clad in
mourning in that white winter day. The Negro is an animal, the Negro is bad,
the Negro is mean, the Negro is ugly. (Fanon 1967: 112)
When Fanon recounts this story, he notes how he is made to appear to
himself as an epidermis, a becoming-skin, a historical-racial body schema (seen
through a third person consciousness). He contrasts this ‘self’ as a becomingskin
with a body-schema, or a phenomenological sense of self, that normally
emerges out of the everyday ‘remnants of feelings and notions of the tactile,
vestibular, kinesthetic or visual nature’ (1967: 91), ‘owned’ by the perceiving
and acting subject (cf. Merleau-Ponty 1996). The epidermilization, or becoming
skin (Fanon’s concept of the body), is at the same time an internalization. In
fact, as pointed out by Gorgis (2015: 86) ‘“becoming-skin” suspends rather
than reinforces the distinction between interiority and exteriority’. Becoming
skin is thus ‘the process by which the exteriority of the skin internalizes affects’
(2015: 86). Fanon coins the term scissiparite (self-division or self cleaving) or
fissiparousness (a reproductive process by means of fission) to capture this form
of enforced subjectification.
Fanon refers to becoming-skin, as living in the zone of non-being. The Black,
reduced to inhabiting a two-dimensional body, has no inner life that is
recognized as interactively engaging in his/her own subjectification. There is
no recognition in the sociogeny of Blackness that s/he is anything more than
surface appearances. One implication of this is that, if the Black has no inner
life worth engaging with intersubjectively, then everything that can be
‘known’ can be sourced from his/her surface. Thus, the Black is a victim of
epistemic closure, ‘sealed in a world without reciprocity or the intersubjectively
social’ (Gordon 2015: 48–49), existing only in the zone of non-being.
In order to become fully human, to have a recognized inner life that goes
beyond the interiorization of the exteriority of the racial epidermal schema, the
Black subject must transcend the boundaries of race. However, there is a
repeated ‘failure’ of the black body to enter the world – to emerge into a world
where the standards of humanity are determined by and as whiteness – other
than as an object. In Black Skin, White Masks, each chapter elaborates on a
different aspect of the failure of black attempts to gain recognition of their
humanity. With respect to language, Fanon (2008: 3) notes how ‘the black
man who has lived in France for a certain time returns home radically
transformed’; ‘speaking pidgin means imprisoning the black man and
perpetuating a conflictual situation where the white man infects the black
man with extremely toxic foreign bodies’ (2008: 19); addressing a black man
in pidgin means ‘you stay where you are’ (2008: 17). According to Fanon
(1967: 1), ‘to speak is to exist absolutely for the other’. The world and what is
human is defined by the white as white.
For the purposes of this paper, Fanon’s complex understanding of how
(female) gender (and the exclusion or denial of femininities) mediates the
(sexual) construction of black male disempowerment is of particular relevance.
Firstly, the gaze or power of interpellation that reduces the black body to an
exteriority or ‘lack’ is in psychoanalytic thought a prerogative of the (white)
male. The black male who is denied this gaze, becoming instead its ‘object’, is
thus refused a fundamental ‘privilege’ of masculinity. The disempowerment is
accentuated even more if the gaze that constructs the black body is feminine
(thus also reversing gender roles): in an episode recounted by Fanon (1967:
94), a woman exclaims ‘Look how handsome that Negro is’ and the powerful
retort, ‘Fuck you, madame’ testifies to the added dismemberment felt by the
black male from being objectified in a female gaze (cf. Bergner 1995).
Secondly, Fanon discusses the gendered differences between black men and
women in how they desire and attempt to inhabit whiteness. In Black Skin,
White Masks, he strongly critiques Mayotte Capecia’s (1948: 202) comment in
her autobiography Je suis Martiniquaise, ‘I should have liked to be married but
to a white man’, condemning her reproduction of racist ideology. Bergner
(1995: 86) remarks on how ‘black women’s attempts to inhabit a whiteness
that Fanon consistently defines in masculine terms becomes mimicry, a
feminine masquerade both of race and gender’. In this comment, black
femininity is de-subjectivized. Thus, gender and sexuality figure prominently in
Fanon’s thought in the construction of the black male.
Fanon’s concern with appearance as subjectification (how what can appear
in what guise and when, under what conditions), the notion of sociogeny as
the site where collective racial narratives become individualized, embodied
subjectivities, the metatheory of failure as the generative process in the
construction of black identities, together with the role of sexuality and gender
in the construction of the black male, provides an interesting perspective from
which to study drag. Performance more generally is a site for highly
coordinated and public displays of cultural reproduction (and contestation;
Bauman 2001), where the communicative act is also put on display for an
audience, and is thus objectified and able to be intensely scrutinized with
regard to multiple features of its semiotics (cf. also Coupland 2007). Because of
this, performance is a potentially productive site of resistance to and
reindexicalization of cultural stereotypes of sexual and racialized identities.
However, performances acquire this potential through tapping into (globally)
circulating discourses and characterological figures and genres that audiences
can identify, align with or distance themselves from. It is also this dimension
that opens up performances to reproducing the familiar and the status quo.
Performances are ‘. . . encounters in which individuals establish forms of
footing and alignment with voices indexed by speech, and thus with social
types of persons, real or imagined . . .’ (Agha 2005: 38).
A Fanonian approach to the sociolinguistics of performance suggests a
specific angle of interrogation into the drag genre and its instantiations in the
performance, one that explores the drag show as a potential site for the
construction of alienating stereotypes of blackness (and sexuality). We feel that
this is a particularly important perspective to ask of a drag performance with
decolonial ambitions in contemporary postapartheid South Africa.
Drag shows are an instance of a particular genre that is a complex cluster of
speaker types, audience types, technologies, settings and purposes, ‘a
constellation of systemically related, co-occurrent formal features and
structures that serves as a conventionalized orienting framework for the
production and reception of discourse’ (Bauman 2001: 79). It is a relational
event, creating indexical connections across performances (Bauman and
Briggs 1990) with ‘other times, other places and persons’ (1992: 147–148),
thereby linking to ‘structural whiteness’. When an utterance is interpreted
through its intertextual relationships with prior texts, including prior
situational contexts and their constituents (settings, participant roles,
scenarios), it transcends the locally produced event (Bauman 2001). Of
particular interest here is the role of genres in reproducing or subverting social
power. Bauman and Briggs (1990) speak of an intertextual gap occurring in the
linking of particular utterances to generic models. These gaps can either be
minimized (as in ‘rendering the discourse interpretable through the use of
generic precedents’ (Bauman and Briggs 1992: 49) or maximizing the gaps.
With respect to the latter they note that:
Maximizing and highlighting these intertextual gaps underlies strategies for
building authority through claims of individual creativity and innovation . . .
[resulting in] resistance to the hegemonic structures associated with established
genres . . .. (1992: 149)
We explore the minimizing and maximizing of intertextual gaps in relation to
the production and subversion of Blackness in the drag king show below.
DRAG KINGS IN CAPE TOWN: PERFORMING A GENRE.
In November 2011, after attending a performance by drag king Johnny Deep at
a drag bar in Cape Town called ‘Bubbles Bar’, Catherine Saint Jude Pretorius
decided to create her own drag king persona, rapper Saint Dude. Following a
handful of successful performances at the open stage nights at Bubbles, and
realizing that other women may also benefit from the catharsis she experienced
while performing, Pretorius put out an invitation on the Facebook group ‘Cape
Town Lesbians’ for a gathering to discuss the possible formation of a drag king
troupe. Bros B4 Ho’s was formed, now comprising four white performers and
two women of colour. At the time of the study, the troupe was made up of six
personas regularly performed by the group: troupe leader Saint Dude and
Umlilo John – the only two kings of colour – both of whom are hip hop
characters; FreDDie, a Freddie Mercury impersonator; King Cory Lingus and
Cole Steel Johnson, white kings who performed mostly rock and pop music; and
Frankie H, a white king who dipped into both hip hop and pop music (Figure 1).
The group performs predominantly in traditionally white spaces in Cape Town.
Pretorius believed that a troupe could provide a safe, supportive space for a
woman to experiment with gender-bending performances (Lea 2013). Frankie
H, who at the time described himself as a ‘pre-op trans guy’, said that the
troupe was a space in which he could safely dress and behave as a man, and
have his masculinity ‘celebrated’. He went as far as admitting that the
affirmation he received while performing with the troupe allowed him to finally
make the decision to transition (Frankie H 2012). Another king, Umlilo John,
said that being in Bros B4 Ho’s allowed him to be butch without being
ostracized, and that he viewed the troupe as a second family: it was as though
he had gained new brothers and sisters at the same time (Lea 2013). This
cathartic effect that participation in the troupe has on its members, and the
options of safely performing other genders has been noted by other authors.
Shapiro (2007: 251) notes how participating in a drag performance may
‘transform the gender identity and politics of the drag performer’ functioning
as ‘a form of consciousness raising and a site of identity transformation for
performers’ (2007: 251).
As noted earlier, one prime motivation for Pretorius to start the group in the
first place was a firm political belief expressed on their Facebook page that ‘[i]n
order to debunk the hegemonic power that too often goes unaddressed and
unchallenged, we must adopt the empowered personae so that we can expose
it’.3 Furthermore, Pretorius explained that doing drag allowed her to bring the
complexities of her (and others’) gender presentation to people’s attention, and
to fight for ‘gender presentation without persecution’ (Lea 2013) as part of her
gender activism. Shapiro (2007: 267) adds the caveat, though, that a
prerequisite for tapping into the disruptive power of drag is that it is done ‘in a
group with an oppositional collective identity, feminist political commitment
and collective organizational practices’.
Escudero-Alıas (2011: 257) remarks on ‘relevant queer tools: camp humor,
slapstick’, as strategies of ‘disindentification’ (Mu~noz 1999: 39), that is,
survival strategies for resisting hegemonies. The techniques and practices
whereby the Bros B4 Ho’s enact and articulate their subversion of sexual and
gender hierarchies are those of satire, irony, parody, performed mostly through
musical acts, lip syncing or singing songs. In general, the decision to sing songs
originally performed by male artists is an effective way of using the resources of
interdiscursivity to perform masculinity. Through allusion to previous
performances, the audience is invited to associate the meaning-making of
the original act with the current performance, and the masculinity of the
original singer with that of the drag king. This is, thus, a chronotopical event
which gets its local meaning from similar performances in similar spaces across
historical time. Furthermore, there is a strong drag queen culture in Cape
Town, and nearly all the drag queen performances in this city have included
queens doing music performances as well-known female singers like Beyonce
and Lady Gaga. It is not surprising, then, that the kings chose to follow the
example of the queens around them in designing their act, again testifying to
the role of linkages with similar contemporary discourses (Table 1).
The strategies used and the aspects of coloniality that the groups target for
subversion depend on the make-up of their performers, a point that a number
of authors have captured in the notion of intersectionality. Moreman and
McIntosh (2010), for example, mention that white drag uses camp to
‘exaggerate drag performance’, whereas Latinas ‘focus more on mannerisms
and mimicry of the personality portrayed’ (Hobson 2013: 38). Hobson (2013:
39) notes how ‘when performing in public space, racial and class markers
inevitably influence audience and performer interactions’.
One aspect of this was their attempt to shift the conventional racial and
sexual parameters of the drag show away from the predominantly white, LGTB
spaces in which drag is usually performed in Cape Town to more racially open,
predominantly heterosexual spaces. However, as these spaces are located in
what were designated white areas before 1994, the three venues used by this
group (Bubbles Bar, Obz Theatre Cafe and Alexander Bar theatre) are situated
quite a distance from where the majority of non-white Capetonians are
currently living in the former coloured and black townships of the city. It is
therefore unsurprising that the audience at both events was predominantly
white and middle class.
For the purposes of this study, we limit our focus to data collected from the
only two sit-down performances held by the troupe Bros B4 Ho’s – the first at
Obz Theatre Cafe in Observatory in June 2012 and the second in December
2012 at Alexander Bar’s theatre in town. At these events, the first author
actively participated as an audience member, but also took field notes on
costumes, songs performed, movements and dance, and the reactions of the
crowd. After each event, any available footage of the show was downloaded off
the group’s YouTube channel for closer examination. Preliminary analysis of
the data was supplemented by conducting one face-to-face semi-structured
interview with the founder of the troupe, Catherine Saint Jude Pretorius. This
interview was meant to gain clarity on and further explore a few of the issues
that had come up in the data.
KINGING IN CAPE TOWN.
The performances put on in the two events under discussion could be divided
into three types. Firstly, the troupe performed group acts, with all six drag
kings on stage in matching costumes, their songs accompanied by
choreographed dances. An example would be their rendition of Color Me
Badd’s hit song I Wanna Sex You Up. Secondly, they performed individually,
choosing their drag personae based on musical genres and then putting their
drag selves on display by performing the masculinities they associated with
those singers of those genres. Individual performances were introduced by
another member of the group, usually through some witty dialogue or a funny
or endearing anecdote – a buying-in to the current global genre of the drag
king performance. Lastly, the performers would step out of their personae to
render biographical performances that they identified with personally. In these
cases, they would either choose a song which they felt fit their biography, or
would perform a song they’d written themselves.
In the next section, we look at one general troupe performance and two
performances where drag members choose their own personae for display. We
focus only on the lyrics and the stage props used by the performers, and choose
here not to discuss the nature of the locales where the shows took place, nor go
into detail on the role of the audience. We motivate our choice of foci for this
paper with reference to our (Fanonian) interest in the personae that the troupe
wish to offer in their attempt at decoloniality, and less in the audience uptake
or co-construction of these personae.
Racializing skin through gender.
Fanon’s conception of the subjectivation of Blackness finds resonance in a
conceptual framework of sociolinguistics (semiotic anthropology) dealing with
enregisterment, indexicality, interdiscursivity, voice, stance and alignment and
the contribution that these tools make to understanding the circulation and
fixedness of the stereotype of the black as object. Bros B4 Ho’s use a palette of
semiotic devices to stylize (Bakhtin 1981; Rampton 1995) and build indexical
relationships (Silverstein 2003) with a variety of male voices, and to stage and
highlight a conventional masculinity. The audiences align themselves with
these characterological masculinities, which are also reproduced, circulated
and subjected to metalinguistic commentary on the group’s blogs, interviews
and Facebook page. Throughout, we suggest, the Black subject is racialized as
an exteriority of skin.
The outstanding feature of this part of the show is the strong
heteronormative and patriarchal parameters that frame the deconstruction
of gender roles. The kings used a variety of indexical props to perform
masculinity, both linguistic and broadly semiotic. A detailed unpacking of the
strategies employed by the performers showed the most common strategy for
performing masculinity to be the modification of the body’s appearance. The
performers donned what is generally considered men’s clothing, in some cases
chosen for a baggy quality to hide curves and make the wearer look more
angular. Other body sculpting techniques were also employed, like binding,4
packing,5 and the use of makeup to add the appearance of facial hair and to
change the shape of cheeks and jaws so as to make them appear chiselled and
more defined. Certain bodily movements and choreography – such as crotchgrabbing
and hip-thrusting – were used strategically to perform a type of
masculinity that was aggressively sexual.
Furthermore, the song drag king Frankie H chose expresses quite explicitly a
man’s sexual desire for a woman’s body. Drag king Frankie H’s rendition of Sir
Mix-A-Lot’s Baby Got Back at the show in Obz Cafe is a case in point. This song
is a means for Frankie to perform a particular type of stereotypical and
hegemonic masculinity characterized by misogyny and sexism, where women
are objectified as a highly sexualized single body. Frankie’s exaggerated and
comic performance of Sir Mix-A-Lot’s hit song parodies the male gaze and the
objectification of the original song and music video. We see this in the
following well-known lyrics:
Extract 1 (Sir Mix-A-Lot, 1992)
I like big butts and I cannot lie
You other brothers can’t deny
That when a girl walks in with an itty bitty waist
And a round thing in your face
You get sprung
In this context, the word ‘sprung’ refers to having an erection, reinforced by
the way the singer grabs his crotch at this point in the music video. Frankie
signals the importance of heterosexuality to his masculinity by modifying some
of the song’s lyrics to emphasize this point. In the original, Sir Mix-A-Lot
praises black women’s bodies with the line ‘Even white boys got to shout’,
implying that black women (with the ‘right’ body shape, of course) are so
desirable that even white men have to admit to being attracted to them – the
assumption being that it is the norm for white men to desire white women
rather than black women. In Frankie’s version, the line is ‘even gay boys got to
shout’, meaning that women with big behinds are so desirable that men who
aren’t usually expected to desire women’s bodies would do so. In marking the
‘other men’ as ‘gay’, Frankie positions himself as a straight man, thereby
underscoring a point made by Hobson (2013) that heterosexual identities are
(per)formed at the cost of other identities.
The transposition of the wording of the song is not an insignificant detail.
The original text of the song sung by a black singer carries a level of Fanonian
significance that is completely lost in the change of wording. In Black Skin,
White Masks, Fanon makes a strong case for the racial dimension of sought
white recognition in relations between Black and White. The Black woman of
his example desires to be loved by her White lover (all the better if he should be
racist) in order to be recognized in his eyes, and thus to perceive herself
through whiteness, as non-black (or just a ‘little bit coloured’). Fanon’s
discussion of this example not only deconstructs the psychoanalytic primacy
accorded to sexuality and gender in the formation of the Self in favour of race;
it also shows that heteronormativity is superficial. Once again, we note that
subjectivation of blackness (how it is allowed to appear in itself and through
whiteness) is formed through collective racial narratives.
With his analysis, Fanon dismantles the ground-zero importance of
heteronormativity and the power of the phallus as a structuring parameter
in human relationships in favour of the primacy of the racial dimension.
Frankie’s rendition elides this dimension completely, introducing an ambiguity
and invisibilizing blackness in the process in favour of a masculine
representation of femaleness.
The portrayal of typical masculine representations of femaleness is also
clearly apparent in the scenography of the performance. Frankie performs the
song with two very feminine back-up dancers, whose appearances carefully
draw on elements closely linked with dominant narratives of femininity. They
are dressed in short, tight black dresses that show off their legs and their curvy
figures. The ‘sexy little black dress’, of course, is associated with chronotopical
indexicalities of a classic and timeless femininity – this skimpy piece of clothing
is what some magazines insist all women should own. The women also have
long, loose hair and wear makeup, which they have used to highlight their lips
and eyes, unlike Frankie, whose makeup adds the appearance of facial hair to
his face. A hyperfeminine woman or drag queen joining a drag king
performance is a strategy of masculine supplementarity (cf. Halberstam
2001: 428), and serves to both supplement the king’s masculinity and
destabilize it by highlighting anything he lacks. The back-up dancers also
contribute to an interdiscursive link between this performance and the hip hop
music videos screened frequently on music channels like MTV. Throughout the
song, Frankie exaggerates his attraction to the women, touching their bodies
and grinding against them as he dances, and performing both a stereotypical
masculinity and femininity; through this explicit articulation of heterosexual
desire through movement, gesture, song, and clothing, the drag king performs
his masculinity.
This is further emphasized by Frankie’s costume. In this act, he wears a
sleeveless black vest with the words ‘GIRLS GIRLS GIRLS GIRLS’ printed on it,
and in smaller print, the words ‘Girls I do adore’. Each letter ‘i’ in the larger
print is a silhouette of a thin, curvy woman posing in a suggestive way
(Figure 2). The shirt acts as a prop that spells out his sexual preference.
In the conventional sense of drag, the drag kings are successful in
overturning commonsense understandings of the relationship between sex
and gender. Firstly, their performances make the ‘performance’ aspect of
gender visible. By demonstrating that successful performances of masculinity
can be produced by people who are not men, it denaturalizes masculinity,
bringing attention to all the props and strategies that are needed to perform it
successfully (Butler 1990; Milani 2014).
In addition to this, the audience’s knowledge of the female performer behind
each persona allows for the reinterpretation of the depictions of heterosexuality
during the performances, which now take on homoerotic overtones, because
while it is a performance of a man desiring women, to the viewers it is also a
demonstration of a woman desiring other women. The titillation of the display
of same-sex desire is confirmed by the audience reactions observed at these
points during fieldwork. Without fail, each time the kings performed sexual
attraction – towards each other, towards supporting women performers or
women in the audience – the crowd erupted with hollers, wolf whistles and
laughter.
This is a recontextualization of cultural texts of masculinity (Bauman and
Briggs 1990) just as much as it is an attempted dismantling. In this respect,
among others, the drag show has all the attributes of the carnivalesque, where
the gross depiction of power is momentarily inverted in the performance, but
nevertheless understood by all participants, as solidly present and as robustly
powerful the very moment the carnival concludes. However, what is hidden
behind the White mask of the heteronormative performance is the Black skin –
the reproduction of the invisibility of the racial-epidermal body schema.
Performing personae through choice of song.
Another example of how the performance constructs Blackness in the zone of
non-being and as an artefact and prop in a heteronormative production of
Whiteness is when one of the drag kings, Umlilo, stands out by choosing to
perform masculinity with a song originally sung by a woman hip hop artist,
Nicki Minaj. Minaj is a controversial figure who often makes people feel
uncomfortable because her performances of femininity are designed to make
audiences question their ideas on how black women in music videos should
behave. She unapologetically plays with her sexuality on her own terms,
appearing in erotic situations with women, flipping the male gaze, taking
pleasure in black women’s bodies that deliberately resist white ideals of beauty,
or performing a hyperfeminine ‘fake’ Barbie persona as an over-the-top
conforming to such ideals. The Nicki Minaj song chosen by Umlilo, Beez in the
Trap, is about selling drugs and pimping (the phrase translates to ‘I always
have what you need’) and is characteristic of the stereotypical ‘pimp-hoegangsta’
culture that has become emblematic of hip hop culture since the
nineties and is constantly being displayed in rap music videos. The rap register
is usually linked with a particular social stereotype of black masculinity, and so
by performing the hip hop hustler as a woman, she disrupts the masculine link
while retaining and recycling the stereotype indexically associated with the
register of rap.
In the interview, the first author asked Pretorius explicitly about this choice
of song, and she answered the following:
Extract 26
Yeah, Beez in the Trap.Umm(.) Because also– because Nicki Minaj is an interesting
character that’s why. It’s because Nicki Minaj plays with her masculine identity. So
what Umlilo did was take the masculinity out of what Nicki Minaj was saying (.)
and flip it and s– have it from a male perspective.Umso ya it’s pretty much based on
like the way Nicki Minaj plays with gender because then what happens is (.) you
can divorce what– like divorce her lyrics from her gender identity and apply it to
like– the like the masculine and then she’s doing it through like (.) a feminineum(.)
voice like her voice is feminine and then having that you can s– I mean if you listen
to the words she talks about like ‘bitches’ and all of that (.) Ya it’s interesting also
because (.) just as a side note we always used to discuss how Nicki Minaj um (..)
some people call her a feminist, but it’s interesting that she exploits women in the
same way that (.) male hip hop performers do. So it’s interesting that like a woman
needs to do that too to be like deemed powerful. Ya, so we were kinda like exploring
that whole (.) idea like (.)
Here, Pretorius seems to be saying that in some cases, it’s possible to ‘source’
masculinity or emulate a masculine performance froma non-male-bodied person
(like Minaj), and this confirms her belief that gender can be divorced from
biological sex. The drag king persona here follows Nicki Minaj’s lead by
embodying masculinity in the female body and articulating masculinity through
the feminine voice. At the same time, she is playing on the controversy
surrounding Minaj who treats other women as though they were her ‘bitches’,
and ‘exploits women in the same way that male hip hop performers do’, thus
delivering a critique of masculinity as a denigrating power that is not localized to
the male body only. By bringing in this aspect of power as non-specific to gendered
bodies, the performance can thus be read as a critique of the lip synching
heteronormativity on which the success of the drag king performance rests.
Interestingly, however, the critique of the testosteronal male and the
disembodiment of pernicious masculinity is figuratively embodied and carried
through a representation and enactment of the black body and the black male.
Minaj uses the rap register to make visible a transgressive feminine
masculinity, but in so doing there is again a stereotyping of the social persona
of the black rapper. This cultural appropriation, in which masculinities of
colour are used as props, has many problematic dimensions. Bucholtz (1999)
has examined one set of problematics of this strategy in her work on the speech
of a young white man called Brand One who, through his use of AAVE
resources, ‘borrows’ an honorary black status and its accompanying
ideological form of masculinity, where AAVE indexes black masculinity,
which is seen as a more successful form of masculinity because it is
stereotypically linked to physical power and violence. Brand One’s
borrowing reproduces and preserves both this racist narrative which projects
essentialized qualities onto racialized groups and evaluates members in how
they measure up to these qualities and the racial hierarchy that enables white
cultural appropriation of African American culture through language crossing
(cf. Bucholtz and Lopez’s 2011 discussion of ‘linguistic minstrelsy’).
E.P. Johnson (2003) also discusses instances when people who identify as
white appropriate black signifiers. He argues that the sources are often black
performers whose blackness is implicated in the construction of racist
stereotypes – something we see happening in drag king Frankie H’s
performance of Sir Mix-A-Lot’s famous hit song analysed below. He points
out that such appropriation is always fraught with discourses of otherness. ‘For
their part’, he says,
whites construct linguistic representations of blacks that are grounded in racist
stereotypes to maintain the status quo only to then reappropriate these
stereotypes to affect a fetishistic ‘escape’ into the Other to transcend the
rigidity of their own whiteness, as well as to feed the capitalist gains of
commodified blackness. (Johnson 2003: 5)
In his interview in the documentary, Frankie reveals that, unlike other
performers, he didn’t know immediately what persona he would choose. After
doing research and watching videos of other drag performances, he was
surprised to find that he was most attracted to ‘old-school’ rap and hip hop
performances, and that these eventually shaped his persona, which he
characterizes as a ‘whiteboy gangsta wannabe’ (Lea 2013). His performance of
Sir Mix-A-Lot’s Baby got Back is exactly the kind of fetishizing and unreflective
appropriation of over-the-counter stereotypes of blackness that Johnson talks
about here.
The construction of blackness as physically aberrant in ways that echo
Fanon’s characterization of ‘my body thrown back at me through a third
person consciousness’ (2008: 93) in all its grotesque, exaggerated physicality
is a feature of the performance that comes across frequently. We find this in
Frankie’s performance of Sir Mix-A-Lot’s song. In the original song, the (black)
rapper makes a show of his preference for black women’s bodies over those of
white women. As problematic as the song is, it is partly a comment on the way
white women’s bodies are held as the standard of beauty at the expense of
black women’s bodies. However, Frankie – a white performer – not only
appropriates the original performance of black masculinity, but also replaces
the black back-up dancers with white women. Importantly, the explicit parody
of ‘the white girl’ and her racism in the famous introduction to the song – in
which a white woman expresses comical disgust at a black woman’s body – is
omitted:
Extract 3 (Sir Mix-A-Lot, 1992)
Oh, my, god. Becky, look at her butt.
It is so big. [scoff]
She looks like one of those rap guys’ girlfriends.
But, you know, who understands those rap guys? [scoff]
They only talk to her, because, she looks like a total prostitute, ‘kay?
I mean, her butt, is just so big.
I can’t believe it’s just so round, it’s like, out there, I mean— gross. Look!
She’s just so. . . black!
The meaning of the original song sung and performed by Black artists is
arguably a celebration of blackness. However, this element of the original
performance is completely lost in Frankie’s appropriated rendition. The
omission of the introductory parody of ‘the white girl’, and loss of the
important locus of enunciation of this song in the black body of Sir Mix-A-Lot is
lost in transition, a form of ‘glossing’ that ultimately has the effect that white
supremacy and hegemony reasserts itself. In the example of the kings, the
‘gloss of white enunciation’ opens up a whole new set of interdiscursive chains
– not just the visibility of the black body and its indexicalities and meanings
through the white gaze, but also how that white gaze itself, as the very
modality through which the black body can be interpellated, has ocular
histories in colonial oppression. Making oneself visible through appropriating
the ‘visibility’ and audibility of Black music and characters reinforces one of the
traditional/conventional (framing) parameters of Blackness, namely to be
interpellated through the White gaze. In fact, the text of the song linking big
buttocks to excessive sexuality and prostitution is eerily reminiscent of the texts
circulating in conjunction with the display of the naked body of Saartjie
Baartman, the ‘Hottentot Venus’ of the human zoos of the 19th century
(Mendez 2015). Her ‘darker skin’, ‘horribly flattened nose’, ‘voluptuousness’,
‘protruding buttocks’ and ‘overdeveloped clitoris and labia’ were seen as
‘markers of primitive physiology and sexuality’ (Mendez 2015: 48; Gilman
1985; cf. also Mbembe 2017).
MIND THE GAP.
So far, we have emphasized how the drag kings accomplish gender subversion
through the invisibilization, stereotyping and reproduction of race. In these
respects, rather than destabilizing the colonial nexus of sex, gender and race,
the performances can arguably be seen as stabilizing and reproducing it. The
genre as performed so far seems to offer no escape from the colonial stereotype
of the Black subject. However, genres do allow for renewal and change. There
are instances in the performance when intertextual gaps open up, and create
spaces for the performers to step away from racially stereotyping reproductions
and perform race and gender/sexuality differently. One such gap occurs when
Umlilo moves away from the drag king convention of singing songs sung by
male artists and chooses to sing a song by Nicki Minaj, a female rapper, as
discussed above.
There are two features of the performance that we can identify as stepping
outside of the circulation of stereotypes. In the first instance, the voice of the
performers are engaged by the lyrics they perform as ‘themselves’, singing
songs that reflected their own personal ‘Journey through Gender’ (the title of
the show); some chose to sing existing American songs, but others performed
their own lyrics. The song entitled Revolution by Pretorius, in particular, makes
some political points as she talks about her struggles with her cultural and
gender identity. In the middle of the song, she sings the following:
Extract 4
I don’t want to be a boy and I don’t want to be a girl
No room for grey area in this black and white world
I don’t want to be coloured, white or black
But I was forced to choose
Reality gave me a smack
I’m a black female lesbian
My political motives
I became militant too, words were my explosives
. . .
I’m the wrong kind of boy, his name is Saint Dude.
I have a slave name but I’m still Afrocentric
I love these dreads, please don’t call them eccentric
The text of this song is one of few occasions when the drag kings step out of the
cut-and-dry representation of masculinity and femininity, and complicate the
idea of gender, at the same time as they complicate racial categorizations of
white, black and coloured, as well as sexuality. This kind of biographical piece
or metacommentary is not typical of the genre of drag king performances.
Here, Pretorius links her current ambivalence with the history of the slave
trade. The song is a powerful interruption of the classical drag narrative of
gender binaries, and introduces a voice weary of the stereotype and alert to the
linkages of sexualities, races and genders. As with Besnier’s (2002) study of the
transgendered fakaleitı of Tonga, what is transgressive about her performance
has less to do with subverting the gender binary and more to do with
highlighting aspects of the local of importance for identity work. In the Tongan
case, the pageant allows an underprivileged and marginalized sector of Tongan
society to play with locality (in this case performing ‘Tongan-ness’) as well as
to have access to global symbolic capital in ways that they don’t usually have
off-stage (Besnier 2002: 559). In a similar manner, the Filipino gay men in
New York City in the late 1980s to mid-1990s that Manalansan (2003) writes
about resist adopting American gay culture outright, and rather create their
own identities influenced by practices from home, as well as contesting
mainstream Western ideas about gayness and adapting them to suit
themselves. Manalansan positions his study as a resistance to generalizing
discourses of globalization that erase local differences within minority groups,
particularly with regard to LGBT issues. In referencing the local web of
imposed sexual and racial entanglements in which she is caught, Pretorius
momentarily steps outside the conventional genre of the drag performance.
What we see exhibited/performed here is an intertextual gap that maximizes
distance from the genre. To all intents and purposes, Pretorius’ initiative appears
to be well received by the audience, who clap and otherwise express appreciation.
However, a similar attempt by another performer to maximize the gap while
performing the lyric The Umlilo in Me during the autobiographical portion of the
‘Journey through Gender’ event is not as successful, and in fact ‘misfires’. Gordon
(2015) discusses ‘failure’ as a pervasive structuring trope of Fanon’s thinking
when drawing attention to the similarities in design of Black Skin, White Masks to
the tales in Dante’s inferno. As the black attempts in various ways to gain access
to humanity (through whiteness), repeated failures compound the descent into
the hell of the zone of non-being.
The failure or ‘misfire’ occurs when the performer who plays Umlilo forgets
the lyrics to her own rap. Such a lapse in memory is, of course, not expected in
a theatrical performance, and reminds the audience of the artifice of the event.
At first, the audience was clearly supportive – the show must go on – but the
longer the artist struggled with recalling the text, the more ‘awkward’ the
audience became, and the more they were shifted out of the complicity of the
particular co-construction of the event. The result that unfolded was a
slippage, where the ‘gaze’ of the audience was pried away from the coconstructed
imaginary being depicted on the scene to the ‘reality’ of the
immediate present and the wonky workings of the pulleys and cogs, including
the complicity of the audience in the delivery.7 Rather than maximizing the
gap, the performer tore a split across the whole fabric of the genre, leaving the
audience unhappy with the professionalism of the performers.
Fanon’s metatheory of failure offers some enticing avenues for interpretation
here. What we appear to be witnessing is the failure, the misfiring of the
performer’s attempt to put the interiority of the autobiographical self into the
exteriority of the performed public persona visible on the drag stage. Fanon
speaks of the ‘shame’ and psychic distress experienced by the Black subject in
not being able to enter into the world of whiteness. Affect takes many psychic
forms, including silence – or, in this case, the forgetting of lines. It is suggestive
of the racialized nature of the genre that the performer is unable to align her
autobiography within its format. We suggest that it is precisely in the
conditions for such ruptures – or the forces that constrain them – that we
might look for decoloniality.
<Conclusion>
DISCUSSION.
The drag performance we have analysed has all the trappings of a Western genre,
complete with scenography and the audience design and uptake
characteristically associated with the genre. The drag kings insert themselves
into a highly knotted web of interdiscursive links, flagging explicit alignments and
footings with characterologically gendered figures through their choice of lyrics.
The drag kings of Bros B4 Ho’s portray very similar masculinities and perform
genres of music popular to drag king performances on a global level. Attached
meanings of gender and race are carried over, along with the reliance on Western
pop culture and music. There is also an overlay of white privilege, and the
performance of black masculinities by white bodies is troubling from a decolonial
perspective. The interdiscursive links reach across space and time, and across
microevents of interaction (around particular songs) and globally circulating
registers of the institution of the drag genre. We have also noted the role of ‘white
gaze’ in structuring the representation and enactment of racialized bodies.
A number of authors have given consideration to whether or not drag
consolidates or subverts hegemonic gender normativities (Dolan 1985; Lorber
1999), with authors such as Tewksbury (1994) finding they do, and others
finding that drag poses challenges to these normativities (e.g. Rupp and Taylor
2003). Hobson (2013: 37) finds that ‘female drag performances do the work of
oppression and social justice simultaneously’, ‘as sites filled with class and
racial tension amongst other things, perpetuating misogyny and whiteness’
(2013: 37); claiming that ‘drag teeters a jagged line between our normative
ideological assumptions of gender, sexuality, race and class and the
performances that resist those norms’ (2013: 36). Shapiro (2007), likewise,
found that the possibilities for reimagining identities were limited by race and
ethnicity, and limited to imaginaries of gender and the enactment of a variety
of masculinities rather than offering alternative forms of whiteness.
Not surprisingly, then, we have found in our analysis that the act both
contests and colludes with problematic, normative scripts of masculinity
simultaneously, thereby contributing to the further enregisterment (Agha
2005) of styles associated with the characterological figures of masculinity.
However, perhaps even more importantly, we have found a greater collusion
with problematic normative scripts in the perpetuation of stereotypical
racializations. In fact, we would hazard the claim that the ambiguity of
shifting, interlocking and variable mappings and erasures of sexualities and
genders – the contest and collusion of stereotypes of masculinity – are
undergirded by the reproduction of racial hierarchies.
Many voices alert us to the complexities of doing anti-hegemony and
decoloniality through a focus on gender binaries alone. Mendez reminds us
that decolonial feminism cannot be ‘reduced to descriptive biology or even to
the social relation between “Men” and “Women” because to reduce it in this
fashion means to obscure the bodies and histories of the enslaved and the
critical role they played in giving gender new meaning’ (Mendez 2015: 46).
Lugones, likewise, notes how ignoring the racial foundation of these concepts
perpetuates colonial constructs:
It is important to see that a framework may well be fundamentally critical of the
‘categorical’ essentialist logic of modernity and be critical of the dichotomy
between woman and man, and even of the dimorphism between male and female
without seeing coloniality or the colonial difference. Such a framework would
not have and may exclude the very possibility of resistance to the modern
colonial gender system . . .. (2010: 749)
Mendez (2015) also reminds us that gender as a shorthand for the
dehumanization of the colonial other is reproduced continually through
global economic circuits and in postcolonial structures. We have suggested
here that one of the technologies of such global, postcolonial reproductions is
the global genre of drag performance. However, the level at which this circuit
of reproduction is most insidious is that of race rather than sexuality or gender.
In fact, the question is whether the reproduction of Blackness as stereotype is
not an integral part of the White de-construction of gender.
Where then might decoloniality reside? We would suggest that it is found less
in the drag framing of the show itself, and more in the juxtapositions, slippages,
and interruptions that accompany and speckle its delivery. It is tangibly present
in the misreadings, intertextual gaps and diversion of the white gaze, purposely or
through accident and chance circumstance that reveals scripts on the sidelines
and peripheries of the drag king act as a normative genre. It is the moments when
personal witness and individual voice rather than the persona of the drag king
appears in the lyrics of Pretorius, skilfully but crisply juxtaposing the
arbitrariness and imposition of both racial and gendered categories, revealing
through the parallelism the historical link between these constructs. And it is the
white gaze (co)constructing white visibility through the appropriation of staged
blackness, turned back onto itself in the misreading/mis-rendition of the personal
lyric, that leads to the collapse of the imaginary (recall Patsy Smith at the Nobel
festival in Stockholm, 2016). We would argue that it is in the misappropriations,
slivers of alternative happenings in the performance, unintended cracks in
reproduction of coloniality/modernity, that moments of change are occurring
and gathering momentum amidst reproductions of the everyday ‘conventional’.
This is where we might begin to search for a Fanonian decolonial humanism.
Finally, what are the implications, if any, for a decolonial sociolinguistics? A
Fanonian approach to sociolinguistics offers an approach to accounting for
subjectivization as the nexus between how we see, understand, comprehend
and imagine race as individuals and groups (Mbembe 2017). It offers a
metatheory of failure as a pervasive trope of subject formation (of Blackness in
the world) that must pose a challenge to how we usually conceptualize
language in identity. A Fanonian approach also emphasizes the
intersectionality and unbearable coloniality of race, gender and sexuality
and the need for their Southern disentanglement. Above all, the thinking of
Fanon alerts us to the ethical problematic of our everyday complicities in the
semiotic production of zones of non-being. The zone of non-being bears more
than a superficial resemblance to the concept of ‘bare life’, and this zone is
growing by the day. Clearly, the reduction of the human to a materiality is a
complex co-constructed semiotic construction of difference under conditions of
denial and lack of intersubjectivity. These are complex processes of elision,
invisibilization and diversion in the circulation of the semiotic stuff that make
up our identities. The question is whether we have even begun to touch upon
these issues analytically in sociolinguistics – the resolution of which is a
prerequisite to more ethical engagements with others.