Applied Psycholinguistics 38 (2017), 1071–1094
doi:10.1017/S0142716417000042

Simple morphological spelling rules
are not always used: Individual
differences in children and adults

NENAGH KEMP
University of Tasmania

PAUL MITCHELL
Nottingham Trent University

PETER BRYANT
University of Oxford

Received: December 3, 2015

Accepted for publication: December 18, 2016

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Nenagh Kemp, Division of Psychology, School of Medicine, University of Tasmania,
Locked Bag 30, Hobart 7001, Tasmania, Australia. E-mail: nenagh.kemp@utas.edu.au

ABSTRACT
The English spelling system has a variety of rules and exceptions, but both theoretical and empirical
accounts have generally concluded that by about age 9 or 10, children master the morphological rule
that regular plural nouns (e.g., socks) and third-person singular present verbs (e.g., lacks) are spelled
with the inﬂectional ending –s. In three experiments, however, we found that when forced to rely
exclusively on morphological cues, only a minority of primary school children, secondary school
children, and even adults performed signiﬁcantly above chance at choosing the appropriate spelling for
novel words presented as inﬂected or uninﬂected nouns and verbs. Further, signiﬁcantly above-chance
performance was more common in adults who had attended school until age 18, compared to age
16. We conclude that many spellers, especially those who do not go on to tertiary education, never
learn some simple morphological spelling rules, and instead rely on a store of individual word-speciﬁc
spellings.

The English spelling system is notoriously difﬁcult to master, because as well as
having regular relationships between sounds and spelling (e.g., the sound [z] is
written as z, as in zoo or quiz), it also has numerous inconsistent and irregular
relationships (e.g., [z] can also be written as s or x, as in bees or xylophone).
However, the apparent “chaos” of English spelling is less extensive if larger scale
patterns are considered (Kessler & Treiman, 2003). For example, some spellings
can be conditioned by their position in a word, and/or by their adjacent letters
(e.g., word-initial [kh] is usually written c before a, o, and u, but k before e and
i). In other cases, a word’s morphological structure can inﬂuence its spelling. For
example, a word’s inﬂectional ending can determine the spelling of its last few

© Cambridge University Press 2017 0142-7164/17

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1072

letters, regardless of its pronunciation. This can lead to different spellings for the
endings for words such as purest (a superlative) and purist (a person), but the
same spellings for the endings for words such as laughed and smiled (both regular
past-tense verbs), or laughs and smiles (both plural nouns, or third-person singular
verbs).

As discussed in more detail below, major theoretical and empirical accounts of
spelling development suggest that writers learn quite early that plural nouns and
third-person singular verbs should be spelled with a ﬁnal –s in English. However,
there is growing evidence that these simple rules may not be used at all by many
children, and even not by some adults (Bourassa, Beaupre, & MacGregor, 2011;
Kemp & Bryant, 2003). In direct contrast to conventional assumptions, many
children and even adults may rely instead on individual, word-speciﬁc spellings
to get these endings right. Further, whether or not these morphological rules
are used may vary with the level of education attained in adulthood (Mitchell,
Kemp, & Bryant, 2011). For people who do apply these spelling rules, it is not
known when their application begins or how it progresses. The aim of this study
was thus to examine, for the ﬁrst time, both overall performance and individual
differences in the application of two seemingly simple morphological spelling
rules, by participants in primary school, secondary school, and adulthood.

CONVENTIONAL ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT THE ACQUISITION
OF INFLECTIONAL ENDINGS

Conventional stage-based models of English spelling development hold that chil-
dren learn to spell simple inﬂectional endings such as –s, –ed, –er, and –ing by
about the age of 9 to 10 years (Ehri, 1986, 1992, 1997; Frith, 1985; Gentry, 1982;
Gentry & Gillet, 1993; Henderson & Templeton, 1986). There is some evidence
that children’s initial spelling of inﬂectional endings improves quite quickly, and is
usually correct by the end of primary school, in studies of both naturalistic spelling
(e.g., Green, McCutchen, Schwiebert, Quinlan, Eva-Wood, & Juelis, 2003; Varn-
hagen, McCallum, & Burstow, 1997) and spelling to dictation (Leong, 2009;
Walker & Hauerwas, 2006). For example, the regular plural ending –s appears to
be acquired reasonably well in the ﬁrst 2 years of writing experience (e.g., Read,
1986; Treiman, 1993), although third-person singular –s appears to take longer to
get right (Leong, 2009; Turnbull, Deacon, & Kay-Raining Bird, 2011).

However, a closer look at these and other data reveals that the acquisition of
inﬂectional endings is not as rapid or complete as these conventional stage-based
spelling models would claim. For example, the ﬁrst graders in Treiman’s (1993)
and Turnbull et al.’s (2011) studies occasionally used –z for plurals ending in
the sound [z]. Green et al. (2003) found that even though overall mean rates
of correctness were 86%–92%, only 61% to 76% of their individual third- and
fourth-grade participants spelled plural noun inﬂections correctly, and Sterling
(1983) observed phonetic spellings of inﬂectional endings in children as old as
12 years. Many of the correct spellings in the studies reviewed above might come
from children’s store of rote-learned orthographic forms. It is therefore important
also to test the spelling of novel words, whose orthographic representation cannot
be retrieved from memory. For example, Beers and Beers (1992) asked children

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1073

in school Grades 1 to 6 to spell inﬂected pseudowords such as guds, and found
that the correct use of the plural inﬂection –s was very similar across grade levels,
but not at ceiling (approximately 80%).

Further, in previous studies, children may simply have been using a particular
spelling for a certain sound pattern, regardless of its morphological status. The only
way to rule out this possibility is to compare children’s spelling of both uninﬂected
and inﬂected words. In a large longitudinal study that made this comparison for
another inﬂection, the regular past-tense –ed, Nunes, Bryant, and Bindman (1997a)
found that children learned to spell this ending only very gradually, between the
ages of 6 to 10 years. They moved from sound-based spelling (e.g., kist for
kissed), to applying –ed indiscriminately to verbs and nonverbs (e.g., kissed but
also sofed for soft), then just to verbs (whether regular or irregular, e.g., sleped for
slept), and ﬁnally only to regular verbs. In a second study, this gradual pattern of
acquisition was also shown to occur in the spelling of pseudowords (Nunes, Bryant,
& Bindman, 1997b), where stored word knowledge could not be used. These
ﬁndings suggest that without directly contrasting uninﬂected and inﬂected word
forms, the ability to spell inﬂected endings correctly can be easily overestimated.

LEARNING TO SPELL THE INFLECTIONAL ENDING –s

The –s endings of regular plural nouns and third-person singular verbs constitute
two of the simplest spelling rules in English (especially when applied to one-
syllable words, as in most of the research). To reiterate, regular plural (inﬂected)
nouns may be pronounced with a ﬁnal [s] (as in bricks) or [z] (as in bees), or
with [ɪz] (as in boxes). However, they are always written with a ﬁnal –s. Similarly,
present-tense verbs inﬂected in the third person, such as picks, sees, and ﬁxes,
are always written with a ﬁnal –s. In contrast, uninﬂected words pronounced
with a ﬁnal [s] or [z] are virtually never spelled with a ﬁnal –s. Instead, these
singular nouns or uninﬂected verbs are generally written with –x (if their ﬁnal [s]
is preceded by the sound [k], as in box or ﬁx), or with –ze, –zz, or –se (as in breeze
or seize). (There are some uninﬂected words spelled with a ﬁnal –s, but these
are mostly multisyllabic words of Greek or Latin origin such as mathematics and
diabetes, plus some low-frequency monosyllabic exceptions such as lens.)

The correct spelling of the word endings discussed so far could always be
achieved on the basis of their meaning or their morphological status, as all have had
a sound structure that could plausibly be either inﬂected or uninﬂected. However,
there are some English words whose sound structure (and thus whose spelling)
means that they can occur only in inﬂected form. Speciﬁcally, words in which a
ﬁnal [z] is preceded by a voiced consonant (such as [d], [g], [n]) are virtually all
inﬂected, and therefore spelled with a ﬁnal –s (as in leads, begs, and swans). Thus,
it is very common to see penultimate voiced consonants written together with –s,
but very uncommon to see them written with other representations of [s] such as
–z, –ze, and –se. In other words, combinations such as –gze and -bz simply look
wrong. There is now robust evidence that humans can, and do, learn all kinds of
patterns from their environment without direct instruction, including the spellings
for certain sounds (e.g., Thompson, Fletcher-Flinn, & Cottrell, 1999), but also
quite complex statistical patterns of letter co-occurrence (e.g., Hayes, Treiman, &

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1074

Kessler, 2006; Pollo, Treiman, & Kessler, 2009; Treiman & Kessler, 2006). Thus,
such words could conceivably be spelled correctly with a ﬁnal –s on the basis of
people’s sensitivity to the frequency with which letters co-occur, without a thought
to morphological status.

Several studies support the conclusion that the accurate spelling of some mor-
phological endings could be achieved via sensitivity to letter co-occurrence rather
than to morphology. Kemp and Bryant (2003) assessed the use of the plural rule
in children (school years 2 to 4, aged 6 to 9) and adults by asking them to spell
one-syllable pseudowords ending in [z]. They found that participants were much
more likely to use the ending –s correctly for pseudowords presented as plurals
when the ﬁnal [z] was preceded by a voiced consonant (e.g., writing stogs in There
are some baby [stɒgz] in the pond: 74% correct for children, 91% for adults) than
when it was preceded by a long vowel (e.g., writing grues in There are some
baby [gruz] in the pond: 37% correct for children, 50% for adults). These ﬁndings
were extended by Bourassa et al. (2011), who found that children in Grade 4
(aged 9–10 years) used inﬂectional –s correctly for the ﬁnal [z] of pseudowords
presented as inﬂected nouns and verbs (e.g., writing scrays in Al [skrez] the ﬁsh in
the afternoon) more often than they incorrectly used –s for pseudowords presented
as uninﬂected (e.g., writing scraze in Joe and Sue will [skrez] the bike). However,
their performance was still very low (all means between 21% and 37%). It appears
that child and adult spellers do not consistently use the morphology-based plural
rule when confronted with new words, and instead may rely on statistical patterns
of letter co-occurrence.

EDUCATIONAL LEVEL DIFFERENCES

One unexpected ﬁnding from Kemp and Bryant’s (2003) was that the adult par-
ticipants who had been to university performed signiﬁcantly better than adults
who had not. It is not unsurprising that those who go on to tertiary education
might have higher literacy skills than those who pursue other types of employ-
ment. However, given the apparent simplicity of the plural spelling rule, and the
widespread assumptions about its early acquisition, it was unexpected that perfor-
mance would differ with education level. This issue was explored by Mitchell et
al. (2011), who gave participants inﬂected and uninﬂected nouns and verbs, with
two different end sounds ([ks] and [z]), and used a spelling choice task rather
than a dictation task, which allowed more pseudowords to be tested in a shorter
time. They, too, found clear differences in the responses of young adults who were
university students, and those who had not attended university, but were instead
involved in (semi)skilled training. As well as calculating overall mean scores, the
authors assessed individual performance, by considering which participants per-
formed above chance in selecting the morphologically appropriate spelling for the
pseudowords. The difference was striking: more than 80% of university students
consistently chose the appropriate spelling, whereas less than 8% of nonuniversity
students did so.

It is difﬁcult to compare these ﬁndings to those of previous studies, as there
is a dearth of research on spelling and morphological knowledge in adults who
are not reading disabled, but who are also not at university. Numerous researchers

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1075

have investigated various aspects of spelling (e.g., Coleman, Gregg, McLain, &
Bellair, 2009; Greenberg, Ehri, & Perin, 2002; Kemp, Parrila, & Kirby, 2009) and
morphological processing (e.g., Leikin & Hagit, 2006; Raveh & Schiff, 2008) in
adults with poor literacy skills, whether because of limited educational opportunity
or dyslexia. However, much of the extant research on typical adults’ spelling (e.g.,
Burt, Salzgeber, & Carroll, 2013; Holmes & Malone, 2004) and morphological
processing (e.g., Rueckl & Aicher, 2008; S´anchez-Guti´errez & Rastle, 2013) has
come from samples of university students. This means that many conclusions
about adult spelling knowledge could well represent overestimations, as they are
based on the performance of a subgroup of adults who are likely to have higher
literacy skills, on average, than the general population. We do not know how
well such conclusions apply to adults who do not go on to tertiary education, but
who would not identify as having literacy difﬁculties. More than half of adults in
the United Kingdom do not have a tertiary education (UK Government, 2014).
It is therefore essential to test the spelling and morphological knowledge of this
majority group, not just from those at university, if we are to draw conclusions
that are relevant to a wider range of adults.

THE PRESENT STUDIES

The aim of the studies presented here was to assess knowledge of the rules about
spelling plural noun and third-person singular verb –s in children at primary
school, secondary school, and in a group of young adults who had not been to
university. This is the ﬁrst research to use a spelling choice test of the ability to
apply both noun and verb endings, across such a range of ages, including adults
not at university. Further, the few previous studies to assess the use of inﬂectional
–s have presented the stimuli in a single form only (e.g., How many [priz] can you
see?), whether as a dictation task (Bourassa et al., 2011; Kemp & Bryant, 2003) or
a spelling choice task (Mitchell et al., 2011). It is possible that rather than having
an imperfect grasp of the relevant morphological rules, the participants simply did
not pay sufﬁcient attention to the sentence context to make use of its morphological
cues in their responses. In the present studies, we instead included two forms of
each pseudoword (inﬂected and uninﬂected, in counterbalanced order), and asked
participants to choose the spelling of the second form. For example, participants
might hear Last week I saw a [pri], and today I heard two [priz] singing, and then
choose the appropriate spelling of [priz] as prees or preeze. (In this case, prees is
correct, as the sentence makes clear it is a plural.) Providing two forms of the target
pseudoword might help to focus attention on its morphological form, and thus give
participants a greater chance of applying their morphological knowledge. In each
of our three studies, we examined overall mean scores, to assess overall spelling
knowledge of these patterns and to provide a comparison with previous research.
However, our main aim was to assess the tendency of individual participants to
perform above chance at choosing the correct type of spelling. We predicted that
in each age group tested, there would be a group of participants who knew and
used the rules under study, and a group who did not. In general, those who know
the rule should perform consistently above chance on the pseudowords whose

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1076

spelling they are asked to choose. Those who do not know the rule should perform
around chance level.

EXPERIMENT 1: PRIMARY SCHOOL CHILDREN

In this ﬁrst experiment, we looked at the ability to choose the morphologically
appropriate spelling for pseudowords presented as inﬂected and uninﬂected verbs
and nouns, in children in British school years 4 to 6 (aged 8–11 years). According
to the conventional models of spelling development and experimental ﬁndings
discussed earlier, most children at this stage of their schooling should have learned
to go beyond sound-based spelling, and should be making use of the morphological
structure of words in their spelling. However, none of our participants had received
any formal instruction in morphology or morphology-based spelling patterns. Such
instruction was not part of the United Kingdom’s National Curriculum at the time
of testing, and the teachers of the classes involved conﬁrmed that they had not
taught the children anything about morphology. Their responses were in line with
the ﬁndings of research conducted with British teachers around the same time,
which revealed that the vast majority had no explicit knowledge of morphology
themselves (Hurry, Curno, Parker, & Pretzlik, 2006; Hurry et al., 2005).

Method

Participants. Participants were 317 British children (162 boys, 155 girls) in
school years 4 to 6, at four government-funded primary schools in a middle-class
area of Southeast England. The children had a mean age of 9.8 years, and a range of
8.0 to 11.9 years. Fifty-ﬁve of these children (17%) spoke an additional language
to English.

Materials.

GENERAL SPELLING. General spelling ability was measured by asking children
to spell to dictation the ﬁrst 15 words of the spelling subtest of the Wide Range
Achievement Test—Third Version (WRAT-3; Wilkinson, 1993), which increase
in difﬁculty. Time constraints precluded the presentation of up to all 40 words
until children made 6 errors in a row, as is standard for this subtest, and thus we
used raw, rather than standardized, scores in our analyses.

REAL-WORD ORTHOGRAPHIC CHOICE. A set of 20 real words was presented
to test participants’ ability to choose the correct one of two potential spellings, both
with the same pronunciation. This is an ability required to succeed on the main
task of pseudoword orthographic choice. These one-syllable real words ended in
[ks] or [z], and each child was presented with either 10 [ks] or 10 [z] real words,
to match the end sound of the pseudowords with which they were later presented,
as described below. Each real word appeared twice in a sentence; once in inﬂected
form (as a plural noun, e.g., boxes, or a third-person singular verb, e.g., sacks),
and once in uninﬂected form (as a singular noun, e.g., box, or ﬁrst-person singular
verb, e.g., sack). Each form could occur ﬁrst or second in the sentence. These

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1077

sentences were read aloud by the researcher (e.g., We need some large boxes.
Have you got a spare box? or Here is another sack. Can you carry two sacks?).
For each target form, participants saw two possible spellings, one correct (e.g.,
box), and the other with the same pronunciation but a morphologically incorrect
ending (e.g., bocks). These real words, and the other pseudowords, are shown in
Appendix A.

VC[Z] ORTHOGRAPHIC CHOICE. A set of 10 pseudoword pairs ending in a
vowel + voiced consonant + [z] sound (referred to as VC[z] pseudowords) was
developed. These pseudowords were presented in spoken sentence contexts. They
were presented ﬁrst in uninﬂected and then in inﬂected form, half as nouns (e.g., In
my garage I have one [plin], but in the shed there are three more [plinz]) and half
as verbs (e.g., We [krʌn] after school, but Mary [krʌnz] in her lunch break). As
described in more detail further below, for each pseudoword, participants chose
which they considered to be the more suitable spelling (e.g., pleenze or pleens for
[plinz]; cruns or crunze for [krʌnz]). As noted above, verbs and nouns with this
VC[z] pattern are nearly always inﬂected and require a ﬁnal –s spelling. To avoid
children becoming biased to choose –s every time, these pseudowords were added
to the main pseudoword orthographic choice task described below, in which the
correct choice varied.

MAIN PSEUDOWORD ORTHOGRAPHIC CHOICE TASK. Finally, a set of 120
one-syllable pseudoword pairs (based on Mitchell et al., 2011, shown in Appendix
A) was used to test participants’ ability to choose the appropriate spelling on the
basis of morphology alone. Half of the pseudowords ended in [ks] and half in
[z], and each was placed in a different sentence context that indicated whether the
pseudoword was intended as a noun or a verb. Thus, there were 30 pseudowords of
each category (end sound and word type). The pseudowords had an overall mean
number of 14.4 (SD = 10.8) phonological neighbors (real words that differed
from the pseudowords by a single phoneme), and these neighbors had a summed
word frequency of 409.5 (SD = 926.9; Rastle, Harrington, & Coltheart, 2002).
As above, each pseudoword appeared twice per sentence. It appeared once in
uninﬂected form, for which the appropriate ending was always –x (e.g., snox) or
–ze (e.g., preeze). It also appeared once in inﬂected form, for which the appropriate
ending was always –s (e.g., snocks and prees). Order was counterbalanced so each
pseudoword was presented half the time as a noun and half as a verb, and half the
time the target spelling was inﬂected, and half the time uninﬂected. Each time, the
choice was between two possible spellings of the second, target, pseudoword in
each sentence (e.g., snocks/snox or prees/preeze).

Procedure. Participants were tested in 12 class groups of 25 to 30, in three classes
at each year level (4, 5, and 6) at each of the four schools. Children completed
the 15-word general spelling test to dictation. It proved too onerous for these
young children to each make spelling decisions about all 120 pseudoword pairs,
and so each child was administered just 30 pairs, consisting of 30 [ks] nouns, or
30 [ks] verbs, or 30 [z] nouns, or 30 [z] verbs (counterbalanced across schools
and year groups). The presentation order of the 30 pseudoword pairs, combined

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1078

Table 1. Means (standard deviations) for primary school children’s general spelling
(raw scores), and real word and VC[z] pseudoword orthographic choice (proportions)

[ks] Noun
Group
(n = 80)

[ks] Verb
Group
(n = 80)

[z] Noun
Group
(n = 85)

[z] Verb
Group
(n = 72)

Overall
(n = 317)

11.01 (3.87) 11.61 (2.94) 12.18 (2.85) 12.53 (2.63) 11.82 (3.15)

0.84 (0.19)

0.80 (0.18)

0.91 (0.11)

0.84 (0.20)

0.85 (0.18)

0.75 (0.22)

0.64 (0.28)

0.87 (0.15)

0.79 (0.19)

0.76 (0.23)

General spelling

(15 items)

Real word orth

choice (10 items)

VC[z] orth choice

(10 items)

Note: General spelling score out of 15.

with the 10 real-word pairs and the 10 VC[z] pseudoword pairs, was randomized
to generate four separate 50-item sequences. The experimenter explained, “We
are going to do some work with made-up words. We call these made-up words
‘pseudowords’ because they do not have any meaning in the English language.
For each pseudoword you will hear two sentences. The sentences will contain
different forms of the same pseudoword. Your task is to choose the most suitable
spelling for the second form of the pseudoword by ticking the box next to your
choice from the two words that you have printed in front of you.”

The experimenter asked the participants if they had any questions, and then for
each task, read each sentence, including the two forms of the target (pseudo)word
for participants to choose the most suitable spelling for the second form. Even
though having prerecorded stimuli would have ensured the identical delivery of
each pseudoword, it was much more familiar for the children, and more engaging,
to hear spelling words pronounced by an adult. Watching the experimenter read
the stimuli also provided visual, as well as auditory, information about the pseu-
dowords. The placement (upper or lower) of the correct form of each target on the
response sheet was counterbalanced. An example item is given below.

(Heard) “My sister [glɒksɪz] in the sunshine. I [glɒks] in the rain”
(Seen) Choose spelling: glox (cid:2)
glocks (cid:2)

Results and discussion

Group means. To gain an overall view of children’s performance, we ﬁrst con-
sidered the group means for the test of general spelling, and for the orthographic
choice tests of the real words and the VC[z] pseudowords, shown in Table 1. Over-
all scores on the real-word orthographic choice task were high, which suggests
that as a group, participants grasped the task requirement of selecting the correct
one of two spellings for a single heard word. When presented with a choice of
spellings for the VC[z] pseudowords, children performed quite well overall, which
suggests that they, like children in previous studies, were sensitive to the fact that

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1079

Table 2. Mean proportions (standard deviations) of primary school children’s correct
pseudoword orthographic choices across age groups

Age

8
9
10

Overall

n

73
103
141
317

[ks] Noun

[ks] Verb

[z] Noun

[z] Verb

Overall

0.69 (0.14)
0.69 (0.14)
0.69 (0.16)
0.69 (0.15)

0.67 (0.19)
0.62 (0.11)
0.64 (0.14)
0.64 (0.14)

0.57 (0.11)
0.63 (0.14)
0.66 (0.17)
0.63 (0.15)

0.52 (0.14)
0.61 (0.14)
0.61 (0.17)
0.59 (0.17)

0.62 (0.16)
0.64 (0.14)
0.65 (0.16)
0.64 (0.16)

Note: Each child completed 30 items of one sound/word type combination.

Table 3. Percentage (number) of primary school children in each age group who
performed signiﬁcantly above chance on pseudoword orthographic choice

Age

[ks] Noun

[ks] Verb

[z] Noun

[z] Verb

Overall [5% CIs]

8
9
10

Overall

40.0 (8)
48.0 (12)
45.7 (16)

45.0

33.3 (7)
33.3 (9)
34.4 (11)

33.8

23.5 (4)
34.4 (11)
47.2 (17)

37.6

0.0 (0)
21.1 (4)
26.3 (10)

19.4

26.0 [16.0–36.0]
35.0 [25.8–44.2]
38.3 [30.3–46.3]

34.4

[z] after a voiced consonant is virtually always spelled –s. The 55 children who
knew an additional language to English did not differ signiﬁcantly from the rest
on any of these initial tasks (all ps > .05). Their data were therefore retained for
all further analyses.

Mean performance on the main pseudoword orthographic choice task is shown
in Table 2. The interitem reliability of the scales was moderate to good, with
Cronbach α calculated as 0.71 for the [ks] nouns, 0.65 for the [ks] verbs, 0.69 for
the [z] nouns, and 0.73 for the [z] verbs. As shown in the table, participants chose
the morphologically appropriate spelling only about two-thirds of the time in most
cases, with little consistent increase across age groups, and some small variations
between word types.

Individual performance. Our main aim, however, was to go beyond group means
to consider individual performance. We had predicted that some children would use
the relevant morphological rules and perform consistently above chance, whereas
others would not. In a two-option choice task with 30 trials, chance performance
is 15, and on the binomial, a score of 21 or more is signiﬁcantly above chance (as
21 is signiﬁcantly more than 15 at p = .04). Thus, it was highly likely that children
who scored ࣙ21 out of 30 on their pseudoword category ([ks] nouns, [ks] verbs,
[z] nouns, or [z] verbs) had used a morphological rule to guide their spelling choice
for that category. Table 3 presents the percentage and number of participants of
each age group who performed signiﬁcantly above chance for each category. We
also checked for potential sex differences, but saw very little difference between

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1080

the percentage of boys (38.3%) and girls (36.8%) who performed signiﬁcantly
above chance.

As shown in Table 3, the children who performed signiﬁcantly above chance
on their pseudoword category were in the minority, for each age group, ranging
from 26% of the 8-year-olds up to 38% of the 10-year-olds. Their mean scores out
of 30, for the [ks] nouns and verbs, and the [z] nouns and verbs, were 24.9, 24.0,
23.7, and 25.4, respectively. These signiﬁcantly above-chance scores suggest that
these participants were using the morphological rule under study. The remainder
(the majority of children) had scores that were around chance level, ranging from
73% of the 8-year-olds to 62% of the 10-year-olds. Their mean scores out of 30 for
the pseudoword groups listed above were 17.4, 16.7, 16.1, and 15.9, respectively.
The performance of these children leads us to conclude that they were not using
the morphological rule at all, or that they were using it too sporadically to reach
consistently above-chance performance.

We considered which factors may have contributed to children performing at or
above chance on this task. We ﬁrst ruled out the possibility that their orthographic
choices were strongly related to the phonological characteristics of individual
pseudowords: neither the number of each pseudoword’s phonological neighbors
nor the summed frequency of those neighbors was signiﬁcantly related to the
likelihood that the most appropriate pseudoword spelling would be chosen. Nor
was the likelihood of appropriate spelling choice signiﬁcantly related to the order
in which a pseudoword was presented. This suggests that overall, participants did
not learn to, or realize how to, choose the correct spelling during the course of the
task, which is perhaps unsurprising given the lack of feedback during the task.

A binary logistic regression was conducted to assess which, if any, of the main
factors of interest contributed to achieving above-chance or chance performance:
general spelling ability (as measured by the WRAT-3), sex, or age group, or
the two manipulated pseudoword factors, word type (noun or verb) and word
ending ([ks] or [z]). This generalized linear mixed models analysis revealed that a
signiﬁcant contribution was made to pseudoword orthographic choice by spelling
ability (p = .004), word type (p = .016), and word ending (p = .035), but not by
sex or age group (nor any interactions). Speciﬁcally, children improved slightly
but signiﬁcantly with each extra word spelled correctly on the general spelling
task (odds ratio [OR] = 1.02), and were slightly but signiﬁcantly more likely to
perform better on pseudowords presented as nouns than as verbs (OR = 1.08) and
on pseudowords ending in [ks] than in [z] (OR = 1.07).

Overall, these ﬁndings suggest that by the age of 10 years, most children have
not yet fully grasped the seemingly simple English rules concerning the spellings
of nouns and present-tense verb inﬂections. Their uneven performance across word
types (nouns and verbs) and end sounds ([ks] and [z]) suggests that participants
were relying on patterns of letter co-occurrence, and not (just) morphology to make
their spelling decisions. These ﬁndings support those of Kemp and Bryant (2003)
and Bourassa et al. (2011), but are at odds with the predictions of conventional
spelling models, which suggest that simple inﬂectional endings should be largely
mastered by this stage. Previous research has shown an improvement in spelling
pseudowords’ inﬂectional endings from the primary school years to adulthood
(Kemp & Bryant, 2003). In the present study, the likelihood of above-chance

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1081

performance did not improve signiﬁcantly with age, but it did improve with
general spelling ability. This was unexpected, as age and spelling ability are
correlated. In this sample, however, the variation in spelling skill with age must
have been sufﬁciently large that the relationship with above-chance performance
held only with spelling ability. In our second experiment, we asked secondary
school students, who were both older and more experienced with spelling, to
complete the same tasks.

EXPERIMENT 2: SECONDARY SCHOOL CHILDREN

Conventional models of spelling development, as well as empirical data, suggest
that knowledge of morphology-based spelling patterns, like knowledge of other
aspects of written language, develops with age and with exposure to written text.
In this second experiment, we investigated the performance of secondary school
students in school years 7 to 9 (aged 11–14 years) on the orthographic choice task
of the spellings of inﬂected and uninﬂected endings of pseudoword nouns and
verbs. Like the children in Experiment 1, they had received no explicit instruction
in morphology or morphology-based spelling patterns.

Method

Participants. Participants were 190 British children (98 boys, 92 girls) in school
years 7 to 9, with a mean age of 12.9 years, and a range of 11.4 to 14.7 years.
Because there were relatively few 11-year-olds (n = 23) and 14-year-olds (n =
18), we grouped participants into two more even age groups; 11 to 12 years (n =
97) and 13 to 14 years (n = 93). These children attended a school drawn from a
moderate to high socioeconomic status population with relatively high academic
expectations, in the same area as the primary schools visited for Experiment 1.
Forty-two (22%) of these children spoke an additional language to English.

Materials.

GENERAL SPELLING. General spelling ability was measured by asking children
to spell to dictation the ﬁrst 25 words of the WRAT-3 (Wilkinson, 1995), which
increase in difﬁculty. Again, time constraints on testing prevented the test being
administered in its standardized form (until six consecutive errors had been made),
and so we used raw scores in our analyses.

REAL-WORD ORTHOGRAPHIC CHOICE. As a test of participants’ ability to
choose the correct one of two potential spellings for a heard word, the 20 mono-
syllabic real nouns and verbs from Experiment 1 were presented to each child;
10 ending in [ks] and ending in [z], in the same sentence contexts as before. Be-
cause of time constraints on testing, VC[z] pseudowords (e.g., ploons) were not
administered.

MAIN PSEUDOWORD ORTHOGRAPHIC CHOICE TASK. The set of 120 pseu-
doword pairs and sentences from Experiment 1 was used in this study.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1082

Table 4. Means (standard deviations) for secondary school children’s general spelling
(raw scores out of 25) and real word spelling (proportions)

General spelling (25 items)
Real word orth choice (20 items)

Noun Group
(n = 92)
19.79 (3.63)
0.92 (0.13)

Verb Group
(n = 98)
20.23 (3.81)
0.92 (0.11)

Overall
(n = 190)
19.98 (3.70)
0.92 (0.12)

Procedure. Participants were tested at their school, with two classes from each
school year tested together, in groups of 60–65. They completed the 25-word
general spelling test to dictation. Because these older children were capable of
completing more items than those in the previous experiment, each child was
asked to select the correct spelling for 60 of the 120 pseudoword pairs. Each
participant was presented with 30 [ks] nouns and 30 [z] nouns, or with 30 [ks]
verbs and 30 [z] verbs (counterbalanced across school years). Again, the [z] and
[ks] pseudoword pairs were randomized, together with the 20 real-word pairs, to
generate four separate 80-item sequences. Children were asked to tick the box that
they thought corresponded to the more suitable spelling of the second form of the
target, with instructions as in Experiment 1.

Results and discussion

Group means. Children’s scores for the test of general spelling, and of their
spelling of the experimental real words, are shown in Table 4. As half the children
were presented with orthographic choices about nouns, and half about verbs, the
means for these two groups are also shown. The children performed very well on
the real-word orthographic choice task, which suggests that they understood the
task requirements. The 42 children who had an additional language to English did
not differ signiﬁcantly from their peers on either of these tasks (ps > .05). Thus,
we retained all participants’ data in the subsequent analyses.

The children’s mean performance on the [z] and [ks] pseudoword nouns and
verbs was then considered. The interitem reliability of the scales was moderate to
good for three of the scales, with Cronbach α calculated as 0.76 for the [ks] nouns,
0.80 for the [ks] verbs, and 0.74 for the [z] nouns, but weaker, 0.52, for the [z] verbs.
The mean performance on these pseudowords is presented in Table 5, where it is
seen that overall, these children selected the morphologically appropriate spelling
for about two-thirds of the pseudowords, regardless of age group or word type.
It thus appears that these secondary school students had a better idea of these
morphological rules than primary school students (cf. Experiment 1; see Bourassa
et al., 2011; Kemp & Bryant, 2003), but their overall mean performance was still
quite low.

Individual performance. Our main aim was to consider individual performance.
The number of participants who had performed above chance (at least 21 out of
30) on each of the pseudoword categories was calculated, as shown in Table 6.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1083

Table 5. Means (standard deviations) for secondary school children’s spelling
of pseudowords across age groups

Age

11–12
13–14
Total

n

97
93
190

[ks] Noun

[ks] Verb

[z] Noun

[z] Verb

Total

0.74 (0.16)
0.69 (0.15)
0.72 (0.18)

0.59 (0.14)
0.71 (0.19)
0.65 (0.18)

0.69 (0.16)
0.65 (0.16)
0.67 (0.16)

0.61 (0.13)
0.70 (0.16)
0.65 (0.15)

0.65 (0.15)
0.69 (0.15)
0.67 (0.15)

Note: Each child completed 60 nouns or 60 verbs.

Table 6. Percentage (numbers) of secondary school children in each age group who
performed signiﬁcantly above chance on pseudoword orthographic choice

Age

[ks] Noun

[ks] Verb

[z] Noun

[z] Verb

Overall [5% CIs]

11–12
13–14
Total

53.2 (25)
64.4 (29)

58.7

24.0 (12)
58.3 (28)

40.8

44.7 (21)
44.4 (20)

44.6

22.0 (11)
47.9 (23)

34.7

35.6 [26.1–45.1]
53.8 [43.7–63.9]

44.7

For each pseudoword type, we identiﬁed a group who had performed signiﬁcantly
above chance. In most cases, the above-chance group constituted the minority of
the sample, and the overall percentage of children who performed above chance
was around 36% for the younger group and 54% for the older group. There were
no obvious sex differences, with similar percentages of male (45.4%) and female
(43.5%) participants performing above chance. The mean numbers of appropriate
choices for the [ks] nouns and verbs, and the [z] nouns and verbs, were 24.7, 25.0,
24.4, and 24.8, respectively, for these above-chance performers. The remainder of
the children performed at around chance level. Their mean appropriate choices for
the pseudoword types listed above were 16.8, 15.7, 16.5, and 16.8, respectively.
We suggest that the former group were applying the morphological rules, and that
the latter group were not, or only very occasionally.

As in Experiment 1, an initial check conﬁrmed that participants’ tendency to
choose the most suitable pseudoword spelling was not signiﬁcant to the phono-
logical characteristics of the pseudowords (number of phonological neighbors
or summed word frequency of those neighbors), nor to the order in which the
pseudowords were presented. A binary logistic regression was conducted to as-
sess whether achieving above-chance or chance performance was signiﬁcantly
determined by general spelling ability, sex, age group, pseudoword type (noun
or verb), or ending ([ks] or [z]). This generalized linear mixed models analysis
showed that a signiﬁcant contribution was made by spelling ability (p < .001),
word type (p = .031), and word ending (p = .012), but not by sex or age group
(nor any interactions), even though spelling generally improves with age. Specif-
ically, children improved signiﬁcantly with each extra word spelled correctly on
the general spelling task (OR = 1.35), and were nearly twice as likely to perform
above chance on pseudowords presented as nouns than as verbs (OR = 1.75) and

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1084
on pseudowords ending in [ks] than in [z] (OR = 1.89). As in Experiment 1, these
variations across pseudoword types and ending sounds suggest that participants
were not simply applying morphological rules when making spelling choices.

Although the mean scores were similar to those of Experiment 1, the percentage
of individuals who could correctly choose the appropriate ending for inﬂected
and uninﬂected nouns and verbs appeared higher in secondary school than in
primary school. We would assume that this improvement comes about as a result
of increased exposure to, and experience with, written and spoken language.
However, it should also be borne in mind that these children attended a school
with relatively high academic standards, and might have shown better performance
than would be seen in other schools. Nevertheless, we would expect to see further
improvement in an adult sample. This was the focus of our ﬁnal experiment.

EXPERIMENT 3: ADULTS

In this third experiment, we presented the same set of pseudowords to an adult
sample. Previous evidence suggests that the ability to correctly spell these kinds of
pseudoword is nearly ubiquitous in undergraduates but substantially rarer in those
without a university degree (Kemp & Bryant, 2003; Mitchell et al., 2011). How-
ever, there are no data on whether there are differences between adults who have
not attended university, but who have completed different levels of preuniversity
education, and we tested these groups here. Outside a university context (where
students often receive course credit for research participation), it can be difﬁcult
to recruit groups of adult participants in spelling studies, especially when a pool
of community volunteers does not exist. We were able to secure the participation
of a large group of new recruits to the British Armed Services. These young adults
were currently at the compulsory basic training stage, during which there is no
differentiation of ofﬁcers from other ranks. In general, these recruits represent a
wide cross-section of society and education, from young school-leavers, to those
already highly skilled in particular ﬁelds (e.g., electrical or mechanical engineers),
and those who would later achieve ofﬁcer rank. Although this group had more
males than females, in most other aspects it appeared more representative of the
general population than most university-based psycholinguistic samples. Such
samples are very often made up of ﬁrst-year psychology students, who tend to
be unrepresentative of the general population not only in their usual sex ratio
(usually female dominated) but also, more important, in that they are also likely
to have much higher academic and literacy skills than their nonuniversity peers.
Thus, we felt that at least some generalizations could be made from Experiment
3’s participants to the general population.

Method

Participants. Participants were 95 young adults (84 male, 11 female) with a
mean age of 21.5 years, and a range of 17 to 32 years. All had recently joined the
British Armed Services as new recruits and were beginning training in a variety
of skilled and semiskilled occupations. The participants had completed school up
until at least the age of 16 years; all had completed their General Certiﬁcate of

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1085

Table 7. Means (standard deviations) for adults’ general spelling (raw scores out of 40),
and real word and VC[z] pseudoword orthographic choice (proportions)

General spelling (40 items)
Real word orth choice (20 items)
VC[z] pseudoword orth choice (20 items)

GCSE
(n = 73)
23.44 (5.44)
0.91 (0.12)
0.57 (0.13)

A-Level
(n = 22)
26.91 (4.77)
0.94 (0.07)
0.61 (0.18)

Overall
(n = 95)
24.24 (5.47)
0.92 (0.16)
0.58 (0.14)

Secondary Education (GCSE, completed during the ages of 14–16 years), and 22
had also taken A-level exams (General Certiﬁcate of Education Advanced Level,
taken during the ages of 16–18 years), but none had attended university. English
was the ﬁrst language for all but 3 participants in the sample.

Materials.

GENERAL SPELLING ABILITY. General spelling ability was measured by ad-
ministering, to dictation, all 40 words of the WRAT-3, with raw scores reported
here.

REAL-WORD ORTHOGRAPHIC CHOICE. Participants were asked to choose
the correct spellings of the 20 real words presented in Experiment 2.

VC[Z] ORTHOGRAPHIC CHOICE. Participants were presented with the 16
monosyllabic VC[z] pseudowords (e.g., truds, inﬂected –s spelling always correct)
used in Experiment 1.

MAIN PSEUDOWORD ORTHOGRAPHIC CHOICE TASK. The same 120 pseu-
dowords, in the same sentence contexts, were presented as in Experiments 1
and 2.

Procedure. Participants were tested in a classroom, in groups of 14 to 30, as
described for Experiments 1 and 2. These adult participants were each given
all pseudoword 120 pairs: 30 each of [ks] nouns, [ks] verbs, [z] nouns, and [z]
verbs. The combination of sentences and pseudowords was systematically varied
to control for any word-level effects. The sequence of presentation of the 20 real-
word pairs, 16 VC[z] pseudoword pairs, and 120 [z] and [ks] pseudoword pairs
was randomized to generate four separate 156-item sequences.

Results and discussion

The mean numbers of correct spellings on the general spelling test, of correctly
selected spellings of real words and of VC[z] pseudowords, for participants of
the two education levels, are shown in Table 7. Participants did relatively well,

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1086

Table 8. Means (standard deviations) for adults’ spelling of pseudowords (proportions)
across education groups

Education

GCSE
A-level
Overall

n

73
22
95

[ks] Noun

[ks] Verb

[z] Noun

[z] Verb

Overall

0.64 (0.15)
0.68 (0.17)
0.65 (0.15)

0.61 (0.13)
0.70 (0.17)
0.63 (0.14)

0.59 (0.15)
0.63 (0.19)
0.60 (0.16)

0.56 (0.13)
0.63 (0.19)
0.58 (0.15)

0.60 (0.11)
0.66 (0.16)
0.62 (0.13)

Note: All participants completed all 30 of each pseudoword type.

Table 9. Percentage (numbers) of adults of each education level who performed
signiﬁcantly above chance on pseudoword orthographic choice

Education

[ks] Noun

[ks] Verb

[z] Noun

[z] Verb

Overall [5% CIs]

GCSE
A-level
Overall

39.7 (29)
63.6 (14)

45.3

24.7 (18)
54.5 (12)

31.6

26.0 (19)
31.8 (7)
27.4

21.9 (16)
36.4 (8)
25.3

28.1 [17.8–38.4]
46.6 [25.8–67.4]

37.3

although certainly not at ceiling, at choosing the appropriate spelling for the real
words, which suggests that they understood the task requirements. On the VC[z]
pseudowords, however, performance was quite low, suggesting that participants
made limited use of the cues provided by words with this pattern.

The participants’ performance on the four categories of experimental pseu-
dowords was then considered. The reliability of the scale for the categories was
moderate to good, with Cronbach α calculated at 0.71 for [ks] nouns, 0.60 for [ks]
verbs, 0.72 for [z] nouns, and 0.68 for [ks] verbs. The participants’ mean scores
on the [z] and [ks] pseudowords are shown in Table 8. Overall, participants chose
the appropriate spelling for these pseudowords a little less than two-thirds of the
time, with minor variations across education level and pseudoword category. It
appears that the understanding and use of apparently simple morphological rules
is not perfect by adulthood, at least in this sample.

Individual differences. We then calculated the number and percentage of partici-
pants who performed signiﬁcantly above chance (21 or more out of 30) on the four
categories of [ks] nouns, [ks] verbs, [z] nouns, and [z] verbs. These signiﬁcantly
above-chance performers are shown in Table 9. Even in this adult sample, overall,
only a minority of participants chose appropriate spellings at a rate higher than
would be expected by chance: about 37% overall. On the [ks] nouns and verbs,
and the [z] nouns and verbs, these adults showed mean scores out of 30 of 24.4,
24.0, 24.4, and 24.6, respectively. The remainder of the sample chose spellings
at around chance level, which suggests that they were not consistently following
morphological rules. Their mean scores across pseudoword types were 16.7, 16.5,
15.7, and 15.5, respectively. In contrast to the child samples, a greater percentage
of women (36.4%) performed above chance than men (28.3%). However, this

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1087

difference seems to be driven by the smaller group with A-levels (men 41.6%,
women 56.3%), rather than the larger group with GCSEs (men 24.6%, women
25.0%).

As in the previous two experiments, there was no signiﬁcant relationship be-
tween performance on the pseudoword orthographic choice task and the phonolog-
ical features of the pseudowords (number of phonological neighbors or neighbors’
summed word frequency), nor of the order in which a pseudoword occurred in the
test. A binary logistic regression was conducted to assess whether general spelling
ability, education level, sex, pseudoword type (noun or verb), or ending sound
([ks] or [z]) helped to determine whether a participant would show above-chance
or chance performance. This generalized linear mixed models analysis showed
that spelling ability (p < .001), education level (p = .044), and word ending
(p = .007) all made a signiﬁcant contribution to performance on the pseudoword
orthographic choice task, but sex and word type did not (nor any interactions).
Speciﬁcally, participants improved signiﬁcantly with each extra word spelled cor-
rectly on the general spelling task (OR = 1.14), were more likely to perform better
if they had completed A-levels than GCSEs (OR = 1.71) and were nearly twice
as likely to perform better on pseudowords ending in [ks] than in [z] (OR = 1.93).
Thus, although adults did not differ in their performance on nouns and verbs,
the difference in ending sound suggests that participants were using word-level,
nonmorphological cues, in addition to any use of more reliable sentence-level
morphological cues. The results also conﬁrm previous ﬁndings of differences in
applying simple morphological rules in adults with different levels of education
(Kemp & Bryant, 2003; Mitchell et al., 2011), but suggest a differentiation even
between those who have completed different levels of schooling preuniversity.

Comparison across experiments. We would have liked to present the same 120
stimuli to all participants across the three experiments. However, as mentioned
earlier, this proved too difﬁcult for the younger participants, and so our compro-
mise was to present the full set of items in a fully or partially between-subjects
design for the two school-age groups. This meant that we could not fully compare
performance across the three experiments. However, we were able to make basic
comparisons by conducting a chi-squared analysis on the proportion of partici-
pants who performed above chance overall on the main pseudoword orthographic
choice tasks, across the three experiments: 34.4% of primary students, 44.7% of
secondary students, and 37.3% of adults, as shown in Tables 3, 6, and 9. It con-
ﬁrmed that the differences across the three groups did not reach signiﬁcance, χ2
(2) = 5.47, p = .07.

GENERAL DISCUSSION

We examined the ability of primary school children, secondary school children,
and adults of two different education levels to choose spellings for pseudowords
presented as inﬂected and uninﬂected nouns and verbs. The rules about using
–s for the inﬂected forms, and other spellings for the uninﬂected forms, are
among the simplest in the English orthography. The sentence contexts highlighted
the morphology of the target pseudowords by presenting them in both inﬂected

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1088

and uninﬂected forms. However, we found that across the age groups tested,
participants chose the morphologically appropriate spelling only about two-thirds
of the time.

This ﬁnding is important in that it goes against the claims made in conventional
models of spelling development (e.g., Ehri, 1997; Frith, 1985; Gentry & Gillet,
1993; Henderson & Templeton, 1986), and of various naturalistic and experimental
spelling studies (e.g., Green et al., 2003; Leong, 2009; Read, 1986) that simple
inﬂectional endings are acquired by age 9 or 10, and certainly by the end of primary
school. However, the present results support the conclusions of studies that have
used more systematic or rigorous spelling comparisons to show that many children
and adults (who have not received explicit teaching in this area) make no use, or
inconsistent use, of morphological conventions in their spelling (Bourassa et al.,
2011; Kemp & Bryant, 2003; Nunes et al., 1997a). The overall mean scores in the
current study are higher than those in previous similar studies that have used a
dictation format (Bourassa et al., 2011; Kemp & Bryant, 2003), but similar to the
one previous study to use the easier two-alternative forced-choice format (Mitchell
et al., 2011).

The main aim of this study, however, was to go beyond group means to consider
performance at the level of individual spellers. In each sample (primary students,
secondary students, and adults), we saw a smaller group of participants who per-
formed above chance on the orthographic choice task, and a larger group who did
not. In none of the three samples did pseudoword order correlate signiﬁcantly with
pseudoword score: that is, over the course of the task, participants did not appear
to learn or work out the morphology-based rule that could aid performance. These
results support the idea that spellers do not make reliable use of morphological
rules in their writing, at least when they have not been taught these rules, as in
our samples. We conclude that in each sample, a minority of participants under-
stood the morphological rules under study, and used them reasonably consistently
(if imperfectly) in their spelling choices. The majority of participants, however,
did not seem to use these morphological rules, and performed at, or close to,
chance. These ﬁndings underscore the vital importance of considering individual
differences in spellers’ use and understanding of morphology (Bryant & Nunes,
2008).

The percentage of participants in the above-chance group appeared to increase
with age group/education level within the three samples, but age group/education
contributed signiﬁcantly to performance group only in the adults. It seems that the
children did not show consistent improvement with age, as might be expected on
the basis of conventional models of spelling development. Although spelling skill
generally improves with age, it seems that the variation in general spelling ability
seen within groups was wide enough to mean that only spelling score itself, rather
than exact age, was enough to predict membership of the above-chance group.

The difference between adults at different secondary education levels observed
here adds to previous ﬁndings that adults with a university education make better
use of the plural –s inﬂection than those without (Kemp & Bryant, 2003), and
speciﬁcally, that the vast majority of university-educated adults perform above
chance on this kind of pseudoword spelling task, while the vast majority of non-
university-educated adults do not (Mitchell et al., 2011). We do not wish to imply

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1089

that a longer education is what teaches people to understand and use simple
morphological rules. Instead, we suggest that individuals who are more interested
and skilled in the structure of written language are probably those who pick up on
morphological regularities in language and learn to apply them in writing. These
people are the ones who are likely to go on to tertiary education, where these
linguistic and analytical skills are valued. Those who are less interested in the
structure of language might never notice these morphological regularities or learn
these rules, and might be more likely to choose a less academic path.

If children and adults do not consistently use morphological rules to spell
inﬂected and noninﬂected endings, on what do they base their spelling decisions?
We suggest that participants were using their knowledge of statistical patterns of
letter co-occurrence. This suggestion is supported by participants’ performance
on the VC[z] pseudowords (ending in a voiced consonant plus [z], e.g., [stɒgz],
stogs), which exempliﬁed the pattern that word-ﬁnal [z] after a voiced consonant is
nearly always spelled –s, regardless of morphology. In line with previous research
(Kemp & Bryant, 2003), the primary school participants chose the correct ending
about 75% of the time for these pseudowords. In contrast with the children, and
with previous adult performance (Kemp & Bryant, 2003; Mitchell et al., 2011), the
adults chose the correct ending only about 58% of the time. Previous studies have
shown that sensitivity to statistical patterns in spelling increases with age/school
grade and develops from print exposure rather than direct instruction (e.g., Hayes
et al., 2006; Thompson et al., 1999; Treiman & Kessler, 2006). The present
ﬁndings suggest that such sensitivity might also differ between adults, and might
be associated with education level. More generally, however, it seems that when
spelling inﬂected words in the real world, some adults and children may simply be
relying on knowledge of a large number of individually learned words, rather than
using the kinds of morphological rules, or even statistical patterns, often assumed.
Across the three experiments, participants did not perform equally well on all
four categories of pseudoword. The spellers in all three samples were more likely
to perform above chance on pseudowords ending in [ks] than in [z]. This might
reﬂect a tendency to rely on knowledge of stored spellings: participants may have
tried to think of similar-sounding real words on which to base their decisions.
However, this does not seem to be the whole explanation: neither the number
of real words that were just one phoneme different nor these words’ frequency
in written language was related to the likelihood of participants choosing the
morphologically appropriate spelling for the pseudowords. Even if participants
were able to think of infrequent real words to use as spelling analogies, this
would be a generally unsuccessful strategy, as there would be both inﬂected and
uninﬂected phonological neighbors for virtually all the items (e.g., [priz] could be
spelled like knees or breeze, or [zæks] like packs or wax). Participants may also
have based their pseudoword spelling choices on individual patterns of word-ﬁnal
letter co-occurrence. Thus, they may have found it easier to choose an appropriate
analogy for [ks] than [z] pseudowords because of the smaller range of possible
spellings that exist for real words ending in [ks]: they can be spelled with –x or
with –s preceded by a representation of [k]. Real words ending in [z], however,
can be spelled with –z, –zz, –ze, –se, or –s, and this range of possibilities may have
made it more difﬁcult to choose the correct one of the two presented in the task.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1090

There was also a difference for pseudoword type. Both the primary and sec-
ondary school children were more likely to perform above chance when choosing
the endings for nouns than for verbs (a difference not seen in the adult sample).
This ﬁnding would not be predicted by stage models of spelling development,
which suggest that children acquire simple inﬂectional endings, including plural
noun/present verb –s, at about the same time. However, it does ﬁt with the robust
ﬁnding that plural noun –s is acquired quite early in speech, and certainly earlier
than third-person present verb –s in toddlers’ speech (Brown, 1973; de Villiers &
de Villiers, 1973), and in children’s naturalistic writing (Turnbull et al., 2011) and
dictated spelling (Bourassa et al., 2011; Leong, 2009). Further, a post hoc analysis
showed that real monosyllabic nouns of the structure used for our pseudowords
(ending in a long vowel plus [z] or a short vowel plus [ks]) are more numerous
(n = 483) and have a higher summed frequency (19,960) than real monosyllabic
verbs with that structure (n = 300, summed frequency = 14,438; Coltheart, 1981).
Thus, our child participants’ superior performance on nouns than verbs probably
also reﬂects their greater exposure in written text to nouns than verbs of the forms
used in our experiments.

There are several limitations to these studies that should be considered. The
reliability data for the major outcomes were for the most part only moderate, and
future research designs should aim to improve on these values. An unavoidable
limitation was that the child participants had the capacity to complete only one-
quarter (primary students) or one-half (secondary students) of the 120 pseudoword
stimuli completed by the adults. This means that statistical comparison across the
three experiments was restricted to a simple comparison of the proportion of above-
chance performers in each. Further, the secondary school from which we drew
our sample had relatively high academic standards, and unlike those in our adult
sample, it is likely that many of the secondary school participants would go on
to university. Thus, any comparisons between our three broad samples need to be
interpreted with caution, as they are not necessarily equally representative of their
respective age groups overall. Having better matched groups would strengthen
this aspect of future research in this area.

Nevertheless, the present ﬁnding of above-chance performance in less than half
of adults with A-levels, and just over a quarter of adults with GCSEs, adds to
previous suggestions (Kemp & Bryant, 2003; Mitchell et al., 2011) that many
adults might never acquire this inﬂection at all. As noted earlier, almost all re-
search on spelling and morphology in typical adults (and even much research on
dyslexic adults) comes from undergraduate students, often in female-dominated
groups, who provide a convenient and reliable participant pool (e.g., Burt et al.,
2013; Coleman et al., 2009). However, in most countries, including the United
Kingdom (UK Government, 2014), they do not represent the majority of the
population. The military participants tested here were male dominated, but we
did not see evidence for strong sex differences. These recruits’ wide range of
educational backgrounds means that their responses are probably more repre-
sentative of those of the general population than the responses of a traditional
undergraduate sample would be. Future research in this area should aim to
test an even greater variety of participants, to allow broader generalizations to
be made.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1091

In sum, the present studies add to the ﬁndings that suggest that children, and
even adults, may not know and apply apparently simple morphology-based rules in
their spelling. On a practical level, the results emphasize the importance of testing
the use of spelling rules systematically, through the use of unfamiliar words and
through comparing performance on words that do not require the spelling pattern
under study, as well as on words that do. If many people are not able to apply
simple morphological rules, then it is important to teach these rules explicitly from
the early years of school. On a theoretical level, the current ﬁndings contribute to
the idea that some spelling and morphological knowledge is acquired later than is
usually assumed, or not at all. Finally, these outcomes serve as a reminder of the
need to consider individual, as well as overall, performance, and of the importance
of looking beyond the university classroom, before drawing general conclusions
about spelling ability, and particularly about the use of morphemes in spelling, in
adults.

APPENDIX A
Real-word spelling pairs

In Experiment 1, primary school children saw 10 [ks] or 10 [z] word pairs; in Experiments
2 and 3, secondary school children and adults saw 10 [ks] and 10 [z] word pairs: fox/focks,
bocks/box, hoax/hoacks, ﬁcks/ﬁx, wax/wacks, sacks/sax, lox/locks, trucks/trux, packs/pax,
kicks/kix; breeze/brees, cheese/chees, blays/blaze, maze/mays, wheeze/whees, seaze/seas,
zooze/zoos, beeze/bees, plays/plaze, and sways/swaze. (Note that in several cases the “incor-
rect” choice did represent a possible word (e.g., sax, lox), but these words were nonsensical
as well as morphologically inappropriate in the contexts given, and of much lower fre-
quency than the correct choice, and thus it was considered unlikely that any participants
would be confused by the potential alternative spellings.)

VC[Z] [seudoword pairs

In Experiment 1, primary school children saw a subset of 10 of these pseudoword
pairs; in Experiment 3, adults saw all 16 pseudoword pairs: credze/creds, pleenze/pleens,
stogs/stogze, broogze/broogs, clavs/clavze, troms/tromze, crunze/cruns, nargs/nargze, vinze/
vins, veets/veetze, stoogze/stoogs, truds/trudze, lomze/loms, noogs/noogze, foomze/fooms,
and chabs/chabze.

Main pseudoword pairs

In Experiment 1, primary school children saw 30 pseudoword pairs: all [ks] nouns, all
[ks] verbs, all [z] nouns, or all [z] verbs; in Experiment 2, secondary school children
saw 60 pseudoword pairs: either all [ks] and [z] nouns or all [ks] and [z] verbs; in
Experiment 3, adults saw all 120 pseudoword pairs. Half the time the pseudowords were
presented as nouns and verbs as listed here; half the time they were counterbalanced and pre-
sented as verbs and nouns: [z] nouns: vaze/vays, moize/moys, droze/droes, heeze/hees, gruze/
grues, preeze/prees, kaze/kays, fooze/foos, kroize/kroys, phoze/phoes, troze/troes, fruze/frues,
skaze/skays, klaze/klays, vruze/vrues, stroze/stroes, zaze/zays, creeze/crees, greeze/grees,

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1092

blize/blies, stuze/stues, cleeze/clees, taze/tays, pruze/prues, thaze/thays, veeze/vees, and
pluze/plues. [z] verbs: skoize/skoys, smuze/smoos, dwaize/dways, kize/kies, deeze/dees, voze/
voes, stoze/stoes, sreeze/srees, queeze/quees, smoize/smoys, kleeze/klees, druze/drues, dooze/
doos, keeze/kees, speeze/spees, moze/moes, swuze/swues, veeze/vees, voize/voys, fruze/frues,
dreeze/drees, glize/glise, broze/broes, blooze/bloos, steeze/stees, vuze/voos, gooze/goos,
vraze/vrays, streeze/strees, and snaze/snays. [ks] nouns: snox/snocks, crex/crecks, drax/
dracks, thex/thecks, frix/fricks, krux/krucks, drex/drecks, zix/zicks, glix/glicks, slox/slocks,
thax/thacks, yox/yocks, grax/gracks, brux/brucks, blex/blecks, jex/jecks, grix/gricks, vox/
vocks, quox/quocks, plax/placks, blux/blucks, plix/plicks, bix/bicks, frax/fracks, zax/zacks,
jix/jicks, and swex/swecks. [ks] verbs: drux/drucks,
prex/precks,
glox/glocks, yax/yacks, trex/trecks, dax/dacks, yex/yecks, brox/brocks, dox/docks, blix/blicks,
gax/gacks, crix/cricks, prex/precks, drox/drocks, prox/procks, grex/grecks, srix/sricks, prax/
pracks, frex/frecks, srex/srecks, brax/bracks, yix/yicks, grux/grucks, plex/plecks, drix/dricks,
swox/swocks, plox/plocks, strix/stricks, tex/tecks, skax/skacks, and trox/trocks.

tox/tocks, gox/gocks,

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the school students and the new recruits to the British military services who took
part in these studies. We are also grateful to the school staff and parents, and to the military
services, for allowing us to administer our tasks to these participants.

REFERENCES
Beers, C. S., & Beers, J. W. (1992). Children’s spelling of English inﬂectional morphology. In S. Tem-
pleton & D. R. Bear (Eds.), Development of orthographic knowledge and the foundations
of literacy: A memorial Festschrift for Edmund H. Henderson (pp. 231–252). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Bourassa, D. C., Beaupre, J., & MacGregor, K. (2011). Fourth graders’ sensitivity to morphological
context in spelling. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 65, 109–114. doi:10.1037/
a0021852

Brown, R. (1973). A ﬁrst language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bryant, P., & Nunes, T. (2008). Morphemes, spelling, and development: Comments on “The timing
and mechanisms of children’s use of morphological information in spelling” by S. Pacton and
H. Deacon. Cognitive Development, 23, 360–369. doi:10.1016/j.cogdev.2007.11.003

Burt, J. S., Salzgeber, A., & Carroll, M. F. (2013). Spelling recognition after exposure to misspellings:
Implications for abstractionist vs. episodic theories of orthographic representations. Acta Psy-
chologica, 142, 383–393. doi:10.1016/j.actpsy.2013.01.015

Coleman, C., Gregg, N., McLain, L., & Bellair, L. W. (2009). A comparison of spelling performance
across young adults with and without dyslexia. Assessment for Effective Intervention, 34,
94–105. doi:10.1177/1534508408318808

Coltheart, M. (1981). The MRC psycholinguistic database. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psy-

chology, 33, 497–505. doi:10.1080/14640748108400805

de Villiers, J. G., & de Villiers, P. A. (1973). A cross-sectional study of the acquisition of grammatical
morphemes in child speech. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 2, 267–278. doi:10.1007/
BF01067106

Ehri, L. C. (1986). Sources of difﬁculty in learning to read and spell. In M. L. Wolraich & D. Routh
(Eds.), Advances in developmental and behavioural pediatrics (Vol. 7, pp. 121–195). Green-
wich, CT: JAI.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1093

Ehri, L. C. (1992). Review and commentary: Stages of spelling development. In S. Templeton &
D. R. Bear (Eds.), Development of orthographic knowledge and the foundations of literacy: A
memorial Festschrift for Edmund H. Henderson (pp. 307–332). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Ehri, L. C. (1997). Learning to read and learning to spell are one and the same, almost. In C. A. Per-
fetti, L. Rieben, & M. Fayol (Eds.), Learning to spell: Research, theory, and practice across
languages (pp. 237–269). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Frith, U. (1985). Beneath the surface of developmental dyslexia. In K. Patterson, M. Coltheart, &

J. Marshall (Eds.), Surface dyslexia (pp. 301–330). London: Erlbaum.

Gentry, J. R. (1982). An analysis of developmental spelling in GYNS AT WRK. Reading Teacher, 36,

192–200.

Gentry, J. R., & Gillet, J. W. (1993). Teaching kids to spell. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Green, L., McCutchen, D., Schwiebert, C., Quinlan, T., Eva-Wood, A., & Juelis, J. (2003). Morpho-
logical development in children’s writing. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 752–764.
doi:10.1037/0022-0663.95.4.752

Greenberg, D., Ehri, L. C., & Perin, D. (2002). Do adult literacy students make the same word-reading
and spelling errors as children matched for word-reading age? Scientiﬁc Studies of Reading, 6,
221–244. doi:10.1207/S1532799XSSR0603 2

Hayes, H., Treiman, R., & Kessler, B. (2006). Children use vowels to help them spell consonants.

Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 94, 27–42. doi:10.1016/j.jecp.2005.11.001

Henderson, E. H., & Templeton, S. (1986). A developmental perspective of formal spelling instruction
through alphabet, pattern, and meaning. Elementary School Journal, 86, 305–316. doi:10.1086/
461451

Holmes, V. M., & Malone, N. (2004). Adult spelling strategies. Reading and Writing, 17, 537–566.

doi:10.1023/B:READ.0000044368.17444.7d

Hurry, J., Curno, T., Parker, M., & Pretzlik, U. (2006). An intervention program for classroom teaching
about morphemes: Effects on the children’s vocabulary. In T. Nunes & P. Bryant (Eds.),
Improving literacy by teaching morphemes (pp. 134–154). London: Routledge.

Hurry, J., Nunes, T., Bryant, P., Pretzlik, U., Parker, M., Curno, T., & Midgely, L. (2005). Transforming

research on morphology into teacher practice. Research Papers in Education, 20, 187–206.

Kemp, N., & Bryant, P. (2003). Do beez buzz? Rule-based and frequency-based knowledge in learning

to spell the plural -s. Child Development, 74, 63–74. doi:10.1111/1467-8624.00521

Kemp, N., Parrila, R., & Kirby, J. (2009). Phonological and orthographic spelling in high-functioning

adult dyslexics. Dyslexia, 15, 105–128. doi:10.1002/dys.364

Kessler, B., & Treiman, R. (2003). Is English spelling chaotic? Misconceptions concerning its irregu-

larity. Reading Psychology, 24, 267–289. doi:10.1080/02702710390227228

Leikin, M., & Hagit, E. Z. (2006). Morphological processing in adult dyslexia. Journal of Psycholin-

guistic Research, 35, 471–490. doi:10.1007/s10936-006-9025-8

Leong, C. K. (2009). The role of inﬂectional morphology in Canadian children’s word reading and

spelling. Elementary School Journal, 4, 343–358. doi:10.1086/593937

Mitchell, P., Kemp, N., & Bryant, P. (2011). Variations among adults in their use of morphemic
spelling rules and of word-speciﬁc knowledge when spelling. Reading Research Quarterly, 46,
119–133. doi:10.1598/RRQ.46.2.2

Nunes, T., Bryant, P., & Bindman, M. (1997a). Morphological spelling strategies: Developmental
stages and processes. Developmental Psychology, 33, 637–649. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.33.4.
637

Nunes, T., Bryant, P., & Bindman, M. (1997b). Learning to spell regular and irregular verbs. Reading

and Writing, 9, 427–449. doi:10.1023/A:1007951213624

Pollo, T. C., Kessler, T., & Treiman, R. (2009). Statistical patterns in children’s early writing. Journal

of Experimental Child Psychology, 104, 410–426. doi:10.1016/j.jecp.2009.07.003

Rastle, K., Harrington, J., & Coltheart, M. (2002). 358,534 nonwords: The ARC nonword
database. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55, 1339–1362. doi:10.1080/
02724980244000099

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Kemp et al.: Morphological spelling rules

1094

Raveh, M., & Schiff, R. (2008). Visual and auditory morphological priming in adults with develop-
mental dyslexia. Scientiﬁc Studies of Reading, 12, 221–252. doi:10.1080/10888430801917068

Read, C. (1986). Children’s creative spelling. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Rueckl, J. G., & Aicher, K. A. (2008). Are CORNER and BROTHER morphologically com-
plex? Not in the long term. Language and Cognitive Processes, 23, 972–1001. doi:10.1080/
01690960802211027

S´anchez-Guti´errez, C., & Rastle, K. (2013). Letter transpositions within and across morphemic bound-
aries: Is there a cross-language difference? Psychonomic Bulletin & Review. Advance online
publication. doi:10.3758/s13423-013-0425-0

Sterling, C. M. (1983). Spelling errors in context. British Journal of Psychology, 74, 353–364.
Thompson, G. B., Fletcher-Flinn, C. M., & Cottrell, D. S. (1999). Learning correspondences between

letters and phonemes without explicit instruction. Applied Psycholinguistics, 20, 21–50.

Treiman, R. (1993). Beginning to spell: A study of ﬁrst-grade children. New York: Oxford University

Press.

Treiman, R., & Kessler, B. (2006). Spelling as statistical learning: Using consonantal context to spell

vowels. Journal of Educational Psychology, 98, 642–652. doi:10.1037/0022-0663.98.3.642

Turnbull, K., Deacon, S. H., & Kay-Raining Bird, E. (2011). Mastering inﬂectional sufﬁxes: A longi-
tudinal study of beginning writers’ spellings. Journal of Child Language, 38, 533–553. doi:10.
1017/S030500091000022X

UK Government, Department for Business, Innovation, and Skills. (2014). Participation rates in
higher education. Retrieved from https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/
attachment_data/ﬁle/458034/HEIPR_PUBLICATION_2013-14.pdf

Varnhagen, C. K., McCallum, M., & Burstow, M. (1997). Is children’s spelling naturally stage-like?

Reading and Writing, 9, 451–481. doi:10.1023/A:1007903330463

Walker, J., & Hauerwas, L. (2006). Development of phonological, morphological, and orthographic
knowledge in young spellers: The case of inﬂected verbs. Reading and Writing, 19, 819–843.
doi:10.1007/s11145-006-9006-1

Wilkinson, G. S. (1993). Wide Range Achievement Test (version 3). Wilmington, DE: Wide Range.


