A central assumption of most models of reading acquisition is that children start
out by decoding words on a letter-by-letter basis at ﬁrst (Ehri, 1995; Grainger
& Ziegler, 2011; Seymour, 2005; Share, 1995). They learn grapheme–phoneme
correspondence (GPC) mappings and sound out words. As their reading skills
develop and they gain more experience with written words, it is assumed that they
become sensitive to intermediate-sized units until they are ﬁnally able to decode
whole words directly “on sight.” For example, Seymour’s (2005) dual-foundation
model proposes that reading develops in phases. It is thought to begin with simple
alphabetic decoding using phonemes and advances to increasingly more com-
plex structures, ﬁrst centered around rimes, and in the last stage using syllables
and morphemes. Equally, the multiple-route model of orthographic processing
(Grainger & Ziegler, 2011) assumes that beginning readers start out by decod-
ing words on a phonology-driven letter-by-letter basis (cf. Share, 1995) that leads
them to two routes of orthographic processing: a ﬁne-grained and a coarse-grained
route. The main difference between the ﬁne-grained and coarse-grained routes is
the coding of letter positions: the ﬁne-grained route is sensitive to ordered letter
sequences, whereas letter coding in the coarse-grained route is position invariant.
As a consequence, the coarse-grained route entails direct access from orthography
to semantics via whole words, whereas the ﬁne-grained route is tuned to detect
frequently co-occurring letter sequences as functional units for word recognition.
Both syllables and morphemes feature frequently co-occurring letter sequences
and can thus be suspected to function as sensible intermediate-sized units that are
detected in the ﬁne-grained route. Albeit being formally very similar in terms of
size and features of letter position coding, syllables and morphemes differ from
each other in how they are deﬁned and what type of information they encode. Syl-
lables are phonologically deﬁned and encode information about pronunciation.
Morphemes are deﬁned through the convergence of form and meaning, encoding
lexical–semantic information. Syllables can thus be seen as being more closely
associated with a phonological processing route, while morphemes constitute a
more direct link between orthography and semantics. A very recent extension of
the multiple-route model by H¨aiki¨o, Bertram, and Hy¨on¨a (2016) captures this
relation by proposing a syllabic assembly mechanism as an intermediate stage be-
tween a phonological and a ﬁne-grained route, thus predicting the use of syllables
to chronologically precede the use of morphemes in reading development.

In a range of languages, empirical evidence has been put forward separately
for the use of syllables and morphemes in reading development. Vast evidence
shows that sensitivity to syllables, as a subdomain of phonological awareness,
is a strong predictor for later reading ability (e.g., Wagner & Torgesen, 1987),
measured, for example, by syllable counting or syllable segmentation tasks. In the
process of reading, sensitivity to syllables has also been found early in children of
different languages. For example, French Grade 5 readers show effects of syllable
frequency (Chetail & Mathey, 2008) and syllable compatibility effects, that is,
faster responses when a word was preceded by the corresponding syllable, have
been found in syllable detection tasks with Grade 1, 3 and 5 children (Col´e,
Magnan, & Grainger, 1999; Ma¨ıonchi-Pino, Magnan, & ´Ecalle, 2010) and in
lexical decision tasks with sixth graders (Chetail & Mathey, 2012). The visual
segmentation of a word in a position congruent with a syllable boundary (pa/per
vs. p/aper) results in fewer word recognition errors for poor second-grade readers
of English (Katz & Baldasare, 1983) and syllable-congruent coloring similarly
speeds up poor second-grade readers of French, while it slows down good age-
matched peers (Chetail & Mathey, 2009). Moreover, eye-tracking studies indicate
that hyphenation at syllable boundaries is less disruptive than hyphenation within
syllables for Finnish readers already by the end of ﬁrst grade (H¨aiki¨o, Hy¨on¨a, &
Bertram, 2015). This indicates that syllables are helpful units very early in reading
acquisition and for dysﬂuent readers (see also Hautala, Aro, Eklund, Lerkkanen,
& Lyytinen, 2012) and that in many languages syllables come into play very early
in the course of reading acquisition.

There is also vast evidence that children use morphemes in word recogni-
tion. In lexical decision and naming tasks in a variety of languages, elementary
school children have been found to respond faster and more accurately to mul-
timorphemic compared to matched monomorphemic words (Italian: Marcolini,
Traﬁcante, Zocolotti, & Burani, 2011; French: Col´e, Bouton, Leuwers, Casalis, &
Sprenger-Charolles, 2011; Qu´emart, Casalis, & Duncan, 2012; English: Carlisle
& Stone, 2003, 2005). Conversely, more false alarms and prolonged response
times (RTs) in lexical decision were found in the presence of real morphemes
in pseudowords, because they were mistaken as real words and thus harder to
reject (Qu´emart et al., 2012). Those effects of morphology were found as early
as in Grade 2 for French children, and a little later (around Grade 3) in Italian
children. Moreover, masked morphological priming effects for sufﬁxed words and
nonwords have been reported for children in different languages from around
Grade 3 onward (English: Beyersmann, Castles, & Coltheart, 2012; French: Bey-
ersmann, Grainger, Casalis, & Ziegler, 2015; Casalis, Dusautoir, Col´e, & Ducrot,
2009; Qu´emart, Casalis, & Col´e, 2011). A Finnish eye-tracking study by H¨aiki¨o,
Bertram, and Hy¨on¨a (2011) reports advantages from hyphenations in compounds
only for slow second-grade readers, but not for their faster age-matched peers or
Grades 4 and 6 readers. Therefore, as for syllables, there is general consensus that
children use morphemes as units at some point in reading development; however,
ﬁndings on when this happens diverge depending on the language studied.

It is important to note that only a few studies have more directly compared
syllables and morphemes in reading (see Prinzmetal, Hoffman, & Vest, 1991,
for a study with adults using an illusory conjunction paradigm). However, in
order to reﬁne models of reading acquisition, it is necessary to disentangle the
relative importance of syllables and morphemes in word recognition and determine
whether there is an order of their utilization in reading development. One study
that has addressed the direct comparison between syllables and morphemes in
child reading was undertaken by Col´e et al. (2011) with French second and third
graders. They used multimorphemic words in which the syllable and morpheme
boundary do not coincide (e.g., malade). This is the case for multimorphemic
words that have a sufﬁx beginning with a vowel. The consonants at the end of
the stem in these cases form a syllable unit with the sufﬁx, because syllable
division follows the maximal onset principle (Spencer, 1996), which states that
the maximally possible number of consonants should be assigned to the onset of a
syllable rather than to the end of the preceding syllable. Col´e et al. (2011) exploited
these cases to more directly compare the impact of syllabic segmentation (e.g., ma
lade), morphological segmentation (mal ade) and morphological + 1 grapheme
(mala de) to unsegmented low-frequency derivations (malade) in a reading task.
Reading times were expected to be shorter if the segmentation is in line with
the units that are activated in reading and longer when the segmentation destroys
important units. The authors found that both second and third graders read words
equally fast when they were segmented by a space into syllables or morphemes
or were unsegmented. Readers were only slowed down by the morphological
+ 1 condition. These results point to ﬂexible use of syllables, morphemes, and
even whole words, at least for French Grade 2 and 3 readers in the reading of
multimorphemic words.

Ziegler and Goswami (2005) emphasize in their psycholinguistic grain size
theory that language-speciﬁc characteristics determine preferences for the use
of certain units as linguistic characteristics of a language and its orthography
may pose different demands on learners. Cross-linguistic differences in reading
development have been attributed to orthographic transparency (Katz & Frost,
1992), syllable structure (Seymour, Aro, & Erskine, 2003), and morphological
richness (Perfetti & Harris, 2013). Learners of opaque orthographies (e.g., En-
glish) might need longer to master GPC-based reading, while in transparent or-
thographies, like German or Finnish, solid reading skills can be achieved quickly
by the use of GPC rules only (Wimmer & Goswami, 1994). As a consequence,
learners of opaque orthographies can be assumed to proﬁt considerably more from
using bigger units, such as syllables or morphemes, because those tend to have
more consistency in the way they are spelled and pronounced (Katz & Frost,
1992). However, languages also vary in the complexity of their syllable structure:
for example, in Finnish and French syllable structure tends to be more simple,
while the syllable structure of German and English is rather complex (Seymour
et al., 2003). As Seymour et al. (2003) found, complex syllable structures tend to
be more challenging for developing readers. Moreover, as the transparency of an
orthography tends to be correlated with the morphological complexity of the lan-
guage (Perfetti & Harris, 2013; Seidenberg, 2011), more transparent languages are
often equipped with a richer and more productive morphology. For languages in
which morphemes are very prominent, like German or Finnish, then, they suggest
themselves as units in word recognition, despite the availability of smaller units.
Considering the interplay of syllables and morphemes, languages also differ in
the degree of convergence and interactions of the two units. In German, syllables
and morphemes very often coincide. Moreover, sufﬁxation usually does not affect
stress assignment in the word, whereas in French, sufﬁxes often draw the stress.
The distinction between syllables and morphemes might therefore be less pro-
nounced in German in comparison to French. Differences between languages in
the structure of mappings between phonology, orthography, and meaning can pro-
duce differences in the sensitivity to certain sublexical units. Due to the described
characteristics, German presents an interesting contrast to the languages in which
development of syllables and morphemes as reading units has been studied so far,
and different predictions can be made on the basis of its linguistic characteristics.
In particular, the orthographic transparency together with complex syllable struc-
ture would predict prolonged reliance on graphemes throughout development.
However, the morphological richness should act in favor of early advancement to
morphemes. Finally, the prevalent convergence of morphemic units with syllabic
units can be expected to also enhance reliance on syllables. Consequently, the rel-
ative importance of syllables and morphemes in reading development is unclear
for this language and needs to be tested empirically.

To address the role of syllables and morphemes as reading units in German
reading development, we adopted the methodology from the study by Col´e et al.
(2011), using a manipulation of the presentation format. Unfortunately, the study
by Col´e et al. (2011) focuses exclusively on multimorphemic words and does not
reveal whether syllables are equally used in reading monomorphemic words. It is
possible that a segmentation at the syllable boundary in monomorphemic words
leads to even faster responses as it does not simultaneously destroy a morphemic
structure. Therefore, we further extended the study design to monomorphemic
words and made some slight changes to the paradigm. We included multimor-
phemic words with a syllabic segmentation (e.g., FAH:RER) and a morphological
segmentation condition (FAHR:ER) in our study, just like Col´e et al. (2011). In
order to examine the use of syllables in multimorphemic words in comparison
to that in monomorphemic words, we also included monomorphemic words that
were segmented at the same positions as the multimorphemic words, namely, at the
syllable boundary (syllable-congruent; e.g., SPI:NAT) or one letter after the syl-
lable boundary (syllable-incongruent; SPIN:AT). Note that the latter parallels the
morphological segmentation condition of the multimorphemic words, but in the
case of the monomorphemic words cannot coincide with a morpheme boundary
by deﬁnition (–at is not a German sufﬁx). We hypothesized that word recogni-
tion would be easiest for readers in the disruption condition that puts emphasis
on the functional unit they actually use, while other disruption positions should
make reading harder. That is, if a reader uses only syllables as functional units,
the syllable-congruent disruption condition should lead to faster word recognition
compared to the incongruent disruption in both monomorphemic and multimor-
phemic words. However, if a reader uses morphemes as functional units, the
syllable-incongruent disruption of multimorphemic words (e.g., FAHR:ER, thus
being morpheme-congruent) should be faster than the syllable-congruent one,
while this should not be the case for the monomorphemic words (SPIN:AT) as
the resulting structure does neither map onto a phonological syllable nor onto a
morpheme (but see Taft, 1979, 1986, for another possible structure called BOSS).
Our study thus not only allows investigating the ﬁndings of Col´e et al. (2011) for
another language but also reﬁnes them due to the inclusion of monomorphemic
words.

Another limitation of the study by Col´e et al. (2011) is that no pseudowords were
included, although those can also be informative concerning the use of syllables
and morphemes in reading new items. Because children, especially those who have
just started to read, are often confronted with a given written word for the ﬁrst time,
the use of syllables or morphemes in reading such a newly encountered word is of
special interest with regard to the role of different units in reading development.
Reading pseudowords most likely parallels the processes involved in reading new
words. In the present study, we included pseudowords by employing a lexical
decision task. Learners of transparent orthographies achieve basic reading skills
with rather high accuracy rates very early in development (Seymour et al., 2003;
Wimmer & Goswami, 1994), and silent reading, as required in the lexical decision
task, is already natural to them. Therefore, a lexical decision is an adequate task to
study processing also in beginning readers of German. The pseudowords included
in the study matched the real words: they either did or did not feature an existing
sufﬁx (multimorphemic and monomorphemic pseudowords) and were also seg-
mented syllable-congruent (e.g., DOS:TOR, HEL:BER) or syllable-incongruent
(DOST:OR, HELB:ER), the latter again corresponding to a morpheme-congruent
disruption for pseudowords featuring a sufﬁx (–er). Considering the hypotheses
for pseudowords, one has to keep in mind that, opposite of words, those have to
be rejected in a lexical decision task. Syllable-congruent segmentation, encour-
aging the use of syllables, might help to “read through” the pseudoword faster
than a segmentation that destroys this unit when readers rely on a phonological
decoding strategy. It might thus allow a faster rejection relative to a syllable-
incongruent segmentation, as evidence from English and Serbo-Croatian (Katz
& Feldman, 1981; Lima & Pollatsek, 1983) suggests. However, multimorphemic
pseudowords have been found to be harder to reject (Burani, Marcolini, & Stella,
2002; Qu´emart et al., 2012), because morphemes as lexical–semantic units sig-
nal word status. Therefore, the syllable-incongruent segmentation of multimor-
phemic pseudowords (e.g., HELB:ER), which puts emphasis on the real sufﬁx,
might result in prolonged rejection times. Overall, including both mulimorphemic
and monomorphemic words and pseudowords in our study provides a more
extensive direct comparison of syllables and morphemes as functional units in
reading.

To summarize, one of our main aims was to ﬁnd out how the use of syllables and
morphemes changes in the course of reading development in German. In order
to investigate developmental differences, children at different stages in reading
development were examined. Based on the previously mentioned ﬁndings on syl-
lable and morpheme use in children, we decided to conduct the study with second
and fourth graders. In accordance with the prediction of the multiple route model
(Grainger & Ziegler, 2011) that developing readers use a phonological strategy in
the beginning, we expected that younger children would be more inclined to make
use of syllables in word recognition, because although those are intermediate-sized
units, they are phonologically deﬁned and thus more approximate to the phonolog-
ical route (see H¨aiki¨o et al., 2016). Based on the developmental sequence outlined
by H¨aiki¨o et al. (2016), older children, who had gained more reading experience,
were expected to have moved away further from a phonological strategy and more
toward an orthographic strategy using ﬁne-grained processing with morphemes
as functional units. In order to compare the processing strategies of readers that
are still in the course of development to those of skilled readers, we also included
a group of adults. The adults’ processing thus serves as a reference point for the
reading skills that the children should be achieving at some point in the future.
Skilled readers should have access to both ﬁne-grained and coarse-grained pro-
cessing. Consequently, their reading strategy should depend on task demands.
As coarse-grained processing, that is position invariant, is more robust to small
changes in words that only affect a single sign (i.e., transposed or substituted
letters: e.g., Forster, Davis, Schoknecht, & Carter, 1987; O’Connor & Forster,
1981), this would be a more beneﬁcial strategy for the present task. It is therefore
plausible that adults are able to adjust to this, being considerably less affected by
the position of the disruption.
<Middle>
METHOD.
Participants.
Fifty-seven second-grade children were recruited from 10 elementary schools in
the Berlin area. At the time of testing, the children were at the beginning of
second grade, meaning they had received approximately 1 year of formal read-
ing instruction. Permission for participation from the school administration and
the children’s parents was acquired prior to the experiment. Moreover, 20 fourth
graders were recruited at the after-school care of one Berlin school. Permis-
sion from the after-school care and the children’s parents was acquired before
testing. Every child received a small gift and candy for his or her participation.
Finally, 24 university students from the Berlin area participated for monetary
reimbursement.

In order to ensure that participants showed age-appropriate reading behavior,
each participant’s reading ﬂuency was assessed using the 1-min reading test for
words and nonwords from the second edition of the Salzburg Reading and Spelling
Test (Moll & Landerl, 2010). We used reading ﬂuency percentile norm values of
<3 as an indication that readers belonged to the 3% of the population at the
lowest end of the reading ﬂuency scale suffering from dyslexia. This applied
to 6 second graders. Furthermore, we excluded one adult who reported having
a history of dyslexia and two adults who reported having learned German as a
second language later in life. As we aimed at investigating unimpaired reading,
we excluded those participants. As a consequence, the study included 51 second
graders (24 girls, M age = 6.9 years), 20 fourth graders (10 girls, M age = 9.5
years), and 21 university students (10 women, M age = 26.1 years). All remaining
participants reported normal or corrected to normal vision and had German as
their native language or second language acquired before the age of 6. As analyses
for monolinguals and early bilinguals showed no differences, all children were
included in the analyses.

Materials.
Twenty-four multimorphemic words, consisting of a stem and a sufﬁx, were se-
lected from the childLex corpus (Schroeder, W¨urzner, Heister, Geyken, & Kliegl,
2015). Crucially, sufﬁxes beginning with a vowel were chosen (–er, –in, –ung),
because when they are combined with a stem, the syllable boundary does not
correspond to the morpheme boundary, thus creating a special morphophono-
logical case. The words were disrupted by inserting a colon (:) at the syllable
boundary (syllable-congruent condition, e.g., FAH:RER) or one letter right of
the syllable boundary (syllable-incongruent condition, FAHR:ER), which corre-
sponds to the morpheme boundary in the multimorphemic words, thus being
morpheme congruent for those. Moreover, 24 monomorphemic words were se-
lected from the corpus and were also disrupted by a colon at the syllable-congruent
(e.g., SPI:NAT) or syllable-incongruent (SPIN:AT) position. Mono- and multimor-
phemic words were matched on number of letters, number of syllables, frequency,
bigram frequency, and neighbors (all t < 1, p > .05, see Table 1 for lexical
statistics).

Moreover, 24 multimorphemic pseudowords were created by selecting multi-
morphemic words that were not in the stimulus set but had the same sufﬁxes that
were used in the word set (–er, –in, –ung). To create pseudowords, one letter in
the stem was changed, such that the morphological structure remained due to the
presence of the real sufﬁx. Again, the items were disrupted syllable-congruent
(e.g., HEL:BER) or syllable-incongruent/morpheme-congruent (HELB:ER). In
addition, 24 monomorphemic words were chosen and one letter was changed in
order to create monomorphemic pseudowords, which were again segmented at the
syllable boundary (e.g., DOS:TOR) or one letter to its right (DOST:OR). Mono-
and multimorphemic pseudowords were matched on number of letters, number
of syllables, bigram frequency, and neighbors (all t < 1, p > .05, see Table 1
for details). Finally, the pseudoword set and the word set were matched on these
characteristics as well (all t < 1, p > .05, see Table 1).

Two lists were created from the ﬁnal set of 48 words and 48 pseudowords,
such that each stimulus appeared both in the syllable-congruent and the syllable-
incongruent/morpheme-congruent condition across participants, but each partici-
pant only saw each stimulus in one of the conditions.

Procedure.
The children were tested individually in a quiet room in their schools or in their
after-school care. The adults were tested individually at the test center of the
research institution. The experiment was run on a 15-in. laptop monitor with a
refresh rate of 60 Hz. The stimuli were always presented in the center of the screen
in white 20-point Courier New font on a black background. Each trial started with
a 500-ms ﬁxation cross, followed directly by a disrupted word or pseudoword.
The word or pseudoword remained on the screen until a response was made by
the participant. Participants were instructed to decide as quickly and as accurately
as possible whether the presented stimulus was an existing German word or not
while ignoring the colon in the stimulus. They were further instructed to indicate
their decision by pressing the D or the K key on a standard keyboard, marked red
and green. Eight practice trials with feedback (right or wrong answer) were given
prior to the 96 experimental items. After half of the items, the participants had a
break that was timed by the experimenter.

RESULTS.
Reaction times and error rates from the experiment were collected and analyzed
separately for words and pseudowords. For the RT analysis, incorrect responses
were removed from the analysis (15.80% for words, 15.80% for pseudowords), as
were RTs below 200 ms or above 10000 ms (0.91% for words, 3.16% for pseu-
dowords). The remaining RTs were then logarithmically transformed. Following
Baayen and Milin (2010), model criticism based on a simple model including
random effects for subject and item was used for further outlier trimming, exclud-
ing all data points with residuals exceeding 2.5 SD for the main analyses (2.32%
for words, 1.95% for pseudowords). It should be noted that adults made very
few errors, limiting the meaningfulness of the error rate analysis for adults. For
reasons of completeness and because the children made more errors, we report
error analyses too. The means and standard errors for words and pseudowords are
presented in Tables 2 and 3 and illustrated in Figures 1 and 2, respectively.

Main data analyses were performed using linear mixed-effects models (Baayen,
2008; Baayen, Davidson, & Bates, 2008). A forward-selection procedure was used
for model building, starting with a very simple model only including age group as
a ﬁxed effect and only adding predictors when they signiﬁcantly improved model
ﬁt as indicated by comparison of the Bayes information criterion. The ﬁnal model
included morphological status (monomorphemic vs. multimorphemic), disruption
position (syllable-congruent vs. syllable-incongruent/morpheme-congruent), age
group (second graders vs. fourth graders vs. adults), and their interactions as ﬁxed
effects, and participants and items as random factors. The results for the overall
effects tests using contrast coding and Type III sum of squares (using the Anova
function in the car package) are summarized in Table 4. Post hoc comparisons were
carried out using cell means coding, and single df contrasts using the glht function
of the multcomp package (Hothorn, Bretz, & Westfall, 2008) were evaluated using
a normal distribution.

Words.
The model ﬁtted to the word data revealed a signiﬁcant main effect of age group,
indicating faster RTs with increasing age. Furthermore, age group interacted with
morphological status as well as with disruption position. Decomposing the Age
Group × Morphological Status interaction, post hoc contrasts showed that albeit
second graders showed a numerical advantage for monomorphemic compared to
multimorphemic words, this effect did not reach signiﬁcance (RT = 230 ms,
t = 1.72, p = .08), and neither did the difference between monomorphemic and
multimorphemic words in fourth graders and adults (Grade 4: RT = 55 ms,
t < 1, p = .42; adults: RT = 5 ms, t < 1, p = .84). The simple main effect
of morphological status, however, was signiﬁcantly different in second graders
compared to fourth graders (t = 4.29, p < .01) and compared to adults (t = 2.68,
p < .01), while fourth graders and adults did not differ signiﬁcantly (t = 1.57,
p > .05).
Decomposing the Age Group× Disruption Position interaction, it became clear
that all children were slowed down signiﬁcantly by the syllable-incongruent
compared to the syllable-congruent condition (Grade 2: RT = 162 ms,
t = 3.69, p < .01; Grade 4: RT = 72 ms, t = 2.21, p = .03), while this
was not the case for adults (RT = 7 ms, t < 1, p = .56). The simple main effect
of disruption position did not differ between second and fourth graders (t < 1, p =
.87), but differed signiﬁcantly between both second graders and adults (t = 2.63,
p < .01) and fourth graders and adults (t = 2.02, p = .04).

There was no three-way interaction of morphological status, disruption position,
and age group. A similar model was ﬁtted to the error data. This mirrored the
outcome of the RT model with a signiﬁcant main effect of age group, indicating
more accurate responses with increasing age. Age group also interacted with
morphological status and with disruption position. Regarding the Age Group ×
Morphological Status interaction, post hoc contrasts showed that the direction of
the morphological status effect differed signiﬁcantly between second graders and
fourth graders (t = 2.74, p < .01) and between second graders and adults (t =
2.45, p = .01). All other contrasts were not signiﬁcant.
When decomposing the Age Group×Disruption Position, it became evident that
second graders made fewer errors in the syllable-congruent disruption condition
(t = 3.57, p < .01), while this was not the case for fourth graders (t = 1.57, p =
.12) and adults (t < 1, p = .86).

Taken together, children’s word recognition is impeded when syllables are vi-
sually disrupted, while adults are not affected differentially by syllable-congruent
and syllable-incongruent/morpheme-congruent visual disruptions.

Pseudowords.
RTs to pseudowords were analyzed as described above. A main effect of age group
was found, indicating that RTs to pseudowords became faster with increasing age.
This main effect was moderated by a three-way interaction of morphological
status, disruption position, and age group.
Post hoc contrasts showed that for second-grade children, there was no inter-
action of morphological status and disruption position (t = 1.09, p = .28), nor
a simple main effect of morphological status (t = 1.44, p = .15), but the sim-
ple main effect of disruption position was signiﬁcant (t = 4.62, p < .01). This
indicated slower responses to syllable-incongruent compared to syllablecongruent
pseudowords (RT = 264 ms).
For fourth-grade children, there was an interaction effect of morphological
status and disruption position (t = 3.23, p < .01). The effect of disruption position
was only significant for multimorphemic words (t = 4.29, p < .01); that is,
RTs to pseudowords disrupted at the syllable-incongruent position were longer
when the pseudoword contained an existing morpheme (RT = 298 ms) and the
segmentation was therefore morpheme congruent. There were no prolonged RTs
to monomorphemic syllable-incongruent pseudowords (t < 1, p = .85).
Adults did not show a significant effect of neither morphological status (t < 1,
p = .42) nor disruption position (t = 1.17, p = .24), nor the interaction of those
(t < 1, p = .52).
Error rates to pseudowordswere analyzed parallel to the RTs. Themodel yielded
a significant main effect of age group only, indicating that error rates decreased
with increasing age.
In summary, second graderswere slower in rejecting pseudowordswhen the disruption
was syllable incongruent, while fourth graders were only slowed down by
syllable-incongruent (i.e., morpheme-congurent) disruptions of multimorphemic
pseudowords, which were the morpheme-congruent cases. Adults were again not
influenced by disruptions at all.
<Conclusion>
DISCUSSION.
The present study examined second graders’, fourth graders’, and adults’ use of
syllables and morphemes as functional units in word recognition by using a lexical
decision task with monomorphemic and multimorphemic words and pseudowords
that were visually disrupted either in a syllable-congruent or a syllable-incongruent
way (being morpheme-congruent in the case of mulitmorphemic words). Beginning
and skilled readers were impacted differently by this disruption, implying
that different units are preferred depending on the stage of reading development.
Moreover, the effect of disruption position also differed for word recognition and
pseudoword rejection in the different age groups. Second graders were faster when
the disruption was syllable congruent in both word recognition and pseudoword
rejection. For fourth graders, syllable-congruent disruptions were also faster in
word recognition, but in pseudoword rejection, this was only the case for multimorphemic
pseudowords. Together, this indicates that syllables facilitate word
recognition for all children, while morphemes selectively impede the rejection of
multimorphemic pseudowords in fourth graders. Adults were not affected differently
by syllable-congruent and syllable-incongruent disruptions, neither in word
recognition nor in pseudoword rejection.
Second-grade children in the present study responded faster when disruptions
were congruent with the syllables (SPI:NAT, FAH:RER) than if they were not
(SPIN:AT, FAHR:ER), regardless of the morphological status. Moreover, this pattern
emerged for both words and pseudowords. In addition, second graders made
fewer errors to words with syllable-congruent disruptions. Together, this shows
that beginning readers of German can use syllables as units in reading. Moreover,
the results indicate that word and pseudoword reading in young children is based
on the same sublexical mechanism. This can be best interpreted as some kind of
phonological restructuring into syllables prior to lexical access (Katz & Feldman,
1981) that helps the ﬂow of reading, making it easier for beginning readers to “get
through” the word or pseudoword. Taken together, the response pattern to words
and pseudowords militates for the syllable as a salient grain size in German second
graders’ reading, while morphemic structure is still tedious.

Children in fourth grade in our study also showed facilitation from syllable-
congruent compared to syllable-incongruent disruptions, albeit this effect did
only emerge in the RTs, but not in the error rates. It is interesting that no facil-
itation from syllable-congruent disruptions in the monomorphemic pseudowords
(DOS:TOR) was evident. The disruption position only made a difference in the
multimorphemic pseudowords that featured a sufﬁx, which was accentuated in
the syllable-incongruent disruption (HELB:ER). Because pseudowords have to be
rejected, the RTs can reﬂect not only actual reading processes but also rejection
difﬁculty. Thus, the longer RTs to pseudowords that feature a sufﬁx and are dis-
rupted at the morpheme boundary, such that the sufﬁx is highlighted, might point
to a role of morphemes in reading. The prominences of syllables as functional
units in word reading, but morphemes in pseudoword reading, is very interesting
because it suggests that different processing mechanisms can be involved de-
pending on lexicality and/or familiarity. When reading unfamiliar words, such as
pseudowords, morphemes might be particularly consulted, as they aid breaking
down and understanding unknown words (Bertram, Laine, & Virkkala, 2000).
This draws on the different types of information that syllables and morphemes
encode. The accentuation of the existing sufﬁx in a pseudoword might thus result
in longer attempts at ascribing meaning to the pseudoword, which ﬁnally fails
(see Qu´emart et al., 2012). It can be assumed that fourth graders have already
developed some sensitivity to sufﬁxes as lexical–semantic units, but do not fully
capitalize on morphemes as sublexical decoding units in words when they do not
coincide with syllables. Together, results from words and pseudowords for fourth-
grade readers indicate that in the course of reading development, sensitivity to
morphemes emerges, while syllables do not lose their relevance as a grain size in
ﬁne-grained reading.

Turning to the results for the skilled adult readers in our study, we failed to
ﬁnd any effects of the disruption, in the case of both words and pseudowords.
Certainly, this does not rule out the possibility that adults are sensitive to syllables
and morphemes in word recognition, as has been evidenced by many studies with
a variety of paradigms (e.g., for syllable effects, Carreiras, ´Alvarez, & De Vega,
1993; and Conrad & Jacobs, 2004; for a review of morphological effects, see
Amenta & Crepaldi, 2012). Our results should be interpreted with caution in this
regard with several considerations in mind. First, the words were very familiar to
adults, as we chose them from a child corpus (childLex; Schroeder et al., 2015) with
the developmental focus of the study in mind, and syllable and morpheme effects
have been shown to diminish or even disappear with increasing word frequency
(Col´e et al., 1999; Marcolini et al., 2011). Second, the disruption we used (:) was
very subtle for skilled readers, whose reading system is robust to some amount
of impreciseness (e.g., Forster et al., 1987; O’Connor & Forster, 1981). Third, as
the accentuation of certain units through the disruptions was not always helpful
(e.g., SPIN:AT, leaving no sensible subunits, or HELB:ER, drawing the attention
to the misleading existing sufﬁx), adults might have ignored the manipulation
altogether. Skilled readers thus showed less sensitivity to syllables and morphemes
as sublexical units in the present study, which does not exclude their ability to
rely on these grain sizes under task demands. However, in the present study, we
suggest that they used a coarse-grained strategy that is more tuned to deal with the
insertion of a single character at any position, because it uses position-invariant
letter coding. After having arrived at a whole-word orthographic representation
via the coarse-grained route, of course, morphological processing is possible.
This supralexical morphological processing, however, does not assume the use of
morphemes as ordered letter sequences, which we believe our manipulations tap
into. The interpretation of the adult data in terms of skilled processing mechanisms
is surely limited and needs to be investigated separately in future studies. In
the present study, the skilled readers nevertheless serve as a control group to
illustrate how the same materials should be processed by the end of reading
development.

Our developmental results diverge from those of Col´e et al. (2011), who re-
ported equal use of syllables and morphemes in multimorphemic words already
in second grade, while in our study syllables seemed to be the preferred units
in word recognition still in fourth grade. The divergence in ﬁndings could pos-
sibly be ascribed to differences in the study design: for example, word frequen-
cies might inﬂuence the magnitude of syllable and morpheme use (Col´e et al.,
1999; Marcolini et al., 2011), but are difﬁcult to compare across the two studies.
However, cross-linguistic differences affecting reading development (Seymour
et al., 2003; Ziegler & Goswami, 2005) seem to present a more crucial factor
for children. Particularly, in French, most common sufﬁxes start with a vowel;
thus, derivations typically have a morpheme-incongruent syllable structure. In
German, in contrast, there are many sufﬁxes starting with a vowel and many suf-
ﬁxes starting with a consonant, such that morpheme-congruent syllable structure
is not an exception. Moreover, stress assignment in French is typically changed
by sufﬁxation, whereas in German, sufﬁxation virtually never changes stress as-
signment. As a consequence, the distinction between syllables and morphemes
might be less pronounced in German as compared to French, such that there is
also less pressure to functionally separate them. The establishment of morphemes
as separate functional units might only become urgent later for German chil-
dren and in the beginning particularly for newly encountered words, when the
amount of multimorphemic words that are learned through reading drastically
increases between Grades 3 and 5 (Anglin, 1993; Segbers & Schroeder, 2016).
Together with arguably less pronounced, but still effective differences in GPC con-
sistency, syllable complexity, and morphological richness between German and
French, this bears the possibility of a deviating developmental trajectory in the two
languages.

The present study suggests that, at least for German, functional units of word
recognition emerge in a sequential order, with syllables preceding morphemes.
This is consistent with H¨aiki¨o et al.’s (2016) recent extension of the multiple-route
model, which predicts the use of syllables to chronologically precede the use
of morphemes in reading development. Nevertheless, comparing our ﬁndings
to studies in other languages, especially the one by Col´e et al. (2001), supports
the assumptions of the psycholinguistic grain size theory (Ziegler & Goswami,
2005) that language-speciﬁc characteristics pose different demands on learners
and determine cross-linguistic differences in the preference for certain reading
units across reading development. This strongly suggests that cross-linguistic
differences need to be taken into consideration by models of reading development.
To base models on ﬁndings from a single language severely limits their general-
izability across languages. Future studies should therefore aim at comparing the
use of different functional units in reading development directly across languages,
carefully selecting the languages under investigation with regard to their
orthographic transparency, syllable structure, and morphological complexity. In
addition, including younger and older children and reading skills as a moderating
factor as well as the inﬂuence of other linguistic skills, such as phonological and
morphological awareness, is highly desirable in order to investigate individual
trajectories in future studies and thus advance models of reading development
further.

In summary, by examining the use of syllabic and morphemic units in both
mono- and multimorphemic words and also pseudowords in German, our results
extend previous ﬁndings on children’s use of ordered letter sequences in a ﬁne-
grained processing route. This allowed us, in an important extension to the ﬁndings
by Col´e et al. (2011) for French, to demonstrate developmental changes in the use
of different functional units. We were able to show that the syllable comes ﬁrst
in development, and German second graders have a stronger preference for using
syllables in word recognition, while morphemic structure is challenging for them.
For the fourth graders, we did ﬁnd use of both units in multimorphemic word
recognition, indicating that ﬁne-grained reading is still in practice by the end of
elementary school and is ﬂexible in regard to syllable versus morpheme use. While
our data suggests that there is an order of acquisition, with syllables coming ﬁrst
and morphemes later, this does not need to be the case in all languages, as the
comparison to Col´e et al. (2011) demonstrates. Therefore, cross-linguistic devel-
opmental studies on that topic are highly desirable in order to further disentangle
how language-speciﬁc characteristics inﬂuence the use of certain grain sizes at
different stages in reading development.
