Applied Psycholinguistics 38 (2017), 1173–1199
doi:10.1017/S0142716417000091

The role of cognitive control
in anaphor resolution in children
with speciﬁc language impairment

ENIK ˝O LADÁNYI
Université Paris Descartes and Budapest University of Technology and
Economics

BENCE KAS
Hungarian Academy of Sciences and Eötvös Loránd University

ÁGNES LUKÁCS
Budapest University of Technology and Economics

Received: February 16, 2016

Accepted for publication: February 20, 2017

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Enik˝o Ladányi, Laboratoire Psychologie de la Perception, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France.
E-mail: eniko.ladanyi@parisdescartes.fr

ABSTRACT
We studied anaphor resolution and its relationship with cognitive control abilities in children with
speciﬁc language impairment (SLI) and typically developing (TD) children. In a sentence–picture
veriﬁcation task assessing anaphor interpretation, the SLI group was less successful than age-matched
TD peers, and displayed similar performance patterns as younger TD children in previous studies. The
SLI group showed weaknesses in nonlinguistic cognitive control tasks, which were associated with
anaphor interpretation results. These ﬁndings are in contrast with the view that proposes a grammar-
speciﬁc deﬁcit behind anaphor resolution problems in SLI. We suggest that anaphor interpretation in
this population is delayed but not atypical, and this delay can be partly explained by weaker cognitive
control abilities.

Children with speciﬁc language impairment (SLI) are characterized by a marked
deﬁcit in language development despite apparently typical intellectual, sensory,
and social abilities and neurological state. This deﬁcit may affect both expressive
and receptive language in both lexical and grammatical domains. One of the central
areas of difﬁculty in children with SLI is sentence comprehension, particularly
evident in complex sentences (e.g., Bishop, Bright, James, Bishop, & van der
Lely, 2000; Norbury, Bishop, & Briscoe, 2002; van der Lely, 1996, 1998; van der
Lely & Harris, 1990; van der Lely & Stollwerck, 1997). Some argue that problems
in sentence comprehension (alongside other language difﬁculties) are caused by
a deﬁcit in the innate representation of grammar (Rice, Wexler, & Redmond,
1999; van de Lely, 2005), while others claim that factors external to grammar

© Cambridge University Press 2017 0142-7164/17

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1174

such as weaknesses in working memory (Ellis Weismer & Thordardottir, 2002;
Joannisse & Seidenberg, 1998; Montgomery, 1995, 2000, 2004; Montgomery &
Evans, 2009; Montgomery, Magimairaj, & Finney, 2010; Norbury et al., 2002),
auditive perception (Tallal & Piercy, 1973), or the general slowing of processing
(Kail, 1994; Leonard et al., 2007; Miller, Kail, Leonard, & Tomblin, 2001; Windsor
& Hwang, 1999) can account for the observed problems.

Sentences containing an anaphoric expression like a reﬂexive or a pronoun are
among complex sentence types that might be problematic for children with SLI,
and they are also good candidates for investigating different sources of language
difﬁculties. The correct interpretation of anaphoric expressions depends upon an-
other expression in context. It requires knowledge of clausal structure and syntactic
dependencies, but it also builds on processing distant constituents, burdening work-
ing memory. In many cases, it requires selection among several candidates, relying
on cognitive control. Thus, this domain of grammatical processing is a good focus
of study for examining the contribution of linguistic and extralinguistic cognitive
factors to language processing.

Although these factors make sentences with anaphoric expressions a good test-
ing ground for disentangling different accounts of language impairment, as far as
we are aware, there are only three studies that investigate anaphor interpretation in
children with SLI (Montgomery & Evans, 2009; Novogrodsky & Friedman, 2010;
van der Lely & Stollwerck, 1997). Van der Lely and Stollwerck (1997) investigated
the interpretation of pronouns and reﬂexives to ﬁnd out whether intrasentential
reference assignment is impaired in children with SLI, and what the underlying
causes of the impairment are. Using a sentence–picture veriﬁcation task to test
12 English-speaking children with SLI aged between 9 years, 3 months (9;3) and
12;10 years and three language control groups, they observed signiﬁcantly lower
levels of performance in children with SLI than in any of the TD groups. They
concluded that children with SLI show a modular language deﬁcit concerning de-
pendent structural relationships between syntactic constituents. Montgomery and
Evans (2009)’s main aim was the investigation of the relationship between working
memory and sentence comprehension. In their sentence comprehension task, they
used a shorter version of van der Lely and Stollwerck (1997)’s design involving
pronouns and reﬂexives, and they also tested comprehension of passive sentences
in a sentence–picture veriﬁcation task. They tested 24 English-speaking children
with SLI aged between 6 and 12 years and two TD groups. They did not report
results for sentences with anaphors separately, but the total scores were signiﬁ-
cantly lower in children with SLI than in age-matched TD children and similar to
scores in the control group of language and memory matched TD children (see
more details about the study below in the Sentence Comprehension and Working
Memory in Children With SLI section).

In Novogrodsky and Friedman (2010)’s study, interpretation of pronouns and
reﬂexives was tested together with comprehension of complex sentences involving
wh-movement in a picture selection task in 12 Hebrew-speaking children with SLI
aged between 9;3 and 13;10 and control children. Their objective was to ﬁnd out
whether different kinds of dependencies can be selectively impaired or the deﬁcit
involves all of them. While children in the SLI group showed impairments in the in-
terpretation of sentences involving wh-movement relative to TD children, no group

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1175

differences were observed in anaphor interpretation, suggesting the possibility of
selective impairments.

The apparent controversy in the above ﬁndings may result from methodological
differences. Impairments in anaphor interpretation were observed in the two studies
relying on sentence–picture veriﬁcation (Montgomery & Evans, 2009; van der Lely
& Stollwerck, 1997); this measure could be more sensitive to complex sentence
comprehension differences than choosing the picture that matches the sentence
out of two candidates.

The two studies that found signiﬁcant differences between the SLI and TD
groups took different theoretical approaches and thus drew different conclusions
concerning the source of difﬁculties in anaphor interpretation in SLI. Van der Lely
and Stollwerck (1997) argue that difﬁculties with anaphor interpretation are a con-
sequence of a grammar-speciﬁc deﬁcit (in the binding module of grammar; see
below). In contrast, Montgomery and Evans (2009) propose that anaphor compre-
hension deﬁciencies are secondary to reduced complex working memory capacity
in children with SLI.

Our goal in the present study was to explore whether anaphor comprehension
is problematic in Hungarian children with SLI, and to identify possible sources
of the potential deﬁcit in antecedent assignment. In what follows, we will review
the generative linguistic account of anaphor interpretation, psycholinguistic mod-
els of anaphor comprehension based on online sentence comprehension studies,
and various accounts of difﬁculties with anaphor processing. We will also discuss
previous work on the associations between working memory and sentence com-
prehension in SLI. We then clarify the concept of cognitive control, and go on to
discuss the potential role of cognitive control in anaphor interpretation in children
with SLI.

SYNTACTIC FACTORS IN ANAPHOR INTERPRETATION

Within generative grammar, the interpretation of anaphors is accounted for by bind-
ing theory (Chomsky, 1981, 1986). In binding theory, there are two main syntactic
principles (Principles A and B) that constrain potential antecedents for reﬂexives
and pronouns. Binding Principle A states that a reﬂexive must be bound in its
governing category, which means that the reﬂexive has to have a c-commanding
antecedent within the same governing category. In contrast, pronouns cannot be
bound within the same clause according to Binding Principle B but should core-
fer with a suitable discourse element in the context. Thus, the antecedent of the
reﬂexive herself must be Mary in (1a), whereas the antecedent of the pronoun her
cannot be Mary in (1b).

(1) a. Jane says Mary washed herself.

b. Jane says Mary washed her.

From the perspective of processing, these principles express the syntactic local-
ity conditions of binding that presuppose the recognition of the different types of
anaphors.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1176

Chien and Wexler (1990) and Grodzinsky and Reinhart (1993) argue that sen-
tences with a pronoun have two logical interpretations: when the pronoun (e.g.,
her in (1b)) is coindexed with the subject of the clause (Mary in (1b)) and when
it is not. They propose that the correct interpretation has to be computed with the
help of a pragmatic principle (see more details in the next section) that makes pro-
nouns more difﬁcult to interpret than reﬂexives. However, according to Chien and
Wexler (1990) if the antecedent is a quantiﬁer, only one interpretation is possible,
because coindexation with a quantiﬁer is only possible with a variable bound by
(i.e., being in the same clause with) that quantiﬁer. For this reason, in these cases
the processing of the pronoun will not be more difﬁcult than the processing of
reﬂexives.

PROCESSING ANAPHORS IN SENTENCES

An increasing number of studies investigate when and how the abovementioned
syntactic constraints take effect during anaphor processing, relying on online sen-
tence comprehension methods (priming, self-paced reading, eye-tracking during
reading, and eye-tracking during listening), mainly in adults. Some of the ﬁndings
suggest that the adult parser only considers syntactically appropriate antecedents
(those which are in accordance with Principle A and B) but not structurally inap-
propriate ones (e.g., Nicol & Swinney, 1989). This view is usually called the early
ﬁlter hypothesis.

Other online sentence comprehension studies however argue for the multiple
constraints approach (e.g., Badecker & Straub, 2002), proposing that syntactic
and discourse factors affect anaphor processing simultaneously. According to the
latter view during the course of sentence processing, several potential antecedents
are activated in the discourse context beyond the syntactically appropriate an-
tecedent, and the inappropriate one(s) is/are ruled out later during processing. In
the multiple constraints approach, this process controls the interpretation of both
pronouns and reﬂexives, but empirical evidence on the activation of multiple po-
tential antecedents is only available for pronouns in the majority of studies (e.g.,
Runner, Sussman, & Tanenhaus, 2003). Results about reﬂexives are less consistent.
Some studies have found no evidence for the activation of syntactically incorrect
potential antecedents in the case of reﬂexives (cross-modal priming: Nicol, 1988;
Nicol & Swinney, 1989; eye tracking during listening: Clackson, Felser, & Clah-
sen, 2011; event-related potential: Xiang, Dillon, & Phillips, 2009), while other
results support the activation of multiple potential antecedents for reﬂexives as
well (self-paced reading: Badecker & Straub, 2002; eye-tracking during reading:
Cunnings & Felser, 2013; eye-tracking during listening: Clackson & Heyer, 2014).
Although Clackson and Heyer (2014) also emphasize that the effect is stronger in
the case of pronouns, they argue that the lack of evidence for multiple potential
antecedents during reﬂexive processing in other studies is due to a methodological
ﬂaw. Overall, online sentence comprehension studies suggest that when there is a
prominent potential antecedent in the discourse context during the processing of
reﬂexives and pronouns, the processing system does not rule it out immediately
even if it is inappropriate based on binding principles. This effect seems to be

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1177

stronger in the case of pronouns, especially when the other potential antecedent(s)
is/are not quantiﬁed noun(s).

Most of the above online studies tested adults; ofﬂine studies suggest changes
in anaphor comprehension during development. The results show that while chil-
dren are already quite successful at interpreting reﬂexives at age 3, they make
mistakes with pronouns until age 6 (Chien & Wexler, 1990; Guasti, 2002; Per-
ovic, Modyanova, & Wexler, 2013; Rákosi & Tóth, 2016), but if the competing
antecedent is a quantiﬁed noun, the difference between pronouns and reﬂexives
decreases (Chien & Wexler, 1990). Clackson et al. (2011) investigated develop-
mental changes in anaphor resolution with an eye-movement monitoring during
listening paradigm in children (6–9 years) and in adults. Participants were audito-
rily presented with two-sentence paragraphs with either reﬂexives or pronouns at
the end of the second sentences. Both the ﬁrst and the second sentence contained
an animate character. In the double match condition, the gender of the two char-
acters matched each other and the gender of the anaphor as well (2a). In the single
match condition, the anaphor only matched its antecedent (the proper noun of the
ﬁrst sentence in the case of pronouns and the proper noun of the second sentence
in the case of reﬂexives) in gender (2b).

(2) a. Double-match

Mr. Jones was listening very hard. He knew that Peter was playing some classical
music to himself/him on the new piano.

b. Single-match

Susan was listening very hard. She knew that Peter was playing some classical music
to himself/her on the new piano.

While participants were hearing the sentences, a visual display with four pictures
was presented. Two pictures depicted the two animate characters mentioned in
the sentences: one depicted an inanimate object that was also mentioned in the
second sentence, and the fourth picture depicted a distractor inanimate object not
mentioned in the sentences. Looking times for the pictures were measured during
the processing window of the anaphoric expression. Both children and adults were
temporarily distracted by the competitor antecedent in the double match condition
in the case of pronouns shown by longer looking times to the reference of the
competing antecedent in the double than in the single match condition, but the
effect was signiﬁcantly higher in children. During the interpretation of reﬂexives,
only children looked signiﬁcantly longer at the competing antecedent in the double
than in the single match condition (but see Clackson & Heyer, 2014). This suggests
that if a noun phrase is not a potential antecedent based on binding principles,
but is supported by other cues (gender match and recency/primacy in this case),
it distracts children by creating competition between antecedents supported by
different cues in the case of both pronouns and reﬂexives. These results show
that although the ﬁnal interpretation of reﬂexives is adultlike in children, their
processing is different when binding principles and discourse prominence provide
conﬂicting cues.

Taken together, the above results show that multiple potential antecedents have
additional processing costs both in children and in adults, but it is not yet clear

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1178

what mechanism plays a role in selecting the correct one and why young children
have more difﬁculties than adults. Earlier studies emphasized the contribution of
a pragmatic principle (Chien & Wexler, 1990; Grodzinsky & Reinhart, 1993) or
working memory factors (Grodzinsky & Reinhart, 1993; Montgomery & Evans,
2009), while Clackson et al. (2011) attributed an important role to cognitive con-
trol. Chien and Wexler (1990) argue that a pragmatic principle (Principle P) is
necessary for ruling out coreference between the pronoun and an NP in its local
domain, and thus for identifying the antecedent of a pronoun. They claim that
while syntactic principles like Principle A and B are innate, pragmatic principles
have to be learned during the course of development. This proposal is in line with
the model of syntactic acquisition in the principles and parameters theory (Guasti,
2002). Grodzinsky and Reinhart (1993) also argue that the operation of, in their
case, an innate-pragmatic principle, which they call Rule I, is necessary for rul-
ing out inappropriate coreference in the case of pronouns. They emphasize the
importance of general processing abilities, more speciﬁcally of working memory,
in the use of the pragmatic principle. Both theories were primarily formulated to
account for developmental differences between the interpretation of pronouns and
reﬂexives, but their conclusions are considered to be true for anaphor interpretation
in general. Recent studies investigating the role of working memory with targeted
working memory (Montgomery & Evans, 2009) and cognitive control (Clackson
et al., 2011; Clackson & Heyer, 2014) tests also support the role of these abilities
in anaphor interpretation. In the following section, we review studies that inves-
tigated the relationship between working memory and sentence comprehension
in SLI, including Montgomery and Evans’s (2009) study, which aimed to test the
relationship speciﬁcally with sentences with anaphors. Before discussing the as-
sociation with cognitive control, we would like to make some clariﬁcations about
the use of the concept and its relationship with working memory in the Working
Memory, Executive Functions, and Cognitive Control Section.

SENTENCE COMPREHENSION AND WORKING MEMORY IN SLI

The importance of working memory, that is, our ability to store and manipulate
information simultaneously, in sentence comprehension has been widely docu-
mented in adults (Just & Carpenter, 1992; Miyake, Carpenter, & Just, 1994; Waters
& Caplan, 1996). Although the limitations of working memory, especially in the
verbal domain, are among the proposed core deﬁcits in children with SLI (e.g.,
Archibald & Gathercole, 2006; Ellis Weismer, Evans, & Hesketh, 1999; Gather-
cole & Baddeley, 1990; Hesketh & Conti-Ramsden, 2013; Marton, Kelmenson,
& Pinkhasova, 2007; Marton & Schwartz, 2003), we found only a limited num-
ber of studies speciﬁcally investigating the relationship between sentence com-
prehension and working memory in language impairment. Montgomery (1995,
2004) tested the relationship between phonological working memory measured
by a nonword repetition task and sentence comprehension in 8;2 (1995) and 8;9
(2004) aged children with SLI and in their TD peers. Sentence comprehension was
tested with auditory sentences in a picture selection task. A positive correlation
was found between nonword repetition and sentence comprehension performance
in the whole group of children in Montgomery (1995), but there was no signiﬁcant

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1179

correlation between the two measures in Montgomery (2004). More relevant to our
study, Montgomery and Evans (2009) investigated the role of working memory
in the comprehension of complex sentences with a passive structure, and with re-
ﬂexives and with pronouns. Beside nonword repetition span, attentional resource
capacity/allocation was also measured by the competing language processing task
(CLPT; Gaulin & Campbell, 1994). The CLPT is a listening span task, where
participants listen to increasingly larger sets of sentences. They have to decide
if the sentence is true or not after each sentence, and after each set they have to
recall the last word of each of the sentences in the actual set. In the SLI group,
performance on the CLPT task was associated with performance on the complex
sentence comprehension task, while in age-matched TD peers, the correlation was
not signiﬁcant.

WORKING MEMORY, EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS, AND COGNITIVE
CONTROL

The CLPT task and its adult version, the listening span task, are frequently used
measures of the processing part of working memory. Most working memory mod-
els differentiate between a passive storage component and an active processing
component (central executive in the multicomponent model, Baddeley & Hitch,
1974; focus of attention in the embedded process model, Cowan, 1995, 1999; and
executive attention in the executive attention view, Engle, 2002). These compo-
nents are suggested to be used when the contents of short-term memory have to be
manipulated; they maintain goal-relevant information in a highly active accessible
state under conditions of interference. Similar abilities began to be recognized as
an important function of the prefrontal cortex by neuropsychological and brain
imaging studies; these are usually referred to as executive functions or cognitive
control. Although the role of cognitive control or executive functions in various
areas of cognition is the focus of many studies, there is no consensus about the
deﬁnitions of these concepts and the relationships between them in the literature. In
this paper, we will use the term cognitive control to refer to these controlling func-
tions in line with the view presented in Novick, Trueswell, and Thompson-Schill
(2005). Novick et al. (2005) consider cognitive control as a process responsible
for the resolution of conﬂict or interference between contradicting representa-
tions (based on Miller & Cohen, 2001). Conﬂict often arises from the presence of
an automatic response/stimulus characterization, which is irrelevant in the actual
situation and has to be overwritten by a goal-relevant response/stimulus charac-
terization. A typical experimental design for generation of conﬂict and thus for
measuring cognitive control is the Stroop task (Stroop, 1935) in which color names
are presented written in different ink colors (e.g., the word green printed in blue)
and participants have to name the ink color, which required that they override the
automatic response generated by the word meaning.

COGNITIVE CONTROL, ANAPHOR RESOLUTION, AND SLI

Novick et al. (2005, 2010) suggest that cognitive control is a core process in lan-
guage as well, helping resolve linguistic conﬂict in cases of complex sentences

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1180

with structural ambiguity, in homonym processing, or in word retrieval. Cognitive
control was found to be important in the comprehension of complex sentences
when competing syntactic analyses are present for several structures in adults (del
Río et al., 2011; January, Trueswell, & Thompson-Schill, 2009; Novick et al.,
2005; 2010; Ye & Zhou, 2009), but we have not found any studies targeting the
relationship between sentence comprehension and cognitive control in children
with SLI. There are, however, several studies investigating cognitive control abil-
ities in SLI motivated by the assumption that the impairment of cognitive control
might contribute to language problems. As we have discussed previously, con-
cepts referring to abilities controlling and coordinating our thoughts and actions
vary within the literature, and the lack of clear conceptualization of these phe-
nomena and their relationships with each other makes it difﬁcult to generalize
ﬁndings of speciﬁc studies. Keeping this in mind, a growing body of evidence
shows problems in the abilities responsible for the resolution of conﬂict between
competing representations by selecting relevant and inhibiting irrelevant informa-
tion in children with SLI (e.g., Finneran, Francis, & Leonard 2009; Henry, Messer,
& Nash, 2012; Im-Bolter, Johnson, & Pascual-Leone, 2006; Marton, 2008; Mar-
ton, Campanelli, Eichorn, Scheuer, & Yoon, 2014; Spaulding, 2010), although
other studies show no difference between SLI and TD groups (Lukács, Ladányi,
Fazekas, & Kemény, 2016; Noterdaeme, Amorosa, Mildenberger, Sitter, & Minow,
2001).

In the current study, our aim was to investigate the hypothesis that cognitive con-
trol is involved in anaphor resolution, and thus an impairment of cognitive control
in SLI contributes to sentence processing difﬁculties in the case of sentences con-
taining anaphors. This hypotheses was motivated by Clackson et al. (2011)’s study
described above, and their suggestion that as cognitive control is responsible for
selecting among competing representations in general, it might also be necessary
for inhibiting syntactically inappropriate antecedents in anaphor resolution. They
also predict asymmetries in the processing of pronouns and reﬂexives. As the au-
thors argue, competition might be higher in the case of pronouns because unlike
Principle A, Principle B does not determine a unique referent and its interpretation
requires recourse to, and integration of, additional information sources. There-
fore, it is more difﬁcult to inhibit a semantically or pragmatically prominent but
syntactically inappropriate antecedent for pronouns than it is for reﬂexives. This
difference should be eliminated if the competing antecedent is a quantiﬁed noun.
This difference explains why processing difﬁculties apparent in online measures
are more expressed in the case of pronouns in adults. Furthermore, it can also
account for developmental changes in anaphor comprehension: cognitive control
develops until adolescence that explains the lack of adultlike processing of pro-
nouns (shown both by online and ofﬂine studies) and reﬂexives (appearing only if
investigated by online methods) in children.

THE CURRENT STUDY

The current study investigates whether anaphor resolution is impaired in
Hungarian-speaking children with SLI and whether individual differences in cogni-
tive control contribute to differences in anaphor resolution performance in SLI and

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1181

in typical development. Our questions were motivated by several lines of research.
First, Montgomery and Evans (2009) found a correlation between complex work-
ing memory and anaphor interpretation in children with SLI, and recent studies
suggest that cognitive control might be necessary for performing complex working
memory tasks (such as listening span tasks). Second, Clackson et al. (2011) argued
that cognitive control abilities are crucial for anaphor processing. Third, several
studies found reduced efﬁciency of cognitive control in children with SLI (e.g.,
Finneran et al., 2009; Henry et al., 2012; Im-Bolter et al., 2006; Marton, 2008;
Marton et al., 2014; Spaulding, 2010).

Motivated by the above lines of research, our ﬁrst aim was to investigate whether
Hungarian primary school children with SLI show differences in anaphor com-
prehension compared to their typically developing peers. Our second aim was to
ﬁnd out whether children with SLI show impairments in cognitive control tasks
compared to TD children. The third focus of our research was on the relationship
between anaphor comprehension and cognitive control abilities. Our fourth aim
was to investigate the differences between the relationship of cognitive control and
pronoun processing and cognitive control and reﬂexive processing.

Considering cross-linguistic factors, it seems that the syntactic properties of
anaphoric structures in Hungarian are very similar to those in English. Reﬂexives
and pronouns have distinct, well-identiﬁable lexical paradigms, and their patterns
of dependency follow Principle A and Principle B, respectively. Initial studies on
the acquisition of pronoun interpretation in Hungarian revealed an asymmetry be-
tween reﬂexive and pronominal comprehension in preschool children similar to the
above-cited ﬁndings in English (Rákosi & Tóth, 2016). Thus, expecting the same
asymmetry in the comprehension of reﬂexives and pronouns in school-age children
with SLI might be considered as a null hypothesis based on our earlier results on
SLI in Hungarian. These studies showed that the pattern of language impairment in
Hungarian SLI can be characterized as a general language weakness with a signif-
icant decrease in complex structures and vocabulary. Hungarian children with SLI
show only a few additional problems in the area of grammar such as the processing
of atypical word order patterns, verbal sufﬁxes, and lexical case marking. How-
ever, these weaknesses have been explained by factors external to grammar, such
as verbal working memory effects, low frequency of occurrence, and phonological
complexity (Kas, Lukács, & Szentkuti-Kiss, 2016; Lukács, Kas, & Leonard, 2013;
Lukács, Leonard, Kas, & Pléh, 2009). Therefore, we expect school-age Hungarian
children with SLI to perform similarly to typically developing preschool children in
the interpretation of reﬂexives and pronouns, showing an asymmetry preferring the
former.

Anaphor comprehension was tested by an adaptation of van der Lely and Stoll-
werck (1997)’s sentence comprehension task. Cognitive control was tested by three
tasks: a backward digit span task, which is frequently used to measure complex
working memory; an n-back task, which requires the updating of relevant infor-
mation in working memory and is often used for measuring cognitive control; and
a modiﬁed version of the Stroop task (Stroop, 1935), which is one of the most
prevalent cognitive control tasks in the literature and measures cognitive control
without the storage component. The n-back task shows similarities with anaphor
comprehension (a previously seen/heard element has to be selected for processing

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1182

the actual element), but does not involve the sentence-processing confound of the
reading span/listening span/CLPT task used in previous studies as a cognitive con-
trol measure. Both the n-back and the backward digit span tasks contain storage
and processing components. Since storage is also necessary for sentence compre-
hension, the storage component of a complex task can in itself be responsible for
associations between the cognitive control and sentence comprehension measures.
As our main focus was on the role of the cognitive control component, we assessed
storage abilities with a nonword repetition task to be able to control for the effect
of storage capacity during the analysis.

Based on previous ﬁndings we expected the following:

1. Children with SLI would have problems with anaphor interpretation, and this
difﬁculty would be especially prominent in the case of pronouns and sentences
without a quantiﬁer.

2. Children with SLI would show cognitive control impairments in all of the three

cognitive control tasks.

3. Difﬁculties with anaphor comprehension would be associated with deﬁcits in
cognitive control in children with SLI shown by signiﬁcant correlations with the
Stroop task, and with the n-back and backward digit span tasks even when storage
capacity is controlled for.

4. Performance on pronouns would show a stronger correlation with cognitive con-

trol measures than performance on reﬂexives.

To test these hypotheses, we examined anaphor interpretation abilities and cogni-
tive control functions in children with SLI and age-matched typically developing
peers.

METHODS

Participants
Sixty children participated in our study.1 The SLI group consisted of 30 Hungarian-
speaking children (8 girls, 22 boys) who were selected from two special schools
for children with language impairments. Their mean age was 8.93 years with
a standard deviation of 1.18 years. Only children with normal hearing and no
history of neurological impairments were included. All participants’ IQ was in
the normal range (above 85 scores on Raven’s Coloured Progressive Matrices;
Raven, Court, & Raven, 1987). Children meeting the above criteria were screened
further for inclusion in the SLI group based on criteria that are commonly used
in SLI research (see, e.g., Leonard 2014/1998, Tager-Flusberg & Cooper, 1999).
Linguistic abilities were assessed with four tests, and children who performed at
least 1.5 SD below age norms on at least two out of the four tests were included
in the SLI group. These four tests included two receptive and two expressive
tests. The receptive tests were the Hungarian versions of the Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test (Peabody Képes Szókincsteszt; Csányi, 1974) and the Test for
Reception of Grammar (Bishop, 1983; Nyelvtani Szerkezetek Megértése Teszt;
Lukács, Gy˝ori, & Rózsa, 2012). The expressive tests were the Hungarian Sentence

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1183

Repetition Test (Magyar Mondatutánmondási Teszt; Kas & Lukács, 2016), and a
nonword repetition test (Álszóismétlési teszt; Racsmány, Lukács, Németh, & Pléh,
2005).

Typically developing children were matched individually to children in the SLI
group on chronological age and sex, and they were matched groupwise on nonver-
bal IQ (Raven et al., 1987). Demographic and screening data for the two groups
are shown in Table 1. All children were tested with the informed consent of their
parents, in accordance with the principles set out in the Declaration of Helsinki
and the stipulations of the local institutional review board.

Design and procedure

Anaphor interpretation. Our anaphor interpretation task was based on van der
Lely and Stollwerck’s study (1997), more speciﬁcally on their Experiment 2. A
yes/no sentence–picture judgment task was used in which children saw a picture
while they heard a sentence presented by the experimenter. The picture either
matched the sentence (sentence: Róbert Gida azt mondja, hogy Nyuszi lelocsolja
˝ot. “Christopher Robin says that Rabbit sprinkles him”; picture: Rabbit sprinkles
Christopher Robin) or was a mismatch (same sentence, picture: Christopher Robin
sprinkles Rabbit). There were four types of experimental sentences and one control
sentence type. Every sentence had the same structure with a main clause of the
form X azt mondja, hogy . . . “X says that . . .” followed by a subordinate clause of
the form Y Z-olja W-t “Y is Z-ing W,” where X, Y, and W were cartoon characters
familiar to the children, and Z was always a transitive verb. In the subordinate
clauses, following van der Lely and Stollwerck (1997), half of the experimental
conditions had a referential deﬁnite NP and half had a quantiﬁed NP in subject
position.2 The object NPs were reﬂexives in half of the sentences and pronouns
in the other half. These factors add up to four experimental sentence types: no
quantiﬁer–pronoun; quantiﬁer–pronoun; no quantiﬁer–reﬂexive; and quantiﬁer–
reﬂexive (see Examples (3a–d)). We also had a control condition in which both the
subject and the object were deﬁnite referential NPs, but we did not include them
in the analysis.

(3) a. No quantiﬁer, pronoun
azt
that-ACC say-PRS.3SG that
˝ot.

Róbert Gida
Christopher Robin
lelocsolja
sprinkle-PRS.3SG s/he-ACC.
“Christopher Robin says that Rabbit sprinkles him.”

mondja,

b. Quantiﬁer, pronoun

hogy Nyuszi
Rabbit

mondja,

azt
that-ACC say-PRS.3SG that

Róbert Gida
Christopher Robin
lelocsolja
Nyuszi
sprinkle-PRS.3SG s/he-ACC.
rabbit
“Christopher Robin says that every rabbit sprinkles him.”

˝ot.

hogy minden

every

c. No quantiﬁer, reﬂexive
azt
that-ACC say-PRS.3SG that

Róbert Gida
Christopher Robin

mondja,

hogy Nyuszi
Rabbit

Table 1. Demographic and screening data of the SLI and TD groups

TD

SD

1.18

9.94

0.96
12.21
1.7
4.64

Min

7.08

85

4
102
13
16

Mean

8.93

106.27

6.33
124.033
17.77
36.83

Max

11.33

125

8
146
20
40

Mean

8.95

101.9

3.43
96.73
13.33
20.57

SLI

SD

1.18

10.09

1.17
18.91
2.26
8.24

Min

7.08

Max

11.25

85

0
66
9
0

130

5
132
18
36

F

Signif.

0.008

2.851

110.803
44.131
73.694
88.761

.928

.097

.000
.000
.000
.000

2
ηp

0.000

0.47

0.656
0.432
0.560
0.605

Age
Stand. scores

Raven IQ
Raw scores

Nonword repetition
PPVT
TROG blocks
Sentence repetition

Note: TD, Typically developing; SLI, speciﬁc language impairments; PPVT, Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test; TROG, Test of Reception of
Grammar.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1185

lelocsolja
sprinkle-PRS.3SG self-1SG-ACC.
“Christopher Robin says that Rabbit sprinkles himself.”

magát.

d. Quantiﬁer, reﬂexive

azt
Christopher Robin say-PRS.3SG that

Róbert Gida
that-ACC
nyuszi
Rabbit
“Christopher Robin says that every rabbit sprinkles himself.”

mondja,

lelocsolja
sprinkle-PRS.3SG self-1SG-ACC

magát.

hogy minden

every

Each experimental sentence was presented three times, once with a matching
picture (match condition) and twice with nonmatching pictures (mismatch condi-
tions). There were two types of mismatch conditions, one involving an antecedent
error and another involving an agent error. In the antecedent mismatch condition,
the agent in the picture matched the agent (subject) of the subordinate clause, but
the patient in the picture was different from the patient (object) in the sentence.
If the object was a pronoun, the patient in the picture was the subject character
of the subordinate clause (as would follow from an incorrect reﬂexive interpre-
tation of the pronoun). Similarly, if the object was a reﬂexive, the patient in the
picture was the main clause subject character (in line with an incorrect pronoun
interpretation).

In the agent mismatch condition, the agent in the picture was incorrectly the
subject of the main clause (instead of the subject of the subordinate clause). There
was also a patient mismatch: if the object was a pronoun, the patient in the picture
was the character expressed by the subject of the subordinate clause (incorrect
reﬂexive interpretation). Similarly, if the object was a reﬂexive, the patient in
the picture was the main clause subject (incorrect pronoun interpretation; Table 2
illustrates the different sentence types and conditions). There were 12 (4 sentence
types × 3 picture match types) experimental conditions and 2 control conditions
(1 sentence type with a match and a mismatch condition), yielding 14 conditions
altogether. There were 6 sentences with 6 different action verbs in each condition,
yielding 14 × 6 = 84 test sentences altogether.

Children were informed that they were going to see pictures and hear sentences,
and their task was to decide if the character is telling the truth about the picture
or not. Before the experiment children were asked to name the characters to be
presented during the experiment, and they were reminded of the names they did not
know. This task as well as the following cognitive control tasks were programmed
and presented with the E-Prime 2.0 software (Schneider, Eschman, & Zuccolotto,
2012). Sentences were read by the experimenter after the picture appeared. The
answers were coded by the experimenter by pressing a button on the keyboard
based on the answer of the child. Pictures were presented in two blocks with a
little break in the middle. Testing took approximately 20–25 min per child.

In the backward digit span task, children were pre-
Backward digit span task.
sented with sequences of numbers auditorily and they had to repeat them in a
reversed order. Sequences of different lengths were presented, and each length
was associated with four items. Sequences were presented in increasing length,

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1186

Table 2. Examples of sentence types and scenarios presented in pictures in different
conditions

Match

Rabbit

sprinkles
Christopher
Robin.

Rabbit

sprinkles
himself.

Every rabbit
sprinkles
Christopher
Robin

Every rabbit
sprinkles
himself.

Antecedent
Mismatch

Agent

Mismatch

Christopher

Robin
sprinkles
Rabbit.

Christopher

Robin
sprinkles
every
rabbit.

Rabbit

sprinkles
himself.

Rabbit

sprinkles
Christopher
Robin.

Christopher

Robin
sprinkles
himself.

Every rabbit
sprinkles
himself.

Every rabbit
sprinkles
Christopher
Robin.

Christopher

Robin
sprinkles
himself.

Pronoun, no
quantiﬁer

Pronoun,

quantiﬁer

Róbert Gida azt
mondja, hogy
Nyuszi lelocsolja
˝ot.

“Christopher Robin
says that Rabbit
sprinkles him.”
Róbert Gida azt
mondja, hogy
minden nyuszi
lelocsolja ˝ot.

Reﬂexive,

no
quantiﬁer

Reﬂexive,

quantiﬁer

“Christopher Robin

says that every
rabbit sprinkles
him.”

Róbert Gida azt
mondja, hogy
Nyuszi lelocsolja
magát.

“Christopher Robin
says that Rabbit
sprinkles himself.”

Róbert Gida azt
mondja, hogy
minden nyuszi
lelocsolja magát.
“Christopher Robin

says that every
rabbit sprinkles
himself.”

and the child had to repeat at least two out of four items to proceed to the next level
of length. If the participant made three errors in one block, testing was terminated,
and the span of the participant was established as sequence-length of the block
before the last, that is, the maximum length that was completed. The span estab-
lished this way was the measure we used in the analysis of results. Testing started
with two items and the longest possible sequence contained nine items. The task
lasted for 3–4 min.

N-back task. During the n-back task, participants were presented with a sequence
of letters on the computer screen, and their task was to indicate (by pressing
“ENTER”) when the current letter matched the one presented “n” steps earlier.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1187

We used one and two back conditions, in two blocks with about a minute break
between them. Each block consisted of 60 trials, from which 10 were n-back
trials (i.e., stimuli that match the ones presented “n” before), which appeared
pseudorandomly within the blocks. We calculated the discrimination index (Pr) in
the two-back condition for each child, which is the difference between the number
of hits (when the participant correctly pressed “ENTER” on an “n-back trial,” i.e.,
when the current item was identical to the target item, with a maximum of 10 hits
per block) and the number of false alarms (the participant pressed “ENTER” on a
not “n-back trial,” i.e., the actual stimulus was not identical to the one presented
“n” before) and used this score in the analyses. The task took about 10 min to
administer.

Stroop task. During the Stroop task the child was sitting in front of the computer
screen wearing headphones. Pictures of animals appeared on the screen with si-
multaneous animal names presented auditorily through the headphones. Stimuli
consisted of four animal pictures (cow, cat, cock, and horse) and their names. In the
congruent condition the auditory name matched the picture (e.g., a cow appears
and the word cow is heard); in the incongruent condition they did not match (e.g.,
a cow appears and the word horse is heard); and in the control condition only the
picture appeared without an auditory stimulus. Conditions appeared in blocks of
60 trials. Blocks as well as stimuli within the blocks appeared in a randomized
order. The ﬁrst block was preceded by an instruction and a short practice session.
Children were asked to press a button corresponding to the picture they see on a
special keyboard with pictures of the animals. Reaction times necessary for press-
ing a button were collected. We calculated the difference between reaction times
in the incongruent and the control conditions as the measure of cognitive control.

Nonword repetition task. During the nonword repetition task children were asked
to repeat auditorily presented nonsense words that followed the phonotactic rules
of Hungarian. We used the Hungarian nonword repetition task (Racsmány et al.,
2005), which contains words with one to nine syllables, each length associated
with four items. Children had to repeat increasingly longer items, and they could
proceed to the next level only if they could repeat at least two out of the four items.
The child’s span, the last length level of which s/he could repeat at least two items,
was used during analysis. The task lasted for about 5–6 min.

Data analysis

We analyzed the results of the anaphor comprehension task in a repeated-measures
analysis of variance (ANOVA). Match and mismatch sentences were analyzed sep-
arately to yield more easily interpretable results. For match sentences anaphor type
(pronoun vs. reﬂexive) and quantiﬁer (quantiﬁer vs. no quantiﬁer) were used as
two-level within-subject factors and group (SLI vs. TD) as a two-level between-
subject factor. In the case of the mismatch sentences, the effects of mismatch type
(antecedent vs. agent mismatch), anaphor type (pronoun vs. reﬂexive), and quan-
tiﬁer (quantiﬁer vs. no quantiﬁer) were investigated as two-level within-subject

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1188

factors and group (SLI vs. TD) as a two-level between-subject factor. Signiﬁcant
interactions were analyzed further with paired-sampled t tests.

Group differences in cognitive control tasks between the SLI and TD groups
were investigated with a one-way ANOVA. Relationships between anaphor com-
prehension performance and cognitive control tasks were examined by correlation
analyses. To eliminate the effect of short-term memory, we included nonword rep-
etition scores as a covariant in partial correlation analysis. For investigating the
relative contribution of various cognitive control and short-term memory abilities
to anaphor comprehension, we conducted a stepwise multiple linear regression
analysis.

RESULTS

Anaphor interpretation
Match sentences. For match sentences (results are presented in Figure 1), the
ANOVA showed a signiﬁcant main effect of quantiﬁer, F (1, 58) = 6.231, p =
.015, η2 = 0.097, demonstrating signiﬁcantly better performance for sentences
with a quantiﬁer than without a quantiﬁer and the Quantiﬁer × Group interaction
was also signiﬁcant, F (1, 58) = 9.509, p = .003, η2 = 0.141. No other main effects
or interactions were signiﬁcant (all ps > .05).

To further investigate the interaction we tested the effect of the quantiﬁer factor
separately in the two groups: the SLI group showed signiﬁcantly better perfor-
mance on sentences with a quantiﬁer, t (29) = 4.462, p < 001, and in the TD group
the difference was not signiﬁcant, t (29) = 0.720, ns.

Mismatch sentences. For mismatch sentences (results are presented in Figure 2),
the main effect of anaphor type, F (1, 58)= 26.871, p < .001, η2 = 0.317, quantiﬁer,
F (1, 58) = 11.325, p = .001, η2 = 0.163, and group, F = 21.955, p < .001, η2 =
0.275, were signiﬁcant. Two-way interactions between anaphor type and group, F
(1, 58) = 9.214, p = .004, η2 = 0.137, quantiﬁer and group, F (1, 58) = 4.939,
p = .030, η2 = 0.078, mismatch type and anaphor type, F (1, 58) = 19.750, p <
.001, η2 = 0.254, mismatch type and quantiﬁer, F (1, 58) = 25.693, p < .001, η2 =
0.307, and anaphor type and quantiﬁer, F (1, 58) = 13.218, p = .001, η2 = 0.186,
were also signiﬁcant. The Mismatch Type × Anaphor Type × Group, F (1, 58) =
5.637, p = .021, η2 = 0.089, as well as the Mismatch Type × Quantiﬁer × Group,
F (1, 58) = 6.207, p = .016, η2 = 0.097, interactions also reached signiﬁcance.
Interactions and main effects were analyzed further by conducting paired sam-
pled t tests. To correct for multiple comparisons, the level of alpha was divided by
the number of t tests conducted (α= 0.05/10 = 0.005). We started the analysis with
three-way interactions and investigated further lower order signiﬁcant interactions
and main effects only if they were not qualiﬁed by higher order interactions.
We broke down the Mismatch Type × Anaphor Type × Group interaction. We
tested the effects of the mismatch type and anaphor type factors separately in the
two groups with a 2 × 2 ANOVA. The two-way interaction was signiﬁcant in
both groups although the effect was smaller in the TD group, SLI: F (1, 29) =
14.335, p = .001, η2 = 0.331; TD: F (1, 29) = 5.659, p = .024, η2 = 0.163. To

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1189

Figure 1. (Color online) Average number of correct responses in the (a) speciﬁc language
impairment group and (b) typically developing group for “match” sentences. Note that the
range for correct responses was between 0 and 6 for each sentence type; but because all means
were above 3, the results are presented in a range between 3 and 6 for the sake of exposition.

further analyze the interaction, we compared the effect of the anaphor type in the
case of the two mismatch types separately in the two groups. In the SLI group a
signiﬁcantly better performance appeared on reﬂexives than on pronouns in the
agent mismatch condition, t (29) = 4.894, p < .001, while there was no difference

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1190

Figure 2. (Color online) Average number of correct responses in the (a) speciﬁc language
impairment group and (b) typically developing group for “mismatch” sentences.

in the antecedent mismatch condition, t (29) = 1.887, ns. In the TD group we
found the same pattern, antecedent: t (29) = 0.551, ns; agent: t (29) = 2.942,
p = .006.
For breaking down the Mismatch Type × Quantiﬁer × Group interaction, we
conducted a 2 × 2 ANOVA with mismatch type and quantiﬁer factors in the two
groups separately. The interaction was signiﬁcant in both groups, but the effect

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1191
was stronger in the SLI group, SLI: F (1, 29) = 18.815, p < .001, η2 = 0.393 TD:
F (1, 29) = 6.905, p = .014, η2 = 0.192. To further analyze the interaction, we
investigated the effect of quantiﬁer in sentences with antecedent and agent mis-
matches separately in the two groups. In the SLI group there was no difference
between performance on sentences with and without a quantiﬁer when an an-
tecedent mismatch was present, t (29) = 0.000, ns, but a better result appeared
on sentences with a quantiﬁer in the case of agent mismatches, t (29) = 5.047,
p < .001. In the TD group the difference was not signiﬁcant in either condition,
antecedent: t (29) = 0.551, ns; agent: t (29) = 1.934, ns.
We tested the effect of the quantiﬁer factor separately in the case of pronouns
and reﬂexives to unpack the Anaphor Type × Quantiﬁer interaction. Sentences
with quantiﬁers were comprehended more successfully in the case of pronouns, t
(59) = 3.976, p < .001 ns, but there was no signiﬁcant difference in the case of
reﬂexives, t (59) = 0.125, ns.

Cognitive control tasks
In the backward digit span task, a signiﬁcant difference was observed between the
performance of the SLI (mean span = 2.41, SE = 0.12) and TD (mean span = 3.29,
SE = 0.15) groups, F (1, 56) = 19.372 p < .001. Similarly, on the n-backs task,
children with SLI (mean score = 3.14, SE = 0.49) performed signiﬁcantly below
the TD group (mean score = 5.47, SE = 0.49) as shown by the one-way ANOVA,
F (1, 58) = 11.093, p = .002. There were no signiﬁcant differences between the
two groups on the size of the Stroop effect, F (1, 59) = 2.554, ns; mean Stroop
effect in the SLI group: 210.57 ms, SE = 43.79, mean Stroop effect in the TD
group: 124.58 ms, SE = 31.26.

Correlation analyses

To learn whether cognitive control abilities are associated with anaphor resolution,
we tested correlations between the number of correct answers on the sentence
comprehension task and performance measures on the cognitive control tasks with
Pearson’s bivariate correlation analysis. We found a signiﬁcant correlation between
backward digit span and anaphor interpretation in the SLI group (r = .39, p =
.038). To control for the contribution of short-term memory span in the SLI group,
short-term memory capacity was partialed out by including the nonword repetition
span (which was part of the screening battery; see Table 1) as a covariant and
correlation analysis was rerun. The correlation remained signiﬁcant (and actually
became stronger; r = .407, p = .035). In the TD group the correlation was not
signiﬁcant (r = .18, ns), even after controlling for short-term memory span (r =
.172, ns).

To investigate potential differences between the relationship of the backward
digit span with interpretation of pronouns and reﬂexives, we ran the correlation
analysis separately with performance on the two anaphor types in the SLI group.
The correlation was not signiﬁcant with performance on sentences with pronouns
(r = .261, ns) but reached signiﬁcance in the case of reﬂexives (r = .467, p =
.011). The pattern remained the same when a partial correlation was conducted

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1192
with nonword repetition as a covariant (pronouns: r= .280, ns; reﬂexives: r= .463,
p = .015).
Performance on the n-back task was strongly associated with anaphor interpre-
tation scores in the SLI group (r = .67, p < .001) and stayed signiﬁcant even after
controlling for the effect of short-term memory by including nonword repetition
as a covariant (r = .714, p < .001). Neither of these correlations was signiﬁcant
in the TD group (bivariate: r = .36, ns; partial: r = .36, ns).
Running the correlation separately with pronouns and reﬂexives in the SLI
group showed signiﬁcant correlations in both cases (pronouns: r = .606, p <
.001; reﬂexives: r = .622, p < .001) even after partialing out short-term memory
(pronouns: r = .630, p < .001; reﬂexives: r = .631, p < .001).
A signiﬁcant negative correlation was observed between performance on the
Stroop task and anaphor comprehension scores in the SLI group (r = –.399, p =
.029). Higher scores on the Stroop task are associated with weaker cognitive control
abilities, while higher scores on the sentence comprehension task reﬂect better
anaphor comprehension abilities. Therefore, if we assume that weaker cognitive
control leads to more difﬁculties in anaphor comprehension, we expect a negative
correlation between the two measures, which means that the negative direction of
the correlation is in line with our expectations. The correlation in the SLI group
remained signiﬁcant after partialing out nonword repetition scores (r = –.423, p =
.022). The correlations were not signiﬁcant in the TD group (bivariate: r = –.022,
ns; partial: –.051, ns).
Testing the correlations separately in the case of pronouns and reﬂexives in the
SLI group showed a signiﬁcant correlation in the case of reﬂexives (r = –.580,
p = .001) even after controlling for short-term memory (r = –.585, p = .001) but
not in the case of pronouns (r = –.197, ns).

To determine which factors are the best predictors of performance on the anaphor
comprehension task in the SLI group, we included backward digit span, n-back
score, nonword repetition span, and Stroop scores in a multiple stepwise linear
regression analysis conducted on the results of the SLI group. We used the number
of correct answers on the anaphor comprehension task as a dependent variable.
Nonword repetition, backward digit span, and Stroop scores were excluded by the
analysis, and n-back score alone proved to be the best model of anaphor resolution
performance explaining 46% of the variance in performance on the binding task
(R2 = .460, p < .001, standardized b = 0.678).

DISCUSSION

We investigated anaphor resolution and cognitive control abilities of Hungarian
primary school children with SLI and with TD. Our ﬁrst aim was to ﬁnd out
whether Hungarian children with SLI show problems with anaphor resolution rel-
ative to their typically developing peers. Difﬁculties were expected in the SLI
group, especially in sentences with a pronoun and without a quantiﬁer as a result
of their higher cognitive control requirements. Overall, we found that children
with SLI are less successful in anaphor interpretation than TD children: while TD
children performed at ceiling on almost all sentence types, signiﬁcant differences
appeared between conditions in the SLI group. However, most children with SLI

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1193

displayed evidence of relatively good knowledge of anaphor interpretation: they
performed better than chance level as a group, and even at an individual level,
chance level performance was observed only in 6 children out of 30 in one or more
conditions. Below we will only discuss patterns in mismatch responses in detail,
since results were less diverse in the match condition due to high performance
in both groups. Furthermore, as there were no signiﬁcant differences between
conditions in most cases in the TD group, we mainly discuss SLI patterns be-
low, and only mention TD results where there was a difference between sentence
types.

In accordance with our expectations, we found better performance on reﬂexives
than on pronouns and on sentences with a quantiﬁer than without a quantiﬁer in the
SLI group. This pattern is more similar to previous results of younger TD children
(e.g., Chien &Wexler, 1990; Guasti, 2002; Perovic et al., 2013) than to performance
patterns of children with SLI in van der Lely and Stollwerck (1997)’s study. The
positive effect of quantiﬁers on the resolution of pronouns together with the lack
of such an effect on reﬂexives shown by the entire group in our study was also
observed in younger TD children in previous studies (e.g., Chien & Wexler, 1990).
They are in contrast, however, with van der Lely and Stollwerck (1997)’s ﬁndings;
in their study, the SLI group showed relatively low (chance level) performance in
the quantiﬁer-reﬂexive and non-quantiﬁer-pronoun conditions and relatively good
performance in nonquantiﬁer-reﬂexive and quantiﬁer-pronoun conditions leading
to a very different pattern of results from ours. Furthermore, performance levels
in the SLI group were generally lower than in our study. These differences can be
the result of children participating in the van der Lely and Stollwerck study having
a more severe impairment or the use of different selection criteria in the two
studies.

The above-mentioned pattern in the SLI group (better performance on sentences
with reﬂexives vs. pronouns and on sentences with a quantiﬁer vs. nonquantiﬁed
name) was present only in the case of the agent mismatches but not when a picture
with antecedent mismatch was presented. Better performance on reﬂexives than
on pronouns in the case of agent mismatches appeared in the TD group as well
while their performance did not differ based on the presence or absence of a
quantiﬁer. A possible explanation for this is that children might revert to a simpler
strategy based on linear order to interpret a sentence when it is difﬁcult to analyze.
Agent mismatches represent a scenario that matches an interpretation based on
the linear strategy (in the picture for the sentence “Christopher Robin says that
Rabbit sprinkles him,” Christopher Robin, the ﬁrst noun in the sentence, acts as
an agent and sprinkles Rabbit, the second noun in the sentence). For such items,
interpretations based on linear order lead to incorrectly accepting sentences with
agent mismatches. Children seemed to be better at analyzing sentences with a
reﬂexive or with a quantiﬁer, as shown by higher rates of correct rejections of
agent mismatches. Antecedent mismatches in contrast depict scenarios that are
false both based on syntactic analysis and on the linear strategy, which could
explain a lack of difference between easier and more difﬁcult sentences.

A common explanation for the differences between pronouns and reﬂexives
(weaker performance for pronouns in sentences without a quantiﬁer but no evi-
dence of a quantiﬁer-based difference in the case of reﬂexives) is that nonsyntactic

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1194

abilities (pragmatic principle, Chien & Wexler, 1990; working memory, Grodzin-
sky & Reinhart, 1993) also affect selecting the antecedent for pronouns when the
sentence contains a nonquantiﬁed name, but processing cost is reduced if the other
potential antecedent is a quantiﬁed noun. Following Clackson et al. (2011)’s ex-
planation, we suggest that the demand for cognitive control might be an important
factor among such costs: this cost is higher when several equally prominent an-
tecedents are present, as in the case of pronouns and sentences with a nonquantiﬁed
name and especially in sentences with pronouns and with no quantiﬁer. Cognitive
control develops slowly; therefore, it is not very efﬁcient in young children (Novick
et al., 2005). Furthermore, as reviewed above, some studies report deﬁcits of cog-
nitive control in children with SLI. Difﬁculties with sentences with a pronoun and
without a quantiﬁer in young children in previous studies and in children with
SLI in our study can both be accounted for by participants’ less efﬁcient cognitive
control causing problems in sentences with a higher cognitive control demand.

This account also found support in our ﬁndings on differences in cognitive con-
trol between children with SLI and TD. Based on previous research, we expected
difﬁculties in SLI on all three of our cognitive control tasks, and our results showed
lower performance in the SLI than in the TD group on two: children with SLI
showed lower performance than the TD group on the n-back and on the backward
digit span tasks, but not on the Stroop task.

To test the hypothesis that low cognitive control abilities contribute to difﬁcul-
ties with anaphor interpretation in children with SLI, we explored the relationship
between cognitive control and anaphor resolution abilities. Performance on the
backward digit span and the n-back task was strongly associated with anaphor
interpretation performance in the SLI but not in the TD group. The correlations
remained signiﬁcant after controlling for the contribution of short-term memory
span, which shows that short-term memory, which is a common component of
the digit backword/n-back and the sentence comprehension tasks, did not entirely
account for these associations, and that differences in cognitive control also con-
tribute to differences in anaphor resolution.

Primarily, we were interested in associations between anaphor comprehension
scores and those cognitive control scores in which the SLI group showed a weaker
performance than the TD group. Nevertheless, we also observed a signiﬁcant cor-
relation between Stroop scores (on which the SLI and TD groups did not differ)
and anaphor comprehension scores in the SLI group. This suggests that although
the abilities involved in the Stroop task are not impaired in children with SLI,
the ability of handling interference in the Stroop task is generally related to the
comprehension of sentences with anaphors. This relationship was not observed in
the TD group, probably due to the low variance in the scores.

Among the cognitive control tasks, n-back performance alone was the best
predictor of anaphor interpretation performance (as shown by regression analysis),
and backward digit span and nonword repetition scores (involving functions that are
also at least partially subsumed under the n-back task) did not contribute further to
explaining variance in performance. This suggests that updating is the most critical
cognitive control function involved in anaphor interpretation.

We also aimed to investigate the differences in cognitive control involvement in
the interpretation of pronouns versus reﬂexives. Clackson et al. (2011) suggested

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1195

greater involvement of cognitive control in pronoun processing; this prediction
was not borne out by our ﬁndings. In the case of the n-back task, a signiﬁcant
correlation appeared with both anaphor types. Backward digit span was associated
with performance on reﬂexives but not on pronouns. As far as we know, this was
the ﬁrst attempt to test differential involvement of cognitive control in reﬂexive
versus pronoun resolution, but we need further studies to investigate differences
in cognitive control requirement of different anaphor types.

Taken together, similar patterns of anaphor interpretation performance in chil-
dren with SLI in our study and in younger TD children in previous studies and
associations between anaphor interpretation and cognitive control suggest that
weaker performance on anaphor resolution in SLI is not a result of a speciﬁc
grammatical deﬁcit. The different patterns of results between groups in van der
Lely and Stollwerck (1997), namely, that children with SLI show lower perfor-
mance on sentences with a quantiﬁer and a reﬂexive as well as with a nonquantiﬁed
name and a pronoun, were a critical argument in their grammar-speciﬁc account
for anaphor interpretation difﬁculties in children with SLI. There was no evidence
of such a pattern in our ﬁndings, and our results are more in line with the idea that
the development of anaphor resolution is very similar in children with SLI and in
TD. Overall, results from our study and previous ones suggest that the observed
delay in SLI is mainly due to limitations in processing resources, and can be partly
attributed to the delay in the development of cognitive control abilities. However,
as results on anaphor interpretation abilities in SLI are scarce, more studies are
needed to establish the factors contributing to the deﬁcit.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by Research Grant OTKA K 83619 from the Hungarian Na-
tional Science Foundation (to Á.L., Principal Investigator).

NOTES
1. One child did not complete the n-back task, and three children’s scores were missing

for the backward digit span task.

2. Note that the subject of the subordinate clause was a proper noun in the nonquantiﬁed

condition and a common noun in the quantiﬁed condition.

REFERENCES
Archibald, L., & Gathercole, S. (2006). Short-term and working memory in speciﬁc language impair-

ment. International Journal of Language and Communication Disorders, 41, 675–693.

Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. J. (1974). Working memory. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of
learning and motivation: Advances in research and theory (pp. 47–89). New York: Academic
Press.

Badecker, W., & Straub, K. (2002). The processing role of structural constraints on the interpreta-
tion of pronouns and anaphors. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 28, 748–769.

Bishop, D. V. M. (1983). Test for Reception of Grammar. Manchester: Medical Research Council.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1196

Bishop, D. V. M., Bright, P., James, C., Bishop, S. J., & van der Lely, H. K. J. (2000). Grammatical
SLI: A distinct subtype of developmental language impairment? Applied Psycholinguistics, 21,
159–181.

Chien, Y.-C. & Wexler, K. (1990). Children’s knowledge of locality conditions in binding as evidence

for the modularity of syntax and pragmatics. Language Acquisition, 1, 225–295.

Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on government and binding. Dordrecht: Foris.
Chomsky, N. (1986). Knowledge of language: Its nature, origin and use. New York: Praeger.
Clackson, K., Felser, C., & Clahsen, H. (2011). Children’s processing of reﬂexives and pronouns in
English: Evidence from eye-movements during listening. Journal of Memory and Language,
65, 128–144.

Clackson, K., & Heyer, V. (2014). Reﬂexive anaphor resolution in spoken language comprehension:

Structural constraints and beyond. Frontiers in Psychology: Language Sciences, 5, 904.

Cowan, N. (1995). Attention and memory: An integrated framework. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cowan, N. (1999). An embedded-processes model of working memory. In A. Miyake & P. Shah (Eds.),

Models of working memory (pp. 62–101). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Csányi, I. (1974). Peabody Szókincs-Teszt [Peabody Receptive Vocabulary Test]. Budapest: Bárczi

Gusztáv Gyógypedagógiai F˝oiskola.

Cunnings, I., & Felser, C. (2013). The role of working memory in the processing of reﬂexives. Language

and Cognitive Processes, 28, 188–219.

del Ri´o, D., Maestu´, F., Lo´pez-Higes, R., Moratti, S., Gutie´rrez, R., Maestu´, C., & del-Pozo, F. (2011).
Conﬂict and cognitive control during sentence comprehension: Recruitment of a frontal network
during the processing of Spanish object-ﬁrst sentences. Neuropsychologia, 49, 382–391.

Ellis Weismer, S., Evans, J., & Hesketh, L. (1999). An examination of verbal working memory capacity
in children with speciﬁc language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 42, 1249–1260.

Ellis Weismer, S., & Thordardottir, E. T. (2002). Cognition and language. In P. Accardo, A. Capute,
& B. Rogers (Eds.), Disorders of language development (pp. 21–37). Timonium, MD: York
Press.

Engle, R. W. (2002). Working memory capacity as executive attention. Current Directions in Psycho-

logical Science, 11, 19–23.

Finneran, D. A., Francis, A. L., & Leonard, L. B. (2009). Sustained attention in preschool-age children
with speciﬁc language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language and Hearing Research, 52,
915–929.

Gathercole, S., & Baddeley, A. (1990). Phonological memory deﬁcits in language disordered children:

Is there a causal connection? Journal of Memory and Language, 29, 336–360.

Gaulin, C., & Campbell, T. (1994). Procedure for assessing verbal working memory in normal school-

age children: Some preliminary data. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 79, 55–64.

Grodzinsky, Y., & Reinhart, T. (1993). The innateness of binding and coreference. Linguistic Inquiry,

24, 69–101.

Guasti, M. T. (2002). Language acquisition: The growth of grammar. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Henry, L. A., Messer, D., & Nash, G. (2012). Executive functioning in children with speciﬁc language

impairment. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 53, 37–45.

Hesketh, A., & Conti-Ramsden, G. (2013). Memory and language in middle childhood for individuals

with a history of speciﬁc language impairment. PLOS ONE, 8, e56314.

Im-Bolter, N., Johnson, J., & Pascual-Leone, J. (2006) Processing limitations in children with speciﬁc

language impairment: The role of executive function. Child Development, 77, 1822–1841.

January, D., Trueswell, J. C., & Thompson-Schill, S. L. (2009). Co-localization of Stroop and syntactic
ambiguity resolution in Broca’s area: Implications for the neural basis of sentence processing.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21, 2434–2444.

Joanisse, M. F., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1998). Speciﬁc language impairment in children: An impairment

in grammar or processing? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2, 240–246.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1197

Just, M., & Carpenter, P. (1992). A capacity theory of comprehension: Individual differences in working

memory. Psychological Review, 99, 122–149.

Kail, R. (1994). A method for studying the generalized slowing hypothesis in children with speciﬁc

language impairment. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 37, 418–421.

Kas, B., & Lukács, Á. (2016). Magyar Mondatutánmondási Teszt [Hungarian Sentence Repetition

Test]. Unpublished manuscript.

Kas, B., Lukács, Á., & Szentkuti-Kiss, K. (2016) A szórend és az esetjelölés szerepe speciﬁkus nyelvi
zavart mutató gyerekek mondatfeldolgozásában. In B. Kas (Ed.), Szavad ne feledd! Tanul-
mányok Bánréti Zoltán tiszteletére. Budapest: MTA Nyelvtudományi Intézet.

Leonard, L. B. (2014). Children with speciﬁc language impairment. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

(Original work published 1998)

Leonard, L. B., Ellis Weismer, S., Miller, C. A., Francis, D. J., Tomblin, J. B., & Kail, R. V. (2007).
Speed of processing, working memory, and language impairment in children. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 50, 408–428.

Lukács, Á., Gy˝ori, M., & Rózsa, S. (2012). A TROG pszichometriai jellemz˝oinek magyar vizsgálata,
a normák kialakítása [The psychometric analysis of Hungarian data from the TROG]. In D. V.
M. Bishop (Ed.), TROG—Test for Reception of Grammar. Handbook (pp. 47–86). Budapest:
OS Hungary.

Lukács, Á., Kas, B., & Leonard, L. B. (2013). Case marking in Hungarian children with speciﬁc

language impairment. First Language, 33, 331–353.

Lukács, Á., Ladányi, E., Fazekas, K., & Kemény, F. (2016). Executive functions and the contribution
of short-term memory span in children with speciﬁc language impairment. Neuropsychology,
30, 296–303.

Lukács, A., Leonard, L. B., Kas, B., & Pléh, C. (2009). The use of tense and agreement by Hungarian-
speaking children with language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Re-
search, 52, 98–117.

Marton, K. (2008). Visuo-spatial processing and executive functions in children with speciﬁc language
impairment. International Journal of Language and Communication Disorders, 43, 181–200.
Marton, K., Campanelli, L., Eichorn, N., Scheuer, J., & Yoon, J. (2014). Information processing and
proactive interference in children with and without speciﬁc language impairment (SLI). Journal
of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 57, 106–119.

Marton, K., Kelmenson, L., & Pinkhasova, M. (2007). Inhibition control and working memory capacity

in children with SLI. Psychologia, 50, 110–121.

Marton, K., & Schwartz, R. (2003). Working memory capacity and language processes in children
with speciﬁc language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 46,
1138–1153.

Miller, C. A., Kail, R., Leonard, L. B., & Tomblin, B. (2001). Speed of processing in children with
speciﬁc language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 44, 416–
433.

Miller, E. K., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function. Annual Review

of Neuroscience, 24, 167–202.

Miyake, A., Carpenter, P. A., & Just, M. A. (1994). A capacity approach to syntactic comprehension
disorders: Making normal adults perform like aphasic patients. Cognitive Neuropsychology,
11, 671–717.

Montgomery, J. (1995). Sentence comprehension in children with speciﬁc language impairment: The
role of phonological working memory. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 38, 187–199.
Montgomery, J. (2000). Verbal working memory and sentence comprehension in children with speciﬁc

language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 43, 293–308.

Montgomery, J. (2004). Sentence comprehension in children with speciﬁc language impairment: Ef-
fects of input rate and phonological working memory. International Journal of Language and
Communication Disorders, 39, 115–134.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1198

Montgomery, J. W., & Evans, J. L. (2009). Complex sentence comprehension and working memory
in children with speciﬁc language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language and Hearing
Research, 52, 269–288.

Montgomery, J. W., Magimairaj, B. M., & Finney, M. C. (2010). Working memory and speciﬁc lan-
guage impairment: An update on the relation and perspectives on assessment and treatment.
American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 19, 78–94.

Nicol, J. (1988). Coreference processing during sentence comprehension (PhD thesis, Massachusetts

Institute of Technology, Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences).

Nicol, J., & Swinney, D. (1989). The role of structure in coreference assignment during sentence

comprehension. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 18, 5–19.

Norbury, C., Bishop, D. V. M., & Briscoe, J. (2002). Does impaired grammatical comprehension pro-

vide evidence for an innate grammar module? Applied Psycholinguistics, 23, 247–268.

Noterdaeme, M., Amorosa, H., Mildenberger, K., Sitter, S., & Minow, F. (2001). Evaluation of attention
in children with autism and children with a speciﬁc language disorder. European Journal of
Child Psychology, 10, 58–66.

Novick, J. M., Trueswell, J. C., & Thompson-Schill, S. L. (2005). Cognitive control and parsing: Reex-
amining the role of Broca’s area in sentence comprehension. Cognitive, Affective and Behavioral
Neuroscience, 5, 263–281.

Novick, J. M., Trueswell, J. C., & Thomspon-Schill, S. L. (2010). Broca’s area and language process-
ing: Evidence for the cognitive control connection. Language and Linguistics Compass, 4,
906–924.

Novogrodsky, R., & Friedmann, N. (2010). Not all dependencies are impaired in syntactic-SLI: Binding
in children with a deﬁcit in Wh-movement. In K. Franich, L. Keil, K. Iserman, & J. Chandlee
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th Boston University Conference on Language Development
(BUCLD). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.

Perovic, A., Modyanova, N., & Wexler, K. (2013). Comparison of grammar in neurodevelopmental
disorders: The case of binding in Williams syndrome and autism with and without language
impairment. Language Acquisition, 20, 133–154.

Racsmány, M., Lukács, Á., Németh, D., & Pléh, C. (2005). A verbális munkamemória magyar nyelv˝u
vizsgálóeljárásai [Hungarian methods for studying verbal working memory]. Magyar Pszi-
chológiai Szemle, 60, 479–505.

Rákosi, G., & Tóth, E. (2016). The pronoun interpretation problem in child Hungarian. Acta Linguistica

Hungarica, 63, 63–96.

Raven, J., Court, J. H., & Raven, J. C. (1987). Raven’s Progressive Matrices. London: H. K. Lewis.
Rice, M. L., Wexler, K., & Redmond, S. (1999) Grammaticality judgments of an extended optional in-
ﬁnitive grammar: Evidence from English-speaking children with speciﬁc language impairment.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 943–961.

Runner, J. T., Sussman, R. S., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2003). Assignment of reference to reﬂexives and

pronouns in picture noun phrases: Evidence from eye movements. Cognition, 89, B1–B13.

Schneider, W., Eschman, A., & Zuccolotto, A. (2012). E-Prime user’s guide. Pittsburgh, PA: Psychol-

ogy Software Tools.

Spaulding, T. J. (2010). Investigating mechanisms of suppression in preschool children with speciﬁc

language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 53, 725–738.

Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions. Journal of Experimental Psy-

chology, 18, 643–662.

Tager-Flusberg, H., & Cooper, J. (1999). Present and future possibilities for deﬁning a phenotype
for speciﬁc language impairment. Journal of Speech, Language and Hearing Research, 42,
1275–1278.

Tallal, P., & Piercy, M. (1973). Defects of non-verbal auditory perception in children with developmental

aphasia. Nature, 241, 468–469.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:5
Ladányi et al.: Anaphor resolution in children with SLI

1199

van der Lely, H. K. (1996). Speciﬁcally language impaired and normally developing children: Verbal

passive vs adjectival passive sentence interpretation. Lingua, 98, 243–272.

van der Lely, H. K. (2005). Domain-speciﬁc cognitive systems: Insight from grammatical speciﬁc

language impairment. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9, 53–59.

van der Lely, H. K. (1998). SLI in children: Movement, economy and deﬁcits in the computational

syntactic system. Language Acquisition, 72, 161–192.

van der Lely, H. K., & Harris, M. (1990). Comprehension of reversible sentences in speciﬁcally

language-impaired children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 55, 101–117.

van der Lely, H. K., & Stollwerck, L. (1997). Binding theory and grammatical speciﬁc language

impairment in children. Cognition, 62, 245–290.

Waters, G., & Caplan, D. (1996). Processing resource capacity and the comprehension of garden path

sentences. Memory and Cognition, 24, 24–55.

Windsor, J., & Hwang, M. (1999). Testing the generalized slowing hypothesis in speciﬁc language

impairment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 42, 1205–1218.

Xiang, M., Dillon, B., & Phillips, C. (2009). Illusory licensing effects across dependency types: ERP

evidence. Brain and Language, 108, 40–55.

Ye, Z., & Zhou, X. (2009). Executive control in language processing. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral

Reviews, 33, 1168–1177.


