Applied Psycholinguistics 38 (2017), 509–539
doi:10.1017/S014271641600031X

Utilization of prosodic and linguistic
cues during perceptions of
nonunderstandings in radio
communication

JAIME C. AUTON, MARK W. WIGGINS, BEN J. SEARLE,
and NAN XU RATTANASONE
Macquarie University

Received: September 14, 2015

Accepted for publication: July 11, 2016

ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE
Jaime Auton, Department of Psychology, Macquarie University, Sydney, New South Wales 2109,
Australia. E-mail: jaime.auton@mq.edu.au

ABSTRACT
The readback/hearback loop is a communicative protocol used in many high-risk environments to
ensure that a verbal instruction has been heard correctly by a receiver. However, it does not neces-
sarily ensure that an instruction has been understood. Using an international sample of hydroelectric
power generation controllers, this study examined whether particular linguistic (complete and partial
readbacks) and prosodic (ﬁnal intonation, ﬁller, and interturn delay) cues contained within a readback
response could signal to listeners the extent to which speakers had understood an instruction. The
results indicated that different prosodic cues are used to detect nonunderstandings, depending upon
the linguistic content of the readback. The results have implications for training and system design in
distributed environments.

Many high-risk, high-consequence technical environments, including air trafﬁc
control, hydroelectric power generation, and emergency services, are character-
ized by time pressure, uncertainty, and dynamic relationships between components
(Orasanu & Connolly, 1993). The safe and efﬁcient management of these envi-
ronments is reliant upon effective communication between operators, where any
communication error has the potential for a signiﬁcant loss (Australian Transport
Safety Bureau, 2007). The process of communication within such domains is in-
herently a joint activity between communicative partners (Clark, 1994; Clark &
Schaefer, 1989).

Models of dialogue structure, such as the collaborative model (Clark, 1994;
Clark & Brennan, 1991; Clark & Schaefer, 1987, 1989; Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs,
1986), emphasize that both communicative partners have a shared responsibility
to ensure that information exchanged has been appropriately heard and understood

© Cambridge University Press 2016 0142-7164/16

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

510

before the conversation proceeds. A communicative exchange involves two distinct
stages: the presentation of information and the grounding of that information
(Clark & Schaefer, 1987).

During the presentation stage, the sender will provide information for the re-
ceiver to interpret and from which meaning can be derived. During the grounding
stage, the sender and receiver collaborate to ensure that the receiver has under-
stood the sender’s intended message (Clark & Brennan, 1991; Clark & Schaefer,
1987). For grounding to take place, the receiver must demonstrate evidence of un-
derstanding to the sender, and the sender must accept the evidence as true. When
the process of grounding is successful, the utterance from the sender is referred
to as “common ground” between the two communicative participants (Clark &
Schaefer, 1987, p. 19).

MISCOMMUNICATION

Although the objective of any communicative transaction is to ensure mutual un-
derstanding between all participants (Dascal & Berenstein, 1987), communication
has been identiﬁed as a contributing factor in a signiﬁcant proportion of errors
within many high-risk industries (Kim, Park, Han, & Kim, 2010). For example,
Billings and Cheaney (1981) noted that information transfer difﬁculties were a
primary factor in over 70% of cases reported to the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration Aviation Safety Reporting System. Similarly, Greenberg
et al. (2007) reported that miscommunication contributed to almost a quarter of
surgical malpractice claims that led to patient harm.

Miscommunication is the broad term used to encompass the various types of
communicative problems that can occur in discourse (Skantze, 2005). There are
two main types of miscommunication: misunderstandings and nonunderstand-
ings (Hirst, McRoy, Heeman, Edmonds, & Horton, 1994). In a misunderstanding,
receivers are under the incorrect assumption that they have understood the instruc-
tion and thus remain unaware that an error in discourse has occurred (Hirst et al.,
1994; Skantze, 2005).

In contrast, a nonunderstanding refers to instances where a receiver does not
obtain any meaningful interpretation of a message or is unable to select from
two or more interpretations of a message (Skantze, 2005). A nonunderstanding
involves conscious awareness of a partial or complete lack of understanding and
can be disclosed or concealed (Weigand, 1999). A disclosed nonunderstanding
occurs when a receiver fails to understand a message and alerts the sender that
the message has not been understood. In contrast, a concealed nonunderstanding
occurs when the receiver fails to understand a message, but deceptively conceals
this state of nonunderstanding from the sender (Weigand, 1999).

THE READBACK/HEARBACK COMMUNICATIVE PROTOCOL

While nonunderstandings can occur in many different types of communicative
exchanges, they can also threaten the effectiveness of the readback/hearback pro-
tocol. This is a communications procedure that speciﬁes how verbal instructions
are to be delivered and conﬁrmed over the radio/telephone (Prinzo & Britton,

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

511

1993). Used in many different high-risk operational environments, including avi-
ation, electricity transmission control, hydroelectric power generation, and more
recently, in some healthcare settings, this protocol is used to reduce operator error
and maintain the integrity of communication processes (Prabhakar et al., 2012;
Prinzo & Britton, 1993).

This four-step protocol is initiated when a sender transmits a verbal message to
a receiver (Federal Aviation Administration, 2015, Section 2-4-3). For example,
an air trafﬁc controller might send the following instruction to a pilot; “Aircraft X,
turn left to a heading of zero three zero” (Barshi & Farris, 2013, p. 2). The receiver
is then required to actively listen to the instruction before repeating the instruction
verbatim back to the sender (known as the readback). In the aviation context, a
pilot would respond to the air trafﬁc controller with “Turning left to a heading of
zero three zero, Aircraft X.” The sender is then expected to listen to the readback
to ensure that it has been repeated correctly, which is referred to as the hearback
portion of the exchange (Cushing, 1995; Prinzo & Britton, 1993; Prinzo, Hendrix,
& Hendrix, 2006).

The main purpose of the readback/hearback loop is to ensure that the receiver
has accurately heard the instruction as the sender is able to identify and correct
any errors made in the readback during the hearback portion of the exchange
(Prinzo & Britton, 1993; Prinzo et al., 2006). For example, if the sender hears the
pilot incorrectly read back the instruction as “Turning left to a heading of zero
three three, Aircraft X” during the hearback, the sender is expected to correct the
misheard heading on the part of the pilot and reinitiate the readback/hearback loop
until the correct instruction has been heard. If a receiver is given an instruction
that is not understood, this can be indicated to the sender in lieu of a readback (i.e.,
disclosed nonunderstanding), allowing the information to be recommunicated until
the instruction becomes common ground between the communicative participants
(Streitenberger, Breen-Reid, & Harris, 2006).

Readback/hearback protocol limitation

Although the readback/hearback protocol is an effective strategy for the identiﬁca-
tion of misunderstandings and disclosed nonunderstandings, it does not necessarily
protect against concealed nonunderstandings, because a nonunderstanding can be
concealed, despite an accurate readback (Jones, 2003). Concealed nonunderstand-
ings on the part of the receiver in a readback/hearback exchange may also go
undetected by a sender for various reasons. For example, senders (of any commu-
nicative exchange) have a tendency to overestimate the extent to which they have
successfully communicated the intended meaning of a message and, therefore,
may not anticipate a lack of understanding (Fay, Page, & Serfaty, 2010; Keysar &
Henly, 2002). Further, receivers may prefer to conceal a lack of understanding to
“save face,” especially in those situations where there is an expectation that the
instruction would normally be understood (Chiang & Pepper, 2006).

There is also an explicit expectation in many high-risk environments, including
aviation, that the receipt of an accurate readback provides evidence to the sender
that the message has been understood by the receiver (Federal Aviation Adminis-
tration, 2014; Morrow, Rodvold, & Lee, 1994). Nevertheless, nonunderstandings,

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

512

in spite of an accurate readback, do occur (Air Accidents Investigation Branch,
2008; Billings & Cheaney, 1981; Morrow et al., 1994). This suggests that the
delivery of an accurate readback from a receiver does not necessarily provide
the sender with adequate evidence during the grounding process to indicate that
mutual understanding has taken place.

Reliance on auditory cues to gauge understanding

The identiﬁcation of effective strategies that could improve the detection of nonun-
derstandings during the grounding process of readback/hearback exchanges is
an important step in improving the integrity of this communication system. For
grounding to take place within a communicative exchange, the collaborative model
suggests that the sender will rely on evidence from the receiver’s utterance to gauge
whether or not the message has been understood as intended (Clark & Brennan,
1991). Because the readback/hearback protocol takes place primarily over the ra-
dio/telephone, this evidence can only be derived from auditory cues, including the
linguistic cues within the speech (the syllables, words, or phrases of an utterance)
and the prosodic cues inherent in vocal communication (Drummond & Hopper,
1991; Kanki & Smith, 2001; Nygaard, Herold, & Namy, 2009; Soskin, 1953).
Prosodic cues refer to the range of paralinguistic characteristics of the voice, such
as tempo and intonation, that inﬂuence how something is said (Bolinger, 1985). In
the absence of visual cues, operators working in domains that rely on radio com-
munication are exclusively dependent on linguistic and prosodic cues to determine
levels of understanding.

Auton, Wiggins, Searle, Loveday, and Xu Rattanasone (2013) were the ﬁrst to
investigate whether particular prosodic cues, when contained within a full read-
back spoken by a receiver, were salient to a sender (i.e., listener of a readback)
to gauge the extent to which the receiver had understood the instruction during
the grounding process. Using electricity transmission control as a context, Au-
ton et al. (2013) asked network operators to listen to a series of auditory-only,
simulated readback/hearback communicative exchanges. During each exchange,
participants heard a sender delivering an instruction to a receiver, followed by the
receiver delivering an accurate readback to the sender. Auton et al. systematically
manipulated three prosodic cues contained within the readback (speciﬁcally, ﬁnal
intonation, ﬁller, and interturn delay), to determine whether these cues signalled
to a participant (i.e., “listener”), the extent to which a receiver (i.e., “speaker”) had
understood an instruction. These speciﬁc prosodic cues were derived from Bren-
nan and Williams (1995) who examined the role of prosody during perceptions of
uncertainty. After listening to each exchange, participants were asked to rate the
extent to which they perceived the receiver had understood the instruction based
on the way the readback had been spoken.

Intonation is generally understood as the pitch patterns of a spoken utterance
or the “melody” of speech, where there is a basic division between tunes falling
in pitch (i.e., falling intonation) and those rising in pitch (i.e., rising intonation;
Bolinger, 1985; Cruttenden, 1981; Denes & Milton-William, 1962; Hunter, 2004;
O’Connor & Arnold, 1961). Interturn delay refers to the duration of silence be-
tween the end of one speaker’s utterance and the beginning of the other speaker’s

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

513

response (Roberts, Francis, & Morgan, 2006). An unﬁlled interturn delay refers
to a delay that only contains silence, whereas a ﬁlled interturn delay refers to a
delay that contains a ﬁller (a speech interjection, such as uh or um; Clark & Fox
Tree, 2002; Goldman-Eisler, 1961).

Auton et al. (2013) observed that the prosodic cues of ﬁnal intonation and ﬁller,
when contained within the readback portion of the exchange, had the capacity
to signal to a listener a receiver’s state of understanding. In ﬁnal intonation,
participants perceived that the receiver had a lower level of understanding of
the instruction when the readback ended with rising intonation in comparison to
falling intonation. For ﬁller, participants perceived readbacks that were preceded
by the ﬁller um as signaling a relatively lower level of understanding on the part
of the receiver, compared to readbacks that were not preceded by a ﬁller. Even
though the duration of interturn delay had been found to be a useful cue during
perceptions of uncertainty (Brennan & Williams, 1995), no association between
perceptions of nonunderstanding and the duration of interturn delays was evident.

Utility of the linguistic content of the readback response to gauge
understanding

Although Auton et al. (2013) demonstrated that particular prosodic cues were
useful to network operators in detecting varying levels of understanding on the
part of the receiver when a full readback was articulated, they did not consider
whether such cues would be relied upon when a receiver responded with a partial
readback. In a partial readback response, the receiver does not repeat all the
information in the instruction provided by the sender and, therefore, provides the
sender with less linguistic evidence that an instruction has been understood (Barshi
& Farris, 2013). It is unclear from Auton et al. (2013) whether the utility of ﬁnal
intonation, ﬁller, and less so interturn delay, only exists when the precondition of
a full readback is met. Evidence from Brennan and Williams’ (1995) investigation
into the usefulness of prosodic cues during perceptions of uncertainty suggest that
these cues are still used by listeners to gauge a speaker’s level of certainty, even
when the listener does not have evidence that the speaker’s linguistic response
is accurate. However, this proposition has not been tested empirically within the
framework of nonunderstandings and the readback/hearback protocol.

Although there is an explicit expectation in many high-risk environments that
operators provide a full readback to an issued instruction (i.e., a receiver is to repeat
the message back to the sender in full), procedural variations occur frequently.
For example, Morrow, Lee, and Rodvold (1993) observed that up to 13% of
the routine pilot communication they analyzed contained partial, rather than full,
readbacks. Other investigators have reported similar ﬁgures (Cardosi, 1993; Prinzo
et al., 2006). If prosodic cues, such as ﬁnal intonation, ﬁller, and interturn delay,
have the potential to be used as a training tool to improve operator detection
of nonunderstandings, it is important to establish whether the use of such cues
can be generalized across nonroutine responses to instructions (i.e., during partial
readback responses).

In addition to examining the potential interaction between prosodic cues and the
linguistic content within a readback response during judgements of understanding,

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

514

it is also important to assess whether the contrast between full and partial readback
responses to an instruction affects perceptions of understanding. Within many
technical environments, there is an assumption that the receipt of a full readback
from a receiver is necessary evidence to infer understanding on the part of the
receiver (International Civil Aviation Organization, 2007). Evidence from the
conversation analytic literature supports this notion with partial repeats, especially
those that end in rising intonation (partial questioning repeats), constituting repair
initiations on the part of the speaker who uttered the repeat (Kim, 2002; Robinson,
2013; Schegloff, 2007).

Recovering from, or repairing, difﬁculties in communication can be either self-
initiated (executed by the communicator of the “trouble source”) or other initiated
(executed by the communicator who is the recipient of the trouble source; Scheg-
loff, 2000; Schegloff, Jefferson, & Sacks, 1977). In cases where a sender presents
a message for a receiver to understand and the receiver responds with a partial
questioning repeat, this “other-initiated repair” could be perceived by the sender as
an index of the receiver’s nonunderstanding of the instruction. However, repetitions
of speech tokens are not infrequent in everyday conversations (Schegloff, 1987)
and partial questioning repeats are not used to exclusively convey insufﬁcient
understanding of repeated items in context.

Partial questioning repeats can be used to convey (and are perceived to convey) a
range of different social actions, such as emphasis, humor, hearing issues, stalling,
disagreement with repeated tokens, imitation, and are also used to indicate re-
ceipt of a message (Kim, 2002; Norrick, 1987; Robinson, 2013; Schegloff, 1997;
Tannen; 1987). Therefore, while there may be an assumption, within technical
domains, that a partial readback reﬂects insufﬁcient or inadequate understanding
of the repeated tokens, the conversation analytic literature suggests partial read-
back can be a manifestation of many other issues in technical environments (such
as excessive workload or simply a lack of adherenece to protocol on the part of
the receiver). It is important to test this assumption empirically, as the readback
procedure (i.e., the requirement of a full readback response) has been criticized
as unnecessary and time consuming (Schneider, Healy, & Barshi, 2004). If it is
evident that a full readback does not provide a listener with evidence that the
receiver has understood the instruction, additional supporting evidence may need
to be considered in particular circumstances.

THE PRESENT STUDY

This study extended the relatively limited literature examining the relation-
ship between auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstanding within a read-
back/hearback context. Speciﬁcally, it capitalized on Auton et al. (2013) in three
critical ways. While Auton et al. used electricity transmission control as a context,
this study assessed the utility of auditory cues during perceptions of nonunder-
standing within the allied domain of hydroelectric power generation. This is a
high-risk, high-consequence environment in which the force of falling or ﬂowing
water is used to generate electricity.

This study also differed from Auton et al. (2013) by including an examination of
the association between the amount of linguistic information contained within the

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

515

readback response (full vs. partial readback) and perceptions of nonunderstanding.
Of perhaps more theoretical and practical importance, the utility of prosodic
cues during assessments of nonunderstanding was examined contingent upon the
amount of linguistic content within the readback response.

Finally, this study incorporated a task whereby participants were asked con-
currently to listen to communicative exchanges and read and recall a series of
numeric digits. The addition of the concurrent task was designed to better reﬂect
the cognitive demands in the operational environment. Referred to as the numeric
digit span recall task, it was designed to impose a cognitive demand on partici-
pants, thereby restricting the cognitive resources available during assessments of
nonunderstanding.

Research aim and hypotheses

The aim of the present study was to examine how both linguistic and prosodic cues
embodied within a receiver’s response to an instruction inﬂuenced perceptions of
the extent to which a receiver had understood an instruction. It was hypothesized
that full readback responses to instructions would receive higher ratings of un-
derstanding compared to partial readback responses according to Hypothesis 1
(H1). It was also predicted that full readback responses ending in rising intona-
tion would attract lower ratings of understanding of the instruction, compared to
readback responses ending in falling intonation Hypothesis 2a (H2a). Similarly,
it was hypothesized that partial readback responses ending in rising intonation
would receive lower ratings of understanding of the instruction compared to par-
tial readback responses ending in falling intonation Hypothesis 2b (H2b).

For the prosodic cue “ﬁller,” hypotheses were speciﬁed for the two durations
of interturn delay to identify any interaction between delay and ﬁller. It was
hypothesized that full readback responses preceded by a ﬁlled delay of 600 ms
would attract lower ratings of understanding of the instruction compared to full
readbacks that were preceded by an unﬁlled delay of the same duration (H3a).
Similarly, full readback responses preceded by a ﬁlled delay of 1200 ms were
expected to attract lower ratings of understanding compared to full readbacks that
were preceded by an unﬁlled delay of the same duration (H3b).

Partial readback responses preceded by a ﬁlled delay of 600 ms were expected
to attract lower ratings of understanding of the instruction compared to partial
readbacks that were preceded by an unﬁlled delay of 600 ms (H3c). Similarly,
partial readback responses preceded by a ﬁlled delay of 1200 ms were predicted
to attract lower ratings of understanding of the instruction compared to partial
readbacks that were preceded by an unﬁlled delay of 1200 ms (H3d).

Although Auton et al. (2013) failed to identify interturn delay as a salient cue
used by network operators during perceptions of nonunderstanding of full readback
responses, it was unclear whether interturn delay would be useful in a different
domain and/or when the linguistic cue associated with a full readback was un-
available (i.e., during partial readback responses). Therefore, it was hypothesized
that full readback responses that commenced after a longer (1200 ms) interturn
delay would attract lower ratings of understanding of the instruction compared to
full readback responses that commenced after a shorter (600 ms) interturn delay

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

516

(H4a). Finally, it was predicted that partial readback responses that commenced
after a longer (1200 ms) inteturn delay would attract lower ratings of understand-
ing of the instruction compared to partial readback responses commencing after a
shorter (600 ms) interturn delay (H4b).

Overview of methodology

This study was undertaken within the domain of hydroelectric power genera-
tion. The participants comprised hydroelectric power generation operators whose
role is to monitor and diagnose system events through supervisory control and
data acquisition visual interfaces and intervene where necessary to safeguard the
supply of electricity. These operators were selected as they generally follow the
readback/hearback procedure when communicating over the radio/telephone, and
therefore, they represented a sample in which the utilization of linguistic and
prosodic cues during perceptions of nonunderstanding could be examined with a
degree of ecological validity.

In comparison to environments like aviation, where the readback protocol is
adhered to consistently, adherence to full readbacks within hydroelectric power
generation varies between organizations. In the hydroelectric domain, the commu-
nication process tends to be less formal and less structured, involving a combina-
tion of full and partial readbacks, depending upon organizational and task-speciﬁc
circumstances.

Participants in this study were asked to listen to a series of scripted audio com-
municative exchanges through an online experimental platform. Each exchange
included a sender delivering an instruction and a receiver responding with either
a full or a partial readback. The readbacks varied systematically in the type of
intonation heard at the end of the response, the presence of a ﬁller before the
commencement of the response, and the duration of the interturn delay between
speakers. After listening to each exchange, participants were asked to indicate the
extent to which they perceived that the receiver (who delivered the full or partial
readback) had understood the instruction.

METHOD

Participants

The participants were recruited from either online advertisements within a major
US power generation magazine that has subscribers worldwide or through direct
contact using a major hydroelectric power generation company in New Zealand. A
total of 34 operators completed the study, although 6 were subsequently excluded
because they were not currently working within the ﬁeld of hydroelectric power
generation nor had they reported any experience within this specialized ﬁeld.
As this study was completed online and in participants’ own time, all of the
demographic data was provided via self-report.

Twenty-eight hydroelectric power generation operators from companies world-
wide participated in the study. Overall, an equal proportion of participants were
from the United States (35.7%) and New Zealand (35.7%), with the remaining

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

517

participants residing in various countries including England, Australia, Italy, and
Croatia. The sample was predominantly male (92.9%), ranged in age from 29 to
74 years (M = 51.96, SD = 8.89), and had accumulated between 4 and 44 years
of experience within power generation (M = 25.13, SD = 11.02). Within the
specialized ﬁeld of hydroelectric power generation, participants had accumulated
between 2 and 44 years of experience (M = 20.32, SD = 11.34).

Before participants commenced the online study, they were advised in writ-
ing that only proﬁcient English speakers should complete the study due to the
challenging nature of the tasks. Participants were asked to self-report their native
language and the number of years they had been speaking English. The majority of
the sample identiﬁed as native English speakers (85.7%). Of the four participants
who identiﬁed as nonnative English speakers, the least experienced nonnative
English speaker had been speaking English for 43.48% of his life, and the most
experienced nonnative English speaker had been speaking English for 75.47% of
his life. Participants received a US $25 Amazon eVoucher in exchange for their
completion of the study.

Materials

The auditory readback task, incorporating the numeric digit span recall task,
was created to assess the extent to which particular prosodic and linguistic cues
inﬂuenced participants’ perceptions of nonunderstandings while listening to a
series of readback/hearback exchanges.

Auditory readback task.
DESIGN. The auditory readback task comprised a 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 (Com-
municative Exchange [1, 2] × Instruction Response Type [full readback, partial
readback]× Final Intonation [rising, falling]× Filler [present, absent]× Interturn
Delay [shorter, longer]) repeated measures, within-subjects design. This resulted
in 32 distinct communicative exchange conditions to which participants listened
in random order.

After listening to each exchange, participants were asked to rate, on a 7-point
Likert scale from 1 (did not understand at all) to 7 (understood completely), the
extent to which they perceived that the receiver, who uttered the readback response,
had understood the meaning of the instruction. This type of scale was consistent
with Brennan and Williams’ (1995) measure of perceptions of uncertainty and
Auton et al.’s (2013) measure of perceptions of nonunderstanding. These ratings
represented the dependent variable.

The design incorporated two, semantically distinct communicative exchanges
to ensure that the semantic content of the exchanges did not inﬂuence prosodic
cue use, and thus, were used as replicates of the other auditory cue conditions to
ensure a more robust design. Each communicative exchange consisted of a sender
delivering an operational instruction to a receiver and a receiver responding to the
instruction. These two communicative exchanges differed in the type of operational
tasks that the sender requested the receiver to execute.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

Table 1. Semantic content of the communicative exchanges

518

Communicative

Exchange

Instruction Response Type

Instruction

Full Readback

Partial Readback

1

2

Hi Steve, Can you go
to Rangipo Station
and check the status
of the bypass valves
on the two
generators and give
me a call?

Hey Steve, we’ve just
had a tripping down
at Tekapo B station.
Can you do a
manual reset on
Unit 2?

Thanks Pete. I’m on

my way to Rangipo
right now and will
check the status of
the bypass valves
and give you a call.

Thanks Pete. I’ll go

ahead and reset
Unit 2 trips.

Thanks Pete. I’ll do

that now.

Thanks Pete. I’ll go

ahead with that.

“Instruction response type” referred to the nature of the response to the opera-
tional instruction in each of the two communicative exchanges, where the receiver
responded with either a full readback (i.e., the entire message was repeated back
to the sender) or a partial readback (i.e., the receipt of the instruction was acknowl-
edged but the operational steps were not repeated). “Final intonation” referred to
whether the receiver’s readback response ended in either a rising intonation or a
falling intonation. “Filler” referred to the presence of a verbal interjection (i.e.,
um) prior to the commencement of the response. Finally, “interturn delay” referred
to whether the delay between the sender delivering the instruction and the receiver
responding was shorter (600 ms) or longer (1200 ms).

Stimuli development.

COMMUNICATIVE EXCHANGES. The semantic content of the two communica-
tive exchanges was developed in consultation with two subject matter experts from
a major hydroelectric power generation company in New Zealand. Each exchange
consisted of an instruction that was likely to occur within the hydroelectric power
generation industry, specifying the operational steps to be executed by the receiver,
together with a response (either a full readback or a partial readback; see Table 1).
The auditory versions of the communicative exchanges were recorded by
two Australian English male speakers using a digital audio editor program
(GarageBandTM) on a MacBook laptop. One speaker assumed the role of the
sender, who delivered the instruction in both exchanges, and the other speaker as-
sumed the role of the receiver, who delivered the instruction responses associated
with both exchanges. Speakers maintained their allocated roles as either sender
or receiver across both exchanges to prevent differences in voice timbre from

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

519

inﬂuencing perceptions of nonunderstanding. The duration of the communicative
exchanges (including both the instruction and response) ranged from 10 to 13 s.

Prosodic manipulation of instruction response types. The instruction response
portion of each communicative exchange was manipulated to vary systematically
the type of intonation at the end of the response, whether the receiver used a ﬁller
(i.e., um) before responding to the instruction, and the duration of the interturn
delay between the offset of the sender’s instruction and the onset of the receiver’s
readback response.

Final intonation. To generate responses that ended with either rising or falling
intonation, the speaker who played the role of the receiver was instructed to end the
response token with either rising or falling intonation. A manipulation check was
conducted to validate that the intonation contours produced by the male speaker
were perceived as intended (i.e., ending with either rising or falling intonation).
The participants included 11 postgraduate students from an Australian University
who were all native English speakers, predominantly female (81.82%), and ranged
in age from 23 to 49 years (M = 32.09, SD = 8.37).

The participants accessed the study through an online survey, where they were
asked to listen to the instruction response tokens of each exchange and de-
cide whether the receiver used rising or falling intonation at the end of each
response token. The participants listened and responded to a total of 16 in-
struction response tokens; 8 full readbacks (4 × Communicative Exchange
1, 4× Communicative Exchange 2) and 8 partial readbacks (4× Communicative
Exchange 1, 4 × Communicative Exchange 2). Half of the instruction responses
ended in rising intonation and half in falling intonation. The results indicated that
participants were able to correctly identify rising and falling intonation at the
end of full readback response tokens with 100% accuracy. For partial readback
response tokens, participants were able to correctly identify rising and falling
intonation with an accuracy rate of 97.7% and 95.45%, respectively.

Filler. The receiver’s response was preceded by either a ﬁlled interturn delay (i.e.,
the duration between the sender’s instruction and receiver’s response contained
silence as well as the ﬁller um) or an unﬁlled interturn delay (i.e., the duration
between the sender’s instruction and the receiver’s response was silent). The male
speaker who played the role of the receiver was recorded several times producing
the ﬁller um. One instance of the ﬁller um was selected based on its duration
(400 ms) and timbre, and was used across all ﬁlled interturn delays to maintain
consistency. The ﬁller was then digitally inserted within an interturn delay of
600 ms (100 ms silence, um [400 ms], 100 ms silence) and 1200 ms (700 ms
silence, um [400 ms], 100 ms silence).

Interturn delay. Although Auton et al. (2013) examined whether the prosodic
cues reportedly perceived as useful during perceptions of uncertainty by Brennan
and Williams (1995) were also useful during perceptions of nonunderstanding in a
readback context, they did not incorporate the same interturn delay durations used
by Brennan and Williams. While Brennan and Williams used delays of 1000 ms

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

520

(“short” delay) and 5000 ms (“long” delay) between speakers, Auton et al. argued
that these durations would be perceptually unrealistic within technical domains
and threaten the ecological validity of their study. Instead, Auton et al. examined
the role of interturn delay on perceptions of nonunderstanding using four distinct
delay durations: –300 ms (i.e., a 300 ms portion of overlapping speech between
the end of the instruction and the beginning of the readback), 300 ms, 600 ms, and
1200 ms. These durations had been shown to be perceptually relevant to listeners
during problematic everyday communication (Roberts et al., 2006; Shimojima,
Katagiri, Koiso, & Swerts, 2002).

Auton et al. (2013) found no relationship between interturn delay durations and
perceptions of nonunderstanding and suggested that this could be due to one of two
reasons: (a) the interturn delay durations tested were not long enough to signal
difﬁculty during communicative exchanges within the electricity transmission
domain or (b) any type of interturn delay is not perceptually relevant in technical
environments due to other attributable causes of delay (e.g., technical difﬁculties
or air congestion). Although it may be that tolerance for interturn delay is greater
within operational environments compared to everyday social interactions (where
a delay of approximately 1 s, sometimes even less, is needed to signal problematic
communication to listeners; Davidson, 1984; Jefferson, 1989, Kendrick & Torreira,
2015; Nevile & Walker, 2005), relatively conservative interturn delay intervals of
600 and 1200 ms were maintained in the present study.

The selection of these two interturn delay durations for this study was twofold.
First, even though Auton et al. (2013) suggested that future studies should test
longer interturn delay durations in technical environments, their study was de-
signed to examine the effect of interturn delay durations only within full readback
responses. It may be that salient interturn delay durations demonstrated within
social interactions (>1000 ms) only become important within technical environ-
ments when linguistic evidence of understanding is absent (i.e., during partial
readback responses). Second, the work by Roberts and colleagues suggest that
the incremental increase of a 600 and 1200 ms interturn delay between speakers
affects perceptions of willingness to comply with friendly requests (Roberts &
Francis, 2013; Roberts et al., 2006; Roberts, Margutti, & Takano, 2011).

As the contrast between the interturn durations of 600 ms and 1200 ms appears
to affect perceptions of willingness to comply with a request, it was hypothesized
that the same durations could also affect perceptions of nonunderstanding within
a more operational context where the instruction involved a request. To create
interturn delays of either a shorter (600 ms) or a longer (1200 ms) duration,
artiﬁcial silences of the two durations were electronically inserted, using the digital
audio editor program GarageBand, between the offset of the sender delivering the
instruction and the onset of the receiver’s response.

Numeric digit span recall task

The auditory readback task was designed to assess associations that operators
have developed between auditory cues and the extent to which they perceive
that a speaker has understood an instruction. Operators who have developed re-
ﬁned associations between auditory cues and instances of nonunderstanding are

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

521

presumed to access these associations, even when cognitive resources are limited.
In contrast, operators who have not developed such associations in long-term mem-
ory rely more heavily on working-memory processing to determine the meaning
of the auditory cues and are more hindered when cognitive resources are limited
(Coderre, Mandin, Harasym, & Fick, 2003; Sweller, 1988).

It was important to devise a task that would restrict participants’ cognitive
resources while listening to the communicative exchanges, as this is typical of
the real-life operational context. However, it was also important to ensure that it
did not impose such a load that it prevented participants from attending to the
exchanges altogether. The numeric digit span recall task was incorporated into
the auditory readback task, and required participants to remember a series of
eight single numeric digits that were visually displayed for the duration of each
communicative exchange (see Figure 1). Each series of numeric digits included
numerals from one to nine in a randomized order for each exchange, with no
repetition of digits. After each communicative exchange was completed, the series
of numeric digits disappeared, and participants were asked to type in the digits
in an open response box. They were then asked to rate the perceived level of
nonunderstanding on the subsequent page.

Because working memory is capacity limited (Miller, 1956), a manipulation
check was conducted with postgraduate students from an Australian University
to ensure that a string of eight numeric digits (compared to a string of four or six
numeric digits) would restrict cognitive resources but not to an extent that it would
deprive participants of the resources necessary to attend to the communicative
exchanges. The results of the manipulation check conﬁrmed such a hypothesis. In
total, the auditory readback task required participants to listen and respond to 34
communicative exchanges presented in randomized order: 2 practice items and 32
communicative exchanges.

Procedure

The participants were invited to take part in the study either by E-mail to oper-
ators within the New Zealand power generation company or through an online
advertisement published in a major US power generation magazine. Through both
sources, participants were directed to the domain address where they were able
to access the study. They completed a number of brief demographic items that
ascertained their years of experience within the domain as well as the extent to
which they give/receive instructions over the telephone/radio in their position. The
auditory readback task took approximately 20 min to complete.

RESULTS

Data reduction

For the auditory readback task, participants recorded a single rating of their as-
sessment of the receiver’s level of understanding of the instruction for each of
the 32 communicative exchanges along a 7-point Likert scale, from 1 (did not
understand at all) to 7 (understood completely).

Figure 1. (Color online) The visual presentation of the auditory readback task and the numeric digit span recall task.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

Numeric digit span recall task manipulation

523

Immediately prior to rating the receiver’s level of understanding, the numeric digit
span recall task required participants to type in the eight, single digits that were
visible on the screen for the duration of auditory communicative exchange. As the
aim of this task was to restrict participants’ cognitive resources while listening
to the communicative exchange, it was only appropriate to include ratings of
understanding for an exchange where participants made an attempt to recall at least
one of the eight digits. This method was selected as it ensured that participants
were ascribing at least some cognitive resources to the secondary task, rather
than focusing entirely on listening to the communicative exchanges. Of the 28
participants who were asked to respond to a total of 32 response items each, there
were four instances where a participant failed to make an attempt to recall any
of the numeric digits associated with a communicative exchange. Rather than
removing these data points, the grand mean across participants for that particular
auditory variable was substituted.

Native language as a covariate

Prior to testing differences in perceptions of nonunderstanding at a cohort level, it
was important to establish whether participants’ native language inﬂuenced their
responses to the dependent variables. Independent samples t tests were undertaken
with native language as the grouping variable (native language: English, other) and
the aggregated ratings of understanding for each linguistic and prosodic cue as the
dependent variables. As there were no statistically signiﬁcant differences between
native English speakers and nonnative English speakers’ ratings of prosodic and
linguistic cues for levels of understanding (p > .05), native language was not
included as a covariate in subsequent analyses.

Analyses of hypotheses
The data were analyzed using a 2×2×2×2×2 (Communicative Exchange [1, 2]
× Instruction Response Type [full readback, partial readback] × Final Intonation
[rising, falling] × Filler [present, absent] × Interturn Delay [shorter, longer])
within-subjects, repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA). The dependent
variable comprised the ratings of level of understanding attributed to the receiver
on a 7-point Likert scale. As several researchers have shown that Likert scales can
be used effectively as interval data (e.g., Baggaley & Hull, 1983; Cariﬁo & Perla,
2007; Maurer & Pierce, 1998), thus fulﬁlling the assumptions of ANOVA, the use
of a repeated measures ANOVA was appropriate for the analyses undertaken in
this study. Although a factorial analysis was used to reduce the risk of a Type 1
error, planned contrasts were used to assess the hypotheses. See Table 2 for mean
ratings of understanding for each of the 32 conditions.

Communicative exchange was included as a variable in the design of this study
as a manipulation check to ensure that auditory cue use was not contingent on the
semantic content of a particular communicative exchange. Although the two-level
variable of communicative exchange (Exchange 1, Exchange 2) was not formally

Table 2. Mean (standard deviation) ratings of understanding as a function of auditory cue condition

Rising Intonation

Falling Intonation

Filler Present

Filler Absent

Filler Present

Filler Absent

Communicative

Exchange

Instruction

Response Type

n

Shorter
Delay

Longer
Delay

Shorter
Delay

Longer
Delay

Shorter
Delay

Longer
Delay

Shorter
Delay

Longer
Delay

Exchange 1

Exchange 2

Full readback
28 6.56 (0.69) 6.21 (0.96) 6.61 (0.61) 6.73 (0.44) 6.33 (0.82) 6.74 (0.44) 6.61 (0.61) 6.63 (0.62)
Partial readback 28 3.82 (1.63) 3.68 (1.44) 4.21 (1.34) 4.29 (1.36) 4.11 (1.57) 4.07 (1.46) 4.71 (1.49) 4.39 (1.52)
Full readback
28 5.04 (1.55) 5.54 (1.37) 5.75 (1.40) 6.00 (1.02) 5.29 (1.36) 5.36 (1.28) 5.96 (1.00) 5.00 (1.49)
Partial readback 28 3.64 (1.64) 3.43 (1.53) 4.25 (1.69) 3.68 (1.49) 3.86 (1.56) 4.18 (1.36) 4.39 (1.42) 3.96 (1.55)

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

525

predicted to have an effect on ratings of understanding, a main effect was evident,
F (1, 27) = 55.47, p < .001, ηp
2 = 0.67. This indicates that when participants
heard the receiver read back the instruction from the ﬁrst exchange, the receiver
was perceived to have a greater level of understanding of the instruction (M =
5.36, SE = 0.14) in comparison to the readback from the second exchange (M =
4.71, SE = 0.18). Therefore, participants ascribed different levels of understanding
to the receiver, depending upon the semantic content included in each of the two
exchanges.

Based on this main effect, the interactions between communicative exchange
and each of the auditory cues (instruction response type, ﬁnal intonation, ﬁller,
and interturn delay) were examined to establish whether prosodic and linguis-
tic cue use was contingent upon the semantic content of the exchange. While
there was no signiﬁcant interaction between communicative exchange and any
of the prosodic cues: ﬁnal intonation, F (1, 27) = 0.71, p = .405, ηp
2 = 0.03;
ﬁller, F (1, 27) = 0.00, p = .989, ηp
2 = 0.00; nor interturn delay, F (1, 27) =
1.28, p = .268, ηp
2 = 0.05, a statistically signiﬁcant interaction was evident be-
tween communicative exchange and instruction response type, F (1, 27) = 23.34,
2 = 0.46. As these ﬁndings suggest that the importance of instruction
p < .001, ηp
response type during perceptions of nonunderstanding is related to the semantic
content of a communicative exchange, the variable communicative exchange was
included in the analyses relating to H1.

To examine the ﬁrst hypothesis, the statistically signiﬁcant interaction between
communicative exchange and instruction response type was further investigated.
The simple main effects analysis using a Bonferroni adjustment indicated that there
was a statistically signiﬁcant difference for ratings of understanding ascribed to
the use of full and partial readbacks, for both Communicative Exchange 1 (p <
.001) and Communicative Exchange 2 (p < .001; see Figure 2). This suggests
that receivers who responded to an instruction with a full readback were rated as
having a greater level of understanding of the instruction (for both communicative
exchanges: Exchange 1, M = 6.55, SE = 0.09; Exchange 2, M = 5.49, SE = 0.18),
compared to receivers who responded to an instruction with a partial readback (for
both communicative exchanges: Exchange 1, M = 4.16, SE = 0.24; Exchange 2,
M = 3.92, SE = 0.24). While the statistically signiﬁcant interaction suggests that
there is a greater difference in ratings of understanding between full and partial
readbacks for Exchange 1 compared to Exchange 2, a statistically signiﬁcant
difference was recorded between full and partial readbacks for both exchanges,
thereby providing support for H1.

To examine the second set of hypotheses, the interaction between instruction
response type and ﬁnal intonation was investigated further. A statistically sig-
niﬁcant, two-way interaction was evident, F (1, 27) = 13.05, p = .001, ηp
2 =
0.33, suggesting that the inﬂuence of the type of ﬁnal intonation on ratings of
understanding differed for full and partial readback responses (see Figure 3). Sub-
sequent main effects analysis using a Bonferroni adjustment indicated that there
was a statistically signiﬁcant difference in ratings of understanding for the type
of intonation used at the end of partial readback responses (p = .001), where
this effect was not evident for full readback responses (p = .459). This suggests
that partial readbacks that ended with rising intonation attracted a lower mean

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

526

Figure 2. (Color online) This boxplot illustrates the signiﬁcant two-way interaction between
instruction response type and communicative exchange on ratings of understanding. The ﬁrst
and second box clusters display a signiﬁcant simple main effect of instruction response type
for Exchange 1 and Exchange 2 for ratings of understanding. Each box contains the middle
50% of scores for that variable, where the relatively thicker horizontal line within each box
represents the median value. The upper and lower whisker speciﬁes the top and bottom 25% of
scores, respectively, excluding outliers. The short horizontal lines at the end of each whisker
represent the maximum and minimum observation for each variable.

rating of understanding (M = 3.88, SE = 0.25) compared to partial readbacks that
ended with falling intonation (M = 4.21, SE = 0.23), providing support for H2b.
In contrast, regardless of whether a full readback ended with rising (M = 6.05,
SE = 0.12) or falling (M = 5.99, SE = 0.13) intonation, ratings of understanding
did not differ, thereby failing to provide support for H2a.

The third set of hypotheses examined whether the presence of a ﬁller affected
ratings of understanding when contained within a shorter or longer interturn delay
for both full and partial readbacks. To assess these hypotheses, simple main
effects analysis of the three-way interaction was conducted between instructional
response type, ﬁller, and interturn delay using a Bonferroni adjustment, and the
speciﬁc comparisons relating to the hypotheses were inspected. See Table 3 for
the means, standard errors, and p values for the simple main effects analysis. For
readback responses that were preceded by a shorter delay, lower ratings were

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

527

Figure 3. (Color online) This boxplot illustrates the signiﬁcant two-way interaction between
instruction response type and ﬁnal intonation on ratings of understanding. The second box
cluster displays a signiﬁcant simple main effect of intonation within partial readback responses
for ratings of understanding. Each box contains the middle 50% of scores for that variable,
where the relatively thicker horizontal line within each box represents the median value. The
upper and lower whisker speciﬁes the top and bottom 25% of scores, respectively, excluding
outliers. The short horizontal lines at the end of each whisker represent the maximum and
minimum observation for each variable.

ascribed when the receiver used a ﬁller (M = 5.80, SE = 0.14), compared to
statements where no ﬁller was used (M = 6.23, SE = 0.12; p < .001). This
outcome provides support for H3a. For readback responses that were preceded by
a longer delay, the use of a ﬁller did not affect ratings of understanding ascribed
to the part of the speaker (p = .238), thereby failing to provide support for H3b.
See Figure 4 for the pictorial representation of H3a and H3b.
For partial readback responses that were preceded by a shorter delay, the use of
a ﬁller was associated with a lower mean rating of perceived understanding (M =
3.86, SE = 0.27) compared to statements where a ﬁller was not used (M = 4.39,
SE = 0.23; p < .001), thereby providing support for H3c. For partial readback
responses that were preceded by a longer delay, the use of a ﬁller did not affect
ratings of understanding ascribed to the part of the speaker (p = .159), failing to
provide support for H3d. See Figure 5 for the pictorial representation of H3c and
H3d. Overall, ﬁllers were useful during perceptions of understanding when they
preceded both full and partial readbacks, but only when contained within a shorter
interturn delay of 600 ms.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

528

Table 3. Summary of the mean (standard error) ratings of understanding and signiﬁcance
values for the interactions among instruction response type, ﬁller, and interturn delay

Instruction

Response Type

Interturn
Delay

Filler

Present

Absent

Full readback

Partial readback

Shorter
Longer
Shorter
Longer

<.001
.238
<.001
.159
*p = .05. The mean difference is signiﬁcant at this level with Bonferroni adjustments for
multiple comparisons.

5.80 (0.14)
5.96 (0.14)
3.86 (0.27)
3.84 (0.26)

6.23 (0.12)
6.10 (0.11)
4.39 (0.23)
4.08 (0.24)

p

Mean

Difference
−0.432*
−0.128
−0.536*
−0.241

Figure 4. (Color online) This boxplot represents the relationship between interturn delay and
ﬁller contained within full readback responses. The ﬁrst box cluster displays a signiﬁcant
simple main effect for ﬁller on ratings of understanding when contained within a shorter
interturn delay. Each box contains the middle 50% of scores for that variable, where the
relatively thicker horizontal line within each box represents the median value. The upper and
lower whisker speciﬁes the top and bottom 25% of scores, respectively, excluding outliers.
The short horizontal lines at the end of each whisker represent the maximum and minimum
observation for each variable.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

529

Figure 5. (Color online) This boxplot represents the relationship between interturn delay and
ﬁller contained within partial readback responses. The ﬁrst box cluster displays a signiﬁcant
simple main effect for ﬁller on ratings of understanding when contained within a shorter
interturn delay. Each box contains the middle 50% of scores for that variable, where the
relatively thicker horizontal line within each box represents the median value. The upper and
lower whisker speciﬁes the top and bottom 25% of scores, respectively, excluding outliers.
The short horizontal lines at the end of each whisker represent the maximum and minimum
observation for each variable.

For the fourth set of hypotheses, the simple main effects analysis of the three-
way interaction between instruction response type, ﬁller, and interturn delay was
also inspected, using a Bonferroni adjustment for multiple comparisons. The
two-way interaction between instruction response type and interturn delay was
not examined as “delay” would be collapsed across the different levels of the
variable ﬁller, introducing a potential confound as the ﬁllers were preceded by
different durations of silence. There was no statistically signiﬁcant difference in
ratings of understanding when a longer interturn delay preceded a full readback
(M = 6.23, SE = 0.12), compared to a shorter interturn delay that preceded a full
readback (M = 6.09, SE = –0.11), p = .080, thereby failing to provide support for
H4a. In contrast, when a longer interturn delay preceded a partial readback, the
receiver was rated with a relatively lower level of understanding of the instruction
(M = 4.39, SE = 0.23), compared to a shorter interturn delay preceded a partial
readback (M= 4.08, SE= 0.24; p= .033). This outcome provides support for H4b.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

530

DISCUSSION

Summary of ﬁndings

The overall aim of the present study was to investigate the role of linguistic
(namely, a full or partial readback) and prosodic (namely, ﬁnal intonation, ﬁller,
and interturn delay) cues in hydroelectric power generation operators’ perceptions
of nonunderstanding in simulated readbacks/hearback exchanges. Consistent with
H1, the amount of linguistic information contained within an instruction response
was associated with a receiver’s perceived state of understanding. Speciﬁcally,
when a response contained a full readback, operators perceived a greater level of
understanding on the part of the receiver compared to an instruction with a partial
readback.

An interaction between communicative exchange and instruction response type
highlighted that the difference in assessments for full and partial readbacks was
greater when participants listened to the ﬁrst, compared to the second commu-
nicative exchange. This suggests that the weight that a listener placed on the
type of response depended upon the semantic content of the exchange. The im-
portance of semantic information during perceptions of nonunderstanding was
also highlighted by the different ratings that participants ascribed to the two
different semantic exchanges. This suggests that, controlling for all other lin-
guistic and prosodic variables, operators perceived the speakers to have differ-
ent levels of understanding of the instruction, based on semantic content of the
exchange.

In ﬁnal intonation, it appeared only perceptually relevant when heard at the end
of partial readback responses (H2b). Speciﬁcally, when listeners heard speakers
use rising intonation at the end of a partial readback response, listeners perceived
that speakers held a lesser level of understanding of the instruction, compared to
the use of a falling intonation. This effect of intonation was not evident for full
readback responses, failing to provide support for H2a.

The utility of a ﬁller as a prosodic cue was evident during perceptions of
nonunderstanding when preceding both a full and a partial readback. However, it
was only salient to listeners when contained within the shorter (600 ms) rather than
longer (1200 ms) interturn delay. This pattern of results provides support for H3a
and H3c, respectively. Because a ﬁller did not affect perceptions of understanding
when contained within the longer delay for either full or partial readbacks, no
support was evident for H3b and H3d, respectively.

Interturn delay was only perceived as useful during assessments of understand-
ing when exchanges contained partial readbacks. Speciﬁcally, a lower level of
understanding was associated with a partial readback preceded by the longer in-
terturn delay, in comparison to the shorter delay (consistent with H4b). No effect
was evident for interturn delay when it preceded a full readback (inconsistent with
H4a). See Table 4 for a summary of ﬁndings.

Salience of auditory cues during perceptions of nonunderstanding

Overall, the pattern of results from this study suggest that not all auditory cues
are assigned the same level of importance when listeners are making judgments

Table 4. Summary of results with accompanying hypotheses

Linguistic

Cues

Full readback

Partial readback

Hypotheses

H1
H2a
H3a
H3c
H4a
H1
H2b
H3b
H3d
H4b

Auditory Cues

Semantic Cues

Prosodic Cues

Exchange 1

Exchange 2

Rising

Intonation

Falling

Intonation

600 ms
Filled

600 ms
Unﬁlled

1200 ms
Filled

1200 ms
Unﬁlled

✔a

✔a

✔b

✔b

✗

✔

✗

✔

✔

✔

✔

✗

✔

✔

✗

✗

✗
✗

✗
✔

Note: The presence of two adjacent checkmarks indicates that the mean difference between the two variables was signiﬁcant and therefore provided
support for the corresponding hypothesis. The presence of two adjacent cross symbols indicates that the mean difference between the two variables
was not signiﬁcant and therefore did not support the corresponding hypothesis. For H1 only, the checkmarks with corresponding subscripts represent
the mean differences being compared.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

532

about speakers’ levels of understanding. In some circumstances, it was only in the
absence of one cue that the presence of another cue became perceptually important
to listeners. In other circumstances, the presence of one cue enhanced the salience
attributed to another cue when judging a speaker’s state of understanding.

Three key ﬁndings point to a potential hierarchy of auditory cues used during
perceptions of nonunderstanding in the context of readbacks. First, the importance
ascribed to the type of instruction response (full or partial readback) on ratings
of understanding was greater for the semantic content of Exchange 1 compared
to Exchange 2. This suggests that listeners take into consideration the semantic
content of the exchange before relying on the type of readback response to make
judgments of understanding.

Second, ﬁnal intonation and interturn delay only became perceptually relevant
to listeners when there was relatively less linguistic content evident in the readback
response. This suggests that listeners rely more heavily on the linguistic content of
a readback response over prosodic cues, and it is only in the absence of such rich
content (i.e., during a partial readback response) that the prosodic cues of ﬁnal
intonation and interturn delay are engaged in assessments of nonunderstanding.

Third, although a ﬁller was an important prosodic cue during both full and
partial readbacks, it was only employed when the delay was relatively short
between speakers. For example, a ﬁller was only perceptually relevant when
contained within shorter (600 ms) delays preceding both full and partial readbacks.
During longer delays, the importance of a ﬁller as an indicator of a speaker’s
understanding diminished. Not only is this indicative of a hierarchy, but it also
suggests that the basis for this hierarchy may be the perception of a potential cause
of a nonunderstanding where a ﬁller (in the absence of delay) signals something
about the cognitive state of a speaker (such as speech planning; Clark & Fox Tree,
2002) whereas the use of a delay suggests something more problematic in relation
to a speaker’s state of understanding.

The notion that listeners ascribe different diagnostic values to auditory cues
when assessing speakers’ levels of understanding is not particularly surprising.
For instance, Brennan and Williams’ (1995) investigation into perceptions of
uncertainty within a “trivia” game setting hinted at a particular preference to
place greater weight on interturn delay, when a speaker’s response ended in
falling, rather than the more salient, rising intonation (Experiment 2). Of particular
interest in the present study was how the semantic content of the communicative
exchanges inﬂuenced perceptions of understanding. The notion that semantic con-
tent inﬂuences perceptions of understanding is not surprising, but it was primarily
intended as a manipulation check. This decision was based on the relatively con-
sistent ratings across the two communicative exchanges in Auton et al. (2013),
but it could simply be that these exchanges were more semantically homogeneous
than the exchanges incorporated in the present study.

In considering the semantic content in future research, one element that might
be considered is the complexity of the tasks requested by the sender. In their
examination of over 50 hr of air trafﬁc control and pilot exchanges from ﬁve
airports in the United States, Prinzo et al. (2006) noted that, as the complexity
and message length of controller’s instruction increased, so did the frequency of
readback errors made by pilots. The instruction contained within the ﬁrst exchange

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

533

in this study was more complex (based on the number of elements it contained;
Prinzo et al., 2006) compared to the instruction within the second exchange,
which may have led listeners to perceive that speakers were less likely to have
understood an instruction that was more complex when there was no linguistic
evidence to conﬁrm understanding. Although it is important to note that there was
no relationship between semantic content and prosodic cues in this study, future
research will need to consider this relationship more closely.

Implications for practice

One of the notable ﬁndings of this study was how the amount linguistic information
contained within a readback response was used to establish common ground. This
suggests that in practice, operators who have heard an instruction correctly but
who fail to understand it have the capacity to conceal their lack of understanding
through the use of an accurate readback. Nevertheless, replacing the full readback
requirement with an acknowledgment (such as afﬁrmative) is not necessarily the
solution to curtail the potential for concealed nonunderstandings during radio
communication.

The readback requirement is critical insofar as it provides the sender with
an opportunity to monitor the accuracy of a receiver’s readback, thereby reducing
errors of mishearing (Schneider et al., 2004). Moreover, a partial readback response
in lieu of a full readback does not necessarily denote a lack of understanding on
the part of the receiver. It may occur for other reasons, such as elevated workload
or a time constraint (Cushing, 1994). Therefore, the outcomes of the present
study simply suggest that operators should not rely solely on a full readback as
evidence of a receiver’s understanding during the grounding process. Operators
could be trained to consider both an accurate readback and the speciﬁc prosodic
cues contained with a readback when judging a receiver’s state of understanding,
particularly during high-risk maneuvers.

Consistent with previous research in the context of uncertainty (Brennan &
Williams, 1995), prosodic cues differed in their association with perceptions of
nonunderstanding. Speciﬁcally, shorter ﬁlled delays inﬂuenced perceptions of
nonunderstanding during full readback responses, while ﬁnal intonation, shorter
ﬁlled delays, and unﬁlled delays inﬂuenced perceptions of nonunderstanding
during partial readback responses. These results are not entirely consistent with
Auton et al. (2013), who found that, during full readback responses, both ﬁnal
intonation and ﬁlled delays (both shorter and longer) were used by operators to
gauge a receiver’s level of understanding. This discrepancy could be accounted
for by slight methodological variations between the two studies.

In the present study, operators were asked to make judgments of understanding
on both full and partial readbacks, whereas Auton et al. (2013) only presented full
readbacks to participants. As a result, the participants in Auton et al. were assessing
responses that did not vary in the amount of linguistic information available, nor
did they have full readbacks to contrast against partial readbacks. This prevented
any investigation as to whether the use of prosodic cues differed according to
the amount of linguistic information available. The results of the present study
suggest that participants use ﬁnal intonation and interturn delay as an important

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

534

cue during perceptions of understanding, but only when linguistic information
from a full readback is unavailable.

Although Auton et al. (2013) reported that the duration of the interturn delay
between speakers is not a useful prosodic cue for operators during perceptions
of nonunderstanding during full readback responses, interturn delay was included
in the present study to investigate whether it became useful to operators within
a different domain and/or when the linguistic information of a full readback was
unavailable. Consistent with Auton et al., the results demonstrate that the length of
interturn delay that preceded a full readback did not affect ratings of understanding
on the part of the speaker.

It was evident that interturn delay was a salient cue to operators when it preceded
a partial readback response, suggesting a propensity to use this cue in the absence
of any linguistic evidence of understanding. This pattern of results for interturn
delay is not entirely consistent with the communicative literature that suggests a
delay of 1 s, sometimes less, is perceived as signalling difﬁculties in everyday
social communications (Davidson, 1984; Jefferson, 1989, Kendrick & Torreira,
2015; Roberts & Francis, 2013; Roberts et al., 2006). The outcomes suggest that
the tolerance for delay in operational contexts is greater when there is linguistic
evidence of understanding (i.e., the presence of a full readback). However, when
this evidence is absent (i.e., during partial readbacks), an interturn delay duration
of over 1 s becomes indicative of trouble in communication, which is consistent
with the threshold of delay in everyday social communicative exchanges.

Limitations and future research

There were three main limitations in this study. First, perceptions of nonunder-
standing were not made by a participant within the communicative exchange,
but rather, by a third-party participant listening to the exchange. This process is
distinct from actual operational communication, where the sender is responsible
for speaking when issuing instructions to the receiver, in addition to monitor-
ing the readback for accuracy. There is evidence to suggest that the cognitive
demands inherent in speaking can contribute to speakers overestimating their
communication effectiveness (Keysar & Henly, 2002). This suggests that real-life
senders may be less likely to perceive a communication error should this occur
within the operational context.

To control for cognitive demands, participants in the present study were asked
to retain a series of eight numeric digits in memory while listening to each ex-
change. Although future research is needed to establish whether perceptions of
nonunderstandings differ between operators involved in an exchange and third-
party listeners, the outcomes demonstrated that, under the cognitive load imposed
by a secondary task, instruction response type, ﬁnal intonation, ﬁller, and inter-
turn delay constitute important auditory cues attended to by hydroelectric power
generation operators to gauge a receiver’s level of understanding during responses
to instructions.

Second, there was no investigation as to whether linguistic and prosodic cues
incorporated within an instruction response were sufﬁciently salient to moti-
vate operators to ensure that the instruction had been properly understood. It is

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

535

important for future research to establish the practical relevance of these audi-
tory cues to determine whether these critical semantic, linguistic, and prosodic
cues inﬂuence not only operators’ perceptions of nonunderstanding on the part of
the receiver but also their behavior subsequent to the receipt of such information
(such as clarifying the instruction). Considering the relatively small effect sizes
obtained in this study, it may be that the receipt of a readback response must
contain a combination of critical cues (such as a partial readback, preceded by
a ﬁller, and ending in rising intonation) rather than a singular cue, to have any
practical signiﬁcance to operators during real-life experiences. The outcomes of
such research could help inform tailored, cue-based learning approaches to assist
the recognition of nonunderstandings on the part of the sender, thereby improving
performance at the operational level.

Learning approaches that have focused on the training of critical cues have been
successful in improving cue detection in a variety of industries, including aviation
(Wiggins & O’Hare, 2003), sport (Smeeton, Williams, Hodges, & Ward, 2005),
organizational settings (Gary & Wood, 2011), and general medicine (Litchﬁeld,
Ball, Donovan, Manning, & Crawford, 2010). The results arising from the present
study might provide a framework to direct the development of a cue-based learning
approach in the auditory domain.

Third, there were two methodological limitations present in this study. The
ﬁrst is that while the 32 communicative exchanges were presented to participants
in a randomized order, due to limitations inherent within the software used to
conduct this research, the order was the same for each participant. Although
Auton et al. (2013) noted the same limitation, it may be that a potential learning
effect inﬂuenced ratings of understanding as the study progressed. The second
methodological limitation was the relatively small (n= 28) sample size. A strength
of this study was the use of actual domain operators within hydroelectric power
generation, but the sample size potentially limits the generalizability of the ﬁndings
within or across domains. It also raises the possibility that the importance of, or
between, auditory cues on perceptions of nonunderstanding went undetected, or
that some spurious ﬁndings were detected. These concerns should be addressed
with a larger operational sample in future studies.

The outcomes of this study were important insofar as they identiﬁed auditory
cues that could potentially improve the recognition of nonunderstandings in the
context of readback responses. It is unclear, however, whether operators could
use the same cues to detect instances of misunderstanding that also frequently
occur within technical environments (Billings & Reynard, 1981; Morrow et al.,
1994). Within the domain of aviation, for example, Jones (2003) suggests that
all runway incursions are evidence of misunderstandings, with more than 300
occurrences each year in the United States. Therefore, future research should
address the cues associated with the identiﬁcation of misunderstandings during
readback exchanges.

Conclusion

Using an international sample of hydroelectric power generation operators, it was
established that a shorter ﬁlled delay preceding a full readback response, and a

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

536

shorter ﬁlled delay, ﬁnal intonation, and interturn delay, when contained within
partial readback responses, are important prosodic cues used during perceptions
of nonunderstanding. The semantic content of the communicative exchange also
affected perceptions of nonunderstanding and inﬂuenced the extent to which a
full or partial readback response affected ratings of nonunderstanding. The out-
comes of this study have implications for training and system design in technical
environments.

REFERENCES
Air Accidents Investigation Branch. (2008). Boeing 737-500, SP-LKA (Report No. EW/C2007/06/02).
Retrieved from http://www.aaib.gov.uk/publications/bulletins/june_2008/boeing_737_500__
sp_lka.cfm

Australian Transport Safety Bureau. (2007). Radiotelephony readback compliance and its relationship
to surface movement control frequency congestion (Investigation Report No. B2006/0053).
Retrieved from http://www.atsb.gov.au/media/29962/b20060053.pdf

Auton, J. C., Wiggins, M. W., Searle, B. J., Loveday, T., & Xu Rattanasone, N. (2013). Prosodic cues
used during perceptions of nonunderstandings in radio communication. Journal of Communi-
cation, 63, 600–616. doi:10.1111/jcom.12033

Baggaley, A. R., & Hull, A. L. (1983). The effect of nonlinear transformation on a Likert scale.

Evaluation & Health Professions, 6, 483–491.

Barshi, I., & Farris, C. (2013). Misunderstandings in ATC communication: Lanugage, cognition, and

experimental methodolgy. Burlington, VT: Ashgate.

Billings, C. E., & Cheaney, E. S. (1981). The information transfer problem: Summary and comments.
In C. E. Billings & E. S. Cheaney (Eds.), Information transfer problems in the aviation system
(Report No. NASA TP-1875). Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administra-
tion.

Billings, C. E., & Reynard, W. D. (1981). Dimensions of the information transfer problem. In
C. E. Billings & E. S. Cheaney (Eds.), Information transfer problems in the aviation system
(Report No. NASA TP-1875). Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administra-
tion.

Bolinger, D. (1985). Intonation and its parts. London: Edward Arnold.
Brennan, S. E., & Williams, M. (1995). The feeling of another’s knowing: Prosody and ﬁlled pauses as
cues to listeners about the metacognitive states of speakers. Journal of Memory and Language,
34, 383–398. doi:10.1006/jmla.1995.1017

Cardosi, K. M. (1993). An analysis of en route controller–pilot voice communications (Report No.
DOT/FAA/RD-93/11). Washington, DC: Research and Development Administration Trans-
portation Systems Center.

Cariﬁo, J., & Perla, R. J. (2007). Ten common misunderstandings, misconceptions, persistent myths
and urban legends about Likert scales and Likert response formats and their antidotes. Journal
of Social Sciences, 3, 106–116. doi:10.3844/jssp.2007.106.116

Chiang, H.-Y., & Pepper, G. A. (2006). Barriers to nurses’ reporting of medication administra-
tion errors in Taiwan. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 38, 392–399. doi:10.1111/j.1547-
5069.2006.00133.x

Clark, H. H. (1994). Managing problems in speaking. Speech Communication, 15, 243–250.

doi:10.1016/0167-6393(94)90075-2

Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine,
& S. D. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 127–149). Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.

Clark, H. H., & Fox Tree, J. E. (2002). Using uh and um in spontaneous speaking. Cognition, 84,

73–111. doi:10.1016/S0010-0277(02)00017-3

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

537

Clark, H. H., & Schaefer, E. F. (1987). Collaborating on contributions to conversations. Language and

Cognitive Processes, 2, 19–41. doi:10.1080/01690968708406350

Clark, H. H., & Schaefer, E. F. (1989). Contributing to discourse. Cognitive Science, 13, 259–294.

doi:10.1207/s15516709cog1302_7

Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1–39.

doi:10.1016/0010-0277(86)90010-7

Coderre, S., Mandin, H., Harasym, P. H., & Fick, G. H. (2003). Diagnostic reasoning strategies and
diagnostic success. Medical Education, 37, 695–703. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2923.2003.01577.x
Cruttenden, A. (1981). Falls and rises: Meanings and universals. Journal of Linguistics, 17, 77–91.

doi:10.1017/S0022226700006782

Cushing, S. (1994). Fatal words: Communication clashes and aircraft crashes. Chicago: University of

Chicago Press.

Cushing, S. (1995). Pilot–air trafﬁc control communications: It’s not (only) what you say, it’s how you

say it. Flight Safety Digeset, 14, 1–10.

Dascal, M., & Berenstein, I. (1987). Two modes of understanding: Comprehending and grasping.

Language and Communication, 7, 139–151. doi:10.1016/0271-5309(87)90004-8

Davidson, J. (1984). Subsequent versions of invitations, offers, requests, and proposals dealing with
potential or actual rejection. In J. M. Atkinson & J. Heritage (Eds.), Structures of social action:
Studies in conversation analysis (pp. 102–128). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Denes, P., & Milton-William, J. (1962). Further studies in intonation. Language and Speech, 5, 1–14.

doi:10.1177/002383096200500101

Drummond, K., & Hopper, R. (1991). Misunderstanding and its remedies: Telephone miscommuni-
cation. In N. Coupland, H. Giles, & J. Wiemann (Eds.), “Miscomunication” and problematic
talk (pp. 301–314). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Fay, N., Page, A. C., & Serfaty, C. (2010). Listeners inﬂuence speakers’ perceived communica-
tion effectiveness. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 689–692. doi:10.1016/
j.jesp.2010.02.012

Federal Aviation Administration. (2014). Aeronautical

information manual. Washington, DC:
Government Printing Ofﬁce. Retrieved from http://www.faa.gov/air_trafﬁc/publications/
atpubs/aim/index.htm

Federal Aviation Administration. (2015). Air trafﬁc organization policy (Report No. JO 7110.65W).

Retrieved from https://www.faa.gov/documentLibrary/media/Order/ATC.pdf

Gary, M. S., & Wood, R. E. (2011). Mental models, decision rules and performance heterogeneity.

Strategic Management Journal, 594, 569–594. doi:10.1002/smj.899

Goldman-Eisler, F. (1961). A comparative study of two hesitation phenomena. Language and Speech,

4, 18–26. doi:10.1177/002383096100400102

Greenberg, C. C., Regenbogen, S. E., Studdert, D. M., Lipsitz, S. R., Rogers, S. O., Zinner, M. J.,
& Gawande, A. A. (2007). Patterns of communication breakdowns resulting in injury to
surgical patients. Journal of the American College of Surgeons, 204, 533–540. doi:10.1016/j.
jamcollsurg.2007.01.010

Hirst, G., McRoy, S., Heeman, P., Edmonds, P., & Horton, D. (1994). Repairing conversational mis-
understandings and non-understandings. Speech Communication, 15, 213–229. doi:10.1016/
0167-6393(94)90073-6

Hunter, M. (2004). The music is the message: Prosody in aviation discourse. In M. A. Turney (Ed.),
Tapping diverse talent in aviation: Culture, gender, and diversity (pp. 129–151). Hampshire:
Ashgate.

International Civil Aviation Organization. (2007). Manual of radiotelephony (Report No. Doc 9432
AN/925). Retreived from http://www.aeroclubvercelli.it/download/Manual%20of%20RT%
20DOC%209432%20-%204%20ed.%202007.pdf

Jefferson, G. (1989). Preliminary notes on a possible metric which provides for a “standard maximum”
silence of approximately one second in conversation. In D. Roger & P. Bull (Eds.), Conversa-
tion: An interdisciplinary perspective (pp. 166–196). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

538

Jones, R. K. (2003). Miscommunication between pilots and air trafﬁc control. Language Problems and

Language Planning, 27, 233–248. doi:10.1075/lplp.27.3.03jon

Kanki, B. G., & Smith, G. M. (2001). Training aviation communication skills. In E. Salas, C. A. Bow-
ers, & E. Edens (Eds.), Improving teamwork in organizations (pp. 31–54). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.

Kendrick, K. H., & Torreira, F. (2015). The timing and construction of preference: A quantitative

study. Discourse Processes, 52, 255–289. doi:10.1080/0163853X.2014.955997

Keysar, B., & Henly, A. S. (2002). Speakers’ overestimation of their effectiveness. Psychological

Science, 13, 207–212. doi:10.1111/1467-9280.00439

Kim, H. (2002). The form and function of next-turn repetition in English conversation. Language

Research, 38, 51–81.

Kim, S., Park, J., Han, S., & Kim, H. (2010). Development of extended speech act coding scheme
to observe communication characteristics of human operators of nuclear power plants under
abnormal conditions. Journal of Loss Prevention in the Process Industries, 23, 539–548.
doi:10.1016/j.jlp.2010.04.005

Litchﬁeld, D., Ball, L. J., Donovan, T., Manning, D. J., & Crawford, T. (2010). Viewing another person’s
eye movements improves identiﬁcation of pulmonary nodules in chest x-ray inspection. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 16, 251–262. doi:10.1037/a0020082

Maurer, T. J., & Pierce, H. R. (1998). A comparison of Likert scale and traditional measures of

self-efﬁcacy. Journal of Applied Psychology, 83, 324–329.

Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity for

processing information. Psychological Review, 63, 81–97. doi:10.1037/h0043158

Morrow, D., Lee, A., & Rodvold, M. (1993). Analysis of problems in routine controller–pilot
communication. International Journal of Aviation Psychology, 3, 285–302. doi:10.1207/
s15327108ijap0304_3

Morrow, D., Rodvold, M., & Lee, A. (1994). Nonroutine transactions in controller–pilot communica-

tion. Discourse Processes, 17, 235–258. doi:10.1080/01638539409544868

Nevile, M., & Walker, M. B. (2005). Analysis of crew conversations provides for accident investigation.

Flight Safety Digest, 24, 1–32.

Norrick, N. (1987). Functions of repetition in conversation. Text, 7, 245–264.
Nygaard, L. C., Herold, D. S., & Namy, L. L. (2009). The semantics of prosody: Acoustic and
perceptual evidence of prosodic correlates to word meaning. Cognitive Science, 33, 127–146.
doi:10.1111/j.1551-6709.2008.01007.x

O’Connor, J. D., & Arnold, G. F. (1961). Intonation of colloquial English. London: Longman.
Orasanu, J., & Connolly, T. (1993). The reinvention of decision making. In G. A. Klein, J. Orasanu,
R. Calderwood, & C. E. Zsambok (Eds.), Decision making in action: Models and methods (pp.
3–20). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Prabhakar, H., Cooper, J. B., Sabel, A., Weckbach, S., Mehler, P. S., & Stahel, P. F. (2012). Introducing
standardized “readbacks” to improve patient safety in surgery: A prospective survey in 92
providers at a public safety-net hospital. BMC Surgery, 12, 1–8. doi:10.1186/1471-2482-12-8
Prinzo, O. V., & Britton, T. W. (1993). ATC/pilot voice communications: A survey of the literature

(Report No. DOT/FAA/AM-93/20). Washington, DC: Ofﬁce of Aviation Medicine.

Prinzo, O. V., Hendrix, A. M., & Hendrix, R. (2006). The outcome of ATC message complexity on pilot
readback performance (Report No. DOT/FAA/AM-06/25). Oklahoma City, OK: FAA Civil
Aerospace Medical Institute.

Roberts, F., & Francis, A. L. (2013). Identifying a temporal threshold of tolerance for silent
gaps after requests. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 133, EL471–EL477.
doi:10.1121/1.4802900

Roberts, F., Francis, A. L., & Morgan, M. (2006). The interaction of inter-turn silence with prosodic
cues in listener perceptions of “trouble” in conversation. Speech Communication, 48, 1079–
1093. doi:10.1016/j.specom.2006.02.001

Applied Psycholinguistics 38:3
Auton et al.: Auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstandings

539

Roberts, F., Margutti, P., & Takano, S. (2011). Judgments concerning the valence of inter-turn silence
across speakers of American English, Italian, and Japanese. Discourse Processes, 48, 331–354.
doi:10.1080/0163853X.2011.558002

Robinson, J. D. (2013). Epistemics, action formation, and other-initiation of repair: The case of partial
questioning repeats. In M. Hayashi, G. Raymond, & J. Sidnell (Eds.), Conversational repair
and human understanding (pp. 261–292). New York: Cambridge University Press.

Schegloff, E. A. (1987). Recycled turn beginnings: A precise repair mechanism in conversation’s
turn-taking organisation. In G. Button & J. R. E. Lee (Eds.), Talk and social organisation
(pp. 70–85). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.

Schegloff, E. A. (1997). Practice and actions: Boundary cases of other-initiated repairs. Discourse

Processes, 23, 499–545. doi:10.1080/01638539709545001

Schegloff, E. A. (2000). When “others” initiate repair. Applied Linguistics, 21, 205–243. doi:10.1093/

applin/21.2.205

Schegloff, E. A. (2007). Sequence organization in interaction: A primer in conversation analysis. New

York: Cambridge University Press.

Schegloff, E. A., Jefferson, G., & Sacks, H. (1977). The preference for self-correction in the organiza-

tion of repair in conversation. Language, 53, 361–382. doi:10.1353/lan.1977.0041

Schneider, V. I., Healy, A. F., & Barshi, I. (2004). Effects of instruction modality and readback on
accuracy in following navigation commands. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied,
10, 245–257. doi:10.1037/1076-898X.10.4.245

Shimojima, A., Katagiri, Y., Koiso, H., & Swerts, M. (2002). Informational and dialogue-coordinating
functions of prosodic features of Japanese echoic responses. Speech Communication, 36, 113–
132. doi:10.1016/S0167-6393(01)00029-2

Skantze, G. (2005). Exploring human error recovery strategies: Implications for spoken dialogue

systems. Speech Communication, 45, 325–341. doi:10.1016/j.specom.2004.11.005

Smeeton, N. J., Williams, A. M., Hodges, N. J., & Ward, P. (2005). The relative effectiveness of various
instructional approaches in developing anticipation skill. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 11, 98–110. doi:10.1037/1076-898X.11.2.98

Soskin, W. F. (1953). Symposium: Communication in the counselling situation. American Psychologist,

8, 272.

Streitenberger, K., Breen-Reid, K., & Harris, C. (2006). Handoffs in care—Can we make them safer?
Pediatric Clinics of North Americalinics of North America, 53, 1185–1195. doi:10.1016/
j.pcl.2006.09.010

Sweller, J. (1988). Cognitive load during problem solving: Effects on learning. Cognitive Science, 12,

257–285. doi:10.1016/0364-0213(88)90023-7

Tannen, D. (l987). Repetition in conversation: Toward a poetics of talk. Language, 63, 574–605.
Weigand, E. (1999). Misunderstanding: The standard case. Journal of Pragmatics, 31, 763–785.

doi:10.1016/S0378-2166(98)00068-X

Wiggins, M. W., & O’Hare, D. (2003). Weatherwise: Evaluation of a cue-based training approach for
the recognition of deteriorating weather conditions during ﬂight. Human Factors, 45, 337–345.
doi:10.1518/hfes.45.2.337.27246


