
Visibility of stimulus components may be enhanced or diminished
by the presence of adjacent stimulus elements.  Such eﬀects are evident
with high-contrast lateral masks [1], metacontrast with zero stimulus
onset asynchrony [2], and crowding of peripheral targets [3].  Contextual eﬀects on perceptual capacities may reﬂect neural interactions
among representations of targets and lateral masks. 
At a neural
level, response properties of cortical neurons are
modulated by the context in which stimuli are placed [4–6].  In primates
and cats, systematic relationships exist among the orientation preference of neurons.  Such connections may contribute to a system of
enhancement and inhibition of signals based upon contextual eﬀects
from other cortical sites [7,8].  In rodents, the distribution of orientation
preference is not systematic [9,10], nor do lateral projections display
the periodic patches found in primates and cats [11].  These distinctions
in cortical organization suggest that lateral interactions among stimulus
elements may operate diﬀerently in rats than in primates and cats. 
At a perceptual level, the ability of rats to discriminate the presence
or absence of targets declined when target onset was accompanied by
ﬂankers [12].  In addition, misses as well as false alarms increased when
ﬂankers were collinear to targets, compared to ﬂankers that deviated
from collinearity.  Such eﬀects on detecting suprathreshold stimuli were
observed across a range of contrasts of both targets and ﬂankers [13]. 
For humans, contrast thresholds are elevated in the presence of
collinear, co-axial Gabor patches positioned near test stimuli (within 2
cycles), whereas thresholds decrease with adjacent elements positions
within a farther zone (approximately 3–10 cycles) [14].  Flanker eﬀects
appear to be restricted to near foveal viewing [15,16] to which attention is directed [17,16], and are not observed at suprathreshold levels
[15].  Flanker eﬀects may reﬂect a system for contour integration
mediated by short- and long-range interactions within neural populations [18]. 
The functional signiﬁcance of connection patterns in local cortical
circuits may be distinguished across species [19].  In order to explore
lateral masking on detection thresholds in rats, responses to target onset
were measured across luminance contrast for targets presented alone,
or in the presence of masks. 
<Middle> Methods. 
2. 1.  Subjects
Ten Long-Evans hooded rats served as subjects, each randomly assigned to one or more stimulus conditions.  Animals were deprived of
water for 22 h before each session, and allowed water ad lib for one
hour following sessions.  Sessions occurred ﬁve days each week, and
animals were allowed water ad lib on the remaining two days.  This
⁎ Corresponding author at: Psychology Department, Brooklyn College CUNY, 2900 Bedford Avenue, Brooklyn, NY, United States. 
E-mail address: dkurylo@brooklyn. cuny. edu (D. D.  Kurylo). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 07. 046
Received 2 April 2017; Received in revised form 11 July 2017; Accepted 29 July 2017
Available online 05 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
D. D.  Kurylo Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 1–7
Fig.  1.  A.  Top view displaying geometry of test chamber.  Test stimuli (Gabor patches) appeared on the monitor, subtending a visual angle of either 5. 9° or 14. 0°.  B.  Trial events and
reaction time measurements.  Dotted lines represent variable ranges of events.  Test stimulus onset relative to initial nose-poke occurred with a randomly chosen latency, ranging from 500
to 2000 ms. 
study was conducted in accordance with the National Institutes of
Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, and approved
by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Brooklyn
College. 
2. 2.  Apparatus
Behavioral measurements were made in a customized operant
conditioning chamber (Fig.  1A).  The front panel of the chamber supported a metal funnel that extended 3 cm outside of the chamber.  Animals had access to the funnel through a 5 cm diameter hole, centered
2. 