
In humans exposure to stressful conditions can result in debilitating
mental disorders with altered memory performances [1–3].  Response to
stress is complex and includes avoidance of contexts and cues associated with the stressor.  This avoidance behavior is mainly due to development of fear memory.  In addition to the development of fear
memory, which is often strong and persistent, there could be impairment of other forms of memories, along with the development of anxiety and depression as well as physiological changes.  While acute
stress and its neurological eﬀects were the focus of several studies,
chronic stress can also disrupt memory performance and change hippocampal cell structure and function [4,5].  Interestingly chronic stress
results in remarkable variability in memory performances [6–8] indicating multiple factors may be involved in modulation of memory
with chronic stress.  However, little is known about these factors and
especially their relationship with molecular and physiological processes
that modulate memory. 
Strength of the stress is a major factor that is positively correlated toin strong adverse psychobiological
the stress responses.  Traumatic stress such as exposure to predators canin rodents. 
Furthermore, exposure to predators [9] better mimic the life threatening stress that is often associated with human stress related psychiatric conditions such as PTSD.  Especially ethological relevance and
potency of predator exposure is believed to be a highly relevant approach for developing an intense, psychological response in rodents [9]. 
Chronic traumatic stress also has high human health relevance as many
stressors like childhood abuse, sexual abuse or domestic violence can
often be continual in nature.  Despite this relevance preclinical research
on chronic traumatic stress is scant and the propensity of chronic predator stress to develop defective memory performance is not well studied. 
The hippocampus located in the medial temporal lobe of the brain is
crucial for formation of memories [10,11].  Patients with stress disorders tend to have lower hippocampal volume and impaired hippocampus dependent memories [12–15].  In addition to neurotransmitter
receptors, such as cholinergic receptors, that are involved in the molecular mechanisms of memory encoding,the neurons
⁎ Corresponding author.  Department of Biological and Environmental Science, Texas A & M University−Commerce, Commerce, TX, Tel. :+ 903 468 8648,
E-mail address: kparameshwaran@tamuc. edu (K.  Parameshwaran). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 013
Received 8 June 2017; Received in revised form 24 July 2017; Accepted 5 August 2017
Available online 08 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
A.  Bhakta Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 32–40
hippocampus also express receptors for stress hormones and inﬂammatory mediators [16–19].  The inﬂammatory and stress responses
mediated by these receptors are often disruptive to memory.  Elevated
inﬂammatory and immunological responses in the hippocampus are
also associated with certain stress disorders [20–24].  Furthermore, increased levels of stress hormones and inﬂammatory mediators are also
known to cause cell death in the hippocampus and other brain regions
[25–30].  These ﬁndings
stress hormones and inﬂammatory mediators in the hippocampus may play a crucial role in
stress induced memory deﬁcits.  In addition to increased inﬂammatory
responses, alterations of neurotrophins are also strongly correlated with
the pathophysiology of stress [31–33].  The stress related and inﬂammation associated cellular processes associated with decreased
memory are not fully understood.  Therefore, in this present study we
utilized the rat-mouse predator-prey relationship [34] in order to
analyze the chronic traumatic stress exposure induced behavioral and
molecular changes in mice. 
indicate that
<Middle> Materials and methods. 
2. 1.  Animals and stress procedure
Male C57BL/B6 mice (1 month old) and old (> 1 year) male Long
Evans rats were housed in standard housing conditions (12 h dark; 12 h
light) with free access to food and water.  Rats and mice were housed in
separate rooms.  Mice were randomly divided into control and predator
stress groups.  All procedures involving live animals were in accordance
with National Institutes of Health Guidelines for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals and with the animal use protocol approved by
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. 
Chronic traumatic stress in mice was induced by exposure to the
Long Evan rats [34].  Brieﬂy, a mouse was placed inside a clear plastic
hamster ball (Super Pet, Elk Grove Village, IL; material # 100079348)
and then the hamster ball was placed inside the home cage of an aggressive rat for 30 min for 28 consecutive days (Fig.  1).  This type of
stress allows visual and olfactory exposure to the predator without direct physical contacts that might lead to injury or death to the mice.  An
individual mouse was not exposed to the same rat for two consecutive2. 2.  Behavioral procedures
Open ﬁeld activity was studied by placing each mouse at the center
of a rectangular open ﬁeld area (34 cm X 34 cm) and allowing them to
explore for 10 min.  Elevated plus maze test was performed as previously described [35] and the time spent in open and closed arms were
measured.  Sucrose preference test was performed by providing mice
with a choice between two identical bottles, one ﬁlled with tap water
and the other with 2% sucrose solution, in their home cages for 48 h. 
Fig 1.  Design and time line for chronic predator stress exposure in mice.  Each stress
episode consisted of placing a mouse in a transparent plastic ball and placing the ball
inside the home cage of a rat.  Control and stressed mice underwent a battery of behavioral evaluations that contained open ﬁeld test (OFT), elevated plus maze (EPM), radial
arm maze test (RAM), and sucrose preference test (SPT). The bottles were switched after 24 h to avoid any side preference
[34,36].  Amount of sucrose solution consumed was measured. 
Radial arm maze (RAM) experiments were performed as previously
described [37] with some minor modiﬁcations.  Prior to radial arm maze
experiments mice were diet-restricted to reduce and maintain a body
weight of ∼85. 0% of their ad libitum food body weight. 