
Conditioned Place Preference (CPP) measures drug reward, especially the appetitive quality of a reward stimulus that drives the subject
to seek out environmental cues previously paired with a rewarding
substance.  A baseline preference for each conditioned stimulus or CS
(e. g.  environmental context) in the absence of a paired unconditioned
stimulus or US (e. g.  drug) is determined prior to conditioning.  For the
conditioning trials that follow, the US is paired with the initially nonpreferred CS, determined from a baseline preference assessment, according to a biased stimulus assignment procedure.  After conditioning,
a choice test is performed in which both previously conditioned contexts are presented in the absence of the US, and the subject is unrestricted so that it may move between each CS [1].  CPP tasks also
allow for locomotor behavior of the animal to be investigated in the
presence of the rewarding stimulus (US) during conditioning when it is
under the inﬂuence of the drug of interest, compared to behavior in the
reward-paired context (CS), when the drug is not present [2,3]. 
CPP is induced in rodents in response to various stimuli including:
food, water, sweet ﬂuids, conspeciﬁc social stimuli, access to wheelrunning, opportunities to copulate, novel objects, brain stimulation,
and addictive drugs [1,4–8], including ethanol [9].  CPP induction in
zebraﬁsh was ﬁrst reported in a study using cocaine as the US [10].  The
number of stimuli evoking CPP in zebraﬁsh has increased extensively to
also include food, morphine, amphetamine, ethanol, nicotine, and salvinorin A [11–16], all of which also induce CPP in rodents.  CPP in
zebraﬁsh is often induced by a single exposure/conditioning trial,
though increasing the number of conditioning cycles potentiates this
response in a drug-speciﬁc manner [14]. 
A single exposure to ethanol induces dose-dependent CPP in zebraﬁsh at concentrations of 0. 25%, 0. 50%, and 1. 00% [12].  CPP in
zebraﬁsh is also reported in response to 1. 50% ethanol [11,16].  Zebraﬁsh display an U-shaped dose response in locomotor activity when
exposed to (0. 00, 0. 25, 0. 50, or 1. 00%) ethanol [17], while ethanol
induces an inverted U-shaped temporal trajectory of locomotor activity
(distance traveled) [18].  Similarly, adolescent rats receiving ethanol
show divergent behavioral preferences for the same dose of ethanol and
require increased ethanol doses, compared to adults, in order to induce
CPP [19].  However, studies in mice indicate that pre-treatment with
ethanol every 48 h for a week before conditioning does not alter CPP,
but it does sensitize locomotor activation to ethanol [20].  These results
suggest that long-term exposure to ethanol may have additional, potentially confounding eﬀects that impact CPP. 
Diminished predator avoidance occurs in control zebraﬁsh acutely
treated with 0. 50% ethanol or in ﬁsh chronically treated with 0. 25%
ethanol for 2 weeks and then acutely treated with 1. 00% ethanol. 
Chronic 0. 25% ethanol exposure also diminishes hyperactivity in zebraﬁsh receiving 0. 25% or 0. 50% acute ethanol treatment, which the
authors suggest to be a consequence of neural adaptation due to suppression of reinforcing and anxiolytic eﬀects of ethanol by prolonged
alcohol exposure [21].  Alcohol’s anxiolytic eﬀects have been demonstrated in zebraﬁsh in the form of diminished predator avoidance,
startle reaction, inter-ﬁsh distance, and area occupied by a group of
zebraﬁsh [11,21].  In this study, zebraﬁsh undergo a novel tank test
(dive test) and shoaling test directly prior to ethanol CPP training, as
have been used previously to assess trait anxiety in zebraﬁsh [18]. 
Thus, rodents and zebraﬁsh pre-exposed to ethanol display altered
locomotor and anxiety-like behavior at baseline along with altered
behavioral responses to ethanol, suggesting neuroplastic changes.  These
underlying changes in ethanol tolerance may translate to implications
of ethanol pre-exposure for ethanol-induced CPP.  The purpose of this
study was to observe the behavioral eﬀects of chronic exposure of
zebraﬁsh juveniles/adolescents (starting at 20 dpf or 40 dpf) to a low
dose of ethanol (1. 50%) for 20-min daily treatments for one week.  This
treatment paradigm mimics the cycle of alcohol binge and withdrawal
demonstrated in adolescent humans, and is likely to contribute to
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 174–184
development of ethanol tolerance [22].  Upon reaching adulthood (at
160–175 dpf), ﬁsh were then acutely exposed to ethanol in a single
conditioning trail, after which the ability of ethanol to induce CPP was
assessed.  The purpose of this design was to determine if 1 week of daily
20-min ethanol pre-exposure treatments in adolescence (20–40 dpf)
aﬀects ethanol-induced change in percent time spent in an ethanolpaired context in male and female adult (160–175 day old) zebraﬁsh.  In
addition, recorded zebraﬁsh were examined to identify acute locomotor
eﬀects of ethanol exposure in conditioning.  Behavioral responses in the
novel tank and shoaling test were assessed in adulthood prior to conditioning. 
<Middle> Materials and methods. 
2. 1.  Subjects
Adult, short-ﬁn wild-type zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio) were maintained in
the lab on a 14 h light/10 h dark photoperiod at 28–29 °C in an Aquatic
Habitats (AHAB) rack system.  Each day, the ﬁsh were monitored and
fed a mix of AP-100, TetraMin ﬂakes, and dried brine shrimp twice per
day, and environmental parameters were measured.  All experiments
were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at
American University. 
2. 2.  Pre-exposure and behavioral testing chambers
A 24 well plate ﬁlled with 2. 5 mL of 1. 5% v/v ethanol/water was
used to pre-expose ﬁsh starting at 20 dpf, and a small petri dish ﬁlled
with a total volume of 20 mL of 1. 50% v/v ethanol/water was used to
pre-expose ﬁsh starting at 40 dpf.  Distinct volumes were used to account for diﬀerences in the size of ﬁsh at the two ages and so that they
would have similar mobility capacities.  Ethanol was purchased fromThe novel
tank used in this
study was a clear Nalgene™
Polycarbonate Narrow Mouth Square container, with the lid and top cut
oﬀ to leave a square opening.  This cut container had dimensions of
90 mm x 90 mm x 140 mm (width x length x height) and was ﬁlled to
108 mm (height) with 800 mL of water.  For the shoaling test, the experimental subject ﬁsh remained in the same tank used for the novel
tank test.  The shoal was presented by removing a paper divider between
the novel tank and another tank of the same type and dimensions
containing the shoal. 
The CPP chamber was covered with packing tape from the outside,
with half covered in light tan tape and the other half covered in dark
tan tape.  The CPP chamber had dimensions of 120 mm x 215 mm x
140 mm (width x length x height) and was ﬁlled to 90 mm (height)
with 1. 5 L of water during baseline and post-conditioning preference
testing and control conditioning or 1. 5 L of (0–1. 75%) ethanol during
ethanol conditioning.  The CPP chamber was a commercially available
ﬁsh tank (Aqueon) with dark blue plastic partitions placed in the center
of the tank.  This partition, covered in paraﬁlm to prevent ﬁsh from
escaping around the edges, was used during conditioning trials to separate the light and dark sides of the chamber.  During conditioning,
ﬁsh were conﬁned to either the dark or light tan side of the tank, depending upon whether ﬁsh received ethanol or control conditioning on
a given day.  The plastic partitions were removed prior to the baseline
preference assessment and prior to the post-conditioning preference
assessment so that ﬁsh could freely swim between the dark and light
halves of the tank.  After each testing day, ﬁsh were removed from the
chamber and individually contained in 150 mL of water in small
(250 mL) opaque plastic beakers so that their identity was maintained
throughout the CPP procedure and so that they could see other ﬁsh
during this holding period. C. L.  Clayman Name
2. 3.  Procedures
For ethanol pre-exposure, larvae (aged either 20 or 40 days post
fertilization (dpf)) were removed from the AHAB system and immersed
in 1. 50% v/v ethanol/water in one well of a 24 well plate or in a petri
dish.  Ethanol pre-exposure consisted of daily 20-min treatments for 1
week.  Control treatments immersed ﬁsh of the same ages into the same
volume of water to account for handling stress. 
Behavioral tests were performed on adult ﬁsh, aged 160–175 dpf,
and included a novel tank test and shoaling test, to assess eﬀects of
ethanol pre-exposure, and CPP.  The novel tank test compared anxietylike behavior of control and ethanol-pre-exposed zebraﬁsh 1 day before
the start of the CPP procedure.  To do this, ﬁsh were removed from their
holding tank and placed in the center of the top of the novel tank.  Fish
were observed for 5 min, and their positions in the tank were recorded. 
The dependent measure was percent time spent in the lower third of a
novel tank.  The novel tank test was immediately followed by a shoaling
test.  The shoaling test measures the response to conspeciﬁcs and involves presenting a stimulus ﬁsh (or group of ﬁsh) in a tank adjacent to
the experimental tank and measures the time spent on the half of the
tank closer to the stimulus ﬁsh compared to the time spent on this tank
half in the novel tank test. 
Next, ﬁsh were transferred to the CPP chamber so the baseline
preference for either the light or dark side could be determined by
tracking the time spent on each side of the tank.  Once determined,
conditioning was performed (days 1 and 2).  Order of conditioning to
either ethanol or water was counterbalanced over two total days of
conditioning, with one CS1-US1 (ethanol) pairing on one conditioning
day and one CS2-US2 (water) pairing on the other conditioning day. 
The following two-day procedure constituted one conditioning cycle. 
On one conditioning day, ﬁsh were exposed to either 0. 00%, 1. 00%,
1. 25%, 1. 50%, 1. 60%, or 1. 75% v/v of ethanol dissolved in 1. 5 L of
water and restricted for 20 min to their non-preferred side.  On the other
conditioning day, ﬁsh were placed in 1. 5 L of water and restricted to
their initially preferred tank side for 20 min.  Percent time on the initially non-preferred side (PTN) was then measured the next day (day 3
or 16–30 h after the second conditioning session) as the percent preference shift toward the initially non-preferred tank side when ﬁsh were
allowed to freely swim in the testing chamber for 20 min. 
All responses from the ﬁsh were recorded with a video camera and
analyzed by live-tracking.  EthovisionXT® video tracking software
(Noldus) was used to record all behavioral trials and then to quantify
the change in ethanol-induced PTN by measuring time spent in each
side of the chamber pre- and post-conditioning, locomotor behavior in
each conditioning trial, and behavioral response in the novel tank and
shoaling tests.  Video recordings were scored with live-tracking by the
same observer. 
Data were analyzed using SPSS version 24. 0 (SPSS, Inc.  2016). 
Statistical analysis to determine the eﬀects of these diﬀerent parameters
were separated into ﬁve diﬀerent comparisons (described below). 
2. 4.  Statistical analysis: ethanol-induced CPP (linear mixed model)
We used a liner mixed model to determine the eﬀect of age of
ethanol pre-exposure (20 dpf, 40 dpf), ethanol conditioning dose
(0–1. 75%), sex (male, female), and time ((5-min treatment increments
during the 20 min post-conditioning preference assessment) on percent
time on the non-preferred side (PTN) in the CPP paradigm.  As
EthovisionXT® allowed us to record locomotor activity, such as absolute
angular velocity during ethanol and control conditioning, we also used
a linear mixed model to assess changes in this parameter. 
Linear mixed models are the appropriate test here because they
account for the inﬂuence of repeated measurements on individual
subjects, as has been done in other studies of zebraﬁsh, which incorporate random eﬀects, such as individual subject identity and family
and tank in which ﬁsh are tested [23–28].  The linear mixed model
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 174–184
design in this study controls for the within-subject eﬀects of the behavioral tasks by including a random intercept for subjects, with restricted
maximum likelihood estimation (REML) and a compound symmetry
covariance structure using the linear mixed model procedure in SPSS. 
The compound symmetry covariance structure across trials estimated
correlated errors between time points within subjects.  Thus, this analysis allowed us to target dependent variables at various time points
during the post-conditioning preference assessment (PTN) and during
ethanol conditioning (AAV). 
Assumptions for the linear mixed model were checked and descriptive statistics were examined for the PTN and AAV.  If signiﬁcant
main eﬀects or interactions emerged, post hoc tests with a Sidak correction were performed.  Means presented in reported post hoc tests are
based on estimated marginal means, which are modiﬁed population
means adjusted for all other factors in the model. 
2. 5.  Statistical analysis: conditioning day (2-way ANOVA) and novel tank
and shoaling responses (3-way ANOVA)
The counterbalanced conditioning design used resulted in some ﬁsh
being exposed to ethanol on conditioning day 1 and other ﬁsh being
exposed to ethanol on conditioning day 2.  Since the post-conditioning
preference assessment was performed immediately after conditioning
day 2 (i. e.  on day 3), we wanted to determine whether one or both
groups were still inﬂuenced by ethanol on day 3, as this could aﬀect the
CPP outcome.  To do this, we performed a 2-way ANOVA to assess the
eﬀect of conditioning dose (0–1. 75%) and day of conditioning (day 1,
day 2) on PTN. 
To determine whether age of pre-exposure (20 dpf, 40 dpf), sex
(male, female), and change PTN response (more or less than 10% increase in preference at post-conditioning preference assessment, relative to baseline) aﬀected novel tank and shoaling responses, we used
separate three-way ANOVAs.  We separated degree of PTN for these
statistical tests because the previous analysis indicated that the degree
of PTN varied across ﬁsh.  More speciﬁcally, the change in PTN (more or
less than 10%) was derived from a median split of PTN scores of
ethanol-conditioned ﬁsh and supported by Receiver Operating
Characteristics
Supplementary
Table 1).  Deriving this categorical measure was conducted using similar
methods to those performed in previous CPP studies, which have been
established as a complementary approach to the continuous measures
used here [29]. 
(Supplementary Fig.  1;
analysis
Assumptions for the ANOVAs were checked and descriptive statistics were calculated for PTN, Percent time on the bottom third of a
novel tank, and the change in time spent next to shoal.  If signiﬁcant
main eﬀects or interactions emerged, post hoc tests with a Sidak correction were performed. 
3.  Results
3. 1.  CPP results: behavior in the PTN assessment in 5-min segments
We analyzed CPP by separating the 20-min post-conditioning PTN
test period into 5-min increments to assess if there were diﬀerences in
PTN response throughout the 20-min testing session (n = 83).  This
analysis indicates that ethanol conditioning dose signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced ethanol-induced PTN (p < 0. 005).  There was also a non-signiﬁcant trend of an interaction between pre-exposure age and sex
(p < 0. 052) and a signiﬁcant four-way interaction between ethanol
conditioning dose, pre-exposure age, sex, and time (p < 0. 040). 
Post-hoc tests identiﬁed that the 1. 00% conditioning dose group had
a signiﬁcantly greater mean of 67. 82% post-conditioning PTN, compared to 35. 03% post-conditioning PTN observed in adults conditioned
to 1. 50% ethanol (p < 0. 037).  None of the other conditioning dose
groups showed signiﬁcant diﬀerences in pairwise comparisons, nor did
pairwise comparisons within groups for pre-exposure age, time, andC. L.  Clayman Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 174–184
sex.  However, within ﬁsh pre-exposed to ethanol at 40 dpf, male zebraﬁsh had a signiﬁcantly greater average estimated marginal mean of
59. 56% post-conditioning percent time on the ethanol-paired side,
compared to 33. 78% post-conditioning percent time on the ethanolpaired side observed in female zebraﬁsh (p < 0. 031). 