
Several studies suggest that inhibition diﬃculties among people with ASD might be related to atypical cardiac
vagal control.  We examined how low versus high baseline heart rate variability (HRV) inﬂuences prepotent
response inhibition in 31 males with autism spectrum disorder (ASD; mean age: 32. 2; mean IQ: 107. 8) compared
to 39 typically developing (TD) males (mean age: 30. 5; mean IQ: 102. 0) by administering a stop signal task. 
Moreover, we examined whether adding an aﬀective manipulation would alter ﬁndings and whether this manipulation aﬀected HRV.  Findings indicated that baseline HRV inﬂuenced inhibition in ASD males.  Speciﬁcally,
an ASD subgroup with low baseline HRV performed signiﬁcantly worse compared to an ASD subgroup with high
baseline HRV.  No inﬂuence of baseline HRV was found in TD males.  The aﬀective manipulation did negatively
inﬂuence performance and also altered HRV.  Although replication is required, these ﬁrst ﬁndings indicate that
baseline cardiac vagal control seems to aﬀect inhibitory control in males with ASD. resistanceresponse
inhibition
Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are neurodevelopmental disorders, characterized by social interaction and communication diﬃculties as well as repetitive behaviors (APA, 2013).  Both repetitive
behaviors and social interaction diﬃculties have been theorized to be
related to inhibitory control deﬁciencies (e. g. , Bachevalier & Loveland,
2006; Hill, 2004; Mosconi Name, 2009; Russel, 1997).  Three types of
inhibitory control can be identiﬁed, namely interference control, prepotent
interference
(Friedman & Miyake, 2004).  Prepotent response inhibition and interference control are the two most studied types of inhibition in the ASD
population.  Prepotent response inhibition is the ability to suppress or
withhold a (motor) response.  Interference control is the ability to ignore
irrelevant stimuli.  Although recent meta-analyses conﬁrm that people
with ASD have more prepotent response inhibition (Cohen’s d = 0. 55;
Hedges’g = 0. 51) and interference control (Cohen’s d = 0. 31) diﬃculties than typically developing (TD) individuals, both meta-analyses
also found a large amount of heterogeneity (Geurts, van den
Bergh & Ruzzano, 2014; Kuiper, Verhoeven & Geurts, 2016).  This means
that the ﬁndings across studies were inconsistent. 
This large amount of heterogeneity between inhibitory control
study ﬁndings in people with ASD suggests that there are other factors
that inﬂuence these ﬁndings.  In the two aforementioned meta-analyses,
we examined several possible factors, namely the possible inﬂuence of
age, intelligence (IQ), interstimulus interval (ISI) and ‘stimulus type’
(Geurts Name, 2014; Kuiper Name, 2016).  In the ﬁrst meta-analysis, age
explained 25% of the heterogeneity between the studies on prepotent
response inhibition, but a signiﬁcant amount of heterogeneity still remained.  Age was not a relevant moderator for interference control.  IQ
showed the opposite pattern as it had no eﬀect on prepotent response
inhibition, but did explain 62% of the heterogeneity between the interference control studies (Geurts Name, 2014).  In the second metaanalysis, which solely focused on prepotent response inhibition, the
possible inﬂuence of variations in ISI and ‘stimulus type’ as well as the
factors age and IQ were examined (Kuiper Name, 2016).  Age, IQ and ISI
did not signiﬁcantly reduce the heterogeneity between the studies.  The
inﬂuence of ‘stimulus type’ was systematically reviewed and showed
mixed results.  It seemed to depend on the type of stimulus whether or
not it inﬂuenced inhibition.  We hypothesized that perhaps the stimulus
types have diﬀerent physiological eﬀects and that more studies were
needed that include two diﬀerent sets of stimuli as well as physiological
measures to be able to directly measure the (physiological) inﬂuence of
a stimulus type on inhibitory control in people with ASD.  The reason
behind why there was a non-signiﬁcant eﬀect of age found in the
second meta-analysis (Kuiper Name, 2016) compared to the signiﬁcant
⁎ Corresponding author at: Dr.  Leo Kannerhuis, Houtsniplaan 1, 6865 XZ Doorwerth, The Netherlands. 
E-mail addresses: kuiper. marieke@gmail. com, m. kuiper@leokannerhuis. nl (M. W. M.  Kuiper). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. biopsycho. 2017. 07. 006
Received 14 November 2016; Received in revised form 10 July 2017; Accepted 11 July 2017
Available online 15 July 2017
0301-0511/ 
M. W. M.  Kuiper Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 141–152
eﬀect in the ﬁrst meta-analysis (Geurts Name, 2014), was suggested to
be related to the smaller percentage of studies focusing on adults with
ASD, as this was 18. 9% and 26. 1% respectively.  Taken together, this
shows that there are other factors than age, IQ, and ISI that inﬂuence
inhibition in people with ASD.  Several authors have hypothesized that
cardiac vagal control might be one of these factors (e. g. , Geurts,
Begeer, & Stockmann,Kindt, & Forstmann, 2011; Raymaekers, van der Meere, & Roeyers,
2004; Raymaekers, van der Meere, & Roeyers, 2006; Raymaekers,
Antrop, van der Meere, Wiersema, & Roeyers, 2007). 
Krypotos,Jahfari,Cardiac vagal control refers to the degree of tonic vagal inﬂuences
on the heart.  The beat-to-beat heart rate (HR) of humans varies considerably (e. g. , Billman, 2011; Stein, Bosner, Kleiger, & Conger, 1994). 
This variation in time between heart beats is mostly caused by brain
stem projections
to the heart via the vagus nerve (Berntson,
Cacioppo, & Quigley, 1993).  Vagus nerve activity is also related to the
respiratory cycle (e. g. , Berntson Name, 1997).  During inhalation, HR
accelerates and vagal activity is decreased, and during exhalation HR
slows down and vagal activity is restored.  Cardiac vagal control is indexed by respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) or high frequency HRV,
which both refer to HRV during spontaneous breathing (e. g. , Berntson
Name, 1997).  There are several theoretical models that argue the importance of cardiac vagal control in relation to (social) behavior.  Two
commonly reported models are the Neurovisceral Integration Model
(e. g. , Thayer & Lane, 2000; Thayer & Friedman, 2002; Friedman, 2007)
and the Polyvagal Theory (e. g. , Porges, 2001, 2007; Porges Name,The Neurovisceral Integration Model states that a core set of neural
structures (emphasizing the role of the amygdala and the medial prefrontal cortex) integrates signals from inside and outside the body to
assess whether the physiological state of the body, cognition, perception and action match the environmental demands (e. g. , Thayer & Lane,
2000; Thayer, Ahs, Fredrikson, Sollers 3rd, & Wager, 2012).  These
neural structures are suggested to form a system that continuously assesses whether the environment is safe or unsafe, which is needed to
prepare the body for the appropriate response.  The model describes a
central autonomic network (CAN) that has bidirectional pathways to
the sinoatrial node of the heart.  Through the CAN, the brain would
control responses on a visceromotor, neuroendocrine and behavioral
level that are crucial
for adaptability and goal-directed behavior
(Benarroch, 1993).  Both sympathetic and parasympathetic preganglionic neurons would mediate the primary output of the CAN at the
sinoatrial node of the heart via the vagus nerve.  The output of the CAN
would produce HRV (Thayer & Lane, 2000).  In their paper, Thayer and
Lane (2000) argue that HRV is not only related to physiological ﬂexibility and attentional regulation but also to aﬀective information
processing.  People with low HRV would be less able to detect and experience safety (even when it is present) and would also have diﬃculty
with aﬀective information processing.  Taken together, in this model,
HRV is seen as an index for health and adaptability. 
Besides this model, the Polyvagal Theory (Porges, 2001) explains
the relationship between cardiac vagal control and social behavior from
an evolutionary and hierarchical perspective.  Brieﬂy, in this theory, the
nervous system regulates both bodily and behavioral states (Porges,
2001).  This is partially realized by the function of the myelinated vagus
nerve as a vagal “brake” (Porges, 2001, 2007).  The “brake” would aﬀect
the sympathetic inﬂuences on the heart by either inhibiting vagal tone
(supporting mobilization) or disinhibiting vagal tone (promoting calm
and social behavior).  Speciﬁc brain areas, such as the temporal cortex,
would determine whether the surroundings require physiological states
that either encourage social behavior or ﬁght-ﬂight behavior (Porges,
2007).  Individual diﬀerences in this process are suggested to mediate
emotion regulation and expression.  The theory argues that the impact
of the myelinated vagus nerve on the heart can be measured with the
quantiﬁcation of RSA.  Porges (2001, 2007) argues that lower RSA
mobilizes ﬁght-ﬂight behaviors, while higher RSA supports socialengaging behaviors and emotional regulation. 
Besides these two theoretical models, ﬁndings from several studies
seem to conﬁrm the hypothesis that variations in HRV are related to
diﬀerences in behavior (e. g. , Appelhans & Luecken, 2006; Katahira,
Fujimura, Matsuda, Okanoya, & Okada, 2014) as well as to several
psychiatric disorders (e. g. , Thayer & Lane, 2000).  For instance, reductions in HRV are shown to be related to depression (Thayer & Lane,
2000), generalized anxiety disorder, and behavioral
inﬂexibility
(Friedman & Thayer, 1998a, 1998b).  Taken together, higher HRV seems
to be associated with health, emotion regulation and better adjustment
to environmental demands, while lower HRV would be associated with
disease, ﬁght-ﬂight behaviors and social diﬃculties (Thayer & Lane,
2000; Friedman 2007; Thayer Name, 2012; Porges, 2001; Porges Name,Recent studies suggest there might be a subgroup within the ASD
population that is characterized by low HRV.  In a review on cardiac
autonomic regulation in ASD, Klusek, Roberts, and Losh (2015) reported several studies that showed that children with ASD had signiﬁcantly decreased HRV compared to TD individuals during cognitive
tasks.  Interestingly, it was discovered that these children with ASD also
had decreased HRV at baseline.  Moreover, studies that found no differences between the ASD and TD group in HRV during a cognitive task,
did not ﬁnd diﬀerences in HRV at baseline either (Klusek Name, 2015). 
The authors concluded that a subgroup of the ASD population has
chronically lowered HRV (Klusek Name, 2015).  Therefore, the level of
baseline HRV might be of greater importance than thought until now. 
Especially, since in the general population the inﬂuence of baseline
HRV on cognitive performance has been shown as well.  Krypotos Name
(2011) used a median split on baseline HRV to create a low and high
baseline subgroup.  These subgroups then performed an emotional
prepotent response inhibition task.  The results showed that,
independent of subgroup, negative valence highly arousing pictures lead
to more inhibitory control diﬃculties.  This is in line with previous
studies (e. g. , Verbruggen & De Houwer, 2007), which showed that
being confronted with highly arousing emotional pictures will lead to
slower stopping-responses (i. e. , more diﬃculty inhibiting a response). 
Moreover, the subgroup with low baseline HRV performed signiﬁcantly
worse on the task compared to the high baseline HRV subgroup when
confronted with these negative valence highly arousing pictures
(Krypotos Name, 2011).  This suggests that if one’s baseline HRV is low,
being confronted with negative emotions will lead to more prepotent
response inhibition diﬃculties.  Perhaps the inconsistencies in ﬁndings
between studies on prepotent response inhibition in the ASD population
(Geurts Name, 2014; Kuiper Name, 2016) can be explained by the existence of diﬀerent subgroups that are characterized by diﬀerent baseline HRV levels.  Speciﬁcally, it is plausible that there is a subgroup
within the ASD population that is characterized by low baseline HRV. 
Negative valence highly arousing stimuli would lead to even more inhibitory control diﬃculties in this subgroup. 
The aim of the present study was threefold.  First, we aimed to examine whether low versus high baseline HRV inﬂuenced prepotent
response inhibition in adults with ASD.  Second, we aimed to examine
whether this possible inﬂuence of low versus high baseline HRV might
be diﬀerent for adults with ASD compared to TD adults.  Third, we
aimed to examine whether adding negative valence highly arousing
stimuli would aﬀect inhibitory control diﬀerently for people with and
without ASD as well as for subgroups with diﬀerent baseline HRV levels.  In line with previous relevant studies (e. g. , Krypotos Name 2011),
we were divided the ASD and TD group into subgroups based on
baseline HRV using a median split.  The inhibition task consisted of two
conditions: a neutral condition and a condition with a negative aﬀective
manipulation.  In addition to Krypotos Name (2011), we examined both
subjectively and physiologically whether the negative aﬀective manipulation was eﬀective as well as whether the physiological response
to the two conditions diﬀered between the subgroups.  Regarding inhibitory control diﬃculties, we hypothesized that people with ASD with
M. W. M.  Kuiper Name
low baseline HRV levels would have signiﬁcantly more inhibitory
control diﬃculties compared to people with ASD with high baseline
HRV levels and compared to TD people with low and high baseline
HRV.  Additionally, we hypothesized that people with ASD with high
baseline HRV levels would perform similarly to TD people with low
baseline HRV levels.  Regarding the aﬀective manipulation, we hypothesized that the negative aﬀective manipulation would cause more
inhibitory control diﬃculties compared to the neutral condition for
people with ASD (both with low and high baseline HRV levels) as well
as for TD people with low baseline HRV levels. 
<Middle> Methods. 
2. 1.  Participants
Initially, 41 male adults with and 40 male adults without ASD with
an age range of 18–45 years old were included in this study.  The participants with ASD were recruited at Dutch mental health care centers,
specialized in ASD, and by means of advertisements on several websites
of Dutch autism societies.  The TD adults were recruited via the personal
network of the researchers and students involved in this project as well
as via advertisements, social media and the local community.  All participants were Dutch citizens and 77 participants were of Caucasian
descent.  We focused solely on males as some studies showed that
women react physiologically stronger to adverse International Aﬀective
Pictures System (IAPS; Lang, Bradley, & Cuthbert, 2005) pictures compared to men (e. g. , Bradley, Codispoti, Cuthbert, & Lang, 2001;
Gard & Kring, 2007).  Moreover, ASD is thought to be more common in
men than in woman (estimated ratio is 4:1; Fombonne, 2003, 2009).  In
order to enhance feasibility, only males were included in this study. Dutch
version: Hoekstra,
All ASD adults had a clinical ASD diagnosis according to the criteria
of the Diagnostic Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders IV (DSM-IV;
American Psychiatric Association, 2000) prior to inclusion.  All were
diagnosed by clinicians specialized in ASD.  This clinical diagnosis was
veriﬁed using the Social Responsiveness Scale-AdultsConstantino & Gruber, 2005; Dutch version: De la Marche Name, 2009)
and the Autism Quotient (AQ; Baron-Cohen, Wheelwright, Skinner,
Martin, & Clubley,
Bartels,
Cath & Boomsma, 2008).  Adults with ASD were included in the study if
they scored above the cut-oﬀ of 54 on the SRS-A or above 26 on the AQ. 
The autism diagnostic observation schedule (ADOS) 2, module 4 (Lord
Name, 2012), was administered to be able to give a more detailed description of ASD characteristics of the included ASD participants (see
Table 1).  The new algorithm, by Hus and Lord (2014), was used.  In this
algorithm a total score ≥ 8 classiﬁes as ASD and a total score ≥ 10
classiﬁes as autism.  TD adults were included if the following criteria
were met: 1) a score below the cut-oﬀ of 54 on the SRS-A and below the
cut-oﬀ of 26 on the AQ; 2) no developmental disorders or any other
psychiatric disorder; and 3) not having any immediate family with ASD. 
All participants needed to be free of any form of heart disease, lung
disease or beta-blocker medication and were asked not to drink any
coﬀee on the day of the test-session, as these variables could all inﬂuence the physiological data.  Almost half of the ASD participants
(n = 19) had, either in the past or currently, one or more of the following psychiatric diagnoses: AD(H)D (n = 3), Anxiety disorder
(n = 4), Bipolar Disorder (n = 1), Depression (n = 8), Eating Disorder
(n = 1), Gilles de la Tourette (n = 1), Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
(n = 3), Personality Disorder (NOS) (n = 5) and Post Traumatic Stress
Syndrome (n = 3).  Half of the ASD participants (n = 20) used one orthe following psychotropic medications: antidepressants
(n = 13), antipsychotics (n = 8), benzodiazepines (n = 1),(n = 1), narcoleptic medication (n = 1), anti-epileptic medication
(n = 2) and sleep medication (n = 2).  None of the TD group participants used psychotropic medication.  One participant with ASD had a
physical condition called “hemiparesis” and another participant with
ASD had epilepsy.  One TD participant had a physical condition called
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 141–152
“hemophilia”.  These participants did not diﬀer in their mean response
times on the experimental task when compared to the other participants.  Nor were these participants outliers on the physiological measures.  All participants needed to have an estimated total intelligence
quotient (TIQ) above 70 on the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale – IV
(WAIS-IV; Wechsler, 2012).  We estimated the overall TIQ by using two
subtests, Vocabulary and Matrix Reasoning, of the WAIS-IV (Uterwijk,
2000).  Two participants (one ASD; one TD) had an estimated TIQ of 69
(range 65–75).  However, given their education levels (community
college and higher education), we did not exclude their data from the
analyses.  One participant with ASD, who had an estimated TIQ of 66,
was excluded as this was in line with the reported low educationalTo be included in the analyses, participants needed to inhibit between 40% and 60% (a. k. a.  P(inhibit) = 0. 4–0. 6) of the stop-trials to be
able to calculate a reliable stop signal reaction time (SSRT) (van den
Wildenberg, van Boxtel, & van der Molen, 2003).  The SSRT is the inhibitory control outcome measure (for more information on the task or
SSRT, see below).  Nine participants with a P(inhibit) below or above
0. 4–0. 6 were matched with a participant from the other group with a
similar P(inhibit).  Only when this matching was impossible, was the
participant excluded from further analyses.  This resulted in excluding 9
ASD participants.  Next, outliers in the baseline HRV data were determined.  Outliers were deﬁned as data points more than three times
the interquartile range above or below the ﬁrst quartile.  This resulted in
the exclusion of one TD participant based on baseline RSA (> 3 SD). 
Then, subgroups were created, following Krypotos Name (2011), by
means of a median split.  This was done separately for both HRV measures (RMSSD; RSA), which resulted in the following groups: low ASD;
high ASD; low TD and high TD ASD.  For descriptive information on
these subgroups see Table 1. 
Taken together, 31 ASD and 39 TD participants were included in the
analyses.  The baseline RMSSD median split resulted in a low (n = 16)
and high (n = 15) RMSSD subgroup in the ASD group (median: 24. 5;
SD: 16. 9) and a low (n = 20) and high (n = 19) RMSSD subgroup in
the TD group (median: 31. 7; SD: 17. 5).  The baseline RSA median split
resulted in a low (n = 15) and high (n = 16) RSA subgroup in the ASD
group (median: 5. 9; SD: 1. 1) and a low (n = 20) and high (n = 19)
subgroup in the TD group (median: 6. 2; SD: 0. 81). 
Written informed consent was given by all participants.  This study
the University of
was approved by the Ethics Review Board of
Amsterdam (2014-BC-3773). 
2. 2.  Experimental task
Prepotent response inhibition was measured with an emotional stop
signal task (Krypotos Name, 2011; Logan, 1994; Verbruggen & De
Houwer, 2007).  In addition to Krypotos Name (2011), who solely
measured HRV during baseline, we also examined HRV during the stop
signal task.  Therefore, we had to make some adjustments to the task to
be able to make reliable calculations of HRV (Task Force, 1996).  The
adjusted emotional stop signal task (see Fig.  1) consisted of 380 trials,
divided into a practice block (20 trials) and 10 experimental blocks (36
trials each).  In a go-trial, the participant was shown a black ﬁxation
cross on a white background that remained on the screen for
500–2000 ms (mean = 1250 ms; steps of 500 ms), which was followed
by a neutral or negative valence highly arousing picture.  This picture
was presented for 500 ms.  Next, the go-stimulus (a black arrow) was
presented for 200 ms.  Participants were instructed to respond as fast
and as accurately as possible to the arrows by pressing a right key (the
“L” on the keyboard of the laptop, marked with a green dot) when the
arrow pointed to the right and pressing a left key (the “A” on the
keyboard of the laptop, marked with a red dot) when the arrow pointed
to the left.  In stop-trials (30% of all trials), a stop signal (an auditory
tone) was presented and participants needed to withhold their response
and not press any buttons.  The stop signal delay (SSD) between the go143
M. W. M.  Kuiper Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 141–152pelvDhiAR0=(ToAR9=(ShiAR6=(SwLS)1n2ƞ9=(0=(5=(6=(uapTgHSMDwLSMDAgHSMDAoDSRpogu. nsrpodaenmorpstsvticepogu1la20505070101030–0. 0. –0. 0. *00. 3. *00. *00. 60302090–*0. )6(551)5. 72)1()5. 2155–)5()4()4. 1(4338. 0195. )4(8. 9. 25. 51. 9–1(. 0–––0. 96)7. 272(. 8. 7(1(6. 3)9. 6(. 7. 07000**0090)6. 36)8. 07)3. 1(0. 100305080––. 11. 70. 6(13. 82. 3(3338. )7(0610(03. )9(6(02. 5870605070)8(0. 30–*00. 2. *00. *00. *10)1(1–1. 4. )1(1–6. 2. . 31. 518(. 7. 61)5. 7172)6(7()4. )4(23196192)6(50)5. 32)4(3(. 1. 7. 71. 016(. 4. 11)6. 7339sayeAIQAR. 3(875(. 99()1. 8. 11(02)0. 3. 4(. 8)4. 9)3. 0(3. 1)0. 3. 1(92)o(SM)s(IARHHnlsBeiprsDReieaA)dm(SD. 4o(SDltt)dm2OAR)o(RSlrun)o(RSeiae(litGR)ate(litGR)vtgnTS1441(22. 1(3. )002)0. 3. )042)0. 3. 1(22)0. 3. –10. 3. 1(12)0. 3. 1(5220. 81(165)61. 56. 79. 33. 93(0950. 6. )51. 34. 23(695)11. 35. 33(5050. )01. 54. 83(495)4(165)71. 30. 62(285)21. 48. 49. 28. 43(545–4. 7. tetuenglenlttQTgioeelcptD;tuA;stagsosaotm=SEtetumiu=AsersdutesstaDAriaeeiieedtite=R;cﬀlio=Seosao4ldm2euecniarsoisnadsta). o(SDeo,udmi0. lasi0(srustlirp2ƞsnpctafrbu=;enrﬀdvsecsorusamorDSRsneinicene=R;erfnrglglyiiarvtrre=R;trre=Hlcseeinpelio=SSamthrsnsrtrpe=S;erli1. . 00p*. 10p*. 0≤*
M. W. M.  Kuiper Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 141–152
slowing down their go-response in order to inhibit their response more
easily.  So, the SSD ensures that the stop signal is presented depending
on a participant’s success to inhibit a response while at the same time
ensuring that the percentage of inhibited trials is 50% for all participants.  Due to this tracking mechanism, the sum of the SSRT and the SSD
will equal the mean go-reaction time.  Therefore, the SSRT can be calculated by subtracting the SSD from the mean go-reaction time (Logan
Name, 1997).  A higher SSRT indicates more prepotent response inhibition diﬃculties. 
The adjusted emotional stop signal task was programmed, using the
software package Presentation (Neurobehavioural Systems,Version 17. 2), by the technical support team of the University of
Amsterdam.  The program ran on a Dell laptop (Latitude E5510, 15. 6″,
1366 × 768, Intel Core i5 Dual-core) using Windows 7. 
2. 3.  Physiological measures
An electrocardiogram (ECG) and three Ag/AgCl electrodes (3 M Red
Dot Electrodes), in Lead II conﬁguration, were used to measure HRV,
which was analyzed in both a time and frequency domain.  HR was also
recorded as this data is used for the calculation of HRV.  The HR data is
reported in Tables 1 and 2B.  The ECG signal was recorded and analyzed
by the Versatile Stimulus Response Registration Program (VSRRP98;
version 9. 2 and 10. 1 respectively), which is software developed by the
University of Amsterdam.  It has a sampling rate of 1000 S/s.  The
VSRRP98 has been used in several other published articles (e. g. ,
Krypotos Name, 2011; van Well, Visser, Scholte & Kindt, 2012).  All recordings were automatically ﬁltered for artifacts, but were also manually checked to adjust for any missed artifacts or R-tops. 
Following Krypotos Name (2011) as well as the recent ASD literature
on HRV, we included both a time (RMSSD) and frequency (RSA) domain measure of HRV.  HRV was measured at baseline and continuously
during the experimental task.  Baseline RMSSD and RSA were calculated
based on the last 5 min of the 10 min baseline period.  During the experimental task, RMSSD and RSA were calculated based on the ﬁrst
2 min of each block, which is in line with the guidelines of the Task
Force (1996) for short-term recordings. 
The root mean square diﬀerence of successive R–R intervals
(RMSSD) is a common and reliable time domain measure of HRV (Task
Force of The European Society of Cardiology and The North American
Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology, 1996) and is suggested to
predominantly reﬂect cardiac vagal control (Bernston Name, 2005;
Kleiger Name, 1991; Stein Name, 1994).  The frequency domain measure
used in this study is respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA), quantiﬁed
according to the “Porges Method” (Porges Name, 2013): ﬁrst, an ECG
scoring algorithm applies a peak-ﬁlter (Fc = 17 Hz, Q = 2, Matlab
iirpeak ﬁlter) to the raw ECG signal to isolate the r-tops.  A peak-search
algorithm, based on the ﬁrst derivative of the signal, is combined with
an adaptive IBI estimation method, which are then applied to detect the
r-tops.  This results in an IBI array, which is then resampled into a 4
samples per second time-based IBI array and detrended using a 51-point
moving average ﬁlter.  Next, a band-pass ﬁlter (between 0. 12 and
1. 0 Hz; 8th Butterworth) is applied to the detrended signal.  The ﬁnal
step is that RSA (ln(ms2)) is calculated by dividing this ﬁltered signal
into intervals and applying a natural logarithm of the variance.  To make
sure every participant’s respiration fell within the band-pass of
0. 12–1. 0 Hz, respiration was measured using a Braebon ValueLine Effort Belt (or the 5-Foot double buckle Eﬀort Belt).  It was recorded and
analyzed with the VSRRP98 program. 
2. 4.  Subjective ratings of IAPS pictures
After the emotional stop signal task, participants rated each of the
140 IAPS pictures, in order to determine whether the aﬀective manipulation was successful.  Ratings were given on both valence and arousal,
using the same two questions as the self-assessment manikin procedure
Fig.  1.  The Emotional Stop Signal Task.  This schematic representation of a stop-trial
starts with the presentation of a ﬁxation cross, which is followed by either a neutral or
negative IAPS picture.  Then an arrow (the go-stimulus) is presented to which participants
need to respond.  In 30% of the trials, an auditory signal is given, indicating a stop-trial. 
The go-trials end after the presentation of the arrow. 
stimulus (the arrow) and the stop-signal (the tone) was dynamically
adjusted to target a percentage of 50% successfully inhibited stop-trials
by each participant (a. k. a.  P(inhibit) of 0. 5).  This was realized by increasing the SSD with 25 ms when a participant successfully inhibited
their response and decreasing the SSD with 25 ms when a participant
failed to inhibit their response on a stop-trial.  The initial SSD was
250 ms.  The SSD was adjusted separately for the neutral and negative
aﬀective manipulation condition. 
The task consists of a neutral and a negative aﬀective manipulation
condition, created by the presentation of neutral or negative stimuli. 
The negative stimuli were included as an aﬀective manipulation, which
was assumed to negatively inﬂuence HRV and, therefore, might inﬂuence performance more than the neutral condition (Krypotos Name,
2011).  The stimuli were neutral valence low arousing pictures and
negative valence highly arousing pictures from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS; Lang Name, 2005).  In the study of
Krypotos Name (2011) some of the neutral pictures were rated as positive and some of the negative pictures were rated as neutral.  To avoid
this, we selected a subsample of the included IAPS pictures from the
study of Krypotos Name (2011), containing the 60 most highly arousing
and most negative valence pictures for the negative condition and the
60 most neutral valence and less arousing pictures for the neutral
condition.  We selected another 20 neutral pictures for the practice
block.  The pictures (500 pixels wide and 700 pixels high) were shown
on a white background and each picture was shown three times.  There
were ﬁve neutral and ﬁve negative blocks in this task.  The sequence of
the blocks (negative vs neutral) and which pictures were included in
each block were randomized for each participant.  Whether the trial was
a go- or stop-trial was semi-randomized.  This means that it was prevented that all the stop-trials would be presented after each other as this
would lead to a non-reliable measure of prepotent response inhibition. 
The stop signal reaction time (SSRT) was used as the outcome measure
However, this measure cannot be directly observed, and needs to be
calculated.  The SSRT is the estimated time it takes for a participant to
inhibit a response (Logan, Schachar, & Tannock, 1997).  The calculation
of the SSRT depends on two observable measures, namely the go-reaction time and the stop signal delay (SSD).  Both are expressed in
milliseconds (ms).  Due to the dynamically adjusting SSD, participants
will inhibit an average of 50% of the trials.  The SSD increases when a
participant inhibits a response correctly and decreases when a participant does not inhibit a response when the stop signal was given.  The
SSD will ensure that participants cannot successfully use a strategy ofM. W. M.  Kuiper Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 141–152
(SAM; Lang Name, 2005; Bradley & Lang, 1994; see also Krypotos Name,
2011).  Each picture was shown again for 500 ms, followed by two
questions.  The ﬁrst question regarded valence: “How happy/not happy
did you feel when you saw that picture?”.  Participants were asked to
rate this between 1 (not happy) and 9 (very happy).  The second question regarded arousal: “How excited/calm did you feel when you saw
that picture?”.  Again, participants rated this from 1 (very calm) to 9
(highly stressed). 
2. 5.  Procedure
Before inclusion, participants ﬁlled out the SRS-A and AQ as well as
some general questions, which determined whether they met the ﬁrst
series of inclusion criteria.  Before and three months after the test-session, participants ﬁlled out four other questionnaires at home for a
related ongoing study for which data-collection is still in progress.  The
results of these questionnaires will not be reported in the current paper. 
At the test-session, participants were seated in a comfortable chair
and were given a short explanation of the outline of the session.  This
was followed by the placement of three electrodes on the chest of the
participant.  The reference (ground) electrode was placed below the left
clavicle, one electrode was placed below the right clavicle and one
electrode was placed on the left side of the chest on the ribs.  The respiration belt was placed around the chest, just the below the ribs.  The
participant was asked to sit calmly in the chair, so the ECG and respiration signal could be tested.  Next, the participant was asked to
move around, while watching the signal.  This information was used to
illustrate to the participant that the signal is vulnerable to movement
and that it was important to sit as quietly and calmly as possible during
the 10 min baseline period during which participants read a book or
magazine. 
After the baseline, the emotional stop signal task was administered. 
Before starting the program, the participant received instructions regarding the task.  During the practice block and after block 1, 3, 5, 7 and
9, the participant was encouraged by the examiner to respond as fast
and as accurately as possible to the arrows on the screen.  At the end of
the emotional stop signal task, the participants rated every picture on
valence and arousal. 
Finally, the ADOS (for ASD participants) and the subtests of the
WAIS-IV were administered.  At the end of the study protocol, participants received information and debrieﬁng on the negative pictures that
were used in the task.  They received 10 euros for participating and up
to 20 euros for travel expenses.  After the full study was completed, all
participants received the overall results of the study. 
2. 6.  Statistical analyses
Before starting this study, we performed a power analysis, using the
program G*Power (Faul, Erdfelder, Buchner, & Lang, 2009), to analyze
how many participants were needed.  We based the power analysis on
an ANOVA (repeated measures, within-between interaction).  For the
eﬀect size, we based this on “the type of trial*cardiac vagal response”
interaction of the Krypotos Name study (2011).  This eﬀect size was
2 = 0. 115).  However, as we were also interested in
medium-large (Np
additional interactions, we used a smaller eﬀect size, namely the lowest
bound of a medium eﬀect size.  This means that we entered in G*Power
an eﬀect size f = 0. 25, α = 0. 05, Power was 0. 8 (β = 0. 20), number of
groups = 4, number of measurements = 2 and the correlation between
the repeated measures was set at 0. 3.  This showed that the expected
total sample size of our study needed to be 68.  Moreover, we assumed
to encounter approximately three drop-outs per subgroup (n = 12). 
This implies that we needed a total sample size of 80 participants (20
participants per subgroup).  In our study, we included 81 participants
and our analyses are based on a total sample of 70 participants, which is
enough based on our power analysis (n = 68). 
The main analyses can be divided into two stages, but before thosetwo stages the variables age, SRS-A, AQ, TIQ, baseline RMSSD, baseline
RSA, baseline HR, neutral SSRT and negative SSRT were checked onthey were normally distributed among the subgroups. 
Skewness and kurtosis scores were calculated and then transformed into
z-scores (Field, 2009).  This analysis showed that the SSRT of the neutral
condition and baseline RMSSD were not normally distributed.  After a
log-transformation (Field, 2009), the neutral SSRT and baseline RMSSD
were normally distributed within all subgroups.  To be able to compare
the scores of the negative SSRT to the neutral SSRT, the negative SSRT
was also log-transformed.  Afterwards, we examined with two one-way
ANOVAs (separately for RMSSD and RSA subgroups) whether age, TIQ,
SRS-A, AQ, baseline HR and baseline RMSSD or baseline RSA diﬀered
between the subgroups.  Then the two analyses stages followed. 
The ﬁrst stage regarded the ‘manipulation check’, which was performed to determine whether the negative aﬀective manipulation
condition was, as intended, subjectively and objectively experienced as
more negative and more arousing.  This was done in three steps: 1) did
the subgroups physiologically respond to both conditions? To determine whether HRV (RMSSD or RSA) changed from baseline to the
neutral or negative condition for each subgroup (RMSSD/RSA), paired
t-tests were done comparing baseline HRV with HRV during the conditions.  The same paired t-tests were done with the HR data to get more
insight into the physiological responses to the conditions; 2) did the
subgroups have diﬀerent (mean) HRV during the negative aﬀective
manipulation condition than during the neutral condition? This was
examined by running two mixed ANOVA, with ‘HRV during the task’
(neutral, negative) as within subject factor and ‘subgroup’ (for both
RMSSD and RSA subgroups) as between subject.  The RMSSD analyses
used a log transformed mean ‘RMSSD during the task’ as it was not
normally distributed within each subgroup; and ﬁnally, step 3) did the
subgroups (RMSSD/RSA) subjectively rate the negative aﬀective manipulation condition as more negative and more arousing? This was
done by performing two mixed ANOVA’s (RMSSD/RSA) with ‘valence’
(neutral, negative) and ‘arousal’ (neutral, negative) respectively, as
within subject factor and ‘subgroup’ as between subject factor. 
The second stage included the analyses to address our main questions.  We performed two mixed ANOVAs (separately for RMSSD and
RSA subgroups) to examine the eﬀect of baseline HRV (low vs.  high
baseline RMSSD/RSA) on prepotent response inhibition (neutral vs. 
negative condition).  In both mixed ANOVAs, ‘subgroup’ was the between subject factor and ‘condition type’ the within subject factor.  Both
analyses were repeated with medication as covariate to determine
whether medication-use aﬀected the main ﬁndings.  Only when the
main pattern of ﬁndings was altered will the results be discussed.  To
examine our hypothesis that the high HRV ASD subgroup did not diﬀer
from the low HRV TD subgroup on both inhibition conditions, we additionally performed a Bayesian t-test to provide more insight into
whether there is more evidence for this “null” hypothesis compared to
the alternative hypothesis.  We used the program JASP (JASP Team,
2017; Love Name, 2015; Morey, Rouder, Jamil, & Morey, 2015) to run
the Bayesian t-test.  We used the default setting (0. 707) for the prior
width setting.  We will report the Bayesian Factor 01 (BF01), which
represents the likelihood that the “null” hypothesis is true relative to
the alternative hypothesis, given the data.  These Bayesian analyses
were done separately for the RSA and RMSSD subgroups and separately
for the negative and neutral condition. 
Overall, when signiﬁcant diﬀerences were found, post hoc analyses
using Sidak Corrections for multiple comparisons were used to further
explore the relationships (Field, 2009).  Also, we used the program
StatCheck (Epskamp & Nuijten, 2016) to check whether all our reported
p-values are correctly reported. 
M. W. M.  Kuiper Name
3.  Results
3. 1.  Subgroup descriptives
See Table 1 for the subgroup descriptives and statistics.  Post hoc
analyses showed that, only the low-RMSSD ASD group had a signiﬁcantly higher age than the high-RMSSD TD group (p = 0. 01) and
the other subgroups did not diﬀer from each other on age (all
p > 0. 05).  Also, as intended, the ASD subgroups scored signiﬁcantly
higher on the AQ and SRS-A compared to the TD subgroups (all p <
0. 001).  The low ASD subgroups had similar scores on the AQ and SRS-A
as the high ASD subgroups (all p > 0. 91).  The low and high TD subgroups did also not diﬀer from each other on these questionnaires (all
p > 0. 91).  Baseline HR did diﬀer between the RMSSD subgroups (see
Table 1).  Post hoc analyses showed that the low-RMSSD ASD subgroup
had signiﬁcantly higher HR compared to the high-RMSSD TD subgroup
(p < 0. 001).  The low-RMSSD TD group had signiﬁcantly higher HR
compared to the high-RMSSD TD subgroup (p < 0. 01) as well.  The
other subgroup comparisons were non-signiﬁcant (p > 0. 08).  Baseline
HR did not diﬀer between the RSA subgroups (see Table 1).  Baseline
RMSSD was signiﬁcantly lower for the low-RMSSD ASD subgroup
compared to the remaining three subgroups (all p < 0. 03).  The highRMSSD ASD subgroup had signiﬁcantly higher baseline RMSSD compared to the low-RMSSD TD subgroup (p < 0. 001), but not compared
to the high-RMSSD TD group (p = 0. 28).  The high-RMSSD TD subgroup
had also signiﬁcantly higher baseline RMSSD compared to the lowRMSSD TD subgroup (p < 0. 001).  Baseline RSA was signiﬁcantlythe low-RSA ASD compared to the high-RSA ASD
(p < 0. 001) and high-RSA TD subgroup (p < 0. 001), but not compared to the low-RSA TD subgroup (p = 0. 11).  Also, there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the high-RSA ASD and the high-RSA TD
subgroup on baseline RSA (p = 0. 87). 3. 2.  Manipulation check
3. 2. 1.  Do the
manipulation?
subgroups
physiologically
respond to the aﬀective
The high HRV subgroups (both ASD/TD as well as RMSSD/RSA)
showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in HRV from baseline in response to
the neutral or negative condition of the emotional stop signal task (see
Table 2A for descriptives and statistics).  The low-HRV TD subgroups
showed a signiﬁcant increase in HRV in response to both the neutral
and the negative condition. 