
Beginning a new romantic relationship is often accompanied by a
barrage of emotional and physiological changes.  Individuals report
experiencing euphoria during the honeymoon period and exhibit differences in hormone and neurotransmitter levels (Marazziti, Akiskal,
Rossi, & Cassano, 1999; Marazziti & Canale, 2004), and brain activation
patterns (Aron Name, 2005).  Recent evidence points toward a link between autonomic reactivity and relationship formation, with new romantic relationships potentially buﬀering physiological reactivity to
negative emotions.  Speciﬁcally, diﬀerences in heart rate variability
(HRV) have been detected between single and newly-coupled individuals presented with emotional stimuli (Schneiderman, ZilbersteinKra, Leckman, & Feldman, 2011). 
HRV refers to the variation between successive heartbeat intervals
and is extracted through electrocardiography (ECG).  A variable heart
responds more readily to environmental cues and returns to baseline
more quickly.  The high frequency (HF) component of HRV (. 15–. 40 Hz)
primarily represents the inﬂuence of the parasympathetic nervous
system (Thayer, Åhs, Fredrikson, Sollers, & Wager, 2012) which is associated with vegetative and restorative functions.  Resting HRV refers
to a single measurement taken while the individual is at rest, whereas
HRV reactivity measures phasic changes in HRV in response to a
stressor. 
According to Porges’ (1995; 1998) polyvagal theory, the myelinated
branch of the vagus nerve exerts parasympathetic inﬂuence on the
heart and controls the social engagement system.  This social engagement system serves as the neurophysiological basis for courting behaviours associated with seduction and the control of facial expression,
vocalization, and head tilt.  This system communicates reproductive
availability and fosters proximity with potential romantic partners
(Porges, 1998).  In times of stress this system is depressed to allow for
the expression of the sympathetic nervous system’s ﬁght-or-ﬂight response.  HRV may therefore serve as an index of both the vagus nerve’s
parasympathetic inﬂuence on the heart and the activation of the social
engagement system.  Building on Porges’ theory, Schneiderman Name
(2011) found that, in comparison to single participants, individuals
who had recently begun new romantic relationships demonstrated
lower HRV reactivity in response to negative emotion-inducing videos. 
They postulated that HRV reactivity decreases during the process of
courting associated with new romantic relationships due to increased
activation of the social engagement system. 
☆ This manuscript is based on Laura K.  Bailey’s Master’s Thesis.  Neither author have any interests that might be interpreted as inﬂuencing the research.  APA ethical standards were
followed in conducting the study. 
☆☆ This research was supported in part by a grant from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada [grant number 766-2012-4040].  This research could not have
been conducted without the tireless eﬀorts of research assistants in the Stress, Eating Behaviour, and Body Image Laboratory at Lakehead University.  Special thanks to Jennifer Bailey,
Danielle Ransom, and Chad Keefe for their insightful critiques of this manuscript. 
⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Psychology, Lakehead University, 955 Oliver Road, Thunder Bay, ON, P7B 5E1, Canada. 
E-mail address: lbailey1@lakeheadu. ca (L. K.  Bailey). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. biopsycho. 2017. 07. 004
Received 17 May 2016; Received in revised form 17 February 2017; Accepted 9 July 2017
Available online 10 July 2017
0301-0511/ 
L. K.  Bailey, R.  Davis
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 50–54
The ﬁrst purpose of the present study is to replicate key ﬁndings
reported by Schneiderman Name (2011).  A cohort of single women was
studied over a 6-month period.  The replication hypothesis asserts that
compared to participants who remained single over the 6-month followup, their newly-coupled counterparts will evidence (a) higher HRV
during an emotionally evocative negative ﬁlm clip and (b) lower HRV
reactivity, deﬁned as milder change in HRV from positive to negative
ﬁlm clips.  Schneiderman Name interpreted both ﬁndings as evidence for
love causing a “buﬀered stress response” to negative stimuli (p.  1318). 
However, given the cross-sectional nature of their methodology, assertions about cause cannot be claimed with certainty.  Thus, two
competing longitudinal hypotheses are posited to understand the relationship between HRV reactivity and relationship status:
1.  The consequence hypothesis asserts that newly-coupled individuals
will evidence a drop in HRV reactivity to emotion-evoking ﬁlm clips
as their relationship status changes from single to coupled, while
HRV for singles will remain unchanged. 
2.  The cause hypothesis states that single individuals with lower HRV
reactivity at baseline will be more likely to enter into a new romantic relationship over a 6-month follow-up interval.  Other variables associated with HRV reactivity and relationship formation
may serve as potential moderators including: resting HRV, attachment style, emotional distress, self-esteem, and body mass index. 
<Middle> Method. 
2. 1.  Participants
Ninety-one single, female postsecondary students who were interested in forming a monogamous heterosexual romantic relationship
participated in the study.  Eight participants were excluded for technical
reasons, excessive ectopic heartbeats, or failure to follow instructions. 
Of the remaining 83 participants, 47 (57%) returned and completed the
follow-up laboratory session and thus comprise the sample of interest. 
Mean age was 19. 09 years (SD = 2. 23).  Mean BMI was 22. 31,
SD = 2. 84, range = 17. 47–31. 01.  Twenty-eight (60%) remained single
while 19 (40%) became coupled over the 6-month follow-up, operationally deﬁned as entering into a monogamous heterosexual romantic
relationship lasting at least 10 days.  The length of 10 days was chosen
based on Schneiderman Name's (2011) 2-week minimum relationship
duration.  Shorter relationship duration was expected to yield greater
diﬀerences in HRV in the event that HRV reactivity changed upon beginning a romantic relationship.  Mean duration of the romantic relationships at follow-up was 37. 2 days (SD = 18. 23; range 10–66 days). 
2. 2.  Materials
2. 2. 1.  Demographics questionnaire assessing BMI
calculated
Demographics Questionnaire Assessing BMI:BMI = weight (lb. )/(height [in. ] x height [in. ]) x 703 from self-reported height and weight.  Motivation to begin a romantic relationship
was assessed using the item “Please rate your motivation to begin a
monogamous heterosexual romantic relationship on the following
scale” rated on two separate scales.  For the ﬁrst scale, responses ranged
from 0 (I do not want to begin a monogamous romantic relationship), to 4 (I
am currently taking action to begin a relationship).  On the second scale,
responses ranged from 0 (Not at all motivated) to 7 (Extremely motivated). 
Participants also rated their expectancy to begin a romantic relationship over the follow-up period.  Possible responses for the expectancy
item ranged from 0 (Not at all likely) to 7 (Extremely likely). 
2. 2. 2.  Rosenberg self-esteem scale (RSES)
Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (RSES): a 10-item self-report measure
of global self-esteem (Rosenberg, 1965).  Responses were given on a 451
point Likert-type scale, ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 4 (strongly2. 2. 3.  Attachment style questionnaire (ASQ)
Attachment Style Questionnaire (ASQ): a 40-item self-report measure of how individuals currently view their attachment security with
other adults (Feeney, Noller, & Hanrahan, 1994).  Respondents rated
how much they agree with each item on a 6-point scale ranging from 1
(totally disagree) to 6 (totally agree).  The two-dimensional scoring
method described by Alexander, Feeney, Hohaus, and Noller (2001)
yields two insecure subscales.  Individuals who scored high on the
Avoidant Attachment subscale were expected to not meet the inclusion
criteria of being motivated to form a monogamous romantic relationship.  Thus, the Anxious Attachment (ASQ: AN) subscale was chosen as
the measure of attachment security. 
2. 2. 4.  Kessler psychological distress scale (K6)
Kessler Psychological Distress Scale (K6): a 6-item scale measuring
general emotional distress during the past 30 days (Kessler Name, 2002). 
Respondents rated items on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (None of the
time) to 4 (All of the time). 
2. 2. 5.  Pleasantness questionnaire
Pleasantness Questionnaire: a manipulation check to ensure the ﬁlm
clips produced emotions of the intended aﬀective valence (Rottenberg,
Ray, & Gross, 2007).  Emotions experienced while viewing the ﬁlm clips
were rated on a 9-point Likert-type scale ranging from 0 (unpleasant) to
8 (pleasant). 
2. 3.  Apparatus
2. 3. 1.  Electrocardiogram
ECG was recorded using a 72-channel ampliﬁer, sampled at
1024 Hz.  Participants were ﬁtted with three electrodes with snap-on
Ag-AgCl on cleaned skin located below the right clavicle and below the
left rib in a lead-II conﬁguration and a ground electrode below the left
clavicle.  Raw ECG data was extracted and inspected using ASA-Lab
software (Version 16; Advanced Neuro Technology, Enschede,
Netherlands) and then imported into Kubios 2. 1 HRV specialized analysis software (Biosignal Analysis and Medical Imaging Group; http://
kubios. 