
The term pessimism (pessimistic judgement bias) refers to a ﬁxation
on the darker aspects of a situation or event, to the expectation of a
negative outcome, or to a lack of hope for the future [1,2].  Those who
tend towards pessimism may also feel helpless and believe that any
actions taken are unlikely to have an impact on their future.  The role of
pessimism has been emphasized in the aetiology of aﬀective disorders. 
In cognitive theories, information processing biases, including pessimistic judgement bias, are considered as a vulnerability factor for the
aetiology, maintenance and recurrence of depression [3–6].  This vulnerability has been conceptualized as a trait-like latent endogenous
process reactive to the eﬀects of stress, which reside in genetic, biological, and psychological variables [7].  However, to date, there have
been very few studies that directly support this theoretical claim.  Recent development of the ACI test, a task that can be used to measure
cognitive judgement bias (‘optimism’ and ‘pessimism’) in animals
[8–10], enabled the investigation of cognitive vulnerability to depression in an animal model. 
In our research, we assumed that in animals, similar to the case in
humans, cognitive judgement bias has components of both an enduring
trait and a transient state [11].  A trait represents a stable individual
diﬀerence in the level of pessimism/optimism that is generally experienced, whereas the state includes the pessimism/optimism that may
change on the basis of the situation or contextual factors.  Following this
assumption and on the basis of a number of ACI tests, we are now able
to isolate two groups of animals that signiﬁcantly and persistently diﬀer
in their cognitive judgement bias index over time.  In other words, we
are able to identify animals displaying stable and enduring ‘pessimistic’
and ‘optimistic’ traits. 
Recent research conducted in our laboratory revealed that the trait
‘pessimism’ in rats is linked with higher vulnerability to stress-induced
anhedonia [12].  We also demonstrated that ‘pessimistic’ rats are more
sensitive to negative performance feedback in the probabilistic reversallearning task [13] and less motivated to work for a reward in a progressive ratio schedule of reinforcement [14].  Other studies revealed
the interrelation between the traits ‘pessimism’ and ‘optimism’ and
risky decision making in an animal model of slot machine gambling
where rats classiﬁed as ‘optimists’ were more likely to gamble for a
reward on clearly losing outcomes than were the ‘pessimists’ [15]. 
Another study, which assessed the inﬂuence of cognitive judgement
bias on decision-making under uncertainty, reported that ‘pessimistic’
⁎ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: rygula@gmail. com (R.  Rygula). 
1 These authors contributed equally to this work. 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 028
Received 14 July 2017; Received in revised form 9 August 2017; Accepted 17 August 2017
Available online 24 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
R.  Drozd Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 199–207
rats take risks signiﬁcantly less often than their ‘optimistic’ counterparts
but that this only occurred in hopeless situations when the probability
of gaining a reward was extremely low [16]. 
One of the remaining unanswered questions is whether ‘pessimistic’/‘optimistic’ judgement bias could inﬂuence the way individuals
adjust their behaviour to changing aspects of the environment (cognitive ﬂexibility).  Such an interaction is not unlikely since deﬁcits in
cognitive ﬂexibility have been identiﬁed in psychiatric conditions that
are associated with pessimistic judgements [17–19]. 
One of the aspects of cognitive ﬂexibility that can be investigated
both in humans and in laboratory animals is their ability to initially
learn a rule and form an attentional set within the same stimulus dimensions and then to switch their attention to a new, previously irrelevant stimulus dimension.  This aspect of cognitive ﬂexibility, associated with aﬀective disorders and controlled by the prefrontal cortex
(PFC), is commonly assessed in humans using the Wisconsin Card
Sorting Test (WCST) [20] and in rats using the Attentional Set Shifting
Task (ASST) [21].  In the latter, the animals have to select a bowl
containing a food reward, based on their ability to discriminate the
odours and the media covering the bait.  The ASST requires rats to initially learn a rule and form an attentional set within the same stimulus
dimensions.  In the extra-dimensional (ED) shift, the crucial part of the
test, the subjects have to switch their attention to a new, previously
irrelevant stimulus dimension (e. g. , from the odours to the media
covering the bait).  The ED component is impaired by lesions of the
medial prefrontal cortex [21] as well as by chronic stress [22,23]. 
The present study was designed to investigate the interaction between cognitive judgement bias (‘optimism’/‘pessimism’) and cognitive
ﬂexibility in an animal model of depression based on chronic restraint
stress.  For this, ﬁrst, we trained and tested the rats in a series of ambiguous-cue interpretation tests, which allowed us to classify them as
‘optimistic’ or ‘pessimistic’.  Subsequently, the animals were re-trained
and re-tested on the ASST, which allowed evaluation of the diﬀerencescognitive ﬂexibility. 
Additionally, half of the ‘optimistic’ and half of the ‘pessimistic’ rats
were subjected to chronic (2 weeks) restraint stress and were re-evaluated using the ASST. 
<Middle> Materials and methods. 
2. 1.  Ethics statement
These experiments were conducted in accordance with the NIH
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were approved
by the Ethics Committee for Animal Experiments at the Institute of
Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences. 
2. 2.  Subjects and housing
This study used 80 male Sprague Dawley rats (Charles River,
Germany) weighing 175–200 g upon arrival.  The rats were group
housed (4 rats/cage) in a temperature-controlled room (21 ± 1 °C)
with 30–40% humidity under a 12/12-h light/dark cycle (lights on at
06:00 h).  In all of the experiments, the rats were mildly food restricted
to approximately 85% of their free-feeding weights.  This was achieved
by providing 15 g of food per rat per day (standard laboratory chow). 
The food restriction started 1 week prior to training.  Water was freely
available, except during the test sessions.  The behavioural procedures
and testing were performed during the light phase of the light/dark2. 3.  Ambiguous-cue interpretation test
2. 3. 1.  Apparatus
The behavioural tasks were performed in 24 computer-controlled
Skinner boxes (Med Associates, St Albans, Vermont, USA); each box wasequipped with light, a speaker, a liquid dispenser (set to deliver 0. 1 ml
of 5% sucrose solution), a grid ﬂoor through which scrambled electric
shocks (0. 5 mA) could be delivered, and 2 retractable levers.  The levers
were located at opposite sides of the feeder.  All of the behavioural
protocols, including the data acquisition and recordings, were programmed in Med State notation code (Med Associates).  The experimental procedures for the ACI test used in this study were modiﬁed
versions of the procedures previously described by Enkel and colleagues
[8] and have been described elsewhere [10]. 
2. 3. 2.  Behavioural training for the ACI test
2. 3. 2. 1.  Positive tone training.  During this phase, the rats were trained
to press the lever located on the left side of the feeder to receive the
sucrose solution when a tone (50 s, 2000 Hz at 75 dB sound pressure
level (SPL) or 9000 Hz at 75 dB SPL (counterbalanced)) signalled
reward availability.  Due to its association with a palatable reward,
this tone acquired a positive valence and was referred to as the “positive
tone,” and the associated lever was referred to as the “positive lever. ” A
reliable active lever pressing for the reward was achieved in 3 training
steps: a) presentations of the positive tone (each lasting 10 s) cooccurred with the delivery of the sucrose solution and were separated
by 10 s intertrial intervals (ITIs); b) presentations of the positive tone
co-occurred with a left lever extension and were followed by a 10 s ITI
(each lever press during the tone was continuously rewarded by sucrose
solution delivery); and c) was similar to (b) with the exception that
after the ﬁrst lever press and reward delivery, the tone was terminated
and followed by a 10 s ITI.  Each training session lasted for 30 min, and
the training sessions continued until the animals attained a stable
performance on each of the training steps (more than 80 responses
maintained over 3 consecutive training sessions during step b and a
minimum of 70% of responses to the positive lever following positive
tone presentation maintained over 3 consecutive sessions during step
c). 