
Opioid peptides have a long history of involvement in pain, reward,
and learning and memory.  Previous reports from our laboratory and
others have demonstrated that the general opioid antagonist naloxone,
impairs learning of many associative tasks such as delay conditioning,
operant lever-pressing behavior, fear conditioning, and trace eyeblink
conditioning [1–5].  In exploring the role for speciﬁc opioid receptors in
learning and memory, our laboratory has shown that antagonizing the
kappa-opioid receptor (KOR) impairs acquisition for the associative
paradigm whisker-trace eyeblink (WTEB) conditioning [6]. 
In WTEB conditioning a neutral conditioned stimulus (CS; Whisker
stimulation) is paired following a stimulus free trace interval with a
salient unconditioned stimulus that elicits an eye-blink (US; Eye shock). 
This paradigm has been shown to be dependent on, and induce plasticity in primary somatosensory cortex (S1), a likely site for memory
storage [7–10].  Our subsequent studies exploring the role of KOR with
learning have demonstrated that either systemic or direct S1 KOR inhibition impairs WTEB acquisition [6].  Consistent with our ﬁndings,
many studies have shown that KOR modulation can alter learning on
various tasks such as inhibitory avoidance, spontaneous alternation,
water-maze, radial-arm-maze, and conditioned place aversion [11–15]. 
These studies have strongly suggested that KOR plays a prominent role
in mediating various types of learning. 
KOR’s endogenous ligand and the most likely molecular trigger for
these eﬀects on learning is dynorphin.  Dynorphin is synthesized from
the precursor peptide prodynorphin (PD), which is synthesized in vesicles from the precursor preprodynorphin (PPD) [16].  Similar to KOR,
Dynorphin and its upstream precursors have been implicated in various
forms of learning.  For instance, PD knockout mice exhibit enhanced
levels of freezing in a contextual fear conditioning task [17].  Likewise,
dynorphin knockout mice display reduced age-related deﬁcits in water
⁎ Corresponding author at: Beckman Institute, 405 N.  Mathews Ave, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. 