Theta Oscillations in the Human Medial Temporal
Lobe during Real-World Ambulatory MovementHighlights
d Movement-related 8 Hz theta oscillations occur in the human
medial temporal lobe
d Theta occurs in short bouts that are more prevalent during
fast versus slow movements
d The duration and prevalence of theta are higher in a
congenitally blind participant
d Combined motion capture and iEEG allow for future studies
of ambulatory behaviorZahra M.  Aghajan, Peter Schuette,
Tony A.  Fields, . . . , John Stern, Itzhak
Fried, Nanthia Suthana
Correspondence
nsuthana@mednet. ucla. edu
In Brief
Aghajan Name record deep brain activity,
during untethered freely moving
behavior, from participants chronically
implanted with depth electrodes.  They
demonstrate that 8 Hz theta oscillations,
the hallmark of spatial navigation in
rodents, also occur in humans, albeit in
shorter bouts that are more prevalent
during fast versus slow movements. 
M.  Aghajan Name, 2017, Current Biology 27, 3743–3751
December 18, 2017 Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 10. 062
Current BiologyTheta Oscillations in the Human Medial Temporal
Lobe during Real-World Ambulatory Movement
Zahra M.  Aghajan,1 Peter Schuette,1 Tony A.  Fields,2 Michelle E.  Tran,3 Sameed M.  Siddiqui,1 Nicholas R.  Hasulak,4
Thomas K.  Tcheng,4 Dawn Eliashiv,2 Emily A.  Mankin,3 John Stern,2 Itzhak Fried,1,3,5,6 and Nanthia Suthana1,3,7,8,*
1Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
2Department of Neurology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
3Department of Neurosurgery, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
4NeuroPace, Inc. , Mountain View, CA 94043, USA
5Functional Neurosurgery Unit, Tel Aviv Medical Center, Tel Aviv 64361, Israel
6Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel
7Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
8Lead Contact
*Correspondence: nsuthana@mednet. ucla. edu
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 10. 062The theta rhythm—a slow (6–12 Hz) oscillatory
component of the local ﬁeld potential—plays a critical role in spatial navigation and memory by coordinating the activity of neuronal ensembles within the
medial temporal
lobe (MTL).  Although theta has
been extensively studied in freely moving rodents,
its presence in humans has been elusive and primarily investigated in stationary subjects.  Here we used
a unique clinical opportunity to examine theta within
the human MTL during untethered,
real-world
ambulatory movement.  We recorded intracranial
electroencephalographic activity from participants
chronically implanted with the wireless NeuroPace
responsive neurostimulator (RNS) and tracked their
motion with sub-millimeter precision.  Our data revealed that movement-related theta oscillations
indeed exist in humans, such that theta power is
signiﬁcantly higher during movement than immobility.  Unlike in rodents, however, theta occurs in
short bouts, with average durations of 400 ms,
which are more prevalent during fast versus slow
movements.  In a rare opportunity to study a congenitally blind participant, we found that both the prevalence and duration of theta bouts were increased
relative to the sighted participants.  These results
provide critical support for conserved neurobiological characteristics of theta oscillations during ambulatory spatial navigation, while highlighting some
fundamental differences across species in these
oscillations between humans and rodents. 
INTRODUCTION
The crucial role of the medial temporal lobe (MTL) in declarative
memory and encoding new experiences is unequivocal based on
an abundant body of literature in humans and many mammalian
species [1–3].  It is posited that the ongoing rhythmic oscillatory
activity in the local ﬁeld potential (LFP) is critical for the temporal
organization of neural assemblies in this region, allowing
appropriate modiﬁcation of synaptic connections.  Additionally,
various frequency bands are thought to be involved in different
brain functions [4, 5]. 
In particular, the 6–12 Hz frequency
range—commonly referred to as the theta rhythm—has been
associated with exploratory behavior [6, 7] and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep [8], and different features of this rhythm have
been linked to memory performance on various tasks [9–13]. 
In the rodent hippocampus, theta oscillations (6–12 Hz) are
most prominent during locomotion, even during tasks with no
memory demand, such as running on linear tracks and random
foraging, although a lower frequency theta (3–7 Hz) has been
reported during periods of immobility [14].  Theta has also been
reported in other species, such as cats [15], and in shorter oscillatory bouts in bats [16, 17], non-human primates [18, 19], and
humans [20–22].  There is, thus, an apparent discrepancy in the
presence of persistent movement-related theta across species. 
This issue is confounded by the fact that—due to restrictions
imposed by recording techniques—electrophysiological recordings in primates, contrary to those performed in rodents, have
typically employed virtual navigation in stationary subjects. 
Recent rodent hippocampal recordings during virtual navigation
have demonstrated signiﬁcant differences in theta dynamics
between virtual and real-world navigation, including lower frequencies and a lack of frequency-speed dependence in virtual
navigation [23, 24].  In light of these studies, resolving whether
persistent movement-related theta could be a feature of human
navigation requires directly probing the intracranial electroencephalogram (iEEG) during natural voluntary human movement. 
Movement-related theta was observed in walking humans in one
recent study [22].  However, due to lack of motion tracking, this
study did not allow for characterization of theta with respect to
movement parameters [22].  We therefore conducted an experiment to elucidate the properties of theta oscillations in the MTL
of freely moving humans.  This was made possible by using a
novel chronic implant that allowed for wireless iEEG recording
outside of a restrictive hospital setting. 
Current Biology 27, 3743–3751, December 18, 2017 Published by Elsevier Ltd.  3743
Figure 1.  Simultaneous Motion Tracking
and iEEG Recording within the Human MTL
(A) Example post-operative CT of a participant with
an implanted electrode in the right hippocampus
(top left) along with a coronal view of a high-resolution MRI overlaid with co-registered electrodes
(shown in yellow). 
(B) Sample trajectory of a participant during one
complete trial consisting of
linear and circular
movements. 
(C) Schematic of the setup of cameras used for
motion capture (see the STAR Methods).  Inset:
real-time motion tracking of an example participant is shown. 
(D) Movement speed distribution of all sighted
participants (green; median, [25th, 75th] = 0. 87,
[0. 20, 1. 14] m/s, Ntrials = 21) and one congenitally
blind participant (black; median, [25th, 75th] = 0. 44,
[0. 05, 0. 68] m/s, Ntrials = 7).  Dashed vertical lines
indicate median value; shaded areas correspond
to kernel smoothing function estimates of the distributions. 
See also Tables S1 and S2 and Movie S1. 
<Middle> RESULTS. 
MTL Recordings in Freely Walking Humans Implanted
with the RNS System
Participants were four neurosurgical patients (one congenitally
blind), chronically implanted with the FDA-approved NeuroPace
RNS System (responsive neurostimulator) (Figure 1A) for treatment of pharmacologically intractable epilepsy.  For participant
demographics, see Tables S1 and S2.  For studying ambulatory
movement, the RNS System provides two signiﬁcant advantages over traditional recording techniques in the hospital
setting: motion and muscle artifacts are entirely eliminated (since
the implant is fully shielded); subjects are able to freely move
around without the limitations imposed by restrictive hospital
equipment, related safety protocols, and tethered implanted
wires connected to large recording equipment.  The RNS System
recorded continuous bipolar iEEG activity from two adjacent
electrode contacts (sampling rate: 250 Hz, with an analog ﬁlter
equivalent to a ﬁrst-order Butterworth with 3 dB attenuation at
the cutoff frequencies (4–90 Hz); for a detailed description, see
the STAR Methods).  Participants with MTL electrodes performed
a task in which they were instructed to walk along linear and circular paths at slow and fast speeds.  A complete trial consisted of
the following four movements: (1) slow movement in straight
lines, (2) slow movement in circles, (3) fast movement in straight
lines, and (4) fast movements in circles; the order of these instructions was randomized (Figure 1B; see the STAR Methods). 
Within each trial, after the participants ﬁnished one type of movement, they were temporarily immobile until a pre-recorded voice
command informed them to begin the next type of motion. 
Motion tracking was performed using the OptiTrack system
(Natural Point), which was capable of recording participants’ positional and rotational information (Figures 1C and 1D; Movie S1). 
Position information was recorded simultaneously with iEEG
3744 Current Biology 27, 3743–3751, December 18, 2017
data (Figure 2A; Movies S2 and S3; see the STAR Methods). 
The locations of electrodes were determined by co-registration
of high-resolution post-operative computed tomography (CT)
images with high-resolution pre-operative magnetic resonance
images that had been subjected to automated segmentation of
MTL subregions to facilitate visualization (Figure 2B; Table S3;
see the STAR Methods).  Although the RNS System is implanted
in potential seizure onset zones, pairs of electrode contacts
frequently span up to 10 mm of tissue, thereby leading to
some recordings in healthy tissue.  In the current study, each
participant had at least one contact ipsilateral to the seizure
onset zone (Table S3).  To further account for epileptic tissue in
all contact recordings, we eliminated epochs with putative
epileptic activity by using a thresholding algorithm, similar to
methods previously described [25] (see the STAR Methods and
Figure S1A), and visual inspection, which resulted in discarding
3% of the data per trial (median, [25th, 75th] = 3. 04%, [1. 32%,
4. 62%], Nparticipants = 4, Ntrials 3 channels = 112; Figure S1B). 
Note that the responsive therapy (stimulation feature) was turned
off during the experiments and, hence, there was no stimulation
artifact in the data (see the STAR Methods). 
Theta Oscillations during Movement and ImmobilityExamination of raw iEEG traces revealed striking theta oscillations, which were readily visible (Figure 2A; Movies S2 and S3). 
We ﬁrst sought to examine whether these theta oscillations
were more prominent during movement than immobility and
would thus be considered an analog of movement-related theta
in rodents.  To address this, in each trial a multi-taper power
spectrum was calculated within each condition, i. e. , movement
versus immobility, deﬁned as speeds below 10 cm/s.  We found
that theta power was indeed higher during movement, as shown
in individual examples (Figure 3A; Figure S2).  The theta power
Figure 2.  Example Theta Oscillations in the Human MTL
(A) Example 1-s-long raw iEEG traces (gray) from the MTL of all study participants overlaid with ﬁltered (3–12 Hz) theta oscillations (hippocampal and entorhinal
theta shown in red and blue, respectively).  Participant P3 is congenitally blind.  Note that, on average, the duration of theta bouts is shorter than 1 s, as
demonstrated in this ﬁgure (for a detailed characterization, see Figure 4). 
(B) (Left) Sample electrode locations from a participant (P2) overlaid onto coronal pre-operative high-resolution MRI.  (Right) Automated MTL subregion
segmentation (note that different colors correspond to different areas) demonstrating electrode locations in an example participant.  White areas correspond to
white matter. 
See also Figures S1 and S6, Table S3, and Movies S2 and S3. 
index, a normalized measure of power difference between the
two conditions, was signiﬁcantly positive for all participants
(Figure 3B; see the STAR Methods) and on the population level(median, [25th, 75th] = 0. 40, [0. 30, 0. 51]; p = 4. 56 3 10
Wilcoxon signed-rank test; n = 112).  This analysis assumes
that individual data points are statistically independent and
cannot account for potential clustering of the data due to the
within-subject
repeated-measures design.  To address this,
since neighboring electrode contacts and repeated trials from
the participant do not constitute independent samples, we
used generalized estimating equations (GEEs) [26, 27] to model
relative theta power as a function of whether the participant was
moving or not (see the STAR Methods).  In agreement with the
results obtained from the theta power index distribution, we
found that movement is indeed a signiﬁcant factor in predicting
relative theta power (p < 0. 001, Wald c2 = 172. 50; estimated
means and 95% Wald conﬁdence intervals are as follows:for
immobility). 
for movement and 0. 30,
[0. 67, 0. 73]
[0. 27, 0. 33]
Prevalence of Theta Oscillations
To further investigate how movement speed modulated theta,
we quantiﬁed the prevalence of signiﬁcant theta oscillations during fast versus slow movements using the better oscillation
detection (BOSC) method [28–30].  This method uses wavelets
to provide a power estimate for the signal, and—accounting
for the background 1/f dependency—it can detect periods with
signiﬁcant oscillations at different
frequencies that exceed
thresholds for power and duration (see the STAR Methods). 
This method was recently used by Watrous Name [31]comparative study of theta oscillations between virtual navigation studies in humans and real-world navigation studies in rodents.  Therefore, applying the BOSC method allowed for direct
comparisons of our ﬁndings with previously published results. 
For each participant and within each trial, data were separated
into low- and high-speed movements using a median split on
speed in that trial to obtain an equal amount of data within
each condition (see the STAR Methods).  By utilizing the BOSC
method [28, 29], episodes with signiﬁcant oscillations between
3 and 30 Hz (p-episodes, percentage trial time in oscillatory
episodes [29]; occurring for at least 3 cycles and above 95%
chance level; Figure 4A) were calculated in frequency windows
of 0. 25 Hz (see the STAR Methods). 