
Visibility of stimulus components may be enhanced or diminished
by the presence of adjacent stimulus elements.  Such eﬀects are evident
with high-contrast lateral masks [1], metacontrast with zero stimulus
onset asynchrony [2], and crowding of peripheral targets [3].  Contextual eﬀects on perceptual capacities may reﬂect neural interactions
among representations of targets and lateral masks. 
At a neural
level, response properties of cortical neurons are
modulated by the context in which stimuli are placed [4–6].  In primates
and cats, systematic relationships exist among the orientation preference of neurons.  Such connections may contribute to a system of
enhancement and inhibition of signals based upon contextual eﬀects
from other cortical sites [7,8].  In rodents, the distribution of orientation
preference is not systematic [9,10], nor do lateral projections display
the periodic patches found in primates and cats [11].  These distinctions
in cortical organization suggest that lateral interactions among stimulus
elements may operate diﬀerently in rats than in primates and cats. 
At a perceptual level, the ability of rats to discriminate the presence
or absence of targets declined when target onset was accompanied by
ﬂankers [12].  In addition, misses as well as false alarms increased when
ﬂankers were collinear to targets, compared to ﬂankers that deviated
from collinearity.  Such eﬀects on detecting suprathreshold stimuli were
observed across a range of contrasts of both targets and ﬂankers [13]. 
For humans, contrast thresholds are elevated in the presence of
collinear, co-axial Gabor patches positioned near test stimuli (within 2
cycles), whereas thresholds decrease with adjacent elements positions
within a farther zone (approximately 3–10 cycles) [14].  Flanker eﬀects
appear to be restricted to near foveal viewing [15,16] to which attention is directed [17,16], and are not observed at suprathreshold levels
[15].  Flanker eﬀects may reﬂect a system for contour integration
mediated by short- and long-range interactions within neural populations [18]. 
The functional signiﬁcance of connection patterns in local cortical
circuits may be distinguished across species [19].  In order to explore
lateral masking on detection thresholds in rats, responses to target onset
were measured across luminance contrast for targets presented alone,
or in the presence of masks. 
<Middle> Methods. 
2. 1.  Subjects
Ten Long-Evans hooded rats served as subjects, each randomly assigned to one or more stimulus conditions.  Animals were deprived of
water for 22 h before each session, and allowed water ad lib for one
hour following sessions.  Sessions occurred ﬁve days each week, and
animals were allowed water ad lib on the remaining two days.  This
⁎ Corresponding author at: Psychology Department, Brooklyn College CUNY, 2900 Bedford Avenue, Brooklyn, NY, United States. 
E-mail address: dkurylo@brooklyn. cuny. edu (D. D.  Kurylo). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 07. 046
Received 2 April 2017; Received in revised form 11 July 2017; Accepted 29 July 2017
Available online 05 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
D. D.  Kurylo Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 1–7
Fig.  1.  A.  Top view displaying geometry of test chamber.  Test stimuli (Gabor patches) appeared on the monitor, subtending a visual angle of either 5. 9° or 14. 0°.  B.  Trial events and
reaction time measurements.  Dotted lines represent variable ranges of events.  Test stimulus onset relative to initial nose-poke occurred with a randomly chosen latency, ranging from 500
to 2000 ms. 
study was conducted in accordance with the National Institutes of
Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, and approved
by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Brooklyn
College. 
2. 2.  Apparatus
Behavioral measurements were made in a customized operant
conditioning chamber (Fig.  1A).  The front panel of the chamber supported a metal funnel that extended 3 cm outside of the chamber.  Animals had access to the funnel through a 5 cm diameter hole, centered
2. 5 cm from the chamber ﬂoor.  Placement of the rat's head completely
within the funnel disrupted an infrared (IR) light beam connecting an
emitter/detector pair mounted at the tip of the funnel.  Rats viewed the
stimulus through holes in the funnel positioned over each eye.  Viewing
stimuli from the head-ﬁtted funnel allowed control over viewing position across trials. 
Rats had access to an enclosed drinking well positioned next to the
funnel.  A measured amount of water was delivered to the drinking well
by means of a solenoid driven valve.  Circuitry for the IR pair and solenoid were interfaced via solid-state relay switches to a computer. 
Stimulus generation, data collection, and trial events were controlled in
real-time by customized computer software [20]. 
2. 3.  Stimulus presentation
In an otherwise darkened room, stimuli were presented on a computer monitor (Trinitron CPD 4401) controlled by a graphics adaptor
(NVidia GeForce FX5200) set to 1280 × 1024 pixel resolution.  Rats
viewed stimuli at a distance of 24 cm and elevated by 10°, centered
within the binocular region of the visual ﬁeld.  Stimuli consisted of
Gabor patches on a gray background (22. 3 cd/m2).  Luminance levels
were linearized across a range of 2. 9–42. 2 cd/m2. 
2. 4.  General procedure
Using a free-operant procedure, rats initiated trials by placing their
head into a central funnel.  Following a delay, generated randomly
between 500 and 2000 ms, a Gabor patch appeared on the monitor. 
Rats were trained to remain stationary until stimulus onset, to which
they responded by withdrawing their head from the funnel (Fig.  1B). 
Following training, data collection occurred on approximately every
other session.  In order to maintain consistence performance, a session
of maintenance training occurred on alternate days. 
2. 5.  Training procedure
Following initial magazine training, rats were trained to nose-poke
the central funnel.  The next phase of training required rats to remain
stationary in the funnel for increasing lengths of time, culminating with
a 500 ms hold period.  A high-contrast Gabor patch was presented on
the monitor at the end of the required hold period.  For the next phase of
training, stimulus onset varied randomly between 500–750 ms, and rats
were required to withdraw their head from the funnel within 750 ms of
stimulus onset.  Across training sessions, stimulus onset times progressively increased to 500–2000 ms, and reaction time to stimulus onset
was progressively restricted to 50–400 ms.  Progressive increase to stimulus onset range, and progressive decrease in reaction time window,
was contingent upon rats' performance, requiring 90% correct across a
single session. 
For data collection sessions, reward was delivered on each trail,
regardless of reaction time.  In order to maintain conditioning, each
session of data collection was followed by a training session. 
2. 6.  Reaction time cluster index
Reaction time was recorded from stimulus onset to head withdrawal.  Frequency distributions of reaction times, time-locked to stimulus onset, were displayed as histograms.  High-contrast stimuli produced reaction time distributions that clustered about a mean of 237 ms
(S. D.  104 ms).  Given the unpredictable onset time of stimuli, the clustering pattern of reaction time distributions veriﬁed behavioral control
by the stimulus. 
Quantiﬁcation of reaction time clustering was based upon the incidence of responses that occurred above that found on no-stimulus
trials.  Speciﬁcally, the distribution of response frequency (histogramD. D.  Kurylo Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 1–7
Fig.  2.  Reaction Time Cluster Index.  A.  Reaction time frequency distribution was ﬁrst compiled for trials with no stimuli.  The upper boundary of the no-stimulus (nominal) distribution
was set to 2 S. D.  above the mean.  B.  For each contrast level, response frequencies above the nominal boundary served as the cluster index. 
bin height) across reaction time was ﬁrst determined for no-stimulus
trials (Fig.  2A).  The upper boundary of the nominal distribution was set
to 2 S. D.  above the distribution mean.  Reaction time distributions were
then measured for each stimulus condition (Fig.  2B).  For each contrast
level, the sum of response frequencies above the nominal boundary
served as the response index. 
2. 7.  Psychophysical measurements
Detection thresholds were determined with the psychophysical
Method of Constant Stimuli.  For each condition, reaction time distributions were compiled for each of six contrasts, as well as a no-stimulus condition, presented in random order across trials.  No-stimulus
trials were therefore randomly interleaved among the stimulus-present
trials.  For each contrast level, reaction time distributions were based
upon approximately 150 trials, collected across multiple sessions.  For
no-stimulus trials, reaction times were calculated from a randomized
presentation time (between 500–2000 ms from trial initiation), thereby
corresponding to conditions for the stimulus-present trials. 
Examples of reaction time frequency distributions across contrast
are depicted in Fig.  3.  For high-contrast stimuli, response frequency
above the nominal boundary was approximately 25%, and progressively declined with reduced contrast.  Response indices, plotted across
contrast, are described well by a sigmoidal function.  Threshold contrast, extrapolated from the sigmoidal function, was set to a response
index of 2. 5%.  This value corresponds to the initial elevation in the
psychometric function. 
2. 8.  Stimulus conditions
Contrast thresholds were measured for targets alone, or in the
presence of masks that varied in orientation and lateral separation. 
2. 8. 1.  Contrast sensitivity
Contrast sensitivity was determined for 0. 21 cpd, which corresponds
to near peak sensitivity for Long-Evans rats [21,23], and 0. 40 cpd,
which corresponds to approximately the midpoint of the high-frequency limb of the CSF.  The 0. 21 cpd patch subtended a visual angle of
14. 0°, in which approximately 2. 5 cycles were visible.  The 0. 40 cpd
patch was presented at two sizes, 14. 0° and 5. 9°, in which approximately 5. 5 and 2. 5 cycles were visible, respectively. 
2. 8. 2.  Lateral mask
For the lateral mask condition, masks, set to a Michelson contrast of
0. 53, were positioned above and below test stimuli.  In all cases, lateral
masks matched test stimuli spatial frequency and size.  For the 0. 21 cpd
condition, lateral masks were positioned 2. 8 cycles from test stimuli
centers.  For the 0. 40 cpd condition, lateral masks were positioned 5. 7
(for patch size 14. 0°) and 2. 8 cycles (for patch size 5. 9°) from test stimuli. 
Lateral masks existed before rats placed their head into the funnel,
and remained visible throughout the trial.  Rats thereby responded to
Fig.  3.  A.  Stimuli at ﬁve levels of contrast, as well as no-stimulus condition (right-most display).  B.  Boundaries of nominal distribution ( ± 2 S. D. ) are depicted with gray ﬁeld.  Examples
of responses above nominal are shown for each level of contrast. D. D.  Kurylo Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 1–7
the onset of test stimuli, without additional cues introduced by mask3. 2.  Lateral mask eﬀects
2. 8. 3.  Lateral mask orientation
To investigate eﬀects of relative orientation, performance was
compared between lateral masks that were collinear or orthogonal to
test stimuli.  Orientation eﬀects were examined for 0. 21 and 0. 40 cpd,
with a patch size of 14. 0°. 
2. 8. 4.  Lateral mask separation
To investigate eﬀects of lateral mask separation, performance was
compared across lateral masks positioned 2. 8, 4. 8, and 6. 8 cycles from
test-stimulus centers.  Separation eﬀects were examined for the 0. 21
cpd, 5. 9° size condition.  In all cases, lateral masks were collinear to test
stimuli. 
Mean response indices across contrast, with best-ﬁt functions, are
displayed in Fig.  5.  Performance with masks was reduced compared to
targets alone for intermediate levels of contrast.  Speciﬁcally, for the
0. 21 cpd condition, performance with masks diﬀered signiﬁcantly from
target alone for contrasts between 16–28% (U = 1. 5 at each contrast;
p < 0. 05).  For 0. 40, 14. 0° condition, masks vs.  target alone conditions
diﬀered signiﬁcantly for contrasts between 16–36% (across contrasts U
ranged from 1. 00 to 2. 5; p < 0. 05).  For the 0. 40 cpd, 5. 9° condition,
masks and target alone conditions diﬀered signiﬁcantly for contrasts
between 16–22% (U ranged from 1. 00 to 2. 00; p < 0. 05). 
Comparing contrast sensitivity, lateral masks reduced sensitivity for
each of the stimulus conditions (Fig.  6).  Sensitivity with masks was
signiﬁcantly lower than with target alone for the 0. 21 cpd (U = 4. 00;
p < 0. 05), 0. 40 cpd, 14. 0° (U = 5. 50; p < 0. 05), and 0. 40 cpd, 5. 9°
(U = 5. 50; p < 0. 05) conditions. 
3.  Results
3. 3.  Orientation eﬀects
For high-contrast stimuli, response indices reached approximately
25%, although some rats did not reach this level even with the maximum contrast.  In order to equate variation in behavioral patterns
across rats, response indices were normalized to 25%. 
For each condition, response indices as a function of contrast were
determined separately for each rat.  Best-ﬁt sigmoidal functions were
then determined for each rat, from which 2. 5% thresholds were extrapolated.  Statistical analyses were then applied to response thresholds. 
3. 1.  Contrast sensitivity
Mean response indices are depicted for each condition (Fig.  4).  A
sigmoidal function ﬁt to response indices is also shown in order to
demonstrate the response pattern.  Mean contrast threshold at 0. 21 cpd
was 7% (Michelson), and contrast thresholds at 0. 40 cpd were 13% and
18% for the large and small targets, respectively.  For large targets,
contrast thresholds diﬀered signiﬁcantly between 0. 21 and 0. 40 cpd
(Mann–Whitney U = 0, p < 0. 05).  Contrast thresholds for the two
target sizes at 0. 40 cpd also diﬀered signiﬁcantly (U = 0, p < 0. 05). 
Examining performance across contrast, responses at 0. 21 and 0. 40 cpd
diﬀered signiﬁcantly (p < 0. 05).  A trend existed across intermediate
contrasts for the size factor at 0. 40 cpd, although diﬀerences reached
signiﬁcance only for 22% contrast. 
Performance was similar for collinear and orthogonal masks for
both the 0. 21 (Fig.  7B) and 0. 40 cpd conditions (Fig.  7D).  Comparing
performance at each level of contrast, collinear and orthogonal mask
conditions did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly for either the 0. 21 or 0. 44 cpd
conditions (Mann-Whitney, p > 0. 05). 
3. 4.  Separation eﬀects
Performance was similar for mask separations of 5. 2, 8. 4, and 11. 8
cpd (Fig.  7F).  Comparing results at each level of contrast, performance
did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly across levels of mask separation (KruskalWallis, p > 0. 05). 
<Conclusion> Discussion. 
These results demonstrate a masking eﬀect in rats on contrast sensitivity by stimuli positioned at adjacent, non-overlapping positions.  In
this regard, lateral interactions of stimulus components are apparent at
a perceptual level.  As with suprathreshold stimuli [12,13], contrast
thresholds in rats are elevated in the presence of lateral masking. 
Contrast sensitivities reported here for target alone are similar to
previous studies, although sensitivity measurements reported here are
greater than those from previous reports [21–23].  Diﬀerences may reﬂect distinctions in stimulus parameters, including wave pattern, target
Fig.  4.  For targets alone, A.  response index (frequency distribution above that found for no-stimulus condition) across contrast, ﬁtted to sigmoidal functions.  Threshold contrast, derived
from response indices of 2. 5%, are depicted for each stimulus condition.  B.  Contrast sensitivity for each spatial frequency tested. D. D.  Kurylo Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 1–7
Fig.  5.  Response indices across contrast for targets alone, or targets with lateral masks.  Error bars represent 1 SEM.  Asterisks indicate signiﬁcant diﬀerences between no mask and mask
conditions. 
performance across diﬀerences in relative orientation of targets and
ﬂankers. 
4. 1.  Mechanisms of integration
Diﬀerences in perceptual capacities across species may be associated with neural circuitry in early visual areas.  In primates and cats,
V1 topography displays a systematic pattern of orientation preference
[30–32].  In addition, relative neural responses are enhanced by stimuli
in adjacent areas that match a cell's orientation preference, and suppressed by stimuli
that deviate from the preferred orientation
[4,33–35]. 
In rats, a proportion of cells in primary visual cortex are selective for
orientation [36–38,9].  Horizontal neural connections, found mainly in
layers 2/3 and 5, project laterally within the same layer [39–41] as well
as crossing layers [42].  Horizontal connections in rats extend laterally
to 2 mm [40,41], linking neurons with overlapping receptive ﬁelds
[39].  However, rodents display a heterogeneity of orientation preference in early cortical areas [9,10].  The absence of orientation eﬀects
reported here may reﬂect the locally disordered topography of orientation preference.  As such, characteristics of local cortical connections in rats may be reﬂected at a perceptual level. 
Integration of stimulus elements in rats may be less associated with
intrinsic lateral connections in early cortical areas, and more with longrange interactions, such as convergence across visual areas.  Cortical
mediation of pattern perception in rats is associated with both striate
and lateral prestriate cortex [43–45].  Cortical areas in rats receive
retinal input from two pathways, one passing from dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus to striate cortex, the other passing from superior colliculus to lateral posterior nucleus of the thalamus, and on to medial and
lateral prestriate cortex and higher cortical areas [24,46,47].  The alternate pathway includes connections that bypass primary cortex,
providing input to high-order areas not dependent on subordinate
processing in striate cortex. 
Higher levels of processing that contain larger receptive ﬁelds perform more global analyses of stimuli, and are therefore well suited for
integrating forms.  Rats are capable of object recognition with transformation of stimulus characteristics, such as size, rotation, or position
[48,49].  Systematic analysis of stimulus components indicates that recognition in rats is based upon integrating a pattern of object features,
as opposed to a speciﬁc low-level stimulus characteristic [25].  In rats,
lesions to areas 35 and 36, which show functional similarities to primate inferotemporal cortex [50], disrupt discrimination involving the
conjunctions of features, suggesting that these regions contain conﬁgural representations of stimuli [51].  Pattern regularities among stimulus elements may thereby be processed at later stages, in which
global relationships among stimulus components are encoded. 
Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the City University of New York PSCCUNY Research Award Program. 
Fig.  6.  Contrast sensitivity for target alone or in the presence of lateral masks. 
size, and mean luminance, as well as psychophysical techniques.  In
addition, head position was regulated in the current study in order to
preclude introducing additional visual cues.  Free moving rats may introduce visual cues produced by lateral head movements that reduce
the ability to specify parameters such as luminance or spatial frequency
[24].  Similarly, specifying stimulus metrics, including luminance and
spatial frequency, requires regulation of stimulus position relative to
the corneal surface [25–27]. 
Nevertheless, limitations in psychophysical measures in rats may
obscure perceptual eﬀects, such that sensitivity diﬀerences across
masking conditions may be less than measurement resolution.  In addition, because ﬂanker eﬀects on contrast thresholds are restricted to
regions near the fovea [15,16], eye position, which is not controlled in
rat measurements, may aﬀect sensitivity.  This issue may be further
complicated by retinal characteristics of rats, in which area centralis
and farther eccentric regions encode stimuli at a lower sampling density
than occurs with primate foveal ﬁxation [28,29]. 
Performance did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly between relative orientation
or among levels of separation.  These results diﬀer from those of Meier
Name [12], where ﬂanker orientation aﬀected target detection.  Whereas
some aspects of stimulus presentation were similar to those used here,
signiﬁcant procedural diﬀerences may account for diﬀerences in results.  Procedures employed by Meier Name allowed measures of response choice across levels of stimulus conﬁgurations.  Rats made a twoalternative forced-choice response indicating “yes” or “no” to the presence of the target.  Increased missed targets and increased false alarm
rates occurred when targets and ﬂankers were collinear, compared to
misalignment conditions.  In contrast, target detection measured here
was based upon the reaction time distribution relative to the onset of
the target.  Across trials, ﬂankers were either not presented, or had been
visible before trials were initiated. 