
Working on a daily basis with patients in pain can be a trying experience for healthcare providers (HCPs).  Indeed, witnessing others in
pain can elicit a self-focused aversive reaction called personal distress
(Batson, 1987; Eisenberg & Eggum, 2009; Eisenberg & Fabes, 1990). 
This negative response to the suﬀering of others often motivates behavioral responses aimed at rapidly diminishing one’s own discomfort
instead of oﬀering help to alleviate the other person’s suﬀering (Batson,
1991; Cialdini Name, 1987; Tice, Bratslavsky & Baumeister, 2001). 
Successful regulation of personal distress is therefore necessary to feel
concern for others and oﬀer optimal help to persons(Eisenberg & Eggum, 2009; Eisenberg & Fabes, 1990).  Consequently,
HCPs in charge of treating pain in patients need to be able to adequately
regulate this self-oriented response in order to produce other-oriented
prosocial responses.  A study on HCPs’ neural response to pain in others
has validated this idea by showing that HCPs had, compared to control
participants, increased hemodynamic responses in regions associated
with self-regulation when witnessing painful stimulations applied
to patients, that is the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) and the
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (Cheng Name, 2007).  Using a similar
design, Decety and collaborators (Decety, Yang & Cheng, 2010) observed that physicians did not show the typical diﬀerentiation observed
in control participants between electrocortical responses to pictures
depicting painful and non-painful stimulations to patients.  The authors
interpreted this result as a down-regulation in HCPs of aﬀective processing when perceiving pain in others, allowing them to allocate
cognitive resources to the assistance of others.  It is therefore plausible
that this increased self-regulation of personal distress when confronted
with others’ suﬀering could make HCPs more able to oﬀer help towards
persons in pain than individuals with no clinical experience. 
On the other hand, clinical expertise has also been linked with a
tendency to underestimate the pain of patients compared to the patients’ own estimation or the estimation of control participants (Cheng
Name, 2007; Decety Name, 2010; Kappesser, de C.  Williams & Prkachin,
2006; Prkachin, Solomon & Ross, 2007).  This underestimation bias has
been shown to extend across diﬀerent settings and to increase with the
amount of clinical experience (Gleichgerrcht & Decety, 2014; Solomon,
2001).  The fact that more experienced clinicians tend to underestimate
the pain of patients to a greater extent suggests that repeated exposure
⁎ Corresponding author at: École de psychologie, Pavillon Félix-Antoine-Savard, 2325, rue des Bibliothèques Université Laval, Québec, Québec, G1V 0A6, Canada. 
E-mail address: philip. jackson@psy. ulaval. ca (P. L.  Jackson). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. biopsycho. 2017. 06. 005
Received 20 May 2016; Received in revised form 27 April 2017; Accepted 29 June 2017
Available online 30 June 2017
0301-0511/ 
M. -P.  Coll Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 1–10
to patients in pain could contribute to this bias (Prkachin Name, 2007). 
Several studies (Coll, Gr & goire, Prkachin, & Jackson, 2016; Gr & goire,
Coll, Tremblay, Prkachin, & Jackson, 2016; Prkachin, Mass, & Mercer,
2004; Prkachin & Rocha, 2010) added support to this hypothesis by
showing that participants with no healthcare experience brieﬂy exposed to intense expressions of pain are subsequently less willing to
consider moderate pain expressions as painful.  One immediate consequence of this bias in HCPs could be the inadequate management of
pain in patients.  Indeed, if the pain of the other is perceived as less
intense, it is likely that the observer will be less motivated to help relieve it (Prkachin, Kaseweter & Browne, 2015). 
Based on studies indicating that HCPs show increased emotional
regulation when witnessing pain, one would expect that they would
oﬀer more prosocial behavior towards persons in pain than non HCP
individuals because they can regulate self-oriented feelings of distress
more eﬀectively.  However, based on studies suggesting an underestimation of others’ pain intensity in HCPs, one would expect that
HCPs would oﬀer less prosocial behavior to persons in pain because
they perceive the pain of others as less intense than individuals with no
healthcare experience.  In order to shed light on these conﬂicting hypotheses, the present study compared HCPs and healthy control participants with no healthcare experience (CTL) on prosocial behavior towards persons in pain. 
In a ﬁrst experiment a behavioral paradigm was developed, in
which participants were asked to decide the amount of help they would
oﬀer patients expressing various levels of pain, knowing that oﬀering
more help would help reduce the patients’ pain but would have the
undesirable consequence of lengthening the experimental task.  In a
second experiment, functional neuroimaging was used in order to
provide additional insights into the cognitive mechanisms underlying
this eﬀect.  New groups of HCP and CTL participants performed the
same prosocial task in a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
setting.  It was hypothesized that compared to CTL participants, HCP
participants would show more prosocial behavior towards patients in
pain and that this would be linked to reduced self-reported personal
distress when witnessing others in pain and increased activation, during
the observation of patients in pain, in regions associated with selfregulation such as the DLPFC and the MPFC and decreased activation in
regions associated with aﬀective responses to pain in others such as the
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and the anterior insular cortices.  It was
also predicted that increased hemodynamic responses when witnessing
pain in others in the DLPFC and MPFC would be linked with reduced
self-reported personal distress and increased prosocial behavior. 
<Middle> Materials and methods. 
2. 1.  Participants
HCP and CTL participants were recruited through advertisements
sent to a university e-mail list, and all participants gave written informed consent to take part in these studies.  The Institut de réadaptation
en déﬁcience physique de Québec Research Ethics Committee approved
both studies and participants received a monetary compensation for
their involvement.  All participants received a ﬁxed monetary compensation independently of the time they spent helping during the experimental task.  Exclusion criteria for both studies included any reported history of painful, neurological or psychiatric disorder. 
Additional exclusion criteria for the fMRI experiment included any
contraindication to the MRI magnet, being over 40 years of age and
being left-handed.  Inclusion criteria for the HCP groups included
having practiced a certiﬁed healthcare profession with direct contact
with patients in pain for at least two years.  All HCPs recruited in this
study were either licensed physiotherapists or nurses that worked in a
hospital or rehabilitation setting.  Participants included in the CTL
groups had not studied in, and had no previous work experience in a
healthcare related ﬁeld. 
2. 1. 1.  Behavioral experiment
Fourty-four participants took part in the behavioral version of the
experiment.  Twenty-two were HCP (two males, 20 females) aged on
average 32. 64 years (SD = 12. 85); range: 21–57 years).  There were six
physiotherapists and 16 registered nurses with an average of 11 years of
experience in their ﬁeld (SD = 10. 58, range: 2–35 years) and 14. 90
years of education (SD = 1. 44, range 12–18 years).  The CTL group was
composed of 22 participants (ﬁve males, 17 females) with an average of
31. 50 years of age (SD = 9. 012, range: 20–50) and 15. 18 years of
education (SD = 1. 81, range: 12–18 years).  For the analyses of the
behavioral variables, data collected during the behavioral and fMRI
experiments were pooled due to the similarity of the design performed. 
According to the G*Power 3 software (Faul, Erdfelder, Lang & Buchner,
2007), with an alpha signiﬁcance threshold of 0. 05 and 80% power, an
eﬀect size of d = 0. 66 is necessary to ﬁnd a group diﬀerence (twotailed) using this sample size.  This sample size was thus considered
suﬃcient considering the larger eﬀect sizes observed in previous studies
comparing vicarious pain perception between HCP and CTL participants (Cheng Name, 2007; Decety Name, 2010). 
2. 1. 2.  fMRI experiment
Thirty new participants took part in the fMRI version of the experiment.  HCP (ﬁve males, 10 females) were aged on average 28. 47
years old (SD = 4. 64, range: 23–38 years).  Four were physiotherapists
and 11 were registered nurses.  The HCPs in the fMRI experiment had an
average of 6. 30 years of experience in their ﬁeld (SD = 3. 93, range:
3–15 years) and 15. 53 years of education (SD = 1. 64, range 13–18
years).  The CTL sample was composed of 15 participants (ﬁve males, 10
females) with an average of 25. 27 years of age (SD = 4. 07, range:
20–35 years) and 15. 37 years of education (SD = 1. 36, range: 14–18
years).  Participants in the HCP group were thus older than participants
in the CTL group but this diﬀerence did not reach statistical signiﬁcance
[t(28) = 2. 01, p = 0. 06].  One participant in the CTL group was a replacement participant for a participant that moved excessively during
fMRI scanning (over 20% of volumes removed due to motion-related
artifacts, see below).  This sample size was chosen based on a previous
study successfully showing diﬀerences in brain responses during vicarious pain perception between HCP and CTL participants (Cheng
Name, 2007). 
2. 2.  Visual stimuli
The visual stimuli consisted of still frames extracted from 1 s clips
from the University of Northern British Columbia-McMaster Shoulder
Pain Archive (Lucey, Cohn, Prkachin, Solomon, & Matthews, 2011;
Prkachin & Solomon, 2008).  These clips consist in facial expressions of
actual patients doing painful (aﬀected limb) or non-painful (non-affected limb) shoulder range of motion tests in a supine position.  The
large majority of the patients selected (93%) were of Caucasian ethnicity, which is very similar to the population of Quebec and the recruited2. 2. 1.  Behavioral experiment
Twenty clips of diﬀerent patients (10 males, 10 females; 14 pain
stimuli, 6 neutral stimuli [i. e. , neutral facial expressions]) were used
from the archive for the purpose of the behavioral study.  For pain stimuli, six frames were extracted from each clip.  A test frame was ﬁrst
chosen by visually inspecting the clip and selecting the peak in the pain
expression of the patient.  Four feedback frames were then visually selected from the same clip in order to illustrate a gradual decrease in the
pain expressions.  Finally, a neutral frame with the same patient expressing no pain was extracted from the same clip.  For neutral stimuli,
only a neutral frame was chosen.  Stimuli were presented with E-Prime
2. 0 software (Psychology Software Tools Inc. , Sharpsburg PA, USA) on
a 17-inch computer monitor located at approximately 60 cm from the
participant, at a resolution of 704 × 480 pixels. M. -P.  Coll Name
2. 2. 2.  fMRI experiment
The same frames as in the behavioral experiment were used for the
fMRI experiment and six neutral frames from diﬀerent patients (3 females) were added in order to get an equal number of pain and neutral
trials (28 patients; 14 pain stimuli and 14 neutral stimuli).  Stimuli were
presented at a resolution of 704 × 480 pixels on a screen outside the
scanner which participants viewed using a 20 × 9 cm mirror placed on
the head coil. 
2. 3.  Dispositional empathy measure
After the experiments, all participants completed the Interpersonal
Reactivity Index (IRI; (Davis, 1980).  The IRI consists of a 28-item selfreport questionnaire providing individual scores on four subscales:
Perspective Taking (PT), Fantasy (FS), Empathic Concern (EC) and
Personal Distress (PD).  The PT subscale measures the capacity to understand the perspective of others, the FS subscale measures the tendency to identify with characters from ﬁctional situations and has been
shown to be related to social anxiety and shyness (Davis, 1980), the EC
subscale measures feelings of compassion toward persons in distress,
and the PD subscale measures self-oriented feelings of distress when
facing others’ negative experiences (Davis, 1980). 
2. 4.  Procedure
All participants were asked to put themselves in the role of a
healthcare professional in charge of treating pain in patients.  They were
told that they would meet diﬀerent patients and that for each of them,
they should decide how much time they wanted to devote to treating
his or her pain.  They were also told that the more help they oﬀered, the
more the patient’s pain would be reduced, and that they would see the
patient’s resulting facial expression following their treatment.  In order
to avoid introducing a bias associated with the knowledge of HCPs on
pain management interventions, no speciﬁc type of help (e. g.  pharmacological, social) was speciﬁed and the general term “help” was always used to describe the participants’ action towards patients. 
To ensure that participants would not simply oﬀer the maximum
amount of help to all patients, they were warned that oﬀering more
time to help a patient had a number of consequences, notably that it
would increase their workload and thus lengthen the experimental task. 
However, they were not made aware of the amount of help they would
have to oﬀer to completely alleviate the pain of patients.  It was also
made clear that the amount of help oﬀered would not inﬂuence the
monetary compensation they would receive for their participation. 
2. 4. 1.  Behavioral experiment
For each experimental trial (see Fig.  1) participants ﬁrst saw a
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 1–10
ﬁxation cross for 1 s followed by the test frame (2. 5 s) showing a patient
doing a shoulder movement and who either expressed pain or kept a
neutral expression.  After the test frame, a visual analog scale (VAS) was
presented for 3. 5 s with the label “No help” at the left extremity and the
label “Maximum time allocated” on the right extremity [in French:
“Aucune aide” and “Temps maximal alloué”].  A cursor initially appeared at a random position on the VAS and participants were asked to
indicate how much time they wanted to oﬀer to help the patient they
had just seen by moving the cursor on the VAS using two adjacent keys
on the keyboard.  After they had selected the amount of help, a gauge
representing graphically the amount of time to wait was presented and
emptied at diﬀerent speeds depending on the amount of help oﬀered. 
For instance, if the participant oﬀered little or no help, the waiting
screen was present for 1 s, while the maximum amount of help led to a
20 s waiting period.  These durations were chosen based on the comments of pilot participants (n = 5, Coll Name, unpublished data) who
reported that the waiting duration had inﬂuenced their decision to help
more or less the patients and by taking into account the maximum
possible duration of the task.  Overall, a participant that would oﬀer the
maximum help to every patient would increase the task duration by
approximately 19 min in the behavioral experiment compared to a
participant that oﬀered little or no help to all patients (maximum
duration: 29. 5 min, minimum duration 10. 5 min).  After the waiting
gauge, participants saw the feedback frame for 2. 5 s.  For the pain trials,
this frame depicted the same patient as in the test clip with a similar
amount of pain if little or no help was oﬀered (≤ 20% of the VAS) or in
gradually decreasing levels of pain according to the amount of help
oﬀered (21–39% of the VAS: High pain, 41–59%: Moderate pain,
60–79%: Low pain, ≥80%: No pain).  For the neutral trials, the feedback frame was always the same as the test frame.  The participants ﬁrst
underwent four practice trials with diﬀerent patients than those used in
the experimental trials, followed by 3 identical sessions of 20 experimental trials (20 patients in each session) for a total of 60 trials.  The
presentation order of the stimuli was fully randomized in each session. 
After the main task, participants completed a pain evaluation task.  They
were shown each test frame again for 2. 5 s and, following each image,
were asked to use a VAS (3. 5 ms) with the anchors “No pain” and
“Worst pain imaginable” [in French: “Aucune douleur” and “Pire douleur imaginable”] to evaluate the intensity of the pain expressed by
each patient presented.  They were explicitly told that no consequence
was associated with judging the pain as more or less intense.  After the
experiment, participants ﬁlled out the IRI. 
2. 4. 2.  fMRI experiment
Before performing the task, a structural scan was acquired in approximately 8 min.  After the structural scan, the same task as the one
used in the behavioral experiment was performed in the scanner and
Fig.  1.  Schematic representation of an experimental trial for both experiments.  The participants ﬁrst saw a ﬁxation cross followed by the test frame.  After the test frame, the VAS scale
appeared and participants chose the amount of help they wanted to oﬀer the patient.  Then, a waiting gauge emptied at diﬀerent speeds according to the amount of help oﬀered.  After this
waiting period, a feedback frame showed the same patient in a similar or lower level of pain according to the amount of help oﬀered.  The fMRI experiment included additional blank
screens with a jittered duration of 0. 5–3. 5 s before the visual analog scale and the feedback frame.  Patients’ pictures are displayed in accordance with the terms of use of the UNBCMcMaster Shoulder Pain Archive Database and patients shown in this ﬁgure gave informed consent to appear in scientiﬁc publications (Lucey Name, 2011; http://www. pitt. edu/
∼emotion/um-spread. htm). M. -P.  Coll Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 1–10
participants responded with the right hand using two adjacent keys on
an fMRI compatible response glove.  In the fMRI experiment, a jittered
blank screen (0. 5- 3. 5 s in steps of 0. 5 s distributed according to a
truncated geometrical distribution, average 1. 5 s) was inserted before
the VAS scale and before the feedback frame.  The ﬁxation cross duration was also jittered according to the same duration.  Furthermore, the
maximum waiting duration was reduced to 15 s due to the higher
number of trials in this experiment and the fact that jittered blank
screens also increased the task’s total duration.  The time spent in the
scanner for the fMRI experiment could vary by a maximum of 26 min
depending on the amount of help oﬀered to each patient (maximum
duration: 54 min; minimum duration: 28 min).  The participants underwent four practice trials outside the scanner and performed 4 sessions of 28 trials (same 28 patients in each session) for a total of 112
trials in the scanner.  The presentation order of the stimuli was fully
randomized in each session.  As in the behavioral study, participants
evaluated the intensity of the pain expressed by each patient and ﬁlled
out the IRI outside the scanner. 
2. 4. 3.  fMRI data acquisition
The fMRI data were collected using a standard 8-channel head coil
on a Phillips Achieva TX 3T scanner (Philips Medical Systems,
Hamburg, Germany) equipped for echo planar imaging (EPI).  A structural image was ﬁrst acquired for each participant using a high-resolution T1-weighted MPRAGE sequence.  EPI blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) functional images were acquired using SENSE parallel
imaging.  Forty-ﬁve axial interleaved slices (3 mm thick, no gap) parallel to the anterior and posterior commissure axis covering the whole
brain were acquired per volume (TR = 3000 ms, TE = 35 ms, ﬂip
angle = 90, ﬁeld of view = 230 × 230 mm).  Four functional runs were
performed with a number of volumes varying according to the task
duration (mean = 197 vols, SD = 21. 18, range: 113–244). 
2. 5.  Analyses
2. 5. 1.  Behavioral data
The behavioral analyses were carried out on the pooled behavioral
data collected during the behavioral and fMRI experiments.  All statistical analyses on behavioral variables were performed with IBM SPSS
statistics 20. 0 for Windows (IBM corp. , Amonk, NY) and the signiﬁcance threshold was set at p < 0. 05.  The normality of the distribution for the data of each group was veriﬁed for each variable using
the Shapiro-Wilk test.  The number of years of experience as a HCP was
log transformed to improve its normality and thus the log of this variable was used in all analyses.  The amount of help oﬀered to patients at
each trial was converted to a 0–100 scale according to the position of
the cursor in pixels on the VAS (0 = no help, 100 = maximum help)
and averaged separately for pain and neutral trials.  The same procedure
was used for pain intensity ratings (0 = no pain, 100 = worst pain
imaginable).  Since the objective of those experiments was to compare
groups on their behavior towards persons in pain, trials presenting
neutral facial expressions were not included in the behavioral analyses. 
However, the amount of help given to patients who were not in pain
was used to verify that the participants understood the task and paid
attention to the stimuli, by ensuring that the help oﬀered was lower for
neutral than for painful expressions [F(1, 71) = 33. 25, p < 0. 001,
d = 1. 36] and that prosocial behavior towards neutral facial expressions did not diﬀer between groups [F < 1].  Prosocial behavior and
pain intensity ratings for pain expressions are show in Fig.  2. 
The amount of help oﬀered to patients in pain and the intensity of
the pain perceived in patients were compared between groups using a
one-way ANCOVA and implementing the experimental context (behavioral or fMRI) as a covariate.  The same procedure was used to compare
groups on the four IRI subscales and were corrected family-wise using
the Bonferroni procedure with a threshold set at 0. 05/4 = 0. 0125. 
Finally, Pearson correlations were used to investigate the relationship
between prosocial behavior, pain intensity ratings, the four subscales of
the IRI and years of experience as a HCP. 
2. 5. 2.  fMRI preprocessing
The fMRI analyses were performed using SPM12 software
(Wellcome Department of
Imaging Neuroscience, London, United
Kingdom) within Matlab 8. 0 (Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA).  All images
were ﬁrst corrected for acquisition delay and realigned to the participant’s mean EPI.  The T1 structural image was co-registered to the mean
EPI image and spatially normalized to the Montreal Neurological
Institute (MNI) space and voxel size was resampled to 2 × 2 × 2 mm. 
The deformation ﬁeld parameters obtained during normalization of the
T1 image were then used to normalize all EPI scans to the MNI template.  After normalization all
images were smoothed using an
8 × 8 × 8 mm full-width-half-maximum isotropic Gaussian kernel. 
Finally, images were examined using the Artifact Detection Tool software package (ART; http://www. nitrc. org/projects/artifact_detect/)
for excessive motion artifacts.  Volumes with a diﬀerence of 3 standard
deviations or more from the global mean of the session and/or a between-scan motion of more than 2 mm or rotation of 0. 2 rad were
omitted in the analyses by including a single regressor for each outlier
in the general linear model.  This procedure led to the rejection of an
average of 3. 91% of volumes by participant (SD = 3. 41%) with a similar rejection rate in all groups and conditions.  For one CTL participant, the last of the four scanning sessions was removed from the
analyses due to excessive movement during this session (over 50% of
volumes removed). 
2. 5. 3.  fMRI analyses
Functional images were analyzed in an event-related fashion using a
general linear model for each participant with a high-pass ﬁlter of 128 s to
remove low frequency noise.  Six onset regressors were deﬁned to estimate
activation associated with the task: onset of the pain test frames, onset of the
neutral test frames, onset of the feedback to pain frames, onset of the
feedback to neutral frames, onset of the VAS scale and onset of the waiting
gauge.  Additional regressors generated during motion correction and artifact detection were also entered for each participant and all regressors were
convolved with the canonical hemodynamic response function.  At the ﬁrst
level, the eﬀect of the content presented in the test frame (pain, neutral) was
measured by contrasting pain expressions with neutral expressions for each
participant.  These ﬁxed-eﬀects analyses were then taken forward to second
level analyses in order to perform within and between group analyses.  The
main eﬀect of Pain expressions was ﬁrst assessed within each group by
contrasting pain and neutral expressions using one sample t-tests.  The interaction between Group and Pain was then investigated by using a two
samples t-test: [HCP (Pain > Neutral) > CTL (Pain > Neutral)] and
[CTL (Pain > Neutral) > HCP (Pain > Neutral)].  Because of the age
diﬀerence between groups, all second level analyses were performed using
the age of the participant as a covariate.  The results were corrected for
multiple comparisons by using combined voxel activation intensity and
cluster extent thresholds determined by using Analysis of Functional
Neuroimage software’s 3dClustSim (http://afni. nimh. nih. gov/) with 10 000
Monte Carlo simulations taking into account whole-brain search volume
and estimated spatial smoothness of each axis.  It was determined that a
cluster size of 224 voxels with a voxel-wise p-value threshold of 0. 005
corresponded to a family-wise alpha threshold of p < 0. 05 (corrected). 
Anatomical labels of the signiﬁcant clusters were determined using the
Xjview software (www. alivelearn. net/xjview). 
In order to investigate the relationship between brain responses
during the prosocial task and behavioral variables, parameter estimates
from the pain vs neutral contrast were extracted in spheres of 6 mm
radius located around the peak coordinates in the signiﬁcant clusters of
the Group x Pain interaction analysis.  These clusters were located in the
right DLPFC [x = 42, y = 30, z = 28], the posterior cingulate cortex
(PCC) [x = 12, y = −30, z = 46] and the precuneus [x = −26,
y = 86, z = 28].  This was done using the MarsBaR toolbox (http://M. -P.  Coll Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 1–10
Fig.  2.  Mean (black square), median (black line), range (error bars), 1. 5 interquartile interval (boxes) and distribution of prosocial behavior and pain intensity rating for each experiment,
Group and Stimulus type.  *p < 0. 05. 
marsbar. sourceforge. net/).  The parameter estimates were then correlated with the amount of help oﬀered to patients, the scores on each of
the four subscales of the IRI and the log transform of the number of
years of clinical experience for the HCP group. 
Exploratory analyses were also performed on the feedback frame
presented at the end of each trial.  This was done by contrasting the
eﬀect of the feedback received after pain test frames with the eﬀect of
the feedback received after neutral test frames at the ﬁrst level.  The
interaction between Group and Pain for the feedback frame was assessed at the second level using a two samples t-test.  However, since no
signiﬁcant voxels were found in this analysis, even at a lenient
threshold (p < 0. 001 uncorrected), all participants were pooled together and a one sample t-test was used to investigate the eﬀect of
feedback type independently of clinical experience.  Since no a priori
hypotheses were formulated for the eﬀect of feedback frames, a conservative signiﬁcation threshold of p < 0. 01 (corrected) was used
(voxel-wise p-value: p < 0. 001, cluster extent threshold: 215 voxels). 
3.  Results
3. 1.  Behavioral results
one-way ANCOVA carried out on prosocial behavior showed that the
HCP group oﬀered signiﬁcantly more help to the patients in pain than
the CTL group [F(1, 71) = 4. 10, p = 0. 047, d = 0. 48] after controlling
for experimental context.  The same analysis carried out on pain intensity ratings did not reach signiﬁcance [F(1, 71) = 2. 56, p = 0. 11,
d = 0. 38].  The four additional ANCOVAs used to compare groups on
the four subscales of the IRI showed that HCPs reported signiﬁcantly
less PD than the CTL group [F(1. 71) = 3. 19, p < 0. 001, d = 0. 86]
while there was no group diﬀerence for the FS, EC and PT subscales [all
ps > 0. 16].  Correlation analyses revealed that pain intensity ratings
were strongly associated with prosocial behavior [r(72) = 0. 79,
p < 0. 001].  The correlation between prosocial behavior and the four
subscales of the IRI showed that the PD scale was negatively correlated
with prosocial behavior [r(72) = −0. 25, p = 0. 04] and that there was
no signiﬁcant relationship between the other IRI subscales and prosocial behavior (all ps > 0. 05).  The log transformation of years of clinical experience was not signiﬁcantly correlated with prosocial behavior
[r(35) = −0. 06, p = 0. 73], pain intensity ratings [r(35) = −0. 11,
p = 0. 51] or any of the subscales of the IRI [all ps > 0. 67]. 
3. 2.  fMRI results
The mean and standard deviation of behavioral variables for each
experiment and the pooled data are shown in Table 1 and Fig.  2.  The
The peak coordinates for each signiﬁcant cluster are shown in
Table 2 and the clusters’ locations for the interaction analysis areMean and standard error for the demographics and behavioral variables for each experiment and group and for the pooled data of both experiments. 
Behavioral experiment
fMRI experiment
Pooled data
CTL (n = 22)
HCP (n = 22)
CTL (n = 15)
HCP (n = 15)
CTL (n = 37)
HCP (n = 37)
Age (years)
Clinical experience (years)IRI-PTIRI-FA
31. 50 (1. 