Local Signals in Mouse Horizontal Cell DendritesHighlights
d Light-evoked Ca2+ signals in horizontal cell dendrites reﬂect
opsin gradient
d Chromatic preferences in neighboring dendritic tips vary
markedly
d Mouse horizontal cells process cone photoreceptor inputd Local horizontal cell feedback shapes the temporal
properties of cone outputCamille A.  Chapot, Christian Behrens,
Luke E.  Rogerson, . . . , Philipp Berens,
Thomas Euler, Timm Schubert
Correspondence
thomas. euler@cin. uni-tuebingen. detimm. schubert@cin. uni-tuebingen. deIn Brief
Chapot Name show that local light
responses in mouse horizontal cell
dendrites inherit properties, including
chromatic preference, from the
presynaptic cone photoreceptor,
suggesting that their dendrites can
provide private feedback to cones, for
instance, to shape the temporal ﬁltering
properties of the cone synapse. 
Chapot Name, 2017, Current Biology 27, 3603–3615
December 4, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 10. 050
Current BiologyLocal Signals in Mouse Horizontal Cell Dendrites
Camille A.  Chapot,1,2,3 Christian Behrens,1,2,3,4 Luke E.  Rogerson,1,2,3,4 Tom Baden,1,5 Sinziana Pop,1,2,3
Philipp Berens,1,2,4 Thomas Euler,1,2,4,* and Timm Schubert1,2,6,*
1Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University of Tu¨ bingen, 72076 Tu¨ bingen, Germany
2Center for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tu¨ bingen, 72076 Tu¨ bingen, Germany
3Graduate Training Centre of Neuroscience, University of Tu¨ bingen, 72076 Tu¨ bingen, Germany
4Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, University of Tu¨ bingen, 72076 Tu¨ bingen, Germany
5School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9RH, UK
6Lead Contact
*Correspondence: thomas. euler@cin. uni-tuebingen. de (T. E. ), timm. schubert@cin. uni-tuebingen. de (T. S. )
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 10. 050The mouse retina contains a single type of horizontal
cell, a GABAergic interneuron that samples from all
cone photoreceptors within reach and modulates
their glutamatergic output via parallel
feedback
mechanisms.  Because horizontal cells form an electrically coupled network, they have been implicated
in global signal processing, such as large-scale
contrast enhancement.  Recently, it has been proposed that horizontal cells can also act locally at the
level of individual cone photoreceptors.  To test this
possibility physiologically, we used two-photon microscopy to record light stimulus-evoked Ca2+ signals
in cone axon terminals and horizontal cell dendrites as
well as glutamate release in the outer plexiform layer. 
By selectively stimulating the two mouse cone opsins
with green and UV light, we assessed whether signals
from individual cones remain isolated within horizontal cell dendritic tips or whether they spread across
the dendritic arbor.  Consistent with the mouse’s opsin
expression gradient, we found that the Ca2+ signals
recorded from dendrites of dorsal horizontal cells
were dominated by M-opsin and those of ventral
horizontal cells by S-opsin activation.  The signals
measured in neighboring horizontal cell dendritic
tips varied markedly in their chromatic preference,
arguing against global processing.  Rather, our experimental data and results from biophysically realistic
modeling support the idea that horizontal cells can
process cone input locally, extending the classical
view of horizontal cell function.  Pharmacologically
removing horizontal cells from the circuitry reduced
the sensitivity of the cone signal to low frequencies,
suggesting that local horizontal cell feedback shapes
the temporal properties of cone output. 
INTRODUCTION
Most neurons in the brain have elaborate dendritic arbors
capable of more than simply integrating synaptic input.  Studies
of neurons from different brain regions, such as cerebellar Purkinje cells [1], cortical pyramidal cells [2], hippocampal neurons
[3], and retinal amacrine cells [4, 5], have demonstrated that dendrites can be functionally highly compartmentalized.  Often,
multiple dendritic units can both process synaptic input and
generate synaptic output independently and at a local scale
(reviewed in [6]).  The cellular mechanisms supporting dendritic
processing include anatomical specializations, differential distribution of active channels, and the local restriction of intracellular
signaling (reviewed in [6]).  Moreover, computational work suggests that dendrites can even switch between local and global
signal processing [7].  Such functional compartmentalization of
dendritic arbors greatly increases the computational power of
single neurons and, therefore, that of the brain. 
In the retina, dendritic processing has been mainly studied in
ganglion cells [8, 9] and amacrine cells [4], where dendritic subunits vary dramatically in size and function.  For example, starburst amacrine cell dendritic arbors are divided in sections that
individually compute direction of visual motion [10, 11], while individual dendritic varicosities of A17 amacrine cells provide local
reciprocal feedback to individual rod bipolar cell terminals under
low-light conditions [4].  However, the outer retina also contains a
candidate for dendritic processing, the horizontal cell (HC).  This
is a GABAergic interneuron that provides reciprocal feedback
to photoreceptors and shapes their transmitter release [12–14]. 
The dendrites of HCs contact cone photoreceptors (cones),
whereas their axon terminal system contacts rod photoreceptors
(rods) [15]. 
Traditionally, HCs have been implicated in global processing,
such as contrast enhancement and the generation of antagonistic center-surround receptive ﬁelds (reviewed in [16]).  This is
consistent with the fact that HCs form a gap junction-coupled
network [17], which allows averaging signals across many
cones.  However, recent studies suggest that HCs support also
a local mode of operation and that HC feedback can act at the
level of a single synaptic contact between an HC dendritic tip
and a cone ([14, 18]; for discussion see [19]) (Figures 1A and 1B). 
Here, we test this idea by recording light stimulus-evoked signals at the HC-cone synapse in a slice preparation of the mouse
retina using two-photon Ca2+ [20, 21] and glutamate imaging
[22].  We exploited the particular retinal distribution of mouse
cone types to discriminate between global and local processing:
Mice express two types of cone opsins, a short (S, UV) and a
medium (M, green) wavelength-sensitive opsin.  So-called true
S-cones [23] exclusively express S-opsin and are homogenously
Current Biology 27, 3603–3615, December 4, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd.  3603
Figure 1.  Identiﬁcation of Cone Axon Terminals and HC Processes in Mouse Retinal Slices
(A) Schematic representation of the connectivity between S- (blue) or M-cones (green) and a horizontal cell (HC, orange).  The box corresponds to the enlarged
schemata shown in (B).  The black line indicates the cone axon terminal base. 
(B) Neighboring S- and M-cones with postsynaptic HC dendrites.  Bipolar cell dendrites are shown in white.  The arrows indicate the hypothesized spread of
signals in HC dendrites.  Left: global (lateral) signal spread along HC dendrites.  Right: local signal processing in HC dendritic tips. 
(C and D) Bath application of sulforhodamine 101 (SR101) (top images in C and D) to identify cone axon terminals in retinal slices of the Cx57+/cre 3 Ai38 (C) and
HR2. 1:TN-XL (D) mouse lines.  Outlines of cone axon terminals were manually drawn for illustration purposes; solid lines indicate cone axon terminal base, and
dotted lines indicate outer plexiform layer (OPL) borders.  Upper right diagram depicts imaged synaptic compartment and the biosensor used (red). 
(E) Left: SR101 ﬂuorescence with line marking the cone axon terminal base (analogous to A, C, and D).  Right: GCaMP3-labeled HC processes are superimposed
by regions of interest (ROIs; gray, exemplary ROI marked red) automatically determined (STAR Methods). 
(F) Ca2+ responses to green, UV, and white (GUW) 1 s light ﬂashes of exemplary ROI (in E).  The continuous Ca2+ trace (left) and average of n = 10 trials for each
stimulus condition (right) are shown (Ca2+ signals de-trended by high-pass ﬁltering at 0. 1 Hz and z-normalized; STAR Methods).  Scale bars, 5 mm. 
See also Figure S1. 
distributed across the retina, while M-cones co-express both
opsins at a ratio that changes from M- to S-opsin dominant along
the dorsoventral axis [24].  Thus, recording at different retinal
locations with different-wavelength stimuli makes it possible to
test if signals of neighboring cones mix in the postsynaptic HC
dendritic process.  We found that cone signals indeed remain
local in the contacting HC dendritic tips, suggesting that HCs
support a local mode of operation. 
3604 Current Biology 27, 3603–3615, December 4, 2017. 
<Middle> RESULTS. 
Identiﬁcation of Cone Axon Terminals and HC Processes
in the Mouse Retinal Slice
We recorded Ca2+ signals in retinal slices prepared from transgenic mice (Cx57+/cre 3 Ai38; see the STAR Methods).  HC
processes could be identiﬁed in retinal slices by their GCaMP3
expression (Figure 1C).  To identify cone axon terminals, we
bath-applied SR101 [25], which is taken up from the extracellular
solution by the terminals of synaptically very active cells, such as
photoreceptors, during vesicle endocytosis [26].  We conﬁrmed
that the (larger) SR101-labeled structures in the outer plexiform
layer (OPL) were cone axon terminals with slices prepared
from HR2. 1:TN-XL mice [21], in which exclusively cones expressed TN-XL (Figure 1D). 
Light-Evoked Ca2+ Signals in HC Processes
To record light-evoked Ca2+ signals in HC dendritic segments,
we imaged ﬁelds in the OPL while presenting green, UV, or
white light ﬂashes (GUW protocol, STAR Methods) (Figures 1E
and 1F).  The resulting GCaMP3 ﬂuorescence image series was
averaged to anatomically deﬁned regions of interest (ROIs)
(STAR Methods).  We only considered ROIs that responded to
white ﬂashes and fulﬁlled two strict quality criteria, a quality index
(Qi) and a consistency index (Ci) (Figure S1; STAR Methods),
yielding 423 ROIs (4. 3% from a total of 9,912 ROIs) with reliable
light-evoked Ca2+ signals for further analysis (Figures S1B–S1D). 
Because the structural layout of the cone synapse is highly
stereotypical [27], we assumed that ROIs located close to the
cone axon terminal base are likely to be HC dendritic tips, since
this is where they make invaginating contacts with the cones
(reviewed in [19]).  ROIs well above the cone base are expected
to belong mostly to HC axon terminal tips (contacting rods),
whereas ROIs below the cone base should be located on HC primary dendrites [27].  To get an estimate of each ROI’s identity, we
manually determined the base of the cone terminals as a
landmark (solid lines in Figures 1A and 1C–1E) in each imaged
ﬁeld based on SR101 labeling.  We used the sharp transition
between the brightly stained cone axon terminals and the dimmer SR101 labeling below, which likely represented HC dendrites [26].  We estimated the distance (dbase) to the cone axon
terminal base for each ROI.  Responsive ROIs were most
frequent just above the cone axon terminal base (61. 5% ROIs
within 0 < dbase < 5 mm), within the OPL band occupied by
cone terminals.  Here, ROIs had the highest Qi values (Figure S1E)
and the largest light-evoked Ca2+ signals (Figure S1F), suggesting that we could indeed measure responses from HC dendritic
processes in or very close to the cone synapse. 
Mechanisms Underlying Light-Evoked Ca2+ ResponsesTo conﬁrm that the Ca2+ responses were mediated by glutamate
release from photoreceptors, we puff-applied the AMPA/KAtype glutamate receptor antagonist 6,7-dinitroquinoxaline-2,3dione (NBQX; 200 mM) while presenting white ﬂashes (Figures
2A and 2B).  NBQX signiﬁcantly decreased the Ca2+ baseline
level (F0) in HC processes, and it virtually abolished light-evoked
Ca2+ signals, as indicated by a signiﬁcant reduction in response
amplitude (DF) and area under the curve (FArea) (Figures 2C–2E;
for statistics, see Table 1). 
Earlier experiments on isolated mouse HCs had shown that
intracellular Ca2+ is modulated by inﬂux through Ca2+-permeable
AMPA/KA receptors, L-type voltage-gated Ca2+ channels
(VGCCs), and by release from internal Ca2+ stores [28].  To test
how these pathways contributed to the Ca2+ signals in HC
dendrites, we puff-applied a mixture of AMPA (50 mM) and KA
(25 mM) before and in the presence of blockers (Figure S2).  The
response amplitudes to AMPA/KA puffs alone decreased during
the experiment (Figures S2A and S2C), possibly caused by
downregulation of VGCCs and/or Ca2+ stores due to the strong
pharmacological stimulus.  We estimated this run-down from two
consecutive puffs by calculating the ratio of the response amplitudes (DF2/DF1).  When applying the L-type VGCC blocker verapamil (100 mM) 5 min before the second AMPA/KA puff, DF2/DF1
was signiﬁcantly reduced compared to control (Figures S2A,
S2B, and S2E; for statistics, see Table 1), conﬁrming that VGCCs
contributed to the signals. 
In separate experiments, we tested if
intracellular Ca2+
stores could be involved in amplifying Ca2+ signals in HC
processes.  We bath-applied the sarco-endoplasmic reticulum
inhibitor thapsigargin (5 mM), which
Ca2+ ATPase (SERCA)
blocks Ca2+ store reﬁll and leads to the depletion of Ca2+
stores [28], 20 min before the second AMPA/KA puff.  Thapsigargin decreased DF2/DF1 signiﬁcantly (Figures S2C, S2D, and S2F;
Table 1), suggesting that release from stores contributes to Ca2+
signals in HC dendrites. 
In summary, the observed light-evoked Ca2+ signals in HC
processes result from a combination of Ca2+ sources, in agreement with earlier ﬁndings [13, 28–31].  Moreover, they are modulated by GABA auto-reception (see Figure S3 and Table S1). 
Light-Evoked Ca2+ Signals in HCs Reﬂect the DorsalVentral Opsin Expression Gradient
Next, we recorded HC light-evoked Ca2+ responses at different
locations along the dorsoventral axis of the retina, using the
mouse opsin expression gradient as a tool to speciﬁcally activate
different combinations of S- and M-cones.  While the mouse
retina contains only 5% true S-cones [23], ontogenetic
M-cones in the ventral retina co-express large amounts of
S-opsin and, thus, are functional S-cones [24, 32].  Therefore, if
the spectral preference of the HC Ca2+ signals reﬂects this
gradient, this indicates that cones (and not rods) dominantly
drive these signals and that we are recording from HC dendrites. 
We determined the spectral contrast (SC; STAR Methods) of
each ROI as a function of its location along the dorsoventral
axis (Figure 3).  Consistent with the reported opsin gradient
[32], we found that dorsal HC responses were dominated by
M- and ventral HC responses by S-opsin activation (Figures 3A
and 3B).  ROIs located close to the cone axon terminal base
 5, Wilcoxon rank-sum test)
( 4 % dbase % 4 mm) had signiﬁcantly higher absolute SC
values (jSC-4. +4j = 0. 717 ± 0. 022; mean ± SEM; n = 342) than
ROIs below (dbase <  4 mm, jSC < 4j = 0. 417 ± 0. 045; n = 28;
p = 1. 611$10
(Figure 3C).  This
suggests that the HC distal tips reﬂect the contacted cone’s
chromatic preference and, thus, local signals.  More proximal
dendrites, on the other hand, average across cones, and, thus,
they show spatial integration, in agreement with the funnel shape
of the dbase versus SC plot (Figures 3A and 3B).  In the transitional
zone between dorsal and ventral retina halves, both a UV- and a
green-dominated ROI population co-exist (Figure 3D).  Opsin
immunostaining of slices from this zone conﬁrmed that the distribution of UV and green ROIs reﬂects cone opsin expression
(Figure 3E).  ROIs in the nasal part of the slice were UV sensitive,
and those in the temporal part were green sensitive, consistent
with the transitional zone running at a shallow angle relative to
the naso-temporal axis (Figure 3E, right scheme) [32].  Together,
Current Biology 27, 3603–3615, December 4, 2017 3605
Figure 2.  Light-Evoked Ca2+ Responses in HC Processes Are Mediated by the Activation of AMPA/Kainate-type Glutamate Receptors
(A) Exemplary Ca2+ responses of HC processes to white ﬂashes before (control), after a NBQX puff, and during wash-out. 
(B) Averaged responses for control (green), NBQX (orange), and wash-out (blue) (trials in gray) for the traces shown in (A). 
(C–E) Quantiﬁcation of NBQX effects on response baseline (F0, C), amplitude (DF, D), and area under the curve (FArea, E) (average of n = 23 ROIs from 4 slices, 2
animals).  Error bars indicate SEM; +p % 0. 025, ++p % 0. 005, and +++p % 0. 0005, Bonferroni-corrected signiﬁcance threshold). 
See also Figures S2 and S3 and Table S1. 
our data indicate that the activity recorded in ROIs close to the
cone axon terminal base is mostly cone driven and likely reﬂects
activity in HC dendritic tips. 
Local Light-Evoked Ca2+ Signals in HC Dendritic Tips
Next, we assessed if signals from individual cones remain isolated within HC distal dendrites or if they spread across the cells’
dendritic arbors (or the electrically coupled HC network) (Figure 1B).  We looked for recording ﬁelds where neighboring
ROIs had different SC preferences (i. e. , contained ROIs with
SC > 0 and ROIs with SC < 0).  Indeed, this was the case for 15
of a total of 125 recording ﬁelds in both dorsal (5 ﬁelds; Figure 3F)
and ventral retina (10 ﬁelds; Figure 3G). 
To quantify this ﬁnding, we focused on purely UV and green
ROIs (jSCj > 0. 3; 7 ﬁelds, 22 ROIs), and we analyzed the distribution of the lateral distance between each UV ROI and its neighbors (Figure 3H).  We found that UV ROIs clustered in close
proximity (<10 mm) of each UV ROI, suggesting that they are
driven by the same cone, while the majority of green ROIs
3606 Current Biology 27, 3603–3615, December 4, 2017
clustered at larger distances (>10 mm).  The distribution of green
ROIs appeared to be periodic with the average distance approximating that between cone axon terminals (8 mm, cf.  Figures 1C
and 1D), indicating that these (green) ROIs were likely driven by
other cones. 
HC Dendritic Processes Inherit Properties of the
Presynaptic Cone
If HC dendritic tips reﬂect the local cone output, the measured
signals are expected to share properties with the cone signals
(see also Figure S4).  To test this, we presented a colored noise
stimulus (see the STAR Methods), and we measured correlations
between neighboring cone axon terminals and between neighboring HC dendritic tips in the dorsal retina (Figure 4).  If HCs
integrated signals globally, e. 