
Is Friday ‘right’ and Monday ‘left’? Some individuals experience vivid
spatial forms for non-numerical sequences such as the weekdays, and most
would agree on a left-to-right arrangement, at least in Western societies
reading from left-to-right.  In fact, psychological experiments show that the
cognitive representation of sequence includes a spatial component: In
natural sequences such as numbers, months and weekdays (Dehaene,
Bossini, & Giraux, 1993; Gevers, Reynvoet, & Fias, 2003; Gevers,
Reynvoet, & Fias, 2004), but also in just rehearsed artiﬁcial sequences of
random numbers or objects (van Dijck & Fias, 2011), the primary/ﬁnal
items are mentally arranged to the left/right by healthy participants and
corresponding left-hand and right-hand responses are relatively faster in
simple classiﬁcation tasks.  Seeing these resembling behavioral patterns, a
concise theory could assume that the same neurocognitive process underlies the tendency to project all enumerable objects mentally onto space. 
The SNARC eﬀect (spatial-numerical associations of response codes)
oﬀers a reliable and insightful testbed for exploring spatial associations
and the eﬀect was originally observed in judgments of numerical symbols. 
Numerous studies replicated its central ﬁnding of relatively faster left-side
than right-side responding to smaller numbers, and vice versa for larger
numbers (Dehaene Name, 1993; see Wood, Willmes, Nuerk, & Fischer,
2008 for a meta-analysis).  Originally, the SNARC eﬀect was understood as
a long-term spatial representation of numerical magnitude resembling a
mental number line (Pinel, Piazza, Bihan, & Dehaene, 2004; Restle, 1970). 
However, this classical account would assume that a distinct spatial
⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Psychiatry & Psychotherapy, Neurophysiology & Interventional Neuropsychiatry, University of Tuebingen, Calwerstr.  14, 72762 Tübingen,
Germany. 
E-mail address: philipp. schroeder@uni-tuebingen. de (P. A.  Schroeder). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. biopsycho. 2017. 07. 008
Received 9 February 2017; Received in revised form 12 July 2017; Accepted 12 July 2017
Available online 18 July 2017
0301-0511/ 
P. A.  Schroeder Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 39–49
representation would produce SNARC eﬀects with non-numerical sequences such as letters or weekdays. 
representations
in the SNARC eﬀect
Notably, although SNARC and SNARC-like eﬀects were documented
for both numerical and non-numerical sequences (Dehaene Name, 1993;
Fias, Brysbaert, Geypens, & D’Ydewalle, 1996; Gevers Name, 2004), sequences such as the weekdays expose a clear ordinal structure with additional cyclic component (Zamarian, Egger, & Delazer, 2007) whereas the
number sequence includes mixed ordinal and cardinal magnitude features. 
For instance, the single-digit ‘2’ could refer to the second item in a row
(ordinality), but the same digit ‘2’ could also imply twice the amount of
something (cardinality).  In contrast, ‘Tuesday’ only refers to the second
day of the week and never implies the summed-up amount of two days.  A
conceptual controversy among numerical cognition researchers regards
therefore the distinction between number magnitude and sequential order
information (e. g. , Fitousi, 2010) and their respective roles in forming(e. g. , Nathan, Shaki,
Salti, & Algom, 2009).  A potentially unifying account was recently promoted by experimentally disentangling the cardinal and ordinal properties
of number: In a delayed working memory (WM) paradigm, participants
were asked to maintain randomized number sequences (e. g. , 4-1-6-8-3)
and performed a SNARC task on the memorized numbers in a delay
period.  In this experiment (and in several follow-up studies), it turned out
that spatial-numerical associations were based on the sequential order and
not on the semantic magnitude information of the numbers (van Dijck,
Abrahamse, Acar, Ketels, & Fias, 2014; van Dijck & Fias, 2011).  This
ﬁnding led to the WM account of the SNARC eﬀect: Here, numbers are
thought to elicit spontaneous adaptations of a general cognitive process to
arrange the present sequence with a spatial layout at the level of WM to
temporarily built an eﬀective (spatial) mental representation (Abrahamse,
van Dijck, & Fias, 2016).  The important contribution of verbal WM to the
SNARC eﬀect was highlighted even before in diﬀerent studies that showed
reversals of SNARC eﬀects by verbal labels positioned at physically incompatible locations (Gevers, Verguts, Reynvoet, Caessens, & Fias, 2006;
Gevers Name, 2010).  Moreover, compatibility eﬀects were observed between the parity concept and spatial responding in the MARC eﬀect
(Berch, Foley, Hill, & Ryan, 1999; Iversen, Nuerk, Jäger, & Willmes, 2006;
Iversen, Nuerk, & Willmes, 2004; Nuerk,
Iversen, & Willmes, 2004;
Schroeder & Pﬁster, 2015).  The assumption of the MARC eﬀect is based on
the principle of markedness: Linguistically, there is a default member in
opposite pairs which is deﬁned by semantic, distributional, or formal
characteristics.  If a classiﬁcation involves stimulus and response features
that share their markedness status, this can lead to faster performance than
when one feature is marked and the other is not.  This behavior can also
account for the standard numerical SNARC eﬀect because response features and verbal magnitude categorization share the marked members
(small-left) or unmarked linguistic members (large-right) in compatible
trials, which usually yield faster responses than incompatible trials.  In less
detail, the verbally mediated categorical correspondence principle is also
compatible with the proposal of polarity correspondence (Proctor & Cho,
2006) and the involvement of verbal circuits for magnitude processing
(Dehaene, Piazza, Pinel, & Cohen, 2003). 
Regarding the underlying functional neuroanatomy, the uniﬁed
theory also invites shifting the focus from the parietal regions bolstering
numerical representations and operations (Cohen Kadosh & Walsh,
2009; Dehaene Name, 2003; Piazza, Pinel, Le Bihan, & Dehaene, 2007)
to prefrontal cortex regions and their contributions to the processing of
sequential order (Marshuetz, Smith, Jonides, DeGutis, & Chenevert,
2000; Shimamura, Janowsky, & Squire, 1990), most likely in conjunction with distributed WM systems (Baddeley, 2000; D’Esposito & Postle,
2015; Hurlstone, Hitch, & Baddeley, 2014).  Furthermore, previous research identiﬁed especially frontoparietal networks for abstract quantity representations in non-human primates, possibly along a hierarchical gradient (Nieder, 2016; Tudusciuc & Nieder, 2009).  Prefrontal
activations were also often found in early neuroimaging studies of
number processing; however, they were often interpreted as subserving
only or predominantly non-numerical processes and were thus not (orless) considered in neurofunctional models (e. g. , Dehaene Name, 2003). 
Disruption of the frontoparietal number circuits in human participants
with transcranial magnetic stimulation over right frontal eye ﬁeld and
inferior frontal gyrus, but not over parietal regions, reduced spatialnumerical associations (Rusconi, Dervinis, Verbruggen, & Chambers,
2013).  Furthermore, functional and structural connectivities between
neuroanatomically distinct frontal and parietal areas corroborate verbal
and non-verbal processing of numerical magnitude (Klein Name, 2016). 
By administering transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) to the
left prefrontal cortex, we recently demonstrated polarity-dependent modulations of SNARC eﬀects in a sham-controlled setting (Schroeder, Pﬁster,
Kunde, Nuerk, & Plewnia, 2016).  Originally, this tDCS conﬁguration was
motivated by the possibility to modulate WM processes with cathodal tDCS
(e. g. , Wolkenstein, Zeiller, Kanske, & Plewnia, 2014; Zaehle, Sandmann,
Thorne, Jäncke, & Herrmann, 2011), and a recent publication demonstrated
the selectivity of left-hemispheric tDCS on a verbal letter n-back WM tasks
and right-hemispheric tDCS on a visuospatial n-back task (Ruf,
Fallgatter, & Plewnia, 2017).  Similar modulations of number processing by
prefrontal tDCS were also observed in number bisection and clock drawing
tasks (Arshad Name, 2016).  Transcranial brain stimulation with tDCS directs
weak currents in the range of 1–2 mA to targeted brain regions and its
eﬀects are best deﬁned by the current polarity, which produces predominant excitation underneath the ‘anodal’ electrode and inhibition underneath the ‘cathodal’ electrode (Nitsche & Paulus, 2000).  The eﬀects of
tDCS are thought
to depend on the current network activity
(Fertonani & Miniussi, 2016), as neural structures are not entirely blocked,
but resting membrane potentials are shifted and thus ﬁring thresholds are
reduced (anodal tDCS) or increased (cathodal tDCS).  However, cathodal
tDCS can also modulate resting-state connectivity (Keeser Name, 2011) and
engagement of task-speciﬁc fronto-parietal networks in arithmetic processing (Hauser Name, 2016) and in verbal ﬂuency (Ehlis, Haeussinger, Gastel,
Fallgatter, & Plewnia, 2015).  Thus, the method is ideally suited to modulate
SNARC-related network activity, including left-hemispheric verbal WM
(Gevers Name, 2010; van Dijck & Fias, 2011).  Nevertheless, it is mandatory
to highlight that the mechanisms of tDCS are not yet clearly understood and
its eﬃcacy is rather controversial (Horvath, Forte, & Carter, 2015).  In behavioral tasks, it should be further acknowledged that internal consistency
and test-retest reliability for reaction time measurements can be fairly low
[e. g. , r1/2 = . 698 for SNARC regression slopes (Cipora & Nuerk, 2013)]. 
Finally, behavioral eﬀects of tDCS can be observed best when a task implies
a targeted region, and stimulation eﬀects were most pronounced for the
most active task instructions (Gill, Shah-basak, & Hamilton, 2015; Zwissler
Name, 2014). 
In separate experiments involving parity and magnitude judgment,
we recently observed a reduction of SNARC eﬀects by cathodal tDCS to
the left prefrontal cortex (Schroeder Name, 2016).  However, the mere
correspondence between WM-implied areas and neuromodulation results only provided suggestive evidence for a WM account of the SNARC
eﬀect, and alternative explanations such as a modulation of subthreshold conﬂict detection processes still required further empirical validation (Schroeder Name, 2016).  Moreover, the tested single-digit stimuli
could not diﬀerentiate whether the modulation of SNARC eﬀects by
prefrontal tDCS depended on numerical magnitude or sequential order
information, because numbers convey simultaneous ordinal and cardinal magnitude information, as noted above.  However, the uniﬁed
ordinal WM account would predict comparable behavioral changes
from the same manipulation of neurocognitive activity in both ordinal,
non-numerical sequences as well as in cardinal, numerical sequences
with magnitude information. 
Thus, following up on the previously reported eﬀects of tDCS on
spatial-numerical processing (Arshad Name, 2016; Schroeder Name,
2016), the current study set out to also investigate modulations of the
spatial associations of a non-numerical sequence by the identical lefthemispheric prefrontal tDCS conﬁguration.  More precisely, to address
whether the same neurocognitive mechanism is involved in mentally
aligning numerical and non-numerical sequences spatially, we tested
P. A.  Schroeder Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 39–49
two groups of healthy participants before and concurrent to anodal or
cathodal tDCS in a series of classiﬁcation tasks.  From the previous results, we expected that the stimulation would attenuate (cathodal
group) or emphasize (anodal group) the associations between space and
sequence positions for a single-digit numerical sequence (1–5) and we
expected the same behavior for a non-numerical weekday sequence
(Monday-Friday).  Thus, the design tested the presence of a generalized
neurocognitive mechanism that would predict similar stimulation effects from the spontaneous arrangement of order along a spatial template. 
In a separate control experiment conducted in the same participants on
the same testing day, we also asked whether stimulation eﬀects could
persist even in cases where the target concept (e. g. , numerical or non-numerical sequence) is only weakly activated.  We therefore tested participants’ performance with the same stimuli on a task variant that does not
require active processing of the sequence (font color classiﬁcation).  In the
order-irrelevant tasks, SNARC-like eﬀects are less substantial (Gevers Name,
2003, 2004) or even abolished due to involvement of SNARC-irrelevant
neural circuits in color classiﬁcation (Fias, Lauwereyns, & Lammertyn,
2001).  Thus, given that sequence information is here available to somewhat
smaller extents, this task variant tested the possibility of subthreshold detection modulations (Schroeder Name, 2016) as opposed to the state dependency principle of tDCS (Gill Name, 2015; Zwissler Name, 2014).  The
subthreshold detection hypothesis would anticipate greater neuromodulation eﬀects in the color judgment tasks in the sense that a response conﬂict
between the spatial code extracted from numerical/ordinal information and
spatial responding would become behaviorally relevant only concurrent to
tDCS when capacities are enhanced, but the state dependency principle
would anticipate greater neuromodulation eﬀects in the order-relevant
judgment tasks. 