
Several studies suggest that inhibition diﬃculties among people with ASD might be related to atypical cardiac
vagal control.  We examined how low versus high baseline heart rate variability (HRV) inﬂuences prepotent
response inhibition in 31 males with autism spectrum disorder (ASD; mean age: 32. 2; mean IQ: 107. 8) compared
to 39 typically developing (TD) males (mean age: 30. 5; mean IQ: 102. 0) by administering a stop signal task. 
Moreover, we examined whether adding an aﬀective manipulation would alter ﬁndings and whether this manipulation aﬀected HRV.  Findings indicated that baseline HRV inﬂuenced inhibition in ASD males.  Speciﬁcally,
an ASD subgroup with low baseline HRV performed signiﬁcantly worse compared to an ASD subgroup with high
baseline HRV.  No inﬂuence of baseline HRV was found in TD males.  The aﬀective manipulation did negatively
inﬂuence performance and also altered HRV.  Although replication is required, these ﬁrst ﬁndings indicate that
baseline cardiac vagal control seems to aﬀect inhibitory control in males with ASD. resistanceresponse
inhibition
Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are neurodevelopmental disorders, characterized by social interaction and communication diﬃculties as well as repetitive behaviors (APA, 2013).  Both repetitive
behaviors and social interaction diﬃculties have been theorized to be
related to inhibitory control deﬁciencies (e. g. , Bachevalier & Loveland,
2006; Hill, 2004; Mosconi Name, 2009; Russel, 1997).  Three types of
inhibitory control can be identiﬁed, namely interference control, prepotent
interference
(Friedman & Miyake, 2004).  Prepotent response inhibition and interference control are the two most studied types of inhibition in the ASD
population.  Prepotent response inhibition is the ability to suppress or
withhold a (motor) response.  Interference control is the ability to ignore
irrelevant stimuli.  Although recent meta-analyses conﬁrm that people
with ASD have more prepotent response inhibition (Cohen’s d = 0. 55;
Hedges’g = 0. 51) and interference control (Cohen’s d = 0. 31) diﬃculties than typically developing (TD) individuals, both meta-analyses
also found a large amount of heterogeneity (Geurts, van den
Bergh & Ruzzano, 2014; Kuiper, Verhoeven & Geurts, 2016).  This means
that the ﬁndings across studies were inconsistent. 
This large amount of heterogeneity between inhibitory control
study ﬁndings in people with ASD suggests that there are other factors
that inﬂuence these ﬁndings.  In the two aforementioned meta-analyses,
we examined several possible factors, namely the possible inﬂuence of
age, intelligence (IQ), interstimulus interval (ISI) and ‘stimulus type’
(Geurts Name, 2014; Kuiper Name, 2016). 