
Probabilistic categorization learning requires a coordinated interaction between declarative and non-declarative memory.  Over the past
20 years, evidence has accumulated that probabilistic learning involves
distinct anatomically and functionally segregated memory systems [1]. 
It has been discussed whether these systems interact in a competitive
[2,3] or cooperative manner [4].  Brain regions which are involved in
cognitive control, performance integration and reward learning [5–9]
represent additional factors aﬀecting the probabilistic categorization
learning process.  With respect to memory, the interplay of the medial
temporal lobe [MTL] and the basal ganglia is in the focus of research
[2].  Declarative memory involves the hippocampus which supports the
acquisition of ﬂexible knowledge in contrast to more rigid striatumdependent memory systems [10,11]. 
The weather prediction task (WPT) is a well-known probabilistic
learning task [5–7,2].  In this task, participants are asked to classify one
to three (out of four) diﬀerent cue cards into one of two weather categories (rain or sun) based on feedback they receive for their actions. 
The WPT is a well-established probabilistic categorization learning task
that demonstrates the diﬀerential contributions of declarative (mediated by the hippocampus) and nondeclarative (mediated by the basal
ganglia) memory processes [12].  Patients with basal ganglia disorders
show reduced performances in the WPT, especially in the early probabilistic learning phase [5].  However, amnesic patients with damage to
the hippocampus perform comparably to controls in the early phases of
learning, presumably because the declarative memory system interferes
with the nondeclarative regularities detected by the nondeclarative
memory system [6]. 
Additionally, further studies focused on the contribution of declarative knowledge to WPT performance [8,13,9,14].  Schwabe and
Wolf [9], for instance, demonstrated a positive correlation between
WPT task performance and hippocampal activation.  It seems that the
hippocampus-based learning and the hippocampal activity play an
important role in the categorization learning process and support the
learning performance in a probabilistic learning task. 
The hippocampal activity as well as the hippocampal based memory
processing and hippocampal based behavior can be in turn modiﬁed by
⁎ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: Sabrina. Schenk@rub. de (S.  Schenk). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 027
Received 3 March 2017; Received in revised form 30 May 2017; Accepted 17 August 2017
Available online 24 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
S.  Schenk Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 208–214
Fig.  1.  Modiﬁed version of the weather prediction task. 
the environmental enrichment [15–17].  This eﬀect might be mediated
by enhanced visual exploration of enriched environments, which in
turn promotes hippocampal neuroplasticity and hippocampus-dependent learning and declarative memory.  Based on these ﬁndings a
modiﬁcation of the environmental enrichment or a visual exploration
training should enhance hippocampal-based learning and behavior as
well as the related hippocampal activity.  Since the hippocampus responds to both the real and the virtual environment in a comparable
way [18,19], it should be possible to use video games as an eﬀective
training method to enhance hippocampal-based learning and behavior
as well as the related hippocampal activity. 
In previous research, playing video games has already been linked
to improved attention resources, visual imagery, problem solving, visual processing, response speed [20–22] and cognitive ﬂexibility [23]. 
Moreover and in accordance with the positive eﬀect of the environmental enrichment, Clemenson and Stark [17] demonstrated that video
games provide a strong environmental enrichment, which leads to enhanced memory performance on a task that is thought to tax hippocampal processing.  All these cognitive functions, which can be improved by video games, are important factors within the probabilistic
categorization learning process. 
Using the WPT, the current study investigated the eﬀects of video
game playing on the performance in a probabilistic categorization task,
the related usage of learning and memory processes as well as other
cognitive functions and its neural correlates, which represents a widely
unexplored area in gaming research up to now.  We used a modiﬁed
version of the WPT (see [9]) that include an equal condition (50/50%
probabilities) as well as more certain (probabilities in the 80/20%
range) and less certain conditions (probabilities in the 70/30% and 60/
40% range).  In contrast to the uncertain conditions, which should address the nondeclarative learning and activate the implicit memory
system (mediated by the basal ganglia), the certain condition should be
related to a more pronounced usage of declarative knowledge and
should additionally activate the explicit memory system (mediated by
the MTL, especially the hippocampus). 
Based on previous ﬁndings, we expected that video gamers show
better categorization performances due to a more pronounced usage of
declarative knowledge, hippocampus-dependent learning and memory
processes.  More speciﬁcally, we aimed to investigate to which degree
probabilistic categorization learning is positively mediated by the assumed enhanced hippocampus-depending learning of video gamers that
is due to the strong environmental enrichment of video games.  To
measure these eﬀects of video game playing the categorization performance in the WPT, the brain activity and the explicit knowledge of
the task and their relation to each other were assessed. 
<Middle> Materials and methods. 
2. 1.  Participants
The current study included ﬁfteen healthy right-handed video gamers (13 male and 4 female; mean age: 24. 6 years; SD: 3. 0 years) and
ﬁfteen healthy right-handed non-gamers (13 male and 4 female; mean
age: 27. 5 years; SD: 4. 1 years).  The subjects were recruited through
advertisements at the Ruhr University and in local newspapers.  The
group membership was deﬁned on the basis of a screening questionnaire.  Video gamers were characterized by playing more than 15 h
of video games like “starcraft” or other action-based videogames per
week.  Non-gamers, with low or without any video game experience,
were deﬁned by playing less than 4 h per week. 
All participants had normal or corrected to normal vision and no
current or past mental illnesses. 