
Reward anticipation (‘wanting’) is crucial for human adaptation to
the environment (Bubic, von Cramon, & Schubotz, 2010).  The ability to
predict future motivational events permits us to organize our behavior
proactively to cope with the impact of those events.  For instance, gain
anticipation can promote approach behavior whereas loss anticipation
can promote avoidance behavior (Knutson & Greer, 2008).  On the other
hand, dysfunction in reward anticipation has been identiﬁed as a critical contributor to psychopathologies such as schizophrenia (Gard,
Kring, Gard, Horan, & Green, 2007), depression (Treadway & Zald,
2011), and addictive behaviors (Robinson & Berridge, 2008). taskincentive
A well-validated task designed to evaluate reward anticipation is the
monetary
(Knutson, Westdorp,
Kaiser, & Hommer, 2000), which has been extensively used across
healthy and clinical populations in conjunction with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI; Lutz & Widmer, 2014).  In a typical MID
task trial, participants initially observe a cue signaling trial information
(i. e. , gain, loss, or neutral), followed by a delayed period during which
the participants prepare a motor response for an imperative visual
target.  Following the motor response, another interval is provided
striatum, anterior
during which the participants wait for the outcome of their performance on that trial.  In healthy individuals, reward anticipation mainly
implicates the mesocorticolimbic dopaminergic pathway,
includinginsula, and anterior cingulate cortex
(Knutson & Greer, 2008).  However, despite its excellent spatial resolution, fMRI cannot provide the necessary temporal resolution to fully
characterize the temporal dynamics of reward anticipation in the
human brain.  Speciﬁcally, it remains largely unexplored whether those
sub-stages (e. g. , cue evaluation, motor preparation, and feedback anticipation) coarsely labelled reward anticipation are dissociable on the
neural level. 
Electroencephalography (EEG) with its superior temporal resolution
provides a narration of distinct psychological processes as they unfold
during reward anticipation millisecond-by-millisecond.  Three anticipatory slow waves are associated with reward anticipation.  The ﬁrst
slow negative-going wave, labelled the contingent negative variation
(CNV), is typically observed between a warning stimulus (cue) and an
imperative stimulus (target) and is maximal at central sites (Walter,
Cooper, Aldridge, McCallum, & Winter, 1964).  The CNV is believed to
reﬂect neural activity within the thalamo-cortico-striatal network and
has been linked with anticipatory attention, motivation, as well as
⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Psychology, Dalian Medical University, No.  9 West Section, Lvshun South Road, Dalian 116044, China. 
E-mail address: zhengya@dmu. edu. cn (Y.  Zheng). 
1 These authors contributed equally to this work. 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. biopsycho. 2017. 07. 011
Received 6 January 2017; Received in revised form 13 July 2017; Accepted 17 July 2017
Available online 21 July 2017
0301-0511/ 
Y.  Zhang Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 89–97
motor preparation (Brunia, van Boxtel, & Böcker, 2012; Fan Name,
2007).  Analogous to the CNV, a broad slow negative-going wave during
the waiting period of a motivationally relevant stimulus (e. g. , the
period between the target and feedback in the MID task), called the
stimulus-preceding negativity (SPN), is manifest as a plateau-shaped
distribution at
frontal areas with a right hemisphere dominance
(Brunia, Hackley, van Boxtel, Kotani, & Ohgami, 2011).  The most likely
neural generator of the SPN, given its frontotemporal focus, is the right
anterior insula (Bocker, Brunia, & van den Berg-Lenssen, 1994; Brunia,
de Jong, van den Berg-Lenssen, & Paans, 2000).  In contrast to the CNV,
the SPN reﬂects anticipatory processing more purely due to the exclusion of motor preparation in the waiting period (van Boxtel & Böcker,
2004).  Finally, incentive cues during the cue-evaluation stage often
elicit a P3 component (i. e. , the cue-P3), a positive-going wave peaking
between 300 and 600 ms at parietal sites (Broyd Name, 2012; Goldstein
Name, 2006).  The cue-P3 is generally associated with attentional resources for stimulus evaluation based on motivational signiﬁcance
(Nieuwenhuis, Aston-Jones, & Cohen, 2005). 
Previous research has thus identiﬁed three ERP correlates of reward
anticipation: the cue-P3 during the cue-evaluation stage, the CNV
during the motor-preparation stage, and the SPN during the feedbackanticipation stage.  However, it remains to be determined whether these
anticipatory ERP components reﬂect a common neural process or a set
of distinct neural processes.  Supporting the former hypothesis, all these
ERP components have a close association with the mesocorticolimbic
dopaminergic pathway.  Speciﬁcally, previous research has demonstrated that the dopaminergic system plays a critical role in the generation of the P3 (Pogarell Name, 2011; Takeshita & Ogura, 1994) and
that P3 amplitude variation is correlated with brain activity in the
ventral striatum (Pfabigan Name, 2014).  Similarly, CNV amplitude is
inﬂuenced by dopaminergic manipulation (Linssen Name, 2011) and is
associated with ventral striatal activity (Plichta Name, 2013; but see
Pfabigan Name, 2014).  Finally, recent research has shown that the SPN
is moderated by genetic variation in dopamine (Foti & Hajcak, 2012)
and that SPN amplitude is reduced in individuals with Parkinson’s
disease, a disorder with well-known deterioration of dopamine pathway
(Mattox, Valle-Inclan, & Hackley, 2006). 
However, despite the fact that all these anticipatory ERP components are associated with reward anticipation (Broyd Name, 2012;
Goldstein Name, 2006; Gruber & Otten, 2010; Kotani, Hiraku,
Suda, & Aihara, 2001; Krebs, Boehler, Appelbaum, & Woldorﬀ, 2013;
Schevernels, Krebs, Santens, Woldorﬀ, & Boehler, 2014; van den Berg,
Krebs, Lorist, & Woldorﬀ, 2014), recent evidence suggests that they are
dissociable in terms of reward valence (i. e. , gain anticipation vs.  loss
anticipation).  On the one hand, the CNV appears to be insensitive to
reward valence such that it is comparable for gain and loss anticipation
(Novak & Foti, 2015; Pfabigan Name, 2014).  On the other hand, both the
cue-P3 and SPN seem to be modulated by reward valence.  The cue-P3 is
observed with larger amplitude after gain cues relative to loss cues
(Pfabigan Name, 2014; Santesso Name, 2012; Zheng Name, 2017; but see
Schmitt, Ferdinand, & Kray, 2015).  Similarly, the SPN appears to be
more sensitive in gain context as compared to loss context (Ohgami
Name, 2006; Zheng, Li, Wang, Wu, & Liu, 2015). 
To address this issue, we ﬁrst investigated whether the anticipatory
ERP components (i. e. , the cue-P3, CNV, and SPN) elicited in an MID
task were modulated by incentive valence (gain vs.  loss anticipation)
commonly or selectively.  If these ERP components are driven by
common neural mechanisms, then they should be modulated by incentive valence similarly.  Moreover, given its close relationship with
the mesocorticolimbic dopaminergic pathway, these anticipatory ERP
components should also relate to other measures of the dompaminergic
pathway. 