
Operant behavior results from the relations between behavior and
its consequences and has been used extensively as a model of voluntary
behavior [1,2].  The systematic analysis of environmental and biological
factors underlying operant behavior provides understanding and potential treatments for a range of behaviors considered maladaptive,
such as addictions [3] and overeating [4].  Most research examining
biological and environmental factors in learning processes come from
studies with mammalian laboratory animals.  As an alternative, zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio) are ideal for examining environmental and biological
factors involved in learning because of their high fecundity, low-cost
maintenance,
transparent embryo, and fully sequenced genome
[e. g. ,5–8].  Key neurobiological structures mediating the reinforcing
eﬀects of
(e. g. , drugs) appear conserved in zebraﬁsh
[e. g. ,9,10].  Moreover, many diﬀerent types of genetically modiﬁedzebraﬁsh are available (e. g. , National BioResource Project in Japan). 
These features oﬀer biomedical and behavioral researchers opportunities to examine how genes and environment interact to determine
operant behavior.  Nevertheless, studies of operant behavior with zebraﬁsh remain few [11–13]. 
One area of research relevant to understanding operant behavior
generally, and treatments for maladaptive behavior speciﬁcally, is with
laboratory models of relapse.  A persistent tendency to relapse even after
prolonged periods of abstinence is a deﬁning feature of addictive behavior [14].  Therefore, relapse of previously learned behavior has been
investigated extensively during the past few decades [15–18].  Most
models of relapse arrange reinforcement of operant responding in Phase
1 to simulate engaging in maladaptive behavior and then, in Phase 2,
model a basic form of behavioral treatment by eliminating those reinforcers through extinction of operant responding.  Models of relapse
primarily diﬀer in Phase 3 as a result of arranging diﬀerent factors
⁎ Corresponding author at: Aichi Bunkyo University, Faculty of Humanities, 5969-3 Okusa, Komaki, Aichi, 485-8565 Japan. 
E-mail addresses: toshikazu. kuroda@gmail. com (T.  Kuroda), yuto. mizutani3@gmail. com (Y.  Mizutani), carlos. cancado@gmail. com (C. R. X.  Cançado),
cpodlesnik@ﬁt. edu (C. A.  Podlesnik). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 023
Received 25 July 2017; Received in revised form 3 August 2017; Accepted 14 August 2017
Available online 19 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
T.  Kuroda Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 215–222A summary of typical procedures for assessing resurgence, renewal, and reinstatement.  “Target” and “Alt” stand for target and alternative responses, respectively. Phase 2ResurgenceReinstatement
Target reinforced;
Alt not reinforced
Target reinforced in Context A
Target reinforced
Target extinguished;
Alt reinforced
Target extinguished in Context B
Target extinguished
Target extinguished;
Alt extinguished
Target extinguished in Context A
Target extinguished; Response-independent delivery of reinforcer
contributing to the relapse.  The relapse of previously reinforced and
extinguished responding in these models indicates that decreases in
operant responding during extinction do not represent an elimination of
prior learning.  Instead, relapse indicates new learning involving the
extinction contingency [see 15]. 
Relapse of operant behavior has been demonstrated with a wide
variety of species in the three laboratory models of relapse serving as
the focus in this investigation (see Table 1).  First, resurgence is the relapse
of a previously reinforced and then extinguished response when
reducing or eliminating reinforcement for a more recently trained response
[e. g. ,19–22].  Hereafter, the response reinforced and then extinguished
will be referred to as the target response and the more recently
trained response as the alternative response.  Resurgence has been
demonstrated with rats [e. g. ,20,23], pigeons [e. g. ,24,25], Siamese
fighting fish [26], monkeys [27], and humans [e. g. ,28].  Recently, our
laboratory demonstrated resurgence with zebrafish for the first timeSecond, renewal is relapse due to changes in environmental context. 
Specifically, renewal is the return of a target response when changing
the global environmental context compared to the extinction context
[e. g. ,30,31,32].  Renewal occurs, for example, when reinforcing and
extinguishing the target response in different contexts and then (1)
returning to the training context (ABA renewal) or (2) transitioning to a
novel context (e. g. , ABC renewal).  Renewal of operant behavior has
been demonstrated with rats [30,33], pigeons [e. g. ,34,35], and humans
[36] but not yet with zebrafish. 
Finally, reinstatement is relapse resulting from exposure to a range of
events due to learning (e. g. , cues) or biological relevance (e. g. , stress)
[37].  One commonly used method for assessing reinstatement of an
extinguished target response is to present the event previously serving
as the reinforcer independently of responding [38,39].  Reinstatement
has been demonstrated with rats [e. g. ,40], pigeons [e. g. ,41,42], monkeys
[43,44], and humans [e. g. ,45,46].  Thus far, there have been no
demonstrations of reinstatement of operant behavior in zebrafish −
only reinstatement of a Pavlovian conditioned approach response to
drug (cocaine or nicotine) [10]. 
All these studies suggest relapse of previously reinforced and then
extinguished operant behavior is general across species.  These three
procedures serve as experimental models for understanding the conditions
under which relapse occurs and might be used as platforms to
examine biological influences in relapse, including developmental,
pharmacological, and neurobiological factors [16].  Nevertheless, research
on laboratory models of relapse using zebrafish has been limited. 
Therefore, the goals of the present study were to systematically replicate
resurgence and to extend the analysis to renewal, and reinstatement
of extinguished operant behavior in zebrafish using an
automated device to record discrete responses (i. e. , approaching sensors)
and deliver decapsulated brine shrimp eggs as reinforcers [11,12]. 
<Middle> General methods. 
2. 1.  Subjects
Forty experimentally naïve zebrafish (National Bioresource Project
of Japan, Riken Brain Science Institute), 7–8 months old at the start of
the experiments, served as subjects.  They were wild-type fish (i. e. , not
genetically modiﬁed).  Each ﬁsh was housed individually in a room with
a 14hr:10hr light-dark cycle (lights on at 6:00 am) in an aquarium
(13. 0-cm wide by 16. 8-cm long by 11. 3-cm high) connected to a pump
and tank where water was ﬁltered, aerated, and maintained at 28 °C
with a heater.  Water was kept at a pH level of 7. 5 and half of the water
in the tank was replaced weekly.  When a ﬁsh produced fewer than 30
reinforcers (decapsulated brine shrimp eggs) in a session, postsession
feedings of supplemental food (Kyorin, Hikari Labo 270) occurred
30 min after sessions. 
2. 2.  Material
Two types of automated device, similar to that described by Manabe
Name [11], were used.  Fig.  1 shows the device used to study resurgence
in Experiment 1.  The device was placed in the aquarium of each ﬁsh
during sessions and consisted of three sensors and two feeders ﬁxed on
Plexiglas.  The three sensors were for the target, alternative, and control
responses, as described below.  Each sensor consisted of a 2-mm diameter polymeroptical ﬁber (Mitsubishi Rayon Co. , LTD, Esca CK80), a
ﬁber sensor (Keyence FU-23X), an ampliﬁer (Keyence, FS-V21X), and a
tri-color LED (Oput-Supply OSTA5131A-C).  The tip of each sensor was
set 5 mm below the water surface and 5 mm away from the front wall of
the aquarium.  The sensor tips were 4. 5 cm apart from each other and
could be illuminated red, green, or blue.  A response was registered
when the ﬁsh approached and was at least within 5 mm below the
sensor tip. 
The feeders were located 2. 25 cm to the left and right of the middle
sensor.  Each feeder consisted of a servo motor (Futaba S3005), a brass
tube with the inner diameter of 600 μm, a 400-μm-diameter piano wire
inserted in the brass tube, a vibrator, and a white LED (i. e. , the feeder
light).  During reinforcement, the feeder light turned on immediately
upon a response, the servo motor pulled the piano wire, the vibrator
operated, decapsulated brine shrimp eggs were loaded into the brass
contributing to the relapse.  The relapse of previously reinforced and
extinguished responding in these models indicates that decreases in
operant responding during extinction do not represent an elimination of
prior learning.  Instead, relapse indicates new learning involving the
extinction contingency [see 15]. 
Relapse of operant behavior has been demonstrated with a wide
variety of species in the three laboratory models of relapse serving as
the focus in this investigation (see Table 1).  First, resurgence is the relapse of a previously reinforced and then extinguished response when
reducing or eliminating reinforcement for a more recently trained response [e. g. ,19–22].  Hereafter, the response reinforced and then extinguished will be referred to as the target response and the more recently trained response as the alternative response.  Resurgence has been
demonstrated with rats [e. g. ,20,23], pigeons [e. g. ,24,25], Siamese
ﬁghting ﬁsh [26], monkeys [27], and humans [e. g. ,28].  Recently, our
laboratory demonstrated resurgence with zebraﬁsh for the ﬁrst timeSecond, renewal is relapse due to changes in environmental context. 
Speciﬁcally, renewal is the return of a target response when changing
the global environmental context compared to the extinction context
[e. g. ,30,31,32].  Renewal occurs, for example, when reinforcing and
extinguishing the target response in diﬀerent contexts and then (1)
returning to the training context (ABA renewal) or (2) transitioning to a
novel context (e. g. , ABC renewal).  Renewal of operant behavior has
been demonstrated with rats [30,33], pigeons [e. g. ,34,35], and humans
[36] but not yet with zebraﬁsh. 
Finally, reinstatement is relapse resulting from exposure to a range of
events due to learning (e. g. , cues) or biological relevance (e. g. , stress)
[37].  One commonly used method for assessing reinstatement of an
extinguished target response is to present the event previously serving
as the reinforcer independently of responding [38,39].  Reinstatement
has been demonstrated with rats [e. g. ,40], pigeons [e. g. ,41,42], monkeys [43,44], and humans [e. g. ,45,46].  Thus far, there have been no
demonstrations of reinstatement of operant behavior in zebraﬁsh −
only reinstatement of a Pavlovian conditioned approach response to
drug (cocaine or nicotine) [10]. 
inﬂuences in relapse,
All these studies suggest relapse of previously reinforced and then
extinguished operant behavior is general across species.  These three
procedures serve as experimental models for understanding the conditions under which relapse occurs and might be used as platforms to
examine biological
including developmental,
pharmacological, and neurobiological factors [16].  Nevertheless, research on laboratory models of relapse using zebraﬁsh has been limited. 
Therefore, the goals of the present study were to systematically replicate resurgence and to extend the analysis to renewal, and reinstatement of extinguished operant behavior in zebraﬁsh using an
automated device to record discrete responses (i. e. , approaching sensors) and deliver decapsulated brine shrimp eggs as reinforcers [11,12]. 
2.  General methods
2. 1.  Subjects
Forty experimentally naïve zebraﬁsh (National Bioresource Project
of Japan, Riken Brain Science Institute), 7–8 months old at the start of
the experiments, served as subjects.  They were wild-type ﬁsh (i. e. , not
Fig.  1.  A photo of the automated device used in Experiment 1.  See text for details. T.  Kuroda Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 215–222
tube, and the servo motor pushed the eggs out of the tube and into the
water (this whole series of events occurred approximately in 0. 5 s).  The
feeder light then ﬂashed 5 times at a 0. 2-s interval.  Thereafter, the
device remained inoperative until 5 s had elapsed since the onset of
reinforcement. 
The other type of the device, used to study renewal and reinstatement in Experiments 2 and 3, respectively, was similar to that used in
Experiment 1 except that there were only two sensors (left and right),
9 cm apart from each other, and a single feeder in between.  The two
sensors were for the target and control responses, as described below. 
The feeder was set on the midline of the front wall of the aquarium. 
Except in Experiment 2, in which changes in contextual stimuli were
necessary, a white partition covering each side of the aquarium minimized visual distraction during sessions.  A Lenovo® laptop computer
with Visual Basic 2015® controlled the experiment and recorded data
through an I/O board (Pololu, Mini Maestro servo controller). 
2. 3.  Procedure
After acclimation in the home aquarium for 3-4 days, the ﬁsh were
trained to consume the reinforcer delivered from the feeder.  At this
stage, a single feeder was set on the midline of the front wall of the
aquarium and delivered the reinforcer randomly three times per min
(i. e. , 20 s on average).  The sensors were removed to preclude responding to the sensors being reinforced adventitiously.  Sessions ended
after 40 reinforcers. 
When each ﬁsh consumed the reinforcer reliably, response training
initiated with the sensors and feeder(s) being set as described previously and by reinforcing responses to a target sensor according to a
ﬁxed-ratio (FR) 1 schedule.  In this schedule, every target response resulted in a reinforcer delivery.  When the ﬁsh obtained 40 reinforcers
within 20 min, the schedule was changed from an FR 1 to a variableinterval (VI) 10 s, with the latter being in eﬀect for three 20-min sessions.  Under the VI 10-s schedule, the ﬁrst response after intervals with
the average of 10 s resulted in a reinforcer delivery.  The VI schedules at
this stage and in subsequent phases in each experiment consisted of 10
intervals [47], randomly selected without replacement.  Reinforcement
time (5 s per reinforcer) was excluded from the session time.  Sessions
were conducted during the light period of the room’s light-dark cycle,
around the same time of the day, seven days a week. 
2. 4.  Data analysis
The primary dependent variable was response rate (i. e. , responses
per min).  A one-way repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted in each
experiment with session as a within-subject independent variable and
target response rate as a dependent variable.  To assess whether target
responding was
sensitive to reinforcement and extinction contingencies, the analysis included data from the last baseline (Phase-1)
session and from extinction (Phase-2) sessions.  To determine the presence of relapse, the analysis included data from the last extinction
(Phase-2) session and from the ﬁve relapse-test (Phase-3) sessions. 
These sessions were consecutive and were evenly spaced in time; thus,
the ﬁrst-order autocorrelation (i. e. , correlation between at a time, Tn,
and the one before, Tn-1) was expected.  For this reason, the ﬁrst-order
autoregressive structure was set for the covariance matrix when the
ANOVA was conducted using the proc mixed function on SAS®. 
Following the ANOVA, the Bonferroni method was used for post hoc
tests (t tests) to control the familywise error rate at 0. 05.  This method
could be too conservative for a large number of contrasts between
means.  The primary question of the present study was whether target
responding was higher in the ﬁve relapse-test (Phase-3) sessions than in
the last extinction (Phase-2) session so that the mean contrast was
limited to those ﬁve comparisons.  Thus, the alpha level was set at 0. 01
(i. e. , 0. 05 divided by 5) in each of the post hoc tests for assessing relapse.  Likewise, for assessing sensitivity to reinforcement and extinction
contingencies, the alpha level was set at 0. 01, 0. 007, and 0. 006 for
Experiments 1, 2, and 3 where there were ﬁve, seven, and eight Phase-2
sessions, respectively. 
3.  Experiment 1
The ﬁrst experiment investigated resurgence, which involved reinforcement of a target response in Phase 1, extinction of the target
response while reinforcing an alternative response in Phase 2, and extinction of both responses in Phase 3.  In addition to the target and alternative responses, a control response that was never reinforced
throughout the experiment was measured to dissociate resurgence from
a possible increase in general activity induced by extinction (i. e. , extinction-induced variability) [48]. 
We recently demonstrated resurgence with zebraﬁsh using a similar
experimental setup [29] but the study was limited in several aspects. 
First, the magnitude of the resurgence eﬀect was meager, perhaps due
to the reinforcement schedules used.  We arranged equal VI 20-s schedules in Phases 1 and 2, but previous studies of resurgence indicate
greater rates of alternative reinforcement in Phase 2 produce greater
resurgence [19].  Therefore, we doubled the rate of alternative reinforcement in Phase 2 relative to Phase 1.  Second, the experimental
apparatus was not optimal for assessing resurgence.  Speciﬁcally, three
sensors and one feeder were aligned as follows: left sensor, middle
sensor, the feeder, and right sensor with equal distances between each
pair.  Either the left or right sensor was for the target response while the
other sensor was for the control response (counterbalanced across ﬁsh),
and the middle sensor was for the alternative response for each subject. 
Thus, the distance between the target and alternative sensors, as well as
the distance between the control and alternative sensors, varied across
subjects.  This might have unnecessarily increased between-subject
variability in the magnitude of resurgence.  This problem was eliminated in the present study by setting the three sensors equally apart
with a feeder being placed between each pair of the sensors, as described in the Material section above. 
3. 1.  Methods
3. 1. 1.  Subjects and material
Sixteen experimentally naïve ﬁsh (8 males and 8 females) initially
served as subjects.  Three male ﬁsh failed to acquire either a target or an
alternative response and their results are not reported.  Two sets of the
device with three sensors and two feeders were used.  In a feeder test
with 100 operations of the ﬁrst set, a mean of 19. 70 (SD = 6. 99) and
24. 03 eggs (SD = 7. 62) were delivered per operation from the left and
right feeders, respectively.  For the second set, a mean of 20. 88
(SD = 6. 98) and 23. 67 eggs (SD = 7. 88) were delivered per operation
from the respective feeders. 
3. 1. 2.  Procedure
response was
3. 1. 2. 1.  Phase 1: acquisition.  The target
reinforced
according to a VI 20-s schedule.  Alternative and control responses
were recorded but had no programmed consequence.  Approaching
either the left or right sensor served as the target response, and the
opposite sensor was for the alternative response, counterbalanced
across subjects; the middle sensor served as the control response for
all the subjects.  The LED colors (red, blue, and green) illuminating the
tips of the sensors were counterbalanced across the subjects.  Only the
feeder on the same side as the target sensor operated.  Sessions ended
after 20 min and this phase lasted for 15 sessions. 
3. 1. 2. 2.  Phase 2: extinction and alternative reinforcement.  The target
response was
response was
reinforced according to a VI 10-s schedule.  Reinforcement rate was
doubled between phases because previous studies with other species
extinguished and the alternativeT.  Kuroda Name
[e. g. ,18,19,49]. 
showed higher reinforcer rates for alternative responding increase
resurgence
remained
unreinforced.  Only the feeder on the same side as the alternative
sensor operated.  Sessions ended after 20 min and this phase lasted for 5
sessions. 
responsecontrol
3. 1. 2. 3.  Phase 3: resurgence test.  Extinction was in eﬀect for the target,
alternative, and control responses and neither feeder operated.  Sessions
ended after 20 min and this phase lasted for 5 sessions.  Resurgence was
deﬁned as an increase in target response rates compared to target
response rates during the last session of Phase 2; additionally, this
increase in target response rate had to exceed that of control response
rates in a given session [see 48]. 
3. 2.  Results and discussion
The left graph in Fig.  2 shows mean response rates for the target,
alternative, and control responses in each phase.  During acquisition in
Phase 1, target response rates were higher than alternative and control
response rates, indicating that decapsulated brine shrimp eggs indeed
served as a reinforcer when presented upon a target response.  Control
response rates were slightly but consistently higher than alternative
response rates, most likely because the control (middle) sensor was
physically closer than the alternative sensor to the operable feeder. 