
Protein malnutrition is one of the most common health conditions,
aﬀecting human children during the most vulnerable stage of their
development [1].  Adequate nutrition during this critical period is an
essential factor that ensures the normal structural and functional development of the brain [2]; and while there is no doubt that all nutrients are essential for adequate neurodevelopment, proteins appear to
play the most critical role in this period [3].  An insuﬃcient protein diet
during brain development may result in maladaptive structural changes
and, consequently, behavioral deﬁcits [4–8]. 
The eﬀects of nutritional imbalance are aggravated when they occur
during brain development and there is evidence that the earlier the
malnutrition, the more severe, lasting, or permanent are its eﬀects on
brain maturation [9,10].  In fact, the eﬀects of malnutrition on brain
development can lead to severe long-term changes, which may last until
adulthood [10,11].  Neuroanatomical changes due to malnutrition are
not uniform throughout the brain; among the brain regions most affected in early postnatal life, the hippocampus is particularly vulnerable.  The hippocampal formation has been widely studied for its importance in the acquisition and consolidation of memory, and
neuroanatomical changes in the hippocampal formation are correlated
with deﬁcits in learning and memory, which include decreased neuronal density in the CA1 and CA3 regions caused by malnutrition
[12–14].  It has also been demonstrated that malnourished rats were
slower to learn an eﬃcient search strategy on the Morris water maze
(MWM), requiring more time to ﬁnd the hidden platform, and showed
retention deﬁcits on the probe-trial indicated by impaired performance
in recalling the former position of the platform [5,13].  Cordoba Name
[15] showed that malnutrition also induces deﬁcits in eﬃcient navigation even after a long period of nutritional recovery.  In the same vein,
Braga Name reported that protein malnutrition in early life was responsible for impaired performance in recognition memory in adult rats
and even after nutritional recovery they were unable to reach the
⁎ Corresponding author at: Laboratório de Neuroanatomia, Departamento de Cirurgia e Anatomia, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, USP, Av.  Bandeirantes 3900, 14049-900,
Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brazil. 
E-mail address: jjlachat@fmrp. usp. br (J. -J.  Lachat). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 012
Received 1 June 2017; Received in revised form 25 July 2017; Accepted 5 August 2017
Available online 08 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
R. O.  Soares Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 55–62
recognition indices demonstrated by control animals [16].  Lukoyanov
and Andrade [13] demonstrated that the total number of neurons in the
granular layer of the dentate gyrus and pyramidal neurons in the CA1
region was signiﬁcantly reduced even after a period of nutritional rehabilitation.  All these results indicate that malnutrition may result in
irreversible consequences to the normal development of the hippocampal formation and its function in learning and memory. 
It is well known that the brain is remarkably responsive to its interaction with the environment and this can shape its development. 
Studies have shown consistently alteration in the morphological, biochemical, and molecular processes of brain development due to environmental stimulation, mainly when performed during the early days
of life [17–21].  It has also been demonstrated that when animals are
exposed to environmental enrichment, which is a combination of
complex inanimate, social, visual, and sensorial stimulation, this may
lead to neuroanatomical changes in the hippocampus that diﬀer from
those in animals living in standard conditions, which include increases
in hippocampal thickness and volume [22–24], in the number of
granule and glial cells [23,24], in dendritic spine density [25,26],
hippocampal progenitor proliferation and neurogenesis [27,28], and
alterations in receptor expression [29].  The beneﬁcial eﬀects of environmental enrichment are not limited to neuroanatomy, and it has
been showed to induce improvements in spatial learning performance
[24,30,31].  Studies have reported that the possible cause for these
structural and behavioral changes is related to changes in brain neurochemistry.  Indeed, environmental enrichment increases the expression of factors associated with enhanced spatial ability and neurogenesis, such as the brain-derived neurotrophic factor and vascular
endothelial growth factor [32–36]. 
Although some eﬀects of protein malnutrition have been shown to
be permanent, a degree of protection can be obtained through an enriched early experience.  Growing evidence reveals that malnourished
rats can achieve some prophylaxis by exposure to an enriched environment [20,29,37,38].  However, there are no studies showing
whether the protective eﬀect of environmental enrichment on hippocampal neuroanatomy and its function in learning and memory can be
extended to adult rats maintained on a protein malnutrition diet early
in life.  Thus, based on all the preceding studies examining the inﬂuence
of environmental enrichment on brain and behavior, we hypothesized
that it is plausible that such an experience could be protective against
neuroanatomical changes in the hippocampus and memory impairment
in protein-deﬁcient rats exposed to an enriched environment, for 1 h
per day, during the ﬁrst 35 d of life.  The purpose of this study was to
investigate learning and memory performance and hippocampal morphology of adult rats maintained on a protein-deﬁcient diet in the early
postnatal period and the possible beneﬁts produced by environmental
enrichment under this condition.  To elucidate the protective eﬀects of
environmental enrichment, we used the MWM and structural analysis
to determine whether changes in spatial memory and the number and
size of CA1 neurons, caused by early malnutrition, were signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent between an enriched and non-enriched group. 
<Middle> Experimental procedures. 
2. 1.  Animals
Forty-eight male Wistar rats, from the animal colony at the Ribeirão
Preto campus of the University of São Paulo, were used.  According to
the experimental protocol previously established in our laboratory, on
the day of birth, each litter was culled to 6 male and 2 female pups
housed with the dam in transparent plastic cages (40 × 25 × 20 cm)
during the lactation period, from postnatal day (P) 0 to P21.  During the
lactation period, the dams and entire litters were weighed once a week. 
Weaning occurred on P21 and consisted of separation of the dams and
female pups that were not used in this study to avoid possible result
variation related to the estrous cycle.  Male rats were reared in pairs instandard polypropylene cages (30 × 19 × 18 cm) and they were
weighed individually once a week, until P70. 
Rats were randomly divided into two dietary groups: well-nourished, with a diet containing 16% protein (W), and malnourished, with
a diet containing 6% protein (M). 