
Obstructive Sleep Apnea is a common prevalent disorder which is
associated with increased cardiovascular morbidities and mortality,
metabolic dysfunction and neurocognitive impairments [1].  With the
progress of OSA, patients will suﬀer from daytime sleepiness, depression, decline in memory, emotional disorders, cognitive loss, decline in
the ability of language understanding and expressing [2].  Intermittent
hypoxia (IH), as one of the major pathophysiological changes of OSA,
plays a signiﬁcant role in the processing of OSA [3].  Exposure to IH is
associated with neurodegenerative changes in addition to alterations in
brain regions and neurotransmitter systems involved in learning and
memory, attention, and locomotor activity.  Multiple pathophysiological
processes appear to be involved in the mechanistic aspects of the behavioral and neuronal susceptibility to IH, and include pathways
leading to increased oxidative stress and inﬂammation, altered gene
regulation, and decreases in the cellular and molecular substrates of
synaptic plasticity [4].  In addition, both environmental and genetic
factors modulate the end-organ susceptibility to IH-induced cognitive
dysfunction.  Collectively, the available data indicated that the cognitive
impairment could be the consequence of IH in the brain [5]. 
MicroRNA (miRNA) which is the endogenous non-coding singlestranded small molecule RNA has the capacity for blocking a number of
target genes and suppressing their translation [6].  Research on stroke
and brain injury found that regulating miRNA expression in brain could
alleviate the neuronal apoptosis and improve neurobehavioral functions [7–9].  Thus intervening the target genes through up/down-regulating the expression of target miRNA could be a potential way to
protect from cognitive impairment after IH.  It is important to analyse
the miRNA expression in rat hippocampus after chronic intermittent
hypoxia.  As far as we know, miRNA expression in rat hippocampus after
IH has not been reported yet.  In our study, we investigate the microarray based analysis of microRNA expression proﬁling in rat hippocampus after IH which could lay some foundation for future study of the
miRNA functional mechanism involved in the complex course of OSAreduced cognitive impairment. 
⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Geriatrics, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Tianjin Geriatrics Institute, Tianjin, 300052, China. 