
Important clues to retrosplenial cortex (areas 29, 30) function come
from its connectivity.  This posterior cingulate region has dense interconnections with the anterior thalamic nuclei, as well as with hippocampal and parahippocampal regions [1–6].  Reﬂecting these connections, the rat retrosplenial cortex contributes to spatial memory and
navigation [7–12].  Despite these ﬁndings, it is clear that the retrosplenial cortex has a very diﬀerent role in spatial cognition from that of
the hippocampus and anterior thalamic nuclei.  Indeed, retrosplenial
lesion deﬁcits often only emerge when animals are required to switch
ﬂexibly between diﬀerent spatial strategies or competing cue types
[13–15].  Such evidence potentially points to a broader role for the
retrosplenial cortex in cognition beyond the spatial domain.  A consideration of its other anatomical connections is consistent with this
proposal.  Retrosplenial cortex is also heavily interconnected with the
anterior cingulate cortex [16–18] which, in turn, is closely connected
with other frontal areas, including prelimbic cortex [19].  Retrosplenial
cortex is also indirectly linked with prelimbic cortex via its dense
anterior thalamic and medial thalamic connections [16,19].  Yet, the
functional importance of these retrosplenial-frontal connections remains poorly understood. 
The present study, therefore, addressed the question of whether
retrosplenial cortex contributes to functions associated with the rodent
anterior cingulate and prelimbic cortices.  Preliminary support for this
view comes from the ﬁnding that retrosplenial cortex lesions disrupt a
rodent analogue of the Stroop task [20], which is also sensitive to
medial frontal cortex lesions [21].  In addition, retrosplenial cortex lesions can disrupt recency judgements [22], an ability closely associated
with medial frontal cortex function in rats [23–25] as well as crossmodal recognition memory [26,27]. 
To provide a more comprehensive answer, rats with retrosplenial
cortex lesions were tested on a series of four behavioural tasks thought
to rely on either the prelimbic cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, or both
cortical areas.  In Experiment 1, rats with retrosplenial cortex lesions
performed an attentional set-shifting task, previously shown to be
⁎ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: Powellal3@cf. ac. uk (A. L.  Powell). 
1 Anna Powell and Andrew Nelson are joint ﬁrst authors. 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 010
Received 25 May 2017; Received in revised form 25 July 2017; Accepted 5 August 2017
Available online 08 August 2017
0166-4328/ © 2017 The Authors.  Published by Elsevier B. V.  This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons. org/licenses/BY/4. 0/). 
A. L.  Powell Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 88–102
Fig.  1.  Set-shifting task (Experiment 1).  (A) Schematic of the arena used for the set-shifting experiment.  Approximately one third of the length of the box was divided into two smaller
compartments.  The remaining area of the box was a single open space.  The two smaller sections could be separated from the larger area by a removable black Perspex panel.  A glass pot
(depicted by the clear circles) containing the digging medium was placed in each of the two smaller areas.  A third identical glass pot containing water was placed against the opposite wall
of the larger area (depicted by the “W”).  (B) Examples of possible stimulus pairings for each stage of the attentional set-shifting task.  A rewarded stimulus is indicated with + while −
indicates the nonrewarded stimulus in each pair.  Abbreviations: extra, extradimensional shift; intra, intradimensional shift. 
sensitive to lesions centred in prelimbic cortex [28].  These medial
frontal lesions produce a selective deﬁcit on extradimensional setshifting, the ability to switch from one class of reinforced cues to another [28], while more selective anterior cingulate lesions can impair
intradimensional set-shifting [29].  The latter experiment also examined
the retrosplenial (posterior cingulate) cortex, ﬁnding that restricted
lesions centred on mid anterior-posterior levels within the area can also
retard intradimensional shifts [29].  In Experiment 2, a second cohort of
rats with retrosplenial lesions was tested on a strategy switch task in an
automated chamber.  This task involved learning and then shifting between visual-based and response-based discriminations, switches that
are sensitive to inactivation of the medial frontal cortex in rats (Ragozzino Name [31]; Floresco Name [30]).  Both Experiments 1 and 2
included a reversal stage as this form of behavioural change can be
dissociated from shifting attention from one domain to another [28,32]. 
Lesions in the anterior cingulate cortex impair eﬀort-based decision
making, whilst other medial frontal cortex lesions can spare such tasks
[33].  We, therefore, trained the cohort of rats from Experiment 2 on an
operant cost-beneﬁt discrimination task (Experiment 3).  Such tasks pit
reward size against the eﬀort required to gain that reward [34].  Finally,
a third cohort of rats with retrosplenial lesions was trained on reinforced matching-to-place in a T-maze (Experiment 4). 