Novel Microbial Diversity and Functional Potential in
the Marine Mammal Oral MicrobiomeHighlights
d Genomes were recovered from dolphin-associated
candidate phyla bacteria
d Two new bacterial phyla were deﬁned (C.  Delphibacteria and
C.  Fertabacteria)
d C.  Delphibacteria is common in the dolphin mouth and may
affect host physiology
d Novel functional diversity was identiﬁed, including unusual
CRISPR-Cas9 systemsNatasha K.  Dudek, Christine L.  Sun,
David Burstein, . . . , Brian C.  Thomas,
Jillian F.  Banﬁeld, David A.  Relman
Correspondence
relman@stanford. edu
In Brief
Dudek Name reconstruct genomes from
previously uncharacterized microbes
living in the dolphin mouth.  Three of these
genomes represent two new phyla, and
22 come from members of nine relatively
unexplored candidate phyla.  Novel
taxonomic diversity in the community is
accompanied by novel functional
diversity, such as unusual CRISPR-Cas9
systems. 
Dudek Name, 2017, Current Biology 27, 3752–3762
December 18, 2017 Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 10. 040
Current BiologyNovel Microbial Diversity and Functional Potential
in the Marine Mammal Oral Microbiome
Natasha K.  Dudek,1 Christine L.  Sun,2,3 David Burstein,4 Rose S.  Kantor,5 Daniela S.  Aliaga Goltsman,2,3
Elisabeth M.  Bik,2,8 Brian C.  Thomas,4 Jillian F.  Banﬁeld,4,6 and David A.  Relman2,3,7,9,*
1Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA
2Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
3Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
4Department of Earth and Planetary Science, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
5Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
6Earth and Environmental Science, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
7Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA
8Present address: uBiome, San Francisco, CA 94105, USA
9Lead Contact
*Correspondence: relman@stanford. edu
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 10. 040The vast majority of bacterial diversity lies within
phylum-level
lineages called ‘‘candidate phyla,’’
which lack isolated representatives and are poorly
understood.  These bacteria are surprisingly abundant in the oral cavity of marine mammals.  We employed a genome-resolved metagenomic approach
to recover and characterize genomes and functional
potential from microbes in the oral gingival sulcus of
two bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus).  We detected organisms from 24 known bacterial phyla and
one archaeal phylum.  We also recovered genomes
from two deep-branching, previously uncharacterized phylum-level lineages (here named ‘‘Candidatus
Delphibacteria’’ and ‘‘Candidatus Fertabacteria’’). 
The Delphibacteria lineage is found in both managed
and wild dolphins; its metabolic proﬁle suggests
a capacity for denitriﬁcation and a possible role in
dolphin health.  We uncovered a rich diversity of predicted Cas9 proteins, including the two longest predicted Cas9 proteins to date.  Notably, we identiﬁed
the ﬁrst type II CRISPR-Cas systems encoded by
members of the Candidate Phyla Radiation.  Using
their spacer sequences, we subsequently identiﬁed
and assembled a complete Saccharibacteria phage
genome.  These ﬁndings underscore the immense
microbial diversity and functional potential that await
discovery in previously unexplored environments. 
INTRODUCTION
The vast majority of bacterial diversity is found within phylumlevel
lineages that lack isolated representatives [1], commonly
referred to as ‘‘candidate phyla. ’’ Candidate phyla constitute at
least 103 out of approximately 142 widely recognized bacterial
phyla for which there is genomic representation [1–3]; 46% of
known bacterial phyla are clustered in the Candidate Phyla Radiation (CPR).  However, there remain many phylum-level bacterial
lineages that have no genomic representation and are not yet
formally recognized [4].  Genome-resolved metagenomic studies
offer unique and unprecedented insights into the biology of these
uncultured, poorly understood lineages and their biochemical
diversity [3–8].  In addition to revealing the environmentally and
economically important roles played by such bacteria, these
studies contribute greatly to our understanding of the distribution
of lifestyles across the tree of life.  For example, genomes from
members of the CPR suggest that they are metabolically sparse
and lack many biosynthetic pathways typically required for life,
presumably because these organisms are dependent on other
microbes for survival
[6, 9].  Candidate phyla genomes may
also reveal novel functional diversity, as phylogenetic diversity
is correlated with novel proteomic diversity and biological properties [10, 11]. 
Marine mammals are an ecologically important group of
animals harboring little-explored microbial communities.  Previous research has shown that bottlenose dolphins, in particular,
host a rich diversity of novel bacteria [12].  Nearly 70% of nearfull-length 16S rRNA genes from the dolphin microbiota were
novel in 2015 at the species level, and representatives from 25
bacterial phyla were present in the mouth alone.  Furthermore,
a surprising number of candidate phyla such as Gracilibacteria
(BD1-5/GN02), Modulibacteria (KSB3), and the Parcubacteria
(OD1) supergroup, which are unusual in mammal-associated environments, were found in the dolphin mouth [12].  Genomes from
such candidate phyla have nearly exclusively been retrieved
from non-host-associated environments, and thus it is unknown
how these bacteria adapt to a mammalian environment.  Interestingly, despite evidence that the marine mammal microbiota is
shaped by the sea, these bacteria were not detected in the adjacent seawater [12]. 
The vast majority of bacterial diversity is found within phylumlevel lineages that lack isolated representatives [1], commonly
referred to as ‘‘candidate phyla. ’’ Candidate phyla constitute at
least 103 out of approximately 142 widely recognized bacterial
On the basis of these prior observations, we concluded that
marine mammals afford an unusual opportunity for studying
bacterial diversity.  Working under the hypothesis that novel
phylogenetic diversity correlates with novel functional diversity,
3752 Current Biology 27, 3752–3762, December 18, 2017 Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
in this study we applied genome-resolved metagenomics to
investigate the diversity and functional potential of the dolphin
oral microbiome.  The results hint at the wealth of evolutionary
and biochemical diversity that remains uncharted within previously unexplored environments, including mammalian microbiomes, and will contribute to future comparative studies of
host-associated versus non-host-associated candidate phyla
bacteria. 
<Middle> RESULTS. 
Dolphin Oral Microbiota Composition and Structure
Swab samples were collected from the gingival sulcus of
healthy bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) under the purview of the U. S. 