Article
Vagus Motor Neuron Topographic Map Determined
by Parallel Mechanisms of hox5 Expression and Time
of Axon Initiation
Highlights
d Time of axon formation is differentially regulated independent
of neuron birthdateGabrielle R.  Barsh, Adam J.  Isabella,
Cecilia B.  Moens
d hox5 genes are expressed in posterior, but not anterior,
vagus motor neurons
Correspondence
cmoens@fredhutch. org
d hox5 directs vagus topographic map formation independent
of time of axon outgrowth
d Time of axon outgrowth directs vagus topographic map
formation independent of hox5
In Brief
The development of topographic maps
classically relies upon spatial patterning
mechanisms.  Barsh Name show that in
zebraﬁsh vagus motor neurons, map
formation is determined by a hox5dependent spatial mechanism that acts in
parallel with a novel temporal mechanism
dependent upon the time of axon
outgrowth. 
Barsh Name, 2017, Current Biology 27, 3812–3825
December 18, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 11. 022
Current BiologyVagus Motor Neuron Topographic Map
Determined by Parallel Mechanisms
of hox5 Expression and Time of Axon Initiation
Gabrielle R.  Barsh,1,2,3 Adam J.  Isabella,1 and Cecilia B.  Moens1,2,4,*
1Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA
2Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
3Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
4Lead Contact
*Correspondence: cmoens@fredhutch. org
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 11. 022Many networks throughout the nervous system are
organized into topographic maps, where the positions
of neuron cell bodies in the projecting ﬁeld correspond
with the positions of their axons in the target ﬁeld.  Previous studies of topographic map development show
evidence for spatial patterning mechanisms, in which
molecular determinants expressed across the projecting and target ﬁelds are matched directly in a point-topoint mapping process.  Here, we describe a novel
temporal mechanism of topographic map formation
that depends on spatially regulated differences in the
timing of axon outgrowth and functions in parallel
with spatial point-to-point mapping mechanisms.  We
focus on the vagus motor neurons, which are topographically arranged in both mammals and ﬁsh.  We
show that cell position along the anterior-posterior
axis of hindbrain rhombomere 8 determines expression of hox5 genes, which are expressed in posterior,
but not anterior, vagus motor neurons.  Using live imaging and transplantation in zebraﬁsh embryos, we
additionally reveal that axon initiation is delayed in
posterior vagus motor neurons independent of neuron
birth time.  We show that hox5 expression directs
topographic mapping without affecting time of axon
outgrowth and that time of axon outgrowth directs
topographic mapping without affecting hox5 expression.  The vagus motor neuron topographic map is
therefore determined by two mechanisms that act in
parallel: a hox5-dependent spatial mechanism akin
to classic mechanisms of topographic map formation
and a novel axon outgrowth-dependent temporal
mechanism in which time of axon formation is spatially
regulated to direct axon targeting. 
INTRODUCTION
Topographic maps are a common organizational motif in neurobiology and are crucial for the ability of animals to accurately
perceive and respond to their external environment.  These
maps are characterized by an arrangement of neurons in which
neighbor-neighbor relationships are preserved between cell
bodies and axon targets, creating representations of the outside
world inside the brain [1].  The best-studied topographic maps
form through a spatial patterning process, where precise patterns of gene expression in neurons and their target areas direct
axons to the proper location in a point-to-point matching system
[2, 3].  For example, in the retinotopic map, gradients of EphA receptor expression in the retina and EphrinA ligand expression in
the tectum are matched such that high and low EphA-expressing
neurons innervate opposite regions of the tectum while neighbor
neurons expressing similar EphA levels innervate the same
region [4–9].  Similarly, in the spinal musculotopic map, dorsal
and ventral limb-innervating neurons occupy spatially distinct locations and reach their respective targets due to the presence of
repulsive ligands expressed by the inappropriate targets [10–14]. 
Thus, spatial patterning mechanisms underlie topographic map
development in both sensory and motor systems. 
In addition to classic spatial patterning, previous studies have
also proposed a temporal mechanism of topographic map
development.  In the Drosophila photoreceptor map, sequential
expression of a temporal identity transcription factor during neurogenesis directs targeting to different layers of the medulla [15]. 
Additionally, in the mouse olfactory topographic map, cell position correlates with birth order and therefore with time of axonin the target region [16, 17].  However, though these
studies demonstrate correlations between temporal patterning
and topographic connectivity, timing-based mechanisms for
topographic map formation have been difﬁcult to explicitly test,
as they require live imaging and the ability to manipulate the temporal environment. 
Here, to dissect the relative contributions of both spatial and
temporal mechanisms of topographic map development, we
focus on vagus motor neurons (motor neurons of cranial
nerve X, or mX neurons) in the zebraﬁsh embryo as a model of
topographic map development.  In all vertebrates, mX neurons
are located in the most posterior segment of the hindbrain, rhombomere 8 (r8) [18].  In humans, mX neurons innervate pharyngealarch-derived muscles important for speech and swallowing. 
In ﬁsh, mX neurons innervate homologous muscles to move
the pharynx, gills, and pharyngeal
In both ﬁsh and
humans, the vagus also supplies preganglionic parasympathetic3812 Current Biology 27, 3812–3825, December 18, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 
(legend on next page)
Current Biology 27, 3812–3825, December 18, 2017 3813
innervation of visceral targets [19, 20].  Previous studies in ﬁsh
and mammals have shown that mX neurons in the adult animal
are arranged topographically, with anterior neurons innervating
more anterior pharyngeal arches and posterior neurons innervating posterior pharyngeal arches and visceral[21, 22].  However, it is unclear how the vagus topographic map
is established during development. 
We describe two parallel and independent mechanisms for
vagus topographic map development.  First, we show that
hox5 genes are expressed in posterior mX neurons and direct
mX neuron targeting toward posterior targets.  Second, we
demonstrate that temporal regulation of axon initiation inﬂuences axon targeting.  Whereas anterior and posterior mX neurons are born at the same time, axons emerge from posterior
mX neurons later than from anterior mX neurons and late
axon arrival in the peripheral target area directs axons to posterior targets.  Finally, we demonstrate that these two mechanisms are independent.  This work therefore establishes a new
temporal mechanism that acts in parallel with hox-dependent
spatial patterning mechanisms to govern the robust development of a topographic map. 
<Middle> RESULTS. 
Characterization of Embryonic Vagus Motor Neuron
Topographic Map
Vagus (mX) neurons, detectable with isl1-driven ﬂuorescent proteins [23], are born ventrally in hindbrain r8 and migrate dorsolaterally to form the vagus motor nucleus by 36 hr post-fertilization
(hpf) [24].  Axons emerge basally, ﬁrst exiting the hindbrain at
27 hpf, and travel anteriorly in a single fascicle before making
a characteristic ventral turn at the otic vesicle toward the pharyngeal arches (PAs) (Figure 1A) [25].  The axons divide peripherally
into 5 branches, which are all present by 3 days post-fertilization
(dpf): 4 branches innervate PA4, 5, 6, and 7 and a 5th posterior
branch innervates visceral targets (Figure 1A) [23].  In time-lapse
movies, the axon branches appear sequentially in anterior-toposterior order, with the PA4 branch emerging ﬁrst and the
PA7 and visceral branches emerging last (Figure 1B; Movie S1). 
To simultaneously visualize the appearance of mX axons
and their PA targets, we time-lapsed embryos expressing
Tg(isl1:eGFPCAAX) and Tg(tcf21:mCherry), which marks the
progenitors of the PA muscles that are the targets of branchiomotor innervation [26, 27].  Tcf21:mCherry+ cells appear in an
anterior-to-posterior sequence, with each PA emerging about
6–8 hr before mX axon innervation (Figure 1C; Movie S2).  Thus,
the sequential outgrowth of mX branches correlates with the
sequential appearance of their PA targets. 
To understand how the mX neuron topographic map is established, we ﬁrst determined whether it is detectable in the zebraﬁsh embryo.  We injected single-cell-stage embryos expressing
Tg(isl1:mRFP) with isl1:eGFPCAAX, titrated to a low level such
that only a single mX neuron was labeled with eGFPCAAX.  We
divided the mX territory into 10 equal-length bins and determined
the axon target of each single mX neuron based upon its relative
position in the mX territory (Figures 1D–1H).  We note that single
mX neurons only ever project into a single PA (n = 57/57).  We
found that mX neurons in bin 1 exclusively innervated PA4 and
PA5, whereas mX neurons in bins 4–10 exclusively innervate
PA7 and the viscera (Figure 1I).  We conﬁrmed this single-cell
mapping approach with photoconversion experiments using
Tg(isl1:Kaede), photoconverting deﬁned regions of the mX territory and subsequently visualizing the photoconverted Kaede in
the peripheral branches (anterograde labeling), and conversely
photoconverting speciﬁc branches and subsequently visualizing
the photoconverted Kaede in cell bodies (retrograde labeling;
Figure S1).  Whereas we observed overlap between mX neurons
innervating neighboring PAs, our single-neuron and photoconversion mapping approaches consistently describe a vagus
topographic map at 3 dpf that is sufﬁciently resolved to allow
us to investigate its developmental basis. 
Vagus Motor Neuron Position Determines Axon Target
We ﬁrst asked whether the position of an mX neuron in r8 determines its axon target.  To address this question, we used singleneuron transplantation to manipulate the spatial environment of
individual postmitotic neurons [28].  At 27 hpf, when postmitotic
mX neurons are present along the anterior-posterior axis of r8
but before they have extended axons, we transplanted postmitotic mX neurons from a Tg(isl1:Kaede) donor to the same
(homotopic) or different (heterotopic) position in r8 of a Tg(isl1:
GFP) host embryo.  To ensure accurate developmental age, we
used the precise ‘‘prim staging’’ method to stage all embryos
at the time of transplantation [29] (see STAR Methods for details). 
We transplanted 1–5 mX neurons (median = 2) into each host
embryo and then assessed targeting of the donor neuron(s)
at 3 dpf (Figure 2A).  Singly transplanted neurons only projected
into a single PA, similar to our earlier single-cell labeling experiments (n = 8/8 embryos; e. g. , Figures 2B and 2E).  As expected,
in control anterior / anterior homotopic transplants, donor neurons innervated primarily anterior targets (Figures 2B and 2F),
and in control posterior / posterior homotopic transplants,
donor neurons innervated primarily posterior targets (Figures
2D and 2F).  In heterotopic anterior / posterior transplants,
donor neurons innervated primarily posterior targets (Figures
in heterotopic posterior / anterior
2C and 2F).  Likewise,
Figure 1.  Topographic Mapping by Vagus Motor Neurons
(A) Lateral view of a zebraﬁsh embryo expressing Tg(isl1:Kaede) at 3 dpf.  Brackets, cranial motor nuclei; ov, otic vesicle; PA, pharyngeal arches.  Asterisk marks a
subset of vagus sensory cells labeled by islet1. 
(B) mX axon branches innervate PAs sequentially.  See Movie S1.  Gray arrowhead indicates the glossopharyngeal motor nerve (mIX). 
(C) tcf21:mCherry+ PA muscle precursors (magenta) appear sequentially prior to mX axon entry.  White bracket indicates mX nucleus expressing isl1:eGFPCAAX
(green).  See Movie S2. (D–H) mX neurons are arranged in a topographic map.  Single neuron labeled by Tg(isl1:eGFPCAAX) in magenta or black (D
) on Tg(isl1:mRFP) background
(green).  Dotted lines indicate the length of the mX territory.  (D) Neuron in region 1 projecting to PA4; (E) neuron in region 2 projecting to PA5; (F) neuron in region 2
projecting to PA6; (G) neuron in region 3 projecting to PA7; (H) neuron in region 6 projecting to the visceral branch. 
(I) Quantiﬁcation of (D)–(H).  mX territory was divided into 10 equal-length bins along the A-P axis. 
In all ﬁgures, anterior is left and dorsal is up.  The scale bars represent 50 mm.  See also Figure S1. 0
3814 Current Biology 27, 3812–3825, December 18, 2017
Figure 2.  Vagus Motor Neuron Position Determines
Axon Target
(A) Schematic of postmitotic neuron transplantation approach. 
mX neurons are transplanted homotopically or heterotopically
(pictured) before axon formation, and donor axon targeting is
assayed at 3 dpf. 
(B–E) Examples of homotopic (B and D) and heterotopic
(C and E) transplants.  Donor-derived neurons are marked byTg(isl1:Kaede) in magenta and black on white (B
).  Host motor
neurons are marked by Tg(isl1:GFP) in green.  Dotted lines indicate length of mX territory; dotted boxes indicate region shown
in lower panels. 
(F) Quantiﬁcation of transplant results showing number of host
embryos with a donor axon in a given branch.  Statistical analysis
was done with Fisher’s exact test (see STAR Methods for
details).  Ant / ant: n = 14 host embryos; ant / post: n = 12;
post / post: n = 7; post / ant: n = 12. –E
Current Biology 27, 3812–3825, December 18, 2017 3815
transplants, donor neurons innervated primarily anterior targets
(Figures 2E and 2F).  These results show that the anterior-posterior position of an mX neuron in r8 determines its peripheralhox5 Expression Distinguishes Anterior and Posterior
mX Neurons
To understand how cell position determines axon target, we
sought to identify differences between anterior and posterior
mX neurons.  Hox genes are well-known for their role in anterior-posterior patterning of the vertebrate hindbrain, including
motor neurons; however, a role in vagus-speciﬁc topographic
mapping has not been described [30].  We therefore sought to
determine whether hox4, hox5, and hox6 paralogs, which are
known to have anterior expression limits in the posterior hindbrain and anterior spinal cord [31–34], were differentially expressed in anterior versus posterior mX neurons by RNA in situ
hybridization at 27 hpf.  We found that hox4 genes have anterior
limits anterior to the mX territory, and hox6 genes have anterior
limits posterior to the mX territory (Figure S2).  However, hoxa5a,
hoxb5a, and hoxb5b all have diffuse anterior limits of expression
within the mX territory (Figures 3A and S2E–S2G). 
To visualize hox5 expression and motor neurons together with
high resolution in live embryos, we targeted GFP to the endogenous hoxb5a locus [35] (see STAR Methods for details) and
examined expression of hoxb5aGFP at 1–3 dpf (Figures 3B–3D). 
Consistent with RNA in situ expression data, hoxb5aGFP is
expressed in a graded pattern, with GFP-negative cells at the
anterior end of
the mX territory (corresponding to regions
1 and 2 from Figure S1), whereas 100% of cells in the posterior
mX territory (regions 3, 4, and 5) are GFP positive (Figure 3B;
data not shown).  The anterior limit of hoxb5aGFP expression is
more anterior than the corresponding hoxb5a mRNA expression
domain (compare Figure 3A to 3B).  This difference most likely
reﬂects the different sensitivity of the detection methods, as
well GFP perdurance: hoxb5aGFP marks every cell that ever
expressed hoxb5a, whereas the mRNA in situ detects the
expression domain at the moment of ﬁxation.  hoxb5aGFP is
also expressed in PA6 and PA7 (Figure 3E).  Thus, hox5 genes
are expressed in posterior mX neurons and their posterior PA
targets, suggesting that hox5 expression may direct posterior
mX axon targeting. 
Vagus Motor Neuron Position Determines hox5
Expression
Our expression experiments demonstrated that mX neuron position correlates with hox5 expression.  We next asked whether mX
neuron position determines hox5 expression by transplanting
postmitotic mX neurons at 27 hpf from hoxb5aGFP-positive donor
embryos into hoxb5aGFP-negative host embryos and assessing
GFP expression in donor-derived mX neurons at 3 dpf.  Host
embryos expressed Tg(isl1:mRFP) so that we could correlate
hoxb5aGFP expression in the transplanted neuron(s) with their
position in the host mX territory.  As expected, 100% of donor
mX neurons (n = 13 neurons) maintained GFP expression in control homotopic posterior / posterior transplants (Figure 3H). 
Also as expected, in control anterior / anterior transplants,
only 23% of donor mX neurons (n = 22 neurons) were GFP+ (Figures 3F and 3H).  However, when anterior mX neurons were
3816 Current Biology 27, 3812–3825, December 18, 2017
transplanted heterotopically into posterior r8, 64% (n = 28
neurons; p = 0. 0046 by Fisher’s exact test compared to anterior / anterior) of the donor mX neurons were GFP+ (Figures
3G and 3H).  Due to GFP perdurance, we were not able to assess
hoxb5a downregulation in posterior / anterior transplants. 
These results suggest that the position of an mX neuron in r8 determines its hox5 expression.  The ability of transplanted postmitotic neurons to turn on expression of hoxb5a (Figure 3) and to
change their axon targeting after transplantation (Figure 2) indicates that mX neuron fate remains plastic after birth. 
hox5 Expression Drives Posterior Axon Targetingtransplant experiments demonstrated that both hox5
expression and posterior PA targeting are induced in an anterior mX neuron that is placed in the posterior mX territory.  We
therefore sought to test whether hox5 expression causes posterior PA targeting.  Given that there are three hox5 genes
with overlapping expression in posterior r8 in zebraﬁsh and
that Hox5 genes are known to act redundantly in other processes [36], we reasoned that a targeted gain-of-function
approach would most efﬁciently allow us to test the ability of
hox5 genes to impact mX axon targeting.  We constructed plasmids encoding UAS:hox5gene-p2a-eGFPCAAX and injected
the DNA into single-cell stage Tg(isl1:Gal4);Tg(isl1:mRFP) embryos.  This strategy allowed us to generate embryos with membrane-GFP-labeled hox5-expressing mX neurons scattered
sparsely throughouthox5 expression directs axons toward posterior targets, we
predicted that hox5-expressing mX neurons would innervate
posterior targets with a higher than expected frequency.  We
found that, whereas hox5 expression had no effect on
the overall distribution of mX neurons compared to control
eGFPCAAX expression (Figure 4E), hox5-expressing neurons
were biased toward innervating more posterior PAs compared
to eGFPCAAX-expressing control neurons (Figures 4A–4D
and 4F).  This was true for neurons expressing any of the three
hox5 genes: hoxa5a, hoxb5a, or hoxb5b, though the effect of
hoxb5b expression was less dramatic. 
the vagus territory (Figures 4A–4E). 
To further examine how hox5 expression instructs the formation of the mX topographic map, we focused on embryos with
hox5-expressing neurons in the anterior-most region of the mX
territory that normally exclusively innervates PA4 and PA5
(bin 1 in Figure 1I).  In control experiments, 100% of embryos
with labeled cells in bin 1 also had labeled axons in the PA4 or
PA5 branch, consistent with the single-neuron mapping data
(Figure 4G).  However, in embryos with hoxb5a-expressing neurons in bin 1, only 27% of the embryos had labeled axons in
the PA4 or PA5 branch (p = 0. 0014; Figure 4G).  The effect of
ectopic hoxa5a or hoxb5b expression in bin 1 neurons was
less dramatic, with 88% and 81%, respectively, of embryos
having labeled axons in the PA4 or PA5 branch (Figure 4G). 
Together, these results strongly suggest that hox5 expression
biases mX axon targeting to posterior targets. 
Axon Formation and Arrival in the Periphery Are Delayed
in Posterior mX Neurons
The anterior-posterior sequence of PA innervation by mX neurons (Figures 1B and 1C; Movies S1 and S2) suggested that there
may be earlier developmental differences between anterior and
Figure 3.  hox5 Expression Distinguishes Anterior and Posterior mX Neurons
(A) hoxb5a is expressed in the posterior mX territory.  RNA in situ hybridization of 28 hpf embryo for hoxb5a expression (purple) followed by immunostaining
against Tg(isl1:eGFPCAAX) to label motor neurons (green) is shown.  Dotted lines in (A)–(D) indicate anterior limit of hoxb5a expression.  See also Figure S2. 
(B–E) hoxb5aGFP is expressed in posterior mX neurons, PA6, and PA7.  hoxb5aGFP (green) and Tg(isl1:mRFP) (magenta) at 32 hpf (B), 2 dpf (C), or 3 dpf (D and E)
are shown. 
(F and G) Anterior mX neurons marked by lineage dye (cyan) and isl1:mRFP (magenta) transplanted homotopically (F) or heterotopically (G) are hoxb5aGFPnegative (arrow in F) or hoxb5aGFP-positive, respectively (arrow, green in G and black in G
(H) Quantiﬁcation of (F) and (G).  Analysis was done by Fisher’s exact test.  Ant / ant: n = 22 neurons, 6 embryos; ant / post: n = 28 neurons, 9 embryos; post /
post: n = 13 neurons, 5 embryos. 
).  Host motor neurons express Tg(isl1:mRFP) (magenta). posterior mX neurons that impact axon targeting.  We crossed
the Tg(isl1:Gal4) line to the variegated Tg(UAS:Kaede) line to
mosaically label mX neurons and then photoconverted posterior
mX neurons and time lapsed starting at 29 hpf, when mX neurons
are present throughout r8 but axons have only just begun to
emerge (Figure 5A; Movie S3).  Anterior mX axons exit the brain
and turn ventrally to extend into the periphery at 29 ± 1. 9 hpf
(95% conﬁdence interval
[CI] = 26. 71–32. 6 hpf), consistent
with previous literature [24].  However, posterior mX neurons,
which were also present at the beginning of the time lapse,
show extensive protrusive activity but remain multipolar until
axons are ﬁnally detected at 37. 7 ± 2. 7 hpf (95% CI = 35. 9–
39. 5 hpf), when anterior mX axons had already extended into
the PAs (Figures 5A and 5B; Movie S3).  Posterior growth cones
Current Biology 27, 3812–3825, December 18, 2017 3817
controlA
hoxa5a-overexpressionB'controlmXnshoxa5aviscPA7PA7PA6PA5PA7
hoxb5a-overexpression
hoxb5b-overexpressionC'D' dea twsybe ngrnvin nm dea twsybe#cabnvin nxmXnshoxb5ahoxb5bGPA6PA6PA5PA7hi orm o%1n islcdea25155
overexpressinghoxa5aoverexpressing
overexpressing
hoxb5bhoxb5ans **2010overexpressing
overexpressing
overexpressinghoxb5bhoxb5ahoxa5ans1006020
region 1
region 2
region 3
region 4
region 5PA5PA7axon in 
PA4 or 5 
no axon in 
PA4 or 5 overexpressing
overexpressingoverexpressing
hoxa5ahoxb5bhoxb5aFigure 4.  hox5 Expression Directs mX Axons to Posterior Targets
(A–D) Expression of control isl1:eGFPCAAX (A) or isl1:hox5-P2A-eGFPCAAX expression construct (B–D, magenta; A
(green).  Dotted lines indicate length of mX territory; dotted boxes indicate region shown in bottom panels. 
(E) Quantiﬁcation of distribution of labeled neurons after hox5 expression as in (A)–(D).  Regions are based on morphological boundaries as in Figure S1. 
(F) Quantiﬁcation of labeled axon targeting in (A)–(D).  Analysis was done using Fisher’s exact test comparing control to each ectopic expression condition with
respect to each axon branch.  Conditions are considered different if they differ in at least one branch.  In both (E) and (F), control n = 17 embryos, hoxa5a n = 24,
hoxb5a n = 20, and hoxb5b n = 28. 
(G) Analysis of axon targeting in cases where a labeled mX neuron was located within the most anterior region of the mX territory (bin 1; see Figure 1I).  Ectopic
hoxb5a-expressing mX neurons in bin 1 avoid PA4 and PA5.  Analysis was done by Chi-square followed by Fisher’s exact test comparing each hox5 construct to
control.  Control n = 9 embryos, hoxa5a n = 17, hoxb5a n = 11 embryos, and hoxb5b n = 16. 
, black) in a Tg(isl1:mRFP) background0then extend quickly, following tracts of previously extended
anterior mX axons (Movie S3).  This suggests that the delayed
appearance of posterior mX axons is due to delayed axon initiation rather than slower extension. 0-deoxy-2
One explanation for the observed delay in posterior mX axon
formation could be that posterior mX neurons are born later
than anterior ones.  To test this possibility, we birthdated mX-ﬂuoro-5-ethynyluridine (EdU). 
neurons with (2
We added EdU to Tg(isl1:GFP) embryos at 10, 14, 18, 22, or 28
hpf and ﬁxed embryos at 48 hpf.  We then identiﬁed mX neurons
by GFP expression and determined whether each neuron under 
) or after (EdU+) the time point
went its last division before (EdU
at which EdU was added.  We divided the mX territory into 5equal-length regions and determined the proportion of EdU
neurons in each region for each treatment
time (Figures
5C–5E).  If time of axon formation correlates with time of birth,
3818 Current Biology 27, 3812–3825, December 18, 2017 
to posterior.  However,
mX neurons to appear progressively
we would expect EdU
this is not what we
from anterior
) mX neurons appear at all anteobserved: postmitotic (EdU
rior-posterior levels of the motor nucleus between 10 and
28 hpf, with no signiﬁcant difference in the onset of neurogenesis
between the ﬁve regions assayed (Figure 5E; p = not signiﬁcant
[ns] by one-way ANOVA of all regions at 14 hpf).  Surprisingly,
therefore, the delayed axon initiation by posterior mX neurons
does not reﬂect a later birthdate.  We conclude that timing of
axon formation is an independently regulated event along the
anterior-posterior axis of the mX territory. 
Vagus Motor Neuron Position Determines Time of Axon
Formation
Given that cell position correlates with time of axon formation, we
sought to test whether cell position could determine time of axon
(legend on next page)
Current Biology 27, 3812–3825, December 18, 2017 3819
formation.  We therefore applied time-lapse imaging to our postmitotic mX neuron transplant approach, after mX neurons were
transplanted homotopically or heterotopically at 27 hpf.  In control
anterior / anterior transplants, mX neurons initiated axons
6. 3 ± 2. 1 hr post-transplantation (hpt) (95% CI = 5. 1–7. 5 hpt; Figures 5F and 5J; Movie S4).  However, transplanting mX neurons
heterotopically from anterior / posterior delayed time of axon
formation, with axons appearing 8. 6 ± 2 hpt (95% CI = 7. 4–9. 8
hpt; Figures 5G and 5J; Movie S4; p = 0. 0067 by unpaired
t test).  Consistent with this result, in control posterior / posterior
transplants, mX neurons initiated axons late (8. 2 ± 1. 3 hpt; 95%
CI = 6. 9–9. 6 hpt), whereas transplanting neurons heterotopically
from posterior / anterior hastened time of axon formation
(6. 1 ± 0. 8 hpt; 95% CI = 5. 3–6. 9 hpt; Figures 5H–5J; Movie S5;
p = 0. 0051 by unpaired t test).  Whereas the difference in time of
axon formation between control and heterotopic transplants
was smaller than that observed between endogenous anterior
and posterior mX neurons (most likely due to the transplantation
procedure itself), these results suggest that the position of an
mX neuron within r8 determines its time of axon formation. 
Time of Axon Arrival in the Periphery Determines Axon
Targeting
Our transplant experiments demonstrated that mX neurons positioned in anterior r8 will initiate axon formation early (Figure 5)
and will innervate anterior axon targets (Figure 2).  Conversely,
mX neurons positioned in posterior r8 will initiate axon formation
late and will
innervate posterior axon targets.  We therefore
sought to test the hypothesis that in addition to hox5 expression,
time of axon formation also inﬂuences mX axon targeting.  We
simulated a delay in axon initiation by transplanting anterior
mX neurons from a younger donor (25. 9 ± 2 hpf) to the anterior
mX territory of an older host (31. 8 ± 2. 1 hpf) such that the extending axon of the transplanted neuron joins the fascicle with latearriving posterior mX axons (Figure 6A).  If axon targeting is
determined by anterior-posterior position alone, then this transplanted mX neuron should innervate anterior targets.  Alternatively, if timing of axon outgrowth inﬂuences axon targeting
independently of position, then it should innervate a posterior
target.  We found that compared to stage-matched transplants,
where donor-derived anterior mX neurons innervated primarily
anterior PAs (Figures 2B, 6B, and 6D), anterior mX neurons transplanted homotopically but heterochronically into older host embryos innervated primarily posterior PAs (Figures 6C and 6D). 
This change in axon targeting is not due to induction of ectopic
hox5 expression, because when we did the equivalent heterochronic transplant using our hoxb5aGFP line as a donor, we did
not see induction of GFP expression in the transplanted neurons
(Figures 6E and 6F).  These results indicate that, surprisingly,
delaying axon growth into the periphery is sufﬁcient to shift
axon targeting to posterior targets. 
hox5 Expression and Time of Axon Initiation Direct mX
Axon Targeting Independently
Our experiments demonstrate that the spatiotemporal environment of mX neurons inﬂuences their topographic mapping to
the PAs.  Position along the anterior-posterior axis of r8 determines hox5 expression and time of axon formation, and both
hox5 expression and delayed axon initiation can target axons
to more posterior PAs.  We asked whether hox5 expression is
responsible for delayed axon initiation, which in turn drives posterior PA targeting, or whether the two are independent.  If hox5
expression delays axon initiation, we expected that,hox5 ectopic expression approach, hox5-expressing mX neurons in the anterior mX territory would initiate axon formation
late, at a time appropriate for posterior mX neurons.  We therefore
used our injection strategy to ectopically express hox5 genes
sparsely throughout the mX territory and then imaged and quantiﬁed the time of axon formation in ectopic hox5-expressing mX
neurons within the anterior-most quarter of the mX territory.  Control anterior mX neurons expressing isl1:eGFPCAAX formed
axons at 29. 8 ± 1. 6 hpf (95% CI = 28. 4–31. 05 hpf), consistent
with our earlier results (Figures 5B, 7A, and 7E; Movie S6).  Surprisingly, we observed no signiﬁcant difference in the time of
axon initiation by anterior mX neurons expressing hoxa5a,
hoxb5a, or hoxb5b compared to the control construct (Figures
7B–7E; Movies S7, S8, and S9).  Thus, regardless of hox5 expression, anterior mX neurons initiate axon formation by approximately 30 hpf, an average of approximately 8 hr before posterior
mX neurons do.  Together, these results indicate that delayed
axon initiation guides axons to posterior targets independently
of hox5 expression and hox5 expression guides axons to posterior targets independently of timing of axon initiation. 
<Conclusion> DISCUSSION. 
Topographic maps are of high interest to neurobiologists, given
their functional importance and prevalence throughout the CNS
[1, 37].  Here, we identify a vagus motor neuron topographic map
in the zebraﬁsh embryo and present two mechanisms that
function in parallel to govern its initial
formation.  First, we
demonstrate that hox5 gene expression in posterior mX neurons
drives posterior axon targeting.  Second, we introduce a novel
mechanism of topographic map development dependent upon
; white arrow) initiate axons 8 hr after anterior mX neurons (green, green arrowhead). 
Figure 5.  Time of Axon Formation and Arrival in the Head Periphery Is Delayed in Posterior mX Neurons Independent of Birthdate
(A) Stills from representative time lapse (see Movie S3) of embryo expressing Tg(isl1:Gal4);Tg(UAS:Kaede).  Photoconverted posterior mX neurons (magenta,A; black, A
(B) Quantiﬁcation of (A).  Each point represents a single embryo.  Analysis was done by unpaired t test. (C and D) Embryo expressing Tg(isl1:GFP) (green) was incubated in EdU (magenta; C
ﬁxed at 48 hpf, and the mX territory was divided into 5 equal-length regions from anterior (1) to posterior (5). 
(E) Quantiﬁcation of (C and D) showing percentage of postmitotic (EdU
cells]).  Each point represents mean; error bars show SD.  n = 5 embryos for all time points except 14 hpf, where n = 4 embryos. 
(F–I) Transplanting an anterior mX neuron heterotopically into the posterior delays axon formation (F and G) whereas transplanting a posterior mX neuron into the
anterior hastens axon formation (H and I).  Donor neurons are marked by Tg(isl1:Kaede) in magenta and (F
) black, and host neurons are marked by
Tg(isl1:mRFP) in green.  See also Movies S4 and S5. 
(J) Quantiﬁcation of (F)–(I).  Each point represents a single embryo.  Analysis was done by unpaired t test. ) mX neurons (isl1:GFP+) in each region at each time point ([no.  EdU
, black) to label cells born after 14 hpf (C) or 28 hpf (D).  Embryos wereand DGFP+ cells]/[no.  GFP+03820 Current Biology 27, 3812–3825, December 18, 2017
Figure 6.  Time of mX Axon Outgrowth Determines Peripheral Target Independently of hox5 Expression
(A) mX neurons are transplanted from anterior to anterior (homotopic) from a 26 hpf donor to a 32 hpf host, and donor axon targeting is assayed at 3 dpf. 
(B and C) Anterior mX neurons transplanted isochronically (B) innervate anterior targets whereas anterior mX neurons transplanted heterochronically (C) innervateposterior targets.  Donor neurons are marked by Tg(isl1:Kaede) (magenta; B
, black).  Host motor neurons are marked by Tg(isl1:GFP) (green).  Dotted lines
indicate length of mX territory.  Dotted boxes indicate region shown in bottom panels. 
(D) Quantiﬁcation of transplant results.  Isochronic control transplants are the same data shown in Figure 2F (anterior / anterior).  Analysis was done using Fisher’s
exact test; see STAR Methods for details.  Isochronic: n = 14 host embryos; heterochronic: n = 16. 
(E) Change in targeting after heterochronic transplantation is not due to induction of hox5 expression.  Transgenes are as described in Figures 3F and 3G. 
(F) Quantiﬁcation of (E).  Isochronic control transplants are the same data shown in Figure 3F.  Heterochronic: n = 19 cells, 11 embryos. 0
delayed axon formation and outgrowth by posterior mX neurons
(Figure 7F).  We note that the embryonic vagus map is not highly
resolved, in that adjacent neurons can innervate different PAs. 
It is likely that, as for other topographic maps, later competitionand/or activity-dependent mechanisms further resolve the vagus
map [1]. 
hox5 Expression Drives Posterior Axon Targeting
A major ﬁnding from our work is that hox5 genes are expressed in
posterior mX neurons and posterior PAs and direct posterior mX
axons to posterior targets.  Hox transcription factors are known
to play roles in specifying neuron identity and axon targeting
[30] and to function in topographic map development in both motor and sensory systems [38–40].  Hox genes affect axon targeting through both intermediate transcription factors and direct
regulation of cell-surface guidance and adhesion molecules
[30].  However, hox5 target genes that direct targeting of posterior mX neurons remain unknown.  Given the expression of
hoxb5a in both the posterior mX neurons and their target region,
an intriguing possibility is that hox5 acts through regulation of a
homophilic adhesion molecule.  Homophilic cadherin interactions have been shown to affect connectivity in the Drosophila
visual system [15, 41].  In vertebrates, cadherins also affect
axon targeting decisions in the visual system, though they are
thought to act heterophilically [42].  An important goal of future
experiments will be to identify genes that direct posterior mX
axon targeting downstream of hox5. 