
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common progressive neurodegenerative disorder of the elderly, characterized by a decline in
cognitive functions.  Sporadic AD (sAD; i. e. , late-onset AD), the most
frequent form of AD with an unknown etiology, presents early abnormalities in brain glucose metabolism and insulin signaling, thus
resulting in an insulin-resistant state in the brain, which has been
suggested to be related to etiological events in its pathogenesis [1,2]. 
Additionally, protein aggregates [3], mitochondrial dysfunctions [4],
oxidative stress [5], neuroinﬂammation [6], brain cholinergic deﬁcits
[7], and dysfunctions in adult neurogenesis [8–10] are among the main
features of
sAD.  These features may be modeled by a intracerebroventricular (ICV) injection of low, subdiabetogenic doses of
streptozotocin (STZ) in rodents [11,12] and non-human primates [13]. 
Adult neurogenesis is a multi-step process of the formation of new
neurons in the mammalian brain throughout life.  Evidence suggests
that newly generated neurons play a crucial role in hippocampus-dependent learning and memory (e. g. , spatial memory and orientation)
and recovery from neuronal injury [14].  Neurogenesis starts from the
proliferation of resident neural stem cells (NSC) and neural progenitor
cells (NPC) in two neurogenic niches in the central nervous system
(CNS): the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the lateral ventricles (LVs), and
the subgranular zone (SGZ) ofthe dentate gyrus (DG) of
Abbreviations: BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic fator; CC, corpus callosum; CNS, central nervous system; DCX, doublecortin; DG, dentate gyrus; EPM, elevated plus maze; GFAP, glial
ﬁbrillary acidic protein; Iba-1, ionized calcium binding adaptor molecule-1; ICV, intracerebroventricular; LVs, lateral ventricles; NSC, neural stem cells; NPC, neural progenitor cells; OFT,
open ﬁeld test; OLT, object location test; ORT, object recognition test; sAD, sporadic Alzheimer’s disease; SGZ, subgranular zone; STZ, streptozotocin; SVZ, subventricular zone; TNF-α,
tumor necrosis factor alfa
⁎ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: taysa_bassani@yahoo. com. br (T. B.  Bassani). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 014
Received 11 July 2017; Received in revised form 1 August 2017; Accepted 5 August 2017
Available online 08 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
T. B.  Bassani Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 41–54
hippocampus.  The process of adult neurogenesis can be inﬂuenced by
many intrinsic and extrinsic factors.  Growth factors and neurotrophins,
such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF),
increase diﬀerentiation, maturation, and survival of proliferating NSC/NPC, stimulating neurogenesis.  In contrast, microglial activation and release of
proinﬂammatory cytokines (e. 