
In recent years, opioids have become the second most commonly
initiated drug of abuse.  A study by the National Survey of Drug Use and
Health revealed that 12. 5 million Americans reported opioid abuse.  As a
consequence, the incidence of overdose is reaching alarming rates
across North America [1]. 
A major limiting factor in the ﬁght against opioid abuse is the
limited number of therapies currently available.  Despite the current
situation, there is no eﬀective medical treatment for this type of addiction.  Substitution therapies are the only options currently available,
consisting of a slow acting opioid such as methadone [2] or in some
cases a combination of partial agonists (buprenorphine) and antagonists
(naltrexone) [1].  Despite some success in controlling drug intake, these
therapies do not treat drug seeking directly and are often unsuccessful
[1], leading to a high rate of relapse.  Therefore, increasing eﬀorts are
being put toward the development of drug addiction models to study
the biological mechanism of substance abuse and to ﬁnd new treatment
options.  So far, rodents and non-human primates have been used almost
exclusively [3]. 
Over the years, two main categories of assays have been developed
to study addiction in animal models.  The ﬁrst consists of the non-contingent assays, including locomotor sensitization and the conditioned
place preference paradigms.  The second category consists of the contingent models, including diﬀerent types of self-administration assays
requiring a self-operant response in order to receive a dose [4].  Contingent assays are considered more signiﬁcant and have been shown to
be an eﬃcient way to identify compounds aﬀecting addiction [5].  One
of the main diﬀerences between these two categories resides in the fact
that conditioned place preference is a form of passive administration, as
opposed to self-administration, which is an active administration.  This
distinction is important because studies have demonstrated that active
administration leads to diﬀerent molecular and structural changes in
the addicted brain [6,7]. 
An interesting alternative to rodents or non-human primates in
fundamental research is Danio rerio (zebraﬁsh), which is becoming an
important model for dissecting complex neurological disorders [8,9]. 
Previous studies demonstrated that zebraﬁsh are sensitive to a wide
variety of drugs of abuse [10–15], including opioids [11,16].  In fact,
several important neuronal networks implicated in addiction in humans
are conserved in zebraﬁsh [17,18].  As with other models, ﬁsh show
signs of addiction as well as withdrawal symptoms [19–22]. ⁎ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: randall. peterson@pharm. utah. edu (R. T.  Peterson). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 001
Received 12 May 2017; Received in revised form 31 July 2017; Accepted 1 August 2017
Available online 12 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
G. D.  Bossé, R. T.  Peterson
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 158–166
addition, given its ease of genetic manipulation and the ability to perform in vivo small molecule screening, zebraﬁsh have potential to be a
powerful addition to the addiction research community. 
Thus far, most substance abuse research in zebraﬁsh has been based
on the conditioned place preference paradigm [11,13,14,23].  In these
assays, a drug is delivered in a speciﬁc area of a tank combined with a
speciﬁc visual cue, and trained ﬁsh developed a preference for the area
presenting the cue.  Alternatively, a choice assay has been described in
which ﬁsh larvae are given the option between an opioid solution in
one end of the tank and a drug-free environment at the other end. 
Zebraﬁsh larvae preferentially swim toward the side with morphine,
and this preference is dependent on the dopamine pathway [16].  So far,
a very limited number of active administration assays have been reported with zebraﬁsh.  Recently, an active alcohol administration protocol was designed in which ﬁsh are trained to voluntary consume
gelatin containing various percentages of ethanol.  Using this technique,
it was shown that ﬁsh consume a larger amount of a 10% EtOH gelatin
compared to gelatin without EtOH [24].  Although this assay is an active
form of administration, there was no increase in administration over
time and no evidence of addiction development.  Therefore, the use of
zebraﬁsh as an addiction model remains limited by the absence of a
bona ﬁde self-administration model. 
In order to overcome such limitations, we developed an opioid selfadministration assay using young adult zebraﬁsh, modeled after the
self-administrations used in mammals.  In this assay, ﬁsh are trained to
trigger the delivery of a hydrocodone solution by swimming across a
speciﬁc underwater platform within a test arena.  Fish trained to selfadminister opioids demonstrate an escalation in the number of doses
received, and self-administration is dependent on the μ-opioid receptor
as well as two key pathways for drug addiction: the dopamine and
glutamate pathways.  The development of this assay will enable improved understanding of
the biological mechanism driving drug
seeking. 
<Middle> Methods. 
2. 1.  Animal housing
Ekkwill strain zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio) (EkkWill Waterlife Resources)
were maintained and embryos were obtained according to standard ﬁsh
husbandry protocols and with the approval of the Massachusetts
General Hospital and University of Utah Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committees. 
2. 2.  Experimental apparatus
2. 2. 1.  Design of the testing arena
The conditioning arena consists of a plastic tray (4-3/4 Gallon
Shallow Tray − 17-1/2"L x 15-1/2"W x 5"H, USPlastic, USA) with delimited submersible square platforms and connected to a larger water
reservoir (15 gallons plastic bin, USPlastic, USA) equipped with a pump
(Supreme Aqua-Mag, Thatﬁshplace, USA) to generate a continuous recirculating ﬂow of water (Fig.  1A).  The arena is illuminated with a
warm white light source (2700 K, 40 W, CFL bulb, McMasterCarr, USA)
providing just enough light to allow the ﬁsh to identify the diﬀerent
platforms without aﬀecting behavior (Fig.  1A). 
Infrared cameras (PiNoir camera, Adafruit, USA) are installed over
each platform and are each connected to a mini-computer Raspberry Pi
2 (Adafruit, USA) to monitor movement above each platform.  To generate optimal
light conditions for the camera, an LED strip light
(850 nm, Environmental Lights, USA) was installed above the arena. 
One of the platforms is called the “active platform” and is yellow
while the “inactive platform” is identical but is white.  The color yellow
was chosen because ﬁsh do not seem to have a natural preference for
this color [25,26].  The computer connected to the camera above the
active platform also controls a peristaltic 12 V pump (Adafruit, USA)
and a small green LED (Adafruit, USA).  A small silicone tube is ﬁxed to
one side of the active platform to allow direct delivery of the drug at the
platform. 
2. 