
Operant behavior results from the relations between behavior and
its consequences and has been used extensively as a model of voluntary
behavior [1,2].  The systematic analysis of environmental and biological
factors underlying operant behavior provides understanding and potential treatments for a range of behaviors considered maladaptive,
such as addictions [3] and overeating [4].  Most research examining
biological and environmental factors in learning processes come from
studies with mammalian laboratory animals.  As an alternative, zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio) are ideal for examining environmental and biological
factors involved in learning because of their high fecundity, low-cost
maintenance,
transparent embryo, and fully sequenced genome
[e. g. ,5–8].  Key neurobiological structures mediating the reinforcing
eﬀects of
(e. g. , drugs) appear conserved in zebraﬁsh
[e. g. ,9,10].  Moreover, many diﬀerent types of genetically modiﬁedzebraﬁsh are available (e. g. , National BioResource Project in Japan). 
These features oﬀer biomedical and behavioral researchers opportunities to examine how genes and environment interact to determine
operant behavior.  Nevertheless, studies of operant behavior with zebraﬁsh remain few [11–13]. 
One area of research relevant to understanding operant behavior
generally, and treatments for maladaptive behavior speciﬁcally, is with
laboratory models of relapse.  A persistent tendency to relapse even after
prolonged periods of abstinence is a deﬁning feature of addictive behavior [14].  Therefore, relapse of previously learned behavior has been
investigated extensively during the past few decades [15–18].  Most
models of relapse arrange reinforcement of operant responding in Phase
1 to simulate engaging in maladaptive behavior and then, in Phase 2,
model a basic form of behavioral treatment by eliminating those reinforcers through extinction of operant responding.  Models of relapse
primarily diﬀer in Phase 3 as a result of arranging diﬀerent factors
⁎ Corresponding author at: Aichi Bunkyo University, Faculty of Humanities, 5969-3 Okusa, Komaki, Aichi, 485-8565 Japan. 
E-mail addresses: toshikazu. kuroda@gmail. com (T.  Kuroda), yuto. mizutani3@gmail. com (Y.  Mizutani), carlos. cancado@gmail. com (C. R. X.  Cançado),
cpodlesnik@ﬁt. edu (C. A.  Podlesnik). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 023
Received 25 July 2017; Received in revised form 3 August 2017; Accepted 14 August 2017
Available online 19 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
T.  Kuroda Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 215–222A summary of typical procedures for assessing resurgence, renewal, and reinstatement.  “Target” and “Alt” stand for target and alternative responses, respectively. Phase 2ResurgenceReinstatement
Target reinforced;
Alt not reinforced
Target reinforced in Context A
Target reinforced
Target extinguished;
Alt reinforced
Target extinguished in Context B
Target extinguished
Target extinguished;
Alt extinguished
Target extinguished in Context A
Target extinguished; Response-independent delivery of reinforcer
contributing to the relapse.  The relapse of previously reinforced and
extinguished responding in these models indicates that decreases in
operant responding during extinction do not represent an elimination of
prior learning.  Instead, relapse indicates new learning involving the
extinction contingency [see 15]. 
Relapse of operant behavior has been demonstrated with a wide
variety of species in the three laboratory models of relapse serving as
the focus in this investigation (see Table 1).  First, resurgence is the relapse
of a previously reinforced and then extinguished response when
reducing or eliminating reinforcement for a more recently trained response
[e. g. ,19–22].  Hereafter, the response reinforced and then extinguished
will be referred to as the target response and the more recently
trained response as the alternative response.  Resurgence has been
demonstrated with rats [e. g. ,20,23], pigeons [e. g. ,24,25], Siamese
fighting fish [26], monkeys [27], and humans [e. g. ,28].  Recently, our
laboratory demonstrated resurgence with zebrafish for the first timeSecond, renewal is relapse due to changes in environmental context. 
Specifically, renewal is the return of a target response when changing
the global environmental context compared to the extinction context
[e. g. ,30,31,32].  Renewal occurs, for example, when reinforcing and
extinguishing the target response in different contexts and then (1)
returning to the training context (ABA renewal) or (2) transitioning to a
novel context (e. g. , ABC renewal).  Renewal of operant behavior has
been demonstrated with rats [30,33], pigeons [e. g. ,34,35], and humans
[36] but not yet with zebrafish. 
Finally, reinstatement is relapse resulting from exposure to a range of
events due to learning (e. g. , cues) or biological relevance (e. g. , stress)
[37].  One commonly used method for assessing reinstatement of an
extinguished target response is to present the event previously serving
as the reinforcer independently of responding [38,39].  Reinstatement
has been demonstrated with rats [e. g. ,40], pigeons [e. g. ,41,42], monkeys
[43,44], and humans [e. g. ,45,46].  Thus far, there have been no
demonstrations of reinstatement of operant behavior in zebrafish −
only reinstatement of a Pavlovian conditioned approach response to
drug (cocaine or nicotine) [10]. 
All these studies suggest relapse of previously reinforced and then
extinguished operant behavior is general across species.  These three
procedures serve as experimental models for understanding the conditions
under which relapse occurs and might be used as platforms to
examine biological influences in relapse, including developmental,
pharmacological, and neurobiological factors [16].  Nevertheless, research
on laboratory models of relapse using zebrafish has been limited. 
Therefore, the goals of the present study were to systematically replicate
resurgence and to extend the analysis to renewal, and reinstatement
of extinguished operant behavior in zebrafish using an
automated device to record discrete responses (i. e. , approaching sensors)
and deliver decapsulated brine shrimp eggs as reinforcers [11,12]. 
<Middle> General methods. 
2. 1.  Subjects
Forty experimentally naïve zebrafish (National Bioresource Project
of Japan, Riken Brain Science Institute), 7–8 months old at the start of
the experiments, served as subjects.  They were wild-type fish (i. e. , not
genetically modiﬁed).  Each ﬁsh was housed individually in a room with
a 14hr:10hr light-dark cycle (lights on at 6:00 am) in an aquarium
(13. 0-cm wide by 16. 8-cm long by 11. 3-cm high) connected to a pump
and tank where water was ﬁltered, aerated, and maintained at 28 °C
with a heater.  Water was kept at a pH level of 7. 5 and half of the water
in the tank was replaced weekly.  When a ﬁsh produced fewer than 30
reinforcers (decapsulated brine shrimp eggs) in a session, postsession
feedings of supplemental food (Kyorin, Hikari Labo 270) occurred
30 min after sessions. 
2. 2.  Material
Two types of automated device, similar to that described by Manabe
Name [11], were used.  Fig.  1 shows the device used to study resurgence
in Experiment 1.  The device was placed in the aquarium of each ﬁsh
during sessions and consisted of three sensors and two feeders ﬁxed on
Plexiglas.  The three sensors were for the target, alternative, and control
responses, as described below.  Each sensor consisted of a 2-mm diameter polymeroptical ﬁber (Mitsubishi Rayon Co. , LTD, Esca CK80), a
ﬁber sensor (Keyence FU-23X), an ampliﬁer (Keyence, FS-V21X), and a
tri-color LED (Oput-Supply OSTA5131A-C).  The tip of each sensor was
set 5 mm below the water surface and 5 mm away from the front wall of
the aquarium.  The sensor tips were 4. 5 cm apart from each other and
could be illuminated red, green, or blue.  A response was registered
when the ﬁsh approached and was at least within 5 mm below the
sensor tip. 
The feeders were located 2. 25 cm to the left and right of the middle
sensor.  Each feeder consisted of a servo motor (Futaba S3005), a brass
tube with the inner diameter of 600 μm, a 400-μm-diameter piano wire
inserted in the brass tube, a vibrator, and a white LED (i. e. , the feeder
light).  During reinforcement, the feeder light turned on immediately
upon a response, the servo motor pulled the piano wire, the vibrator
operated, decapsulated brine shrimp eggs were loaded into the brass
contributing to the relapse.  The relapse of previously reinforced and
extinguished responding in these models indicates that decreases in
operant responding during extinction do not represent an elimination of
prior learning.  Instead, relapse indicates new learning involving the
extinction contingency [see 15]. 
Relapse of operant behavior has been demonstrated with a wide
variety of species in the three laboratory models of relapse serving as
the focus in this investigation (see Table 1).  First, resurgence is the relapse of a previously reinforced and then extinguished response when
reducing or eliminating reinforcement for a more recently trained response [e. g. ,19–22].  Hereafter, the response reinforced and then extinguished will be referred to as the target response and the more recently trained response as the alternative response.  Resurgence has been
demonstrated with rats [e. g. ,20,23], pigeons [e. g. ,24,25], Siamese
ﬁghting ﬁsh [26], monkeys [27], and humans [e. g. ,28].  Recently, our
laboratory demonstrated resurgence with zebraﬁsh for the ﬁrst timeSecond, renewal is relapse due to changes in environmental context. 
Speciﬁcally, renewal is the return of a target response when changing
the global environmental context compared to the extinction context
[e. g. ,30,31,32].  Renewal occurs, for example, when reinforcing and
extinguishing the target response in diﬀerent contexts and then (1)
returning to the training context (ABA renewal) or (2) transitioning to a
novel context (e. g. , ABC renewal).  Renewal of operant behavior has
been demonstrated with rats [30,33], pigeons [e. g. ,34,35], and humans
[36] but not yet with zebraﬁsh. 
Finally, reinstatement is relapse resulting from exposure to a range of
events due to learning (e. g. , cues) or biological relevance (e. g. , stress)
[37].  One commonly used method for assessing reinstatement of an
extinguished target response is to present the event previously serving
as the reinforcer independently of responding [38,39].  Reinstatement
has been demonstrated with rats [e. g. ,40], pigeons [e. g. ,41,42], monkeys [43,44], and humans [e. g. ,45,46].  Thus far, there have been no
demonstrations of reinstatement of operant behavior in zebraﬁsh −
only reinstatement of a Pavlovian conditioned approach response to
drug (cocaine or nicotine) [10]. 
inﬂuences in relapse,
All these studies suggest relapse of previously reinforced and then
extinguished operant behavior is general across species.  These three
procedures serve as experimental models for understanding the conditions under which relapse occurs and might be used as platforms to
examine biological
including developmental,
pharmacological, and neurobiological factors [16].  Nevertheless, research on laboratory models of relapse using zebraﬁsh has been limited. 
Therefore, the goals of the present study were to systematically replicate resurgence and to extend the analysis to renewal, and reinstatement of extinguished operant behavior in zebraﬁsh using an
automated device to record discrete responses (i. e. , approaching sensors) and deliver decapsulated brine shrimp eggs as reinforcers [11,12]. 
2.  General methods
2. 1.  Subjects
Forty experimentally naïve zebraﬁsh (National Bioresource Project
of Japan, Riken Brain Science Institute), 7–8 months old at the start of
the experiments, served as subjects.  They were wild-type ﬁsh (i. e. , not
Fig.  1.  A photo of the automated device used in Experiment 1.  See text for details. T.  Kuroda Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 215–222
tube, and the servo motor pushed the eggs out of the tube and into the
water (this whole series of events occurred approximately in 0. 5 s).  The
feeder light then ﬂashed 5 times at a 0. 2-s interval.  Thereafter, the
device remained inoperative until 5 s had elapsed since the onset of
reinforcement. 
The other type of the device, used to study renewal and reinstatement in Experiments 2 and 3, respectively, was similar to that used in
Experiment 1 except that there were only two sensors (left and right),
9 cm apart from each other, and a single feeder in between.  The two
sensors were for the target and control responses, as described below. 
The feeder was set on the midline of the front wall of the aquarium. 
Except in Experiment 2, in which changes in contextual stimuli were
necessary, a white partition covering each side of the aquarium minimized visual distraction during sessions.  A Lenovo® laptop computer
with Visual Basic 2015® controlled the experiment and recorded data
through an I/O board (Pololu, Mini Maestro servo controller). 
2. 3.  Procedure
After acclimation in the home aquarium for 3-4 days, the ﬁsh were
trained to consume the reinforcer delivered from the feeder.  At this
stage, a single feeder was set on the midline of the front wall of the
aquarium and delivered the reinforcer randomly three times per min
(i. e. , 20 s on average).  The sensors were removed to preclude responding to the sensors being reinforced adventitiously.  Sessions ended
after 40 reinforcers. 
When each ﬁsh consumed the reinforcer reliably, response training
initiated with the sensors and feeder(s) being set as described previously and by reinforcing responses to a target sensor according to a
ﬁxed-ratio (FR) 1 schedule.  In this schedule, every target response resulted in a reinforcer delivery.  When the ﬁsh obtained 40 reinforcers
within 20 min, the schedule was changed from an FR 1 to a variableinterval (VI) 10 s, with the latter being in eﬀect for three 20-min sessions.  Under the VI 10-s schedule, the ﬁrst response after intervals with
the average of 10 s resulted in a reinforcer delivery.  The VI schedules at
this stage and in subsequent phases in each experiment consisted of 10
intervals [47], randomly selected without replacement.  Reinforcement
time (5 s per reinforcer) was excluded from the session time.  Sessions
were conducted during the light period of the room’s light-dark cycle,
around the same time of the day, seven days a week. 
2. 4.  Data analysis
The primary dependent variable was response rate (i. e. , responses
per min).  A one-way repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted in each
experiment with session as a within-subject independent variable and
target response rate as a dependent variable.  To assess whether target
responding was
sensitive to reinforcement and extinction contingencies, the analysis included data from the last baseline (Phase-1)
session and from extinction (Phase-2) sessions.  To determine the presence of relapse, the analysis included data from the last extinction
(Phase-2) session and from the ﬁve relapse-test (Phase-3) sessions. 
These sessions were consecutive and were evenly spaced in time; thus,
the ﬁrst-order autocorrelation (i. e. , correlation between at a time, Tn,
and the one before, Tn-1) was expected.  For this reason, the ﬁrst-order
autoregressive structure was set for the covariance matrix when the
ANOVA was conducted using the proc mixed function on SAS®. 
Following the ANOVA, the Bonferroni method was used for post hoc
tests (t tests) to control the familywise error rate at 0. 05.  This method
could be too conservative for a large number of contrasts between
means.  The primary question of the present study was whether target
responding was higher in the ﬁve relapse-test (Phase-3) sessions than in
the last extinction (Phase-2) session so that the mean contrast was
limited to those ﬁve comparisons.  Thus, the alpha level was set at 0. 01
(i. e. , 0. 05 divided by 5) in each of the post hoc tests for assessing relapse.  Likewise, for assessing sensitivity to reinforcement and extinction
contingencies, the alpha level was set at 0. 01, 0. 007, and 0. 006 for
Experiments 1, 2, and 3 where there were ﬁve, seven, and eight Phase-2
sessions, respectively. 
3.  Experiment 1
The ﬁrst experiment investigated resurgence, which involved reinforcement of a target response in Phase 1, extinction of the target
response while reinforcing an alternative response in Phase 2, and extinction of both responses in Phase 3.  In addition to the target and alternative responses, a control response that was never reinforced
throughout the experiment was measured to dissociate resurgence from
a possible increase in general activity induced by extinction (i. e. , extinction-induced variability) [48]. 
We recently demonstrated resurgence with zebraﬁsh using a similar
experimental setup [29] but the study was limited in several aspects. 
First, the magnitude of the resurgence eﬀect was meager, perhaps due
to the reinforcement schedules used.  We arranged equal VI 20-s schedules in Phases 1 and 2, but previous studies of resurgence indicate
greater rates of alternative reinforcement in Phase 2 produce greater
resurgence [19].  Therefore, we doubled the rate of alternative reinforcement in Phase 2 relative to Phase 1.  Second, the experimental
apparatus was not optimal for assessing resurgence.  Speciﬁcally, three
sensors and one feeder were aligned as follows: left sensor, middle
sensor, the feeder, and right sensor with equal distances between each
pair.  Either the left or right sensor was for the target response while the
other sensor was for the control response (counterbalanced across ﬁsh),
and the middle sensor was for the alternative response for each subject. 
Thus, the distance between the target and alternative sensors, as well as
the distance between the control and alternative sensors, varied across
subjects.  This might have unnecessarily increased between-subject
variability in the magnitude of resurgence.  This problem was eliminated in the present study by setting the three sensors equally apart
with a feeder being placed between each pair of the sensors, as described in the Material section above. 
3. 1.  Methods
3. 1. 1.  Subjects and material
Sixteen experimentally naïve ﬁsh (8 males and 8 females) initially
served as subjects.  Three male ﬁsh failed to acquire either a target or an
alternative response and their results are not reported.  Two sets of the
device with three sensors and two feeders were used.  In a feeder test
with 100 operations of the ﬁrst set, a mean of 19. 70 (SD = 6. 99) and
24. 03 eggs (SD = 7. 62) were delivered per operation from the left and
right feeders, respectively.  For the second set, a mean of 20. 88
(SD = 6. 98) and 23. 67 eggs (SD = 7. 88) were delivered per operation
from the respective feeders. 
3. 1. 2.  Procedure
response was
3. 1. 2. 1.  Phase 1: acquisition.  The target
reinforced
according to a VI 20-s schedule.  Alternative and control responses
were recorded but had no programmed consequence.  Approaching
either the left or right sensor served as the target response, and the
opposite sensor was for the alternative response, counterbalanced
across subjects; the middle sensor served as the control response for
all the subjects.  The LED colors (red, blue, and green) illuminating the
tips of the sensors were counterbalanced across the subjects.  Only the
feeder on the same side as the target sensor operated.  Sessions ended
after 20 min and this phase lasted for 15 sessions. 
3. 1. 2. 2.  Phase 2: extinction and alternative reinforcement.  The target
response was
response was
reinforced according to a VI 10-s schedule.  Reinforcement rate was
doubled between phases because previous studies with other species
extinguished and the alternativeT.  Kuroda Name
[e. g. ,18,19,49]. 
showed higher reinforcer rates for alternative responding increase
resurgence
remained
unreinforced.  Only the feeder on the same side as the alternative
sensor operated.  Sessions ended after 20 min and this phase lasted for 5
sessions. 
responsecontrol
3. 1. 2. 3.  Phase 3: resurgence test.  Extinction was in eﬀect for the target,
alternative, and control responses and neither feeder operated.  Sessions
ended after 20 min and this phase lasted for 5 sessions.  Resurgence was
deﬁned as an increase in target response rates compared to target
response rates during the last session of Phase 2; additionally, this
increase in target response rate had to exceed that of control response
rates in a given session [see 48]. 
3. 2.  Results and discussion
The left graph in Fig.  2 shows mean response rates for the target,
alternative, and control responses in each phase.  During acquisition in
Phase 1, target response rates were higher than alternative and control
response rates, indicating that decapsulated brine shrimp eggs indeed
served as a reinforcer when presented upon a target response.  Control
response rates were slightly but consistently higher than alternative
response rates, most likely because the control (middle) sensor was
physically closer than the alternative sensor to the operable feeder.  In
Phase 2, when removing reinforcement for target responding while
introducing reinforcement for the alternative response, target response
rates decreased and alternative response rates increased across sessions. 
The decrease in target response rates from the last Phase-1 session to
Phase-2 sessions was veriﬁed with an ANOVA, F(5, 60) = 56. 12,
p < 0. 0001, with all Phase-2 sessions diﬀering from the last Phase-1
session in post hoc tests (p’s < 0. 0001).  There was no reliable change
in control response rates from Phase 1–2.  During the test of resurgence
in Phase 3, removing alternative reinforcement increased target responding but not control responding; alternative responding decreased
across sessions. 
Mean obtained reinforcement rate (per min; SEM in parenthesis) for
target responding across ﬁsh, in each of the last ﬁve sessions of Phase 1,
were 2. 07 (0. 17), 2. 24 (0. 07), 2. 17 (0. 09), 2. 27 (0. 07), and 2. 12 (0. 12),
respectively.  Mean obtained reinforcement rates for alternative responding in each session of Phase 2 were 0. 86 (0. 31), 1. 47 (0. 33), 2. 21
(0. 30), 2. 54 (0. 29), and 2. 66 (0. 26), respectively.  Thus, the obtained
reinforcement rates in Phase 2 successively increased across sessions of
this phase.  This trend corresponded to the change in alternative response rates. 
The right graph in Fig.  2 shows mean response rates in the last
session of Phase 2 and all sessions of Phase 3.  The increase in target
response rates during Phase-3 sessions relative to the last Phase-2 session was statistically signiﬁcant, F(5, 60) = 6. 14, p = 0. 0001.  Post hoc
tests indicated that the diﬀerence in target response rates between the
last Phase-2 session and the ﬁrst Phase-3 session, but not for other
comparisons, was statistically signiﬁcant, t(60) = 5. 00, p < 0. 0001. 
This suggests that resurgence occurred in zebraﬁsh and its magnitudeBehavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 215–222
Fig.  2.  Mean responses per min across ﬁsh in the last ﬁve
sessions of Phase 1 (Acquisition) and all sessions of Phase 2
(Extinction and alternative reinforcement) and Phase 3
(Resurgence test) in Experiment 1 (left graph).  Closed symbols, open symbols and a dashed line without symbols represent the target, alternative, and control responses, respectively.  Error bars show ± SEM.  The right graph shows
target and control response rates in the last session of Phase 2
and each session of Phase 3 during resurgence tests. 
was greatest in the ﬁrst Phase-3 session. 
Overall, the present ﬁndings demonstrate with zebraﬁsh the reversal of performance with changes in contingencies in Phases 1 and 2
[see also 50–52] and the resurgence of target responding when extinguishing a more recently reinforced alternative response in Phase 3 [see
17].  The absence of systematic change in control response rates suggests the increase in target response rates in Phase 3 was a function of a
previous reinforcement history from Phase 1 and the removal of alternative reinforcers when transitioning from Phase 2–3. 
The present result was consistent with the ﬁnding of our previous
study [29] despite the modiﬁcation in the arrangement of sensors and
feeders.  We attempted to increase the magnitude of resurgence in the
present study by arranging a greater reinforcement rate for alternative
responding in Phase 2.  Although the magnitude was comparable in the
present study, resurgence eﬀects were replicated and therefore indicate
the generality and robustness of the eﬀect.  Further increasing the difference in reinforcement rate between phases might increase the magnitude of resurgence with zebraﬁsh but the magnitude might be limited
due to generally low target response in Phase 1 compared to other
species [e. g. ,20,23,24,25]. 
4.  Experiment 2
The second experiment investigated ABA renewal, which involved
reinforcement of a target response under Context A in Phase 1 and
extinction of the response under Context B in Phase 2.  In Phase 3, extinction remained in eﬀect but the context was changed back to Context
A.  As in Experiment 1, a control response that was never reinforced was
measured throughout the experiment to dissociate renewal from a
possible increase in general activity when the context was changed in
Phase 3.  Contexts were visual stimuli covering the sides of the aquarium
because previous studies reported that zebraﬁsh behavior is sensitive to
this modality of stimuli [53,54]. 
4. 1.  Methods
4. 1. 1.  Subjects and material
Twelve experimentally naïve ﬁsh (6 males and 6 females) initially
served as subjects.  Three male ﬁsh and one female ﬁsh failed to acquire
responding and their results are not reported.  The device with two
sensors and a single feeder was used.  In a feeder test with 100 operations, a mean of 24. 9 eggs (SD = 6. 09) were delivered per operation. 
4. 1. 2.  Procedure
4. 1. 2. 1.  Phase 1: acquisition.  The target response was reinforced in
Context A according to a VI 20-s schedule.  The control response was
recorded but had no programmed consequence.  Locations of the target
and control sensors, as well as the LED colors associated with each
sensor, were counterbalanced across subjects.  Context A was either a
white partition covering each side of the aquarium or a black partition
the aquarium with a green silicon sheet
covering each side of
T.  Kuroda Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 215–222
Fig.  3.  Mean responses per min across ﬁsh in the last ﬁve
sessions of Phase 1 (Acquisition) and all sessions of Phase 2
(Extinction) and Phase 3 (Renewal test) in Experiment 2 (left
graph).  Closed symbols and a dashed line without symbols
represent the target and control responses, respectively.  Error
bars show ± SEM.  The right graph shows target and control
response rates in the last session of Phase 2 and each session
of Phase 3 during renewal tests. 
underneath, counterbalanced across ﬁsh.  Sessions ended after 20 min
and this phase lasted for 15 sessions. 
4. 1. 2. 2.  Phase 2: extinction.  The target response was extinguished in
Context B.  Contextual stimuli for Context B were opposite to the one
used for Context A in Phase 1 for each ﬁsh.  The control response
remained unreinforced.  Sessions ended after 20 min and this phase
lasted seven sessions. 
4. 1. 2. 3.  Phase 3: renewal test.  Extinction remained in eﬀect for the
target and control responses and each ﬁsh was re-exposed to Context A. 
Sessions ended after 20 min and this phase lasted ﬁve sessions.  Renewal
was deﬁned as an increase in target response rates compared to target
response rates during the last session of Phase 2 and this increase had to
exceed that of control response rates in a given session. 
4. 2.  Results and discussion
The left graph in Fig.  3 shows mean response rates for the target and
control responses in each phase.  Target response rates were higher than
control response rates in Phase 1 (Context A).  Obtained reinforcement
rates for target responding, calculated as in Experiment 1, in each of the
last ﬁve sessions of Phase 1 were 1. 96 (0. 21), 2. 11 (0. 08), 2. 04 (0. 13),
2. 13 (0. 05), and 2. 12 (0. 09) in, respectively.  Target response rates
decreased to near zero while control response rates remained near zero
in Phase 2 (Context B).  The decrease in target response rates from the
last Phase-1 session to Phase-2 sessions was veriﬁed, F(7, 49) = 36. 08,
p < 0. 0001, with all Phase-2 sessions diﬀering from the last Phase-1
session (p’s < 0. 0001). 
When placed back to Context A in Phase 3, the right graph in Fig.  3
shows target response rates initially increased and then decreased while
control response rates remained low.  The ANOVA indicated that the
change in target response rates from the last session of Phase 2 to Phase
3 was statistically signiﬁcant, F(5, 35) = 4. 71, p = 0. 0021.  Post hoc
test indicated that the diﬀerence between the last Phase-2 session and
the ﬁrst Phase-3 session was statistically signiﬁcant,
t(35) = 4. 10,
p = 0. 0002.  Diﬀerences in other comparisons were not statistically
signiﬁcant. 
In the present experiment, we observed renewal in zebraﬁsh upon
returning to the training context after extinction and its magnitude was
greatest in the ﬁrst Phase-3 session.  The absence of systematic change
in control response rates suggests the increase in target response rates
in Phase 3 was a function of a previous reinforcement history (Phase 1)
and the change in context from Phase 2 (Context B) to Phase 3 (Context
A).  Overall, these ﬁndings extend others showing sensitivity of zebraﬁsh learning to context [53,54] by demonstrating renewal of operant
behavior with this species [32]. 
5.  Experiment 3
The third experiment
investigated reinstatement [38,55], w hichinvolved reinforcement of a target response in Phase 1 and extinction of the
response in Phase 2.  Phase 3 arranged response-independent presentations
of the stimulus that served as the reinforcer for the target response during
Phase 1.  As in Experiments 1 and 2, a control response was measured to
dissociate reinstatement from general increases in activity [56]. 
5. 1.  Methods
5. 1. 1.  Subjects and material
Twelve experimentally naïve ﬁsh (6 males and 6 females) served as
subjects.  One male ﬁsh failed to acquire responding and its results are
not reported.  As in Experiment 2, the device with two sensors and a
single feeder was used.  In a feeder test with 100 operations, a mean of
24. 2 (SD = 5. 58) were delivered per operation. 
5. 1. 2.  Procedure
5. 1. 2. 1.  Phase 1: acquisition.  The target
reinforced
according to a VI 20-s schedule.  The control response was recorded
but had no programmed consequence.  Locations of the target and
control sensors, as well as the LED colors associated with each sensor,
were counterbalanced across ﬁsh.  Sessions ended after 20 min and this
phase lasted for 15 sessions. 
response was
5. 1. 2. 2.  Phase 2: extinction.  The target response was extinguished and
the control response remained unreinforced.  Sessions ended after
20 min and this phase lasted for 8 sessions. 
5. 1. 2. 3.  Phase 3: reinstatement test.  Neither target nor control responses
resulted in a reinforcer delivery.  However, the reinforcer was delivered
independently of responding twice per min on average, according to a
variable-time 30-s schedule.  This rate approximated the obtained rate
of reinforcement in Phase 1.  Sessions ended after 20 min and this phase
lasted for ﬁve sessions.  Reinstatement was deﬁned as an increase in
target response rates compared to target response rates during the last
session of Phase 2, and this increase had to exceed that of control
response rates in a given session. 
5. 2.  Results and discussion
The left graph in Fig.  4 shows mean response rates for target and
control responses in each phase.  During acquisition in Phase 1, target
response rates were higher than control response rates.  Obtained reinforcement rates for target responding, calculated as in Experiment 1,
in each of the last ﬁve sessions of Phase 1 were 1. 92 (0. 08), 1. 96 (0. 06),
1. 80 (0. 13), 1. 81 (0. 10), and 1. 90 (0. 10), respectively.  During extinction in Phase 2, target response rates decreased to near zero and control
responses remained at this level for all sessions of this phase.  The decrease in target response rates from the last Phase-1 session to Phase-2
sessions was veriﬁed, F(8, 80) = 28. 88, p < 0. 0001, with all Phase-2
sessions diﬀering from the last Phase-1 session (p’s < 0. 0001).  When
T.  Kuroda Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 215–222
Fig.  4.  Mean responses per min across ﬁsh in the last ﬁve
sessions of Phase 1 (Acquisition) and all sessions of Phase 2
(Extinction) and Phase 3 (Reinstatement test) in Experiment 3
(left graph).  Closed symbols and a dashed line without symbols represent the target and control responses, respectively. 
Error bars show ± SEM.  The right graph shows target and
control response rates in the last session of Phase 2 and each
session of Phase 3 during reinstatement tests. 
reinforcers were delivered independently of responding during reinstatement tests in Phase 3, target response rates initially increased
and then decreased but control response rates remained at low levels. 
The right graph in Fig.  4 shows response rates in the last session of
Phase 2 and each session of Phase 3.  The change in target response rates
from the last session of Phase 2 to Phase 3 was statistically signiﬁcant, F
(5, 50) = 4. 20, p = 0. 0029.  Post hoc tests indicated that the last Phase2 session diﬀered from the ﬁrst Phase-3 session, t(50) = 0. 0003, and
from the second Phase-3 session, t(50) = 0. 0074, but not for other
comparisons.  Thus, reinstatement occurred in zebraﬁsh and its magnitude was greatest in the ﬁrst two Phase-3 sessions. 
The present ﬁndings conﬁrmed reinstatement of operant behavior in
zebraﬁsh, thereby extending the generality of reinstatement of operant
behavior [e. g. ,39].  The present ﬁndings further extend those demonstrating reinstatement of Pavlovian conditioning in zebraﬁsh [10] and
were the ﬁrst to show operant reinstatement reliably in any ﬁsh species
[cf.  13]. 
<Conclusion> General discussion. 
The present experiments provided the ﬁrst evidence of relapse of
operant behavior in zebraﬁsh using resurgence, renewal, and reinstatement models.  In each model, we used the apparatus developed
by Manabe Name [11] to study operant behavior with zebraﬁsh, in
which a discrete approach response served as the operant response to
dispense food reinforcers automatically.  Target response rates exceeded
control responses during Phase 1 of all three experiments, indicating
reliable discrimination of the reinforcement contingencies.  Extinction
arranged during Phase 2 of all three experiments reduced target responding to near-zero levels. 